friend of all the little
people, and I'm not much afraid of him myself, but just the same
I wouldn't dare go near enough for him to touch me."

"Pooh!" retorted Tommy Tit. "That's no way of showing true
friendship. You've no idea, Peter, what a comfortable feeling it
is to know that you can trust a friend, and I feel that Farmer
Brown's boy is one of the best friends I've got. I wish more boys
and girls were like him."



CHAPTER XXXVIII  Honker and Dippy Arrive.

The leaves of the trees turned yellow and red and brown and then
began to drop, a few at first, then more and more every day until
all but the spruce-trees and the pine-trees and the hemlock-trees
and the fir-trees and the cedar-trees were bare. By this time
most of Peter's feathered friends of the summer had departed, and
there were days when Peter had oh, such a lonely feeling. The fur
of his coat was growing thicker. The grass of the Green Meadows
had turned brown. All these things were signs which Peter knew
well. He knew that rough Brother North Wind and Jack Frost were
on their way down from the Far North.

Peter had few friends to visit now. Johnny Chuck had gone to
sleep for the winter 'way down in his little bedroom under
ground. Grandfather Frog had also gone to sleep. So had Old Mr.
Toad. Peter spent a great deal of time in the dear Old
Briar-patch just sitting still and listening. What he was
listening for he didn't know. It just seemed to him that there
was something he ought to hear at this time of year, and so he
sat listening and listening and wondering what he was listening
for. Then, late one afternoon, there came floating down to him
from high up in the sky, faintly at first but growing louder, a
sound unlike any Peter had heard all the long summer through. The
sound was a voice. Rather it was many voices mingled "Honk, honk,
honk, honk, honk, honk, honk!" Peter gave a little jump.

"That's what I've been listening for!" he cried. "Honker the
Goose and his friends are coming. Oh, I do hope they will stop
where I can pay them a call."

He hopped out to the edge of the dear Old Briar-patch that he
might see better, and looked up in the sky. High up, flying in
the shape of a letter V, he saw a flock of great birds flying
steadily from the direction of the Far North. By the sound of
their voices he knew that they had flown far that day and were
tired. One bird was in the lead and this he knew to be his old
friend, Honker. Straight over his head they passed and as Peter
listened to their voices he felt within him the very spirit of
the Far North, that great, wild, lonely land which he had never
seen but of which he had so often heard.

As Peter watched, Honker suddenly turned and headed in the
direction of the Big River. Then he began to slant down, his
flock following him. And presently they disappeared behind the
trees along the bank of the Great River. Peter gave a happy
little sigh. "They are going to spend the night there," thought
he. "When the moon comes up, I will run over there, for they will
come ashore and I know just where. Now that they have arrived I
know that winter is not far away. Honker's voice is as sure a
sign of the coming of winter as is Winsome Bluebird's that spring
will soon be here."

Peter could hardly wait for the coming of the Black Shadows, and
just as soon as they had crept out over the Green Meadows he
started for the Big River. He knew just where to go, because he
knew that Honker and his friends would rest and spend the night
in the same place they had stopped at the year before. He knew
that they would remain out in the middle of the Big River until
the Black Shadows had made it quite safe for them to swim in. He
reached the bank of the Big River just as sweet Mistress Moon was
beginning to throw her silvery light over the Great World. There
was a sandy bar in the Great River at this point, and Peter
squatted on the bank just where this sandy bar began.

It seemed to Peter that he had sat there half the night, but
really it was only a short time, before he heard a low signal out
in the Black Shadows which covered the middle of the Big River.
It was the voice of Honker. Then Peter saw little silvery lines
moving on the water and presently a dozen great shapes appeared
in the moonlight. Honker and his friends were swimming in. The
long neck of each of those great birds was stretched to its full
height, and Peter knew that each bird was listening for the
slightest suspicious sound. Slowly they drew near, Honker in the
lead. They were a picture of perfect caution. When they reached
the sandy bar they remained quiet, looking and listening for some
time. Then, sure that all was safe, Honker gave a low signal and
at once a low gabbling began as the big birds relaxed their
watchfulness and came out on the sandy bar, all save one. That
one was the guard, and he remained with neck erect on watch. Some
swam in among the rushes growing in the water very near to where
Peter was sitting and began to feed. Others sat on the sandy bar
and dressed their feathers. Honker himself came ashore close to
where Peter was sitting.

"Oh, Honker," cried Peter, "I'm so glad you're back here safe and
sound."

Honker gave a little start, but instantly recognizing Peter, came
over close to him. As he stood there in the moonlight he was
truly handsome. His throat and a large patch on each side of his
head were white. The rest of his head and long, slim neck were
black. His short tail was also black. His back, wings, breast and
sides were a soft grayish-brown. He was white around the base of
his tail and he wore a white collar.

"Hello, Peter," said he. "It is good to have an old friend greet
me. I certainly am glad to be back safe and sound, for the
hunters with terrible guns have been at almost every one of our
resting places, and it has been hard work to get enough to eat.
It is a relief to find one place where there are no terrible
guns."

"Have you come far?" asked Peter.

"Very far, Peter; very far," replied Honker. "And we still have
very far to go. I shall be thankful when the journey is over, for
on me depends the safety of all those with me, and it is a great
responsibility."

"Will winter soon be here?" asked Peter eagerly.

"Rough Brother North Wind and Jack Frost were right behind us,"
replied Honker. "You know we stay in the Far North just as long
as we can. Already the place where we nested is frozen and
covered with snow. For the first part of the journey we kept only
just ahead of the snow and ice, but as we drew near to where men
make their homes we were forced to make longer journeys each day,
for the places where it is safe to feed and rest are few and far
between. Now we shall hurry on until we reach the place in the
far-away South where we will make our winter home."

Just then Honker was interrupted by wild, strange sounds from the
middle of the Great River. It sounded like crazy laughter. Peter
jumped at the sound, but Honker merely chuckled. "It's Dippy the
Loon," said he. "He spent the summer in the Far North not far
from us. He started south just before we did."

"I wish he would come in here so that I can get a good look at
him and make his acquaintance," said Peter.

"He may, but I doubt it," replied Honker. "He and his mate are
great people to keep by themselves. Then, too, they don't have
to come ashore for food. You know Dippy feeds altogether on fish.
He really has an easier time on the long journey than we do,
because he can get his food without running so much risk of being
shot by the terrible hunters. He practically lives on the water.
He's about the most awkward fellow on land of any one I know."

"Why should he be any more awkward on land then you?" asked
Peter, his curiosity aroused at once.

"Because," replied Honker, "Old Mother Nature has given him very
short legs and has placed them so far back on his body that he
can't keep his balance to walk, and has to use his wings and bill
to help him over the ground. On shore he is about the most
helpless thing you can imagine. But on water he is another fellow
altogether. He's just as much at home under water as on top. My,
how that fellow can dive! When he sees the flash of a gun he will
get under water before the shot can reach him. That's where he
has the advantage of us Geese. You know we can't dive. He could
swim clear across this river under water if he wanted to, and he
can go so fast under water that he can catch a fish. It is
because his legs have been placed so far back that he can swim so
fast. You know his feet are nothing but big paddles. Another
funny thing is that he can sink right down in the water when he
wants to, with nothing but his head out. I envy him that. It
would be a lot easier for us Geese to escape the dreadful hunters
if we could sink down that way."

"Has he a bill like yours?" asked Peter innocently.

"Of course not," replied Honker. "Didn't I tell you that he lives
on fish? How do you suppose he would hold on to his slippery fish
if he had a broad bill like mine? His bill is stout, straight and
sharp pointed. He is rather a handsome fellow. He is pretty
nearly as big as I am, and his back, wings, tail and neck are
black with bluish or greenish appearance in the sun. His back and
wings are spotted with white, and there are streaks of white on
his throat and the sides of his neck. On his breast and below he
is all white. You certainly ought to get acquainted with Dippy,
Peter, for there isn't anybody quite like him."

"I'd like to," replied Peter. "But if he never comes to shore,
how can I? I guess I will have to be content to know him just by
his voice. I certainly never will forget that. It's about as
crazy sounding as the voice of Old Man Coyote, and that is saying
a great deal."

"There's one thing I forgot to tell you," said Honker. "Dippy
can't fly from the land; he must be on the water in order to get
up in the air."

"You can, can't you?" asked Peter.

"Of course I can," replied Honker. "Why, we Geese get a lot of
our food on land. When it is safe to do so we visit the grain
fields and pick up the grain that has been shaken out during
harvest. Of course we couldn't do that if we couldn't fly from
the land. We can rise from either land or water equally well. Now
if you'll excuse me, Peter, I'll take a nap. My, but I'm tired!
And I've got a long journey to-morrow."

So Peter politely bade Honker and his relatives good-night and
left them in peace on the sandy bar in the Big River.



CHAPTER XXXIX   Peter Discovers Two Old Friends.

Rough Brother North Wind and Jack Frost were not far behind
Honker the Goose. In a night Peter Rabbit's world was
transformed. It had become a new world, a world of pure white.
The last laggard among Peter's feathered friends who spend the
winter in the far-away South had hurried away. Still Peter was
not lonely. Tommy Tit's cheery voice greeted Peter the very first
thing that morning after the storm. Tommy seemed to be in just as
good spirits as ever he had been in summer.

Now Peter rather likes the snow. He likes to run about in it, and
so he followed Tommy Tit up to the Old Orchard. He felt sure that
he would find company there besides Tommy Tit, and he was not
disappointed. Downy and Hairy the Woodpeckers were getting their
breakfast from a piece of suet Farmer Brown's boy had
thoughtfully fastened in one of the apple-trees for them. Sammy
Jay was there also, and his blue coat never had looked better
than it did against the pure white of the snow.

These were the only ones Peter really had expected to find in the
Old Orchard, and so you can guess how pleased he was as he hopped
over the old stone wall to hear the voice of one whom he had
almost forgotten. It was the voice of Yank-Yank the Nuthatch, and
while it was far from being sweet there was in it something of
good cheer and contentment. At once Peter hurried in the
direction from which it came.

On the trunk of an apple-tree he caught sight of a gray and black
and white bird about the size of Downy the Woodpecker. The top of
his head and upper part of his back were shining black. The rest
of his back was bluish-gray. The sides of his head and his breast
were white. The outer feathers of his tail were black with white
patches near their tips.

But Peter didn't need to see how Yank-Yank was dressed in order
to recognize him. Peter would have known him if he had been so
far away that the colors of his coat did not show at all. You
see, Yank-Yank was doing a most surprising thing, something no
other bird can do. He was walking head first down the trunk of
that tree, picking tiny eggs of insects from the bark and
seemingly quite as much at home and quite as unconcerned in that
queer position as if he were right side up.

As Peter approached, Yank-Yank lifted his head and called a
greeting which sounded very much like the repetition of his own
name. Then he turned around and began to climb the tree as easily
as he had come down it.

"Welcome home, Yank-Yank!" cried Peter, hurrying up quite out of
breath.

Yank-Yank turned around so that he was once more head down, and
his eyes twinkled as he looked down at Peter. "You're mistaken
Peter," said he. "This isn't home. I've simply come down here for
the winter. You know home is where you raise your children, and
my home is in the Great Woods farther north. There is too much
ice and snow up there, so I have come down here to spend the
winter."

"Well anyway, it's a kind of home; it's your winter home,"
protested Peter, "and I certainly am glad to see you back. The
Old Orchard wouldn't be quite the same without you. Did you have
a pleasant summer? And if you please, Yank-Yank, tell me where
you built your home and what it was like."

"Yes, Mr. Curiosity, I had a very pleasant summer," replied
Yank-Yank. "Mrs. Yank-Yank and I raised a family of six and that
is doing a lot better than some folks I know, if I do say it. As
to our nest, it was made of leaves and feathers and it was in a
hole in a certain old stump that not a soul knows of but Mrs.
Yank-Yank and myself. Now is there anything else you want to
know?"

"Yes," retorted Peter promptly. "I want to know how it is that
you can walk head first down the trunk of a tree without losing
your balance and tumbling off."

Yank-Yank chuckled happily. "I discovered a long time ago,
Peter," said he, "that the people who get on best in this world
are those who make the most of what they have and waste no time
wishing they could have what other people have. I suppose you
have noticed that all the Woodpecker family have stiff tail
feathers and use them to brace themselves when they are climbing
a tree. They have become so dependent on them that they don't
dare move about on the trunk of a tree without using them. If
they want to come down a tree they have to back down.

"Now Old Mother Nature didn't give me stiff tail feathers, but
she gave me a very good pair of feet with three toes in front and
one behind and when I was a very little fellow I learned to make
the most of those feet. Each toe has a sharp claw. When I go up a
tree the three front claws on each foot hook into the bark. When
I come down a tree I simply twist one foot around so that I can
use the claws of this foot to keep me from falling. It is just as
easy for me to go down a tree as it is to go up, and I can go
right around the trunk just as easily and comfortably." Suiting
action to the word, Yank-Yank ran around the trunk of the
apple-tree just above Peter's head. When he reappeared Peter had
another question ready.

"Do you live altogether on grubs and worms and insects and their
eggs?" he asked.

"I should say not!" exclaimed Yank-Yank. "I like acorns and
beechnuts and certain kinds of seeds."

"I don't see how such a little fellow as you can eat such hard
things as acorns and beechnuts," protested Peter a little
doubtfully.

Yank-Yank laughed right out. "Sometime when I see you over in the
Green Forest I'll show you," said he. "When I find a fat beechnut
I take it to a little crack in a tree that will just hold it;
then with this stout bill of mine I crack the shell. It really is
quite easy when you know how. Cracking a nut open that way is
sometimes called hatching, and that is how I come by the name of
Nuthatch. Hello! There's Seep-Seep. I haven't seen him since we
were together up North. His home was not far from mine."

As Yank-Yank spoke, a little brown bird alighted at the very foot
of the next tree. He was just a trifle bigger than Jenny Wren but
not at all like Jenny, for while Jenny's tail usually is cocked
up in the sauciest way, Seep-Seep's tail is never cocked up at
all. In fact, it bends down, for Seep-Seep uses his tail just as
the members of the Woodpecker family use theirs. He was dressed
in grayish-brown above and grayish-white beneath. Across each
wing was a little band of buffy-white, and his bill was curved
just a little.

Seep-Seep didn't stop an instant but started up the trunk of that
tree, going round and round it as he climbed, and picking out
things to eat from under the bark. His way of climbing that tree
was very like creeping, and Peter thought to himself that
Seep-Seep was well named the Brown Creeper. He knew it was quite
useless to try to get Seep-Seep to talk, He knew that Seep-Seep
wouldn't waste any time that way.

Round and round up the trunk of the tree he went, and when he
reached the top at once flew down to the bottom of the next tree
and without a pause started up that. He wasted no time exploring
the branches, but stuck to the trunk. Once in a while he would
cry in a thin little voice, "Seep! Seep!" but never paused to
rest or look around. If he had felt that on him alone depended
the job of getting all the insect eggs and grubs on those trees
he could not have been more industrious.

"Does he build his nest in a hole in a tree?" asked Peter of
Yank-Yank. Yank-Yank shook his head. "No," he replied. "He hunts
for a tree or stub with a piece of loose bark hanging to it. In
behind this he tucks his nest made of twigs, strips of bark and
moss. He's a funny little fellow and I don't know of any one in
all the great world who more strictly attends to his own business
than does Seep-Seep the Brown Creeper. By the way, Peter, have
you seen anything of Dotty the Tree Sparrow?"

"Not yet," replied Peter, "but I think he must be here. I'm glad
you reminded me of him. I'll go look for him.




CHAPTER XL  Some Merry Seed-Eaters.

Having been reminded of Dotty the Tree Sparrow, Peter Rabbit
became possessed of a great desire to find this little friend of
the cold months and learn how he had fared through the summer.

He was at a loss just where to look for Dotty until he remembered
a certain weedy field along the edge of which the bushes had been
left growing. "Perhaps I'll find him there," thought Peter, for
he remembered that Dotty lives almost wholly on seeds, chiefly
weed seeds, and that he dearly loves a weedy field with bushes
not far distant in which he can hide.

So Peter hurried over to the weedy field and there, sure enough,
he found Dotty with a lot of his friends. They were very busy
getting their breakfast. Some were clinging to the weed-stalks
picking the seeds out of the tops, while others were picking up
the seeds from the ground. It was cold. Rough Brother North Wind
was doing his best to blow up another snow-cloud. It wasn't at
all the kind of day in which one would expect to find anybody in
high spirits. But Dotty was. He was even singing as Peter came
up, and all about Dotty's friends and relatives were twittering
as happily and merrily as if it were the beginning of spring
instead of winter.

Dotty was very nearly the size of Little Friend the Song Sparrow
and looked somewhat like him, save that his breast was clear
ashy-gray, all but a little dark spot in the middle, the little
dot from which he gets his name. He wore a chestnut cap, almost
exactly like that of Chippy the Chipping Sparrow. It reminded
Peter that Dotty is often called the Winter Chippy.

"Welcome back, Dotty!" cried Peter. "It does my heart good to see
you."

"Thank you, Peter," twittered Dotty happily. "In a way it is
good to be back. Certainly, it is good to know that an old friend
is glad to see me."

"Are you going to stay all winter, Dotty?" asked Peter.

"I hope so," replied Dotty. "I certainly shall if the snow does
not get so deep that I cannot get enough to eat. Some of these
weeds are so tall that it will take a lot of snow to cover them,
and as long as the tops are above the snow I will have nothing to
worry about. You know a lot of seeds remain in these tops all
winter. But if the snow gets deep enough to cover these I shall
have to move along farther south."

"Then I hope there won't be much snow," declared Peter very
emphatically. "There are few enough folks about in winter at
best, goodness knows, and I don't know of any one I enjoy having
for a neighbor more than I do you."

"Thank you again, Peter," cried Dotty, "and please let me return
the compliment. I like cold weather. I like winter when there
isn't too much ice and bad weather. I always feel good in cold
weather. That is one reason I go north to nest."

"Speaking of nests, do you build in a tree?" inquired Peter.

"Usually on or near the ground," replied Dotty. "You know I am
really a ground bird although I am called a Tree Sparrow. Most of
us Sparrows spend our time on or near the ground."

"I know," replied Peter. "Do you know I'm very fond of the
Sparrow family. I just love your cousin Chippy, who nests in the
Old Orchard every spring. I wish he would stay all winter. I
really don't see why he doesn't. I should think he could if you
can."

Dotty laughed. It was a tinkling little laugh, good to hear.
"Cousin Chippy would starve to death," he declared. "It is all a
matter of food. You ought to know that by this time, Peter.
Cousin Chippy lives chiefly on worms and bugs and I live almost
wholly on seeds, and that is what makes the difference. Cousin
Chippy must go where he can get plenty to eat. I can get plenty
here and so I stay."

"Did you and your relatives come down from the Far North alone?"
asked Peter.

"No," replied Dotty promptly. "Slaty the Junco and his relatives
came along with us and we had a very merry party."

Peter pricked up his ears. "Is Slaty here now?" he asked
eagerly.

"Very much here," replied a voice right behind Peter's back. It
was so unexpected that it made Peter jump. He turned to find
Slaty himself chuckling merrily as he picked up seeds. He was
very nearly the same size as Dotty but trimmer. In fact he was
one of the trimmest, neatest appearing of all of Peter's
friends. There was no mistaking Slaty the Junco for any other
bird. His head, throat and breast were clear slate color.
Underneath he was white. His sides were grayish. His outer tail
feathers were white. His bill was flesh color. It looked almost
white.

"Welcome! Welcome!" cried Peter. "Are you here to stay all
winter?"

I certainly am," was Slaty's prompt response. "It will take
pretty bad weather to drive me away from here. If the snow gets
too deep I'll just go up to Farmer Brown's barnyard. I can always
pick up a meal there, for Farmer Brown's boy is a very good
friend of mine. I know he won't let me starve, no matter what the
weather is. I think it is going to snow some more. I like the
snow. You know I am sometimes called the Snowbird."

Peter nodded. "So I have heard," said he, "though I think that
name really belongs to Snowflake the Snow Bunting."

"Quite right, Peter, quite right," replied Slaty. "I much prefer
my own name of Junco. My, these seeds are good!" All the time he
was busily picking up seeds so tiny that Peter didn't even see
them.

"If you like here so much why don't you stay all the year?"
inquired Peter.

"It gets too warm," replied Slaty promptly,

"I hate hot weather. Give me cold weather every time."

"Do you mean to tell me that it is cold all summer where you
nest in the Far North?" demanded Peter.

"Not exactly cold," replied Slaty, "but a lot cooler than it is
down here. I don't go as far north to nest as Snowflake does, but
I go far enough to be fairly comfortable. I don't see how some
folks can stand hot weather."

"It is a good thing they can," interrupted Dotty. "If everybody
liked the same things it wouldn't do at all. Just suppose all the
birds ate nothing but seeds. There wouldn't be seeds enough to go
around, and a lot of us would starve. Then, too, the worms and
the bugs would eat up everything. So, take it all together, it is
a mighty good thing that some birds live almost wholly on worms
and bugs and such things, leaving the seeds to the rest of us. I
guess Old Mother Nature knew what she was about when she gave us
different tastes."

Peter nodded his head in approval. "You can always trust Old
Mother Nature to know what is best," said he sagely. "By the
way, Slaty, what do you make your nest of and where do you put
it?"

"My nest is usually made of grasses, moss and rootlets. Sometimes
it is lined with fine grasses, and when I am lucky enough to find
them I use long hairs. Often I put my nest on the ground, and
never very far above it. I am like my friend Dotty in this
respect. It always seems to me easier to hide a nest on the
ground than anywhere else. There is nothing like having a nest
well hidden. It takes sharp eyes to find my nest, I can tell you
that, Peter Rabbit."

Just then Dotty, who had been picking seeds out of the top of a
weed, gave a cry of alarm and instantly there was a flit of many
wings as Dotty and his relatives and Slaty sought the shelter of
the bushes along the edge of the field. Peter sat up very
straight and looked this way and looked that way. At first
he saw nothing suspicious. Then, crouching flat among the weeds,
he got a glimpse of Black Pussy, the cat from Farmer Brown's
house. She had been creeping up in the hope of catching one of
those happy little seedeaters. Peter stamped angrily. Then with
long jumps he started for the dear Old Briar-patch,
lipperty-lipperty-lip, for truth to tell, big as he was, he was a
little afraid of Black Pussy.




CHAPTER XLI  More Friends Come With the Snow.

Slaty the Junco had been quite right in thinking it was going
to snow some more. Rough Brother North Find hurried up one big
cloud after another, and late that afternoon the white feathery
flakes came drifting down out of the sky.

Peter Rabbit sat tight in the dear Old Briar-patch. In fact
Peter did no moving about that night, but remained squatting just
inside the entrance to an old hole Johnny Chuck's grandfather had
dug long ago in the middle of the clear Old Briar-patch. Some
time before morning the snow stopped falling and then rough
Brother North Wind worked as hard to blow away the clouds as he
had done to bring them.

When jolly, round, bright Mr. Sun began his daily climb up in the
blue, blue sky he looked down on a world of white. It seemed as
if every little snowflake twinkled back at every little sunbeam.
It was all very lovely, and Peter Rabbit rejoiced as he
scampered forth in quest of his breakfast.

He started first for the weedy field where the day before he had
found Dotty the Tree Sparrow and Slaty the Junco. They were there
before him, having the very best time ever was as they picked
seeds from the tops of the weeds which showed above the snow.
Almost at once Peter discovered that they were not the only
seekers for seeds. Walking about on the snow, and quite as busy
seeking seeds as were Dotty and Slaty, was a bird very near their
size the top of whose head, neck and back were a soft
rusty-brown. There was some black on his wings, but the latter were
mostly white and the outer tail feathers were white. His breast
and under parts were white. It was Snowflake the Snow Bunting in
his winter suit. Peter knew him instantly. There was no mistaking
him, for, as Peter well knew, there is no other bird of his size
and shape who is so largely white. He had appeared so
unexpectedly that it almost seemed as if he must have come out of
the snow clouds just as had the snow itself. Peter had his usual
question ready.

"Are you going to spend the winter here, Snowflake?" he cried.

Snowflake was so busy getting his breakfast that he did not reply
at once. Peter noticed that he did not hop, but walked or ran.
Presently he paused long enough to reply to Peter's question. "If
the snow has come to stay all winter, perhaps I'll stay," said
he.

"What has the snow to do with it?" demanded Peter.

"Only that I like the snow and I like cold weather. When the snow
begins to disappear, I just naturally fly back farther north,"
replied Snowflake. "It isn't that I don't like bare ground,
because I do, and I'm always glad when the snow is blown off in
places so that I can hunt for seeds on the ground. But when the
snow begins to melt everywhere I feel uneasy. I can't understand
how folks can be contented where there is no snow and ice. You
don't catch me going 'way down south. No, siree, you don't catch
me going 'way down south. Why, when the nesting season comes
around, I chase Jack Frost clear 'way up to where he spends the
summer. I nest 'way up on the shore of the Polar Sea, but of
course you don't know where that is, Peter Rabbit."

"If you are so fond of the cold in the Far North, the snow and
the ice, what did you come south at all for? Why don't you stay
up there all the year around?" demanded Peter.

"Because, Peter," replied Snowflake, twittering merrily, "like
everybody else, I have to eat in order to live. When you see me
down here you may know that the snows up north are so deep that
they have covered all the seeds. I always keep a weather eye out,
as the saying is, and the minute it looks as if there would be
too much snow for me to get a living, I move along. I hope I will
not have to go any farther than this, but if some morning you
wake up and find the snow so deep that all the heads of the weeds
are buried, don't expect to find me."

"That's what I call good, sound common sense," said another
voice, and a bird a little bigger than Snowflake, and who at
first glance seemed to be dressed almost wholly in soft chocolate
brown, alighted in the snow close by and at once began to run
about in search of seeds. It was Wanderer the Horned Lark.
Peter hailed him joyously, for there was something of mystery
about Wanderer, and Peter, as you know, loves mystery.

Peter had known him ever since his first winter, yet did not feel
really acquainted, for Wanderer seldom stayed long enough for a
real acquaintance. Every winter he would come, sometimes two or
three times, but seldom staying more than a few days at a time.
Quite often he and his relatives appeared with the Snowflakes,
for they are the best of friends and travel much together.

Now as Wanderer reached up to pick seeds from a weed-top, Peter
had a good look at him. The first things he noticed were the two
little horn-like tufts of black feathers above and behind the
eyes. It is from these that Wanderer gets the name of Horned
Lark. No other bird has anything quite like them. His
forehead, a line over each eye, and his throat were yellow.
There was a black mark from each corner of the bill curving
downward just below the eye and almost joining a black
crescent-shaped band across the breast. Beneath this he was
soiled white with dusky spots showing here and there. His back
was brown, in places having almost a pinkish tinge. His tail was
black, showing a little white on the edges when he flew. All
together he was a handsome little fellow.

"Do all of your family have those funny little horns?" asked
Peter.

"No," was Wanderer's prompt reply. "Mrs. Lark does not have
them."

"I think they are very becoming," said Peter politely.

"Thank you," replied Wanderer. "I am inclined to agree with you.
You should see me when I have my summer suit."

"Is it so very different from this?" asked Peter. "I think your
present suit is pretty enough."

"Well said, Peter, well said," interrupted Snowflake. "I quite
agree with you. I think Wanderer's present suit is pretty enough
for any one, but it is true that his summer suit is even
prettier. It isn't so very different, but it is brighter, and
those black markings are much stronger and show up better. You
see, Wanderer is one of my neighbors in the Far North, and I know
all about him."

"And that means that you don't know anything bad about me,
doesn't it?" chuckled Wanderer.

Snowflake nodded. "Not a thing," he replied. "I wouldn't ask for
a better neighbor. You should hear him sing, Peter. He sings up
in the air, and it really is a very pretty song."

"I'd just love to hear him," replied Peter. "Why don't you sing
here, Wanderer?"

"This isn't the singing season," replied Wanderer promptly.
"Besides, there isn't time to sing when one has to keep busy
every minute in order to get enough to eat."

"I don't see," said Peter, "why, when you get here, you don't
stay in one place."

"Because it is easier to get a good living by moving about,"
replied Wanderer promptly. "Besides, I like to visit new places.
I shouldn't enjoy being tied down in just one place like some
birds I know. Would you, Snowflake?"

Snowflake promptly replied that he wouldn't. Just then Peter
discovered something that he hadn't known before. "My goodness,"
he exclaimed, "what a long claw you have on each hind toe!"

It was true. Each hind claw was about twice as long as any other
claw. Peter couldn't see any special use for it and he was just
about to ask more about it when Wanderer suddenly spied a flock
of his relatives some distance away and flew to join them.
Probably this saved him some embarrassment, for it is doubtful if
he himself knew why Old Mother Nature had given him such long
hind claws.



CHAPTER XLII  Peter Learns Something About Spooky.

Peter Rabbit likes winter. At least he doesn't mind it so very
much, even though he has to really work for a living. Perhaps it
is a good thing that he does, for he might grow too fat to keep
out of the way of Reddy Fox. You see when the snow is deep Peter
is forced to eat whatever he can, and very often there isn't
much of anything for him but the bark of young trees. It is at
such times that Peter gets into mischief, for there is no bark he
likes better than that of young fruit trees. Now you know what
happens when the bark is taken off all the way around the trunk
of a tree. That tree dies. It dies for the simple reason that it
is up the inner layer of bark that the life-giving sap travels in
the spring and summer. Of course, when a strip of bark has been
taken off all the way around near the base of a tree, the sap
cannot go up and the tree must die.

Now up near the Old Orchard Farmer Brown had set out a young
orchard. Peter knew all about that young orchard, for he had
visited it many times in the summer. Then there had been plenty
of sweet clover and other green things to eat, and Peter had
never been so much as tempted to sample the bark of those young
trees. But now things were very different, and it was very seldom
that Peter knew what it was to have a full stomach. He kept
thinking of that young orchard. He knew that if he were wise
he would keep away from there. But the more he thought of it
the more it seemed to him that he just must have some of that
tender young bark. So just at dusk one evening, Peter started for
the young orchard.

Peter got there in safety and his eyes sparkled as he hopped over
to the nearest young tree. But when he reached it, Peter had a
dreadful disappointment. All around the trunk of that young
tree was wire netting. Peter couldn't get even a nibble of that
bark. He tried the next tree with no better result. Then he
hurried on from tree to tree, always with the same result. You
see Farmer Brown knew all about Peter's liking for the bark
of young fruit trees, and he had been wise enough to protect his
young orchard.

At last Peter gave up and hopped over to the Old Orchard. As he
passed a certain big tree he was startled by a voice. "What's
the matter, Peter?" said the voice. "You don't look happy."

Peter stopped short and stared up in the big apple-tree. Look as
he would he couldn't see anybody. Of course there wasn't a leaf
on that tree, and he could see all through it. Peter blinked and
felt foolish. He knew that had there been any one sitting on any
one of those branches he couldn't have helped seeing him.

"Don't look so high, Peter; don't look so high," said the voice
with a chuckle. This time it sounded as if it came right out of
the trunk of the tree. Peter stared at the trunk and then
suddenly laughed right out. Just a few feet above the ground was
a good sized hole in the tree, and poking his head out of it was
a funny little fellow with big eyes and a hooked beak.

"You certainly did fool me that time, Spooky," cried Peter. "I
ought to have recognized your voice, but I didn't."

Spooky the Screech Owl, for that is who it was, came out of the
hole in the tree and without a sound from his wings flew over
and perched just above Peter's head. He was a little fellow, not
over eight inches high, but there was no mistaking the family to
which he belonged. In fact he looked very much like a small copy
of Hooty the Great Horned Owl, so much so that Peter felt a
little cold shiver run over him, although he had nothing in the
world to fear from Spooky.

His head seemed to be almost as big around as his body, and he
seemed to leave no neck at all. He was dressed in bright
reddish-brown, with little streaks and bars of black. Underneath
he was whitish, with little streaks and bars of black and brown.
On each side of his head was a tuft of feathers. They looked like
ears and some people think they are ears, which is a mistake. His
eyes were round and yellow with a fierce hungry look in them. His
bill was small and almost hidden among the feathers of his face,
but it was hooked just like the bill of Hooty. As he settled
himself he turned his head around until he could look squarely
behind him, then brought it back again so quickly that to Peter
it looked as if it had gone clear around. You see Spooky's eyes
are fixed in their sockets and he cannot move them from side to
side. He has to turn his whole head in order to see to one side
or the other.

"You haven't told me yet why you look so unhappy, Peter," said
Spooky.

"Isn't an empty stomach enough to make any fellow unhappy?"
retorted Peter rather shortly.

Spooky chuckled. "I've got an empty stomach myself, Peter," said
he, "but it isn't making me unhappy. I have a feeling that
somewhere there is a fat Mouse waiting for me."

Just then Peter remembered what Jenny Wren had told him early in
the spring of how Spooky the Screech Owl lives all the year
around in a hollow tree, and curiosity made him forget for the
time being that he was hungry. "Did you live in that hole all
summer, Spooky?" he asked.

Spooky nodded solemnly. "I've lived in that hollow summer and
winter for three years," said he.

Peter's eyes opened very wide. "And till now I never even guessed
it," he exclaimed. "Did you raise a family there?"

"I certainly did," replied Spooky. "Mrs. Spooky and I raised a
family of four as fine looking youngsters as you ever have seen.
They've gone out into the Great World to make their own living
now. Two were dressed just like me and two were gray."

"What's that?" exclaimed Peter.

"I said that two were dressed just like me and two were gray,"
replied Spooky rather sharply.

"That's funny," Peter exclaimed.

"What's funny?" snapped Spooky rather crossly.

"Why that all four were not dressed alike," said Peter.

"There's nothing funny about it," retorted Spooky, and snapped
his bill sharply with a little cracking sound. "We Screech Owls
believe in variety. Some of us are gray and some of us are
reddish-brown. It is a case of where you cannot tell a person
just by the color of his clothes."

Peter nodded as if he quite understood, although he couldn't
understand at all. "I'm ever so pleased to find you living here,"
said he politely. "You see, in winter the Old Orchard is rather a
lonely place. I don't see how you get enough to eat when there
are so few birds about."

"Birds!" snapped Spooky. "What have birds to do with it?"

"Why, don't you live on birds?" asked Peter innocently.

"I should say not. I guess I would starve if I depended on birds
for my daily food," retorted Spooky. "I catch a Sparrow now and
then, to be sure, but usually it is an English Sparrow, and I
consider that I am doing the Old Orchard a good turn every time I
am lucky enough to catch one of the family of Bully the English
Sparrow. But I live mostly on Mice and Shrews in winter and in
summer I eat a lot of grasshoppers and other insects. If it
wasn't for me and my relatives I guess Mice would soon overrun
the Great World. Farmer Brown ought to be glad I've come to live
in the Old Orchard and I guess he is, for Farmer Brown's boy
knows all about this house of mine and never disturbs me. Now if
you'll excuse me I think I'll fly over to Farmer Brown's young
orchard. I ought to find a fat Mouse or two trying to get some of
the bark from those young trees."

"Huh!" exclaimed Peter. They can try all they want to, but they
won't get any; I can tell you that."

Spooky's round yellow eyes twinkled. "It must be you have been
trying to get some of that bark yourself," said he.

Peter didn't say anything but he looked guilty, and Spooky once
more chuckled as he spread his wings and flew away so soundlessly
that he seemed more like a drifting shadow than a bird. Then
Peter started for a certain swamp he knew of where he would be
sure to find enough bark to stay his appetite.




CHAPTER XLIII  Queer Feet and a Queerer Bill.

Peter Rabbit had gone over to the Green Forest to call on his
cousin, Jumper the Hare, who lives there altogether. He had no
difficulty in finding Jumper's tracks in the snow, and by
following these he at length came up with Jumper. The fact is,
Peter almost bumped into Jumper before he saw him, for Jumper was
wearing a coat as white as the snow itself. Squatting under a
little snow-covered hemlock-tree he looked like nothing more
than a little mound of snow.

"Oh!" cried Peter. "How you startled me! I wish I had a winter
coat like yours. It must be a great help in avoiding your
enemies."

"It certainly is, Cousin Peter," cried Jumper. "Nine times out
of ten all I have to do is to sit perfectly still when there
was no wind to carry my scent. I have had Reddy Fox pass within
a few feet of me and never suspect that I was near. I hope this
snow will last all winter. It is only when there isn't any snow
that I am particularly worried. Then I am not easy for a minute,
because my white coat can be seen a long distance against the
brown of the dead leaves."

Peter chuckled. "that is just when I feel safest," he replied.
"I like the snow, but this brown-gray coat of mine certainly
does show up against it. Don't you find it pretty lonesome over
here in the Green Forest with all the birds gone, Cousin
Jumper?"

Jumper shook his head. "Not all have gone, Peter, you know,"
said he. "Strutter the Grouse and Mrs. Grouse are here, and I see
them every day. They've got snowshoes now."

Peter blinked his eyes and looked rather perplexed. "Snowshoes!"
he exclaimed. "I don't understand what you mean."

"Come with me," replied Jumper, "and I'll show you."

So Jumper led the way and Peter followed close at his heels.
Presently they came to some tracks in the snow. At first
glance they reminded Peter of the queer tracks Farmer Brown's
ducks made in the mud on the edge of the Smiling Pool in summer.
"What funny tracks those are!" he exclaimed. "Who made them?"

"Just keep on following me and you'll see," retorted Jumper.

So they continued to follow the tracks until presently, just
ahead of them, they saw Strutter the Grouse. Peter opened his
eyes with surprise when he discovered that those queer tracks
were made by Strutter.

"Cousin Peter wants to see your snowshoes, Strutter," said Jumper
as they came up with him.

Strutter's bright eyes sparkled. "He's just as curious as ever,
isn't he?" said he. "Well, I don't mind showing him my
snowshoes because I think myself that they are really quite
wonderful." He held up one foot with the toes spread apart and
Peter saw that growing out from the sides of each toe were
queer little horny points set close together. They quite filled
the space between his toes. Peter recalled that when he had
seen Strutter in the summer those toes had been smooth and that
his tracks on soft ground had shown the outline of each toe
clearly. "How funny!" exclaimed Peter.

"There's nothing funny about them," retorted Strutter. "If Old
Mother Nature hadn't given me something of this kind I
certainly would have a hard time of it when there is snow on the
ground. If my feet were just the same as in summer I would sink
right down in when the snow is soft and wouldn't be able to walk
about at all. Now, with these snowshoes I get along very nicely.
You see I sink in but very little."

He took three or four steps and Peter saw right away how very
useful those snowshoes were. "My!" he exclaimed. "I wish Old
Mother Nature would give me snowshoes too." Strutter and Jumper
both laughed and after a second Peter laughed with them, for he
realized how impossible it would be for him to have anything like
those snowshoes of Strutter's.

"Cousin Peter was just saying that he should think I would find
it lonesome over here in the Green Forest. He forgot that you and
Mrs. Grouse stay all winter, and he forgot that while most of the
birds who spent the summer here have left, there are others who
come down from the Far North to take their place."

"Who, for instance?" demanded Peter.

"Snipper the Crossbill," replied Jumper promptly. "I haven't seen
him yet this winter, but I know he is here because only this
morning I found some pine seeds on the snow under a certain
tree."

"Huh!" Peter exclaimed. "That doesn't prove anything. Those
seeds might have just fallen, or Chatterer the Red Squirrel might
have dropped them."

"This isn't the season for seeds to just fall, and I know by the
signs that Chatterer hasn't been about," retorted Jumper. "Let's
go over there now and see what we will see."

Once more he led the way and Peter followed. As they drew near
that certain pine-tree, a short whistled note caused them to look
up. Busily at work on a pine cone near the top of a tree was a
bird about the size of Bully the English Sparrow. He was dressed
wholly in dull red with brownish-black wings and tail.

"What did I tell you?" cried Jumper. "There's Snipper this very
minute, and over in that next tree are a lot of his family
and relatives. See in what a funny way they climb about among the
branches. They don't flit or hop, but just climb around. I don't
know of any other bird anywhere around here that does that."

Just then a seed dropped and landed on the snow almost in front
of Peter's nose. Almost at once Snipper himself followed it,
picking it up and eating it with as much unconcern as if Peter
and Jumper were a mile away instead of only a foot or so. The
very first thing Peter noticed was Snipper's bill. The upper and
lower halves crossed at the tips. That bill looked very much as
if Snipper had struck something hard and twisted the tips over.

"Have--have--you met with an accident?" he asked a bit
hesitatingly.

Snipper looked surprised. "Are you talking to me?" he asked.
"Whatever put such an idea into your head?"

"Your bill," replied Peter promptly. "How did it get twisted
like that?"

Snipper laughed. "It isn't twisted," said he. "It is just the way
Old Mother Nature made it, and I really don't know what I'd do if
it were any different."

Peter scratched one long ear, as is his way when he is puzzled.
"I don't see," said he, "how it is possible for you to pick
up food with a bill like that."

"And I don't see how I would get my food if I didn't have a bill
like this," retorted Snipper. Then, seeing how puzzled Peter
really was, he went on to explain. "You see, I live very largely
on the seeds that grow in pine cones and the cones of other
trees. Of course I eat some other food, such as seeds and buds of
trees. But what I love best of all are the seeds that grow in the
cones of evergreen trees. If you've ever looked at one of those
cones, you will understand that those seeds are not very easy to
get at. But with this kind of a bill it is no trouble at all. I
can snip them out just as easily as birds with straight bills can
pick up seeds. You see my bill is very much like a pair of
scissors."

"It really is very wonderful," confessed Peter. "Do you mind
telling me, Snipper, why I never have seen you here in summer?"

"For the same reason that in summer you never see Snowflake and
Wanderer the Horned Lark and some others I might name," replied
Snipper. "Give me the Far North every time. I would stay there
the year through but that sometimes food gets scarce up there.
That is why I am down here now. If you'll excuse me, I'll go
finish my breakfast."

Snipper flew up in the tree where the other Crossbills were at
work and Peter and Jumper watched them.

"I suppose you know," said Jumper, "that Snipper has a cousin who
looks almost exactly like him with the exception of two white
bars on each wing. He is called the White-winged Crossbill."

"I didn't know it," replied Peter, "but I'm glad you've told me.
I certainly shall watch out for him. I can't get over those
funny bills. No one could ever mistake it for any other bird.
Is there anyone else now from the Far North whom I haven't seen?"




CHAPTER XLIV  More Folks in Red.

Jumper the Hare didn't have time to reply to Peter Rabbit's
question when Peter asked if there was any one else besides the
Crossbills who had come down from the Far North.

"I have," said a voice from a tree just back of them.

It was so unexpected that it made both Peter and Jumper hop in
startled surprise. Then they turned to see who had spoken. There
sat a bird just a little smaller than Welcome Robin, who at first
glance seemed to be dressed in strawberry-red. However, a closer
look showed that there were slate-gray markings about his head,
under his wings and on his legs. His tail was brown. His wings
were brown, marked with black and white and slate. His bill was
thick and rather short.

"Who are you?" demanded Peter very bluntly and impolitely.

"I'm Piny the Pine Grosbeak," replied the stranger, seemingly not
at all put out by Peter's bluntness.

"Oh," said Peter. "Are you related to Rosebreast the Grosbeak who
nested last summer in the Old Orchard?"

"I certainly am," replied Piny. "He is my very own cousin. I've
never seen him because he never ventures up where I live and I
don't go down where he spends the winter, but all members of the
Grosbeak family are cousins."

"Rosebreast is very lovely and I'm very fond of him," said
Peter. "We are very good friends."

"Then I know we are going to be good friends," replied Piny. As
he said this he turned and Peter noticed that his tail was
distinctly forked instead of being square across like that of
Welcome Robin. Piny whistled, and almost at once he was joined by
another bird who in shape was just like him, but who was dressed
in slaty-gray and olive-yellow, instead of the bright red that he
himself wore. Piny introduced the newcomer as Mrs. Grosbeak.

"Lovely weather, isn't it?" said she. "I love the snow. I
wouldn't feel at home with no snow about. Why, last spring I
even built my nest before the snow was gone in the Far North.
We certainly hated to leave up there, but food was getting so
scarce that we had to. We have just arrived. Can you tell me if
there are any cedar-trees or ash-trees or sumacs near here?"

Peter hastened to tell her just where she would find these trees
and then rather timidly asked why she wanted to find them.

"Because they hold their berries all winter," replied Mrs.
Grosbeak promptly, "and those berries make very good eating.
I rather thought there must be some around here. If there are
enough of them we certainly shall stay a while."

"I hope you will," replied Peter. "I want to get better
acquainted with you. You know, if it were not for you folks who
come down from the Far North the Green Forest would be rather a
lonely place in winter. There are times when I like to be alon