e,
but I like to feel that there is someone I can call on when I
feel lonesome. Did you and Piny come down alone?"

"No, indeed," replied Mrs. Grosbeak. "There is a flock of our
relatives not far away. We came down with the Crossbills. A11
together we made quite a party."

Peter and Jumper stayed a while to gossip with the Grosbeaks.
Then Peter bethought him that it was high time for him to return
to the dear Old Briar-patch, and bidding his new friends good-by,
he started off through the Green Forest, lipperty-lipperty-lip.
When he reached the edge of the Green Forest he decided to run
over to the weedy field to see if the Snowflakes and the Tree
Sparrows and the Horned Larks were there. They were, but almost
at once Peter discovered that they had company. Twittering
cheerfully as he busily picked seeds out of the top of a weed
which stood above the snow, was a bird very little bigger than
Chicoree the Goldfinch. But when Peter looked at him he just
had to rub his eyes.

"Gracious goodness!" he muttered, "it must be something is
wrong with my eyes so that I am seeing red. I've already seen two
birds dressed in red and now there's another. It certainly must
be my eyes. There's Dotty the Tree Sparrow over there; I hear his
voice. I wonder if he will look red."

Peter hopped near enough to get a good look at Dotty and found
him dressed just as he should be. That relieved Peter's mind. His
eyes were quite as they should be. Then he returned to look at
the happy little stranger still busily picking seeds from that
weed-top.

The top of his head was bright red. There was no doubt about it.
His back was toward Peter at the time and but for that bright red
cap Peter certainly would have taken him for one of his friends
among the Sparrow family. You see his back was grayish-brown.
Peter could think of several Sparrows with backs very much like
it. But when he looked closely he saw that just above his tail
this little stranger wore a pinkish patch, and that was something
no Sparrow of Peter's acquaintance possesses.

Then the lively little stranger turned to face Peter and a pair
of bright eyes twinkled mischievously. "Well," said he, "how do
you like my appearance? Anything wrong with me? I was taught that
it is very impolite to stare at any one. I guess your mother
forgot to teach you manners."

Peter paid no attention to what was said but continued to stare.
"My, how pretty you are!" he exclaimed.

The little stranger WAS pretty. His breast was PINK. Below this
he was white. The middle of his throat was black and his sides
were streaked with reddish-brown. He looked pleased at Peter's
exclamation.

"I'm glad you think I'm pretty," said he. "I like pink myself. I
like it very much indeed. I suppose you've already seen my
friends, Snipper the Crossbill and Piny the Grosbeak."

Peter promptly bobbed his head. "I've just come from making their
acquaintance," said he. "By the way you speak, I presume you also
are from the Far North. I am just beginning to learn that there
are more folks who make their homes in the Far North than I
had dreamed of. If you please, I don't believe I know you at
all."

"I'm Redpoll," was the prompt response. "I am called that because
of my red cap. Yes, indeed, I make my home in the Far North.
There is no place like it. You really ought to run up there and
get acquainted with the folks who make their homes there and love
it."

Redpoll laughed at his own joke, but Peter didn't see the joke at
all. "Is it so very far?" he asked innocently; then added, "I'd
dearly love to go."

Redpoll laughed harder than ever. "Yes," said he, "it is. I am
afraid you would be a very old and very gray Rabbit by the time
you got there. I guess the next thing is for you to make the
acquaintance of some of us who get down here once in awhile."

Redpoll called softly and almost at once was joined by another
red-capped bird but without the pink breast, and with sides more
heavily streaked. "This is Mrs. Redpoll," announced her lively
little mate. Then he turned to her and added, "I've just been
telling Peter Rabbit that as long as he cannot visit our
beautiful Far North he must become acquainted with those of us
who come down here in the winter. I'm sure he'll find us very
friendly folks."

"I'm sure I shall," said Peter. "If you please, do you live
altogether on these weed seeds?"

Redpoll laughed his usual happy laugh. "Hardly, Peter," replied
he. "We like the seeds of the birches and the alders, and we eat
the seeds of the evergreen trees when we get them. Sometimes we
find them in cones Snipper the Crossbill has opened but hasn't
picked all the seeds out of. Sometimes he drops some for us. Oh,
we always manage to get plenty to eat. There are some of our
relatives over there and we must join them. We'll see you again,
Peter."

Peter said he hoped they would and then watched them fly over to
join their friends. Suddenly, as if a signal had been given, all
spread their wings at the same instant and flew up in a
birch-tree not far away. All seemed to take wing at precisely the
same instant. Up in the birch-tree they sat for a minute or so and
then, just as if another signal had been given, all began to pick
out the tiny seeds from the birch tassels. No one bird seemed to
be first. It was quite like a drill, or as if each had thought of
the same thing at the same instant. Peter chuckled over it all
the way home. And somehow he felt better for having made the
acquaintance of the Redpolls. It was the feeling that everybody
so fortunate as to meet them on a gold winter's day is sure to
have.



CHAPTER XLV  Peter Sees Two Terrible Feathered Hunters.

While it is true that Peter Rabbit likes winter, it is also true
that life is anything but easy for him that season. In the
first place he has to travel about a great deal to get sufficient
food, and that means that he must run more risks. There isn't a
minute of day or night that he is outside of the dear Old
Briar-patch when he can afford not to watch and listen for
danger. You see, at this season of the year, Reddy Fox often finds
it difficult to get a good meal. He is hungry most of the time,
and he is forever hunting for Peter Rabbit. With snow on the
ground and no leaves on the bushes and young trees, it is not
easy for Peter to hide. So, as he travels about, the thought of
Reddy Fox is always in his mind.

But there are others whom Peter fears even more, and these wear
feathers instead of fur coats. One of these is Terror the
Goshawk. Peter is not alone in his fear of Terror. There is not
one among his feathered friends who will not shiver at the
mention of Terror's name. Peter will not soon forget the day he
discovered that Terror had come down from the Far North, and was
likely to stay for the rest of the winter. Peter went hungry all
the rest of that day.

You see it was this way: Peter had gone over to the Green Forest
very early that morning in the hope of getting breakfast in a
certain swamp. He was hopping along, lipperty-lipperty-lip, with
his thoughts chiefly on that breakfast he hoped to get, but at
the same time with ears and eyes alert for possible danger, when
a strange feeling swept over him. It was a feeling that great
danger was very near, though he saw nothing and heard nothing to
indicate it. It was just a feeling, that was all.

Now Peter has learned that the wise thing to do when one has such
a feeling as that is to seek safety first and investigate
afterwards. At the instant he felt that strange feeling of fear
he was passing a certain big, hollow log. Without really knowing
why he did it, because, you know, he didn't stop to do any
thinking, he dived into that hollow log, and even as he did so
there was the sharp swish of great wings. Terror the Goshawk had
missed catching Peter by the fraction of a second.

With his heart thumping as if it were trying to pound its way
through his ribs, Peter peeped out of that hollow log. Terror had
alighted on a tall stump only a few feet away. To Peter in his
fright he seemed the biggest bird he ever had seen. Of course he
wasn't. Actually he was very near the same size as Redtail the
Hawk, whom Peter knew well. He was handsome. There was no denying
the fact that he was handsome.

His back was bluish. His head seemed almost black. Over and
behind each eye was a white line. Underneath he was beautifully
marked with wavy bars of gray and white. On his tail were four
dark bands. Yes, he was handsome. But Peter had no thought for
his beauty. He could see nothing but the fierceness of the eyes
that were fixed on the entrance to that hollow log. Peter
shivered as if with a cold chill. He knew that in Terror was no
pity or gentleness.

"I hope," thought Peter, "that Mr. and Mrs. Grouse are nowhere
about." You see he knew that there is no one that Terror would
rather catch than a member of the Grouse family.

Terror did not sit on that stump long. He knew that Peter was
not likely to come out in a hurry. Presently he flew away, and
Peter suspected from the direction in which he was headed that
Terror was going over to visit Farmer Brown's henyard. Of all the
members of the Hawk family there is none more bold than Terror
the Goshawk. He would not hesitate to seize a hen from almost
beneath Farmer Brown's nose. He is well named, for the mere
suspicion that he is anywhere about strikes terror to the heart
of all the furred and feathered folks. He is so swift of wing
that few can escape him, and he has no pity, but kills for the
mere love of killing. In this respect he is like Shadow the
Weasel. To kill for food is forgiven by the little people of the
Green Forest and the Green Meadows, but to kill needlessly is
unpardonable. This is why Terror the Goshawk is universally hated
and has not a single friend.

All that day Peter remained hidden in that hollow log. He did not
dare put foot outside until the Black Shadows began to creep
through the Green Forest. Then he knew that there was nothing
more to fear from Terror the Goshawk, for he hunts only by day.
Once more Peter's thoughts were chiefly of his stomach, for it
was very, very empty.

But it was not intended that Peter should fill his stomach at
once. He had gone but a little way when from just ahead of
him the silence of the early evening was broken by a terrifying
sound--"Whooo-hoo-hoo, whooo-hoo!" It was so sudden and there was
in it such a note of fierceness that Peter had all he could do to
keep from jumping and running for dear life. But he knew that
voice and he knew, too, that safety lay in keeping perfectly
still. So with his heart thumping madly, as when he had escaped
from Terror that morning, Peter sat as still as if he could not
move.

It was the hunting call of Hooty the Great Horned Owl, and it
had been intended to frighten some one into jumping and running,
or at least into moving ever so little. Peter knew all about that
trick of Hooty's. He knew that in all the Green Forest there are
no ears so wonderful as those of Hooty the Owl, and that the
instant he had uttered that fierce hunting call he had strained
those wonderful ears to catch the faintest sound which some
startled little sleeper of the night might make. The rustle of a
leaf would be enough to bring Hooty to the spot on his great
silent wings, and then his fierce yellow eyes, which are made for
seeing in the dusk, would find the victim.

So Peter sat still, fearful that the very thumping of his heart
might reach those wonderful ears. Again that terrible hunting cry
rang out, and again Peter had all he could do to keep from
jumping. But he didn't jump, and a few minutes later, as he sat
staring at a certain tall, dead stub of a tree, wondering just
where Hooty was, the top of that stub seemed to break off, and a
great, broad-winged bird flew away soundlessly like a drifting
shadow. It was Hooty himself. Sitting perfectly straight on the
top of that tall, dead stub he had seemed a part of it. Peter
waited some time before he ventured to move. Finally he heard
Hooty's hunting call in a distant part of the Green Forest, and
knew that it was safe for him to once more think of his empty
stomach.

Later in the winter while the snow still lay in the Green Forest,
and the ice still bound the Laughing Brook, Peter made a
surprising discovery. He was over in a certain lonely part of
the Green Forest when he happened to remember that near there was
an old nest which had once belonged to Redtail the Hawk. Out of
idle curiosity Peter ran over for a look at that old nest.
Imagine how surprised he was when just as he came within sight of
it, he saw a great bird just settling down on it. Peter's heart
jumped right up in his throat. At least that is the way it
seemed, for he recognized Mrs. Hooty.

Of course Peter stopped right where he was and took the greatest
care not to move or make a sound. Presently Hooty himself
appeared and perched in a tree near at hand. Peter has seen Hooty
many times before, but always as a great, drifting shadow in the
moonlight. Now he could see him clearly. As he sat bolt upright
he seemed to be of the same height as Terror the Goshawk, but
with a very much bigger body. If Peter had but known it, his
appearance of great size was largely due to the fluffy feathers
in which Hooty was clothed. Like his small cousin, Spooky the
Screech Owl, Hooty seemed to have no neck at all. He looked as if
his great head was set directly on his shoulders. From each side
of his head two great tufts of feathers stood out like ears or
horns. His bill was sharply hooked. He was dressed wholly in
reddish-brown with little buff and black markings, and on his
throat was a white patch. His legs were feathered, and so were
his feet clear to the great claws

But it was on the great, round, fierce, yellow eyes that Peter
kept his own eyes. He had always thought of Hooty as being able
to see only in the dusk of evening or on moonlight nights, but
somehow he had a feeling that even now in broad daylight Hooty
could see perfectly well, and he was quite right.

For a long time Peter sat there without moving. He dared not do
anything else. After he had recovered from his first fright he
began to wonder what Hooty and Mrs. Hooty were doing at that old
nest. His curiosity was aroused. He felt that he simply must find
out. By and by Hooty flew away very carefully, so as not to
attract the attention of Mrs. Hooty. Peter stole back the way he
had come.

When he was far enough away to feel reasonably safe, he
scampered as fast as ever he could. He wanted to get away from
that place, and he wanted to find some one of whom he could ask
questions.

Presently he met his cousin, Jumper the Hare, and at once in a
most excited manner told him all he had seen.

Jumper listened until Peter was through. "If you'll take my
advice," said he, "you'll keep away from that part of the Green
Forest, Cousin Peter. From what you tell me it is quite clear to
me that the Hooties have begun nesting."

"Nesting!" exclaimed Peter. "Nesting! Why, gentle Mistress Spring
will not get here for a month yet!"

"I said NESTING," retorted Jumper, speaking rather crossly, for
you see he did not like to have his word doubted. "Hooty the
Great Horned Owl doesn't wait for Mistress Spring. He and Mrs.
Hooty believe in getting household cares out of the way early.
Along about this time of year they hunt up an old nest of Redtail
the Hawk or Blacky the Crow or Chatterer the Red Squirrel, for
they do not take the trouble to build a nest themselves. Then
Mrs. Hooty lays her eggs while there is still snow and ice. Why
their youngsters don't catch their death from cold when they
hatch out is more than I can say. But they don't. I'm sorry to
hear that the Hooties have a nest here this year. It means a bad
time for a lot of little folks in feathers and fur. I certainly
shall keep away in from that part of the Green Forest, and I advise
you to."

Peter said that he certainly should, and then started on for the
dear Old Briar-patch to think things over. The discovery that
already the nesting season of a new year had begun turned Peter's
thoughts towards the coming of sweet Mistress Spring and the
return of his many feathered friends who had left for the far-away
South so long before. A great longing to hear the voices of Welcome
Robin and Winsome Bluebird and Little Friend the Song Sparrow swept
over him, and a still greater longing for a bit of friendly gossip
with Jenny Wren. In the past year he had learned much about his
feathered neighbors, but there were still many things he wanted
to know, things which only Jenny Wren could tell him. He was only
just beginning to find out that no one knows all there is to know,
especially about the birds. And no one ever will.










Etext prepared by John Bickers, jbickers@ihug.co.nz
and Dagny, dagnyj@hotmail.com





BEATRICE

by H. Rider Haggard




First Published in 1893.




                                  TO

                               BEATRICE



         "Oh, kind is Death that Life's long trouble closes,
          Yet at Death's coming Life shrinks back affright;
          It sees the dark hand,--not that it encloses
              A cup of light.

          So oft the Spirit seeing Love draw nigh
          As 'neath the shadow of destruction, quakes,
          For Self, dark tyrant of the Soul, must die,
              When Love awakes.

          Aye, let him die in darkness! But for thee,--
          Breathe thou the breath of morning and be free!"

                              Rückert. Translated by F. W. B.





                               BEATRICE



                              CHAPTER I

                            A MIST WRAITH

The autumn afternoon was fading into evening. It had been cloudy
weather, but the clouds had softened and broken up. Now they were lost
in slowly darkening blue. The sea was perfectly and utterly still. It
seemed to sleep, but in its sleep it still waxed with the rising tide.
The eye could not mark its slow increase, but Beatrice, standing upon
the farthest point of the Dog Rocks, idly noted that the long brown
weeds which clung about their sides began to lift as the water took
their weight, till at last the delicate pattern floated out and lay
like a woman's hair upon the green depth of sea. Meanwhile a mist was
growing dense and soft upon the quiet waters. It was not blown up from
the west, it simply grew like the twilight, making the silence yet
more silent and blotting away the outlines of the land. Beatrice gave
up studying the seaweed and watched the gathering of these fleecy
hosts.

"What a curious evening," she said aloud to herself, speaking in a low
full voice. "I have not seen one like it since mother died, and that
is seven years ago. I've grown since then, grown every way," and she
laughed somewhat sadly, and looked at her own reflection in the quiet
water.

She could not have looked at anything more charming, for it would have
been hard to find a girl of nobler mien than Beatrice Granger as on
this her twenty-second birthday, she stood and gazed into that misty
sea.

Of rather more than middle height, and modelled like a statue,
strength and health seemed to radiate from her form. But it was her
face with the stamp of intellect and power shadowing its woman's
loveliness that must have made her remarkable among women even more
beautiful than herself. There are many girls who have rich brown hair,
like some autumn leaf here and there just yellowing into gold, girls
whose deep grey eyes can grow tender as a dove's, or flash like the
stirred waters of a northern sea, and whose bloom can bear comparison
with the wilding rose. But few can show a face like that which upon
this day first dawned on Geoffrey Bingham to his sorrow and his hope.
It was strong and pure and sweet as the keen sea breath, and looking
on it one must know that beneath this fair cloak lay a wit as fair.
And yet it was all womanly; here was not the hard sexless stamp of the
"cultured" female. She who owned it was capable of many things. She
could love and she could suffer, and if need be, she could dare or
die. It was to be read upon that lovely brow and face, and in the
depths of those grey eyes--that is, by those to whom the book of
character is open, and who wish to study it.

But Beatrice was not thinking of her loveliness as she gazed into the
water. She knew that she was beautiful of course; her beauty was too
obvious to be overlooked, and besides it had been brought home to her
in several more or less disagreeable ways.

"Seven years," she was thinking, "since the night of the 'death fog;'
that was what old Edward called it, and so it was. I was only so high
then," and following her thoughts she touched herself upon the breast.
"And I was happy too in my own way. Why can't one always be fifteen,
and believe everything one is told?" and she sighed. "Seven years and
nothing done yet. Work, work, and nothing coming out of the work, and
everything fading away. I think that life is very dreary when one has
lost everything, and found nothing, and loves nobody. I wonder what it
will be like in another seven years."

She covered her eyes with her hands, and then taking them away, once
more looked at the water. Such light as struggled through the fog was
behind her, and the mist was thickening. At first she had some
difficulty in tracing her own likeness upon the glassy surface, but
gradually she marked its outline. It stretched away from her, and its
appearance was as though she herself were lying on her back in the
water wrapped about with the fleecy mist. "How curious it seems," she
thought; "what is it that reflection reminds me of with the white all
round it?"

Next instant she gave a little cry and turned sharply away. She knew
now. It recalled her mother as she had last seen her seven years ago.



                              CHAPTER II

                           AT THE BELL ROCK

A mile or more away from where Beatrice stood and saw visions, and
further up the coast-line, a second group of rocks, known from their
colour as the Red Rocks, or sometimes, for another reason, as the Bell
Rocks, juts out between half and three-quarters of a mile into the
waters of the Welsh Bay that lies behind Rumball Point. At low tide
these rocks are bare, so that a man may walk or wade to their
extremity, but when the flood is full only one or two of the very
largest can from time to time be seen projecting their weed-wreathed
heads through the wash of the shore-bound waves. In certain sets of
the wind and tide this is a terrible and most dangerous spot in rough
weather, as more than one vessel have learnt to their cost. So long
ago as 1780 a three-decker man-of-war went ashore there in a furious
winter gale, and, with one exception, every living soul on board of
her, to the number of seven hundred, was drowned. The one exception
was a man in irons, who came safely and serenely ashore seated upon a
piece of wreckage. Nobody ever knew how the shipwreck happened, least
of all the survivor in irons, but the tradition of the terror of the
scene yet lives in the district, and the spot where the bones of the
drowned men still peep grimly through the sand is not unnaturally
supposed to be haunted. Ever since this catastrophe a large bell (it
was originally the bell of the ill-fated vessel itself, and still
bears her name, "H.M.S. Thunder," stamped upon its metal) has been
fixed upon the highest rock, and in times of storm and at high tide
sends its solemn note of warning booming across the deep.

But the bell was quiet now, and just beneath it, in the shadow of the
rock whereon it was placed, a man half hidden in seaweed, with which
he appeared to have purposely covered himself, was seated upon a piece
of wreck. In appearance he was a very fine man, big-shouldered and
broad limbed, and his age might have been thirty-five or a little
more. Of his frame, however, what between the mist and the
unpleasantly damp seaweed with which he was wreathed, not much was to
be seen. But such light as there was fell upon his face as he peered
eagerly over and round the rock, and glinted down the barrels of the
double ten-bore gun which he held across his knee. It was a striking
countenance, with its brownish eyes, dark peaked beard and strong
features, very powerful and very able. And yet there was a certain
softness in the face, which hovered round the region of the mouth like
light at the edge of a dark cloud, hinting at gentle sunshine. But
little of this was visible now. Geoffrey Bingham, barrister-at-law of
the Inner Temple, M.A., was engaged with a very serious occupation. He
was trying to shoot curlew as they passed over his hiding-place on
their way to the mud banks where they feed further along the coast.

Now if there is a thing in the world which calls for the exercise of
man's every faculty it is curlew shooting in a mist. Perhaps he may
wait for an hour or even two hours and see nothing, not even an
oyster-catcher. Then at last from miles away comes the faint wild call
of curlew on the wing. He strains his eyes, the call comes nearer, but
nothing can he see. At last, seventy yards or more to the right, he
catches sight of the flicker of beating wings, and, like a flash, they
are gone. Again a call--the curlew are flighting. He looks and looks,
in his excitement struggling to his feet and raising his head
incautiously far above the sheltering rock. There they come, a great
flock of thirty or more, bearing straight down on him, a hundred yards
off--eighty--sixty--now. Up goes the gun, but alas and alas! they
catch a glimpse of the light glinting on the barrels, and perhaps of
the head behind them, and in another second they have broken and
scattered this way and that way, twisting off like a wisp of gigantic
snipe, to vanish with melancholy cries into the depth of mist.

This is bad, but the ardent sportsman sits down with a groan and
waits, listening to the soft lap of the tide. And then at last virtue
is rewarded. First of all two wild duck come over, cleaving the air
like arrows. The mallard is missed, but the left barrel reaches the
duck, and down it comes with a full and satisfying thud. Hardly have
the cartridges been replaced when the wild cry of the curlew is once
more heard--quite close this time. There they are, looming large
against the fog. Bang! down goes the first and lies flapping among the
rocks. Like a flash the second is away to the left. Bang! after him,
and caught him too! Hark to the splash as he falls into the deep water
fifty yards away. And then the mist closes in so densely that shooting
is done with for the day. Well, that right and left has been worth
three hours' wait in the wet seaweed and the violent cold that may
follow--that is, to any man who has a soul for true sport.

Just such an experience as this had befallen Geoffrey Bingham. He had
bagged his wild duck and his brace of curlew--that is, he had bagged
one of them, for the other was floating in the sea--when a sudden
increase in the density of the mist put a stop to further operations.
He shook the wet seaweed off his rough clothes, and, having lit a
short briar pipe, set to work to hunt for the duck and the first
curfew. He found them easily enough, and then, walking to the edge of
the rocks, up the sides of which the tide was gradually creeping,
peered into the mist to see if he could find the other. Presently the
fog lifted a little, and he discovered the bird floating on the oily
water about fifty yards away. A little to the left the rocks ran out
in a peak, and he knew from experience that the tide setting towards
the shore would carry the curlew past this peak. So he went to its
extremity, sat down upon a big stone and waited. All this while the
tide was rising fast, though, intent as he was upon bringing the
curlew to bag, he did not pay much heed to it, forgetting that it was
cutting him off from the land. At last, after more than half-an-hour
of waiting, he caught sight of the curlew again, but, as bad luck
would have it, it was still twenty yards or more from him and in deep
water. He was determined, however, to get the bird if he could, for
Geoffrey hated leaving his game, so he pulled up his trousers and set
to work to wade towards it. For the first few steps all went well, but
the fourth or fifth landed him in a hole that wet his right leg nearly
up to the thigh and gave his ankle a severe twist. Reflecting that it
would be very awkward if he sprained his ankle in such a lonely place,
he beat a retreat, and bethought him, unless the curlew was to become
food for the dog-fish, that he had better strip bodily and swim for
it. This--for Geoffrey was a man of determined mind--he decided to do,
and had already taken off his coat and waistcoat to that end, when
suddenly some sort of a boat--he judged it to be a canoe from the
slightness of its shape--loomed up in the mist before him. An idea
struck him: the canoe or its occupant, if anybody could be insane
enough to come out canoeing in such water, might fetch the curlew and
save him a swim.

"Hi!" he shouted in stentorian tones. "Hullo there!"

"Yes," answered a woman's gentle voice across the waters.

"Oh," he replied, struggling to get into his waistcoat again, for the
voice told him that he was dealing with some befogged lady, "I'm sure
I beg your pardon, but would you do me a favour? There is a dead
curlew floating about, not ten yards from your boat. If you wouldn't
mind----"

A white hand was put forward, and the canoe glided on towards the
bird. Presently the hand plunged downwards into the misty waters and
the curlew was bagged. Then, while Geoffrey was still struggling with
his waistcoat, the canoe sped towards him like a dream boat, and in
another moment it was beneath his rock, and a sweet dim face was
looking up into his own.



Now let us go back a little (alas! that the privilege should be
peculiar to the recorder of things done), and see how it came about
that Beatrice Granger was present to retrieve Geoffrey Bingham's dead
curlew.

Immediately after the unpleasant idea recorded in the last, or, to be
more accurate, in the first chapter of this comedy, had impressed
itself upon Beatrice's mind, she came to the conclusion that she had
seen enough of the Dog Rocks for one afternoon. Thereon, like a
sensible person, she set herself to quit them in the same way that she
had reached them, namely by means of a canoe. She got into her canoe
safely enough, and paddled a little way out to sea, with a view of
returning to the place whence she came. But the further she went out,
and it was necessary that she should go some way on account of the
rocks and the currents, the denser grew the fog. Sounds came through
it indeed, but she could not clearly distinguish whence they came,
till at last, well as she knew the coast, she grew confused as to
whither she was heading. In this dilemma, while she rested on her
paddle staring into the dense surrounding mist and keeping her grey
eyes as wide open as nature would allow, and that was very wide, she
heard the report of a gun behind her to the right. Arguing to herself
that some wild-fowler on the water must have fired it who would be
able to direct her, she turned the canoe round and paddled swiftly in
the direction whence the sound came. Presently she heard the gun
again; both barrels were fired, in there to the right, but some way
off. She paddled on vigorously, but now no more shots came to guide
her, therefore for a while her search was fruitless. At last, however,
she saw something looming through the mist ahead; it was the Red
Rocks, though she did not know it, and she drew near with caution till
Geoffrey's shout broke upon her ears.

She picked up the dead bird and paddled towards the dim figure who was
evidently wrestling with something, she could not see what.

"Here is the curlew, sir," she said.

"Oh, thank you," answered the figure on the rock. "I am infinitely
obliged to you. I was just going to swim for it, I can't bear losing
my game. It seems so cruel to shoot birds for nothing."

"I dare say that you will not make much use of it now that you have
got it," said the gentle voice in the canoe. "Curlew are not very good
eating."

"That is scarcely the point," replied the Crusoe on the rock. "The
point is to bring them home. /Après cela----/"

"The birdstuffer?" said the voice.

"No," answered Crusoe, "the cook----"

A laugh came back from the canoe--and then a question.

"Pray, Mr. Bingham, can you tell me where I am? I have quite lost my
reckoning in the mist."

He started. How did this mysterious young lady in a boat know his
name?

"You are at the Red Rocks; there is the bell, that grey thing, Miss--
Miss----"

"Beatrice Granger," she put in hastily. "My father is the clergyman of
Bryngelly. I saw you when you and Lady Honoria Bingham looked into the
school yesterday. I teach in the school." She did not tell him,
however, that his face had interested her so much that she had asked
his name.

Again he started. He had heard of this young lady. Somebody had told
him that she was the prettiest girl in Wales, and the cleverest, but
that her father was not a gentleman.

"Oh," he said, taking off his hat in the direction of the canoe.
"Isn't it a little risky, Miss Granger, for you to be canoeing alone
in this mist?"

"Yes," she answered frankly, "but I am used to it; I go out canoeing
in all possible weathers. It is my amusement, and after all the risk
does not matter much," she added, more to herself than to him.

While he was wondering what she meant by that dark saying, she went on
quickly:

"Do you know, Mr. Bingham, I think that you are in more danger than I
am. It must be getting near seven o'clock, and the tide is high at a
quarter to eight. Unless I am mistaken there is by now nearly half a
mile of deep water between you and the shore."

"My word!" he said. "I forgot all about the tide. What between the
shooting and looking for that curlew, and the mist, it never occurred
to me that it was getting late. I suppose I must swim for it, that is
all."

"No, no," she answered earnestly, "it is very dangerous swimming here;
the place is full of sharp rocks, and there is a tremendous current."

"Well, then, what is to be done? Will your canoe carry two? If so,
perhaps you would kindly put me ashore?"

"Yes," she said, "it is a double canoe. But I dare not take you ashore
here; there are too many rocks, and it is impossible to see the ripple
on them in this mist. We should sink the canoe. No, you must get in
and I must paddle you home to Bryngelly, that's all. Now that I know
where I am I think that I can find the way."

"Really," he said, "you are very good."

"Not at all," she answered, "you see I must go myself anyhow, so I
shall be glad of your help. It is nearly five miles by water, you
know, and not a pleasant night."

There was truth in this. Geoffrey was perfectly prepared to risk a
swim to the shore on his own account, but he did not at all like the
idea of leaving this young lady to find her own way back to Bryngelly
through the mist and gathering darkness, and in that frail canoe. He
would not have liked it if she had been a man, for he knew that there
was great risk in such a voyage. So after making one more fruitless
suggestion that they should try and reach the shore, taking the chance
of rocks, sunken or otherwise, and then walk home, to which Beatrice
would not consent, he accepted her offer.

"At the least you will allow me to paddle," he said, as she skilfully
brought the canoe right under his rock, which the tide was now high
enough to allow her to do.

"If you like," she answered doubtfully. "My hands are a little sore,
and, of course," with a glance at his broad shoulders, "you are much
stronger. But if you are not used to it I dare say that I should get
on as well as you."

"Nonsense," he said sharply. "I will not allow you to paddle me for
five miles."

She yielded without another word, and very gingerly shifted her seat
so that her back was towards the bow of the canoe, leaving him to
occupy the paddling place opposite to her.

Then he handed her his gun, which, together with the dead birds, she
carefully stowed in the bottom of the frail craft. Next, with great
caution, he slid down the rock till his feet rested in the canoe.

"Be careful or you will upset us," she said, leaning forward and
stretching out her hand for him to support himself by.

Then it was, as he took it, that he for the first time really saw her
face, with the mist drops hanging to the bent eyelashes, and knew how
beautiful it was.



                             CHAPTER III

                        A CONFESSION OF FAITH

"Are you ready?" he said, recovering himself from the pleasing shock
of this serge-draped vision of the mist.

"Yes," said Beatrice. "You must head straight out to sea for a little
--not too far, for if we get beyond the shelter of Rumball Point we
might founder in the rollers--there are always rollers there--then
steer to the left. I will tell you when. And, Mr. Bingham, please be
careful of the paddle; it has been spliced, and won't bear rough
usage."

"All right," he answered, and they started gaily enough, the light
canoe gliding swiftly forward beneath his sturdy strokes.

Beatrice was leaning back with her head bent a little forward, so that
he could only see her chin and the sweet curve of the lips above it.
But she could see all his face as it swayed towards her with each
motion of the paddle, and she watched it with interest. It was a new
type of face to her, so strong and manly, and yet so gentle about the
mouth--almost too gentle she thought. What made him marry Lady
Honoria? Beatrice wondered; she did not look particularly gentle,
though she was such a graceful woman.

And thus they went on for some time, each wondering about the other
and at heart admiring the other, which was not strange, for they were
a very proper pair, but saying no word till at last, after about a
quarter of an hour's hard paddling, Geoffrey paused to rest.

"Do you do much of this kind of thing, Miss Granger?" he said with a
gasp, "because it is rather hard work."

She laughed. "Ah," she said, "I thought you would scarcely go on
paddling at that rate. Yes, I canoe a great deal in the summer time.
It is my way of taking exercise, and I can swim well, so I am not
afraid of an upset. At least it has been my way for the last two years
since a lady who was staying here gave me the canoe when she went
away. Before that I used to row in a boat--that is, before I went to
college."

"College? What college? Girton?"

"Oh, no, nothing half so grand. It was a college where you get
certificates that you are qualified to be a mistress in a Board
school. I wish it had been Girton."

"Do you?"--you are too good for that, he was going to add, but changed
it to--"I think you were as well away. I don't care about the Girton
stamp; those of them whom I have known are so hard."

"So much the better for them," she answered. "I should like to be hard
as a stone; a stone cannot feel. Don't you think that women ought to
learn, then?"

"Do you?" he asked.

"Yes, certainly."

"Have you learnt anything?"

"I have taught myself a little and picked up something at the college.
But I have no real knowledge, only a smattering of things."

"What do you know--French and German?"

"Yes."

"Latin?"

"Yes, I know something of it."

"Greek?"

"I can read it fairly, but I am not a Greek scholar."

"Mathematics?"

"No, I gave them up. There is no human nature about mathematics. They
work everything to a fixed conclusion that must result. Life is not
like that; what ought to be a square comes out a right angle, and /x/
always equals an unknown quantity, which is never ascertained till you
are dead."

"Good gracious!" thought Geoffrey to himself between the strokes of
the paddle, "what an extraordinary girl. A flesh-and-blood blue-
stocking, and a lovely one into the bargain. At any rate I will bowl
her out this time."

"Perhaps you have read law too?" he said with suppressed sarcasm.

"I have read some," she answered calmly. "I like law, especially
Equity law; it is so subtle, and there is such a mass of it built upon
such a small foundation. It is like an overgrown mushroom, and the top
will fall off one day, however hard the lawyers try to prop it up.
Perhaps you can tell me----"

"No, I'm sure I cannot," he answered. "I'm not a Chancery man. I am
Common law, and /I/ don't take all knowledge for /my/ province. You
positively alarm me, Miss Granger. I wonder that the canoe does not
sink beneath so much learning."

"Do I?" she answered sweetly. "I am glad that I have lived to frighten
somebody. I meant that I like Equity to study; but if I were a
barrister, I would be Common law, because there is so much more life
and struggle about it. Existence is not worth having unless one is
struggling with something and trying to overcome it."

"Dear me, what a reposeful prospect," said Geoffrey, aghast. He had
certainly never met such a woman as this before.

"Repose is only good when it is earned," went on the fair philosopher,
"and in order to fit one to earn some more, otherwise it becomes
idleness, and that is misery. Fancy being idle when one has such a
little time to live. The only thing to do is to work and stifle
thought. I suppose that you have a large practice, Mr. Bingham?"

"You should not ask a barrister that question," he answered, laughing;
"it is like looking at the pictures which an artist has turned to the
wall. No, to be frank, I have not. I have only taken to practising in
earnest during the last two years. Before I was a barrister in name,
and that is all."

"Then why did you suddenly begin to work?"

"Because I lost my prospects, Miss Granger--from necessity, in short."

"Oh, I beg your pardon!" she said, with a blush, which of course he
could not see. "I did not mean to be rude. But it is very lucky for
you, is it not?"

"Indeed! Some people don't think so. Why is it lucky?"

"Because you will now rise and become a great man, and that is more
than being a rich man."

"And why do you think that I shall become a great man?" he asked,
stopping paddling in his astonishment and looking at the dim form
before him.

"Oh! because it is written on your face," she answered simply.

Her words rang true; there was no flattery or artifice in them.
Geoffrey felt that the girl was saying just what she thought.

"So you study physiognomy as well," he said. "Well, Miss Granger, it
is rather odd, considering all things, but I will say to you what I
have never said to any one before. I believe that you are right. I
shall rise. If I live I feel that I have it in me."

At this point it possibly occurred to Beatrice that, considering the
exceeding brevity of their acquaintance, they were drifting into
somewhat confidential conversation. At any rate, she quickly changed
the topic.

"I am afraid you are growing tired," she said; "but we must be getting
on. It will soon be quite dark and we have still a long way to go.
Look there," and she pointed seaward.

He looked. The whole bank of mist was breaking up and bearing down on
them in enormous billows of vapour. Presently, these were rolling over
them, so darkening the heavy air that, though the pair were within
four feet of each other, they could scarcely see one another's faces.
As yet they felt no wind. The dense weight of mist choked the keen,
impelling air.

"I think the weather is breaking; we are going to have a storm," said
Beatrice, a little anxiously.

Scarcely were the words out of her mouth when the mist passed away
from them, and from all the seaward expanse of ocean. Not a wrack of
it was left, and in its place the strong sea-breath beat upon their
faces. Far in the west the angry disc of the sun was sinking into the
foam. A great red ray shot from its bent edge and lay upon the
awakened waters, like a path of fire. The ominous light fell full upon
the little boat and full upon Beatrice's lips. Then it passed on and
lost itself in the deep mists which still swathed the coast.

"Oh, how beautiful it is!" she cried, raising herself and pointing to
the glory of the dying sun.

"It is beautiful indeed!" he answered, but he looked, not at the
sunset, but at the woman's face before him, glowing like a saint's in
its golden aureole. For this also was most beautiful--so beautiful
that it stirred him strangely.

"It is like----" she began, and broke off suddenly.

"What is it like?" he asked.

"It is like finding truth at last," she answered, speaking as much to
herself as to him. "Why, one might make an allegory out of it. We
wander in mist and darkness shaping a vague course for home. And then
suddenly the mists are blown away, glory fills the air, and there is
no more doubt, only before us is a splendour making all things clear
and lighting us over a deathless sea. It sounds rather too grand," she
added, with a charming little laugh; "but there is something in it
somewhere, if only I could express myself. Oh, look!"

As she spoke a heavy storm-cloud rolled over the vanishing rim of the
sun. For a moment the light struggled with the eclipsing cloud,
turning its dull edge to the hue of copper, but the cloud was too
strong and the light vanished, leaving the sea in darkness.

"Well," he said, "your allegory would have a dismal end if you worked
it out. It is getting as dark as pitch, and there's a good deal in
/that/, if only /I/ could express myself."

Beatrice dropped poetry, and came down to facts in a way that was very
commendable.

"There is a squall coming up, Mr. Bingham," she said; "you must paddle
as hard as you can. I do not think we are more than two miles from
Bryngelly, and if we are lucky we may get there before the weather
breaks."

"Yes, /if/ we are lucky," he said grimly, as he bent himself to the
work. "But the question is where to paddle to--it's so dark. Had not
we better run for the shore?"

"We are in the middle of the bay now," she answered, "and almost as
far from the nearest land as we are from Bryngelly, besides it is all
rocks. No, you must go straight on. You will see the Poise light
beyond Coed presently. You know Coed is four miles on the other side
of Bryngelly, so when you see it head to the left."

He obeyed her, and they neither of them spoke any more for some time.
Indeed the rising wind made conversation difficult, and so far as
Geoffrey was concerned he had little breath left to spare for words.
He was a strong man, but the unaccustomed labour was beginning to tell
on him, and his hands were blistering. For ten minutes or so he
paddled on through a darkness which was now almost total, wondering
where on earth he was wending, for it was quite impossible to see. For
all he knew to the contrary, he might be circling round and round. He
had only one thing to direct him, the sweep of the continually rising
wind and the wash of the gathering waves. So long as these struck the
canoe, which now began to roll ominously, on the starboard side, he
must, he thought, be keeping a right course. But in the turmoil of the
rising gale and the confusion of the night, this was no very
satisfactory guide. At length, however, a broad and brilliant flash
sprung out across the sea, almost straight ahead of him. It was the
Poise light.

He altered his course a little and paddled steadily on. And now the
squall was breaking. Fortunately, it was not a very heavy one, or
their frail craft must have sunk and they with it. But it was quite
serious enough to put them in great danger. The canoe rose to the
waves like a feather, but she was broadside on, and rise as she would
they began to ship a little water. And they had not seen the worst of
it. The weather was still thickening.

Still he held on, though his heart sank within him, while Beatrice
said nothing. Presently a big wave came; he could just see its white
crest gleaming through the gloom, then it was on them. The canoe rose
to it gallantly; it seemed to curl right over her, making the craft
roll till Geoffrey thought that the end had come. But she rode it out,
not, however, without shipping more than a bucket of water. Without
saying a word, Beatrice took the cloth cap from her head and, leaning
forward, began to bale as best she could, and that was not very well.

"This will not do," he called. "I must keep her head to the sea or we
shall be swamped."

"Yes," she answered, "keep her head up. We are in great danger."

He glanced to his right; another white sea was heaving down on him; he
could just see its glittering crest. With all his force he dug the
paddle into the water; the canoe answered to it; she came round just
in time to ride out the wave with safety, but the paddle /snapped/. It
was already sprung, and the weight he put upon it was more than it
could bear. Right in two it broke, some nine inches above that blade
which at the moment was buried in the water. He felt it go, and
despair took hold of him.

"Great heavens!" he cried, "the paddle is broken."

Beatrice gasped.

"You must use the other blade," she said; "paddle first one side and
then on the other, and keep her head on."

"Till we sink," he answered.

"No, till we are saved--never talk of sinking."

The girl's courage shamed him, and he obeyed her instructions as best
he could. By dint of continually shifting what remained of the paddle
from one side of the canoe to the other, he did manage to keep her
head on to the waves that were now rolling in apace. But in their
hearts they both wondered how long this would last.

"Have you got any cartridges?" she asked presently.

"Yes, in my coat pocket," he answered.

"Give me two, if you can manage it," she said.

In an interval between the coming of two seas he contrived to slip his
hand into a pocket and transfer the cartridges. Apparently she knew
something of the working of a gun, for presently there was a flash and
a report, quickly followed by another.

"Give me some more cartridges," she cried. He did so, but nothing
followed.

"It is no use," she said at length, "the cartridges are wet. I cannot
get the empty cases out. But perhaps they may have seen or heard them.
Old Edward is sure to be watching for me. You had better throw the
rest into the sea if you can manage it," she added by way of an
afterthought; "we may have to swim presently."

To Geoffrey this seemed very probable, and whenever he got a chance he
acted on the hint till at length he was rid of all his cartridges.
Just then it began to rain in torrents. Though it was not warm the
perspiration was streaming from him at every pore, and the rain
beating on his face refreshed him somewhat; also with the rain the
wind dropped a little.

But he was becoming tired out and he knew it. Soon he would no longer
be able to keep the canoe straight, and then they must be swamped, and
in all human probability drowned. So this was to be the end of his
life and its ambitions. Before another hour had run its course, he
would be rolling to and fro in the arms of that angry sea. What would
his wife Honoria say when she heard the news, he wondered? Perhaps it
would shock her into some show of feeling. And Effie, his dear little
six-year-old daughter? Well, thank God, she was too young to feel his
loss for long. By the time that she was a woman she would almost have
forgotten that she ever had a father. But how would she get on without
him to guide her? Her mother did not love children, and a growing girl
would continually remind her of her growing years. He could not tell;
he could only hope for the best.

And for himself! What would become of him after the short sharp
struggle for life? Should he find endless sleep, or what? He was a
Christian, and his life had not been worse than that of other men.
Indeed, though he would have been the last to think it, he had some
redeeming virtues. But now at the end the spiritual horizon was as
dark as it had been at the beginning. There before him were the Gates
of Death, but not yet would they roll aside and show the traveller
what lay beyond their frowning face. How could he tell? Perhaps they
would not open at all. Perhaps he now bade his last farewell to
consciousness, to earth and sky and sea and love and all lovely
things. Well, that might be better than some prospects. At that moment
Geoffrey Bingham, in the last agony of doubt, would glad