ly have
exchanged his hopes of life beyond for a certainty of eternal sleep.
That faith which enables some of us to tread this awful way with an
utter confidence is not a wide prerogative, and, as yet, at any rate,
it was not his, though the time might come when he would attain it.
There are not very many, even among those without reproach, who can
lay them down in the arms of Death, knowing most certainly that when
the veil is rent away the countenance that they shall see will be that
of the blessed Guardian of Mankind. Alas! he could not be altogether
sure, and where doubt exists, hope is but a pin-pricked bladder. He
sighed heavily, murmured a little formula of prayer that had been on
his lips most nights during thirty years--he had learnt it as a child
at his mother's knee--and then, while the tempest roared around him,
gathered up his strength to meet the end which seemed inevitable. At
any rate he would die like a man.

Then came a reaction. His vital forces rose again. He no longer felt
fearful, he only wondered with a strange impersonal wonder, as a man
wonders about the vital affairs of another. Then from wondering about
himself he began to wonder about the girl who sat opposite to him.
With the rain came a little lightning, and by the first flash he saw
her clearly. Her beautiful face was set, and as she bent forward
searching the darkness with her wide eyes, it wore, he thought, an
almost defiant air.

The canoe twisted round somewhat. He dug his broken paddle into the
water and once more brought her head on to the sea. Then he spoke.

"Are you afraid?" he asked of Beatrice.

"No," she answered, "I am not afraid."

"Do you know that we shall probably be drowned?"

"Yes, I know it. They say the death is easy. I brought you here.
Forgive me that. I should have tried to row you ashore as you said."

"Never mind me; a man must meet his fate some day. Do not think of me.
But I can't keep her head on much longer. You had better say your
prayers."

Beatrice bent forward till her head was quite near his own. The wind
had blown some of her hair loose, and though he did not seem to notice
it at the time, he remembered afterwards that a lock of it struck him
on the face.

"I cannot pray," she said; "I have nothing to pray to. I am not a
Christian."

The words struck him like a blow. It seemed so awful to think of this
proud and brilliant woman, now balanced on the verge of what she
believed to be utter annihilation. Even the courage that induced her
at such a moment to confess her hopeless state seemed awful.

"Try," he said with a gasp.

"No," she answered, "I do not fear to die. Death cannot be worse than
life is for most of us. I have not prayed for years, not since--well,
never mind. I am not a coward. It would be cowardly to pray now
because I may be wrong. If there is a God who knows all, He will
understand that."

Geoffrey said no more, but laboured at the broken paddle gallantly and
with an ever-failing strength. The lightning had passed away and the
darkness was very great, for the hurrying clouds hid the starlight.
Presently a sound arose above the turmoil of the storm, a crashing
thunderous sound towards which the send of the sea gradually bore
them. The sound came from the waves that beat upon the Bryngelly reef.

"Where are we drifting to?" he cried.

"Into the breakers, where we shall be lost," she answered calmly.
"Give up paddling, it is of no use, and try to take off your coat. I
have loosened my skirt. Perhaps we can swim ashore."

He thought to himself that in the dark and breakers such an event was
not probable, but he said nothing, and addressed himself to the task
of getting rid of his coat and waistcoat--no easy one in that confined
space. Meanwhile the canoe was whirling round and round like a walnut
shell upon a flooded gutter. For some distance before the waves broke
upon the reef and rocks they swept in towards them with a steady
foamless swell. On reaching the shallows, however, they pushed their
white shoulders high into the air, curved up and fell in thunder on
the reef.

The canoe rode towards the breakers, sucked upon its course by a
swelling sea.

"Good-bye," called Geoffrey to Beatrice, as stretching out his wet
hand he found her own and took it, for companionship makes death a
little easier.

"Good-bye," she cried, clinging to his hand. "Oh, why did I bring you
into this?"

For in their last extremity this woman thought rather of her companion
in peril than of herself.

One more turn, then suddenly the canoe beneath them was lifted like a
straw and tossed high into the air. A mighty mass of water boiled up
beneath it and around it. Then the foam rushed in, and vaguely
Geoffrey knew that they were wrapped in the curve of a billow.

A swift and mighty rush of water. Crash!--and his senses left him.



                              CHAPTER IV

                       THE WATCHER AT THE DOOR

This was what had happened. Just about the centre of the reef is a
large flat-topped rock--it may be twenty feet in the square--known to
the Bryngelly fishermen as Table Rock. In ordinary weather, even at
high tide, the waters scarcely cover this rock, but when there is any
sea they wash over it with great violence. On to this rock Geoffrey
and Beatrice had been hurled by the breaker. Fortunately for them it
was thickly overgrown with seaweed, which to some slight extent broke
the violence of their fall. As it chanced, Geoffrey was knocked
senseless by the shock; but Beatrice, whose hand he still held, fell
on to him and, with the exception of a few bruises and a shake,
escaped unhurt.

She struggled to her knees, gasping. The water had run off the rock,
and her companion lay quiet at her side. She put down her face and
called into his ear, but no answer came, and then she knew that he was
either dead or senseless.

At this second Beatrice caught a glimpse of something white gleaming
in the darkness. Instinctively she flung herself upon her face,
gripping the long tough seaweed with one hand. The other she passed
round the body of the helpless man beside her, straining him with all
her strength against her side.

Then came a wild long rush of foam. The water lifted her from the
rock, but the seaweed held, and when at length the sea had gone
boiling by, Beatrice found herself and the senseless form of Geoffrey
once more lying side by side. She was half choked. Desperately she
struggled up and round, looking shoreward through the darkness.
Heavens! there, not a hundred yards away, a light shone upon the
waters. It was a boat's light, for it moved up and down. She filled
her lungs with air and sent one long cry for help ringing across the
sea. A moment passed and she thought that she heard an answer, but
because of the wind and the roar of the breakers she could not be
sure. Then she turned and glanced seaward. Again the foaming terror
was rushing down upon them; again she flung herself upon the rock and
grasping the slippery seaweed twined her left arm about the helpless
Geoffrey.

It was on them.

Oh, horror! Even in the turmoil of the boiling waters Beatrice felt
the seaweed give. Now they were being swept along with the rushing
wave, and Death drew very near. But still she clung to Geoffrey. Once
more the air touched her face. She had risen to the surface and was
floating on the stormy water. The wave had passed. Loosing her hold of
Geoffrey she slipped her hand upwards, and as he began to sink
clutched him by the hair. Then treading water with her feet, for
happily for them both she was as good a swimmer as could be found upon
that coast, she managed to open her eyes. There, not sixty yards away,
was the boat's light. Oh, if only she could reach it. She spat the
salt water from her mouth and once more cried aloud. The light seemed
to move on.

Then another wave rolled forward and once more she was pushed down
into the cruel depths, for with that dead weight hanging to her she
could not keep above them. It flashed into her mind that if she let
him go she might even now save herself, but even in that last terror
this Beatrice would not do. If he went, she would go with him.

It would have been better if she had let him go.

Down she went--down, down! "I will hold him," Beatrice said in her
heart; "I will hold him till I die." Then came waves of light and a
sound as of wind whispering through the trees, and--all grew dark.

                  *       *       *       *       *

"I tell yer it ain't no good, Eddard," shouted a man in the boat to an
old sailor who was leaning forward in the bows peering into the
darkness. "We shall be right on to the Table Rocks in a minute and all
drown together. Put about, mate--put about."

"Damn yer," screamed the old man, turning so that the light from the
lantern fell on his furrowed, fiercely anxious face and long white
hair streaming in the wind. "Damn yer, ye cowards. I tells yer I heard
her voice--I heard it twice screaming for help. If you put the boat
about, by Goad when I get ashore I'll kill yer, ye lubbers--old man as
I am I'll kill yer, if I swing for it!"

This determined sentiment produced a marked effect upon the boat's
crew; there were eight of them altogether. They did not put the boat
about, they only lay upon their oars and kept her head to the seas.

The old man in the bow peered out into the gloom. He was shaking, not
with cold but with agitation.

Presently he turned his head with a yell.

"Give way--give way! there's something on the wave."

The men obeyed with a will.

"Back," he roared again--"back water!"

They backed, and the boat answered, but nothing was to be seen.

"She's gone! Oh, Goad, she's gone!" groaned the old man. "You may put
about now, lads, and the Lord's will be done."

The light from the lantern fell in a little ring upon the seething
water. Suddenly something white appeared in the centre of this
illuminated ring. Edward stared at it. It was floating upwards. It
vanished--it appeared again. It was a woman's face. With a yell he
plunged his arms into the sea.

"I have her--lend an hand, lads."

Another man scrambled forward and together they clutched the object in
the water.

"Look out, don't pull so hard, you fool. Blow me if there ain't
another and she's got him by the hair. So, /steady, steady!/"

A long heave from strong arms and the senseless form of Beatrice was
on the gunwale. Then they pulled up Geoffrey beside her, for they
could not loose her desperate grip of his dark hair, and together
rolled them into the boat.

"They're dead, I doubt," said the second man.

"Help turn 'em on their faces over the seat, so--let the water drain
from their innards. It's the only chance. Now give me that sail to
cover them--so. You'll live yet, Miss Beatrice, you ain't dead, I
swear. Old Eddard has saved you, Old Eddard and the good Goad
together!"

Meanwhile the boat had been got round, and the men were rowing for
Bryngelly as warm-hearted sailors will when life is at stake. They all
knew Beatrice and loved her, and they remembered it as they rowed. The
gloom was little hindrance to them for they could almost have
navigated the coast blindfold. Besides here they were sheltered by the
reef and shore.

In five minutes they were round a little headland, and the lights of
Bryngelly were close before them. On the beach people were moving
about with lanterns.

Presently they were there, hanging on their oars for a favourable wave
to beach with. At last it came, and they gave way together, running
the large boat half out of the surf. A dozen men plunged into the
water and dragged her on. They were safe ashore.

"Have you got Miss Beatrice?" shouted a voice.

"Ay, we've got her and another too, but I doubt they're gone. Where's
doctor?"

"Here, here!" answered a voice. "Bring the stretchers."

A stout thick-set man, who had been listening, wrapped up in a dark
cloak, turned his face away and uttered a groan. Then he followed the
others as they went to work, not offering to help, but merely
following.

The stretchers were brought and the two bodies laid upon them, face
downwards and covered over.

"Where to?" said the bearers as they seized the poles.

"The Vicarage," answered the doctor. "I told them to get things ready
there in case they should find her. Run forward one of you and say
that we are coming."

The men started at a trot and the crowd ran after them.

"Who is the other?" somebody asked.

"Mr. Bingham--the tall lawyer who came down from London the other day.
Tell policeman--run to his wife. She's at Mrs. Jones's, and thinks he
has lost his way in the fog coming home from Bell Rock."

The policeman departed on his melancholy errand and the procession
moved swiftly across the sandy beach and up the stone-paved way by
which boats were dragged down the cliff to the sea. The village of
Bryngelly lay to the right. It had grown away from the church, which
stood dangerously near the edge of the cliff. On the further side of
the church, and a little behind it, partly sheltered from the sea
gales by a group of stunted firs, was the Vicarage, a low single-
storied stone-roofed building, tenanted for twenty-five years past and
more by Beatrice's father, the Rev. Joseph Granger. The best approach
to it from the Bryngelly side was by the churchyard, through which the
men with the stretchers were now winding, followed by the crowd of
sightseers.

"Might as well leave them here at once," said one of the bearers to
the other in Welsh. "I doubt they are both dead enough."

The person addressed assented, and the thick-set man wrapped in a dark
cloak, who was striding along by Beatrice's stretcher, groaned again.
Clearly, he understood the Welsh tongue. A few seconds more and they
were passing through the stunted firs up to the Vicarage door. In the
doorway stood a group of people. The light from a lamp in the hall
struck upon them, throwing them into strong relief. Foremost, holding
a lantern in his hand, was a man of about sixty, with snow-white hair
which fell in confusion over his rugged forehead. He was of middle
height and carried himself with something of a stoop. The eyes were
small and shifting, and the mouth hard. He wore short whiskers which,
together with the eyebrows, were still tinged with yellow. The face
was ruddy and healthy looking, indeed, had it not been for the dirty
white tie and shabby black coat, one would have taken him to be what
he was in heart, a farmer of the harder sort, somewhat weather-beaten
and anxious about the times--a man who would take advantage of every
drop in the rate of wages. In fact he was Beatrice's father, and a
clergyman.

By his side, and leaning over him, was Elizabeth, her elder sister.
There was five years between them. She was a poor copy of Beatrice,
or, to be more accurate, Beatrice was a grand development of
Elizabeth. They both had brown hair, but Elizabeth's was straighter
and faint-coloured, not rich and ruddying into gold. Elizabeth's eyes
were also grey, but it was a cold washed-out grey like that of a
February sky. And so with feature after feature, and with the
expression also. Beatrice's was noble and open, if at times defiant.
Looking at her you knew that she might be a mistaken woman, or a
headstrong woman, or both, but she could never be a mean woman.
Whichever of the ten commandments she might choose to break, it would
not be that which forbids us to bear false witness against our
neighbour. Anybody might read it in her eyes. But in her sister's, he
might discern her father's shifty hardness watered by woman's weaker
will into something like cunning. For the rest Elizabeth had a very
fair figure, but lacked her sister's rounded loveliness, though the
two were so curiously alike that at a distance you might well mistake
the one for the other. One might almost fancy that nature had
experimented upon Elizabeth before she made up her mind to produce
Beatrice, just to get the lines and distances. The elder sister was to
the other what the pale unfinished model of clay is to the polished
statue in ivory and gold.

"Oh, my God! my God!" groaned the old man; "look, they have got them
on the stretchers. They are both dead. Oh, Beatrice! Beatrice! and
only this morning I spoke harshly to her."

"Don't be so foolish, father," said Elizabeth sharply. "They may only
be insensible."

"Ah, ah," he answered; "it does not matter to you, /you/ don't care
about your sister. You are jealous of her. But I love her, though we
do not understand each other. Here they come. Don't stand staring
there. Go and see that the blankets and things are hot. Stop, doctor,
tell me, is she dead?"

"How can I tell till I have seen her?" the doctor answered, roughly
shaking him off, and passing through the door.

Bryngelly Vicarage was a very simply constructed house. On entering
the visitor found himself in a passage with doors to the right and
left. That to the right led to the sitting-room, that to the left to
the dining-room, both of them long, low and narrow chambers. Following
the passage down for some seven paces, it terminated in another which
ran at right angles to it for the entire length of the house. On the
further side of this passage were several bedroom doors and a room at
each end. That at the end to the right was occupied by Beatrice and
her sister, the next was empty, the third was Mr. Granger's, and the
fourth the spare room. This, with the exception of the kitchens and
servants' sleeping place, which were beyond the dining-room, made up
the house.

Fires had been lit in both of the principal rooms. Geoffrey was taken
into the dining-room and attended by the doctor's assistant, and
Beatrice into the sitting-room, and attended by the doctor himself. In
a few seconds the place had been cleared of all except the helpers,
and the work began. The doctor looked at Beatrice's cold shrunken
form, and at the foam upon her lips. He lifted the eyelid, and held a
light before the contracted pupil. Then he shook his head and set to
work with a will. We need not follow him through the course of his
dreadful labours, with which most people will have some acquaintance.
Hopeless as they seemed, he continued them for hour after hour.

Meanwhile the assistant and some helpers were doing the same service
for Geoffrey Bingham, the doctor himself, a thin clever-looking man,
occasionally stepping across the passage to direct them and see how
things were getting on. Now, although Geoffrey had been in the water
the longer, his was by far the better case, for when he was immersed
he was already insensible, and a person in this condition is very hard
to drown. It is your struggling, fighting, breathing creature who is
soonest made an end of in deep waters. Therefore it came to pass that
when the scrubbing with hot cloths and the artificial respiration had
gone on for somewhere about twenty minutes, Geoffrey suddenly crooked
a finger. The doctor's assistant, a buoyant youth fresh from the
hospitals, gave a yell of exultation, and scrubbed and pushed away
with ever-increasing energy. Presently the subject coughed, and a
minute later, as the agony of returning life made itself felt, he
swore most heartily.

"He's all right now!" called the assistant to his employer. "He's
swearing beautifully."

Dr. Chambers, pursuing his melancholy and unpromising task in the
other room, smiled sadly, and called to the assistant to continue the
treatment, which he did with much vigour.

Presently Geoffrey came partially to life, still suffering torments.
The first thing he grew aware of was that a tall elegant woman was
standing over him, looking at him with a half puzzled and half
horrified air. Vaguely he wondered who it might be. The tall form and
cold handsome face were so familiar to him, and yet he could not
recall the name. It was not till she spoke that his numbed brain
realized that he was looking on his own wife.

"Well, dear," she said, "I am so glad that you are better. You
frightened me out of my wits. I thought you were drowned."

"Thank you, Honoria," he said faintly, and then groaned as a fresh
attack of tingling pain shook him through and through.

"I hope nobody said anything to Effie," Geoffrey said presently.

"Yes, the child would not go to bed because you were not back, and
when the policeman came she heard him tell Mrs. Jones that you were
drowned, and she has been almost in a fit ever since. They had to hold
her to prevent her from running here."

Geoffrey's white face assumed an air of the deepest distress. "How
could you frighten the child so?" he murmured. "Please go and tell her
that I am all right."

"It was not my fault," said Lady Honoria with a shrug of her shapely
shoulders. "Besides, I can do nothing with Effie. She goes on like a
wild thing about you."

"Please go and tell her, Honoria," said her husband.

"Oh, yes, I'll go," she answered. "Really I shall not be sorry to get
out of this; I begin to feel as though I had been drowned myself;" and
she looked at the steaming cloths and shuddered. "Good-bye, Geoffrey.
It is an immense relief to find you all right. The policeman made me
feel quite queer. I can't get down to give you a kiss or I would.
Well, good-bye for the present, my dear."

"Good-bye, Honoria," said her husband with a faint smile.

The medical assistant looked a little surprised. He had never, it is
true, happened to be present at a meeting between husband and wife,
when one of the pair had just been rescued by a hair's-breadth from a
violent and sudden death, and therefore wanted experience to go on.
But it struck him that there was something missing. The lady did not
seem to him quite to fill the part of the Heaven-thanking spouse. It
puzzled him very much. Perhaps he showed this in his face. At any
rate, Lady Honoria, who was quick enough, read something there.

"He is safe now, is he not?" she asked. "It will not matter if I go
away."

"No, my lady," answered the assistant, "he is out of danger, I think;
it will not matter at all."

Lady Honoria hesitated a little; she was standing in the passage. Then
she glanced through the door into the opposite room, and caught a
glimpse of Beatrice's rigid form and of the doctor bending over it.
Her head was thrown back and the beautiful brown hair, which was now
almost dry again, streamed in masses to the ground, while on her face
was stamped the terrifying seal of Death.

Lady Honoria shuddered. She could not bear such sights. "Will it be
necessary for me to come back to-night?" she said.

"I do not think so," he answered, "unless you care to hear whether
Miss Granger recovers?"

"I shall hear that in the morning," she said. "Poor thing, I cannot
help her."

"No, Lady Honoria, you cannot help her. She saved your husband's life,
they say."

"She must be a brave girl. Will she recover?"

The assistant shook his head. "She may, possibly. It is not likely
now."

"Poor thing, and so young and beautiful! What a lovely face, and what
an arm! It is very awful for her," and Lady Honoria shuddered again
and went.

Outside the door a small knot of sympathisers was still gathered,
notwithstanding the late hour and the badness of the weather.

"That's his wife," said one, and they opened to let her pass.

"Then why don't she stop with him?" asked a woman audibly. "If it had
been my husband I'd have sat and hugged him for an hour."

"Ay, you'd have killed him with your hugging, you would," somebody
answered.

Lady Honoria passed on. Suddenly a thick-set man emerged from the
shadow of the pines. She could not see his face, but he was wrapped in
a large cloak.

"Forgive me," he said in the hoarse voice of one struggling with
emotions which he was unable to conceal, "but you can tell me. Does
she still live?"

"Do you mean Miss Granger?" she asked.

"Yes, of course. Beatrice--Miss Granger?"

"They do not know, but they think----"

"Yes, yes--they think----"

"That she is dead."

The man said never a word. He dropped his head upon his breast and,
turning, vanished again into the shadow of the pines.

"How very odd," thought Lady Honoria as she walked rapidly along the
cliff towards her lodging. "I suppose that man must be in love with
her. Well, I do not wonder at it. I never saw such a face and arm.
What a picture that scene in the room would make! She saved Geoffrey
and now she's dead. If he had saved her I should not have wondered. It
is like a scene in a novel."

From all of which it will be seen that Lady Honoria was not wanting in
certain romantic and artistical perceptions.



                              CHAPTER V

                        ELIZABETH IS THANKFUL

Geoffrey, lying before the fire, newly hatched from death, had caught
some of the conversation between his wife and the assistant who had
recovered him to life. So she was gone, that brave, beautiful atheist
girl--gone to test the truth. And she had saved his life!

For some minutes the assistant did not enter. He was helping in
another room. At last he came.

"What did you say to Lady Honoria?" Geoffrey asked feebly. "Did you
say that Miss Granger had saved me?"

"Yes, Mr. Bingham; at least they tell me so. At any rate, when they
pulled her out of the water they pulled you after her. She had hold of
your hair."

"Great heavens!" he groaned, "and my weight must have dragged her
down. Is she dead, then?"

"We cannot quite say yet, not for certain. We think that she is."

"Pray God she is not dead," he said more to himself than to the other.
Then aloud--"Leave me; I am all right. Go and help with her. But stop,
come and tell me sometimes how it goes with her."

"Very well. I will send a woman to watch you," and he went.

Meanwhile in the other room the treatment of the drowned went slowly
on. Two hours had passed, and as yet Beatrice showed no signs of
recovery. The heart did not beat, no pulse stirred; but, as the doctor
knew, life might still linger in the tissues. Slowly, very slowly, the
body was turned to and fro, the head swaying, and the long hair
falling now this way and now that, but still no sign. Every resource
known to medical skill, such as hot air, rubbing, artificial
respiration, electricity, was applied and applied in vain, but still
no sign!

Elizabeth, pale and pinched, stood by handing what might be required.
She did not greatly love her sister, they were antagonistic and their
interests clashed, or she thought they did, but this sudden death was
awful. In a corner, pitiful to see, offering groans and ejaculated
prayers to heaven, sat the old clergymen, their father, his white hair
about his eyes. He was a weak, coarse-grained man, but in his own way
his clever and beautiful girl was dear to him, and this sight wrung
his soul as it had not been wrung for years.

"She's gone," he said continually, "she's gone; the Lord's will be
done. There must be another mistress at the school now. Seventy pounds
a year she will cost--seventy pounds a year!"

"Do be quiet, father," said Elizabeth sharply.

"Ay, ay, it is very well for you to tell me to be quiet. You are quiet
because you don't care. You never loved your sister. But I have loved
her since she was a little fair-haired child, and so did your poor
mother. 'Beatrice' was the last word she spoke."

"Be quiet, father!" said Elizabeth, still more sharply. The old man,
making no reply, sank back into a semi-torpor, rocking himself to and
fro upon his chair.

Meanwhile without intermission the work went on.

"It is no use," said the assistant at last, as he straightened his
weary frame and wiped the perspiration from his brow. "She must be
dead; we have been at it nearly three hours now."

"Patience," said the doctor. "If necessary I shall go on for four--or
till I drop," he added.

Ten minutes more passed. Everybody knew that the task was hopeless,
but still they hoped.

"Great Heavens!" said the assistant presently, starting back from the
body and pointing at its face. "Did you see that?"

Elizabeth and Mr. Granger sprang to their feet, crying, "What, what?"

"Sit still, sir," said the doctor, waving them back. Then addressing
his helper, and speaking in a constrained voice: "I thought I saw the
right eyelid quiver, Williams. Pass the battery."

"So did I," answered Williams as he obeyed.

"Full power," said the doctor again. "It is kill or cure now."

The shock was applied for some seconds without result. Then suddenly a
long shudder ran up the limbs, and a hand stirred. Next moment the
eyes were opened, and with pain and agony Beatrice drew a first breath
of returning life. Ten minutes more and she had passed through the
gates of Death back to this warm and living world.

"Let me die," she gasped faintly. "I cannot bear it. Oh, let me die!"

"Hush," said the doctor; "you will be better presently."

Ten minutes more passed, when the doctor saw by her eyes that Beatrice
wished to say something. He bent his head till it nearly touched her
lips.

"Dr. Chambers," she whispered, "was he drowned?"

"No, he is safe; he has been brought round."

She sighed--a long-drawn sigh, half of pain, half of relief. Then she
spoke again.

"Was he washed ashore?"

"No, no. You saved his life. You had hold of him when they pulled you
out. Now drink this and go to sleep."

Beatrice smiled sweetly, but said nothing. Then she drank as much of
the draught as she could, and shortly afterwards obeyed the last
injunction also, and went to sleep.

Meanwhile a rumour of this wonderful recovery had escaped to without
the house--passing from one watcher to the other till at length it
reached the ears of the solitary man crouched in the shadow of the
pines. He heard, and starting as though he had been shot, strode to
the door of the Vicarage. Here his courage seemed to desert him, for
he hesitated.

"Knock, squire, knock, and ask if it is true," said a woman, the same
who had declared that she would have hugged her husband back to life.

This remark seemed to encourage the man, at any rate he did knock.
Presently the door was opened by Elizabeth.

"Go away," she said in her sharp voice; "the house must be kept
quiet."

"I beg your pardon, Miss Granger," said the visitor, in a tone of deep
humiliation. "I only wanted to know if it was true that Miss Beatrice
lives."

"Why," said Elizabeth with a start, "is it you, Mr. Davies? I am sure
I had no idea. Step into the passage and I will shut the door. There!
How long have you been outside?"

"Oh, since they brought them up. But is it true?"

"Yes, yes, it is true. She will recover now. And you have stood all
this time in the wet night. I am sure that Beatrice ought to be
flattered."

"Not at all. It seemed so awful, and--I--I take such an interest----"
and he broke off.

"Such an interest in Beatrice," said Elizabeth drily, supplying the
hiatus. "Yes, so it seems," and suddenly, as though by chance, she
moved the candle which she held, in such fashion that the light fell
full upon Owen Davies' face. It was a slow heavy countenance, but not
without comeliness. The skin was fresh as a child's, the eyes were
large, blue, and mild, and the brown hair grew in waves that many a
woman might have envied. Indeed had it not been for a short but
strongly growing beard, it would have been easy to believe that the
countenance was that of a boy of nineteen rather than of a man over
thirty. Neither time nor care had drawn a single line upon it; it told
of perfect and robust health and yet bore the bloom of childhood. It
was the face of a man who might live to a hundred and still look
young, nor did the form belie it.

Mr. Davies blushed up to his eyes, blushed like a girl beneath
Elizabeth's scrutiny. "Naturally I take an interest in a neighbour's
fate," he said, in his slow deliberate way. "She is quite safe, then?"

"I believe so," answered Elizabeth.

"Thank God!" he said, or rather it seemed to break from him in a sigh
of relief. "How did the gentleman, Mr. Bingham, come to be found with
her?"

"How should I know?" she answered with a shrug. "Beatrice saved his
life somehow, clung fast to him even after she was insensible."

"It is very wonderful. I never heard of such a thing. What is he
like?"

"He is one of the finest-looking men I ever saw," answered Elizabeth,
always watching him.

"Ah. But he is married, I think, Miss Granger?"

"Oh, yes, he is married to the daughter of a peer, very much married--
and very little, I should say."

"I do not quite understand, Miss Granger."

"Don't you, Mr. Davies? then use your eyes when you see them
together."

"I should not see anything. I am not quick like you," he added.

"How do you mean to get back to the Castle to-night, Mr. Davies? You
cannot row back in this wind, and the seas will be breaking over the
causeway."

"Oh, I shall manage. I am wet already. An extra ducking won't hurt me,
and I have had a chain put up to prevent anybody from being washed
away. And now I must be going. Good-night."

"Good-night, Mr. Davies."

He hesitated a moment and then added: "Would you--would you mind
telling your sister--of course I mean when she is stronger--that I
came to inquire after her?"

"I think that you can do that for yourself, Mr. Davies," Elizabeth
said almost roughly. "I mean it will be more appreciated," and she
turned upon her heel.

Owen Davies ventured no further remarks. He felt that Elizabeth's
manner was a little crushing, and he was afraid of her as well. "I
suppose that she does not think I am good enough to pay attention to
her sister," he thought to himself as he plunged into the night and
rain. "Well, she is quite right--I am not fit to black her boots. Oh,
God, I thank Thee that Thou hast saved her life. I thank Thee--I thank
Thee!" he went on, speaking aloud to the wild winds as he made his way
along the cliff. "If she had been dead, I think that I must have died
too. Oh, God, I thank Thee--I thank Thee!"

The idea that Owen Davies, Esq., J.P., D.L., of Bryngelly Castle,
absolute owner of that rising little watering-place, and of one of the
largest and most prosperous slate quarries in Wales, worth in all
somewhere between seven and ten thousand a year, was unfit to black
her beautiful sister's boots, was not an idea that had struck
Elizabeth Granger. Had it struck her, indeed, it would have moved her
to laughter, for Elizabeth had a practical mind.

What did strike her, as she turned and watched the rich squire's
sturdy form vanish through the doorway into the dark beyond, was a
certain sense of wonder. Supposing she had never seen that shiver of
returning life run up those white limbs, supposing that they had grown
colder and colder, till at length it was evident that death was so
firmly citadelled within the silent heart, that no human skill could
beat his empire back? What then? Owen Davies loved her sister; this
she knew and had known for years. But would he not have got over it in
time? Would he not in time have been overpowered by the sense of his
own utter loneliness and given his hand, if not his heart, to some
other woman? And could not she who held his hand learn to reach his
heart? And to whom would that hand have been given, the hand and all
that went with it? What woman would this shy Welsh hermit, without
friends or relations, have ever been thrown in with except herself--
Elizabeth--who loved him as much as she could love anybody, which,
perhaps, was not very much; who, at any rate, desired sorely to be his
wife. Would not all this have come about if she had never seen that
eyelid tremble, and that slight quiver run up her sister's limbs? It
would--she knew it would.

Elizabeth thought of it as for a moment she stood in the passage, and
a cold hungry light came into her neutral tinted eyes and shone upon
her pale face. But she choked back the thought; she was scarcely
wicked enough to wish that her sister had not been brought back to
life. She only speculated on what might have happened if this had come
about, just as one works out a game of chess from a given hypothetical
situation of the pieces.

Perhaps, too, the same end might be gained in some other way. Perhaps
Mr. Davies might still be weaned from his infatuation. The wall was
difficult, but it would have to be very difficult if she could not
find a way to climb it. It never occurred to Elizabeth that there
might be an open gate. She could not conceive it possible that a woman
might positively reject Owen Davies and his seven or ten thousand a
year, and that woman a person in an unsatisfactory and uncongenial,
almost in a menial position. Reject Bryngelly Castle with all its
luxury and opportunities of wealth and leisure? No, the sun would set
in the east before such a thing happened. The plan was to prevent the
occasion from arising. The hungry light died on Elizabeth's face, and
she turned to enter the sick room when suddenly she met her father
coming out.

"Who was that at the front?" he asked, carefully closing the door.

"Mr. Davies of Bryngelly Castle, father."

"And what did Mr. Davies want at this time of night? To know about
Beatrice?"

"Yes," she answered slowly, "he came to ask after Beatrice, or to be
more correct he has been waiting outside for three hours in the rain
to learn if she recovered."

"Waiting outside for three hours in the rain," said the clergyman
astonished--"Squire Davies standing outside the house! What for?"

"Because he was so anxious about Beatrice and did not like to come in,
I suppose."

"So anxious about Beatrice--ah, so anxious about Beatrice! Do you
think, Elizabeth--um--you know there is no doubt Beatrice is very well
favoured--very handsome they say----"

"I do not think anything about it, father," she answered, "and as for
Beatrice's looks they are a matter of opinion. I have mine. And now
don't you think we had better go to bed? The doctors and Betty are
going to stop up all night with Mr. Bingham and Beatrice."

"Yes, Elizabeth, I suppose that we had better go. I am sure we have
much to be thankful for to-night. What a merciful deliverance! And if
poor Beatrice had gone the parish must have found another
schoolmistress, and it would have meant that we lost the salary. We
have a great deal to be thankful for, Elizabeth."

"Yes," said Elizabeth, very deliberately, "we have."



                              CHAPTER VI

                         OWEN DAVIES AT HOME

Owen Davies tramped along the cliff with a light heart. The wild
lashing of the rain and the roaring of the wind did not disturb him in
the least. They were disagreeable, but he accepted them as he accepted
existence and all its vanities, without remark or mental comment.
There is a class of mind of which this is the prevailing attitude.
Very early in their span of life, those endowed with such a mind come
to the conclusion that the world is too much for them. They cannot
understand it, so they abandon the attempt, and, as a consequence, in
their own torpid way they are among the happiest and most contented of
men. Problems, on which persons of keener intelligence and more
aspiring soul fret and foam their lives away as rushing water round a
rock, do not even break the placid surface of their days. Such men
slip past them. They look out upon the stars and read of the mystery
of the universe speeding on for ever through the limitless wastes of
space, and are not astonished. In their childhood they were taught
that God made the sun and the stars to give light on the earth; that
is enough for them. And so it is with everything. Poverty and
suffering; war, pestilence, and the inequalities of fate; madness,
life and death, and the spiritual wonders that hedge in our being, are
things not to be inquired into but accepted. So they accept them as
they do their dinner or a tradesman's circular.

In some cases this mental state has its root in deep and simple
religious convictions, and in some it springs from a preponderance of
healthful animal instincts over the higher but more troublesome
spiritual parts. The ox chewing the cud in the fresh meadow does not
muse upon the past and future, and the gull blown like a foam-flake
out against the sunset, does not know the splendour of the sky and
sea. Even the savage is not much troubled about the scheme of things.
In the beginning he was "torn out of the reeds," and in the end he
melts into the Unknown, and for the rest, there are beef and wives,
and foes to conquer. But then oxen and gulls are not, so far as we
know, troubled with any spiritual parts at all, and in the noble
savage such things are not cultivated. They come with civilization.

But perhaps in the majority this condition, so necessary to the more
placid forms of happiness, is born of a conjunction of physical and
religious developments. So it was, at least, with the rich and
fortunate man whom we have seen trudging along the wind-swept cliff.
By nature and education he was of a strongly and simply religious
mind, as he was in body powerful, placid, and healthy to an
exasperating degree. It may be said that it is easy to be religious
and placid on ten thousand a year, but Owen Davies had not always
enjoyed ten thousand a year and one of the most romantic and beautiful
seats in Wales. From the time he was seventeen, when his mother's
death left him an orphan, till he reached the age of thirty, some six
years from the date of the opening of this history, he led about as
hard a life as fate could find for any man. Some people may have heard
of sugar drogers, or sailing brigs, which trade between this country
and the West Indies, carrying coal outwards and sugar home.

On board one of these, Owen Davies worked in various capacities for
thirteen long years. He did his drudgery well; but he made no friends,
and always remained the same shy, silent, and pious man. Then suddenly
a relation died without a will, and he found himself heir-in-law to
Bryngelly Castle and all its revenues. Owen expressed no surprise, and
to all appearance felt none. He had never seen his relation, and never
dreamed of this romantic devolution of great estates upon himself. But
he accepted the good fortune as he had accepted the ill, and said
nothing. The only people who knew him were his shipmates, and they
could scarcely be held to know him. They were acquainted with his
appearance and the sound of his voice, and his method of doing his
duty. Also, they were aware, although he never spoke of religion, that
he read a chapter of the Bible every evening, and went to church
whenever they touched at a port. But of his internal self they were in
total ignorance. This did not, however, prevent them from prophesying
that Davies was a "deep one," who, now that he had got the cash, would
"blue it" in a way which would astonish them.

But Davies did not "excel in azure feats." The news of his good
fortune reached him just as the brig, on which he was going to sail as
first-mate, was taking in her cargo for the West Indies. He had signed
his contract for the voyage, and, to the utter astonishment of the
lawyer who managed the estates, he announced that he should carry it
out. In vain did the man of affairs point out to his client that with
the help of a cheque of £100 he could arrange the matter for him in
ten minutes. Mr. Davies merely replied that the property could wait,
he should go the voyage and retire afterwards. The lawyer held up his
hands, and then suddenly remembered that there are women in the West
Indies as in other parts of the world. Doubtless his queer client had
an object in this voyage. As a matter of fact, he was totally wrong.
Owen Davies had never interchanged a tender word with a woman in his
life; he was a creature of routine, and it was part of his routine to
carry out his agreements to the letter. That was all.

As a last resource, the lawyer suggested that Mr. Davies should make a
will.

"I do not think it necessary," was the slow and measured answer. "The
property has come to me by chance. If I die, it may as well go to
somebody else in the same way."

The lawyer stared. "Very well," he said; "it is against my advice, but
you must please yourself. Do you want any money?"

Owen thought for a moment. "Yes," he said, "I think I should like to
have ten pounds. They are building a theatre there, and I want to
subscribe to it."

The lawyer gave him the ten pounds without a word; he was struck
speechless, and in this condition he remained for some minutes after
the door had closed behind his client. Then he sprung up with a single
ejaculation, "Mad, mad! like his great uncle!"

But Owen Davies was not in the least mad, at any rate not then; he was
only a creature of habit. In due course, his agreement fulfilled, he
sailed his brig home from the West Indies (for the captain was drowned
in a gale). Then he took a second-class ticket to Bryngelly, where he
had never been in his life before, and asked his way to the Castle. He
was told to go to the beach, and he would see it. He did so, leaving
his sea-chest behind him, and there, about two hundred paces from the
land, and built upon a solitary mountain of rock, measuring half a
mile or so round the base, he perceived a vast mediæval pile of
fortified buildings, with turrets towering three hundred feet into the
air, and edged with fire by the setting sun. He gazed on it with
perplexity. Could it be that this enormous island fortress belonged to
him, and, if so, how on earth did one get to it? For some little time
he walked up and down, wondering, too shy to go to the village for
information. Meanwhile, though he did not notice her, a well-grown
girl of about fifteen, remarkable for her great grey eyes and the
promise of her beauty, was watching his evident perplexity from a seat
beneath a rock, not without amusement. At last she rose, and, with the
confidence of bold fifteen, walked straight up to him.

"Do you want to get the Castle, sir?" she asked in a low sweet voice,
the echoes of which Owen Davies never forgot.

"Yes--oh, I beg your pardon," for now for the first time he saw that
he was talking to a young lady.

"Then I am afraid that you are too late--Mrs. Thomas will not show
people over after four o'clock. She is the housekeeper, you know."

"Ah, well, the fact is I did not come to see over the place. I came to
live there. I am Owen Davies, and the place was left to me."

Beatrice, for of course it was she, stared at him in amazement. So
this was the mysterious sailor about whom there had been so much talk
in Bryngelly.

"Oh!" she said, with embarrassing frankness. "What an odd way to come
home. Well, it is high tide, and you will have to take a boat. I will
show you where you can get one. Old Edward will row you across for
sixpence," and she led the way round a corner of the beach to where
old Edward sat, from early morn to dewy eve, upon the thwarts of his
biggest boat, seeking those whom he might row.

"Edward," said the young lady, "here is the new squire, Mr. Owen
Davies, who wants to be rowed across to the Castle." Edward, a gnarled
and twisted specimen of the sailor tribe, with small eyes and a face
that reminded the observer of one of those quaint countenances on the
handle of a walking stick, stared at her in astonishment, and then
cast a look of suspicion on the visitor.

"Have he got papers of identification about him, miss?" he asked in a
stage whisper.

"I don't know," she answered laughing. "He says that he is Mr. Owen
Davies."

"Well, praps he is and praps he ain't; anyway, it isn't my affair, and
sixpence is sixpence."

All of this the unfortunate Mr. Davies overheard, and it did not add
to his equanimity.

"Now, sir, if you please," said Edward sternly, as he pulled the
little boat up to the edge of the breakwater. A vision of Mrs. Thomas
shot into Owen's mind. If the boatman did not believe in him, what
chance had he with the housekeeper? He wished he had brought the
lawyer down with him, and then he wished that he was back in the sugar
brig.

"Now, sir," said Edward still more sternly, putting down his
hesitation to an impostor's consciousness of guilt.

"Um!" said Owen to the young lady, "I beg your pardon. I don't even
know your name, and I am sure I have no right to ask it, but would you
mind rowing across with me? It would be so kind of you; you might
introduce me to the housekeeper."

Again Beatrice laughed the merry laugh of girlhood; she was too young
to be conscious of any impropriety in the situation, and indeed there
was none. But her sense of humour told her that it was funny, and she
became possessed with a not unnatural curiosity to see the thing out.

"Oh, very well," she said, "I will come."

The boat was pushed off and very soon they reached the stone quay that
bordered the harbour of the Castle, about which a little village of
retainers had grown up. Seeing the boat arrive, some of these people
sauntered out of the cottages, and then, thinking that a visitor had
come, under the guidance of Miss Beatrice, to look at the antiquities
of the Castle, which was the show place of the neighbourhood,
sauntered back again. Then the pair began the zigzag ascent of the
rock mountain, till at last they stood beneath the mighty mass of
building, which, although it was hoary with antiquity, was by no means
lacking in the comforts of modern civilization, the water, for
instance, being brought in pipes laid beneath the sea from a mountain
top two miles away on the mainland.

"Isn't there a view here?" said Beatrice, pointing to the vast stretch
of land and sea. "I think, Mr. Davies, that you have the most
beautiful house in the whole world. Your great-uncle, who died a year
ago, spent more than fifty thousand pounds on repairing and
refurbishing it, they say. He built the big drawing-room there, where
the stone is a little lighter; it is fifty-five feet long. Just think,
fifty thousand pounds!"

"It is a large sum," said Owen, in an unimaginative sort of way, while
in his heart he wondered what on earth he should do with this white
elephant of a mediæval castle, and its drawing room fifty-five feet
long.

"He does not seem much impressed," thought Beatrice to herself, as she
tugged away at the postern bell; "I think he must be stupid. He looks
stupid."

Presently the door was opened by an active-looking little old woman
with a high voice.

"Mrs. Thomas," thought Owen to himself; "she is even worse than I
expected."

"Now you must please to go away," began the formidable housekeeper in
her shrillest key; "it is too late to show visitors over. Why, bless
us, it's you, Miss Beatrice, with a strange man! What do you want?"

Beatrice looked at her companion as a hint that he should explain
himself, but he said nothing.

"This is your new squire," she said, not without a certain pride. "I
found him wandering about the beach. He did not know how to get here,
so I brought him over."

"Lord, Miss Beatrice, and how do you know it's him?" said Mrs. Thomas.
"How do you know it ain't a housebreaker?"

"Oh, I'm sure he cannot be," answered Beatrice aside, "because he
isn't clever enough."

Then followed a long discussion. Mrs. Thomas stoutly refused to admit
the stranger without evidence of identity, and Beatrice, embracing his
cause, as stoutly pressed his claims. As for the lawful owner, he made
occasional feeble attempts to prove that he was himself, but Mrs.
Thomas was not to be imposed upon in this way. At last they came to a
dead lock.

"Y'd better go back to the inn, sir," said Mrs. Thomas with scathing
sarcasm, "and come up to-morrow with proofs and your luggage."

"Haven't you got any letters with you?" suggested Beatrice as a last
resource.

As it happened Owen had a letter, one from the lawyer to himself about
the property, and mentioning Mrs. Thomas's name as being in charge of
the Castle. He had forgotten all about it, but at this interesting
juncture it was produced and read aloud by Beatrice. Mrs. Thomas took
it, and having examined it carefully through her horn-rimmed
spectacles, was constrained to admit its authenticity.

"I'm sure I apologise, sir," she said with a half-doubtful courtesy
and much tact, "but one can't be too careful with all these trampseses
about; I never should have thought from the look of you, sir, how as
you was the new squire."

This might be candid, but it was not flattering, and it caused
Beatrice to snigger behind her handkerchief in true school-girl
fashion. However, they entered, and were led by Mrs. Thomas with
solemn pomp through the great and little halls, the stone parlour and
the oak parlour, the library and the huge