 drawing-room, in which the
white heads of marble statues protruded from the bags of brown holland
wherewith they were wrapped about in a manner ghastly to behold. At
length they reached a small octagon-shaped room that, facing south,
commanded a most glorious view of sea and land. It was called the
Lady's Boudoir, and joined another of about the same size, which in
its former owner's time had been used as a smoking-room.

"If you don't mind, madam," said the lord of all this magnificence, "I
should like to stop here, I am getting tired of walking." And there he
stopped for many years. The rest of the Castle was shut up; he
scarcely ever visited it except occasionally to see that the rooms
were properly aired, for he was a methodical man.

As for Beatrice, she went home, still chuckling, to receive a severe
reproof from Elizabeth for her "forwardness." But Owen Davies never
forgot the debt of gratitude he owed her. In his heart he felt
convinced that had it not been for her, he would have fled before Mrs.
Thomas and her horn-rimmed eyeglasses, to return no more. The truth of
the matter was, however, that young as was Beatrice, he fell in love
with her then and there, only to fall deeper and deeper into that
drear abyss as years went on. He never said anything about it, he
scarcely even gave a hint of his hopeless condition, though of course
Beatrice divined something of it as soon as she came to years of
discretion. But there grew up in Owen's silent, lonely breast a great
and overmastering desire to make this grey-eyed girl his wife. He
measured time by the intervals that elapsed between his visions of
her. No period in his life was so wretched and utterly purposeless as
those two years which passed while she was at her Training College. He
was a very passive lover, as yet his gathering passion did not urge
him to extremes, and he could never make up his mind to declare it.
The box was in his hand, but he feared to throw the dice.

But he drew as near to her as he dared. Once he gave Beatrice a
flower, it was when she was seventeen, and awkwardly expressed a hope
that she would wear it for his sake. The words were not much and the
flower was not much, but there was a look about the man's eyes, and a
suppressed passion and energy in his voice, which told their tale to
the keen-witted girl. After this he found that she avoided him, and
bitterly regretted his boldness. For Beatrice did not like him in that
way. To a girl of her curious stamp his wealth was nothing. She did
not covet wealth, she coveted independence, and had the sense to know
that marriage with such a man would not bring it. A cage is a cage,
whether the bars are of iron or gold. He bored her, she despised him
for his want of intelligence and enterprise. That a man with all this
wealth and endless opportunity should waste his life in such fashion
was to her a thing intolerable. She knew if she had half his chance,
that she would make her name ring from one end of Europe to the other.
In short, Beatrice held Owen as deeply in contempt as her sister
Elizabeth, studying him from another point of view, held him in
reverence. And putting aside any human predilections, Beatrice would
never have married a man whom she despised. She respected herself too
much.

Owen Davies saw all this as through a glass darkly, and in his own
slow way cast about for a means of drawing near. He discovered that
Beatrice was passionately fond of learning, and also that she had no
means to obtain the necessary books. So he threw open his library to
her; it was one of the best in Wales. He did more; he gave orders to a
London bookseller to forward him every new book of importance that
appeared in certain classes of literature, and all of these he placed
at her disposal, having first carefully cut the leaves with his own
hand. This was a bait Beatrice could not resist. She might dread or
even detest Mr. Davies, but she loved his books, and if she quarrelled
with him her well of knowledge would simply run dry, for there were no
circulating libraries at Bryngelly, and if there had been she could
not have afforded to subscribe to them. So she remained on good terms
with him, and even smiled at his futile attempts to keep pace with her
studies. Poor man, reading did not come naturally to him; he was much
better at cutting leaves. He studied the /Times/ and certain religious
works, that was all. But he wrestled manfully with many a detested
tome, in order to be able to say something to Beatrice about it, and
the worst of it was that Beatrice always saw through it, and showed
him that she did. It was not kind, perhaps, but youth is cruel.

And so the years wore on, till at length Beatrice knew that a crisis
was at hand. Even the tardiest and most retiring lover must come to
the point at last, if he is in earnest, and Owen Davies was very much
in earnest. Of late, to her dismay, he had so far come out of his
shell as to allow himself to be nominated a member of the school
council. Of course she knew that this was only to give him more
opportunities of seeing her. As a member of the council, he could
visit the school of which she was mistress as often as he chose, and
indeed he soon learned to take a lively interest in village education.
About twice a week he would come in just as the school was breaking up
and offer to walk home with her, seeking for a favourable opportunity
to propose. Hitherto she had always warded off this last event, but
she knew that it must happen. Not that she was actually afraid of the
man himself; he was too much afraid of her for that. What she did fear
was the outburst of wrath from her father and sister when they learned
that she had refused Owen Davies. It never occurred to her that
Elizabeth might be playing a hand of her own in the matter.

From all of which it will be clear, if indeed it has not become so
already, that Beatrice Granger was a somewhat ill-regulated young
woman, born to bring trouble on herself and all connected with her.
Had she been otherwise, she would have taken her good fortune and
married Owen Davies, in which case her history need never have been
written.



                             CHAPTER VII

                          A MATRIMONIAL TALE

Before Geoffrey Bingham dropped off into a troubled sleep on that
eventful night of storm, he learned that the girl who had saved his
life at the risk and almost at the cost of her own was out of danger,
and in his own and more reticent way he thanked Providence as heartily
as did Owen Davies. Then he went to sleep.

When he woke, feeling very sick and so stiff and sore that he could
scarcely move, the broad daylight was streaming through the blinds.
The place was perfectly quiet, for the doctor's assistant who had
brought him back to life, and who lay upon a couch at the further end
of the room, slept the sleep of youth and complete exhaustion. Only an
eight-day clock on the mantelpiece ticked in that solemn and
aggressive way which clocks affect in the stillness. Geoffrey strained
his eyes to make out the time, and finally discovered that it wanted a
few minutes to six o'clock. Then he fell to wondering how Miss Granger
was, and to repeating in his own mind every scene of their adventure,
till the last, when they were whirled out of the canoe in the embrace
of that white-crested billow.

He remembered nothing after that, nothing but a rushing sound and a
vision of foam. He shuddered a little as he thought of it, for his
nerves were shaken; it is not pleasant to have been so very near the
End and the Beginning; and then his heart went out with renewed
gratitude towards the girl who had restored him to life and light and
hope. Just at this moment he thought that he heard a sound of sobbing
outside the window. He listened; the sound went on. He tried to rise,
only to find that he was too stiff to manage it. So, as a last
resource, he called the doctor.

"What is the matter?" answered that young gentleman, jumping up with
the alacrity of one accustomed to be suddenly awakened. "Do you feel
queer?"

"Yes, I do rather," answered Geoffrey, "but it isn't that. There is
somebody crying outside here."

The doctor put on his coat, and, going to the window, drew the blind.

"Why, so there is," he said. "It's a little girl with yellow hair and
without a hat."

"A little girl," answered Geoffrey. "Why, it must be Effie, my
daughter. Please let her in."

"All right. Cover yourself up, and I can do that through the window;
it isn't five feet from the ground." Accordingly he opened the window,
and addressing the little girl, asked her what her name was.

"Effie," she sobbed in answer, "Effie Bingham. I've come to look for
daddie."

"All right, my dear, don't cry so; your daddie is here. Come and let
me lift you in."

Another moment and there appeared through the open window the very
sweetest little face and form that ever a girl of six was blessed
with. For the face was pink and white, and in it were set two
beautiful dark eyes, which, contrasting with the golden hair, made the
child a sight to see. But alas! just now the cheeks were stained with
tears, and round the large dark eyes were rings almost as dark. Nor
was this all. The little dress was hooked awry, on one tiny foot all
drenched with dew there was no boot, and on the yellow curls no hat.

"Oh! daddie, daddie," cried the child, catching sight of him and
struggling to reach her father's arms, "you isn't dead, is you,
daddie?"

"No, my love, no," answered her father, kissing her. "Why should you
think that I was dead? Didn't your mother tell you that I was safe?"

"Oh! daddie," she answered, "they came and said that you was drownded,
and I cried and wished that I was drownded too. Then mother came home
at last and said that you were better, and was cross with me because I
went on crying and wanted to come to you. But I did go on crying. I
cried nearly all night, and when it got light I did dress myself, all
but one shoe and my hat, which I could not find, and I got out of the
house to look for you."

"And how did you find me, my poor little dear?"

"Oh, I heard mother say you was at the Vicarage, so I waited till I
saw a man, and asked him which way to go, and he did tell me to walk
along the cliff till I saw a long white house, and then when he saw
that I had no shoe he wanted to take me home, but I ran away till I
got here. But the blinds were down, so I did think that you were dead,
daddie dear, and I cried till that gentleman opened the window."

After that Geoffrey began to scold her for running away, but she did
not seem to mind it much, for she sat upon the edge of the couch, her
little face resting against his own, a very pretty sight to see.

"You must go back to Mrs. Jones, Effie, and tell your mother where you
have been."

"I can't, daddie, I've only got one shoe," she answered, pouting.

"But you came with only one shoe."

"Yes, daddie, but I wanted to come and I don't want to go back. Tell
me how you was drownded."

He laughed at her logic and gave way to her, for this little daughter
was very near to his heart, nearer than anything else in the world. So
he told her how he was "drownded" and how a lady had saved his life.

Effie listened with wide set eyes, and then said that she wanted to
see the lady, which she presently did. At that moment there came a
knock at the door, and Mr. Granger entered, accompanied by Dr.
Chambers.

"How do you do, sir?" said the former. "I must introduce myself,
seeing that you are not likely to remember me. When last I saw you,
you looked as dead as a beached dog-fish. My name's Granger, the
Reverend J. Granger, Vicar of Bryngelly, one of the very worst livings
on this coast, and that's saying a great deal."

"I am sure, Mr. Granger, I'm under a deep debt of gratitude to you for
your hospitality, and under a still deeper one to your daughter, but I
hope to thank her personally for that."

"Never speak of it," said the clergyman. "Hot water and blankets don't
cost much, and you will have to pay for the brandy and the doctor. How
is he, doctor?"

"He is getting on very well indeed, Mr. Granger. But I daresay you
find yourself rather stiff, Mr. Bingham. I see your head is pretty
badly bruised."

"Yes," he answered, laughing, "and so is my body. Shall I be able to
go home to-day?"

"I think so," said the doctor, "but not before this evening. You had
better keep quiet till then. You will be glad to hear that Miss
Beatrice is getting on very well. Hers was a wonderful recovery, the
most wonderful I ever saw. I had quite given her up, though I should
have kept on the treatment for another hour. You ought to be grateful
to Miss Beatrice, Mr. Bingham. But for her you would not have been
here."

"I am most grateful," he answered earnestly. "Shall I be able to see
her to-day?"

"Yes, I think so, some time this afternoon, say at three o'clock. Is
that your little daughter? What a lovely child she is. Well, I will
look in again about twelve. All that you require to do now is to keep
quiet and rub in some arnica."

About an hour afterwards the servant girl brought Geoffrey some
breakfast of tea and toast. He felt quite hungry, but when it came to
the pinch he could not eat much. Effie, who was starving, made up for
this deficiency, however; she ate all the toast and a couple of slices
of bread and butter after it. Scarcely had they finished, when her
father observed a shade of anxiety come upon his little daughter's
face.

"What is it, Effie?" he asked.

"I think," replied Effie in evident trepidation, "I think that I hear
mother outside and Anne too."

"Well, dear, they have come to see me."

"Yes, and to scold me because I ran away," and the child drew nearer
to her father in a fashion which would have made it clear to any
observer that the relations between her and her mother were somewhat
strained.

Effie was right. Presently there was a knock at the door and Lady
Honoria entered, calm and pale and elegant as ever. She was followed
by a dark-eyed somewhat impertinent-looking French /bonne/, who held
up her hands and ejaculated, "Mon Dieu!" as she appeared.

"I thought so," said Lady Honoria, speaking in French to the /bonne/.
"There she is," and she pointed at the runaway Effie with her parasol.

"Mon Dieu!" said the woman again. "Vous voilà enfin, et moi, qui suis
accablée de peur, et votre chère mère aussi; oh, mais que c'est
méchant; et regardez donc, avec un soulier seulement. Mais c'est
affreux!"

"Hold your tongue," said Geoffrey sharply, "and leave Miss Effie
alone. She came to see me."

Anne ejaculated, "Mon Dieu!" once more and collapsed.

"Really, Geoffrey," said his wife, "the way you spoil that child is
something shocking. She is wilful as can be, and you make her worse.
It is very naughty of her to run away like that and give us such a
hunt. How are we to get her home, I wonder, with only one shoe."

Her husband bit his lip, and his forehead contracted itself above the
dark eyes. It was not the first time that he and Lady Honoria had come
to words about the child, with whom his wife was not in sympathy.
Indeed she had never forgiven Effie for appearing in this world at
all. Lady Honoria did not belong to that class of women who think
maternity is a joy.

"Anne," he said, "take Miss Effie and carry her till you can find a
donkey. She can ride back to the lodgings." The nurse murmured
something in French about the child being as heavy as lead.

"Do as I bid you," he said sharply, in the same language. "Effie, my
love, give me a kiss and go home. Thank you for coming to see me."

The child obeyed and went. Lady Honoria stood and watched her go,
tapping her little foot upon the floor, and with a look upon her cold,
handsome face that was not altogether agreeable to see.



It had sometimes happened that, in the course of his married life,
Geoffrey returned home with a little of that added fondness which
absence is fabled to beget. On these occasions he was commonly so
unfortunate as to find that Lady Honoria belied the saying, that she
greeted him with arrears of grievances and was, if possible, more
frigid than ever.

Was this to be repeated now that he had come back from what was so
near to being the longest absence of all? It looked like it. He noted
symptoms of the rising storm, symptoms with which he was but too well
acquainted, and both for his own sake and for hers--for above all
things Geoffrey dreaded these bitter matrimonial bickerings--tried to
think of something kind to say. It must be owned that he did not show
much tact in the subject he selected, though it was one which might
have stirred the sympathies of some women. It is so difficult to
remember that one is dealing with a Lady Honoria.

"If ever we have another child----" he began gently.

"Excuse me interrupting you," said the lady, with a suavity which did
not however convey any idea of the speaker's inward peace, "but it is
a kindness to prevent you from going on in that line. /One/ darling is
ample for me."

"Well," said the miserable Geoffrey, with an effort, "even if you
don't care much about the child yourself, it is a little unreasonable
to object because she cares for me and was sorry when she thought that
I was dead. Really, Honoria, sometimes I wonder if you have any heart
at all. Why should you be put out because Effie got up early to come
and see me?--an example which I must admit you did not set her. And as
to her shoe----" he added smiling.

"You may laugh about her shoe, Geoffrey," she interrupted, "but you
forget that even little things like that are no laughing matter now to
us. The child's shoes keep me awake at night sometimes. Defoy has not
been paid for I don't know how long. I have a mind to get her /sabots/
--and as to heart----"

"Well," broke in Geoffrey, reflecting that bad as was the emotional
side of the question, it was better than the commercial--"as to
'heart?'"

"You are scarcely the person to talk of it, that is all. I wonder how
much of yours you gave /me/?"

"Really, Honoria," he answered, not without eagerness, and his mind
filled with wonder. Was it possible that his wife had experienced some
kind of "call," and was about to concern herself with his heart one
way or the other? If so it was strange, for she had never shown the
slightest interest in it before.

"Yes," she went on rapidly and with gathering vehemence, "you speak
about your heart"--which he had not done--"and yet you know as well as
I do that if I had been a girl of no position you would never have
offered me the organ on which you pretend to set so high a value. Or
did your heart run wildly away with you, and drag us into love and a
cottage--a flat, I mean? If so, /I/ should prefer a little less heart
and a little more common sense."

Geoffrey winced, twice indeed, feeling that her ladyship had hit him
as it were with both barrels. For, as a matter of fact, he had not
begun with any passionate devotion, and again Lady Honoria and he were
now just as poor as though they had really married for love.

"It is hardly fair to go back on bygones and talk like this," he said,
"even if your position had something to do with it; only at first of
course, you must remember that when we married mine was not without
attractions. Two thousand a year to start on and a baronetcy and eight
thousand a year in the near future were not--but I hate talking about
that kind of thing. Why do you force me to it? Nobody could know that
my uncle, who was so anxious that I should marry you, would marry
himself at his age, and have a son and heir. It was not my fault,
Honoria. Perhaps you would not have married me if you could have
foreseen it."

"Very probably not," she answered calmly, "and it is not /my/ fault
that I have not yet learned to live with peace of mind and comfort on
seven hundred a year. It was hard enough to exist on two thousand till
your uncle died, and now----"

"Well, and now, Honoria, if you will only have patience and put up
with things for a while, you shall be rich enough; I will make money
for you, as much money as you want. I have many friends. I have not
done so badly at the Bar this year."

"Two hundred pounds, nineteen shillings and sevenpence, minus ninety-
seven pounds rent of chambers and clerk," said Lady Honoria, with a
disparaging accent on the sevenpence.

"I shall double it next year, and double that again the next, and so
on. I work from morning till night to get on, that you may have--what
you live for," he said bitterly.

"Ah, I shall be sixty before that happy day comes, and want nothing
but scandal and a bath chair. I know the Bar and its moaning," she
added, with acid wit. "You dream, you imagine what you would like to
come true, but you are deceiving me and yourself. It will be like the
story of Sir Robert Bingham's property once again. We shall be beggars
all our days. I tell you, Geoffrey, that you had no right to marry
me."

Then at length he lost his temper. This was not the first of these
scenes--they had grown frequent of late, and this bitter water was
constantly dropping.

"Right?" he said, "and may I ask what right you had to marry me when
you don't even pretend you ever cared one straw for me, but just
accepted me as you would have accepted any other man who was a
tolerably good match? I grant that I first thought of proposing to you
because my uncle wished it, but if I did not love you I meant to be a
good husband to you, and I should have loved you if you would let me.
But you are cold and selfish; you looked upon a husband merely as a
stepping-stone to luxury; you have never loved anybody except
yourself. If I had died last night I believe that you would have cared
more about having to go into mourning than for the fact of my
disappearance from your life. You showed no more feeling for me when
you came in than you would have if I had been a stranger--not so much
as some women might have for a stranger. I wonder sometimes if you
have any feeling left in you at all. I should think that you treat me
as you do because you do not care for me and do care for some other
person did I not know you to be utterly incapable of caring for
anybody. Do you want to make me hate you, Honoria?"

Geoffrey's low concentrated voice and earnest manner told his wife,
who was watching him with something like a smile upon her clear-cut
lips, how deeply he was moved. He had lost his self-control, and
exposed his heart to her--a thing he rarely did, and that in itself
was a triumph which she did not wish to pursue at the moment. Geoffrey
was not a man to push too far.

"If you have quite finished, Geoffrey, there is something I should
like to say----"

"Oh, curse it all!" he broke in.

"Yes?" she said calmly and interrogatively, and made a pause, but as
he did not specially apply his remark to anybody or anything, she
continued: "If these flowers of rhetoric are over, what I have to say
is this: I do not intend to stay in this horrid place any longer. I am
going to-morrow to my brother Garsington. They asked us both, you may
remember, but for reasons best known to yourself, you would not go."

"You know my reasons very well, Honoria."

"I beg your pardon. I have not the slightest idea what they were,"
said Lady Honoria with conviction. "May I hear them?"

"Well, if you wish to know, I will not go to the house of a man who
has--well, left my club as Garsington left it, and who, had it not
been for my efforts, would have left it in an even more unpleasant and
conspicuous fashion. And his wife is worse than he is----"

"I think you are mistaken," Lady Honoria said coldly, and with the air
of a person who shuts the door of a room into which she does not wish
to look. "And, any way, it all happened years ago and has blown over.
But I do not see the necessity of discussing the subject further. I
suppose that we shall meet at dinner to-night. I shall take the early
train to-morrow."

"Do what suits you, Honoria. Perhaps you would prefer not returning at
all."

"Thank you, no. I will not lay myself open to imputations. I shall
join you in London, and will make the best of a bad business. Thank
Heaven, I have learned how to bear my misfortunes," and with this
Parthian shot she left the room.

For a minute or two her husband felt as though he almost hated her.
Then he thrust his face into the pillow and groaned.

"She is right," he said to himself; "we must make the best of a bad
business. But, somehow, I seem to have made a mess of my life. And yet
I loved her once--for a month or two."

This was not an agreeable scene, and it may be said that Lady Honoria
was a vulgar person. But not even the advantage of having been brought
up "on the knees of marchionesses" is a specific against vulgarity, if
a lady happens, unfortunately, to set her heart, what there is of it,
meanly on mean things.



                             CHAPTER VIII

                             EXPLANATORY

About two o'clock Geoffrey rose, and with some slight assistance from
his reverend host, struggled into his clothes. Then he lunched, and
while he did so Mr. Granger poured his troubles into his sympathetic
ear.

"My father was a Herefordshire farmer, Mr. Bingham," he said, "and I
was bred up to that line of life myself. He did well, my father did,
as in those days a careful man might. What is more, he made some money
by cattle-dealing, and I think that turned his head a little; anyway,
he was minded to make 'a gentleman of me,' as he called it. So when I
was eighteen I was packed off to be made a parson of, whether I liked
it or no. Well, I became a parson, and for four years I had a curacy
at a town called Kingston, in Herefordshire, not a bad sort of little
town--perhaps you happen to know it. While I was there, my father, who
was getting beyond himself, took to speculating. He built a row of
villas at Leominster, or at least he lent a lawyer the money to build
them, and when they were built nobody would hire them. It broke my
father; he was ruined over those villas. I have always hated the sight
of a villa ever since, Mr. Bingham. And shortly afterwards he died, as
near bankruptcy as a man's nose is to his mouth.

"After that I was offered this living, £150 a year it was at the best,
and like a fool I took it. The old parson who was here before me left
an only daughter behind him. The living had ruined him, as it ruins
me, and, as I say, he left his daughter, my wife that was, behind him,
and a pretty good bill for dilapidations I had against the estate. But
there wasn't any estate, so I made the best of a bad business and
married the daughter, and a sweet pretty woman she was, poor dear,
very like my Beatrice, only without the brains. I can't make out where
Beatrice's brains come from indeed, for I am sure I don't set up for
having any. She was well born, too, my wife was, of an old Cornish
family, but she had nowhere to go to, and I think she married me
because she didn't know what else to do, and was fond of the old
place. She took me on with it, as it were. Well, it turned out pretty
well, till some eleven years ago, when our boy was born, though I
don't think we ever quite understood each other. She never got her
health back after that, and seven years ago she died. I remember it
was on a night wonderfully like last night--mist first, then storm.
The boy died a few years afterwards. I thought it would have broken
Beatrice's heart; she has never been the same girl since, but always
full of queer ideas I don't pretend to follow.

"And as for the life I've had of it here, Mr. Bingham, you wouldn't
believe it if I was to tell you. The living is small enough, but the
place is as full of dissent as a mackerel-boat of fish, and as for
getting the tithes--well, I cannot, that's all. If it wasn't for a bit
of farming that I do, not but what the prices are down to nothing, and
for what the visitors give in the season, and for the help of
Beatrice's salary as certificated mistress, I should have been in the
poor-house long ago, and shall be yet, I often think. I have had to
take in a border before now to make both ends meet, and shall again, I
expect.

"And now I must be off up to my bit of a farm; the old sow is due to
litter, and I want to see how she is getting on. Please God she'll
have thirteen again and do well. I'll order the fly to be here at
five, though I shall be back before then--that is, I told Elizabeth to
do so. She has gone out to do some visiting for me, and to see if she
can't get in two pounds five of tithe that has been due for three
months. If anybody can get it it's Elizabeth. Well, good-bye; if you
are dull and want to talk to Beatrice, she is up and in there. I
daresay you will suit one another. She's a very queer girl, Beatrice,
quite beyond me with her ideas, and it was a funny thing her holding
you so tight, but I suppose Providence arranged that. Good-bye for the
present, Mr. Bingham," and this curious specimen of a clergyman
vanished, leaving Geoffrey quite breathless.

It was half-past two o'clock, and the doctor had told him that he
could see Miss Granger at three. He wished that it was three, for he
was tired of his own thoughts and company, and naturally anxious to
renew his acquaintance with the strange girl who had begun by
impressing him so deeply and ended by saving his life. There was
complete quiet in the house; Betty, the maid-of-all-work, was employed
in the kitchen, both the doctors had gone, and Elizabeth and her
father were out. To-day there was no wind, it had blown itself away
during the night, and the sight of the sunbeams streaming through the
windows made Geoffrey long to be in the open air. He had no book at
hand to read, and whenever he tried to think his mind flew back to
that hateful matrimonial quarrel.

It was hard on him, Geoffrey thought, that he should be called upon to
endure such scenes. He could no longer disguise the truth from himself
--he had buried his happiness on his wedding-day. Looking back across
the years, he well remembered how different a life he had imagined for
himself. In those days he was tired of knocking about and of youthful
escapades; even that kind of social success which must attend a young
man who was handsome, clever, a good fellow, and blessed with large
expectations, had, at the age of six-and-twenty, entirely lost its
attractiveness. Therefore he had turned no deaf ear to his uncle, Sir
Robert Bingham, who was then going on for seventy, when he suggested
that it might be well of Geoffrey settled down, and introduced him to
Lady Honoria.

Lady Honoria was eighteen then, and a beauty of the rather thin but
statuesque type, which attracts men up to five or six and twenty and
then frequently bores, if it does not repel them. Moreover, she was
clever and well read, and pretended to be intellectually and
poetically inclined, as ladies not specially favoured by Apollo
sometimes do--before they marry. Cold she always was; nobody ever
heard of Lady Honoria stretching the bounds of propriety; but Geoffrey
put this down to a sweet and becoming modesty, which would vanish or
be transmuted in its season. Also she affected a charming innocence of
all vulgar business matters, which both deceived and enchanted him.
Never but once did she allude to ways and means before marriage, and
then it was to say that she was glad that they should be so poor till
dear Sir Robert died (he had promised to allow them fifteen hundred a
year, and they had seven more between them), as this would enable them
to see so much more of each other.

At last came the happy day, and this white virgin soul passed into
Geoffrey's keeping. For a week or so things went fairly well, and then
disenchantment began. He learned by slow but sure degrees that his
wife was vain, selfish and extravagant, and, worst of all, that she
cared very little about him. The first shock was when he accidentally
discovered, four or five days after marriage, that Honoria was
intimately acquainted with every detail of Sir Robert Bingham's
property, and, young as she was, had already formed a scheme to make
it more productive after the old man's death.

They went to live in London, and there he found that Lady Honoria,
although by far too cold and prudent a woman to do anything that could
bring a breath of scandal upon her name, was as fond of admiration as
she was heartless. It seemed to Geoffrey that he could never be free
from the collection of young men who hung about her skirts. Some of
them were very good fellows whom he liked exceedingly; still, on the
whole he would have preferred to remain unmarried and associate with
them at the club. Also the continual round of society and going out
brought heavier expenses on him that he could well support. And thus,
little by little, poor Geoffrey's dream of matrimonial bliss faded
into thin air. But, fortunately for himself, he possessed a certain
share of logic and sweet reasonableness. In time he learnt to see that
the fault was not altogether with his wife, who was by no means a bad
sort of woman in her degree. But her degree differed from his degree.
She had married for freedom and wealth and to gain a larger scope
wherein to exercise those tastes which inherited disposition and
education had given to her, as she believed that he had married her
because she was the daughter of a peer.

Lady Honoria, like many another woman of her stamp, was the overbred,
or sometimes the underbred, product of a too civilized age and class.
Those primitive passions and virtues on which her husband had relied
to make the happiness of their married life simply did not exist for
her. The passions had been bred and educated out of her; for many
generations they have been found inconvenient and disquieting
attributes in woman. As for the old virtues, such as love of children
and the ordinary round of domestic duty, they simply bored her. On the
whole, though sharp of tongue, she rarely lost her temper, for her
vices, like her virtues, were of a somewhat negative order; but the
fury which seized her when she learned for certain that she was to
become a mother was a thing that her unfortunate husband never forgot
and never wished to see again. At length the child was born, a fact
for which Geoffrey, at least, was very thankful.

"Take it away. I do not want to see it!" said Lady Honoria to the
scandalised nurse when the little creature was brought to her, wrapped
in its long robes.

"Give it to me, nurse--I do," said her husband.



From that moment Geoffrey gave all the pent-up affection of his
bruised soul to this little daughter, and as the years went on they
grew very dear to each other. But an active-minded, strong-hearted,
able-bodied man cannot take a babe as the sole companion of his
existence. Probably Geoffrey would have found this out in time, and
might have drifted into some mode of life more or less undesirable,
had not an accident occurred to prevent it. In his dotage, Geoffrey's
old uncle Sir Robert Bingham fell a victim to the wiles of an
adventuress and married her. Then he promptly died, and eight months
afterwards a posthumous son was born.

To Geoffrey this meant ruin. His allowance stopped and his
expectations vanished at one fell swoop. He pulled himself together,
however, as a brave-hearted man does under such a shock, and going to
his wife he explained to her that he must now work for his living,
begging her to break down the barrier that was between them and give
him her sympathy and help. She met him with tears and reproaches. The
one thing that touched her keenly, the one thing which she feared and
hated was poverty, and all that poverty means to women of her rank and
nature. But there was no help for it; the charming house in Bolton
Steet had to be given up, and purgatory must be faced, in a flat, near
the Edgware Road. Lady Honoria was miserable, indeed had it not been
that fortunately for herself she possessed plenty of relations more or
less grand, whom she might continually visit for weeks and even for
months at a stretch, she could scarcely have endured her altered life.

But strangely enough Geoffrey soon found that he was happier than he
had been since his marriage. To begin with, he set to work like a man,
and work is a great source of happiness to all vigorous-minded folk.
It is not, in truth, a particularly cheerful occupation to pass
endless days in hanging about law-courts amongst a crowd of unbriefed
Juniors, and many nights in reading up the law one has forgotten and
threading the many intricacies of the Judicature Act. But it happened
that his father, a younger brother of Sir Robert's, had been a
solicitor, and though he was dead, and all direct interest with the
firm was severed, yet another uncle remained in it, and the partners
did not forget Geoffrey in his difficulties.

They sent him what work they could without offending their standing
counsel, and he did it well. Then by degrees he built up quite a large
general practice of the kind known as deviling. Now there are few
things more unsatisfactory than doing another man's work for nothing,
but every case fought means knowledge gained, and what is more it is
advertisement. So it came to pass that within less than two years from
the date of his money misfortunes, Geoffrey Bingham's dark handsome
face and square strong form became very well known in the Courts.

"What is that man's name?" said one well-known Q.C. to another still
more well known, as they sat waiting for their chops in the Bar Grill
Room, and saw Geoffrey, his wig pushed back from his forehead,
striding through the doorway on the last day of the sitting which
preceded the commencement of this history.

"Bingham," answered the other. "He's only begun to practise lately,
but he'll be at the top of the tree before he has done. He married
very well, you know, old Garsington's daughter, a charming woman, and
handsome too."

"He looks like it," grunted the first, and as a matter of fact such
was the general opinion.

For, as Beatrice had said, Geoffrey Bingham was a man who had success
written on his forehead. It would have been almost impossible for him
to fail in whatever he undertook.



                              CHAPTER IX

                        WHAT BEATRICE DREAMED

Geoffrey lay upon his back, watching the still patch of sunshine and
listening to the ticking of the clock, as he passed all these and many
other events in solemn review, till the series culminated in his vivid
recollection of the scene of that very morning.

"I am sick of it," he said at last aloud, "sick and tired. She makes
my life wretched. If it wasn't for Effie upon my word I'd . . . By
Jove, it is three o'clock; I will go and see Miss Granger. She's a
woman, not a female ghost at any rate, though she is a freethinker--
which," he added as he slowly struggled off the couch, "is a very
foolish thing to be."

Very shakily, for he was sadly knocked about, Geoffrey hobbled down
the long narrow room and through the door, which was ajar. The
opposite door was also set half open. He knocked softly, and getting
no answer pushed it wide and looked in, thinking that he had, perhaps,
made some mistake as to the room. On a sofa placed about two-thirds
down its length, lay Beatrice asleep. She was wrapped in a kind of
dressing-gown of some simple blue stuff, and all about her breast and
shoulders streamed her lovely curling hair. Her sweet face was towards
him, its pallor relieved only by the long shadow of the dark lashes
and the bent bow of the lips. One white wrist and hand hung down
almost to the floor, and beneath the spread curtain of the sunlit hair
her bosom heaved softly in her sleep. She looked so wondrously
beautiful in her rest that he stopped almost awed, and gazed, and
gazed again, feeling as though a present sense and power were stilling
his heart to silence. It is dangerous to look upon such quiet
loveliness, and very dangerous to feel that pressure at the heart. A
truly wise man feeling it would have fled, knowing that seeds sown in
such silences may live to bloom upon a bitter day, and shed their
fruit into the waters of desolation. But Geoffrey was not wise--who
would have been? He still stood and gazed till the sight stamped
itself so deeply on the tablets of his heart that through all the
years to come no heats of passion, no frosts of doubt, and no sense of
loss could ever dull its memory.

The silent sun shone on, the silent woman slept, and in silence the
watcher gazed. And as he looked a great fear, a prescience of evil
that should come, entered into Geoffrey and took possession of him. A
cloud without crossed the ray of sunlight and turned it. It wavered,
for a second it rested on his breast, flashed back to hers, then went
out; and as it flashed and died, he seemed to know that henceforth,
for life till death, ay! and beyond, his fate and that sleeping
woman's were one fate. It was but a momentary knowledge; the fear
shook him, and was gone almost before he understood its foolishness.
But it had been with him, and in after days he remembered it.

Just then Beatrice woke, opening her grey eyes. Their dreamy glance
fell upon him, looking through him and beyond him, rather than at him.
Then she raised herself a little and stretching out both her arms
towards him, spoke aloud.

"So have you have come back to me at last," she said. "I knew that you
would come and I have waited."

He made no answer, he did not know what to say; indeed he began to
think that he also must be dreaming. For a little while Beatrice still
looked at him in the same absent manner, then suddenly started up, the
red blood streaming to her brow.

"Why, Mr. Bingham," she said, "is it really you? What was it that I
said? Oh, pray forgive me, whatever it was. I have been asleep
dreaming such a curious dream, and talking in my sleep."

"Do not alarm yourself, Miss Granger," he answered, recovering himself
with a jerk; "you did not say anything dreadful, only that you were
glad to see me. What were you dreaming about?"

Beatrice looked at him doubtfully; perhaps his words did not ring
quite true.

"I think that I had better tell you as I have said so much," she
answered. "Besides, it was a very curious dream, and if I believed in
dreams it would rather frighten me, only fortunately I do not. Sit
down and I will tell it to you before I forget it. It is not very
long."

He took the chair to which she pointed, and she began, speaking in the
voice of one yet laden with the memories of sleep.

"I dreamed that I stood in space. Far to my right was a great globe of
light, and to my left was another globe, and I knew that the globes
were named Life and Death. From the globe on the right to the globe on
the left, and back again, a golden shuttle, in which two flaming eyes
were set, was shot continually, and I knew also that this was the
shuttle of Destiny, weaving the web of Fate. Presently the shuttle
flew, leaving behind it a long silver thread, and the eyes in the
shuttle were such as your eyes. Again the shuttle sped through space,
and this time its eyes were like my eyes, and the thread it left
behind it was twisted from a woman's hair. Half way between the globes
of Life and Death my thread was broken, but the shuttle flew on and
vanished. For a moment the thread hung in air, then a wind rose and
blew it, so that it floated away like a spider's web, till it struck
upon your silver thread of life and began to twist round and round it.
As it twisted it grew larger and heavier, till at last it was thick as
a great tress of hair, and the silver line bent beneath the weight so
that I saw it soon must break. Then while I wondered what would
happen, a white hand holding a knife slid slowly down the silver line,
and with the knife severed the wrappings of woman's hair, which fell
and floated slowly away, like a little cloud touched with sunlight,
till they were lost in darkness. But the thread of silver that was
your line of life, sprang up quivering and making a sound like sighs,
till at last it sighed itself to silence.

"Then I seemed to sleep, and when I woke I was floating upon such a
misty sea as we saw last night. I had lost all sight of land, and I
could not remember what the stars were like, nor how I had been taught
to steer, nor understand where I must go. I called to the sea, and
asked it of the stars, and the sea answered me thus:

"'Hope has rent her raiment, and the stars are set.'

"I called again, and asked of the land where I should go, and the land
did not answer, but the sea answered me a second time:

"'Child of the mist, wander in the mist, and in darkness seek for
light.'

"Then I wept because Hope had rent her starry garment and in darkness
I must seek for light. And while I still wept, /you/ rose out of the
sea and sat before me in the boat. I had never seen you before, and
still I felt that I had known you always. You did not speak, and I did
not speak, but you looked into my heart and saw its trouble. Then I
looked into your heart, and read what was written. And this was
written:

"'Woman whom I knew before the Past began, and whom I shall know when
the Future is ended, why do you weep?'

"And my heart answered, 'I weep because I am lost upon the waters of
the earth, because Hope has rent her starry robes, and in everlasting
darkness I must seek for light that is not.' Then your heart said,
'/I/ will show you light,' and bending forward you touched me on the
breast.

"And suddenly an agony shook me like the agonies of birth and death,
and the sky was full of great-winged angels who rolled up the mist as
a cloth, and drew the veils from the eyes of Night, and there, her
feet upon the globe, and her star-set head piercing the firmament of
heaven, stood Hope breathing peace and beauty. She looked north and
south and east and west, then she looked upwards through the arching
vaults of heaven, and wherever she set her eyes, bright with holy
tears, the darkness shrivelled and sorrow ceased, and from corruption
arose the Incorruptible. I gazed and worshipped, and as I did so,
again the sea spoke unquestioned:

"'In darkness thou hast found light, in Death seek for wisdom.'

"Then once more Hope rent her starry robes, and the angels drew down a
veil over the eyes of Night, and the sea swallowed me, and I sank till
I reached the deep foundations of mortal death. And there in the Halls
of Death I sat for ages upon ages, till at last I saw you come, and on
your lips was the word of wisdom that makes all things clear, but what
it was I cannot remember. Then I stretched out my hand to greet you,
and woke, and that is all my dream."



Beatrice ceased, her grey eyes set wide, as though they still strove
to trace their spiritual vision upon the air of earth, her breast
heaving, and her lips apart.

"Great heaven!" he said, "what an imagination you must have to dream
such a dream as that."

"Imagination," she answered, returning to her natural manner. "I have
none, Mr. Bingham. I used to have, but I lost it when I lost--
everything else. Can you interpret my dream? Of course you cannot; it
is nothing but nonsense--such stuff as dreams are made of, that is
all."

"It may be nonsense, I daresay it is, but it is beautiful nonsense,"
he answered. "I wish ladies had more of such stuff to give the world."

"Ah, well, dreams may be wiser than wakings, and nonsense than learned
talk, for all we know. But there's an end of it. I do not know why I
repeated it to you. I am sorry that I did repeat it, but it seemed so
real it shook me out of myself. This is what comes of breaking in upon
the routine of life by being three parts drowned. One finds queer
things at the bottom of the sea, you know. By the way I hope that you
are recovering. I do not think that you will care to go canoeing again
with me, Mr. Bingham."

There was an opening for a compliment here, but Geoffrey felt that it
would be too much in earnest if spoken, so he resisted the temptation.

"What, Miss Granger," he said, "should a man say to a lady who but
last night saved his life, at the risk, indeed almost at the cost, of
her own?"

"It was nothing," she answered, colouring; "I clung to you, that was
all, more by instinct than from any motive. I think I had a vague idea
that you might float and support me."

"Miss Granger, the occasion is too serious for polite fibs. I know how
you saved my life. I do not know how to thank you for it."

"Then don't thank me at all, Mr. Bingham. Why should you thank me? I
only did what I was bound to do. I would far rather die than desert a
companion in distress, of any sort; we all must die, but it would be
dreadful to die ashamed. You know what they say, that if you save a
person from drowning you will do them an injury afterwards. That is
how they put it here; in some parts the saying is the other way about,
but I am not likely ever to do you an injury, so it does not make me
unhappy. It was an awful experience: you were senseless, so you cannot
know how strange it felt lying upon the slippery rock, and seeing
those great white waves rush upon us through the gloom, with nothing
but the night above, and the sea around, and death between the two. I
have been lonely for many years, but I do not think that I ever quite
understood what loneliness really meant before. You see," she added by
way of an afterthought, "I thought that you were dead, and there is
not much company in a corpse."

"Well," he said, "one thing is, it would have been lonelier if we had
gone."

"Do you think so?" she answered, looking at him inquiringly. "I don't
quite see how you make that out. If you believe in what we have been
taught, as I think you do, wherever it was you found yourself there
would be plenty of company, and if, like me, you do not believe in
anything, why, then, you would have slept, and sleep asks for
nothing."

"Did you believe in nothing when you lay upon the rock waiting to be
drowned, Miss Granger?"

"Nothing!" she answered; "only weak people find revelation in the
extremities of fear. If revelation comes at all, surely it must be
born in the heart and not in the senses. I believed in nothing, and I
dreaded nothing, except the agony of death. Why should I be afraid?
Supposing that I am mistaken, and there is something beyond, is it my
fault that I cannot believe? What have I done that I should be afraid?
I have never harmed anybody that I know of, and if I could believe I
would. I wish I had died," she went on, passionately; "it would be all
over now. I am tired of the world, tired of work and helplessness, and
all the little worries which wear one out. I am not wanted here, I
have nothing to live for, and I wish that I had died!"

"Some day you will think differently, Miss Granger. There are many
things that a woman like yourself can live for--at the least, there is
your work."

She laughed drearily. "My work! If you only knew what it is like you
would not talk to me about it. Every day I roll my stone up the hill,
and every night it seems to roll down again. But you have never taught
in a village school. How can you know? I work all day, and in the
evening perhaps I have to mend the tablecloths, or--what do you think?
--write my father's sermons. It sounds curious, does it not, that I
should write sermons? But I do. I wrote the one he is going to preach
next Sunday. It makes very little difference to him what it is so long
as he can read it, and, of course, I never say anything which can
offend anybody, and I do not think that they listen much. Very few
people go to church in Bryngelly."

"Don't you ever get any time to yourself, then?"

"Oh, yes, sometimes I do, and then I go out in my canoe, or read, and
am almost happy. After all, Mr. Bingham, it is very wrong and
ungrateful of me to speak like this. I have more advantages than nine-
tenths of the world, and I ought to make the best of them. I don't
know why I have been speaking as I have, and to you, whom I never saw
till yesterday. I never did it before to any living soul, I assure
you. It is just like the story of the man who came here last year with
the divining rod. There is a cottage down on the cliff--it belongs to
Mr. Davies, who lives in the Castle. Well, they have no drinking water
near, and the new tenant made a great fuss about it. So Mr. Davies
hired men, and they dug and dug and spent no end of money, but could
not come to water. At last the tenant fetched an old man f