rom some
parish a long way off, who said that he could find springs with a
divining rod. He was a curious old man with a crutch, and he came with
his rod, and hobbled about till at last the rod twitched just at the
tenant's back door--at least the diviner said it did. At any rate,
they dug there, and in ten minutes struck a spring of water, which
bubbled up so strongly that it rushed into the house and flooded it.
And what do you think? After all, the water was brackish. You are the
man with the divining rod, Mr. Bingham, and you have made me talk a
great deal too much, and, after all, you see it is not nice talk. You
must think me a very disagreeable and wicked young woman, and I
daresay I am. But somehow it is a relief to open one's mind. I do
hope, Mr. Bingham, that you will see--in short, that you will not
misunderstand me."

"Miss Granger," he answered, "there is between us that which will
always entitle us to mutual respect and confidence--the link of life
and death. Had it not been for you, I should not sit here to listen to
your confidence to-day. You may tell me that a mere natural impulse
prompted you to do what you did. I know better. It was your will that
triumphed over your natural impulse towards self-preservation. Well, I
will say no more about it, except this: If ever a man was bound to a
woman by ties of gratitude and respect, I am bound to you. You need
not fear that I shall take advantage of or misinterpret your
confidence." Here he rose and stood before her, his dark handsome face
bowed in proud humility. "Miss Granger, I look upon it as an honour
done to me by one whom henceforth I must reverence among all women.
The life you gave back to me, and the intelligence which directs it,
are in duty bound to you, and I shall not forget the debt."

Beatrice listened to his words, spoken in that deep and earnest voice,
which in after years became so familiar to Her Majesty's judges and to
Parliament--listened with a new sense of pleasure rising in her heart.
She was this man's equal; what he could dare, she could dare; where he
could climb, she could follow--ay, and if need be, show the path, and
she felt that he acknowledged it. In his sight she was something more
than a handsome girl to be admired and deferred to for her beauty's
sake. He had placed her on another level--one, perhaps, that few women
would have wished to occupy. But Beatrice was thankful to him. It was
the first taste of supremacy that she had ever known.

It is something to stir the proud heart of such a woman as Beatrice,
in that moment when for the first time she feels herself a conqueror,
victorious, not through the vulgar advantage of her sex, not by the
submission of man's coarser sense, but rather by the overbalancing
weight of mind.

"Do you know," she said, suddenly looking up, "you make me very
proud," and she stretched out her hand to him.

He took it, and, bending, touched it with his lips. There was no
possibility of misinterpreting the action, and though she coloured a
little--for, till then, no man had even kissed the tip of her finger--
she did not misinterpret it. It was an act of homage, and that was
all.

And so they sealed the compact of their perfect friendship for ever
and a day.

Then came a moment's silence. It was Geoffrey who broke it.

"Miss Granger," he said, "will you allow me to preach you a lecture, a
very short one?"

"Go on," she said.

"Very well. Do not blame me if you don't like it, and do not set me
down as a prig, though I am going to tell you your faults as I read
them in your own words. You are proud and ambitious, and the cramped
lines in which you are forced to live seem to strangle you. You have
suffered, and have not learned the lesson of suffering--humility. You
have set yourself up against Fate, and Fate sweeps you along like
spray upon the gale, yet you go unwilling. In your impatience you have
flown to learning for refuge, and it has completed your overthrow, for
it has induced you to reject as non-existent all that you cannot
understand. Because your finite mind cannot search infinity, because
no answer has come to all your prayers, because you see misery and
cannot read its purpose, because you suffer and have not found rest,
you have said there is naught but chance, and become an atheist, as
many have done before you. Is it not true?"

"Go on," she answered, bowing her head to her breast so that the long
rippling hair almost hid her face.

"It seems a little odd," Geoffrey said with a short laugh, "that I,
with all my imperfections heaped upon me, should presume to preach to
you--but you will know best how near or how far I am from the truth.
So I want to say something. I have lived for thirty-five years, and
seen a good deal and tried to learn from it, and I know this. In the
long run, unless we of our own act put away the opportunity, the world
gives us our due, which generally is not much. So much for things
temporal. If you are fit to rule, in time you will rule; if you do
not, then be content and acknowledge your own incapacity. And as for
things spiritual, I am sure of this--though of course one does not
like to talk much of these matters--if you only seek for them long
enough in some shape you will find them, though the shape may not be
that which is generally recognised by any particular religion. But to
build a wall deliberately between oneself and the unseen, and then
complain that the way is barred, is simply childish."

"And what if one's wall is built, Mr. Bingham?"

"Most of us have done something in that line at different times," he
answered, "and found a way round it."

"And if it stretches from horizon to horizon, and is higher than the
clouds, what then?"

"Then you must find wings and fly over it."

"And where can any earthly woman find those spiritual wings?" she
asked, and then sank her head still deeper on her breast to cover her
confusion. For she remembered that she had heard of wanderers in the
dusky groves of human passion, yes, even Mænad wanderers, who had
suddenly come face to face with their own soul; and that the cruel
paths of earthly love may yet lead the feet which tread them to the
ivory gates of heaven.

And remembering these beautiful myths, though she had no experience of
love, and knew little of its ways, Beatrice grew suddenly silent. Nor
did Geoffrey give her an answer, though he need scarcely have feared
to do so.

For were they not discussing a purely abstract question?



                              CHAPTER X

                   LADY HONORIA MAKES ARRANGEMENTS

In another moment somebody entered the room; it was Elizabeth. She had
returned from her tithe collecting expedition--with the tithe. The
door of the sitting-room was still ajar, and Geoffrey had his back
towards it. So it happened that nobody heard Elizabeth's rather cat-
like step, and for some seconds she stood in the doorway without being
perceived. She stood quite still, taking in the whole scene at a
glance. She noticed that her sister held her head down, so that her
hair shadowed her, and guessed that she did so for some reason--
probably because she did not wish her face to be seen. Or was it to
show off her lovely hair? She noticed also the half shy, half amused,
and altogether interested expression upon Geoffrey's countenance--she
could see that in the little gilt-edged looking-glass which hung over
the fire-place, nor did she overlook the general air of embarrassment
that pervaded them both.

When she came in, Elizabeth had been thinking of Owen Davies, and of
what might have happened had she never seen the tide of life flow back
into her sister's veins. She had dreamed of it all night and had
thought of it all day; even in the excitement of extracting the back
tithe from the recalcitrant and rather coarse-minded Welsh farmer,
with strong views on the subject of tithe, it had not been entirely
forgotten. The farmer was a tenant of Owen Davies, and when he called
her a "parson in petticoats, and wus," and went on, in delicate
reference to her powers of extracting cash, to liken her to a "two-
legged corkscrew only screwier," she perhaps not unnaturally
reflected, that if ever--/pace/ Beatrice--certain things should come
about, she would remember that farmer. For Elizabeth was blessed with
a very long memory, as some people had learnt to their cost, and
generally, sooner or later, she paid her debts in full, not forgetting
the overdue interest.

And now, as she stood in the doorway unseen and noted these matters,
something occurred to her in connection with this dominating idea,
which, like ideas in general, had many side issues. At any rate a look
of quick intelligence shone for a moment in her light eyes, like a
sickly sunbeam on a faint December mist; then she moved forward, and
when she was close behind Geoffrey, spoke suddenly.

"What are you both thinking about?" she said in her clear thin voice;
"you seem to have exhausted your conversation."

Geoffrey made an exclamation and fairly jumped from his chair, a feat
which in his bruised condition really hurt him very much. Beatrice too
started violently; she recovered herself almost instantly, however.

"How quietly you move, Elizabeth," she said.

"Not more quietly than you sit, Beatrice. I have been wondering when
anybody was going to say anything, or if you were both asleep."

For her part Beatrice speculated how long her sister had been in the
room. Their conversation had been innocent enough, but it was not one
that she would wish Elizabeth to have overheard. And somehow Elizabeth
had a knack of overhearing things.

"You see, Miss Granger," said Geoffrey coming to the rescue, "both our
brains are still rather waterlogged, and that does not tend to a flow
of ideas."

"Quite so," said Elizabeth. "My dear Beatrice, why don't you tie up
your hair? You look like a crazy Jane. Not but what you have very nice
hair," she added critically. "Do you admire good hair, Mr. Bingham."

"Of course I do," he answered gallantly, "but it is not common."

Only Beatrice bit her lip with vexation. "I had almost forgotten about
my hair," she said; "I must apologise for appearing in such a state. I
would have done it up after dinner only I was too stiff, and while I
was waiting for Betty, I went to sleep."

"I think there is a bit of ribbon in that drawer. I saw you put it
there yesterday," answered the precise Elizabeth. "Yes, here it is. If
you like, and Mr. Bingham will excuse it, I can tie it back for you,"
and without waiting for an answer she passed behind Beatrice, and
gathering up the dense masses of her sister's locks, tied them round
in such fashion that they could not fall forward, though they still
rolled down her back.

Just then Mr. Granger came back from his visit to the farm. He was in
high good humour. The pig had even surpassed her former efforts, and
increased in a surprising manner, to the number of fifteen indeed.
Elizabeth thereon produced the two pounds odd shillings which she had
"corkscrewed" out of the recalcitrant dissenting farmer, and the sight
added to Mr. Granger's satisfaction.

"Would you believe it, Mr. Bingham," he said, "in this miserably paid
parish I have nearly a hundred pounds owing to me, a hundred pounds in
tithe. There is old Jones who lives out towards the Bell Rock, he owes
three years' tithe--thirty-four pounds eleven and fourpence. He can
pay and he won't pay--says he's a Baptist and is not going to pay
parson's dues--though for the matter of that he is nothing but an old
beer tub of a heathen."

"Why don't you proceed against him, then, Mr. Granger?"

"Proceed, I have proceeded. I've got judgment, and I mean to issue
execution in a few days. I won't stand it any longer," he went on,
working himself up and shaking his head as he spoke till his thin
white hair fell about his eyes. "I will have the law of him and the
others too. You are a lawyer and you can help me. I tell you there's a
spirit abroad which just comes to just--no man isn't to pay his lawful
debts, except of course the parson and the squire. They must pay or go
to the court. But there is law left, and I'll have it, before they
play the Irish game on us here." And he brought down his fist with a
bang upon the table.

Geoffrey listened with some amusement. So this was the weak old man's
sore point--money. He was clearly very strong about that--as strong as
Lady Honoria indeed, but with more excuse. Elizabeth also listened
with evident approval, but Beatrice looked pained.

"Don't get angry, father," she said; "perhaps he will pay after all.
It is bad to take the law if you can manage any other way--it breeds
so much ill blood."

"Nonsense, Beatrice," said her sister sharply. "Father is quite right.
There's only one way to deal with them, and that is to seize their
goods. I believe you are socialist about property, as you are about
everything else. You want to pull everything down, from the Queen to
the laws of marriage, all for the good of humanity, and I tell you
that your ideas will be your ruin. Defy custom and it will crush you.
You are running your head against a brick wall, and one day you will
find which is the harder."

Beatrice flushed, but answered her sister's attack, which was all the
sharper because it had a certain spice of truth in it.

"I never expressed any such views, Elizabeth, so I do not see why you
should attribute them to me. I only said that legal proceedings breed
bad blood in a parish, and that is true."

"I did not say you expressed them," went on the vigorous Elizabeth;
"you look them--they ooze out of your words like water from a peat
bog. Everybody knows you are a radical and a freethinker and
everything else that is bad and mad, and contrary to that state of
life in which it has pleased God to call you. The end of it will be
that you will lose the mistresship of the school--and I think it is
very hard on father and me that you should bring disgrace on us with
your strange ways and immoral views, and now you can make what you
like of it."

"I wish that all radicals were like Miss Beatrice," said Geoffrey, who
was feeling exceedingly uncomfortable, with a feeble attempt at polite
jocosity. But nobody seemed to hear him. Elizabeth, who was now fairly
in a rage, a faint flush upon her pale cheeks, her light eyes all
ashine, and her thin fingers clasped, stood fronting her beautiful
sister, and breathing spite at every pore. But it was easy for
Geoffrey who was watching her to see that it was not her sister's
views she was attacking; it was her sister. It was that soft strong
loveliness and the glory of that face; it was the deep gentle mind,
erring from its very greatness, and the bright intellect which lit it
like a lamp; it was the learning and the power that, give them play,
would set a world aflame, as easily as they did the heart of the slow-
witted hermit squire, whom Elizabeth coveted--these were the things
that Elizabeth hated, and bitterly assailed.

Accustomed to observe, Geoffrey saw this instantly, and then glanced
at the father. The old man was frightened; clearly he was afraid of
Elizabeth, and dreaded a scene. He stood fidgeting his feet about, and
trying to find something to say, as he glanced apprehensively at his
elder daughter, through his thin hanging hair.

Lastly, Geoffrey looked at Beatrice, who was indeed well worth looking
at. Her face was quite pale and the clear grey eyes shone out beneath
their dark lashes. She had risen, drawing herself to her full height,
which her exquisite proportions seemed to increase, and was looking at
her sister. Presently she said one word and one only, but it was
enough.

"/Elizabeth./"

Her sister opened her lips to speak again, but hesitated, and changed
her mind. There was something in Beatrice's manner that checked her.

"Well," she said at length, "you should not irritate me so, Beatrice."

Beatrice made no reply. She only turned towards Geoffrey, and with a
graceful little bow, said:

"Mr. Bingham, I am sure that you will forgive this scene. The fact is,
we all slept badly last night, and it has not improved our tempers."

There was a pause, of which Mr. Granger took a hurried and rather
undignified advantage.

"Um, ah," he said. "By the way, Beatrice, what was it I wanted to say?
Ah, I know--have you written, I mean written out, that sermon for next
Sunday? My daughter," he added, addressing Geoffrey in explanation--
"um, copies my sermons for me. She writes a very good hand----"

Remembering Beatrice's confidence as to her sermon manufacturing
functions, Geoffrey felt amused at her father's /naïve/ way of
describing them, and Beatrice also smiled faintly as she answered that
the sermon was ready. Just then the roll of wheels was heard without,
and the only fly that Bryngelly could boast pulled up in front of the
door.

"Here is the fly come for you, Mr. Bingham," said Mr. Granger--"and as
I live, her ladyship with it. Elizabeth, see if there isn't some tea
ready," and the old gentleman, who had all the traditional love of the
lower middle-class Englishman for a title, trotted off to welcome "her
ladyship."

Presently Lady Honoria entered the room, a sweet, if rather a set
smile upon her handsome face, and with a graceful mien, that became
her tall figure exceedingly well. For to do Lady Honoria justice, she
was one of the most ladylike women in the country, and so far as her
personal appearance went, a very perfect type of the class to which
she belonged.

Geoffrey looked at her, saying to himself that she had clearly
recovered her temper, and that he was thankful for it. This was not
wonderful, for it is observable that the more aristocratic a lady's
manners are, the more disagreeable she is apt to be when she is
crossed.

"Well, Geoffrey dear," she said, "you see I have come to fetch you. I
was determined that you should not get yourself drowned a second time
on your way home. How are you now?--but I need not ask, you look quite
well again."

"It is very kind of you, Honoria," said her husband simply, but it was
doubtful if she heard him, for at the moment she was engaged in
searching out the soul of Beatrice, with one of the most penetrating
and comprehensive glances that young lady had ever enjoyed the honour
of receiving. There was nothing rude about the look, it was too quick,
but Beatrice felt that quick as it might be it embraced her
altogether. Nor was she wrong.

"There is no doubt about it," Lady Honoria thought to herself, "she is
lovely--lovely everywhere. It was clever of her to leave her hair
down; it shows the shape of her head so well, and she is tall enough
to stand it. That blue wrapper suits her too. Very few women could
show such a figure as hers--like a Greek statue. I don't like her; she
is different from most of us; just the sort of girl men go wild about
and women hate."

All this passed through her mind in a flash. For a moment Lady
Honoria's blue eyes met Beatrice's grey ones, and she knew that
Beatrice liked her no better than she did Beatrice. Those eyes were a
trifle too honest, and, like the deep clear water they resembled, apt
to throw up shadows of the passing thoughts above.

"False and cold and heartless," thought Beatrice. "I wonder how a man
like that could marry her; and how much he loves her."

Thus the two women took each other's measure at a glance, each finding
the other wanting by her standard. Nor did they ever change that
hastily formed judgment.

It was all done in a few seconds--in that hesitating moment before the
words we summon answer on our lips. The next, Lady Honoria was
sweeping towards her with outstretched hand, and her most gracious
smile.

"Miss Granger," she said, "I owe you a debt I never can repay--my dear
husband's life. I have heard all about how you saved him; it is the
most wonderful thing--Grace Darling born again. I can't think how you
could do it. I wish I were half as brave and strong."

"Please don't, Lady Honoria," said Beatrice. "I am so tired of being
thanked for doing nothing, except what it was my duty to do. If I had
let Mr. Bingham go while I had the strength to hold on to him I should
have felt like a murderess to-day. I beg you to say no more about it."

"One does not often find such modesty united to so much courage, and,
if you will allow me to say it, so much beauty," answered Lady Honoria
graciously. "Well, I will do as you wish, but I warn you your fame
will find you out. I hear they have an account of the whole adventure
in to-day's papers, headed, 'A Welsh Heroine.'"

"How did you hear that, Honoria?" asked her husband.

"Oh, I had a telegram from Garsington, and he mentions it," she
answered carelessly.

"Telegram from Garsington! Hence these smiles," thought he. "I suppose
that she is going to-morrow."

"I have some other news for you, Miss Granger," went on Lady Honoria.
"Your canoe has been washed ashore, very little injured. The old
boatman--Edward, I think they call him--has found it; and your gun in
it too, Geoffrey. It had stuck under the seat or somewhere. But I
fancy that you must both have had enough canoeing for the present."

"I don't know, Lady Honoria," answered Beatrice. "One does not often
get such weather as last night's, and canoeing is very pleasant. Every
sweet has its salt, you know; or, in other words, one may always be
upset."

At that moment, Betty, the awkward Welsh serving lass, with a fore-arm
about as shapely as the hind leg of an elephant, and a most unpleasing
habit of snorting audibly as she moved, shuffled in with the tea-tray.
In her wake came the slim Elizabeth, to whom Lady Honoria was
introduced.

After this, conversation flagged for a while, till Lady Honoria,
feeling that things were getting a little dull, set the ball rolling
again.

"What a pretty view you have of the sea from these windows," she said
in her well-trained and monotonously modulated voice. "I am so glad to
have seen it, for, you know, I am going away to-morrow."

Beatrice looked up quickly.

"My husband is not going," she went on, as though in answer to an
unspoken question. "I am playing the part of the undutiful wife and
running away from him, for exactly three weeks. It is very wicked of
me, isn't it? but I have an engagement that I must keep. It is most
tiresome."

Geoffrey, sipping his tea, smiled grimly behind the shelter of his
cup. "She does it uncommonly well," he thought to himself.

"Does your little girl go with you, Lady Honoria?" asked Elizabeth.

"Well, no, I think not. I can't bear parting with her--you know how
hard it is when one has only one child. But I think she would be so
bored where I am going to stay, for there are no other children there;
and besides, she positively adores the sea. So I shall have to leave
her to her father's tender mercies, poor dear."

"I hope Effie will survive it, I am sure," said Geoffrey laughing.

"I suppose that your husband is going to stay on at Mrs. Jones's,"
said the clergyman.

"Really, I don't know. What /are/ you going to do, Geoffrey? Mrs.
Jones's rooms are rather expensive for people in our impoverished
condition. Besides, I am sure that she cannot look after Effie. Just
think, she has eight children of her own, poor old dear. And I must
take Anne with me; she is Effie's French nurse, you know, a perfect
treasure. I am going to stay in a big house, and my experience of
those big houses is, that one never gets waited on at all unless one
takes a maid. You see, what is everybody's business is nobody's
business. I'm sure I don't know how you will get on with the child,
Geoffrey; she takes such a lot of looking after."

"Oh, don't trouble about that, Honoria," he answered. "I daresay that
Effie and I will manage somehow."

Here one of those peculiar gleams of intelligence which marked the
advent of a new idea passed across Elizabeth's face. She was sitting
next her father, and bending, whispered to him. Beatrice saw it and
made a motion as though to interpose, but before she could do so Mr.
Granger spoke.

"Look here, Mr. Bingham," he said, "if you want to move, would you
like a room here? Terms strictly moderate, but can't afford to put you
up for nothing you know, and living rough and ready. You'd have to
take us as you find us; but there is a dressing-room next to my room,
where your little girl could sleep, and my daughters would look after
her between them, and be glad of the job."

Again Beatrice opened her lips as though to speak, but closed them
without speaking. Thus do our opportunities pass before we realise
that they are at hand.

Instinctively Geoffrey had glanced towards Beatrice. He did not know
if this idea was agreeable to her. He knew that her work was hard, and
he did not wish to put extra trouble upon her, for he guessed that the
burden of looking after Effie would ultimately fall upon her
shoulders. But her face told him nothing: it was quite passive and
apparently indifferent.

"You are very kind, Mr. Granger," he said, hesitating. "I don't want
to go away from Bryngelly just at present, and it would be a good plan
in some ways, that is if the trouble to your daughters would not be
too much."

"I am sure that it is an excellent plan," broke in Lady Honoria, who
feared lest difficulties should arise as to her appropriation of
Anne's services; "how lucky that I happened to mention it. There will
be no trouble about our giving up the rooms at Mrs. Jones's, because I
know she has another application for them."

"Very well," said Geoffrey, not liking to raise objections to a scheme
thus publicly advocated, although he would have preferred to take time
to consider. Something warned him that Bryngelly Vicarage would prove
a fateful abode for him. Then Elizabeth rose and asked Lady Honoria if
she would like to see the rooms her husband and Effie would occupy.

She said she should be delighted and went off, followed by Mr. Granger
fussing in the rear.

"Don't you think that you will be a little dull here, Mr. Bingham?"
said Beatrice.

"On the contrary," he answered. "Why should I be dull? I cannot be so
dull as I should be by myself."

Beatrice hesitated, and then spoke again. "We are a curious family,
Mr. Bingham; you may have seen as much this afternoon. Had you not
better think it over?"

"If you mean that you do not want me to come, I won't," he said rather
bluntly, and next second felt that he had made a mistake.

"I!" Beatrice answered, opening her eyes. "I have no wishes in the
matter. The fact is that we are poor, and let lodgings--that is what
it comes to. If you think they will suit you, you are quite right to
take them."

Geoffrey coloured. He was a man who could not bear to lay himself open
to the smallest rebuff from a woman, and he had brought this on
himself. Beatrice saw it and relented.

"Of course, Mr. Bingham, so far as I am concerned, I shall be the
gainer if you do come. I do not meet so many people with whom I care
to associate, and from whom I can learn, that I wish to throw a chance
away."

"I think you misunderstand me a little," he said; "I only meant that
perhaps you would not wish to be bothered with Effie, Miss Granger."

She laughed. "Why, I love children. It will be a great pleasure to me
to look after her so far as I have time."

Just then the others returned, and their conversation came to an end.

"It's quite delightful, Geoffrey--such funny old-fashioned rooms. I
really envy you." (If there was one thing in the world that Lady
Honoria hated, it was an old-fashioned room.) "Well, and now we must
be going. Oh! you poor creature, I forgot that you were so knocked
about. I am sure Mr. Granger will give you his arm."

Mr. Granger ambled forward, and Geoffrey having made his adieus, and
borrowed a clerical hat (Mr. Granger's concession to custom, for in
most other respects he dressed like an ordinary farmer), was safely
conveyed to the fly.

And so ended Geoffrey's first day at Bryngelly Vicarage.



                              CHAPTER XI

                    BEATRICE MAKES AN APPOINTMENT

Lady Honoria leaned back in the cab, and sighed a sigh of
satisfaction.

"That is a capital idea," she said. "I was wondering what arrangements
you could make for the next three weeks. It is ridiculous to pay three
guineas a week for rooms just for you and Effie. The old gentleman
only wants that for board and lodging together, for I asked him."

"I daresay it will do," said Geoffrey. "When are we to shift?"

"To-morrow, in time for dinner, or rather supper: these barbarians eat
supper, you know. I go by the morning train, you see, so as to reach
Garsington by tea-time. I daresay you will find it rather dull, but
you like being dull. The old clergyman is a low stamp of man, and a
bore, and as for the eldest daughter, Elizabeth, she's too awful--she
reminds me of a rat. But Beatrice is handsome enough, though I think
her horrid too. You'll have to console yourself with her, and I
daresay you will suit each other."

"Why do you think her horrid, Honoria?"

"Oh, I don't know; she is clever and odd, and I hate odd women. Why
can't they be like other people? Think of her being strong enough to
save your life like that too. She must have the muscle of an Amazon--
it's downright unwomanly. But there is no doubt about her beauty. She
is as nearly perfect as any girl I ever saw, though too independent
looking. If only one had a daughter like that, how one might marry
her. I would not look at anything under twenty thousand a year. She is
too good for that lumbering Welsh squire she's engaged too--the man
who lives in the Castle--though they say that he is fairly rich."

"Engaged," said Geoffrey, "how do you know that she is engaged?"

"Oh, I don't know it at all, but I suppose she is. If she isn't, she
soon will be, for a girl in that position is not likely to throw such
a chance away. At any rate, he's head over ears in love with her. I
saw that last night. He was hanging about for hours in the rain,
outside the door, with a face like a ghost, till he knew whether she
was dead or alive, and he has been there twice to inquire this
morning. Mr. Granger told me. But she is too good for him from a
business point of view. She might marry anybody, if only she were put
in the way of it."

Somehow, Geoffrey's lively interest in Beatrice sensibly declined on
the receipt of this intelligence. Of course it was nothing to him;
indeed he was glad to hear that she was in the way of such a
comfortable settlement, but it is unfortunately a fact that one cannot
be quite as much interested in a young and lovely lady who is the
potential property of a "lumbering Welsh squire," as in one who
belongs to herself.

The old Adam still survives in most men, however right-thinking they
may be, and this is one of its methods of self-assertion.

"Well," he said, "I am glad to hear she is in such a good way; she
deserves it. I think the Welsh squire is in luck; Miss Granger is a
remarkable woman."

"Too remarkable by half," said Lady Honoria drily. "Here we are, and
there is Effie, skipping about like a wild thing as usual. I think
that child is demented."

On the following morning--it was Friday--Lady Honoria, accompanied by
Anne, departed in the very best of tempers. For the next three weeks,
at any rate, she would be free from the galling associations of
straightened means--free to enjoy the luxury and refined comfort to
which she had been accustomed, and for which her soul yearned with a
fierce longing that would be incomprehensible to folk of a simpler
mind. Everybody has his or her ideal Heaven, if only one could fathom
it. Some would choose a sublimated intellectual leisure, made happy by
the best literature of all the planets; some a model state (with
themselves as presidents), in which (through their beneficent efforts)
the latest radical notions could actually be persuaded to work to
everybody's satisfaction; others a happy hunting ground, where the
game enjoyed the fun as much as they did; and so on, /ad infinitum/.

Lady Honoria was even more modest. Give her a well appointed town and
country house, a few powdered footmen, plenty of carriages, and other
needful things, including of course the /entrée/ to the upper
celestial ten, and she would ask no more from age to age. Let us hope
that she will get it one day. It would hurt nobody, and she is sure to
find plenty of people of her own way of thinking--that is, if this
world supplies the raw material.

She embraced Effie with enthusiasm, and her husband with a chastened
warmth, and went, a pious prayer on her lips that she might never
again set eyes upon Bryngelly.

It will not be necessary for us to follow Lady Honoria in her travels.
That afternoon Effie and her father had great fun. They packed up.
Geoffrey, who was rapidly recovering from his stiffness, pushed the
things into the portmanteaus and Effie jumped on them. Those which
would not go in they bundled loose into the fly, till that vehicle
looked like an old clothes ship. Then, as there was no room left for
them inside, they walked down to the Vicarage by the beach, a distance
of about three-quarters of a mile, stopping on their way to admire the
beautiful castle, in one corner of which Owen Davies lived and moved.

"Oh, daddy," said the child, "I wish you would buy a house like that
for you and me to live in. Why don't you, daddy?"

"Haven't got the money, dear," he answered.

"Will you ever have the money, daddy?"

"I don't know, dear, perhaps one day--when I am too old to enjoy it,"
he added to himself.

"It would take a great many pennies to buy a house like that, wouldn't
it, daddy?" said Effie sagely.

"Yes, dear, more than you could count," he answered, and the
conversation dropped.

Presently they came to a boat-shed, placed opposite the village and
close to high-water mark. Here a man, it was old Edward, was engaged
in mending a canoe. Geoffrey glanced at it and saw that it was the
identical canoe out of which he had so nearly been drowned.

"Look, Effie," said he, "that is the boat out of which I was upset."
Effie opened her wide eyes, and stared at the frail craft.

"It is a horrid boat," she said; "I don't want to look at it."

"You're quite right, little miss," said old Edward, touching his cap.
"It ain't safe, and somebody will be drowned out of it one of these
days. I wish it had gone to the bottom, I do; but Miss Beatrice, she
is that foolhardy there ain't no doing nothing with her."

"I fancy that she has learnt a lesson," said Geoffrey.

"May be, may be," grumbled the old man, "but women folk are hard to
teach; they never learn nothing till it's too late, they don't, and
then when they've been and done it they're sorry, but what's the good
o' that?"

Meanwhile another conversation was in progress not more than a quarter
of a mile away. On the brow of the cliff stood the village of
Bryngelly, and at the back of the village was a school, a plain white-
washed building, roofed with stone, which, though amply sufficient and
suitable to the wants of the place, was little short of an abomination
in the eyes of Her Majesty's school inspectors, who from time to time
descended upon Bryngelly for purposes of examination and fault-
finding. They yearned to see a stately red-brick edifice, with all the
latest improvements, erected at the expense of the rate-payers, but as
yet they yearned in vain. The school was supported by voluntary
contributions, and thanks to Beatrice's energy and good teaching, the
dreaded Board, with its fads and extravagance, had not yet clutched
it.

Beatrice had returned to her duties that afternoon, for a night's rest
brought back its vigour to her strong young frame. She had been
greeted with enthusiasm by the children, who loved her, as well they
might, for she was very gentle and sweet with them, though few dared
to disobey her. Besides, her beauty impressed them, though they did
not know it. Beauty of a certain sort has perhaps more effect on
children than on any other class, heedless and selfish as they often
seem to be. They feel its power; it is an outward expression of the
thoughts and dreams that bud in their unknowing hearts, and is somehow
mixed up with their ideas of God and Heaven. Thus there was in
Bryngelly a little girl of ten, a very clever and highly excitable
child, Jane Llewellyn by name, born of parents of strict Calvinistic
views. As it chanced, some months before the opening of this story, a
tub thumper, of high renown and considerable rude oratorical force,
visited the place, and treated his hearers to a lively discourse on
the horrors of Hell.

In the very front row, her eyes wide with fear, sat this poor little
child between her parents, who listened to the Minister with much
satisfaction, and a little way back sat Beatrice, who had come out of
curiosity.

Presently the preacher, having dealt sufficiently in terrifying
generalities, went on to practical illustrations, for, after the
manner of his class, he was delivering an extemporary oration. "Look
at that child," he said, pointing to the little girl; "she looks
innocent, does she not? but if she does not find salvation, my
brethren, I tell you that she is damned. If she dies to-night, not
having found salvation, she will go to /Hell/. Her delicate little
body will be tormented for ever and ever----"

Here the unfortunate child fell forward with a shriek.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, sir," said Beatrice aloud.

She had been listening to all this ill-judged rant with growing
indignation, and now, in her excitement, entirely forgot that she was
in a place of worship. Then she ran forward to the child, who had
swooned. Poor little unfortunate, she never recovered the shock. When
she came to herself, it was found that her finely strung mind had
given way, and she lapsed into a condition of imbecility. But her
imbecility was not always passive. Occasionally fits of passionate
terror would seize upon her. She would cry out that the fiends were
coming to drag her down to torment, and dash herself against the wall,
in fear hideous to behold. Then it was found that there was but one
way to calm her: it was to send for Beatrice. Beatrice would come and
take the poor thin hands in hers and gaze with her calm deep eyes upon
the wasted horror-stricken face till the child grew quiet again and,
shivering, sobbed herself to sleep upon her breast.

And so it was with all the children; her power over them was almost
absolute. They loved her, and she loved them all.

And now the schooling was almost done for the day. It was Beatrice's
custom to make the children sing some simple song before they broke
up. She stood in front of them and gave the time while they sung, and
a pretty sight it was to see her do it. On this particular afternoon,
just as the first verse was finished, the door of the room opened, and
Owen Davies entered, bearing some books under his arm. Beatrice
glanced round and saw him, then, with a quick stamp of her foot, went
on giving the time.

The children sung lustily, and in front of them stood Beatrice,
dressed in simple white, her graceful form swaying as she marked the
music's time. Nearer and nearer drew Owen Davies, till at length he
stood quite close, his lips slightly apart, his eyes fixed upon her
like the eyes of one who dreams, and his slow heavy face faintly lit
with the glow of strong emotion.

The song ended, the children at a word from their mistress filed past
her, headed by the pupil teachers, and then with a shout, seizing
their caps, ran forth this way and that, welcoming the free air. When
they were all gone, and not till then, Beatrice turned suddenly round.

"How do you do, Mr. Davies?" she said.

He started visibly. "I did not know that you had seen me," he
answered.

"Oh, yes, I saw you, Mr. Davies, only I could not stop the song to say
how do you do. By the way, I have to thank you for coming to inquire
after me."

"Not at all, Miss Beatrice, not at all; it was a most dreadful
accident. I cannot tell you how thankful I am--I can't, indeed."

"It is very good of you to take so much interest in me," said
Beatrice.

"Not at all, Miss Beatrice, not at all. Who--who could help taking
interest in you? I have brought you some books--the Life of Darwin--it
is in two volumes. I think that I have heard you say that Darwin
interests you?"

"Yes, thank you very much. Have you read it?"

"No, but I have cut it. Darwin doesn't interest me, you know. I think
that he was a rather misguided person. May I carry the books home for
you?"

"Thank you, but I am not going straight home; I am going to old
Edward's shed to see my canoe."

As a matter of fact this was true, but the idea was only that moment
born in her mind. Beatrice had been going home, as she wanted to see
that all things were duly prepared for Geoffrey and his little
daughter. But to reach the Vicarage she must pass along the cliff,
where there were few people, and this she did not wish to do. To be
frank, she feared lest Mr. Davies should take the opportunity to make
that offer of his hand and heart which hung over her like a nightmare.
Now the way to Edward's shed lay through the village and down the
cliff, and she knew that he would never propose in the village.

It was very foolish of her, no doubt, thus to seek to postpone the
evil day, but the strongest-minded women have their weak points, and
this was one of Beatrice's. She hated the idea of this scene. She knew
that when it did come there would be a scene. Not that her resolution
to refuse the man had ever faltered. But it would be painful, and in
the end it must reach the ears of her father and Elizabeth that she
had actually rejected Mr. Owen Davies, and then what would her life be
worth? She had never suspected it, it had never entered into her mind
to suspect, that, though her father might be vexed enough, nothing on
this earth would more delight the heart of Elizabeth.

Presently, having fetched her hat, Beatrice, accompanied by her
admirer, bearing the Life of Darwin under his arm, started to walk
down to the beach. They went in silence, Beatrice just a little ahead.
She ventured some remark about the weather, but Owen Davies made no
reply; he was thinking, he wanted to say something, but he did not
know how to say it. They were at the head of the cliff now, and if he
wished to speak he must do so quickly.

"Miss Beatrice," he said in a somewhat constrained voice.

"Yes, Mr. Davies--oh, look at that seagull; it nearly knocked my hat
off."

But he was not to be put off with the seagull. "Miss Beatrice," he
said again, "are you going out walking next Sunday afternoon?"

"How can I tell, Mr. Davies? It may rain."

"But if it does not rain--please tell me. You generally do walk on the
beach on Sunday. Miss Beatrice, I want to speak to you. I hope you
will allow me, I do indeed."

Then suddenly she came to a decision. This kind of thing was
unendurable; it would be better to get it over. Turning round so
suddenly that Owen started, she said:

"If you wish to speak to me, Mr. Davies, I shall be in the
Amphitheatre opposite the Red Rocks, at four o'clock on Sunday
afternoon, but I had much rather that you did not come. I can say no
more."

"I shall come," he answered doggedly, and they went down the steps to
the boat-shed.

"Oh, look, daddy," said Effie, "here comes the lady who was drownded
with you and a gentleman," and to Beatrice's great relief the child
ran forward and met them.

"Ah!" thought Geoffrey to himself, "that is the man Honoria said she
was engaged to. Well, I don't think very much of her taste."

In another minute they had arrived. Geoffrey shook hands with
Beatrice, and was introduced to Owen Davies, who murmured something in
reply, and promptly took his departure.

They examined the canoe together, and then walked slowly up to the
Vicarage, Beatrice holding Effie by the hand. Opposite the reef they
halted for a minute.

"There is the Table Rock on which we were thrown, Mr. Bingham," said
Beatrice, "and here is where they carried us ashore. The sea does not
look as though it would drown any one to-night, does it? See!"--and
she threw a stone into it--"the ripples run as evenly as they do on a
pond."

She spoke idly and Geoffrey answered her idly, for they were not
thinking of their words. Rather were they thinking of the strange
chance that had brought them together in an hour of deadly peril and
now left them together in an hour of peace. Perhaps, too, they were
wondering to what end this had come about. For, agnostics, atheists or
believers, are we not, most of us, fatalists at heart?



                             CHAPTER XII

                       THE WRITING ON THE SAND

Geoffrey found himself very comfortable at the Vicarage, and as for
Effie, she positively revelled in it. Beatrice looked after her,
taking her to bed at night and helping her to dress in the morning,
and Beatrice was a great improvement upon Anne. When Geoffrey became
aware of this he remonstrated, saying that he had never expected her
to act as nurse to the child, but she replied that it was a pleasure
to her to do so, which was the truth. In other ways, too, the place
was all that he desired. He did not like Elizabeth, but then he did
not see very much of her, and the old farmer clergyman was amusing in
his way, with his endless talk of tithes and crops, and the iniquities
of the rebellious Jones, on whom he was going to distrain.

For the first day or two Geoffrey had no more conversations with
Beatrice. Most of the time she was away at the school, and on the
Saturday afternoon, when she was free, he went out to the Red Rocks
curlew shooting. At first he thought of asking her to come too, but
then it occurred to him that she might wish to go out with Mr. Davies,
to whom he still supposed she was engaged. It was no affair of his,
yet he was glad when he came back to find that she had been out with
Effie, and not with Mr. Davies.

On Sunday morning they all went to church, including Beatrice. It was
a bare little church, and the congregation was small. Mr. Granger went
through the service with about as much liveliness as a horse driving a
machine. He ground it out, prayers, psalms, litany, lessons, all in
the same depressing way, till Geoffrey felt inclined to go to sleep,
and then took to watching Beatrice's sweet face instead. He wondered
what made her look so sad. Hers was always a sad face when in repose,
that he knew, but to-day it was particularly so, and what was more,
she looked worried as well as sad. Once or twice he saw her glance at
Mr. Davies, who was sitting opposite, the solitary occupant of an
enormous pew, and he thought that there was apprehension in her look.
But Mr. Davies did not return the glance. To judge from his appearance
nothing was troubling his mind.

Indeed, Geoffrey studying him in the same way that he instinctively
studied everybody whom he met, thought that he had never before seen a
man who looked quite so ox-like and absolutely comfortable. And yet he
never was more completely at fault. The man seemed stolid and cold
indeed, but it was the coldness of a volcano. His heart was a-fire.
All the human forces in him, all the energies of his sturdy life, had
concentrated themselves in a single passion for the woman who was so
near and yet so far from him. He had never drawn upon the store, had
never frittered his heart away. This woman, strange and unusual as it
may seem, was absolutely the first whose glance or voice had ever
stirred his blood. His passion for her had grown slowly; for years it
had been growing, ever since the grey-eyed girl on the brink of
womanhood had conducted him to his castle home. It was no fancy, no
light desire to pass with the year which brought it. Owen had little
imagination, that soil from which loves spring with the rank swiftness
of a tropic bloom to fade at the first chill breath of change. His
passion was an unalterable fact. It was rooted like an oak on our
stiff English soil, its fibres wrapped his heart and shot his being
through, and if so strong a gale should rise that it must fall, then
he too would be overthrown.

For years now he had thought of little else than Beatrice. To win her
he would have given all his wealth, ay, thrice over, if that were
possible. To win her, to know her his by right and his alone, ah, that
would be heaven! His blood quivered and his mind grew dim when he
thought of it. What would it be to see her standing by him as she
stood now, and know that she was his wife! There is no form of passion
more terrible than this. Its very earthiness makes it awful.

The service went on. At last Mr. Granger mounted the pulpit and began
to read his sermon, of which the text was, "But the greatest of these
is charity." Geoffrey noticed that he bungled over some of the words,
then suddenly remembered Beatrice had told him that she had written
the sermon, and was all attention. He was not disappointed.
Notwithstanding Mr. Granger's infamous reading, and his habit of
dropping his voice at the end of a sentence, instead of raising it,
the beauty of the thoughts and diction was very evident. It was indeed
a discourse that might equally well have been delivered in a Mahomedan
or a Buddhist place of worship; there was nothing distinctively
Christian about it, it merely appealed to the good in human nature.
But of this neither the preacher nor his audience seemed to be aware,
indeed, few of the latter were listening at all. The sermon was short
and ended with a passage of real power and beauty--or rather it did
not end, for, closing the MS. sheets, Mr. Granger followed on with a
few impromptu remarks of his own.

"And now, brethren," he said, "I have been preaching to you about
charity, but I wish to add one remark, Charity begins at home. There
is about a hundred pounds of tithe owing to me, and some of it has
been owing for two years and more. If that tithe is not paid I shall
have to put distraint on some of you, and I thought that I had better
take this opportunity to tell you so."

Then he gave the Benediction.

The contrast between this business-like speech, and the beautiful
periods which had gone before, was so ridiculous that Geoffrey very
nearly burst out laughing, and Beatrice smiled. So did the rest of the
congregation, excepting one or two who owed tithe, and Owen Davies,
who was thinking of other things.

As they went through the churchyard, Geoffrey noticed something.
Beatrice was a few paces ahead holding Effie's hand. Presently Mr.
Davies passed him, apparently without seeing him, and greeted
Beatrice, who bowed slightly in acknowledgment. He walked a little way
without speaking, then Geoffrey, just as they reached the church gate,
heard him say, "At four this afternoon, then." Again she bowed her
head, and he turned and went. As for Geoffrey, he wondered what it all
meant: was she engaged to him, or was she not?

Dinner was a somewhat silent meal. Mr. Granger was thinking about his
tithe, also about a sick cow. Elizabeth's thoughts pursued some dark
and devious course of their own, not an altogether agreeable one to
judge from her face. Beatrice looked pale and worried; even Effie's
sallies did not do more than make her smile. As for Geoffrey himself,
he was engaged in wondering in an idle sort of way what was going to
happen at four o'clock.

"You is all very dull," said Effie at last, with a charming disregard
of grammar.

"People ought to be dull on Sunday, Effie," answered Beatrice, with an
effort. "At least, I suppose so," she added.

Elizabeth, who was aggressively religious, frowned at this remark. She
knew her sister did not mean it.

"What are you going to do this afternoon, Beatrice?" she asked
suddenly. She had seen Owen Davies go up and speak to her sister, and
though she had not been near enough to catch the words, scented an
assignation from afar.

Beatrice coloured slightly, a fact that escaped neither her sister nor
Geoffrey.

"I am going to see Jane Llewellyn," she answered. Jane Llewellyn was
the crazy little girl whose tale has been told. Up to that moment
Beatrice had no idea of going to see her, but she knew that Elizabeth
would not follow her there, because the child could not endure
Elizabeth.

"Oh, I thought that perhaps you were going out walking."

"I may walk afterwards," answered Beatrice shortly.

"So there is an assignation," thought Elizabeth, and a cold gleam of
intelligence passed across her face.

Shortly after dinner, B