eatrice put on her bonnet and went out. Ten
minutes passed, and Elizabeth did the same. Then Mr. Granger announced
that he was going up to the farm (there was no service till six) to
see about the sick cow, and asked Geoffrey if he would like to
accompany him. He said that he might as well, if Effie could come,
and, having lit his pipe, they started.

Meanwhile Beatrice went to see the crazy child. She was not violent
to-day, and scarcely knew her. Before she had been in the house ten
minutes, the situation developed itself.

The cottage stood about two-thirds of the way down a straggling
street, which was quite empty, for Bryngelly slept after dinner on
Sunday. At the top of this street appeared Elizabeth, a Bible in her
hand, as though on district visiting intent. She looked down the
street, and seeing nobody, went for a little walk, then, returning,
once more looked down the street. This time she was rewarded. The door
of the Llewellyns' cottage opened, and Beatrice appeared. Instantly
Elizabeth withdrew to such a position that she could see without being
seen, and, standing as though irresolute, awaited events. Beatrice
turned and took the road that led to the beach.

Then Elizabeth's irresolution disappeared. She also turned and took
the road to the cliff, walking very fast. Passing behind the Vicarage,
she gained a point where the beach narrowed to a width of not more
than fifty yards, and sat down. Presently she saw a man coming along
the sand beneath her, walking quickly. It was Owen Davies. She waited
and watched. Seven or eight minutes passed, and a woman in a white
dress passed. It was Beatrice, walking slowly.

"Ah!" said Elizabeth, setting her teeth, "as I thought." Rising, she
pursued her path along the cliff, keeping three or four hundred yards
ahead, which she could easily do by taking short cuts. It was a long
walk, and Elizabeth, who was not fond of walking, got very tired of
it. But she was a woman with a purpose, and as such, hard to beat. So
she kept on steadily for nearly an hour, till, at length, she came to
the spot known as the Amphitheatre. This Amphitheatre, situated almost
opposite the Red Rocks, was a half-ring of cliff, the sides of which
ran in a semicircle almost down to the water's edge, that is, at high
tide. In the centre of the segment thus formed was a large flat stone,
so placed that anybody in certain positions on the cliff above could
command a view of it, though it was screened by the projecting walls
of rock from observation from the beach. Elizabeth clambered a little
way down the sloping side of the cliff and looked; on the stone, his
back towards her, sat Owen Davies. Slipping from stratum to stratum of
the broken cliff, Elizabeth drew slowly nearer, till at length she was
within fifty paces of the seated man. Here, ensconcing herself behind
a cleft rock, she also sat down; it was not safe to go closer; but in
case she should by any chance be observed from above, she opened the
Bible on her knee, as though she had sought this quiet spot to study
its pages.

Three or four minutes passed, and Beatrice appeared round the
projecting angle of the Amphitheatre, and walked slowly across the
level sand. Owen Davies rose and stretched out his hand to welcome
her, but she did not take it, she only bowed, and then seated herself
upon the large flat stone. Owen also seated himself on it, but some
three or four feet away. Elizabeth thrust her white face forward till
it was almost level with the lips of the cleft rock and strained her
ears to listen. Alas! she could not hear a single word.

"You asked me to come here, Mr. Davies," said Beatrice, breaking the
painful silence. "I have come."

"Yes," he answered; "I asked you to come because I wanted to speak to
you."

"Yes?" said Beatrice, looking up from her occupation of digging little
holes in the sand with the point of her parasol. Her face was calm
enough, but her heart beat fast beneath her breast.

"I want to ask you," he said, speaking slowly and thickly, "if you
will be my wife?"

Beatrice opened her lips to speak, then, seeing that he had only
paused because his inward emotion checked his words, shut them again,
and went on digging little holes. She wished to rely on the whole
case, as a lawyer would say.

"I want to ask you," he repeated, "to be my wife. I have wished to do
so for some years, but I have never been able to bring myself to it.
It is a great step to take, and my happiness depends on it. Do not
answer me yet," he went on, his words gathering force as he spoke.
"Listen to what I have to tell you. I have been a lonely man all my
life. At sea I was lonely, and since I have come into this fortune I
have been lonelier still. I never loved anybody or anything till I
began to love you. And then I loved you more and more and more; till
now I have only one thought in all my life, and that thought is of
you. While I am awake I think of you, and when I am asleep I dream of
you. Listen, Beatrice, listen!--I have never loved any other woman, I
have scarcely spoken to one--only you, Beatrice. I can give you a
great deal; and everything I have shall be yours, only I should be
jealous of you--yes, very jealous!"

Here she glanced at his face. It was outwardly calm but white as
death, and in the blue eyes, generally so placid, shone a fire that by
contrast looked almost unholy.

"I think that you have said enough, Mr. Davies," Beatrice answered. "I
am very much obliged to you. I am much honoured, for in some ways I am
not your equal, but I do not love you, and I cannot marry you, and I
think it best to tell you so plainly, once and for all," and
unconsciously she went on digging the holes.

"Oh, do not say that," he answered, almost in a moan. "For God's sake
don't say that! It will kill me to lose you. I think I should go mad.
Marry me and you will learn to love me."

Beatrice glanced at him again, and a pang of pity pierced her heart.
She did not know it was so bad a case as this. It struck her too that
she was doing a foolish thing, from a worldly point of view. The man
loved her and was very eligible. He only asked of her what most women
are willing enough to give under circumstances so favourable to their
well-being--herself. But she never liked him, he had always repelled
her, and she was not a woman to marry a man whom she did not like.
Also, during the last week this dislike and repulsion had hardened and
strengthened. Vaguely, as he pleaded with her, Beatrice wondered why,
and as she did so her eye fell upon the pattern she was automatically
pricking in the sand. It had taken the form of letters, and the
letters were G E O F F R E--Great heaven! Could that be the answer?
She flushed crimson with shame at the thought, and passed her foot
across the tell-tale letters, as she believed, obliterating them.

Owen saw the softening of her eyes and saw the blush, and
misinterpreted them. Thinking that she was relenting, by instinct,
rather than from any teaching of experience, he attempted to take her
hand. With a turn of the arm, so quick that even Elizabeth watching
with all her eyes saw nothing of the movement, Beatrice twisted
herself free.

"Don't touch me," she said sharply, "you have no right to touch me. I
have answered you, Mr. Davies."

Owen withdrew his hand abashed, and for a moment sat still, his chin
resting on his breast, a very picture of despair. Nothing indeed could
break the stolid calm of his features, but the violence of his emotion
was evident in the quick shivering of his limbs and his short deep
breaths.

"Can you give me no hope?" he said at last in a slow heavy voice. "For
God's sake think before you answer--you don't know what it means to
me. It is nothing to you--you cannot feel. I feel, and your words cut
like a knife. I know that I am heavy and stupid, but I feel as though
you had killed me. You are heartless, quite heartless."

Again Beatrice softened a little. She was touched and flattered. Where
is the woman who would not have been?

"What can I say to you, Mr. Davies?" she answered in a kinder voice.
"I cannot marry you. How I can I marry you when I do not love you?"

"Plenty of women marry men whom they do not love."

"Then they are bad women," answered Beatrice with energy.

"The world does not think so," he said again; "the world calls those
women bad who love where they cannot marry, and the world is always
right. Marriage sanctifies everything."

Beatrice laughed bitterly. "Do you think so?" she said. "I do not. I
think that marriage without love is the most unholy of our
institutions, and that is saying a good deal. Supposing I should say
yes to you, supposing that I married you, not loving you, what would
it be for? For your money and your position, and to be called a
married woman, and what do you suppose I should think of myself in my
heart then? No, no, I may be bad, but I have not fallen so low as
that. Find another wife, Mr. Davies; the world is wide and there are
plenty of women in it who will love you for your own sake, or who at
any rate will not be so particular. Forget me, and leave me to go my
own way--it is not your way."

"Leave you to go your own way," he answered almost with passion--"that
is, leave you to some other man. Oh! I cannot bear to think of it. I
am jealous of every man who comes near you. Do you know how beautiful
you are? You are too beautiful--every man must love you as I do. Oh,
if you took anybody else I think that I should kill him."

"Do not speak like that, Mr. Davies, or I shall go."

He stopped at once. "Don't go," he said imploringly. "Listen. You said
that you would not marry me because you did not love me. Supposing
that you learned to love me, say in a year's time, Beatrice, would you
marry me then?"

"I would marry any man whom I loved," she answered.

"Then if you learn to love me you will marry me?"

"Oh, this is ridiculous," she said. "It is not probable, it is hardly
possible, that such a thing should happen. If it had been going to
happen it would have happened before."

"It might come about," he answered; "your heart might soften towards
me. Oh, say yes to this. It is a small request, it costs you nothing,
and it gives me hope, without which I cannot live. Say that I may ask
you once more, and that then if you love me you will marry me."

Beatrice thought for a moment. Such a promise could do her no harm,
and in the course of six months or a year he might get used to the
idea of living without her. Also it would prevent a scene. It was weak
of her, but she dreaded the idea of her having refused Owen Davies
coming to her father's ears.

"If you wish it, Mr. Davies," she said, "so be it. Only I ask you to
understand this, I am in no way tied to you. I give you no hope that
my answer, should you renew this offer a year hence or at any other
time, will differ from that I give you to-day. I do not think there is
the slightest probability of such a thing. Also, it must be understood
that you are not to speak to my father about this matter, or to
trouble me in any way. Do you consent?"

"Yes," he answered, "I consent. You have me at your mercy."

"Very well. And now, Mr. Davies, good-bye. No, do not walk back with
me. I had rather go by myself. But I want to say this: I am very sorry
for what has happened. I have not wished it to happen. I have never
encouraged it, and my hands are clean of it. But I am sorry, sorry
beyond measure, and I repeat what I said before--seek out some other
woman and marry her."

"That is the cruellest thing of all the cruel things which you have
said," he answered.

"I did not mean it to be cruel, Mr. Davies, but I suppose that the
truth often is. And now good-bye," and Beatrice stretched out her
hand.

He touched it, and she turned and went. But Owen did not go. He sat
upon the rock, his head bowed in misery. He had staked all his hopes
upon this woman. She was the one desirable thing to him, the one star
in his somewhat leaden sky, and now that star was eclipsed. Her words
were unequivocal, they gave but little hope. Beatrice was scarcely a
woman to turn round in six months or a year. On the contrary, there
was a fixity about her which frightened him. What could be the cause
of it? How came it that she should be so ready to reject him, and all
he had to offer her? After all, she was a girl in a small position.
She could not be looking forward to a better match. Nor would the
prospect move her one way or another. There must be a reason for it.
Perhaps he had a rival, surely that must be the cause. Some enemy had
done this thing. But who?

At this moment a woman's shadow fell athwart him.

"Oh, have you come back?" he cried, springing to his feet.

"If you mean Beatrice," answered a voice--it was Elizabeth's--"she
went down to the beach ten minutes ago. I happened to be on the cliff,
and I saw her."

"Oh, I beg your pardon, Miss Granger," he said faintly. "I did not see
who it was."

Elizabeth sat down upon the rock where her sister had sat, and, seeing
the little holes in the breach, began indolently to clear them of the
sand which Beatrice had swept over them with her foot. This was no
difficult matter, for the holes were deeply dug, and it was easy to
trace their position. Presently they were nearly all clear--that is,
the letters were legible.

"You have had a talk with Beatrice, Mr. Davies?"

"Yes," he answered apathetically.

Elizabeth paused. Then she took her bull by the horns.

"Are you going to marry Beatrice, Mr. Davies?" she asked.

"I don't know," he answered slowly and without surprise. It seemed
natural to him that his own central thought should be present in her
mind. "I love her dearly, and want to marry her."

"She refused you, then?"

"Yes."

Elizabeth breathed more freely.

"But I can ask her again."

Elizabeth frowned. What could this mean? It was not an absolute
refusal. Beatrice was playing some game of her own.

"Why did she put you off so, Mr. Davies? Do not think me inquisitive.
I only ask because I may be able to help you."

"I know; you are very kind. Help me and I shall always be grateful to
you. I do not know--I almost think that there must be somebody else,
only I don't know who it can be."

"Ah!" said Elizabeth, who had been gazing intently at the little holes
in the beach which she had now cleared of the sand. "Of course that is
possible. She is a curious girl, Beatrice is. What are those letters,
Mr. Davies?"

He looked at them idly. "Something your sister was writing while I
talked to her. I remember seeing her do it."

"G E O F F R E--why, it must be meant for Geoffrey. Yes, of course it
is possible that there is somebody else, Mr. Davies. Geoffrey!--how
curious!"

"Why is it curious, Miss Granger? Who is Geoffrey?"

Elizabeth laughed a disagreeable little laugh that somehow attracted
Owen's attention more than her words.

"How should I know? It must be some friend of Beatrice's, and one of
whom she is thinking a great deal, or she would not write his name
unconsciously. The only Geoffrey that I know is Mr. Geoffrey Bingham,
the barrister, who is staying at the Vicarage, and whose life Beatrice
saved." She paused to watch her companion's face, and saw a new idea
creep across its stolidity. "But of course," she went on, "it cannot
be Mr. Bingham that she was thinking of, because you see he is
married."

"Married?" he said, "yes, but he's a man for all that, and a very
handsome one."

"Yes, I should call him handsome--a fine man," Elizabeth answered
critically; "but, as Beatrice said the other day, the great charm
about him is his talk and power of mind. He is a very remarkable man,
and the world will hear of him before he has done. But, however, all
this is neither here nor there. Beatrice is a curious woman, and has
strange ideas, but I am sure that she would never carry on with a
married man."

"But he might carry on with her, Miss Elizabeth."

She laughed. "Do you really think that a man like Mr. Bingham would
try to flirt with girls without encouragement? Men like that are as
proud as women, and prouder; the lady must always be a step ahead. But
what is the good of talking about such a thing? It is all nonsense.
Beatrice must have been thinking of some other Geoffrey--or it was an
accident of something. Why, Mr. Davies, if you for one moment really
believed that dear Beatrice could be guilty of such a shameless thing
as to carry on a flirtation with a married man, would you have asked
her to marry you? Would you still think of asking such a woman as she
must be to become your wife?"

"I don't know; I suppose not," he said doubtfully.

"You suppose not. I know you better than you know yourself. You would
rather never marry at all than take such a woman as she would be
proved to be. But it is no good talking such stuff. If you have a
rival you may be sure it is some unmarried man."

Owen reflected in his heart that on the whole he would rather it was a
married one, since a married man, at any rate, could not legally take
possession of Beatrice. But Elizabeth's rigid morality alarmed him,
and he did not say so.

"Do you know I feel a little upset, Miss Elizabeth," he answered. "I
think I will be going. By the way, I promised to say nothing of this
to your father. I hope that you will not do so, either."

"Most certainly not," said Elizabeth, and indeed it would be the last
thing she would wish to do. "Well, good-bye, Mr. Davies. Do not be
downhearted; it will all come right in the end. You will always have
me to help you, remember."

"Thank you, thank you," he said earnestly, and went.

Elizabeth watched him round the wall of rock with a cold and ugly
smile set upon her face.

"You fool," she thought, "you fool! To tell /me/ that you 'love her
dearly and want to marry her;' you want to get that sweet face of
hers, do you? You never shall; I'd spoil it first! Dear Beatrice, she
is not capable of carrying on a love affair with a married man--oh,
certainly not! Why, she's in love with him already, and he is more
than half in love with her. If she hadn't been, would she have put
Owen off? Not she. Give them time, and we shall see. They will ruin
each other--they /must/ ruin each other; it won't be child's play when
two people like that fall in love. They will not stop at sighs, there
is too much human nature about them. It was a good idea to get him
into the house. And to see her go on with that child Effie, just as
though she was its mother--it makes me laugh. Ah, Beatrice, with all
your wits you are a silly woman! And one day, my dear girl, I shall
have the pleasure of exposing you to Owen; the idol will be unveiled,
and there will be an end of your chances with him, for he can't marry
you after that. Then my turn will come. It is a question of time--only
a question of time!"

So brooded Elizabeth in her heart, madded with malicious envy and
passionate jealousy. She loved this man, Owen Davies, as much as she
could love anybody; at the least, she dearly loved the wealth and
station of which he was the visible centre, and she hated the sister
whom he desired. If she could only discredit that sister and show her
to be guilty of woman's worst crime, misplaced, unlegalised affection,
surely, she thought, Owen would reject her.

She was wrong. She did not know how entirely he desired to make
Beatrice his wife, or realise how forgiving a man can be who has such
an end to gain. It is of the women who already weary them and of their
infidelity that men are so ready to make examples, not of those who do
not belong to them, and whom they long for night and day. To these
they can be very merciful.



                             CHAPTER XIII

                          GEOFFREY LECTURES

Meanwhile Beatrice was walking homewards with an uneasy mind. The
trouble was upon her. She had, it is true, succeeded in postponing it
a little, but she knew very well that it was only a postponement. Owen
Davies was not a man to be easily shaken off. She almost wished now
that she had crushed the idea once and for all. But then he would have
gone to her father, and there must have been a scene, and she was weak
enough to shrink from that, especially while Mr. Bingham was in the
house. She could well imagine the dismay, not to say the fury, of her
money-loving old father if he were to hear that she had refused--
actually refused--Owen Davies of Bryngelly Castle, and all his wealth.

Then there was Elizabeth to be reckoned with. Elizabeth would
assuredly make her life a burden to her. Beatrice little guessed that
nothing would suit her sister's book better. Oh, if only she could
shake the dust of Bryngelly off her feet! But that, too, was
impossible. She was quite without money. She might, it was true,
succeed in getting another place as mistress to a school in some
distant part of England, were it not for an insurmountable obstacle.
Here she received a salary of seventy-five pounds a year; of this she
kept fifteen pounds, out of which slender sum she contrived to dress
herself; the rest she gave to her father. Now, as she well knew, he
could not keep his head above water without this assistance, which,
small as it was, made all the difference to their household between
poverty and actual want. If she went away, supposing even that she
found an equally well-paid post, she would require every farthing of
the money to support herself, there would be nothing left to send
home. It was a pitiable position; here was she, who had just refused a
man worth thousands a year, quite unable to get out of the way of his
importunity for the want of seventy-five pounds, paid quarterly. Well,
the only thing to do was to face it out and take her chance. On one
point she was, however, quite clear; she would /not/ marry Owen
Davies. She might be a fool for her pains, but she would not do it.
She respected herself too much to marry a man she did not love; a man
whom she positively disliked. "No, never!" she exclaimed aloud,
stamping her foot upon the shingle.

"Never what?" said a voice, within two yards of her.

She started violently, and looked round. There, his back resting
against a rock, a pipe in his mouth, an open letter on his knee, and
his hat drawn down almost over his eyes, sat Geoffrey. He had left
Effie to go home with Mr. Granger, and climbing down a sloping place
in the cliff, had strolled along the beach. The letter on his knee was
one from his wife. It was short, and there was nothing particular in
it. Effie's name was not even mentioned. It was to see if he had not
overlooked it that he was reading the note through again. No, it
merely related to Lady Honoria's safe arrival, gave a list of the
people staying at the Hall--a fast lot, Geoffrey noticed, a certain
Mr. Dunstan, whom he particularly disliked, among them--and the number
of brace of partridges which had been killed on the previous day. Then
came an assurance that Honoria was enjoying herself immensely, and
that the new French cook was "simply perfect;" the letter ending "with
love."

"Never what, Miss Granger?" he said again, as he lazily folded up the
sheet.

"Never mind, of course," she answered, recovering herself. "How you
startled me, Mr. Bingham! I had no idea there was anybody on the
beach."

"It is quite free, is it not?" he answered, getting up. "I thought you
were going to trample me into the pebbles. It's almost alarming when
one is thinking about a Sunday nap to see a young lady striding along,
then suddenly stop, stamp her foot, and say, 'No, never!' Luckily I
knew that you were about or I should really have been frightened."

"How did you know that I was about?" Beatrice asked a little
defiantly. It was no business of his to observe her movements.

"In two ways. Look!" he said, pointing to a patch of white sand.
"That, I think, is your footprint."

"Well, what of it?" said Beatrice, with a little laugh.

"Nothing in particular, except that it is your footprint," he
answered. "Then I happened to meet old Edward, who was loafing along,
and he informed me that you and Mr. Davies had gone up the beach;
there is his footprint--Mr. Davies's, I mean--but you don't seem to
have been very sociable, because here is yours right in the middle of
it. Therefore you must have been walking in Indian file, and a little
way back in parallel lines, with quite thirty yards between you."

"Why do you take the trouble to observe things so closely?" she asked
in a half amused and half angry tone.

"I don't know--a habit of the legal mind, I suppose. One might make
quite a romance out of those footprints on the sand, and the little
subsequent events. But you have not heard all my thrilling tale. Old
Edward also informed me that he saw your sister, Miss Elizabeth, going
along the cliff almost level with you, from which he concluded that
you had argued as to the shortest way to the Red Rocks and were
putting the matter to the proof."

"Elizabeth," said Beatrice, turning a shade paler; "what can she have
been doing, I wonder."

"Taking exercise, probably, like yourself. Well, I seat myself with my
pipe in the shadow of that rock, when suddenly I see Mr. Davies coming
along towards Bryngelly as though he were walking for a wager, his hat
fixed upon the back of his head. Literally he walked over my legs and
never saw me. Then you follow and ejaculate, 'No, never!'--and that is
the end of my story. Have I your permission to walk with you, or shall
I interfere with the development of the plot?"

"There is no plot, and as you said just now the beach is free,"
Beatrice answered petulantly.

They walked on a few yards and then he spoke in another tone--the
meaning of the assignation he had overheard in the churchyard grew
clear to him now.

"I believe that I have to congratulate you, Miss Granger," he said,
"and I do so very heartily. It is not everybody who is so fortunate as
to----"

Beatrice stopped, and half turning faced him.

"What /do/ you mean, Mr. Bingham?" she said. "I do not understand your
dark sayings."

"Mean! oh, nothing particular, except that I wished to congratulate
you on your engagement."

"My engagement! what engagement?"

"It seems that there is some mistake," he said, and struggle as he
might to suppress it his tone was one of relief. "I understood that
you had become engaged to be married to Mr. Owen Davies. If I am wrong
I am sure I apologise."

"You are quite wrong, Mr. Bingham; I don't know who put such a notion
into your head, but there is no truth in it."

"Then allow me to congratulate you on there being no truth in it. You
see that is the beauty of nine affairs matrimonial out of ten--there
are two or more sides of them. If they come off the amiable and
disinterested observer can look at the bright side--as in this case,
lots of money, romantic castle by the sea, gentleman of unexceptional
antecedents, &c., &c, &c. If, on the other hand, they don't, cause can
still be found for thankfulness--lady might do better after all,
castle by the sea rather draughty and cold in spring, gentlemen most
estimable but perhaps a little dull, and so on, you see."

There was a note of mockery about his talk which irritated Beatrice
exceedingly. It was not like Mr. Bingham to speak so. It was not even
the way that a gentleman out of his teens should speak to a lady on
such a subject. He knew this as well as she did and was secretly
ashamed of himself. But the truth must out: though Geoffrey did not
admit it even to himself he was bitterly and profoundly jealous, and
jealous people have no manners. Beatrice could not, however, be
expected to know this, and naturally grew angry.

"I do not quite understand what you are talking about, Mr. Bingham,"
she said, putting on her most dignified air, and Beatrice could look
rather alarming. "You have picked up a piece of unfounded gossip and
now you take advantage of it to laugh at me, and to say rude things of
Mr. Davies. It is not kind."

"Oh, no; it was the footsteps, Miss Granger, /and/ the gossip, /and/
the appointment you made in the churchyard, that I unwillingly
overheard, not the gossip alone which led me into my mistake. Of
course I have now to apologise."

Again Beatrice stamped her foot. She saw that he was still mocking
her, and felt that he did not believe her.

"There," he went on, stung into unkindness by his biting but
unacknowledged jealousy, for she was right--on reflection he did not
quite believe what she said as to her not being engaged. "How
unfortunate I am--I have said something to make you angry again. Why
did you not walk with Mr. Davies? I should then have remained
guiltless of offence, and you would have had a more agreeable
companion. You want to quarrel with me; what shall we quarrel about?
There are many things on which we are diametrically opposed; let us
start one."

It was too much, for though his words were nothing the tone in which
he spoke gave them a sting. Beatrice, already disturbed in mind by the
scene through which she had passed, her breast already throbbing with
a vague trouble of which she did not know the meaning, for once in her
life lost control of herself and grew hysterical. Her grey eyes filled
with tears, the corners of her sweet mouth dropped, and she looked
very much as though she were going to burst out weeping.

"It is most unkind of you," she said, with a half sob. "If you knew
how much I have to put up with, you would not speak to me like that. I
know that you do not believe me; very well, I will tell you the truth.
Yes, though I have no business to do it, and you have no right--none
at all--to make me do it, I will tell you the truth, because I cannot
bear that you should not believe me. Mr. Davies did want me to marry
him and I refused him. I put him off for a while; I did this because I
knew that if I did not he would go to my father. It was cowardly, but
my father would make my life wretched----" and again she gave a half-
choked sob.

Much has been said and written about the effect produced upon men by
the sight of a lady in, or on the border line of tears, and there is
no doubt that this effect is considerable. Man being in his right mind
is deeply moved by such a spectacle, also he is frightened because he
dreads a scene. Now most people would rather walk ten miles in their
dress shoes than have to deal with a young lady in hysterics, however
modified. Putting the peculiar circumstances of the case aside,
Geoffrey was no exception to this rule. It was all very well to cross
spears with Beatrice, who had quite an equal wit, and was very capable
of retaliation, but to see her surrender at discretion was altogether
another thing. Indeed he felt much ashamed of himself.

"Please don't--don't--be put out," he said. He did not like to use the
word "cry." "I was only laughing at you, but I ought not to have
spoken as I did. I did not wish to force your confidence, indeed I did
not. I never thought of such a thing. I am so sorry."

His remorse was evidently genuine, and Beatrice felt somewhat
appeased. Perhaps it did not altogether grieve her to learn that she
could make him feel sorry.

"You did not force my confidence," she said defiantly, quite
forgetting that a moment before she had reproached him for making her
speak. "I told you because I did not choose that you should think I
was not speaking the truth--and now let us change the subject." She
imposed no reserve on him as to what she had revealed; she knew that
there was no necessity to do so. The secret would be between them--
another dangerous link.

Beatrice recovered her composure and they walked slowly on.

"Tell me, Mr. Bingham," she said presently, "how can a woman earn her
living--I mean a girl like myself without any special qualifications?
Some of them get on."

"Well," he answered, "that depends upon the girl. What sort of a
living do you mean? You are earning a living now, of a kind."

"Yes, but sometimes, if only I could manage it, I think that I should
like to get away from here, and take another line, something bigger. I
do not suppose that I ever shall, but I like to think of it
sometimes."

"I only know of two things which a woman can turn to," he said, "the
stage and literature. Of course," he added hastily, "the first is out
of the question in your case."

"And so is the other, I am afraid," she answered shaking her head,
"that is if by literature you mean imaginative writing, and I suppose
that is the only way to get into notice. As I told you I lost my
imagination--well, to be frank, when I lost my faith. At one time I
used to have plenty, as I used to have plenty of faith, but the one
went with the other, I do not understand why."

"Don't you? I think I do. A mind without religious sentiment is like a
star without atmosphere, brighter than other stars but not so soft to
see. Religion, poetry, music, imagination, and even some of the more
exalted forms of passion, flourish in the same soil, and are, I
sometimes think, different manifestations of the same thing. Do you
know it is ridiculous to hear you talk of having lost your faith,
because I don't believe it. At the worst it has gone to sleep, and
will wake up again one day. Possibly you may not accept some
particular form of faith, but I tell you frankly that to reject all
religion simply because you cannot understand it, is nothing but a
form of atrocious spiritual vanity. Your mind is too big for you, Miss
Granger: it has run away with you, but you know it is tied by a string
--it cannot go far. And now perhaps you will be angry again."

"No, indeed, why should I be angry? I daresay that you are quite
right, and I only hope that I may be able to believe again. I will
tell you how I lost belief. I had a little brother whom I loved more
than anything else in the world, indeed after my mother died he was
the only thing I really had to love, for I think that my father cares
more for Elizabeth than he does for me, she is so much the better at
business matters, and Elizabeth and I never quite got on. I daresay
that the fault is mine, but the fact remains--we are sisters but we
are not intimate. Well, my brother fell ill of a fever, and for a long
time he lay between life and death, and I prayed for him as I never
prayed for anybody or anything before--yes, I prayed that I might die
instead of him. Then he passed through the crisis and got better, and
I thanked God, thinking that my prayers had been answered; oh, how
happy I was for those ten days! And then this happened:--My brother
got a chill, a relapse followed, and in three days he was dead. The
last words that he spoke to me were, 'Oh, don't let me die, Bee!'--he
used to call me Bee--'Please don't let me die, dear Bee!' But he died,
died in my arms, and when it was over I rose from his side feeling as
though my heart was dead also. I prayed no more after that. It seemed
to me as though my prayers had been mocked at, as though he had been
given back to me for a little while in order that the blow might be
more crushing when it fell."

"Don't you think that you were a little foolish in taking such a
view?" said Geoffrey. "Have you not been amused, sometimes, to read
about the early Christians?--how the lead would not boil the martyr,
or the lion would not eat him, or the rain from a blue sky put out the
fire, and how the pagan king at once was converted and accepted a
great many difficult doctrines without further delay. The Athanasian
Creed was not necessarily true because the fire would not light or the
sword would not cut, nor, excuse me, were all your old beliefs wrong
because your prayer was unanswered. It is an ancient story, that we
cannot tell whether the answering of our petitions will be good or ill
for us. Of course I do not know anything about such things, but it
seems to me rash to suppose that Providence is going to alter the
working of its eternal laws merely to suit the passing wishes of
individuals--wishes, too, that in many cases would bring unforeseen
sorrows if fulfilled. Besides I daresay that the poor child is happier
dead than he would have been had he lived. It is not an altogether
pleasant world for most of us."

"Yes, Mr. Bingham, I know, and I daresay that I should have got over
the shock in time, only after that I began to read. I read the
histories of the religions and compared them, and I read the works of
those writers who have risen up to attack them. I found, or I thought
that I found, the same springs of superstition in them all--
superstitions arising from elementary natural causes, and handed on
with variations from race to race, and time to time. In some I found
the same story, only with a slightly altered face, and I learned,
moreover, that each faith denied the other, and claimed truth for
itself alone.

"After that, too, I went to the college and there I fell in with a
lady, one of the mistresses, who was the cleverest woman that I ever
knew, and in her way a good woman, but one who believed that religion
was the curse of the world, and who spent all her spare time in
attacking it in some form or other. Poor thing, she is dead now. And
so, you see, what between these causes and the continual spectacle of
human misery which to my mind negatives the idea of a merciful and
watching Power, at last it came to pass that the only altar left in my
temple is an altar to the 'Unknown God.'"

Geoffrey, like most men who have had to think on these matters, did
not care to talk about them much, especially to women. For one thing,
he was conscious of a tendency to speech less reverent than his
thought. But he had not entered Beatrice's church of Darkness, indeed
he had turned his back on it for ever, though, like most people, he
had at different periods of his past life tarried an hour in its
porch. So he ventured on an objection.

"I am no theologian," he said, "and I am not fond of discussion on
such matters. But there are just one or two things I should like to
say. It is no argument, to my mind at least, to point to the existence
of evil and unhappiness among men as a proof of the absence of a
superior Mercy; for what are men that such things should not be with
them? Man, too, must own some master. If he has doubts let him look up
at the marshalling of the starry heaven, and they will vanish."

"No," said Beatrice, "I fear not. Kant said so, but before that
Molière had put the argument in the mouth of a fool. The starry
heavens no more prove anything than does the running of the raindrops
down the window-pane. It is not a question of size and quantity."

"I might accept the illustration," answered Geoffrey; "one example of
law is as good as another for my purpose. I see in it all the working
of a living Will, but of course that is only my way of looking at it,
not yours."

"No; I am afraid," said Beatrice, "all this reasoning drawn from
material things does not touch me. That is how the Pagans made /their/
religions, and it is how Paley strives to prove his. They argued from
the Out to the In, from the material to the spiritual. It cannot be;
if Christianity is true it must stand upon spiritual feet and speak
with a spiritual voice, to be heard, not in the thunderstorm, but only
in the hearts of men. The existence of Creative Force does not
demonstrate the existence of a Redeemer; if anything, it tends to
negative it, for the power that creates is also the power which
destroys. What does touch me, however, is the thought of the multitude
of the Dead. /That/ is what we care for, not for an Eternal Force,
ever creating and destroying. Think of them all--all the souls of
unheard-of races, almost animal, who passed away so long ago. Can ours
endure more than theirs, and do you think that the spirit of an
Ethiopian who died in the time of Moses is anywhere now?"

"There was room for them all on earth," answered Geoffrey. "The
universe is wide. It does not dismay me. There are mysteries in our
nature, the nature we think we know--shall there be none in that which
we know not? Worlds die, to live again when, after millions of ages,
the conditions become once more favourable to life, and why should not
a man? We are creatures of the world, we reflect its every light and
shadow, we rejoice in its rejoicing, its every feature has a tiny
parallel in us. Why should not our fate be as its fate, and its fate
is so far as we know eternal. It may change from gas to chaos, from
chaos to active life, from active life to seeming death. Then it may
once more pass into its elements, and from those elements back again
to concrete being, and so on for ever, always changing, but always the
same. So much for nature's allegory. It is not a perfect analogy, for
Man is a thing apart from all things else; it may be only a hint or a
type, but it is something.

"Now to come to the question of our religion. I confess I draw quite a
different conclusion from your facts. You say that you trace the same
superstitions in all religions, and that the same spiritual myths are
in some shape present in almost all. Well, does not this suggest that
the same great /truth/ underlies them all, taking from time to time
the shape which is best suited to the spiritual development of those
professing each. Every great new religion is better than the last. You
cannot compare Osirianism with Buddhism, or Buddhism with
Christianity, or Mahomedanism with the Arabian idol worship. Take the
old illustration--take a cut crystal and hold it in the sun, and you
will see many different coloured rays come from its facets. They look
different, but they are all born of the same great light; they are all
the same light. May it not be so with religion? Let your altar be to
the 'Unknown God,' if you like--for who can give an unaltering
likeness to the Power above us?--but do not knock your altar down.

"Depend upon it, Miss Granger, all indications to the contrary
notwithstanding, there is a watching Providence without the will of
which we cannot live, and if we deliberately reject that Providence,
setting up our intelligence in its place, sorrow will come of it, even
here; for it is wiser than we. I wish that you would try and look at
the question from another point of view--from a higher point of view.
I think you will find that it will bear a great deal of examination,
and that you will come to the conclusion that the dictum of the wise-
acre who says there is nothing because he can see nothing, is not
necessarily a true one. There, that is all I have to say, and I wish
that I could say it better."

"Thank you," said Beatrice, "I will. Why here we are at home; I must
go and put Effie to bed."



And here it may be stated that Geoffrey's advice was not altogether
thrown away. Beatrice did try looking at the question again, and if
Faith did not altogether come back to her at least Hope did, and "the
greatest of these, which is Charity," had never deserted her. Hope
came slowly back, not by argument probably, but rather by example. In
the sea of Doubt she saw another buoyed up, if it were but on broken
pieces of the ship. This encouraged her. Geoffrey believed, and she--
believed in Geoffrey. Indeed, is not this the secret of woman's
philosophy--even, to some extent, of that of such a woman as Beatrice?
"Let the faith or unfaith of This, That, or the other Rabbi answer for
me," she says--it is her last argument. She believes in This, or That,
or some other philosopher: that is her creed. And Geoffrey was the
person in whom Beatrice began to believe, all the more wholly because
she had never believed in any one before. Whatever else she was to
lose, this at least she won when she saved his life.



                             CHAPTER XIV

                               DRIFTING

On the day following their religious discussion an accident happened
which resulted in Geoffrey and Beatrice being more than ever thrown in
the company of each other. During the previous week two cases of
scarlatina had been reported among the school children, and now it was
found that the complaint had spread so much that it was necessary to
close the school. This meant, of course, that Beatrice had all her
time upon her hands. And so had Geoffrey. It was his custom to bathe
before breakfast, after which he had nothing to do for the rest of the
day. Beatrice with little Effie also bathed before breakfast from the
ladies' bathing-place, a quarter of a mile off, and sometimes he would
meet her as she returned, glowing with health and beauty like Venus
new risen from the Cyprian sea, her half-dried hair hanging in heavy
masses down her back. Then after breakfast they would take Effie down
to the beach, and her "auntie," as the child learned to call Beatrice,
would teach her lessons and poetry till she was tired, and ran away to
paddle in the sea or look for prawns among the rocks.

Meanwhile the child's father and Beatrice would talk--not about
religion, they spoke no more on that subject, nor about Owen Davies,
but of everything else on earth. Beatrice was a merry woman when she
was happy, and they never lacked subjects of conversation, for their
minds were very much in tune. In book-learning Beatrice had the
advantage of Geoffrey, for she had not only read enormously, she also
remembered what she read and could apply it. Her critical faculty,
too, was very keen. He, on the other hand, had more knowledge of the
world, and in his rich days had travelled a good deal, and so it came
to pass that each could always find something to tell the other. Never
for one second were they dull, not even when they sat for an hour or
so in silence, for it was the silence of complete companionship.

So the long morning would wear away all too quickly, and they would go
in to dinner, to be greeted with a cold smile by Elizabeth and
heartily enough by the old gentleman, who never thought of anything
out of his own circle of affairs. After dinner it was the same story.
Either they went walking to look for ferns and flowers, or perhaps
Geoffrey took his gun and hid behind the rocks for curlew, sending
Beatrice, who knew the coast by heart, a mile round or more to some
headland in order to put them on the wing. Then she would come back,
springing towards him from rock to rock, and crouch down beneath a
neighbouring seaweed-covered boulder, and they would talk together in
whispers, or perhaps they would not talk at all, for fear lest they
should frighten the flighting birds. And Geoffrey would first search
the heavens for curlew or duck, and, seeing none, would let his eyes
fall upon the pure beauty of Beatrice's face, showing so clearly
against the tender sky, and wonder what she was thinking about; till,
suddenly feeling his gaze, she would turn with a smile as sweet as the
first rosy blush of dawn upon the waters, and ask him what /he/ was
thinking about. And he would laugh and answer "You," whereon she would
smile again and perhaps blush a little, feeling glad at heart, she
knew not why.

Then came tea-time and the quiet, when they sat at the open window,
and Geoffrey smoked and listened to the soft surging of the sea and
the harmonious whisper of the night air in the pines. In the corner
Mr. Granger slept in his armchair, or perhaps he had gone to bed
altogether, for he liked to go to bed at half-past eight, as the old
Herefordshire farmer, his father, had done before him; and at the far
end of the room sat Elizabeth, doing her accounts by the light of a
solitary candle, or, if they failed her, reading some book of a
devotional and inspired character. But over the edge of the book, or
from the page of crabbed accounts, her eyes would glance continually
towards the handsome pair in the window-place, and she would smile as
she saw that it went well. Only they never saw the glances or noted
the smile. When Geoffrey looked that way, which was not often, for
Elizabeth--old Elizabeth, as he always called her to himself--did not
attract him, all he saw was her sharp but capable-looking form bending
over her work, and the light of the candle gleaming on her straw-
coloured hair and falling in gleaming white patches on her hard
knuckles.

And so the happy day would pass and bed-time come, and with it
unbidden dreams.

Geoffrey thought no ill of all this, as of course he ought to have
thought. He was not the ravening lion of fiction--so rarely, if ever,
to be met with in real life--going about seeking whom he might devour.
He had absolutely no designs on Beatrice's affections, any more than
she had on his, and he had forgotten that first fell prescience of
evil to come. Once or twice, it is true, qualms of doubt did cross his
mind in the earlier days of their intimacy. But he put them by as
absurd. He was no believer in the tender helplessness of full-grown
women, his experience having been that they are amply capable--and,
for the most part, more than capable--of looking after themselves. It
seemed to him a thing ridiculous that such a person as Beatrice, who
was competent to form opinions and a judgment upon all the important
questions of life, should be treated as a child, and that he should
remove himself from Bryngelly lest her young affections should become
entangled. He felt sure that they would never be entrapped in any
direction whatsoever without her full consent.

Then he ceased to think about the matter at all. Indeed, the mere idea
of such a thing involved a supposition that would only have been
acceptable to a conceited man--namely, that there was a possibility of
this young lady's falling in love with him. What right had he to
suppose anything of the sort? It was an impertinence. That there was
another sort of possibility--namely, of his becoming more attached to
her than was altogether desirable--did, however, occur to him once or
twice. But he shrugged his shoulders and put it by. After all, it was
his look out, and he did not much care. It would do her no harm at the
worst. But very soon all these shadowy forebodings of dawning trouble
vanished quite. They were lost in the broad, sweet lights of
friendship. By-and-by, when friendship's day was done, they might
arise again, called by other names and wearing a sterner face.

It was ridiculous--of course it was ridiculous; he was not going to
fall in love like a boy at his time of life; all he felt was gratitude
and interest--all she felt was amusement in his society. As for the
intimacy--felt rather than expressed--the intimacy that could already
almost enable the one to divine the other's thought, that could shape
her mood to his and his to hers, that could cause the same thing of
beauty to be a common joy, and discover unity of mind in opinions the
most opposite--why, it was only natural between people who had
together passed a peril terrible to think of. So they took the goods
the gods provided, and drifted softly on--whither they did not stop to
inquire.

One day, however, a little incident happened that ought to have opened
the eyes of both. They had arranged, or rather there was a tacit
understanding, that they should go out together in the afternoon.
Geoffrey was to take his gun and Beatrice a book, but it chanced that,
just before dinner, as she walked back from the village, where she had
gone to buy some thread to mend Effie's clothes, Beatrice came face to
face with Mr. Davies. It was their first meeting without witnesses
since the Sunday of which the events have been described, and,
naturally, therefore, rather an awkward one. Owen stopped short so
that she could not pass him with a bow, and then turned and walked
beside her. After a remark or two about the weather, the springs of
conversation ran dry.

"You remember that you are coming up to the Castle this afternoon?" he
said, at length.

"To the Castle!" she answered. "No, I have heard nothing of it."

"Did not your sister tell you she made an engagement for herself and
you a week or more ago? You are to bring the little girl; she wants to
see the view from the top of the tower."

Then Beatrice remembered. Elizabeth had told her, and she had thought
it best to accept the situation. The whole thing had gone out of her
mind.

"Oh, I beg your pardon! I do remember now, but I have made another
plan--how stupid of me!"

"You had forgotten," he said in his heavy voice; "it is easy for you
to forget what I have been looking forward to for a whole week. What
is your plan--to go out walking with Mr. Bingham, I suppose?"

"Yes," answered Beatrice, "to go out with Mr. Bingham."

"Ah! you go out with Mr. Bingham every day now."

"And what if I do?" said Bea