ndred
pounds, but the result is lovely. The drawing-room is done in hand-
painted white satin, walls and all, and the hall in old oak."

"Indeed!" he answered, reflecting the while that Lord Garsington might
as well have paid some of his debts before he spent eighteen hundred
pounds on his drawing-room furniture.

Then the Saint and Lady Honoria drifted into a long and animated
conversation about their fellow guests, which Geoffrey scarcely tried
to follow. Indeed, the dinner was a dull one for him, and he added
little or nothing to the stock of talk.

When his wife left the room, however, he had to say something, so they
spoke of shooting. The Saint had a redeeming feature--he was somewhat
of a sportsman, though a poor one, and he described to Geoffrey a new
pair of hammerless guns, which he had bought for a trifling sum of a
hundred and forty guineas, recommending the pattern to his notice.

"Yes," answered Geoffrey, "I daresay that they are very nice; but, you
see, they are beyond me. A poor man cannot afford so much for a pair
of guns."

"Oh, if that is all," answered his guest, "I will sell you these; they
are a little long in the stock for me, and you can pay me when you
like. Or, hang it all, I have plenty of guns. I'll be generous and
give them to you. If I cannot afford to be generous, I don't know who
can!"

"Thank you very much, Mr. Dunstan," answered Geoffrey coldly, "but I
am not in the habit of accepting such presents from my--acquaintances.
Will you have a glass of sherry?--no. Then shall we join Lady
Honoria?"

This speech quite crushed the vulgar but not ill-meaning Saint, and
Geoffrey was sorry for it a moment after he had made it. But he was
weary and out of temper. Why did his wife bring such people to the
house? Very shortly afterwards their guest took his leave, reflecting
that Bingham was a conceited ass, and altogether too much for him.
"And I don't believe that he has got a thousand a year," he reflected
to himself, "and the title is his wife's. I suppose that is what he
married her for. She's a much better sort than he is, any way, though
I don't quite make her out either--one can't go very far with her. But
she is the daughter of a peer and worth cultivating, but not when
Bingham is at home--not if I know it."

"What have you said to Mr. Dunstan to make him go away so soon,
Geoffrey?" asked his wife.

"Said to him? oh, I don't know. He offered to give me a pair of guns,
and I told him that I did not accept presents from my acquaintances.
Really, Honoria, I don't want to interfere with your way of life, but
I do not understand how you can associate with such people as this Mr.
Dunstan."

"Associate with him!" answered Lady Honoria. "Do you suppose I want to
associate with him? Do you suppose that I don't know what the man is?
But beggars cannot be choosers; he may be a cad, but he has thirty
thousand a year, and we simply cannot afford to throw away an
acquaintance with thirty thousand a year. It is too bad of you,
Geoffrey," she went on with rising temper, "when you know all that I
must put up with in our miserable poverty-stricken life, to take every
opportunity of making yourself disagreeable to the people I think it
wise to ask to come and see us. Here I return from comfort to this
wretched place, and the first thing that you do is make a fuss. Mr.
Dunstan has got boxes at several of the best theaters, and he offered
to let me have one whenever I liked--and now of course there is an end
of it. It is too bad, I say!"

"It is really curious, Honoria," said her husband, "to see what
obligations you are ready to put yourself under in search of pleasure.
It is not dignified of you to accept boxes at theatres from this
gentleman."

"Nonsense. There is no obligation about it. If he gave us a box, of
course he would make a point of looking in during the evening, and
then telling his friends that it was Lady Honoria Bingham he was
speaking to--that is the exchange. I want to go to the theatre; he
wants to get into good society--there you have the thing in a
nutshell. It is done every day. The fact of the matter is, Geoffrey,"
she went on, looking very much as though she were about to burst into
a flood of angry tears, "as I said just now, beggars cannot be
choosers--I cannot live like the wife of a banker's clerk. I must have
/some/ amusement, and /some/ comfort, before I become an old woman. If
you don't like it, why did you entrap me into this wretched marriage,
before I was old enough to know better, or why do you not make enough
money to keep me in a way suitable to my position?"

"We have argued that question before, Honoria," said Geoffrey, keeping
his temper with difficulty, "and now there is another thing I wish to
say to you. Do you know that detestable woman Anne stopped for more
than half an hour at Paddington Station this evening, flirting with a
ticket collector, instead of bringing Effie home at once, as I told
her to do. I am very angry about it. She is not to be relied on; we
shall have some accident with the child before we have done. Cannot
you discharge her and get another nurse?"

"No, I cannot. She is the one comfort I have. Where am I going to find
another woman who can make dresses like Anne--she saves me a hundred a
year--I don't care if she flirted with fifty ticket collectors. I
suppose you got this story from Effie; the child ought to be whipped
for tale-bearing, and I daresay that it is not true."

"Effie will certainly not be whipped," answered Geoffrey sternly. "I
warn you that it will go very badly with anybody who lays a finger on
her."

"Oh, very well, ruin the child. Go your own way, Geoffrey! At any rate
I am not going to stop here to listen to any more abuse. Good-night,"
and she went.

Geoffrey sat down, and lit a cigarette. "A pleasant home-coming," he
thought to himself. "Honoria shall have money as much as she can spend
--if I kill myself to get it, she shall have it. What a life, what a
life! I wonder if Beatrice would treat her husband like this--if she
had one."

He laughed aloud at the absurdity of the idea, and then with a gesture
of impatience threw his cigarette into the fire and went to his room
to try and get some sleep, for he was thoroughly wearied.



                             CHAPTER XVII

                        GEOFFREY WINS HIS CASE

Before ten o'clock on the following morning, having already spent two
hours over his brief, that he had now thoroughly mastered, Geoffrey
was at his chambers, which he had some difficulty in reaching owing to
the thick fog that still hung over London, and indeed all England.

To his surprise nothing had been heard either of the Attorney-General
or of Mr. Candleton. The solicitors were in despair; but he consoled
them by saying that one or the other was sure to turn up in time, and
that a few words would suffice to explain the additional light which
had been thrown on the case. He occupied his half hour, however, in
making a few rough notes to guide him in the altogether improbable
event of his being called on to open, and then went into court. The
case was first on the list, and there were a good many counsel engaged
on the other side. Just as the judge took his seat, the solicitor,
with an expression of dismay, handed Geoffrey a telegram which had
that moment arrived from Mr. Candleton. It was dated from Calais on
the previous night, and ran, "Am unable to cross on account of thick
fog. You had better get somebody else in Parsons and Douse."

"And we haven't got another brief prepared," said the agonised
solicitor. ""What is more, I can hear nothing of the Attorney-General,
and his clerk does not seem to know where he is. You must ask for an
adjournment, Mr. Bingham; you can't manage the case alone."

"Very well," said Geoffrey, and on the case being called he rose and
stated the circumstances to the court. But the Court was crusty. It
had got the fog down its throat, and altogether It didn't seem to see
it. Moreover the other side, marking its advantage, objected strongly.
The witnesses, brought at great expense, were there; his Lordship was
there, the jury was there; if this case was not taken there was no
other with which they could go on, &c., &c.

The court took the same view, and lectured Geoffrey severely. Every
counsel in a case, the Court remembered, when It was at the Bar, used
to be able to open that case at a moment's notice, and though things
had, It implied, no doubt deteriorated to a considerable extent since
those palmy days, every counsel ought still to be prepared to do so on
emergency.

Of course, however, if he, Geoffrey, told the court that he was
absolutely unprepared to go on with the case, It would have no option
but to grant an adjournment.

"I am perfectly prepared to go on with it, my lord," Geoffrey
interposed calmly.

"Very well," said the Court in a mollified tone, "then go on! I have
no doubt that the learned Attorney-General will arrive presently."

Then, as is not unusual in a probate suit, followed an argument as to
who should open it, the plaintiff or the defendant. Geoffrey claimed
that this right clearly lay with him, and the opposing counsel raised
no great objection, thinking that they would do well to leave the
opening in the hands of a rather inexperienced man, who would very
likely work his side more harm than good. So, somewhat to the horror
of the solicitors, who thought with longing of the eloquence of the
Attorney-General, and the unrivalled experience and finesse of Mr.
Candleton, Geoffrey was called upon to open the case for the
defendants, propounding the first will.

He rose without fear or hesitation, and with but one prayer in his
heart, that no untimely Attorney-General would put in an appearance.
He had got his chance, the chance for which many able men have to wait
long years, and he knew it, and meant to make the most of it.
Naturally a brilliant speaker, Geoffrey was not, as so many good
speakers are, subject to fits of nervousness, and he was, moreover,
thoroughly master of his case. In five minutes judge, jury and counsel
were all listening to him with attention; in ten they were absorbed in
the lucid and succinct statement of the facts which he was unfolding
to them. His ghost theory was at first received with a smile, but
presently counsel on the other side ceased to smile, and began to look
uneasy. If he could prove what he said, there was an end of their
case. When he had been speaking for about forty minutes one of the
opposing counsel interrupted him with some remark, and at that moment
he noticed that the Attorney-General's clerk was talking to the
solicitor beneath him.

"Bother it, he is coming," thought Geoffrey.

But no, the solicitor bending forward informed him that the Attorney-
General had been unavoidably detained by some important Government
matter, and had returned his brief.

"Well, we must get on as we can," Geoffrey said.

"If you continue like that we shall get on very well," whispered the
solicitors, and then Geoffrey knew that he was doing well.

"Yes, Mr. Bingham!" said his Lordship.

Then Geoffrey went on with his statement.

At lunch time it was a question whether another leader should be
briefed. Geoffrey said that so far as he was concerned he could get on
alone. He knew every point of the case, and he had got a friend to
"take a note" for him while he was speaking.

After some hesitation the solicitors decided not to brief fresh
counsel at this stage of the case, but to leave it entirely in his
hands.

It would be useless to follow the details of this remarkable will
suit, which lasted two days, and attracted much attention. Geoffrey
won it and won it triumphantly. His address to the jury on the whole
case was long remembered in the courts, rising as it did to a very
high level of forensic eloquence. Few who saw it ever forgot the sight
of his handsome face and commanding presence as he crushed the case of
his opponents like an eggshell, and then with calm and overwhelming
force denounced the woman who with her lover had concocted the cruel
plot that robbed her uncle of life and her cousins of their property,
till at the last, pointing towards her with outstretched hand, he
branded her to the jury as a murderess.

Few in that crowded court have forgotten the tragic scene that
followed, when the trembling woman, worn out by the long anxiety of
the trial, and utterly unnerved by her accuser's brilliant invective,
rose from her seat and cried:

"We did it--it is true that we did it to get the money, but we did not
mean to frighten him to death," and then fell fainting to the ground--
or Geoffrey Bingham's quiet words as he sat down:

"My lord and gentlemen of the jury, I do not think it necessary to
carry my case any further."

There was no applause, the occasion was too dramatically solemn, but
the impression made both upon the court and the outside public, to
whom such a scene is peculiarly fitted to appeal, was deep and
lasting.

Geoffrey himself was under little delusion about the matter. He had no
conceit in his composition, but neither had he any false modesty. He
merely accepted the situation as really powerful men do accept such
events--with thankfulness, but without surprise. He had got his chance
at last, and like any other able man, whatever his walk of life, he
had risen to it. That was all. Most men get such chances in some shape
or form, and are unable to avail themselves of them. Geoffrey was one
of the exceptions; as Beatrice had said, he was born to succeed. As he
sat down, he knew that he was a made man.

And yet while he walked home that night, his ears still full of the
congratulations which had rained in on him from every quarter, he was
conscious of a certain pride. He will have felt as Geoffrey felt that
night, whose lot it has been to fight long and strenuously against
circumstances so adverse as to be almost overwhelming, knowing in his
heart that he was born to lead and not to follow; and who at last, by
one mental effort, with no friendly hand to help, and no friendly
voice to guide, has succeeded in bursting a road through the
difficulties which hemmed him in, and has suddenly found himself, not
above competition indeed, but still able to meet it. He will not have
been too proud of that endeavour; it will have seemed but a little
thing to him--a thing full of faults and imperfections, and falling
far short of his ideal. He will not even have attached a great
importance to his success, because, if he is a person of this calibre,
he must remember how small it is, when all is said and done; that even
in his day there are those who can beat him on his own ground; and
also that all worldly success, like the most perfect flower, yet bears
in it the elements of decay. But he will have reflected with humble
satisfaction on those long years of patient striving which have at
length lifted him to an eminence whence he can climb on and on,
scarcely encumbered by the jostling crowd; till at length, worn out,
the time comes for him to fall.

So Geoffrey thought and felt. The thing was to be done, and he had
done it. Honoria should have money now; she should no longer be able
to twit him with their poverty. Yes, and a better thought still,
Beatrice would be glad to hear of his little triumph.

He reached home rather late. Honoria was going out to dinner with a
distinguished cousin, and was already dressing. Geoffrey had declined
the invitation, which was a short one, because he had not expected to
be back from chambers. In this enthusiasm, however, he went to his
wife's room to tell her of the event.

"Well," she said, "what have you been doing? I think that you might
have arranged to come out with me. My going out so much by myself does
not look well. Oh, I forgot; of course you are in that case."

"Yes--that is, I was. I have won the case. Here is a very fair report
of it in the /St. James's Gazette/ if you care to read it."

"Good heavens, Geoffrey! How can you expect me to read all that stuff
when I am dressing?"

"I don't expect you to, Honoria; only, as I say, I have won the case,
and I shall get plenty of work now."

"Will you? I am glad to hear it; perhaps we shall be able to escape
from this horrid flat if you do. There, Anne! Je vous l'ai toujours
dit, cette robe ne me va pas bien."

"Mais, milady, la robe va parfaitement----"

"That is your opinion," grumbled Lady Honoria. "Well, it isn't mine.
But it will have to do. Good-night, Geoffrey; I daresay that you will
have gone to bed when I get back," and she was gone.

Geoffrey picked up his /St. James's Gazette/ with a sigh. He felt
hurt, and knew that he was a fool for his pains. Lady Honoria was not
a sympathetic person; it was not fair to expect it from her. Still he
felt hurt. He went upstairs and heard Effie her prayers.

"Where has you beed, daddy?--to the Smoky Town?" The Temple was
euphemistically known to Effie as the Smoky Town.

"Yes, dear."

"You go to the Smoky Town to make bread and butter, don't you, daddy?"

"Yes, dear, to make bread and butter."

"And did you make any, daddy?"

"Yes, Effie, a good deal to-day."

"Then where is it? In your pocket?"

"No, love, not exactly. I won a big lawsuit to-day, and I shall get a
great many pennies for it."

"Oh," answered Effie meditatively, "I am glad that you did win. You do
like to win, doesn't you, daddy, dear."

"Yes, love."

"Then I will give you a kiss, daddy, because you did win," and she
suited the action to the word.

Geoffrey went from the little room with a softened heart. He dressed
and ate some dinner.

Then he sat down and wrote a long letter to Beatrice, telling her all
about the trial, and not sparing her his reasons for adopting each
particular tactic and line of argument which conduced to the great
result.

And though his letter was four sheets in length, he knew that Beatrice
would not be bored at having to read it.



                            CHAPTER XVIII

                           THE RISING STAR

As might be expected, the memorable case of Parsons and Douse proved
to be the turning point in Geoffrey's career, which was thenceforward
one of brilliant and startling success. On the very next morning when
he reached his chambers it was to find three heavy briefs awaiting
him, and they proved to be but the heralds of an uninterrupted flow of
lucrative business. Of course, he was not a Queen's Counsel, but now
that his great natural powers of advocacy had become generally known,
solicitors frequently employed him alone, or gave him another junior,
so that he might bring those powers to bear upon juries. Now it was,
too, that Geoffrey reaped the fruits of the arduous legal studies
which he had followed without cessation from the time when he found
himself thrown upon his own resources, and which had made a sound
lawyer of him as well as a brilliant and effective advocate. Soon,
even with his great capacity for work, he had as much business as he
could attend to. When fortune gives good gifts, she generally does so
with a lavish hand.

Thus it came to pass that, about three weeks after the trial of
Parsons and Douse, Geoffrey's uncle the solicitor died, and to his
surprise left him twenty thousand pounds, "believing," he said in his
will, which was dated three days before the testator's death, "that
this sum will assist him to rise to the head of his profession."

Now that it had dawned upon her that her husband really was a success,
Honoria's manner towards him modified very considerably. She even
became amiable, and once or twice almost affectionate. When Geoffrey
told her of the twenty thousand pounds she was radiant.

"Why, we shall be able to go back to Bolton Street now," she said,
"and as luck will have it, our old house is to let. I saw a bill in
the window yesterday."

"Yes," he said, "you can go back as soon as you like."

"And can we keep a carriage?"

"No, not yet; I am doing well, but not well enough for that. Next
year, if I live, you will be able to have a carriage. Don't begin to
grumble, Honoria. I have got £150 to spare, and if you care to come
round to a jeweller's you can spend it on what you like."

"Oh, you delightful person!" said his wife.

So they went to the jeweller's, and Lady Honoria bought ornaments to
the value of £150, and carried them home and hung over them, as
another class of woman might hang over her first-born child, admiring
them with a tender ecstasy. Whenever he had a sum of money that he
could afford to part with, Geoffrey would take her thus to a
jeweller's or a dressmaker's, and stand by coldly while she bought
things to its value. Lady Honoria was delighted. It never entered into
her mind that in a sense he was taking a revenge upon her, and that
every fresh exhibition of her rejoicings over the good things thus
provided added to his contempt for her.

Those were happy days for Lady Honoria! She rejoiced in this return of
wealth like a school-boy at the coming of the holidays, or a half-
frozen wanderer at the rising of the sun. She had been miserable
during all this night of poverty, as miserable as her nature admitted
of, now she was happy again, as she understood happiness. For bred,
educated, civilized--what you will--out of the more human passions,
Lady Honoria had replaced them by this idol-worship of wealth, or
rather of what wealth brings. It gave her a positive physical
satisfaction; her beauty, which had begun to fade, came back to her;
she looked five years younger. And all the while Geoffrey watched her
with an ever-growing scorn.

Once it broke out. The Bolton Street house had been furnished; he gave
her fifteen hundred pounds to do it, and with what things they owned
she managed very well on that. They moved into it, and Honoria had set
herself up with a sufficient supply of grand dresses and jewellery,
suitable to her recovered position. One day however, it occurred to
her that Effie was a child of remarkable beauty, who, if properly
dressed, would look very nice in the drawing-room at tea-time. So she
ordered a lovely costume for her--this deponent is not able to
describe it, but it consisted largely of velvet and lace. Geoffrey
heard nothing of this dress, but coming home rather early one
afternoon--it was on a Saturday, he found the child being shown off to
a room full of visitors, and dressed in a strange and wonderful attire
with which, not unnaturally, she was vastly pleased. He said nothing
at the time, but when at length the dropping fire of callers had
ceased, he asked who put Effie into that dress.

"I did," said Lady Honoria, "and a pretty penny it has cost, I can
tell you. But I can't have the child come down so poorly clothed, it
does not look well."

"Then she can stay upstairs," said Geoffrey frowning.

"What do you mean?" asked his wife.

"I mean that I will not have her decked out in those fine clothes.
They are quite unsuitable to her age. There is plenty of time for her
to take to vanity."

"I really don't understand you, Geoffrey. Why should not the child be
handsomely dressed?"

"Why not! Great heaven, Honoria, do you suppose that I want to see
Effie grow up like you, to lead a life of empty pleasure-seeking
idleness, and make a god of luxury. I had rather see her"--he was
going to add, "dead first," but checked himself and said--"have to
work for her living. Dress yourself up as much as you like, but leave
the child alone."

Lady Honoria was furious, but she was also a little frightened. She
had never heard her husband speak quite like this before, and there
was something underneath his words that she did not quite understand.
Still less did she understand when on the Monday Geoffrey suddenly
told her that he had fifty pounds for her to spend as she liked; then
accompanied her to a mantle shop, and stood patiently by, smiling
coldly while she invested it in lace and embroideries. Honoria thought
that he was making reparation for his sharp words, and so he was, but
to himself, and in another sense. Every time he gave her money in this
fashion, Geoffrey felt like a man who has paid off a debt of honour.
She had taunted him again and again with her poverty--the poverty she
said that he had brought her; for every taunt he would heap upon her
all those things in which her soul delighted. He would glut her with
wealth as, in her hour of victory, Queen Tomyris glutted dead Cyrus
with the blood of men.

It was an odd way of taking a revenge, and one that suited Lady
Honoria admirably; but though its victim felt no sting, it gave
Geoffrey much secret relief. Also he was curious; he wished to see if
there was any bottom to such a woman's desire for luxury, if it would
not bring satiety with it. But Lady Honoria was a very bad subject for
such an experiment. She never showed the least sign of being satiated,
either with fine things, with pleasures, or with social delights. They
were her natural element, and he might as soon have expected a fish to
weary of the water, or an eagle of the rushing air.



The winter wore away and the spring came. One day, it was in April,
Geoffrey, who was a moderate Liberal by persuasion, casually announced
at dinner that he was going to stand for Parliament in the Unionist
interest. The representation of one of the few Metropolitan divisions
which had then returned a Home Ruler had fallen vacant. As it chanced
he knew the head Unionist whip very well. They had been friends since
they were lads at school together, and this gentleman, having heard
Geoffrey make a brilliant speech in court, was suddenly struck with
the idea that he was the very man to lead a forlorn hope.

The upshot of it was that Geoffrey was asked if he would stand, and
replied that he must have two days to think it over. What he really
wanted the two days for was to enable him to write to Beatrice and
receive an answer from her. He had an almost superstitious faith in
her judgment, and did not like to act without it. After carefully
weighing the pros and cons, his own view was that he should do well to
stand. Probably he would be defeated, and it might cost him five
hundred pounds. On the other hand it would certainly make his name
known as a politician, and he was now in a fair way to earn so large
an income that he could well afford to risk the money. The only great
objection which he saw, was that if he happened to get in, it must
mean that he would have to work all day and all night too. Well, he
was strong and the more work he did the better--it kept him from
thinking.

In due course Beatrice's answer came. Her view coincided with his own;
she recommended him to take the opportunity, and pointed out that with
his growing legal reputation there was no office in the State to which
he might not aspire, when he had once proved himself a capable member
of Parliament. Geoffrey read the letter through; then immediately sat
down and wrote to his friend the whip, accepting the suggestion of the
Government.

The next fortnight was a hard one for him, but Geoffrey was as good a
man on the platform as in court, and he had, moreover, the very
valuable knack of suiting himself to his audience. As his canvass went
on it was generally recognised that the seat which had been considered
hopeless was now doubtful. A great amount of public interest was
concentrated on the election, both upon the Unionist and the
Separatist side, each claiming that the result of the poll would show
to their advantage. The Home Rule party strained every nerve against
him, being most anxious to show that the free and independent electors
of this single division, and therefore of the country at large, held
the Government policy in particular horror. Letters were obtained from
great authorities and freely printed. Irish members, fresh from gaol,
were brought down to detail their grievances. It was even suggested
that one of them should appear on the platform in prison garb--in
short, every electioneering engine known to political science was
brought to bear to forward the fortunes of either side.

As time went on Lady Honoria, who had been somewhat indifferent at
first, grew quite excited about the result. For one thing she found
that the contest attached an importance to herself in the eyes of the
truly great, which was not without its charm. On the day of the poll
she drove about all day in an open carriage under a bright blue
parasol, having Effie (who had become very bored) by her side, and two
noble lords on the front seat. As a consequence the result was
universally declared by a certain section of the press to be entirely
due to the efforts of an unprincipled but titled and lovely woman. It
was even said that, like another lady of rank in a past generation,
she kissed a butcher in order to win his vote. But those who made the
remark did not know Lady Honoria; she was incapable of kissing a
butcher, or indeed anybody else. Her inclinations did not lie in that
direction.

In the end Geoffrey was returned by a magnificent majority of ten
votes, reduced on a scrutiny to seven. He took his seat in the House
on the following night amidst loud Unionist cheering. In the course of
the evening's debate a prominent member of the Government made
allusion to his return as a proof of the triumph of Unionist
principles. Thereon a very leading member of the Separatist opposition
retorted that it was nothing of the sort, "that it was a matter of
common notoriety that the honourable member's return was owing to the
unusual and most uncommon ability displayed by him in the course of
his canvass, aided as it was, by artfully applied and aristocratic
feminine influence." This was a delicate allusion to Honoria and her
blue parasol.

As Geoffrey and his wife were driving back to Bolton Street, after the
declaration of the poll, a little incident occurred. Geoffrey told the
coachman to stop at the first telegraph office and, getting out of the
carriage, wired to Beatrice, "In by ten votes."

"Who have you been telegraphing to, Geoffrey?" asked Lady Honoria.

"I telegraphed to Miss Granger," he answered.

"Ah! So you still keep up a correspondence with that pupil teacher
girl."

"Yes, I do. I wish that I had a few more such correspondents."

"Indeed. You are easy to please. I thought her one of the most
disagreeable young women whom I ever met."

"Then it does not say much for your taste, Honoria."

His wife made no further remark, but she had her thoughts. Honoria
possessed good points: among others she was not a jealous person; she
was too cold and too indifferent to be jealous. But she did not like
the idea of another woman obtaining an influence over her husband,
who, as she now began to recognise, was one of the most brilliant men
of his day, and who might well become one of the most wealthy and
powerful. Clearly he existed for /her/ benefit, not for that of any
other woman. She was no fool, and she saw that a considerable intimacy
must exist between the two. Otherwise Geoffrey would not have thought
of telegraphing to Beatrice at such a moment.

Within a week of his election Geoffrey made a speech. It was not a
long speech, nor was it upon any very important issue; but it was
exceedingly good of its kind, good enough to be reported verbatim
indeed, and those listening to it recognised that they had to deal
with a new man who would one day be a very big man. There is no place
where an able person finds his level quicker than in the House of
Commons, composed as it is for the most part, of more or less wealthy
or frantic mediocrities. But Geoffrey was not a mediocrity, he was an
exceedingly able and powerful man, and this fact the House quickly
recognised.

For the next few months Geoffrey worked as men rarely work. All day he
was at his chambers or in court, and at night he sat in the House,
getting up his briefs when he could. But he always did get them up; no
solicitors had to complain that the interests of their client were
neglected by him; also he still found time to write to Beatrice. For
the rest he went out but little, and except in the way of business
associated with very few. Indeed he grew more and more silent and
reserved, till at last he won the reputation of being cold and hard.
Not that he was really so. He threw himself head and soul into his
work with a fixed determination to reach the top of the tree. He knew
that he should not care very much about it when he got there, but he
enjoyed the struggle.

Geoffrey was not a truly ambitious man; he was no mere self-seeker. He
knew the folly of ambition too well, and its end was always clearly
before his eyes. He often thought to himself that if he could have
chosen his lot, he would have asked for a cottage with a good garden,
five hundred a year, and somebody to care for. But perhaps he would
soon have wearied of his cottage. He worked to stifle thought, and to
some extent he succeeded. But he was at bottom an affectionate-natured
man, and he could not stifle the longing for sympathy which was his
secret weakness, though his pride would never allow him to show it.
What did he care for his triumphs when he had nobody with whom to
share them? All he could share were their fruits, and these he gave
away freely enough. It was but little that Geoffrey spent upon his own
gratification. A certain share of his gains he put by, the rest went
in expenses. The house in Bolton Street was a very gay place in those
days, but its master took but little part in its gaieties.

And what was the fact? The longer he remained separated from Beatrice
the more intensely did he long for her society. It was of no use; try
as he would, he could not put that sweet face from his mind; it drew
him as a magnet draws a needle. Success did not bring him happiness,
except in the sense that it relieved him from money cares.

People of coarse temperament only can find real satisfaction in
worldly triumphs, and eat, drink, and be merry, for to-morrow they
die! Men like Geoffrey soon learn that this also is vanity. On the
contrary, as his mind grew more and more wearied with the strain of
work, melancholy took an ever stronger hold of it. Had he gone to a
doctor, he might have been told that his liver was out of order, which
was very likely true. But this would not mend matters. "What a world,"
he might have cried, "what a world to live in when all the man's
happiness depends upon his liver!" He contracted an accursed habit of
looking on the black side of things; trouble always caught his eye.

It was no wonderful case. Men of large mind are very rarely happy men.
It is your little animal-minded individual who can be happy. Thus
women, who reflect less, are as a class much happier and more
contented than men. But the large-minded man sees too far, and guesses
too much of what he cannot see. He looks forward, and notes the dusty
end of his laborious days; he looks around and shudders at the
unceasing misery of a coarse struggling world; the sight of the
pitiful beggar babe craving bread on tottering feet, pierces his
heart. He cannot console himself with a reflection that the child had
no business to be born, or that if he denuded himself of his last
pound he would not materially help the class which bred it.

And above the garish lights of earthly joys and the dim reek of
earthly wretchedness, he sees the solemn firmament that veils his
race's destiny. For such a man, in such a mood, even religion has
terrors as well as hopes, and while the gloom gathers about his mind
these are with him more and more. What lies beyond that arching
mystery to whose horizon he daily draws more close--whose doors may
even now be opening for him? A hundred hands point out a hundred roads
to knowledge--they are lost half way. Only the cold spiritual
firmament, unlit by any guiding stars, unbrightened by the flood of
human day, and unshadowed by the veils of human night, still bends
above his head in awful changelessness, and still his weary feet draw
closer to the portals of the West.

It is very sad and wrong, but it is not altogether his fault; it is
rather a fault of the age, of over-education, of over-striving to be
wise. Cultivate the searching spirit and it will grow and rend you.
The spirit would soar, it would see, but the flesh weighs it down, and
in all flesh there is little light. Yet, at times, brooding on some
unnatural height of Thought, its eyes seem to be opened, and it
catches gleams of terrifying days to come, or perchance, discerns the
hopeless gates of an immeasurable night.

Oh, for that simpler faith which ever recedes farther from the ken of
the cultivated, questioning mind! There alone can peace be found, and
for the foolish who discard it, setting up man's wisdom at a sign,
soon the human lot will be one long fear. Grown scientific and weary
with the weight of knowledge, they will reject their ancient Gods, and
no smug-faced Positivism will bring them consolation. Science, here
and there illumining the gloom of destiny with its poor electric
lights, cries out that they are guiding stars. But they are no stars,
and they will flare away. Let us pray for darkness, more darkness,
lest, to our bewildered sight, they do but serve to show that which
shall murder Hope.



So think Geoffrey and his kin, and in their unexpressed dismay, turn,
seeking refuge from their physical and spiritual loneliness, but for
the most part finding none. Nature, still strong in them, points to
the dear fellowship of woman, and they make the venture to find a
mate, not a companion. But as it chanced in Geoffrey's case he did
find such a companion in Beatrice, after he had, by marriage, built up
an impassable wall between them.

And yet he longed for her society with an intensity that alarmed him.
He had her letters indeed, but what are letters! One touch of a
beloved hand is worth a thousand letters. In the midst of his great
success Geoffrey was wretched at heart, yet it seemed to him that if
he once more could have Beatrice at his side, though only as a friend,
he would find rest and happiness.



When a man's heart is thus set upon an object, his reason is soon
convinced of its innocence, even of its desirability, and a kindly
fate will generally contrive to give him the opportunity of ruin which
he so ardently desires.



                             CHAPTER XIX

                        GEOFFREY HAS A VISITOR

And Beatrice--had she fared better during these long months? Alas, not
at all. She had gone away from the Bryngelly Station on that autumn
morning of farewell sick at heart, and sick at heart she had remained.
Through all the long winter months sorrow and bitterness had been her
portion, and now in the happiness of spring, sorrow and bitterness
were with her still. She loved him, she longed for his presence, and
it was denied to her. She could not console herself as can some women,
nor did her deep passion wear away; on the contrary, it seemed to grow
and gather with every passing week. Neither did she wish to lose it,
she loved too well for that. It was better to be thus tormented by
conscience and by hopelessness than to lose her cause of pain.

One consolation Beatrice had and one only: she knew that Geoffrey did
not forget her. His letters told her this. These letters indeed were
everything to her--a woman can get so much more comfort out of a
letter than a man. Next to receiving them she loved to answer them.
She was a good and even a brilliant letter writer, but often and often
she would tear up what she had written and begin again. There was not
much news in Bryngelly; it was difficult to make her letters amusing.
Also the farcical nature of the whole proceeding seemed to paralyse
her. It was ridiculous, having so much to say, to be able to say
nothing. Not that Beatrice wished to indite love-letters--such an idea
had never crossed her mind, but rather to write as they had talked.
Yet when she tried to do so the results were not satisfactory to her,
the words looked strange on paper--she could not send them.

In Geoffrey's meteor-like advance to fame and fortune she took the
keenest joy and interest, far more than he did indeed. Though, like
that of most other intelligent creatures, her soul turned with
loathing from the dreary fustian of politics, she would religiously
search the parliamentary column from beginning to end on the chance of
finding his name or the notice of a speech by him. The law reports
also furnished her with a happy hunting-ground in which she often
found her game.

But they were miserable months. To rise in the morning, to go through
the round of daily duty--thinking of Geoffrey; to come home wearied,
and finally to seek refuge in sleep and dreams of him--this was the
sum of them. Then there were other troubles. To begin with, things had
gone from bad to worse at the Vicarage. The tithes scarcely came in at
all, and every day their poverty pinched them closer. Had it not been
for Beatrice's salary it was difficult to see how the family could
have continued to exist. She gave it almost all to her father now,
only keeping back a very small sum for her necessary clothing and such
sundries as stamps and writing paper. Even then, Elizabeth grumbled
bitterly at her extravagance in continuing to buy a daily paper,
asking what business she had to spend sixpence a week on such a
needless luxury. But Beatrice would not make up her mind to dock the
paper with its occasional mention of Geoffrey.

Again, Owen Davies was a perpetual anxiety to her. His infatuation for
herself was becoming notorious; everybody saw it except her father.
Mr. Granger's mind was so occupied with questions connected with tithe
that fortunately for Beatrice little else could find an entry. Owen
dogged her about; he would wait whole hours outside the school or by
the Vicarage gate merely to speak a few words to her. Sometimes when
at length she appeared he seemed to be struck dumb, he could say
nothing, but would gaze at her with his dull eyes in a fashion that
filled her with vague alarm. He never ventured to speak to her of his
love indeed, but he looked it, which was almost as bad. Another thing
was that he had grown jealous. The seed which Elizabeth had planted in
his mind had brought forth abundantly, though of course Beatrice did
not know that this was her sister's doing.

On the very morning that Geoffrey went away Mr. Davies had met her as
she was walking back from the station and asked her if Mr. Bingham had
gone. When she replied that this was so, she had distinctly heard him
murmur, "Thank God! thank God!" Subsequently she discovered also that
he bribed the old postman to keep count of the letters which she sent
and received from Geoffrey.

These things filled Beatrice with alarm, but there was worse behind.
Mr. Davies began to send her presents, first such things as prize
pigeons and fowls, then jewellery. The pigeons and fowls she could not
well return without exciting remark, but the jewellery she sent back
by one of the school children. First came a bracelet, then a locket
with his photograph inside, and lastly, a case that, when she opened
it, which her curiosity led her to do, nearly blinded her with light.
It was a diamond necklace, and she had never seen such diamonds
before, but from their size and lustre she knew that each stone must
be worth hundreds of pounds. Beatrice put it in her pocket and carried
it until she met him, which she did in the course of that afternoon.

"Mr. Davies," she said before he could speak, and handing him the
package, "this has been sent to me by mistake. Will you kindly take it
back?"

He took it, abashed.

"Mr. Davies," she went on, looking him full in the eyes, "I hope that
there will be no more such mistakes. Please understand that I cannot
accept presents from you."

"If Mr. Bingham had sent it, you would have accepted it," he muttered
sulkily.

Beatrice turned and flashed such a look on him that he fell back and
left her. But it was true, and she knew that it was true. If Geoffrey
had given her a sixpence with a hole in it, she would have valued it
more than all the diamonds on earth. Oh! what a position was hers. And
it was wrong, too. She had no right to love the husband of another
woman. But right or wrong the fact remained: she did love him.

And the worst of it was that, as she well knew, sooner or later all
this about Mr. Davies must come to the ears of her father, and then
what would happen? One thing was certain. In his present poverty-
stricken condition he would move heaven and earth to bring about her
marriage to this rich man. Her father never had been very scrupulous
where money was concerned, and the pinch of want was not likely to
make him more so.

Nor, we may be sure, did all this escape the jealous eye of Elizabeth.
Things looked black for her, but she did not intend to throw up the
cards on that account. Only it was time to lead trumps. In other
words, Beatrice must be fatally compromised in the eyes of Owen
Davies, if by any means this could be brought about. So far things had
gone well for her schemes. Beatrice and Geoffrey loved each other, of
that Elizabeth was certain. But the existence of this secret,
underhand affection would avail her naught unless it could be ripened
into acts. Everybody is free to indulge in secret predilections, but
if once they are given way to, if once a woman's character is
compromised, then the world avails itself of its opportunities and
destroys her. What man, thought Elizabeth, would marry a compromised
woman? If Beatrice could be compromised, Owen Davies would not take
her to wife--therefore this must be brought about.

It sounds wicked and unnatural. "Impossible that sister should so
treat sister," the reader of this history may say, thinking of her
own, and of her affectionate and respectable surroundings. But it is
not impossible. If you, who doubt, will study the law reports, and no
worse occupation can be wished to you, you will find that such things
are possible. Human nature can rise to strange heights, and it can
also fall to depths beyond your fathoming. Because a thing is without
parallel in your own small experience it in no way follows that it
cannot be.

Elizabeth was a very remorseless person; she was more--she was a woman
actuated by passion and by greed: the two strongest motives known to
the human heart. But with her recklessness she united a considerable
degree of intelligence, or rather of intellect. Had she been a savage
she might have removed her sister from her path by a more expeditious
way; being what she was, she merely strove to effect the same end by a
method not punishable by law, in short, by murdering her reputation.
Would she be responsible if her sister went wrong, and was thus
utterly discredited in the eyes of this man who wished to marry her,
and whom Elizabeth wished to marry? Of course not; that was Beatrice's
affair. But she could give her every chance of falling into
temptation, and this it was her fixed design to do.

Circumstances soon gave her an opportunity. The need of money became
very pressing at the Vicarage. They had literally no longer the
wherewithal to live. The tithe payers absolutely refused to fulfil
their obligations. As it happened, Jones, the man who had murdered the
auctioneer, was never brought to trial. He died shortly after his
arrest in a fit of /delirium tremens/ and nervous prostration brought
on by the sudden cessation of a supply of stimulants, and an example
was lost, that, had he been duly hanged, might have been made of the
results of defying the law. Mr. Granger was now too poor to institute
any further proceedings, which, in the state of public feeling in
Wales, might or might not succeed; he could only submit, and
submission meant beggary. Indeed he was already a beggar. In this
state of affairs he took counsel with Elizabeth, pointing out that
they must either get money or starve. Now the only possible way to get
money was by borrowing it, and Mr. Granger's suggestion was that he
should apply to Owen Davies, who had plenty. Indeed he would have done
so long ago, but that the squire had the reputation of being an
exceedingly close-fisted man.

But this proposition did not at all suit Elizabeth's book. Her great
object had been to conceal Mr. Davies's desires as regards Beatrice
from her father, and her daily dread was that he might become
acquainted with them from some outside source. She knew very well that
if her father went up to the Castle to borrow money it would be lent,
or rather given, freely enough; but she also knew that the lender
would almost certainly take the opportunity, the very favourable
opportunity, to unfold his wishes as regards the borrower's daughter.
The one thing would naturally lead to the other--the promise of her
father's support of Owen's suit would be the consideration for the
money received. How gladly that support would be given was also
obvious to her, and with her father pushing Beatrice on the one side
and Owen Davies pushing her on the other, how could Elizabeth be sure
that she would not yield? Beatrice would be the very person to be
carried away by an idea of duty. Their father would tell her that he
had got the money on this undertaking, and it was quite possible that
her pride might bring her to fulfil a bond thus given, however
distasteful the deed might be to her personally. No, her father must
at all hazards be prevented from seeking assistance from Owen Davies.
And yet the money must be had from somewhere, or they would be ruined.

Ah, she had it--Geoffrey Bingham should lend the money! He could well
afford it now, and she shrewdly guessed that he would not grudge the
coat off his back if he thought that by giving it he might directly or
indirectly help Beatrice. Her father must go up to town to see him,
she would have no letter-writing; one never knows how a letter may be
read. He must see Mr. Bingham, and if possible bring him down to
Bryngelly. In a moment every detail of the plot became clear to
Elizabeth's mind, and then she spoke.

"You must not go to Mr. Davies, father," she said; "he is a hard man,
and would only refuse and put you in a false position; you must go to
Mr. Bingham. Listen: he is rich now, and he is very fond of you and of
Beatrice. He will lend you a hundred pounds at once. You must go to
London by the early train to-morrow, and drive straight to his
chambers and see him. It will cost two pounds to get there and back,
but that cannot be helped; it is safer than writing, and I am sure
that you will not go for nothing. And see here, father, bring Mr.
Bingham back with you for a few days if you can. It will be a little
return for his kindness, and I know that he is not well. Beatrice had
a letter from him in which he said that he was so overworked that he
thought he must take a little rest soon. Bring him back for Whit-
Sunday."

Mr. Granger hesitated, demurred, and finally yielded. The weak,
querulous old farmer clergyman, worn out with many daily cares and
quite unsupported by mental resources, was but a tool in Elizabeth's
able hands. He did not indeed feel any humiliation at the idea of
trying to borrow the cash, for his nature was not finely strung, and
money troubles had made him callous to the verge of unscrupulousness;
but he did not like the idea of a journey to London, where he had not
been for more than twenty years, and the expenditure that it entailed.
Still he acted as Elizabeth bade him, even to keeping the expedition
secret from Beatrice. Beatrice, as her sister explained to him, was
proud as Lucifer, and might raise objections if she knew that he was
going to London to borrow money of Mr. Bingham. This indeed she would
certainly have done.

On the following afternoon--it was the Friday before Whit-Sunday, and
the last day of the Easter sittings--Geoffrey sat in his chambers, in
the worst possible spirits, thoroughly stale and worn out with work.
There was a consultation going on, and his client, a pig-headed
Norfolk farmer, who was bent upon proceeding to trial with some
extraordinary action for trespass against his own landlord, was
present with his solicitor. Geoffrey in a few short, clear words had
explained the absurdity of the whole thing, and strongly advised him
to settle, for the client had insisted on seeing him, refusing to be
put off with a written opinion. But the farmer was not satisfied, and
the solicitor was now endeavouring to let the pure light of law into
the darkness