 of his injured soul.

Geoffrey threw himself back in his chair, pushed the dark hair from
his brow, and pretended to listen. But in a minute his mind was far
away. Heavens, how tired he was! Well, there would be rest for a few
days--till Tuesday, when he had a matter that must be attended to--the
House had risen and so had the courts. What should he do with himself?
Honoria wished to go and stay with her brother, Lord Garsington, and,
for a wonder, to take Effie with her. He did not like it, but he
supposed that he should have to consent. One thing was, /he/ would not
go. He could not endure Garsington, Dunstan, and all their set. Should
he run down to Bryngelly? The temptation was very great; that would be
happiness indeed, but his common sense prevailed against it. No, it
was better that he should not go there. He would leave Bryngelly
alone. If Beatrice wished him to come she would have said so, and she
had never even hinted at such a thing, and if she had he did not think
that he would have gone. But he lacked the heart to go anywhere else.
He would stop in town, rest, and read a novel, for Geoffrey, when he
found time, was not above this frivolous occupation. Possibly, under
certain circumstances, he might even have been capable of writing one.
At that moment his clerk entered, and handed him a slip of paper with
something written on it. He opened it idly and read:

 "Revd. Mr. Granger to see you. Told him you were engaged, but he
  said he would wait."

Geoffrey started violently, so violently that both the solicitor and
the obstinate farmer looked up.

"Tell the gentleman that I will see him in a minute," he said to the
retreating clerk, and then, addressing the farmer, "Well, sir, I have
said all that I have to say. I cannot advise you to continue this
action. Indeed, if you wish to do so, you must really direct your
solicitor to retain some other counsel, as I will not be a party to
what can only mean a waste of money. Good afternoon," and he rose.

The farmer was convoyed out grumbling. In another moment Mr. Granger
entered, dressed in a somewhat threadbare suit of black, and his thin
white hair hanging, as usual, over his eyes. Geoffrey glanced at him
with apprehension, and as he did so noticed that he had aged greatly
during the last seven months. Had he come to tell him some ill news of
Beatrice--that she was ill, or dead, or going to be married?

"How do you do, Mr. Granger?" he said, as he stretched out his hand,
and controlling his voice as well as he could. "How are you? This is a
most unexpected pleasure."

"How do you do, Mr. Bingham?" answered the old man, while he seated
himself nervously in a chair, placing his hat with a trembling hand
upon the floor beside him. "Yes, thank you, I am pretty well, not very
grand--worn out with trouble as the sparks fly upwards," he added,
with a vague automatic recollection of the scriptural quotation.

"I hope that Miss Elizabeth and Be--that your daughters are well
also," said Geoffrey, unable to restrain his anxiety.

"Yes, yes, thank you, Mr. Bingham. Elizabeth isn't very grand either,
complains of a pain in her chest, a little bilious perhaps--she always
is bilious in the spring."

"And Miss Beatrice?"

"Oh, I think she's well--very quiet, you know, and a little pale,
perhaps; but she is always quiet--a strange woman Beatrice, Mr.
Bingham, a very strange woman, quite beyond me! I do not understand
her, and don't try to. Not like other women at all, takes no pleasure
in things seemingly; curious, with her good looks--very curious. But
nobody understands Beatrice."

Geoffrey breathed a sigh of relief. "And how are tithes being paid,
Mr. Granger? not very grandly, I fear. I saw that scoundrel Jones died
in prison."

Mr. Granger woke up at once. Before he had been talking almost at
random; the subject of his daughters did not greatly interest him.
What did interest him was this money question. Nor was it very
wonderful; the poor narrow-minded old man had thought about money till
he could scarcely find room for anything else, indeed nothing else
really touched him closely. He broke into a long story of his wrongs,
and, drawing a paper from his breast pocket, with shaking finger
pointed out to Geoffrey how that his clerical income for the last six
months had been at the rate of only forty pounds a year, upon which
sum even a Welsh clergyman could not consider himself passing rich.
Geoffrey listened and sympathised; then came a pause.

"That's how we've been getting on at Bryngelly, Mr. Bingham," Mr.
Granger said presently, "starving, pretty well starving. It's only you
who have been making money; we've been sitting on the same dock-leaf
while you have become a great man. If it had not been for Beatrice's
salary--she's behaved very well about the salary, has Beatrice--I am
sure I don't understand how the poor girl clothes herself on what she
keeps; I know that she had to go without a warm cloak this winter,
because she got a cough from it--we should have been in the workhouse,
and that's where we shall be yet," and he rubbed the back of his
withered hand across his eyes.

Geoffrey gasped. Beatrice with scarcely enough means to clothe herself
--Beatrice shivering and becoming ill from the want of a cloak while
/he/ lived in luxury! It made him sick to think of it. For a moment he
could say nothing.

"I have come here--I've come," went on the old man in a broken voice,
broken not so much by shame at having to make the request as from fear
lest it should be refused, "to ask you if you could lend me a little
money. I don't know where to turn, I don't indeed, or I would not do
it, Mr. Bingham. I have spent my last pound to get here. If you could
lend me a hundred pounds I'd give you note of hand for it and try to
pay it back little by little; we might take twenty pounds a year from
Beatrice's salary----"

"Don't, please--do not talk of such a thing!" ejaculated the horrified
Geoffrey. "Where the devil is my cheque-book? Oh, I know, I left it in
Bolton Street. Here, this will do as well," and he took up a draft
note made out to his order, and, rapidly signing his name on the back
of it, handed it to Mr. Granger. It was in payment of the fees in the
great case of Parsons and Douse and some other matters. Mr. Granger
took the draft, and, holding it close to his eyes, glanced at the
amount; it was £200.

"But this is double what I asked for," he said doubtfully. "Am I to
return you £100?"

"No, no," answered Geoffrey, "I daresay that you have some debts to
pay. Thank Heaven, I can get on very well and earn more money than I
want. Not enough clothing--it is shocking to think of!" he added, more
to himself than to his listener.

The old man rose, his eyes full of tears. "God bless you," he said,
"God bless you. I do not know how to thank you--I don't indeed," and
he caught Geoffrey's hand between his trembling palms and pressed it.

"Please do not say any more, Mr. Granger; it really is only a matter
of mutual obligation. No, no, I don't want any note of hand. If I were
to die it might be used against you. You can pay me whenever it is
convenient."

"You are too good, Mr. Bingham," said the old clergyman. "Where could
another man be found who would lend me £200 without security?" (where
indeed!) "By the way," he added, "I forgot; my mind is in such a
whirl. Will you come back with me for a few days to Bryngelly? We
shall all be so pleased if you can. Do come, Mr. Bingham; you look as
though you want a change, you do indeed."

Geoffrey dropped his hand heavily on the desk. But half an hour before
he had made up his mind not to go to Bryngelly. And now----

The vision of Beatrice rose before his eyes. Beatrice who had gone
cold all winter and never told him one word of their biting poverty--
the longing for the sight of Beatrice came into his heart, and like a
hurricane swept the defences of his reason to the level ground.
Temptation overwhelmed him; he no longer struggled against it. He must
see her, if it was only to say good-bye.

"Thank you," he said quietly, lifting his bowed head. "Yes, I have
nothing particular to do for the next day or two. I think that I will
come. When do you go back?"

"Well, I thought of taking the night mail, but I feel so tired. I
really don't know. I think I shall go by the nine o'clock train
to-morrow."

"That will suit me very well," said Geoffrey; "and now what are you
going to do to-night? You had better come and dine and sleep at my
house. No dress clothes? Oh, never mind; there are some people coming
but they won't care; a clergyman is always dressed. Come along and I
will get that draft cashed. The bank is shut, but I can manage it."



                              CHAPTER XX

                          BACK AT BRYNGELLY

Geoffrey and Mr. Granger reached Bolton Street about six o'clock. The
drawing-room was still full of callers. Lady Honoria's young men
mustered in great force in those days. They were very inoffensive
young men and Geoffrey had no particular objection to them. Only he
found it difficult to remember all their names. When Geoffrey entered
the drawing-room there were no fewer than five of them, to say nothing
of two stray ladies, all superbly dressed and sitting metaphorically
at Honoria's very pretty feet. Otherwise their contributions to the
general store of amusement did not amount to much, for her ladyship
did most of the talking.

Geoffrey introduced Mr. Granger, whom Honoria could not at first
remember. Nor did she receive the announcement that he was going to
dine and stay the night with any particular enthusiasm. The young men
melted away at Geoffrey's advent like mists before a rising sun. He
greeted them civilly enough, but with him they had nothing in common.
To tell the truth they were a little afraid of him. This man with his
dark handsome face sealed with the stamp of intellect, his powerful-
looking form (ill dressed, according to their standard) and his great
and growing reputation, was a person with whom they had no sympathy,
and who, they felt, had no sympathy with them. We talk as though there
is one heaven and one hell for all of us, but here must be some
mistake. An impassable gulf yawns between the different classes of
mankind. What has such a man as Geoffrey to do with the feeble male
and female butterflies of a London drawing-room? There is only one
link between them: they live on the same planet.

When the fine young men and the two stray ladies had melted away,
Geoffrey took Mr. Granger up to his room. Coming downstairs again he
found Lady Honoria waiting for him in the study.

"Is that individual really going to dine and sleep here?" she asked.

"Certainly, Honoria, and he has brought no dress clothes," he
answered.

"Really, Geoffrey, it is too bad of you," said the lady with some
pardonable irritation. "Why do you bring people to dinner in this
promiscuous way? It will quite upset the table. Just fancy asking an
old Welsh clergyman to dine, who has not the slightest pretensions to
being a gentleman, when one has the Prime Minister and a Bishop coming
--and a clergyman without dress clothes too. What has he come for?"

"He came to see me on business, and as to the people coming to dinner,
if they don't like it they can grumble when they go home. By the way,
Honoria, I am going down to Wales for a day or two to-morrow. I want a
change."

"Indeed! Going to see the lovely Beatrice, I suppose. You had better
be careful, Geoffrey. That girl will get you into a mess, and if she
does there are plenty of people who are ready to make an example of
you. You have enemies enough, I can tell you. I am not jealous, it is
not in my line, but you are too intimate with that girl, and you will
be sorry for it one day."

"Nonsense," said Geoffrey angrily, but nevertheless he felt that Lady
Honoria's words were words of truth. It struck him, moreover, that she
must feel this strongly, or she would not have spoken in that tone.
Honoria did not pose as a household philosopher. Still he would not
draw back now. His heart was set on seeing Beatrice.

"Am I to understand," went on his wife, "that you still object to my
staying with the Garsingtons? I think it is a little hard if I do not
make a fuss about your going to see your village paragon, that you
should refuse to allow me to visit my own brother."

Geoffrey felt that he was being bargained with. It was degrading, but
in the extremity of his folly he yielded.

"Go if you like," he said shortly, "but if you take Effie, mind she is
properly looked after, that is all," and he abruptly left the room.

Lady Honoria looked after him, slowly nodding her handsome head. "Ah,"
she said to herself, "I have found out how to manage you now. You have
your weak point like other people, Master Geoffrey--and it spells
Beatrice. Only you must not go too far. I am not jealous, but I am not
going to have a scandal for fifty Beatrices. I will not allow you to
lose your reputation and position. Just imagine a man like that pining
for a village girl--she is nothing more! And they talk about his being
so clever. Well, he always liked ladies' society; that is his failing,
and now he has burnt his fingers. They all do sooner or later,
especially these clever men. The women flatter them, that's it. Of
course the girl is trying to get hold of him, and she might do worse,
but so surely as my name is Honoria Bingham I will put a spoke in her
wheel before she has done. Bah! and they laugh at the power of women
when a man like Geoffrey, with all the world to lose, grows love-sick
for a pretty face; it is a /very/ pretty face by the way. I do believe
that if I were out of the way he would marry her. But I am in the way,
and mean to stay there. Well, it is time to dress for dinner. I only
hope that old clown of a clergyman won't do something ridiculous. I
shall have to apologise for him."

Dinner-time had come; it was a quarter past eight, and the room was
filled with highly bred people all more or less distinguished. Mr.
Granger had duly appeared, arrayed in his threadbare black coat,
relieved, however, by a pair of Geoffrey's dress shoes. As might have
been expected, the great folk did not seem surprised at his presence,
or to take any particular notice of his attire, the fact being that
such people never are surprised. A Zulu chief in full war dress would
only excite a friendly interest in their breasts. On the contrary they
recognised vaguely that the old gentleman was something out of the
common run, and as such worth cultivating. Indeed the Prime Minister,
hearing casually that he was a clergyman from Wales, asked to be
introduced to him, and at once fell into conversation about tithes, a
subject of which Mr. Granger was thoroughly master.

Presently they went down to dinner, Mr. Granger escorting the wife of
the Bishop, a fat and somewhat apoplectic lady, blessed with an
excellent appetite. On his other side was the Prime Minister, and
between the two he got on very well, especially after a few glasses of
wine. Indeed, both the apoplectic wife of the Bishop and the head of
Her Majesty's Government were subsequently heard to declare that Mr.
Granger was a very entertaining person. To the former he related with
much detail how his daughter had saved their host's life, and to the
latter he discoursed upon the subject of tithes, favouring him with
his ideas of what legislation was necessary to meet the question.
Somewhat to his own surprise, he found that his views were received
with attention and even with respect. In the main, too, they received
the support of the Bishop, who likewise felt keenly on the subject of
tithes. Never before had Mr. Granger had such a good dinner nor
mingled with company so distinguished. He remembered both till his
dying day.

Next morning Geoffrey and Mr. Granger started before Lady Honoria was
up. Into the details of their long journey to Wales (in a crowded
third-class carriage) we need not enter. Geoffrey had plenty to think
of, but his fears had vanished, as fears sometimes do when we draw
near to the object of them, and had been replaced by a curious
expectancy. He saw now, or thought he saw, that he had been making a
mountain out of a molehill. Probably it meant nothing at all. There
was no real danger. Beatrice liked him, no doubt; possibly she had
even experienced a fit of tenderness towards him. Such things come and
such things go. Time is a wonderful healer of moral distempers, and
few young ladies endure the chains of an undesirable attachment for a
period of seven whole months. It made him almost blush to think that
this might be so, and that the gratuitous extension of his misfortune
to Beatrice might be nothing more than the working of his own
unconscious vanity--a vanity which, did she know of it, would move her
to angry laughter.

He remembered how once, when he was quite a young fellow, he had been
somewhat smitten with a certain lady, who certainly, if he might judge
from her words and acts, reciprocated the sentiment. And he remembered
also, how when he met that lady some months afterwards she treated him
with a cold indifference, indeed almost with an insolence, that quite
bewildered him, making him wonder how the same person could show in
such different lights, till at length, mortified and ashamed by his
mistake, he had gone away in a rage and seen her face no more. Of
course he had set it down to female infidelity; he had served her
turn, she had made a fool of him, and that was all she wanted. Now he
might enjoy his humiliation. It did not occur to him that it might be
simple "cussedness," to borrow an energetic American term, or that she
had not really changed, but was angry with him for some reason which
she did not choose to show. It is difficult to weigh the motives of
women in the scales of male experience, and many other men besides
Geoffrey have been forced to give up the attempt and to console
themselves with the reflection that the inexplicable is generally not
worth understanding.

Yes, probably it would be the same case over again. And yet, and yet--
was Beatrice of that class? Had she not too much of a man's
straightforwardness of aim to permit her to play such tricks? In the
bottom of his soul he thought that she had, but he would not admit it
to himself. The fact of the matter was that, half unknowingly, he was
trying to drug his conscience. He knew that in his longing to see her
dear face once more he had undertaken a dangerous thing. He was about
to walk with her over an abyss on a bridge which might bear them, or--
might break. So long as he walked there alone it would be well, but
would it bear them /both?/ Alas for the frailty of human nature, this
was the truth; but he would not and did not acknowledge it. He was not
going to make love to Beatrice, he was going to enjoy the pleasure of
her society. In friendship there could be no harm.

It is not difficult thus to still the qualms of an uneasy mind, more
especially when the thing in question at its worst is rather an
offence against local custom than against natural law. In many
countries of the world--in nearly all countries, indeed, at different
epochs of their history--it would have been no wrong that Geoffrey and
Beatrice should love each other, and human nature in strong temptation
is very apt to override artificial barriers erected to suit the
convenience or promote the prosperity of particular sections of
mankind. But, as we have heard, even though all things may be lawful,
yet all things are not expedient. To commit or even to condone an act
because the principle that stamps it as wrong will admit of argument
on its merits is mere sophistry, by the aid of which we might prove
ourselves entitled to defy the majority of laws of all calibres. Laws
vary to suit the generations, but each generation must obey its own,
or confusion will ensue. A deed should be judged by its fruits; it may
even be innocent in itself, yet if its fruits are evil the doer in a
sense is guilty.

Thus in some countries to mention the name of your mother-in-law
entails the most unpleasant consequences on that intimate relation.
Nobody can say that to name the lady is a thing wicked in itself; yet
the man who, knowing the penalties which will ensue, allows himself,
even in a fit of passion against that relative, to violate the custom
and mention her by name is doubtless an offender. Thus, too, the
result of an entanglement between a woman and a man already married
generally means unhappiness and hurt to all concerned, more especially
to the women, whose prospects are perhaps irretrievably injured
thereby. It is useless to point to the example of the patriarchs, some
foreign royal families, and many respectable Turks; it is useless to
plead that the love is deep and holy love, for which a man or woman
might well live and die, or to show extenuating circumstances in the
fact of loneliness, need of sympathy, and that the existing marriage
is a hollow sham. The rule is clear. A man may do most things except
cheat at cards or run away in action; a woman may break half-a-dozen
hearts, or try to break them, and finally put herself up at auction
and take no harm at all--but neither of them may in any event do
/this/.

Not that Geoffrey, to do him justice, had any such intentions. Most
men are incapable of plots of that nature. If they fall, it is when
the voice of conscience is lost in the whirlwind of passion, and
counsel is darkened by the tumultuous pleadings of the heart. Their
sin is that they will, most of them, allow themselves to be put in
positions favourable to the development of these disagreeable
influences. It is not safe to light cigarettes in a powder factory. If
Geoffrey had done what he ought to have done, he would never have gone
to Bryngelly, and there would have been no story to tell, or no more
than there usually is.



At length Mr. Granger and his guest reached Bryngelly; there was
nobody to meet them, for nobody knew that they were coming, so they
walked up to the Vicarage. It was strange to Geoffrey once more to
pass by the little church through those well-remembered, wind-torn
pines and see that low long house. It seemed wonderful that all should
still be just as it was, that there should be no change at all, when
he himself had seen so much. There was Beatrice's home; where was
Beatrice?

He passed into the house like a man in a dream. In another moment he
was in the long parlour where he had spent so many happy hours, and
Elizabeth was greeting him. He shook hands with her, and as he did so,
noticed vaguely that she too was utterly unchanged. Her straw-coloured
hair was pushed back from the temples in the same way, the mouth wore
the same hard smile, her light eyes shone with the same cold look; she
even wore the same brown dress. But she appeared to be very pleased to
see him, as indeed she was, for the game looked well for Elizabeth.
Her father kissed her hurriedly, and bustled from the room to lock up
his borrowed cash, leaving them together.

Somehow Geoffrey's conversational powers failed him. Where was
Beatrice? she ought to be back from school. It was holiday time
indeed. Could she be away?

He made an effort, and remarked absently that things seemed very
unchanged at Bryngelly.

"You are looking for Beatrice," said Elizabeth, answering his thought
and not his words. "She has gone out walking, but I think she will be
back soon. Excuse me, but I must go and see about your room."

Geoffrey hung about a little, then he lit his pipe and strolled down
to the beach, with a vague unexpressed idea of meeting Beatrice. He
did not meet Beatrice, but he met old Edward, who knew him at once.

"Lord, sir," he said, "it's queer to see you here again, specially
when I thinks as how I saw you first, and you a dead 'un to all
purposes, with your mouth open, and Miss Beatrice a-hanging on to your
hair fit to pull your scalp off. You never was nearer old Davy than
you was that night, sir, nor won't be. And now you've been spared to
become a Parliament man, I hears, and much good may you do there--it
will take all your time, sir--and I think, sir, that I should like to
drink your health."

Geoffrey put his hand in his pocket and gave the old man a sovereign.
He could afford to do so now.

"Does Miss Beatrice go out canoeing now?" he asked while Edward
mumbled his astonished thanks.

"At times, sir--thanking you kindly; it ain't many suvrings as comes
my way--though I hate the sight on it, I do. I'd like to stave a hole
in the bottom of that there cranky concern; it ain't safe, and that's
the fact. There'll be another accent out of it one of these fine days
and no coming to next time. But, Lord bless you, it's her way of
pleasuring herself. She's a queer un is Miss Beatrice, and she gets
queerer and queerer, what with their being so tight screwed up at the
Vicarage, no tithes and that, and one thing and another. Not but what
I'm thinking, sir," he added in a portentous whisper, "as the squire
has got summut to do with it. He's a courting of her, he is; he's as
hard after her as a dog fish after a stray herring, and why she can't
just say yes and marry him I'm sure I don't know."

"Perhaps she doesn't like him," said Geoffrey coldly.

"May be, sir, may be; maids all have their fancies, in whatssever walk
o' life it has pleased God to stick 'em, but it's a wonderful pity, it
is. He ain't no great shakes, he ain't, but he's a sound man--no girl
can't want a sounder--lived quiet all his days you see, sir, and
what's more he's got the money, and money's tight up at the Vicarage,
sir. Gals must give up their fancies sometimes, sir. Lord! a brace of
brats and she'd forget all about 'em. I'm seventy years old and I've
seen their ways, sir, though in a humble calling. You should say a
word to her, sir; she'd thank you kindly five years after. You'd do
her a good turn, sir, you would, and not a bad un as the saying goes,
and give it the lie--no, beg your pardon, that is the other way round
--she's bound to do you the bad turn having saved your life, though I
don't see how she could do that unless, begging your pardon, she made
you fall in love with her, being married, which though strange
wouldn't be wunnerful seeing what she is and seeing how I has been in
love with her myself since she was seven, old missus and all, who died
eight years gone and well rid of the rheumatics."

Beatrice was one of the few subjects that could unlock old Edward's
breast, and Geoffrey retired before his confusing but suggestive
eloquence. Hurriedly bidding the old man good-night he returned to the
house, and leaning on the gate watched the twilight dying on the bosom
of the west.

Suddenly, a bunch of wild roses in her girdle, Beatrice emerged from
the gathering gloom and stood before him face to face.



                             CHAPTER XXI

                           THE THIRD APPEAL

Face to face they stood, while at the vision of her sweetness his
heart grew still. Face to face, and the faint light fell upon her
tender loveliness and died in her deep eyes, and the faint breeze
fragrant with the breath of pines gently stirred her hair. Oh, it was
worth living to see her thus!

"I beg your pardon," she said in a puzzled tone, stepping forward to
pass the gate.

"/Beatrice!/"

She gave a little cry, and clutched the railing, else she would have
fallen. One moment she stayed so, looking up towards his face that was
hid in the deepening shadow--looking with wild eyes of hope and fear
and love.

"Is it you," she said at length, "or another dream?"

"It is I, Beatrice!" he answered, amazed.

She recovered herself with an effort.

"Then why did you frighten me so?" she asked. "It was unkind--oh, I
did not mean to say anything cross. What did I say? I forget. I am so
glad that you have come!" and she put her hand to her forehead and
looked at him again as one might gaze at a ghost from the grave.

"Did you not expect me?" Geoffrey asked.

"Expect you? no. No more than I expected----" and she stopped
suddenly.

"It is very odd," he said; "I thought you knew that your father was
going to ask me down. I returned from London with him."

"From London," she murmured. "I did not know; Elizabeth did not tell
me anything about it. I suppose that she forgot."

"Here I am at any rate, and how are you?"

"Oh, well now, quite well. There, I am all right again. It is very
wrong to frighten people in that way, Mr. Bingham," she added in her
usual voice. "Let me pass through the gate and I will shake hands with
you--if," she added, in a tone of gentle mockery, "one may shake hands
with so great a man. But I told you how it would be, did I not, just
before we were drowned together, you know? How is Effie?"

"Effie flourishes," he answered. "Do you know, you do not look very
grand. Your father told me that you had a cold in the winter," and
Geoffrey shivered as he thought of the cause.

"Oh, thank you, I have nothing to complain of. I am strong and well.
How long do you stay here?"

"Not long. Perhaps till Tuesday morning, perhaps till Monday."

Beatrice sighed. Happiness is short. She had not brought him here, she
would not have lifted a finger to bring him here, but since he had
come she wished that he was going to stay longer.

"It is supper time," she said; "let us go in."

So they went in and ate their supper. It was a happy meal. Mr. Granger
was in almost boisterous spirits. It is wonderful what a difference
the possession of that two hundred pounds made in his demeanour; he
seemed another man. It was true that a hundred of it must go in paying
debts, but a hundred would be left, which meant at least a year's
respite for him. Elizabeth, too, relaxed her habitual grimness; the
two hundred pounds had its influence on her also, and there were other
genial influences at work in her dark secret heart. Beatrice knew
nothing of the money and sat somewhat silent, but she too was happy
with the wild unreal happiness that sometimes visits us in dreams.

As for Geoffrey, if Lady Honoria could have seen him she would have
stared in astonishment. Of late he had been a very silent man, many
people indeed had found him a dull companion. But under the influence
of Beatrice's presence he talked and talked brilliantly. Perhaps he
was unconsciously striving to show at his very best before her, as a
man naturally does in the presence of a woman whom he loves. So
brilliantly did he talk that at last they all sat still and listened
to him, and they might have been worse employed.

At length supper was done, and Elizabeth retired to her room.
Presently, too, Mr. Granger was called out to christen a sick baby and
went grumbling, and they were left alone. They sat in the window-place
and looked out at the quiet night.

"Tell me about yourself," said Beatrice.

So he told her. He narrated all the steps by which he had reached his
present position, and showed her how from it he might rise to the
topmost heights of all. She did not look at him, and did not answer
him, but once when he paused, thinking that he had talked enough about
himself, she said, "Go on; tell me some more."

At last he had told her all.

"Yes," she said, "you have the power and the opportunity, and you will
one day be among the foremost men of your generation."

"I doubt it," he said with a sigh. "I am not ambitious. I only work
for the sake of work, not for what it will bring. One day I daresay
that I shall weary of it all and leave it. But while I do work, I like
to be among the first in my degree."

"Oh, no," she answered, "you must not give it up; you must go on and
on. Promise me," she continued, looking at him for the first time--
"promise me that while you have health and strength you will persevere
till you stand alone and quite pre-eminent. Then you can give it up."

"Why should I promise you this, Beatrice?"

"Because I ask it of you. Once I saved your life, Mr. Bingham, and it
gives me some little right to direct its course. I wish that the man
whom I saved to the world should be among the first men in the world,
not in wealth, which is an accident, but in intellect and force.
Promise me this and I shall be happy."

"I promise you," he said, "I promise that I will try to rise because
you ask it, not because the prospect attracts me; but as he spoke his
heart was wrung. It was bitter to hear her speak thus of a future in
which she would have no share, which, as her words implied, would be a
thing utterly apart from her, as much apart as though she were dead.

"Yes," he said again, "you gave me my life, and it makes me very
unhappy to think that I can give you nothing in return. Oh, Beatrice,
I will tell you what I have never told to any one. I am lonely and
wretched. With the exception of yourself, I do not think that there is
anybody who really cares for--I mean who really sympathises with me in
the world. I daresay that it is my own fault and it sounds a
humiliating thing to say, and, in a fashion, a selfish thing. I never
should have said it to any living soul but you. What is the use of
being great when there is nobody to work for? Things might have been
different, but the world is a hard place. If you--if you----"

At this moment his hand touched hers; it was accidental, but in the
tenderness of his heart he yielded to the temptation and took it. Then
there was a moment's pause, and very gently she drew her hand away and
thrust it in her bosom.

"You have your wife to share your fortune," she said; "you have Effie
to inherit it, and you can leave your name to your country."

Then came a heavy pause.

"And you," he said, breaking it, "what future is there for you?"

She laughed softly. "Women have no future and they ask none. At least
I do not now, though once I did. It is enough for them if they can
ever so little help the lives of others. That is their happiness, and
their reward is--rest."



Just then Mr. Granger came back from his christening, and Beatrice
rose and went to bed.

"Looks a little pale, doesn't she, Mr. Bingham?" said her father. "I
think she must be troubled in her mind. The fact is--well, there is no
reason why I should not tell you; she thinks so much of you, and you
might say a word to brighten her up--well, it's about Mr. Davies. I
fancy, you know, that she likes him and is vexed because he does not
come forward. Well, you see--of course I may be mistaken, but I have
sometimes thought that he may. I have seen him look as if he was
thinking of it, though of course it is more than Beatrice has got any
right to expect. She's only got herself and her good looks to give
him, and he's a rich man. Think of it, Mr. Bingham," and the old
gentleman turned up his eyes piously, "just think what a thing it
would be for her, and indeed for all of us, if it should please God to
send a chance like that in her way; she would be rich for life, and
such a position! But it is possible; one never knows; he might take a
fancy to her. At any rate, Mr. Bingham, I think you could cheer her up
a little; there is no need for her to give up hope yet."

Geoffrey burst into a short grim laugh. The idea of Beatrice
languishing for Owen Davies, indeed the irony of the whole position,
was too much for his sense of humour.

"Yes," he said, "I daresay that it might be a good match for her, but
I do not know how she would get on with Mr. Davies."

"Get on! why, well enough, of course. Women are soft, and can squeeze
into most holes, especially if they are well lined. Besides, he may be
a bit heavy, but I think she is pining for him, and it's a pity that
she should waste her life like that. What, are you going to bed? Well,
good-night--good-night."

Geoffrey did go to bed, but not to sleep. For a long while he lay
awake, thinking. He thought of the last night which he had spent in
this little room, of its strange experiences, of all that had happened
since, and of the meeting of to-day. Could he, after that meeting, any
longer doubt what were the feelings with which Beatrice regarded him?
It was difficult to so, and yet there was still room for error. Then
he thought of what old Edward had said to him, and of what Mr. Granger
had said with reference to Beatrice and Owen Davies. The views of both
were crudely and even vulgarly expressed, but they coincided, and,
what was more, there was truth in them, and he knew it. The idea of
Beatrice marrying Mr. Davies, to put it mildly, was repulsive to him;
but had he any claim to stand between her and so desirable a
settlement in life? Clearly, he had not, his conscience told him so.

Could it be right, moreover, that this kind of tie which existed
between them should be knitted more closely? What would it mean?
Trouble, and nothing but trouble, more especially to Beatrice, who
would fret her days away to no end. He had done wrong in coming here
at all, he had done wrong in taking her hand. He would make the only
reparation in his power (as though in such a case as that of Beatrice
reparation were now possible)! He would efface himself from her life
and see her no more. Then she might learn to forget him, or, at the
worst, to remember him with but a vague regret. Yes, cost what it
might, he would force himself to do it before any actual mischief
ensued. The only question was, should he not go further? Should he not
tell her that she would do well to marry Mr. Davies?

Pondering over this most painful question, at last he went to sleep.

When men in Geoffrey's unhappy position turn penitent and see the
error of their ways, the prudent resolves that ensue are apt to
overshoot the mark and to partake of an aggressive nature. Not
satisfied with leaving things alone, they must needs hasten to
proclaim their new-found virtue to the partner of their fault, and
advertise their infallible specific (to be taken by the partner) for
restoring the /status quo ante/. Sometimes as a consequence of this
pious zeal they find themselves misunderstood, or even succeed in
precipitating the catastrophe which they laudably desire to prevent.



The morrow was Whit-Sunday, and a day that Geoffrey had occasion to
remember for the rest of his life. They all met at breakfast and
shortly afterwards went to church, the service being at half-past ten.
By way of putting into effect the good resolutions with which he was
so busy paving an inferno of his own, Geoffrey did not sit by
Beatrice, but took a seat at the end of the little church, close to
the door, and tried to console himself by looking at her.

It was a curious sullen-natured day, and although there was not very
much sun the air was as hot as though they were in midsummer. Had they
been in a volcanic region, Geoffrey would have thought that such
weather preceded a shock of earthquake. As it was he knew that the
English climate was simply indulging itself at the expense of the
population. But as up to the present, the season had been cold, this
knowledge did not console him. Indeed he felt so choked in the stuffy
little church that just before the sermon (which he happened to be
aware was /not/ written by Beatrice) he took an opportunity to slip
out unobserved. Not knowing where to go, he strolled down to the
beach, on which there was nobody to be seen, for, as has been
observed, Bryngelly slept on Sundays. Presently, however, a man
approached walking rapidly, and to all appearance aimlessly, in whom
he recognised Owen Davies. He was talking to himself while he walked,
and swinging his arms. Geoffrey stepped aside to let him pass, and as
he did so was surprised and even shocked to see the change in the man.
His plump healthy-looking face had grown thin, and wore a half sullen,
half pitiful expression; there were dark circles round his blue eyes,
once so placid, and his hair would have been the better for cutting.
Geoffrey wondered if he had had an illness. At that moment Owen
chanced to look round and saw him.

"How do you do, Mr. Bingham?" he said. "I heard that you were here.
They told me at the station last night. You see this is a small place
and one likes to know who comes and goes," he added as though in
excuse.

He walked on and Geoffrey walked with him.

"You do not look well, Mr. Davies," he said. "Have you been laid up?"

"No, no," he answered, "I am quite right; it is only my mind that is
ill."

"Indeed," said Geoffrey, thinking that he certainly did look strange.
"Perhaps you live too much alone and it depresses you."

"Yes, I live alone, because I can't help myself. What is a man to do,
Mr. Bingham, when the woman he loves will not marry him, won't look at
him, treats him like dirt?"

"Marry somebody else," suggested Geoffrey.

"Oh, it is easy for you to say that--you have never loved anybody, and
you don't understand. I cannot marry anybody else, I want her only."

"Her? Whom?"

"Who! why, Beatrice--whom else could a man want to marry, if once he
had seen her. But she will not have me; she hates me."

"Really," said Geoffrey.

"Yes, really, and do you know why? Shall I tell you why? I will tell
you," and he grasped him by the arm and whispered hoarsely in his ear:
"Because she loves /you/, Mr. Bingham."

"I tell you what it is, Mr. Davies," said Geoffrey shaking his arm
free, "I am not going to stand this kind of thing. You must be off
your head."

"Don't be angry with me," he answered. "It is true. I have watched her
and I know that it is true. Why does she write to you every week, why
does she always start and listen when anybody mentions your name? Oh,
Mr. Bingham," Owen went on piteously, "be merciful--you have your wife
and lots of women to make love to if you wish--leave me Beatrice. If
you don't I think that I shall go crazed. I have always loved her,
ever since she was a child, and now my love travels faster and grows
stronger every day, and carries me away with it like a rock rolling
down a hill. You can only bring Beatrice to shame, but I can give her
everything, as much money as she wants, all that she wants, and I will
make her a good husband; I will never leave her side."

"I have no doubt that would be delightful for her," answered Geoffrey;
"but does it not strike you that all this is just a little
undignified? These remarks, interesting as they are, should be made to
Miss Granger, not to me, Mr. Davies."

"I know," he said, "but I don't care; it is my only chance, and what
do I mind about being undignified? Oh, Mr. Bingham, I have never loved
any other woman, I have been lonely all my days. Do not stand in my
path now. If you only knew what I have suffered, how I have prayed God
night after night to give me Beatrice, you would help me. Say that you
will help me! You are one of those men who can do anything; she will
listen to you. If you tell her to marry me she will do so, and I shall
bless you my whole life."

Geoffrey looked upon this abject suppliant with the most unmitigated
scorn. There is always something contemptible in the sight of one man
pleading to another for assistance in his love affairs--that is a
business which he should do for himself. How much greater, then, is
the humiliation involved when the amorous person asks the aid of one
whom he believes to be his rival--his successful rival--in the lady's
affection?

"Do you know, Mr. Davies," Geoffrey said, "I think that I have had
enough of this. I am not in a position to force Miss Granger to accept
advances which appear to be unwelcome according to your account. But
if I get an opportunity I will do this: I will tell her what you say.
You really must manage the rest for yourself. Good morning to you, Mr.
Davies."

He turned sharply and went while Owen watched him go.

"I don't believe him," he groaned to himself. "He will try to make her
his lover. Oh, God help me--I cannot bear to think of it. But if he
does, and I find him out, let him be careful. I will ruin him, yes, I
will ruin him! I have the money and I can do it. Ah, he thinks me a
fool, they all think me a fool, but I haven't been quiet all these
years for nothing. I can make a noise if necessary. And if he is a
villain, God will help me to destroy him. I have prayed to God, and
God will help me."

Then he went back to the Castle. Owen Davies was a type of the class
of religious men who believe that they can enlist the Almighty on the
side of their desires, provided only that those desires receive the
sanction of human law or custom.



Thus within twenty-four hours Geoffrey received no less than three
appeals to help the woman whom he loved to the arms of a distasteful
husband. No wonder then that he grew almost superstitious about the
matter.



                             CHAPTER XXII

                           A NIGHT OF STORM

That afternoon the whole Vicarage party walked up to the farm to
inspect another litter of young pigs. It struck Geoffrey, remembering
former editions, that the reproductive powers of Mr. Granger's old sow
were something little short of marvellous, and he dreamily worked out
a calculation of how long it would take her and her progeny to produce
a pig to every square yard of the area of plucky little Wales. It
seemed that the thing could be done in six years, which was absurd, so
he gave up calculating.

He had no words alone with Beatrice that afternoon. Indeed, a certain
coldness seemed to have sprung up between them. With the almost
supernatural quickness of a loving woman's intuition, she had divined
that something was passing in his mind, inimical to her most vital
interests, so she shunned his company, and received his conventional
advances with a politeness which was as cold as it was crushing. This
did not please Geoffrey; it is one thing (in her own interests, of
course) to make up your mind heroically to abandon a lady whom you do
not wish to compromise, and quite another to be snubbed by that lady
before the moment of final separation. Though he never put the idea
into words or even defined it in his mind--for Geoffrey was far too
anxious and unhappy to be flippant, at any rate in thought--he would
at heart have wished her to remain the same, indeed to wax ever
tenderer, till the fatal time of parting arrived, and even to show
appreciation of his virtuous conduct.

But to the utter destruction of most such hands as Geoffrey held,
loving women never will play according to the book. Their conduct
imperils everything, for it is obvious that it takes two to bring an
affair of this nature to a dignified conclusion, even when the stakes
are highest, and the matter is one of life and death. Beatrice after
all was very much of a woman, and she did not behave much better than
any other woman would have done. She was angry and suspicious, and she
showed it, with the result that Geoffrey grew angry also. It was cruel
of her, he thought, considering all things. He forgot that she could
know nothing of what was in his mind, however much she might guess;
also as yet he did not know the boundless depth and might of her
passion for him, and all that it meant to her. Had he realised this he
would have acted very differently.



They came home and took tea, then Mr. Granger and Elizabeth made ready
to go to evening service. To Geoffrey's dismay Beatrice did the same.
He had looked forward to a quiet walk with her--really this was not to
be borne. Fortunately, or rather unfortunately, she was ready the
first, and he got a word with her.

"I did not know that you were going to church," he said; "I thought
that we might have had a walk together. Very likely I shall have to go
away early to-morrow morning."

"Indeed," answered Beatrice coldly. "But of course you have your work
to attend to. I told Elizabeth that I was coming to church, and I must
go; it is too sultry to walk; there will be a storm soon."

At this moment Elizabeth came in.

"Well, Beatrice," she said, "are you coming to church? Father has gone
on."

Beatrice pretended not to hear, and reflected a moment. He would go
away and she would see him no more. Could she let slip this last hour?
Oh, she could not do it!

In that moment of reflection her fate was sealed.

"No," she answered slowly, "I don't think that I am coming; it is too
sultry to go to church. I daresay that Mr. Bingham will accompany
you."

Geoffrey hastily disclaimed any such intention, and Elizabeth started
alone. "Ah!" she said to herself, "I thought that you would not come,
my dear."

"Well," said Geoffrey, when she had well gone, "shall we go out?"

"I think it is pleasanter here," answered Beatrice.

"Oh, Beatrice, don't be so unkind," he said feebly.

"As you like," she replied. "There is a fine sunset--but I think that
we shall have a storm."

They went out, and turned up the lonely beach. The place was utterly
deserted, and they walked a little way apart, almost without speaking.
The sunset was magnificent; great flakes of golden cloud were driven
continually from a home of splendour in the west towards the cold
lined horizon of the land. The sea was still quiet, but it moaned like
a thing in pain. The storm was gathering fast.

"What a lovely sunset," said Geoffrey at length.

"It is a fatal sort of loveliness," she answered; "it will be a bad
night, and a wet morrow. The wind is rising; shall we turn?"

"No, Beatrice, never mind the wind. I want to speak to you, if you
will allow me to do so."

"Yes," said Beatrice, "what about, Mr. Bingham."

To make good resolutions in a matter of this sort is comparatively
easy, but the carrying of them out presents some difficulties.
Geoffrey, conscience-stricken into priggishness, wished to tell her
that she would do well to marry Owen Davies, and found the matter
hard. Meanwhile Beatrice preserved silence.

"The fact is," he said at length, "I most sincerely hope you will
forgive me, but I have been thinking a great deal about you and your
future welfare."

"That is very kind of you," said Beatrice, with an ominous humility.

This was disconcerting, but Geoffrey was determined, and he went on in
a somewhat flippant tone born of the most intense nervousness and
hatred of his task. Never had he loved her so well as now in this
moment when he was about to counsel her to marry another man. And yet
he persevered in his folly. For, as so often happens, the shrewd
insight and knowledge of the world which distinguished Geoffrey as a
lawyer, when dealing with the affairs of others, quite deserted him in
this crisis of his own life and that of the woman who worshipped him.

"Since I have been here," he said, "I have had made to me no less than
three appeals on your behalf and by separate people--by your father,
who fancies that you are pining for Owen Davies; by Owen Davies, who
is certainly pining for you; and by old Edward, intervening as a kind
of domestic /amicus curiæ/."

"Indeed," said Beatrice, in a voice of ice.

"All these three urged the same thing--the desirability of your
marrying Owen Davies."

Beatrice's face grew quite pale, her lips twitched and her grey eyes
flashed angrily.

"Really," she said, "and have /you/ any advice to give on the subject,
Mr. Bingham?"

"Yes, Beatrice, I have. I have thought it over, and I think that--
forgive me again--that if you can bring yourself to it, perhaps you
had better marry him. He is not such a bad sort of man, and he is well
off."

They had been walking rapidly, and now they were reaching the spot
known as the "Amphitheatre," that same spot where Owen Davies had
proposed to Beatrice some seven months before.

Beatrice passed round the projecting edge of rock, and walked some way
towards the flat slab of stone in the centre before she answered.
While she did so a great and bitter anger filled her heart. She saw,
or thought she saw, it all. Geoffrey wished to be rid of her. He had
discerned an element of danger in their intimacy, and was anxious to
make that intimacy impossible by pushing her into a hateful marriage.
Suddenly she turned and faced him--turned like a thing at bay. The
last red rays of the sunset struck upon her lovely face made more
lovely still by its stamp of haughty anger: they lay upon her heaving
breast. Full in the eyes she looked him with those wide angry eyes of
hers--never before had he seen her so imperial a mien. Her dignity and
the power of her presence literally awed him, for at times Beatrice's
beauty was of that royal stamp which when it hides a heart, is a
compelling force, conquering and born to conquer.

"Does it not strike you, Mr. Bingham," she said quietly, "that you are
taking a