 very great liberty? Does it not strike you that no man who is
not a relation has any right to speak to a woman as you have spoken to
me?--that, in short, you have been guilty of what in most people would
be an impertinence? What right have you to dictate to me as to whom I
should or should not marry? Surely of all things in the world that is
my own affair."

Geoffrey coloured to the eyes. As would have been the case with most
men of his class, he felt her accusation of having taken a liberty, of
having presumed upon an intimacy, more keenly than any which she could
have brought against him.

"Forgive me," he said humbly. "I can only assure you that I had no
such intention. I only spoke--ill-judgedly, I fear--because--because I
felt driven to it."

Beatrice took no notice of his words, but went on in the same cold
voice.

"What right have you to speak of my affairs with Mr. Davies, with an
old boatman, or even with my father? Had I wished you to do so I
should have asked you. By what authority do you constitute yourself an
intermediary for the purpose of bringing about a marriage which you
are so good as to consider would be to my pecuniary interest? Do you
not know that such a matter is one which the woman concerned, the
woman whose happiness and self-respect are at stake, alone can judge
of? I have nothing more to say except this. I said just now that you
had been guilty of what would in most people be an impertinence. Well,
I will add something. In this case, Mr. Bingham, there are
circumstances which make it--a cruel insult!"

She stopped speaking, then suddenly, without the slightest warning,
burst into passionate weeping. As she did so, the first rush of the
storm passed over them, winnowing the air as with a thousand eagles'
wings, and was lost on the moaning depths beyond.

The light went out of the sky. Now Geoffrey could only see the faint
outlines of her weeping face. One moment he hesitated and one only;
then Nature prevailed against him, for the next she was in his arms.

Beatrice scarcely resisted him. Her energies seemed to fail her, or
perhaps she had spent them in her bitter words. Her head fell upon his
shoulder, and there she sobbed her fill. Presently she lifted it and
their lips met in a first long kiss. It was finished; this was the end
of it--and thus did Geoffrey prosper Owen Davies's suit.

"Oh, you are cruel, cruel!" he whispered in her ear. "You must have
known I loved you, Beatrice, that I spoke against myself because I
thought it to be my duty. You must have known that, to my sin and
sorrow, I have always loved you, that you have never been an hour from
my mind, that I have longed to see your face like a sick man for the
light. Tell me, did you not know it, Beatrice?"

"How should I know?" she answered very softly; "I could only guess,
and if indeed you love me how could you wish me to marry another man?
I thought that you had learned my weakness and took this way to
reproach me. Oh, Geoffrey, what have we done? What is there between
you and me--except our love?"

"It would have been better if we had been drowned together at the
first," he said heavily.

"No, no," she answered, "for then we never should have loved one
another. Better first to love, and then to die!"

"Do not speak so," he said; "let us sit here and be happy for a little
while to-night, and leave trouble till to-morrow."

And, where on a bygone day Beatrice had tarried with another wooer,
side by side they sat upon the great stone and talked such talk as
lovers use.

Above them moaned the rising gale, though sheltered as they were by
cliffs its breath scarcely stirred their hair. In front of them the
long waves boomed upon the beach, while far out to sea the crescent
moon, draped in angry light, seemed to ride the waters like a boat.



And were they alone with their great bliss, or did they only dream?
Nay, they were alone with love and lovers' joys, and all the truth was
told, and all their doubts were done. Now there was an end of hopes
and fears; now reason fell and Love usurped his throne, and at that
royal coming Heaven threw wide her gates. Oh, Sweetest and most dear!
Oh, Dearest and most sweet! Oh, to have lived to find this happy hour
--oh, in this hour to die!

See heaviness is behind us, see now we are one. Blow, you winds, blow
out your stormy heart; we know the secret of your strength, you rush
to your desire. Fall, deep waters of the sea, fall in thunder at the
feet of earth; we hear the music of your pleading.

Earth, and Seas, and Winds, sing your great chant of love! Heaven and
Space and Time, echo back the melody! For Life has called to us the
answer of his riddle! Heart to heart we sit, and lips to lips, and we
are more wise than Solomon, and richer than barbarian kings, for
Happiness is ours.

To this end were we born, Dearest and most sweet, and from all time
predestinate! To this end, Sweetest and most dear, do we live and die,
in death to find completer unity. For here is that secret of the world
which wise men search and cannot find, and here too is the gate of
Heaven.

Look into my eyes, and let me gaze on yours, and listen how these
things shall be. The world is but a mockery, and a shadow is our
flesh, for where once they were there shall be naught. Only Love is
real; Love shall endure till all the suns are dead, and yet be young.

Kiss me, thou Conqueror, for Destiny is overcome, Sorrow is gone by;
and the flame that we have hallowed upon this earthly altar shall
still burn brightly, and yet more bright, when yonder stars have lost
their fire.

But alas! words cannot give a fitting form to such a song as this. Let
music try! But music also folds her wings. For in so supreme an hour

 "A bolt is shot back somewhere in our breast,"

and through that opened door come sights and sounds such as cannot be
written.



They tell us it is madness, that this unearthly glory is but the
frenzy of a passion gross in its very essence. Let those think it who
will, but to dreamers let them leave their dreams. Why then, at such a
time, do visions come to children of the world like Beatrice and
Geoffrey? Why do their doubts vanish, and what is that breath from
heaven which they seem to feel upon their brow? The intoxication of
earthly love born of the meeting of youth and beauty. So be it! Slave,
bring more such wine and let us drink--to Immortality and to those
dear eyes that mirror forth a spirit's face!

Such loves indeed are few. For they must be real and deep, and natures
thus shaped are rare, nor do they often cross each other's line of
life. Yes, there are few who can be borne so high, and none can
breathe that ether long. Soon the wings which Love lent them in his
hour of revelation will shrink and vanish, and the borrowers will fall
back to the level of this world, happy if they escape uncrushed.
Perchance even in their life-days, they may find these spirit wings
again, overshadowing the altar of their vows in the hour of earthly
marriage, if by some happy fate, marriage should be within their
reach, or like the holy pinions of the goddess Nout, folded about a
coffin, in the time of earthly death. But scant are the occasions, and
few there are who know them.



Thus soared Beatrice and Geoffrey while the wild night beat around
them, making a fit accompaniment to their stormy loves. And thus they
too fell from heaven to earth.

"We must be going, Geoffrey; it grows late," said Beatrice. "Oh,
Geoffrey, Geoffrey, what have we done? What can be the end of all
this? It will bring trouble on you, I know that it must. The old
saying will come true. I saved your life, and I shall bring ruin on
you!"

It is characteristic of Beatrice that already she was thinking of the
consequences to Geoffrey, not of those to herself.

"Beatrice," said Geoffrey, "we are in a desperate position. Do you
wish to face it and come away with me, far away to the other side of
the world?"

"No, no," she answered vehemently, "it would be your ruin to abandon
the career that is before you. What part of the world could you go to
where you would not be known? Besides there is your wife to think of.
Ah, God, your wife--what would she say of me? You belong to her, you
have no right to desert her. And there is Effie too. No, Geoffrey, no,
I have been wicked enough to learn to love you--oh, as you were never
loved before, if it is wicked to do what one cannot help--but I am not
bad enough for this. Walk quicker, Geoffrey; we shall be late, and
they will suspect something."

Poor Beatrice, the pangs of conscience were finding her out!

"We are in a dreadful position," he said again. "Oh, dearest, I have
been to blame. I should never have come back here. It is my fault; and
though I never thought of this, I did my best to please you."

"And I thank you for it," she answered. "Do not deceive yourself,
Geoffrey. Whatever happens, promise me never for one moment to believe
that I reproached or blamed you. Why should I blame you because you
won my heart? Let me sooner blame the sea on which we floated, the
beach where we walked, the house in which we lived, and the Destiny
that brought us together. I am proud and glad to love you, dear, but I
am not so selfish as to wish to ruin you: Geoffrey--I had rather die."

"Don't talk so," he said, "I cannot bear it. What are we to do? Am I
to go away and see you no more? How can we live so, Beatrice?"

"Yes, Geoffrey," she answered heavily, taking him by the hand and
gazing up into his face, "you are to go away and see me no more, not
for years and years. This is what we have brought upon ourselves, it
is the price that we must pay for this hour which has gone. You are to
go away to-morrow, that we may be put out of temptation, and you must
come back no more. Sometimes I shall write to you, and sometimes
perhaps you will write to me, till the thing becomes a burden, then
you can stop. And whether you forget me or not--and, Geoffrey, I do
not think you will--you will know that I shall never forget you, whom
I saved from the sea--to love me."

There was something so sweet and infinitely tender about her words,
instinct as they were with natural womanly passion, that Geoffrey bent
at heart beneath their weight as a fir bends beneath the gentle,
gathering snow. What was he to do, how could he leave her? And yet she
was right. He must go, and go quickly, lest his strength might fail
him, and hand in hand they should pass a bourne from which there is no
return.

"Heaven help us, Beatrice," he said. "I will go to-morrow morning and,
if I can, I will keep away."

"You /must/ keep away. I will not see you any more. I will not bring
trouble on you, Geoffrey."

"You talk of bringing trouble on me," he said; "you say nothing of
yourself, and yet a man, even a man with eyes on him like myself, is
better fitted to weather such a storm. If it ruined me, how much more
would it ruin you?"

They were at the gate of the Vicarage now, and the wind rushed so
strongly through the firs that she needed to put her lips quite close
to his ear to make her words heard.

"Stop, one minute," she said, "perhaps you do not quite understand.
When a woman does what I have done, it is because she loves with all
her life and heart and soul, because all these are a part of her love.
For myself, I no longer care anything--I have /no/ self away from you;
I have ceased to be of myself or in my own keeping. I am of you and in
yours. For myself and my own fate or name I think no more; with my
eyes open and of my own free will I have given everything to you, and
am glad and happy to give it. But for you I still do care, and if I
took any step, or allowed you to take any that could bring sorrow on
you, I should never forgive myself. That is why we must part,
Geoffrey. And now let us go in; there is nothing more to say, except
this: if you wish to bid me good-bye, a last good-bye, dear Geoffrey,
I will meet you to-morrow morning on the beach."

"I shall leave at half-past eight," he said hoarsely.

"Then we will meet at seven," Beatrice said, and led the way into the
house.

Elizabeth and Mr. Granger were already seated at supper. They supped
at nine on Sunday nights; it was just half-past.

"Dear me," said the old gentleman, "we began to think that you two
must have been out canoeing and got yourselves drowned in good earnest
this time. What have you been doing?"

"We have had a long walk," answered Geoffrey; "I did not know that it
was so late."

"One wants to be pleased with one's company to walk far on such a
night as this," put in Elizabeth maliciously.

"And so we were--at least I was," Geoffrey answered with perfect
truth, "and the night is not so bad as you might think, at least under
the lee of the cliffs. It will be worse by and by!"

Then they sat down and made a desperate show of eating supper.
Elizabeth, the keen-eyed, noticed that Geoffrey's hand was shaking.
Now what, she wondered, would make the hand of a strong man shake like
a leaf? Deep emotion might do it, and Elizabeth thought that she
detected other signs of emotion in them both, besides that of
Geoffrey's shaking hand. The plot was working well, but could it be
brought to a climax? Oh, if he would only throw prudence to the winds
and run away with Beatrice, so that she might be rid of her, and free
to fight for her own hand.

Shortly after supper both Elizabeth and Beatrice went to bed, leaving
their father with Geoffrey.

"Well," said Mr. Granger, "did you get a word with Beatrice? It was
very kind of you to go that long tramp on purpose. Gracious, how it
blows! we shall have the house down presently. Lightning, too, I
declare."

"Yes," answered Geoffrey, "I did."

"Ah, I hope you told her that there was no need for her to give up
hope of him yet, of Mr. Davies, I mean?"

"Yes, I told her that--that is if the greater includes the less," he
added to himself.

"And how did she take it?"

"Very badly," said Geoffrey; "she seemed to think that I had no right
to interfere."

"Indeed, that is strange. But it doesn't mean anything. She's grateful
enough to you at heart, depend upon it she is, only she did not like
to say so. Dear me, how it blows; we shall have a night of it, a
regular gale, I declare. So you are going away to-morrow morning.
Well, the best of friends must part. I hope that you will often come
and see us. Good-bye."

Once more a sense of the irony of the position overcame Geoffrey, and
he smiled grimly as he lit his candle and went to bed. At the back of
the house was a long passage, which terminated at one end in the room
where he slept, and at the other in that occupied by Elizabeth and
Beatrice. This passage was lit by two windows, and built out of it
were two more rooms--that of Mr. Granger, and another which had been
Effie's. The windows of the passage, like most of the others in the
Vicarage, were innocent of shutters, and Geoffrey stood for a moment
at one of them, watching the lightning illumine the broad breast of
the mountain behind. Then looking towards the door of Beatrice's room,
he gazed at it with the peculiar reverence that sometimes afflicts
people who are very much in love, and, with a sigh, turned and sought
his own.

He could not sleep, it was impossible. For nearly two hours he lay
turning from side to side, and thinking till his brain seemed like to
burst. To-morrow he must leave her, leave her for ever, and go back to
his coarse unprofitable struggle with the world, where there would be
no Beatrice to make him happy through it all. And she, what of her?

The storm had lulled a little, now it came back in strength, heralded
by the lightning. He rose, threw on a dressing-gown, and sat by a
window watching it. Its tumult and fury seemed to ease his heart of
some little of its pain; in that dark hour a quiet night would have
maddened him.

In eight hours--eight short hours--this matter would be ended so far
as concerned their actual intercourse. It would be a secret locked for
ever in their two breasts, a secret eating at their hearts, cruel as
the worm that dieth not. Geoffrey looked up and threw out his heart's
thought towards his sleeping love. Then once more, as in a bygone
night, there broke upon his brain and being that mysterious spiritual
sense. Stronger and more strong it grew, beating on him in heavy
unnatural waves, till his reason seemed to reel and sink, and he
remembered naught but Beatrice, knew naught save that her very life
was with him now.

He stretched out his arms towards the place where she should be.

"Beatrice," he whispered to the empty air, "Beatrice! Oh, my love! my
sweet! my soul! Hear me, Beatrice!"

There came a pause, and ever the unearthly sympathy grew and gathered
in his heart, till it seemed to him as though separation had lost its
power and across dividing space they were mingled in one being.

A great gust shook the house and passed away along the roaring depths.

Oh! what was this? Silently the door opened, and a white draped form
passed its threshold. He rose, gasping; a terrible fear, a terrible
joy, took possession of him. The lightning flared out wildly in the
eastern sky. There in the fierce light she stood before him--she,
Beatrice, a sight of beauty and of dread. She stood with white arms
outstretched, with white uncovered feet, her bosom heaving softly
beneath her night-dress, her streaming hair unbound, her lips apart,
her face upturned, and a stamp of terrifying calm.

 "In the wide, blind eyes uplift
  Thro' the darkness and the drift."

Great Heaven, she was asleep!

Hush! she spoke.

"You called me, Geoffrey," she said, in a still, unnatural voice. "You
called me, my beloved, and I--have--come."

He rose aghast, trembling like an aspen with doubt and fear, trembling
at the sight of the conquering glory of the woman whom he worshipped.

See! She drew on towards him, and she was /asleep/. Oh, what could he
do?

Suddenly the draught of the great gale rushing through the house
caught the opened door and crashed it to.

She awoke with a wild stare of terror.

"Oh, God, where am I?" she cried.

"Hush, for your life's sake!" he answered, his faculties returning.
"Hush! or you are lost."

But there was no need to caution here to silence, for Beatrice's
senses failed her at the shock, and she sank swooning in his arms.



                            CHAPTER XXIII

                            A DAWN OF RAIN

That crash of the closing door did not awake Beatrice only; it awoke
both Elizabeth and Mr. Granger. Elizabeth sat up in bed straining her
eyes through the gloom to see what had happened. They fell on
Beatrice's bed--surely--surely----

Elizabeth slipped up, cat-like she crept across the room and felt with
her hand at the bed. Beatrice was not there. She sprang to the blind
and drew it, letting in such light as there was, and by it searched
the room. She spoke: "Beatrice, where are you?"

No answer.

"Ah--h," said Elizabeth aloud; "I understand. At last--at last!"

What should see do? Should she go and call her father and put them to
an open shame? No. Beatrice must come back some time. The knowledge
was enough; she wanted the knowledge to use if necessary. She did not
wish to ruin her sister unless in self-defence, or rather, for the
cause of self-advancement. Still less did she wish to injure Geoffrey,
against whom she had no grudge. So she peeped along the passage, then
returning, crept back to her bed like a snake into a hole and watched.

Mr. Granger, hearing the crash, thought that the front door had blown
open. Rising, he lit a candle and went to see.

But of all this Geoffrey knew nothing, and Beatrice naturally less
than nothing.

She lay senseless in his arms, her head rested on his shoulder, her
heavy hair streamed down his side almost to his knee. He lifted her,
touched her on the forehead with his lips and laid her on the bed.
What was to be done? Bring her back to life? No, he dared not--not
here. While she lay thus her helplessness protected her; but if once
more she was a living, loving woman here and so--oh, how should they
escape? He dared not touch her or look towards her--till he had made
up his mind. It was soon done. Here she must not bide, and since of
herself she could not go, why he must take her now, this moment!
However far Geoffrey fell short of virtue's stricter standard, let
this always be remembered in his favour.

He opened the door, and as he did so, thought that he heard some one
stirring in the house. And so he did; it was Mr. Granger in the
sitting-room. Hearing no more, Geoffrey concluded that it was the
wind, and turning, groped his way to the bed where Beatrice lay as
still as death. For one moment a horrible fear struck him that she
might be dead. He had heard of cases of somnambulists who, on being
startled from their unnatural sleep, only woke to die. It might be so
with her. Hurriedly he placed his hand upon her breast. Yes, her heart
stirred--faintly indeed, but still it stirred. She had only swooned.
Then he set his teeth, and placing his arms about her, lifted her as
though she were a babe. Beatrice was no slip of a girl, but a well-
grown woman of full size. He never felt her weight; it seemed nothing
to him. Stealthily as one bent on midnight murder, he stepped with her
to the door and through it into the passage. Then supporting her with
one arm, he closed the door with his left hand. Stealthily in the
gloom he passed along the corridor, his bare feet making no noise upon
the boarded floor, till he reached the bisecting passage leading from
the sitting-rooms.

He glanced up it apprehensively, and what he saw froze the blood in
his veins, for there coming down it, not eight paces from him, was Mr.
Granger, holding a candle in his hand. What could be done? To get back
to his room was impossible--to reach that of Beatrice was also
impossible. With an effort he collected his thoughts, and like a flash
of light it passed into his mind that the empty room was not two paces
from him. A stride and he had reached it. Oh, where was the handle?
and oh, if the room should be locked! By a merciful chance it was not.
He stepped through the door, knocking Beatrice's feet against the
framework as he did so, closed it--to shut it he had no time--and
stood gasping behind it.

The gleam of light drew nearer. Merciful powers! he had been seen--the
old man was coming in. What could he say? Tell the truth, that was
all; but who would believe such a story? why, it was one that he
should scarcely care to advance in a court of law. Could he expect a
father to believe it--a father finding a man crouched like a thief
behind a door at the dead of night with his lovely daughter senseless
in his arms? He had already thought of going straight to Mr. Granger,
but had abandoned the idea as hopeless. Who would believe this tale of
sleep-walking? For the first time in his life Geoffrey felt terribly
afraid, both for Beatrice and himself; the hair rose on his head, his
heart stood still, and a cold perspiration started on to his face.

"It's very odd," he heard the old man mutter to himself; "I could
almost swear that I saw something white go into that room. Where's the
handle? If I believed in ghosts--hullo! my candle has blown out! I
must go and hunt for a match. Don't quite like going in there without
a light."

For the moment they were saved. The fierce draught rushing through the
open crack of the door from the ill-fitting window had extinguished
the candle.

Geoffrey waited a few seconds to allow Mr. Granger to reach his room,
and then once more started on his awful journey. He passed out of the
room in safety; happily Beatrice showed no signs of recovery. A few
quick steps and he was at her own door. And now a new terror seized
him. What if Elizabeth was also walking the house or even awake? He
thought of putting Beatrice down at the door and leaving her there,
but abandoned the idea. To begin with, her father might see her, and
then how could her presence be accounted for? or if he did not, she
would certainly suffer ill effects from the cold. No, he must risk it,
and at once, though he would rather have faced a battery of guns. The
door fortunately was ajar. Geoffrey opened it with his foot, entered,
and with his foot pushed it to again. Suddenly he remembered that he
had never been in the room, and did not know which bed belonged to
Beatrice. He walked to the nearest; a deep-drawn breath told him that
it was the wrong one. Drawing some faint consolation from the fact
that Elizabeth was evidently asleep, he groped his way to the second
bed through the deep twilight of the room. The clothes were thrown
back. He laid Beatrice down and threw them over her. Then he fled.

As he reached the door he saw Mr. Granger's light disappear into his
own room and heard his door close. After that it seemed to him that he
took but two steps and was in his own place.

He burst out laughing; there was as much hysteria in the laugh as a
man gives way to. His nerves were shattered by struggle, love and
fear, and sought relief in ghastly merriment. Somehow the whole scene
reminded him of one in a comic opera. There was a ludicrous side to
it. Supposing that the political opponents, who already hated him so
bitterly, could have seen him slinking from door to door at midnight
with an unconscious lady in his arms--what would they have said?

He ceased laughing; the fit passed--indeed it was no laughing matter.
Then he thought of the first night of their strange communion, that
night before he had returned to London. The seed sown in that hour had
blossomed and borne fruit indeed. Who would have dreamed it possible
that he should thus have drawn Beatrice to him? Well, he ought to have
known. If it was possible that the words which floated through her
mind could arise in his as they had done upon that night, what was not
possible? And were there not other words, written by the same master-
hand, which told of such things as these:

"'Now--now,' the door is heard;
  Hark, the stairs! and near--
  Nearer--and here--
 'Now'! and at call the third,
  She enters without a word.

  Like the doors of a casket shrine,
  See on either side,
  Her two arms divide
  Till the heart betwixt makes sign,
 'Take me, for I am thine.'

  First, I will pray. Do Thou
  That ownest the soul,
  Yet wilt grant control
  To another, nor disallow
  For a time, restrain me now!"

Did they not run thus? Oh, he should have known! This he could plead,
and this only--that control had been granted to him.

But how would Beatrice fare? Would she come to herself safely? He
thought so, it was only a fainting fit. But when she did recover, what
would she do? Nothing rash, he prayed. And what could be the end of it
all? Who might say? How fortunate that the sister had been so sound
asleep. Somehow he did not trust Elizabeth--he feared her.

Well might Geoffrey fear her! Elizabeth's sleep was that of a weasel.
She too was laughing at this very moment, laughing, not loud but long
--the laugh of one who wins.

She had seen him enter, his burden in his arms; saw him come with it
to her own bedside, and had breathed heavily to warn him of his
mistake. She had watched him put Beatrice on her bed, and heard him
sigh and turn away; nothing had escaped her. As soon as he was gone,
she had risen and crept up to Beatrice, and finding that she was only
in a faint had left her to recover, knowing her to be in no danger.
Elizabeth was not a nervous person. Then she had listened till at
length a deep sigh told her of the return of her sister's
consciousness. After this there was a pause, till presently Beatrice's
long soft breaths showed that she had glided from swoon to sleep.

The slow night wore away, and at length the cold dawn crept through
the window. Elizabeth still watching, for she was not willing to lose
a single scene of a drama so entrancing in itself and so important to
her interests, saw her sister suddenly sit up in bed and press her
hands to her forehead, as though she was striving to recall a dream.
Then Beatrice covered her eyes with her hands and groaned heavily.
Next she looked at her watch, rose, drank a glass of water, and
dressed herself, even to the putting on of an old grey waterproof with
a hood to it, for it was wet outside.

"She is going to meet her lover," thought Elizabeth. "I wish I could
be there to see that too, but I have seen enough."

She yawned and appeared to wake. "What, Beatrice, going out already in
this pouring rain?" she said, with feigned astonishment.

"Yes, I have slept badly and I want to get some air," answered
Beatrice, starting and colouring; "I suppose that it was the storm."

"Has there been a storm?" said Elizabeth, yawning again. "I heard
nothing of it--but then so many things happen when one is asleep of
which one knows nothing at the time," she added sleepily, like one
speaking at random. "Mind that you are back to say good-bye to Mr.
Bingham; he goes by the early train, you know--but perhaps you will
see him out walking," and appearing to wake up thoroughly, she raised
herself in bed and gave her sister one piercing look.

Beatrice made no answer; that look sent a thrill of fear through her.
Oh; what had happened! Or was it all a dream? Had she dreamed that she
stood face to face with Geoffrey in his room before a great darkness
struck her and overwhelmed her? Or was it an awful truth, and if a
truth, how came she here again? She went to the pantry, found a morsel
of bread and ate it, for faintness still pursued her. Then feeling
better, she left the house and set her face towards the beach.



It was a dreary morning. The great wind had passed; now it only blew
in little gusts heavy with driving rain. The sea was sullen and grey
and grand. It beat in thunder on the shore and flew over the sunken
rocks in columns of leaden spray. The whole earth seemed one
desolation, and all its grief was centred in this woman's broken
heart.

Geoffrey, too, was up. How he had passed the remainder of that tragic
night we need not inquire--not too happily we may be sure. He heard
the front door close behind Beatrice, and followed out into the rain.

On the beach, some half of a mile away, he found her gazing at the
sea, a great white gull wheeling about her head. No word of greeting
passed between them; they only grasped each other's hands and looked
into each other's hollow eyes.

"Come under the shelter of the cliff," he said, and she came. She
stood beneath the cliff, her head bowed low, her face hidden by the
hood, and spoke.

"Tell me what has happened," she said; "I have dreamed something, a
worse dream than any that have gone before--tell me if it is true. Do
not spare me."

And Geoffrey told her all.

When he had finished she spoke again.

"By what shall I swear," she said, "that I am not the thing which you
must think me? Geoffrey, I swear by my love for you that I am
innocent. If I came--oh, the shame of it! if I came--to your room last
night, it was my feet which led me, not my mind that led my feet. I
went to sleep, I was worn out, and then I knew no more till I heard a
dreadful sound, and saw you before me in a blaze of light, after which
there was darkness."

"Oh, Beatrice, do not be distressed," he answered. "I saw that you
were asleep. It is a dreadful thing which has happened, but I do not
think that we were seen."

"I do not know," she said. "Elizabeth looked at me very strangely this
morning, and she sees everything. Geoffrey, for my part, I neither
know nor care. What I do care for is, what must /you/ think of me? You
must believe, oh!--I cannot say it. And yet I am innocent. Never,
never did I dream of this. To come to you--thus--oh, it is shameless!"

"Beatrice, do not talk so. I tell you I know it. Listen--I drew you. I
did not mean that you should come. I did not think that you would
come, but it was my doing. Listen to me, dear," and he told her that
which written words can ill express.

When he had finished, she looked up, with another face; the deep
shadow of her shame had left her. "I believe you, Geoffrey," she said,
"because I know that you have not invented this to shield me, for I
have felt it also. See by it what you are to me. You are my master and
my all. I cannot withstand you if I would. I have little will apart
from yours if you choose to gainsay mine. And now promise me this upon
your word. Leave me uninfluenced; do not draw me to you to be your
ruin. I make no pretence, I have laid my life at your feet, but while
I have any strength to struggle against it, you shall never take it up
unless you can do so to your own honour, and that is not possible. Oh,
my dear, we might have been very happy together, happier than men and
women often are, but it is denied to us. We must carry our cross, we
must crucify the flesh upon it; perhaps so--who can say?--we may
glorify the spirit. I owe you a great deal. I have learnt much from
you, Geoffrey. I have learned to hope again for a Hereafter. Nothing
is left to me now--but that--that and an hour hence--your memory.

"Oh, why should I weep? It is ungrateful, when I have your love, for
which this misery is but a little price to pay. Kiss me, dear, and go
--and never see me more. You will not forget me, I know now that you
will /never/ forget me all your life. Afterwards--perhaps--who can
tell? If not, why then--it will indeed be best--to die."

                  *       *       *       *       *

It is not well to linger over such a scene as this. After all, too, it
is nothing. Only another broken heart or so. The world breaks so many
this way and the other that it can have little pleasure in gloating
over such stale scenes of agony.

Besides we must not let our sympathies carry us away. Geoffrey and
Beatrice deserved all they got; they had no business to put themselves
into such a position. They had defied the customs of their world, and
the world avenged itself upon them and their petty passions. What
happens to the worm that tries to burrow on the highways? Grinding
wheels and crushing feet; these are its portion. Beatrice and Geoffrey
point a moral and adorn a tale. So far as we can see and judge there
was no need for them to have plunged into that ever-running river of
human pain. Let them struggle and drown, and let those who are on the
bank learn wisdom from the sight, and hold out no hand to help them.

Geoffrey drew a ring from his finger and gave it to his love. It was a
common flat-sided silver ring that had been taken from the grave of a
Roman soldier: one peculiarity it had, however; on its inner surface
were roughly cut the words, "ave atque vale." Greeting and farewell!
It was a fitting gift to pass between people in their position.
Beatrice, trembling sorely, whispered that she would wear it on her
heart, upon her hand she could not put it yet awhile--it might be
recognised.

Then thrice did they embrace there upon the desolate shore, once, as
it were, for past joy, once for present pain, and once for future
hope, and parted. There was no talk of after meetings--they felt them
to be impossible, at any rate for many years. How could they meet as
indifferent friends? Too much they loved for that. It was a final
parting, than which death had been less dreadful--for Hope sits ever
by the bed of death--and misery crushed them to the earth.



He left her, and happiness went out of his life as at nightfall the
daylight goes out of the day. Well, at least he had his work to go to.
But Beatrice, poor woman, what had she?

Geoffrey left her. When he had gone some thirty paces he turned again
and gazed his last upon her. There she stood or rather leant, her hand
resting against the wet rock, looking after him with her wide grey
eyes. Even through the drizzling rain he could see the gleam of her
rich hair, the marking of her lovely face, and the carmine of her
lips. She motioned to him to go on. He went, and when he had traversed
a hundred paces looked round once more. She was still there, but now
her face was a blur, and again the great white gull hovered about her
head.

Then the mist swept up and hid her.



Ah, Beatrice, with all your brains you could never learn those simple
principles necessary to the happiness of woman; principles inherited
through a thousand generations of savage and semi-civilized
ancestresses. To accept the situation and the master that situation
brings with it--this is the golden rule of well-being. Not to put out
the hand of your affection further than you can draw it back, this is
another, at least not until you are quite sure that its object is well
within your grasp. If by misfortune, or the anger of the Fates, you
are endowed with those deeper qualities, those extreme capacities of
self-sacrificing affection, such as ruined your happiness, Beatrice,
keep them in stock; do not expose them to the world. The world does
not believe in them; they are inconvenient and undesirable; they are
even immoral. What the world wants, and very rightly, in a person of
your attractiveness is quiet domesticity of character, not the
exhibition of attributes which though they might qualify you for the
rank of heroine in a Greek drama, are nowadays only likely to qualify
you for the reprobation of society.

What? you would rather keep your love, your reprehensible love which
never can be satisfied, and bear its slings and arrows, and die
hugging a shadow to your heart, straining your eyes into the darkness
of that beyond whither you shall go--murmuring with your pale lips
that /there/ you will find reason and fulfilment? Why it is folly.
What ground have you to suppose that you will find anything of the
sort? Go and take the opinion of some scientific person of eminence
upon this infatuation of yours and those vague visions of glory that
shall be. He will explain it clearly enough, will show you that your
love itself is nothing but a natural passion, acting, in your case, on
a singularly sensitive and etherealised organism. Be frank with him,
tell him of your secret hopes. He will smile tenderly, and show you
how those also are an emanation from a craving heart, and the innate
superstitions of mankind. Indeed he will laugh and illustrate the
absurdity of the whole thing by a few pungent examples of what would
happen if these earthly affections could be carried beyond the grave.
Take what you can /now/ will be the burden of his song, and for
goodness' sake do not waste your precious hours in dreams of a To Be.

Beatrice, the world does not want your spirituality. It is not a
spiritual world; it has no clear ideas upon the subject--it pays its
religious premium and works off its aspirations at its weekly church
going, and would think the person a fool who attempted to carry
theories of celestial union into an earthly rule of life. It can
sympathise with Lady Honoria; it can hardly sympathise with /you/.

And yet you will still choose this better part: you will still "live
and love, and lose."

 "With blinding tears and passionate beseeching,
  And outstretched arms through empty silence reaching."

Then, Beatrice, have your will, sow your seed of tears, and take your
chance. You may find that you were right and the worldlings wrong, and
you may reap a harvest beyond the grasp of their poor imaginations.
And if you find that they are right and /you/ are wrong, what will it
matter to you who sleep? For of this at least you are sure. If there
is no future for such earthly love as yours, then indeed there is none
for the children of this world and all their troubling.



                             CHAPTER XXIV

                     LADY HONORIA TAKES THE FIELD

Geoffrey hurried to the Vicarage to fetch his baggage and say good-
bye. He had no time for breakfast, and he was glad of it, for he could
not have eaten a morsel to save his life. He found Elizabeth and her
father in the sitting-room.

"Why, where have you been this wet morning, Mr. Bingham?" said Mr.
Granger.

"I have been for a walk with Miss Beatrice; she is coming home by the
village," he answered. "I don't mind rain, and I wanted to get as much
fresh air as I could before I go back to the mill. Thank you--only a
cup of tea--I will get something to eat as I go."

"How kind of him," reflected Mr. Granger; "no doubt he has been
speaking to Beatrice again about Owen Davies."

"Oh, by the way," he added aloud, "did you happen to hear anybody
moving in the house last night, Mr. Bingham, just when the storm was
at its height? First of all a door slammed so violently that I got up
to see what it was, and as I came down the passage I could almost have
sworn that I saw something white go into the spare room. But my candle
went out and by the time that I had found a light there was nothing to
be seen."

"A clear case of ghosts," said Geoffrey indifferently. It was indeed a
"case of ghosts," and they would, he reflected, haunt him for many a
day.

"How very odd," put in Elizabeth vivaciously, her keen eyes fixed
intently on his face. "Do you know I thought that I twice saw the door
of our room open and shut in the most mysterious fashion. I think that
Beatrice must have something to do with it; she is so uncanny in her
ways."

Geoffrey never moved a muscle, he was trained to keep his countenance.
Only he wondered how much this woman knew. She must be silenced
somehow.

"Excuse me for changing the subject," he said, "but my time is short,
and I have none to spare to hunt the 'Vicarage Ghost.' By the way,
there's a good title for somebody. Mr. Granger, I believe that I may
speak of business matters before Miss Elizabeth?"

"Certainly, Mr. Bingham," said the clergyman; "Elizabeth is my right
hand, and has the best business head in Bryngelly."

Geoffrey thought that this was very evident, and went on. "I only want
to say this. If you get into any further difficulties with your
rascally tithe-payers, mind and let me know. I shall always be glad to
help you while I can. And now I must be going."

He spoke thus for two reasons. First, naturally enough, he meant to
make it his business to protect Beatrice from the pressure of poverty,
and well knew that it would be useless to offer her direct assistance.
Secondly, he wished to show Elizabeth that it would not be to the
advantage of her family to quarrel with him. If she /had/ seen a
ghost, perhaps this fact would make her reticent on the subject. He
did not know that she was playing a much bigger game for her own hand,
a game of which the stakes were thousands a year, and that she was
moreover mad with jealousy and what, in such a woman, must pass for
love.

Elizabeth made no comment on his offer, and before Mr. Granger's
profuse thanks were nearly finished, Geoffrey was gone.



Three weeks passed at Bryngelly, and Elizabeth still held her hand.
Beatrice, pale and spiritless, went about her duties as usual.
Elizabeth never spoke to her in any sense that could awaken her
suspicions, and the ghost story was, or appeared to be, pretty well
forgotten. But at last an event occurred that caused Elizabeth to take
the field. One day she met Owen Davies walking along the beach in the
semi-insane way which he now affected. He stopped, and, without
further ado, plunged into conversation.

"I can't bear it any longer," he said wildly, throwing up his arms. "I
saw her yesterday, and she cut me short before I could speak a word. I
have prayed for patience and it will not come, only a Voice seemed to
say to me that I must wait ten days more, ten short days, and then
Beatrice, my beautiful Beatrice, would be my wife at last."

"If you go on in this way, Mr. Davies," said Elizabeth sharply, her
heart filled with jealous anger, "you will soon be off your head. Are
you not ashamed of yourself for making such a fuss about a girl's
pretty face? If you want to get married, marry somebody else."

"Marry somebody else," he said dreamily; "I don't know anybody else
whom I could marry except you, and you are not Beatrice."

"No," answered Elizabeth angrily, "I should hope that I have more
sense, and if you wanted to marry me you would have to set about it in
a different way from this. I am not Beatrice, thank Heaven, but I am
her sister, and I warn you that I know more about her than you do. As
a friend I warn you to be careful. Supposing that Beatrice were not
worthy of you, you would not wish to marry her, would you?"

Now Owen Davies was at heart somewhat afraid of Elizabeth, like most
other people who had the privilege of her acquaintance. Also, apart
from matters connected with his insane passion, he was very fairly
shrewd. He suspected Elizabeth of something, he did not know of what.

"No, no, of course not," he said. "Of course I would not marry her if
she was not fit to be my wife--but I must know that first, before I
talk of marrying anybody else. Good afternoon, Miss Elizabeth. It will
soon be settled now; it cannot go on much longer now. My prayers will
be answered, I know they will."

"You are right there, Owen Davies," thought Elizabeth, as she looked
after him with ineffable bitterness, not to say contempt. "Your
prayers shall be answered in a way that will astonish you. You shall
not marry Beatrice, and you shall marry /me/. The fish has been on the
line long enough, now I must begin to pull in."

Curiously enough it never really occurred to Elizabeth that Beatrice
herself might prove to be the true obstacle to the marriage she
plotted to prevent. She knew that her sister was fond of Geoffrey
Bingham, but, when it came to the point that she would absolutely
allow her affection to interfere with so glorious a success in life,
she never believed for one moment. Of course she thought it was
possible that if Beatrice could get possession of Geoffrey she might
prefer to do so, but failing him, judging from her own low and vulgar
standard, Elizabeth was convinced that she would take Owen. It did not
seem possible that what was so precious in her own eyes might be
valueless and even hateful to those of her sister. As for that little
midnight incident, well, it was one thing and marriage was another.
People forget such events when they marry; sometimes even they marry
in order to forget them.

Yes, she must strike, but how? Elizabeth had feelings like other
people. She did not mind ruining her sister and rival, but she would
very much prefer it should not be known that hers was the hand to cut
her down. Of course, if the worst came to the worst, she must do it.
Meanwhile, might not a substitute be found--somebody in whom the act
would seem not one of vengeance, but of virtue? Ah! she had it: Lady
Honoria! Who could be better for such a purpose than the cruelly
injured wife? But then how should she communicate the facts to her
ladyship without involving herself? Again she hit upon a device much
favoured by such people--"un vieux truc mais toujours bon"--the
pristine one of an anonymous letter, which has the startling merit of
not committing anybody to anything. An anonymous letter, to all
appearance written by a servant: it was the very thing! Most likely it
would result in a searching inquiry by Lady Honoria, in which event
Elizabeth, of course against her will, would be forced to say what she
knew; almost certainly it would result in a quarrel between husband
and wife, which might induce the former to show his hand, or even to
take some open step as regards Beatrice. She was sorry for Geoffrey,
against whom she had no ill feeling, but it could not be helped; he
must be sacrificed.

That very evening she wrote her letter and sent it to be posted by an
old servant living in London. It was a master-piece in its way,
especially phonetically. This precious epistle, which was most
exceedingly ill writ in a large coarse hand, ran thus:

 "My Ladi,--My consence druvs me to it, much again my will. I've
  tried hard, my ladi, not to speek, first acorse of miss B. as i
  heve knowed good and peur and also for the sakes of your evil
  usband that wulf in scheeps cloathin. But when i think on you my
  ladi a lorful legel wife gud and virtus and peur and of the things
  as i hev seen which is enuf to bring a blush to the face of a
  stater, I knows it is my holy dooty to rite your ladishipp as
  follers. Your ladishipp forgif me but on the nite of whittsundey
  last Miss B. Grainger wint after midnite inter the room of your
  bad usband--as I was to mi sham ther to se. Afterward more nor an
  hour, she cum out ain being carred /in his harmes/. And if your
  ladishipp dont believ me, let your ladishipp rite to miss
  elizbeth, as had this same misfortune to see as your tru frend,

                                                        "The Riter."

In due course this charming communication reached Lady Honoria,
bearing a London post-mark. She read and re-read it, and soon mastered
its meaning. Then, after a night's thought, she took the "Riter's"
advice and wrote to Elizabeth, sending her a copy of the letter (her
own), vehemently repudiating all belief in it, and asking for a reply
that should dissipate this foul slander from her mind for ever.

The answer came by return. It was short and artful.

 "Dear Lady Honoria Bingham," it ran, "you must forgive me if I
  decline to answer the questions in your letter. You will easily
  understand that between a desire to preserve a sister's reputation
  and an incapacity (to be appreciated by every Christian) to speak
  other than the truth--it is possible for a person to be placed in
  the most cruel of positions--a position which I am sure will
  command even your sympathy, though under such circumstances I have
  little right to expect any from a wife believing herself to have
  been cruelly wronged. Let me add that nothing short of the
  compulsion of a court of law will suffice to unseal my lips as to
  the details of the circumstances (which are, I trust,
  misunderstood) alluded to in the malicious anonymous letter of
  which you inclose a copy."

That very evening, as the Fates would have it, Lady Honoria and her
husband had a quarrel. As usual, it was about Effie, for on most other
subjects they preserved an armed neutrality. Its details need not be
entered into, but at last Geoffrey, who was in a sadly irritable
condition of mind, fairly lost his temper.

"The fact is," he said, "that you are not fit to look after the child.
You only think of yourself, Honoria."

She turned on him with a dangerous look upon her cold and handsome
face.

"Be careful what you say, Geoffrey. It is you who are not fit to have
charge of Effie. Be careful lest I take her away from you altogether,
as I can if I like."

"What do you mean by that threat?" he asked.

"Do you want to know? Then I will tell you. I understand enough law to
be aware that a wife can get a separation from an unfaithful husband,
and what is more, can take away his children."

"Again I ask what you mean," said Geoffrey, turning cold with anger.

"I mean this, Geoffrey. That Welsh girl is your mistress. She passed
the night of Whit-Sunday in your room, and was carried from it in your
arms."

"It is a lie," he said; "she is nothing of the sort. I do not know who
gave you this information, but it is a slanderous lie, and somebody
shall suffer for it."

"Nobody will suffer for it, Geoffrey, because you will not dare to
stir the matter up--for the girl's sake if not for your own. Can you
deny that you were seen carrying her in your arms from your room on
Whit-Sunday night? Can you deny that you are in love with her?"

"And supposing that I am in love with her, is it to be wondered at,
seeing how you treat me and have treated me for years?" he answered
furiously. "It is utterly false to say that she is my mistress."

"You have not answered my question," said Lady Honoria with a smile of
triumph. "Were you seen carrying that woman in your arms and from your
room at the dead of night? Of course it meant nothing, nothing at all.
Who would dare to asperse the character of this perfect, lovely, and
intellectual schoolmistress? I am not jealous, Geoffrey----"

"I should think not, Honoria, seeing how things are."

"I am not jealous, I repeat, but please understand that I will not
have this go on, in your own interests and mine. Why, what a fool you
must be. Don't you know that a man who has risen, as you have, has a
hundred enemies ready to spring on him like a pack of wolves and tear
him to pieces? Why many even of those who fawn upon you and flatter
you to your face, hat