e you bitterly in secret, because you have
succeeded where they have failed. Don't you know also that there are
papers here in London which would give hundreds of pounds for the
chance of publishing such a scandal as this, especially against a
powerful political opponent. Let it once come out that this obscure
girl is your mistress----"

"Honoria, I tell you she is nothing of the sort. It is true I carried
her from my room in a fainting fit, but she came there in her sleep."

Lady Honoria laughed. "Really, Geoffrey, I wonder that you think it
worth while to tell me such nonsense. Keep it for the divorce court,
if ever we get there, and see what a jury says to it. Look here; be
sensible. I am not a moralist, and I am not going to play the outraged
wife unless you force me to it. I do not mean to take any further
notice of this interesting little tale as against you. But if you go
on with it, beware! I will not be made to look a fool. If you are
going to be ruined you can be ruined by yourself. I warn you frankly,
that at the first sign of it, I shall put myself in the right by
commencing proceedings against you. Now, of course, I know this, that
in the event of a smash, you would be glad enough to be rid of me in
order that you might welcome your dear Beatrice in my place. But there
are two things to remember: first, that you could not marry her,
supposing you to be idiot enough to wish to do so, because I should
only get a judicial separation, and you would still have to support
me. Secondly, if I go, Effie goes with me, for I have a right to claim
her at law; and that fact, my dear Geoffrey, makes me mistress of the
situation, because I do not suppose that you would part with Effie
even for the sake of Miss Beatrice. And now I will leave you to think
it over."

And with a little nod she sailed out of the room, completely
victorious. She was indeed, reflected Geoffrey, "mistress of the
situation." Supposing that she brought a suit against him where would
he be? She must have evidence, or she would not have known the story.
The whole drama had clearly been witnessed by someone, probably either
by Elizabeth or the servant girl, and that some one had betrayed it to
Honoria and possibly to others. The thought made him sick. He was a
man of the world, and a practical lawyer, and though, indeed, they
were innocent, he knew that under the circumstances few would be found
to believe it. At the very best there must be a terrible and shocking
scandal, and Beatrice would lose her good name. He placed himself in
the position of counsel for the petitioner in a like case, and thought
how he would crush and crumple such a defence in his address to the
jury. A probable tale forsooth!

Undoubtedly, too, Honoria would be acting wisely from her point of
view. Public sympathy would be with her throughout. He knew that, as
it was, he was believed generally to owe much of his success to his
handsome and high-born wife. Now it would be said that he had used her
as a ladder and then thrown her over. With all this, however, he might
cope; he could even bear with the vulgar attacks of a vulgar press,
and the gibes and jeers of his political and personal enemies, but to
lose Effie he could not bear. And if such a case were brought against
him it was almost certain that he would lose her, for, if he was
worsted, custody of the child would be given to the injured wife.

Then there was Beatrice to be considered. The same malicious tongue
that had revealed this matter to Honoria would probably reveal it to
the rest of the world, and even if he escaped the worst penalties of
outraged morality, they would certainly be wreaked upon her.
Beatrice's reputation would be blasted, her employment lost, and her
life made a burden to her. Yes, decidedly, Honoria had the best of the
position; decidedly, also, she spoke words of weight and common sense.

What was to be done? Was there no way out of it? All that night as
Geoffrey sat in the House, his arms folded on his breast, and to
appearance intently listening to the long harangues of the Opposition,
this question haunted him. He argued the situation out this way and
that way, till at the last he came to a conclusion. Either he must
wait for the scandal to leak out, let Beatrice be ruined, and direct
his efforts to the softening of Honoria, and generally to self-
preservation, or he must take the bull by the horns, must abandon his
great career and his country and seek refuge in another land, say
America, taking Beatrice and Effie with him. Once the child was out of
the jurisdiction, of course no court could force her from him.

Of the two courses, even in so far as he himself was concerned, what
between the urgency of the matter and the unceasing pressure of his
passion, Geoffrey inclined to the latter. The relations between
himself and Honoria had for years been so strained, so totally
different from those which should exist between man and wife, that
they greatly mitigated in his mind the apparent iniquity of such a
step. Nor would he feel much compunction at removing the child from
her mother, for there was no love lost between the two, and as time
went on he guessed shrewdly there would be less and less. For the
rest, he had some seventeen thousand pounds in hand; he would take
half and leave Honoria half. He knew that he could always earn a
living wherever he went, and probably much more than a living, and of
whatever he earned a strict moiety should be paid to Honoria. But
first and above everything, there was Beatrice to be considered. She
must be saved, even if he ruined himself to save her.

Lady Honoria, it is scarcely necessary to say, had little idea that
she was driving her husband to such dangerous and determined councils.
She wanted to frighten Geoffrey, not to lose him and all he meant to
her; this was the last thing that she would wish to do. She did not
greatly care about the Beatrice incident, but her shrewd common sense
told her that it might well be used as an engine to ruin them all.
Therefore she spoke as she did speak, though in reality matters would
have to be bad indeed before she sought the aid of a court of law,
where many things concerning herself might come to the light of day
which she would prefer to leave in darkness.

Nor did she stop here; she determined to attack Geoffrey's position in
another way, namely, through Beatrice herself. For a long time Honoria
hesitated as to the method of this attack. She had some knowledge of
the world and of character, and from what she knew of Beatrice she
came to the sound conclusion that she was not a woman to be
threatened, but rather one to be appealed to. So after much thought
she wrote to her thus:--

 "A story, which I still hesitate to believe, has come to me by
  means of anonymous letters, as to your conduct with my husband. I
  do not wish to repeat it now, further than to say that, if true,
  it establishes circumstances which leave no doubt as to the
  existence of relations so intimate between you as to amount to
  guilt. It may not be true or it may, in which latter event I wish
  to say this: With your morality I have nothing to do; it is your
  affair. Nor do I wish to plead to you as an injured wife or to
  reproach you, for there are things too wicked for mere reproach.
  But I will say this: if the story is true, I must presume that you
  have some affection for the partner of your shame. I put myself
  out of the question, and in the name of that affection, however
  guilty it may be, I ask you to push matters no further. To do so
  will be to bring its object to utter ruin. /If you care for him,
  sever all connection with him utterly and for ever./ Otherwise he
  will live to curse and hate you. Should you neglect this advice,
  and should the facts that I have heard become public property, I
  warn you, as I have already warned him, that in self-preservation
  and for the sake of self-respect, I shall be forced to appeal to
  the law for my remedy. Remember that his career is at stake, and
  that in losing it and me he will lose also his child. Remember
  that if this comes about it will be through /you/. Do not answer
  this, it will do no good, for I shall naturally put no faith in
  your protestations, but if you are in any way or measure guilty of
  this offence, appealing to you as one woman to another, and for
  the sake of the man who is dear to both, I say do your best to
  redeem the evil, /by making all further communication between
  yourself and him an impossibility/.                        H.B."

It was a clever letter; Lady Honoria could not have devised one more
powerful to work on a woman like Beatrice. The same post that took it
to her took another from Geoffrey himself. It was long, though
guarded, and need not be quoted in its entirety, but it put the whole
position before her in somewhat veiled language, and ended by saying,
"Marriage I cannot give you, only life-long love. In other
circumstances to offer this would be an insult, but if things should
be as a I fear, it is worth your consideration. I do not say to you
/come/, I say come /if you wish/. No, Beatrice, I will not put this
cruel burden of decision upon you. I say /come!/ I do not command you
to come, because I promised to leave you uninfluenced. But I pray you
to do so. Let us put an end to this wretchedness, and count the world
well lost as our price of love. Come, dearest Beatrice--to leave me no
more till death. I put my life in your hands; if you take it up,
whatever trouble you may have to face, you will never lose my
affection or esteem. Do not think of me, think of yourself. You have
given me your love as you once gave me my life. I owe something in
return; I cannot see you shamed and make no offer of reparation.
Indeed, so far as I am concerned, I shall think all I lose as nothing
compared to what I gain in gaining you. Will you come? If so, we will
leave this country and begin afresh elsewhere. After all, it matters
little, and will matter less when everything is said and done. My life
has for years been but as an unwholesome dream. The one real thing,
the one happy thing that I have found in it has been our love. Do not
let us throw it away, Beatrice."

By return of post he received this answer written in pencil.

 "No, dear Geoffrey. Things must take their course.--B."

That was all.



                             CHAPTER XXV

                      ELIZABETH SHOWS HER TEETH

Hard had been Beatrice's hours since that grey morning of separation.
She must bear all the inner wretchedness of her lot; she must conceal
her grief, must suffer the slings and arrows of Elizabeth's sharp
tongue, and strive to keep Owen Davies at a distance. Indeed, as the
days went on, this last task grew more and more portentous. The man
was quite unmanageable; his passion, which was humiliating and hateful
to Beatrice, became the talk of the place. Everybody knew of it,
except her father, and even his eyes began to be opened.

One night--it was the same upon which Geoffrey and Honoria
respectively had posted their letters to Beatrice--anybody looking
into the little room at Bryngelly Castle, which served its owner for
all purposes except that of sleeping, would have witnessed a very
strange sight. Owen Davies was walking to and fro--walking rapidly
with wild eyes and dishevelled hair. At the turn of each length of the
apartment he would halt, and throwing his arms into the air ejaculate:

"Oh, God, hear me, and give me my desire! Oh, God, answer me!"

For two long hours thus he walked and thus cried aloud, till at length
he sank panting and exhausted into a chair. Suddenly he raised his
head, and appeared to listen intently.

"The Voice," he said aloud; "the Voice again. What does it say?
To-morrow, to-morrow I must speak; and I shall win her."

He sprang up with a shout, and once more began his wild march. "Oh,
Beatrice!" he said, "to-morrow you will promise to marry me; the Voice
says so, and soon, soon, perhaps in one short month, you will be my
own--mine only! Geoffrey Bingham shall not come between us then, for I
will watch you day and night. You shall be my very, very own--my own
beautiful Beatrice," and he stretched out his arms and clasped at the
empty air--a crazy and unpleasant sight to see.

And so he walked and spoke till the dawn was grey in the east. This
occurred on the Friday night. It was on the following morning that
Beatrice, the unfortunate and innocent object of these amorous
invocations, received the two letters. She had gone to the post-office
on her way to the school, on the chance of there being a note from
Geoffrey. Poor woman, his letters were the one bright thing in her
life. From motives of prudence they were written in the usual semi-
formal style, but she was quick to read between the lines, and,
moreover, they came from his dear hand.

There was the letter sure enough, and another in a woman's writing.
She recognised the hand as that of Lady Honoria, which she had often
seen on envelopes directed to Geoffrey, and a thrill of fear shot
through her. She took the letters, and walking as quickly as she could
to the school, locked herself in her own little room, for it was not
yet nine o'clock, and looked at them with a gathering terror. What was
in them? Why did Lady Honoria write to her? Which should she read
first? In a moment Beatrice had made up her mind. She would face the
worst at once. With a set face she opened Lady Honoria's letter,
unfolded it, and read. We already know its contents. As her mind
grasped them her lips grew ashy white, and by the time that the
horrible thing was done she was nigh to fainting.

Anonymous letters! oh, who could have done this cruel thing?
Elizabeth, it must be Elizabeth, who saw everything, and thus stabbed
her in the back. Was it possible that her own sister could treat her
so? She knew that Elizabeth disliked her; she could never fathom the
cause, still she knew the fact. But if this were her doing, then she
must hate her, and most bitterly; and what had she done to earn such
hate? And now Geoffrey was in danger on her account, danger of ruin,
and how could she prevent it? This was her first idea. Most people
might have turned to their own position and been content to leave
their lover to fight his own battle. But Beatrice thought little of
herself. He was in danger, and how could she protect him? Why here in
the letter was the answer! "If you care for him sever all connection
with him utterly, and for ever. Otherwise, he will live to curse and
hate you." No, no! Geoffrey would never do that. But Lady Honoria was
quite right; in his interest, for his sake, she must sever all
connection with him--sever it utterly and for ever. But how--how?

She thrust the letter into her dress--a viper would have been a more
welcome guest--and opened Geoffrey's.

It told the same tale, but offered a different solution. The tears
started to her eyes as she read his offer to take her to him for good
and all, and go away with her to begin life afresh. It seemed a
wonderful thing to Beatrice that he should be willing to sacrifice so
much upon such a worthless altar as her love--a wonderful and most
generous thing. She pressed the senseless paper to her heart, then
kissed it again and again. But she never thought of yielding to this
great temptation, never for one second. He prayed her to come, but
that she would not do while her will remained. What, /she/ bring
Geoffrey to ruin? No, she had rather starve in the streets or perish
by slow torture. How could he ever think that she would consent to
such a scheme? Indeed she never would; she had brought enough trouble
on him already. But oh, she blessed him for that letter. How deeply
must he love her when he could offer to do this for her sake!

Hark! the children were waiting; she must go and teach. The letter,
Geoffrey's dear letter, could be answered in the afternoon. So she
thrust it in her breast with the other, but closer to her heart, and
went.



That afternoon as Mr. Granger, in a happy frame of mind--for were not
his debts paid, and had he not found a most convenient way of
providing against future embarrassment?--was engaged peaceably in
contemplating his stock over the gate of his little farm buildings, he
was much astonished suddenly to discover Owen Davies at his elbow.

"How do you do, Mr. Davies?" he said; "how quietly you must have
come."

"Yes," answered Owen absently. "The fact is, I have followed you
because I want to speak to you alone--quite alone."

"Indeed, Mr. Davies--well, I am at your service. What is wrong? You
don't look very well."

"Oh, I am quite well, thank you. I never was better; and there's
nothing wrong, nothing at all. Everything is going to be bright now, I
know that full surely."

"Indeed," said Mr. Granger, again looking at him with a puzzled air,
"and what may you want to see me about? Not but what I am always at
your service, as you know," he added apologetically.

"This," he answered, suddenly seizing the clergyman by the coat in a
way that made him start.

"What--my coat, do you mean?"

"Don't be so foolish, Mr. Granger. No, about Beatrice."

"Oh. indeed, Mr. Davies. Nothing wrong at the school, I hope? I think
that she does her duties to the satisfaction of the committee, though
I admit that the arithmetic----"

"No! no, no! It is not about the school. I don't wish her to go to the
school any more. I love her, Mr. Granger, I love her dearly, and I
want to marry her."

The old man flushed with pleasure. Was it possible? Did he hear
aright? Owen Davies, the richest man in that part of Wales, wanted to
marry his daughter, who had nothing but her beauty. It must be too
good to be true!

"I am indeed flattered," he said. "It is more than she could expect--
not but what Beatrice is very good-looking and very clever," he added
hastily, fearing lest he was detracting from his daughter's market
value.

"Good-looking--clever; she is an angel," murmured Owen.

"Oh, yes, of course she is," said her father, "that is, if a woman--
yes, of course--and what is more, I think she's very fond of you. I
think she is pining for you. I've though so for a long time."

"Is she?" said Owen anxiously. "Then all I have to say is that she
takes a very curious way of showing it. She won't say a word to me;
she puts me off on every occasion. But it will be all right now--all
right now."

"Oh, there, there, Mr. Davies, maids will be maids until they are
wives. We know about all that," said Mr. Granger sententiously.

His would-be son-in-law looked as though he knew very little about it
indeed, although the inference was sufficiently obvious.

"Mr. Granger," he said, seizing his hand, "I want to make Beatrice my
wife--I do indeed."

"Well, I did not suppose otherwise, Mr. Davies."

"If you help me in this I will do whatever you like as to money
matters and that sort of thing, you know. She shall have as fine a
settlement as any woman in Wales. I know that goes a long way with a
father, and I shall raise no difficulties."

"Very right and proper, I am sure," said Mr. Granger, adopting a
loftier tone as he discovered the advantages of his position. "But of
course on such matters I shall take the advice of a lawyer. I daresay
that Mr. Bingham would advise me," he added, "as a friend of the
family, you know. He is a very clever lawyer, and, besides, he
wouldn't charge anything."

"Oh, no, not Mr. Bingham," answered Owen anxiously. "I will do
anything you like, or if you wish to have a lawyer I'll pay the bill
myself. But never mind about that now. Let us settle it with Beatrice
first. Come along at once."

"Eh, but hadn't you better arrange that part of the business
privately?"

"No, no. She always snubs me when I try to speak to her alone. You had
better be there, and Miss Elizabeth too, if she likes. I won't speak
to her again alone. I will speak to her in the face of God and man, as
God directed me to do, and then it will be all right--I know it will."

Mr. Granger stared at him. He was a clergyman of a very practical
sort, and did not quite see what the Power above had to do with Owen
Davies's matrimonial intentions.

"Ah, well," he said, "I see what you mean; marriages are made in
heaven; yes, of course. Well, if you want to get on with the matter, I
daresay that we shall find Beatrice in."

So they walked back to the Vicarage, Mr. Granger exultant and yet
perplexed, for it struck him that there was something a little odd
about the proceeding, and Owen Davies in silence or muttering
occasionally to himself.

In the sitting-room they found Elizabeth.

"Where is Beatrice?" asked her father.

"I don't know," she answered, and at that moment Beatrice, pale and
troubled, walked into the room, like a lamb to the slaughter.

"Ah, Beatrice," said her father, "we were just asking for you."

She glanced round, and with the quick wit of a human animal, instantly
perceived that some new danger threatened her.

"Indeed," she said, sinking into a chair in an access of feebleness
born of fear. "What is it, father?"

Mr. Granger looked at Owen Davies and then took a step towards the
door. It struck him forcibly that this scene should be private to the
two persons principally concerned.

"Don't go," said Owen Davies excitedly, "don't go, either of you; what
I have to say had better be said before you both. I should like to say
it before the whole world; to cry it from the mountain tops."

Elizabeth glared at him fiercely--glared first at him and then at the
innocent Beatrice. Could he be going to propose to her, then? Ah, why
had she hesitated? Why had she not told him the whole truth before?
But the heart of Beatrice, who sat momentarily expecting to be
publicly denounced, grew ever fainter. The waters of desolation were
closing in over her soul.

Mr. Granger sat down firmly and worked himself into the seat of his
chair, as though to secure an additional fixedness of tenure.
Elizabeth set her teeth, and leaned her elbow on the table, holding
her hand so as to shade her face. Beatrice drooped upon her seat like
a fading lily, or a prisoner in the dock. She was opposite to them,
and Owen Davies, his face alight with wild enthusiasm, stood up and
addressed them all like the counsel for the prosecution.

"Last autumn," he began, speaking to Mr. Granger, who might have been
a judge uncertain as to the merits of the case, "I asked your daughter
Beatrice to marry me."

Beatrice gave a sigh, and collected her scattered energies. The storm
had burst at last, and she must face it.

"I asked her to marry me, and she told me to wait a year. I have
waited as long as I could, but I could not wait the whole year. I have
prayed a great deal, and I am bidden to speak."

Elizabeth made a gesture of impatience. She was a person of strong
common sense, and this mixture of religion and eroticism disgusted
her. She also know that the storm had burst, and that /she/ must face
it.

"So I come to tell you that I love your daughter Beatrice, and want to
make her my wife. I have never loved anybody else, but I have loved
her for years; and I ask your consent."

"Very flattering, very flattering, I am sure, especially in these hard
times," said Mr. Granger apologetically, shaking his thin hair down
over his forehead, and then rumpling it up again. "But you see, Mr.
Davies, you don't want to marry me" (here Beatrice smiled faintly)--
"you want to marry my daughter, so you had better ask her direct--at
least I suppose so."

Elizabeth made a movement as though to speak, then changed her mind
and listened.

"Beatrice," said Owen Davies, "you hear. I ask you to marry me."

There was a pause. Beatrice, who had sat quite silent, was gathering
up her strength to answer. Elizabeth, watching her from beneath her
hand, thought that she read upon her face irresolution, softening into
consent. What she really saw was but doubt as to the fittest and most
certain manner of refusal. Like lightning it flashed into Elizabeth's
mind that she must strike now, or hold her hand for ever. If once
Beatrice spoke that fatal "yes," her revelations might be of no avail.
And Beatrice would speak it; she was sure she would. It was a golden
road out of her troubles.

"Stop!" said Elizabeth in a shrill, hard voice. "Stop! I must speak;
it is my duty as a Christian. I must tell the truth. I cannot allow an
honest man to be deceived."

There was an awful pause. Beatrice broke it. Now she saw all the
truth, and knew what was at hand. She placed her hand upon her heart
to still its beating.

"Oh, Elizabeth," she said, "in our dead mother's name----" and she
stopped.

"Yes," answered her sister, "in our dead mother's name, which you have
dishonoured, I will do it. Listen, Owen Davies, and father: Beatrice,
who sits there"--and she pointed at her with her thin hand--"/Beatrice
is a scarlet woman!/"

"I really don't understand," gasped Mr. Granger, while Owen looked
round wildly, and Beatrice sunk her head upon her breast.

"Then I will explain," said Elizabeth, still pointing at her sister.
"She is Geoffrey Bingham's /mistress/. On the night of Whit-Sunday
last she rose from bed and went into his room at one in the morning. I
saw her with my own eyes. Afterwards she was brought back to her bed
in his arms--I saw it with my own eyes, and I heard him kiss her."
(This was a piece of embroidery on Elizabeth's part.) "She is his
lover, and has been in love with him for months. I tell you this, Owen
Davies, because, though I cannot bear to bring disgrace upon our name
and to defile my lips with such a tale, neither can I bear that you
should marry a girl, believing her to be good, when she is what
Beatrice is."

"Then I wish to God that you had held your wicked tongue," said Mr.
Granger fiercely.

"No, father. I have a duty to perform, and I will perform it at any
cost, and however much it pains me. You know that what I say is true.
You heard the noise on the night of Whit-Sunday, and got up to see
what it was. You saw the white figure in the passage--it was Geoffrey
Bingham with Beatrice in his arms. Ah! well may she hang her head. Let
her deny if it she can. Let her deny that she loves him to her shame,
and that she was alone in his room on that night."

Then Beatrice rose and spoke. She was pale as death and more beautiful
in her shame and her despair than ever she had been before; her
glorious eyes shone, and there were deep black lines beneath them.

"My heart is my own," she said, "and I will make no answer to you
about it. Think what you will. For the rest, it is not true. I am not
what Elizabeth tells you that I am. I am /not/ Geoffrey Bingham's
mistress. It is true that I was in his room that night, and it is true
that he carried me back to my own. But it was in my sleep that I went
there, not of my own free will. I awoke there, and fainted when I
woke, and then at once he bore me back."

Elizabeth laughed shrill and loud--it sounded like the cackle of a
fiend.

"In her sleep," she said; "oh, she went there in her sleep!"

"Yes, Elizabeth, in my sleep. You do not believe me, but it is true.
You do not wish to believe me. You wish to bring the sister whom you
should love, who has never offended against you by act or word, to
utter disgrace and ruin. In your cowardly spite you have written
anonymous letters to Lady Honoria Bingham, to prevail upon her to
strike the blow that should destroy her husband and myself, and when
you fear that this has failed, you come forward and openly accuse us.
You do this in the name of Christian duty; in the name of love and
charity, you believe the worst, and seek to ruin us. Shame on you,
Elizabeth! shame on you! and may the same measure that you have meted
out to me never be paid back to you. We are no longer sisters.
Whatever happens, I have done with you. Go your ways."

Elizabeth shrank and quailed beneath her sister's scorn. Even her
venomous hatred could not bear up against the flash of those royal
eyes, and the majesty of that outraged innocence. She gasped and bit
her lip till the blood started, but she said nothing.

Then Beatrice turned to her father, and spoke in another and a
pleading voice, stretching out her arms towards him.

"Oh, father," she said, "at least tell me that /you/ believe me.
Though you may think that I might love to all extremes, surely, having
known me so many years, you cannot think that I would lie even for my
love's sake."

The old man looked wildly round, and shook his head.

"In his room and in his arms," he said. "I saw it, it seems. You, too,
who have never been known to walk in your sleep from a child; and you
will not say that you do not love him--the scoundrel. It is wicked of
Elizabeth--jealousy bitter as the grave. It is wicked of her to tell
the tale; but as it is told, how can I say that I do not believe it?"

Then Beatrice, her cup being full, once more dropped her head, and
turned to go.

"Stop," said Owen Davies in a hoarse voice, and speaking for the first
time. "Hear what /I/ have to say."

She lifted her eyes. "With you, Mr. Davies, I have nothing to do; I am
not answerable to you. Go and help your accomplice," and she pointed
to Elizabeth, "to cry this scandal over the whole world."

"Stop," he said again. "I will speak. I believe that it is true. I
believe that you are Geoffrey Bingham's mistress, curse him! but I do
not care. I am still willing to marry you."

Elizabeth gasped. Was this to be the end of her scheming? Would the
blind passion of this madman prevail over her revelations, and
Beatrice still become his rich and honoured wife, while she was left
poor and disgraced? Oh, it was monstrous! Oh, she had never dreamed of
this!"

"Noble, noble!" murmured Mr. Granger; "noble! God bless you!"

So the position was not altogether beyond recovery. His erring
daughter might still be splendidly married; he might still look
forward to peace and wealth in his old age.

Only Beatrice smiled faintly.

"I thank you," she said. "I am much honoured, but I could never have
married you because I do not love you. You must understand me very
little if you think that I should be the more ready to do so on
account of the danger in which I stand," and she ceased.

"Listen, Beatrice," Owen went on, an evil light shining on his heavy
face, while Elizabeth sat astounded, scarcely able to believe her
ears. "I want you, and I mean to marry you; you are more to me than
all the world. I can give you everything, and you had better yield to
me, and you shall hear no more of this. But if you won't, then this is
what I will do. I will be revenged upon you--terribly revenged."

Beatrice shook her head and smiled again, as though to bid him do his
worst.

"And look, Beatrice," he went on, waxing almost eloquent in his
jealous despair, "I have another argument to urge on you. I will not
only be revenged on you, I will be revenged upon your lover--on this
Geoffrey Bingham."

"/Oh!/" said Beatrice sharply, like one in pain. He had found the way
to move her now, and with the cunning of semi-madness he drove the
point home.

"Yes, you may start--I will. I tell you that I will never rest till I
have ruined him, and I am rich and can do it. I have a hundred
thousand pounds, that I will spend on doing it. I have nothing to
fear, except an action for libel. Oh, I am not a fool, though you
think I am, I know. Well, I can pay for a dozen actions. There are
papers in London that will be glad to publish all this--yes, the whole
story--with plans and pictures too. Just think, Beatrice, what it will
be when all England--yes, and all the world--is gloating over your
shame, and half-a-dozen prints are using the thing for party purposes,
clamouring for the disgrace of the man who ruined you, and whom you
will ruin. He has a fine career; it shall be utterly destroyed. By
God! I will hunt him to his grave, unless you promise to marry me,
Beatrice. Do that, and not a word of this shall be said. Now answer."

Mr. Granger sank back in his chair; this savage play of human passions
was altogether beyond his experience--it overwhelmed him. As for
Elizabeth, she bit her thin fingers, and glared from one to the other.
"He reckons without me," she thought. "He reckons without me--I will
marry him yet."

But Beatrice leant for a moment against the wall and shut her eyes to
think. Oh, she saw it all--the great posters with her name and
Geoffrey's on them, the shameless pictures of her in his arms, the
sickening details, the letters of the outraged matrons, the "Mothers
of ten," and the moral-minded colonels--all, all! She heard the
prurient scream of every male Elizabeth in England; the allusions in
the House--the jeers, the bitter attacks of enemies and rivals. Then
Lady Honoria would begin her suit, and it would all be dragged up
afresh, and Geoffrey's fault would be on every lip, till he was
/ruined/. For herself she did not care; but could she bring this on
one whose only crime was that she had learned to love him? No, no; but
neither could she marry this hateful man. And yet what escape was
there? She flung herself upon her woman's wit, and it did not fail
her. In a few seconds she had thought it all out and made up her mind.

"How can I answer you at a moment's notice, Mr. Davies?" she said. "I
must have time to think it over. To threaten such revenge upon me is
not manly, but I know that you love me, and therefore I excuse it.
Still, I must have time. I am confused."

"What, another year? No, no," he said. "You must answer."

"I do not ask a year or a month. I only ask for one week. If you will
not give me that, then I will defy you, and you may do your worst. I
cannot answer now."

This was a bold stroke, but it told. Mr. Davies hesitated.

"Give the girl a week," said her father to him. "She is not herself."

"Very well; one week, no more," said he.

"I have another stipulation to make," said Beatrice, "You are all to
swear to me that for that week no word of this will pass your mouths;
that for that week I shall not be annoyed or interfered with, or
spoken to on the subject, not by one of you. If at the end of it I
still refuse to accept your terms, you can do your worst, but till
then you must hold your hand."

Owen Davies hesitated; he was suspicious.

"Remember," Beatrice went on, raising her voice, "I am a desperate
woman. I may turn at bay, and do something which you do not expect,
and that will be very little to the advantage of any of you. Do you
swear?"

"Yes," said Owen Davies.

Then Beatrice looked at Elizabeth, and Elizabeth looked at her. She
saw that the matter had taken a new form. She saw what her jealous
folly had hitherto hidden from her--that Beatrice did not mean to
marry Owen Davies, that she was merely gaining time to execute some
purpose of her own. What this might be Elizabeth cared little so that
it did not utterly extinguish chances that at the moment seemed faint
enough. She did not want to push matters against her sister, or her
lover Geoffrey, beyond the boundary of her own interests. Beatrice
should have her week, and be free from all interference so far as she
was concerned. She realised now that it was too late how great had
been her error. Oh, if only she had sought Beatrice's confidence at
first! But it had seemed to her impossible that she would really throw
away such an opportunity in life.

"Certainly I promise, Beatrice," she said mildly. "I do not swear, for
'swear not at all,' you know. I only did what I thought my duty in
warning Mr. Davies. If he chooses to go on with the matter, it is no
affair of mine. I had no wish to hurt you, or Mr. Bingham. I acted
solely from my religious convictions."

"Oh, stop talking religion, Elizabeth, and practise it a little more!"
said her father, for once in his life stirred out of his feeble
selfishness. "We have all undertaken to keep our mouths sealed for
this week."

Then Beatrice left the room, and after her went Owen Davies without
another word.

"Elizabeth," said her father, rising, "you are a wicked woman! What
did you do this for?"

"Do you want to know, father?" she said coolly; "then I will tell you.
Because I mean to marry Owen Davies myself. We must all look after
ourselves in this world, you know; and that is a maxim which you never
forget, for one. I mean to marry him; and though I seem to have
failed, marry him I will, yet! And now you know all about it; and if
you are not a fool, you will hold your tongue and let me be!" and she
went also, leaving him alone.

Mr. Granger held up his hands in astonishment. He was a selfish,
money-seeking old man, but he felt that he did not deserve to have
such a daughter as this.



                             CHAPTER XXVI

                         WHAT BEATRICE SWORE

Beatrice went to her room, but the atmosphere of the place seemed to
stifle her. Her brain was reeling, she must go out into the air--away
from her tormentors. She had not yet answered Geoffrey's letter, and
it must be answered by this post, for there was none on Sunday. It was
half-past four--the post went out at five; if she was going to write,
she should do so at once, but she could not do so here. Besides, she
must find time for thought. Ah, she had it; she would take her canoe
and paddle across the bay to the little town of Coed and write her
letter there. The post did not leave Coed till half-past six. She put
on her hat and jacket, and taking a stamp, a sheet of paper, and an
envelope with her, slipped quietly from the house down to old Edward's
boat-house where the canoe was kept. Old Edward was not there himself,
but his son was, a boy of fourteen, and by his help Beatrice was soon
safely launched. The sea glittered like glass, and turning southwards,
presently she was paddling round the shore of the island on which the
Castle stood towards the open bay.

As she paddled her mind cleared, and she was able to consider the
position. It was bad enough. She saw no light, darkness hemmed her in.
But at least she had a week before her, and meanwhile what should she
write to Geoffrey?

Then, as she thought, a great temptation assailed Beatrice, and for
the first time her resolution wavered. Why should she not accept
Geoffrey's offer and go away with him--far away from all this misery?
Gladly would she give her life to spend one short year at his dear
side. She had but to say the word, and he would take her to him, and
in a month from now they would be together in some foreign land,
counting the world well lost, as he had said. Doubtless in time Lady
Honoria would get a divorce, and they might be married. A day might
even come when all this would seem like a forgotten night of storm and
fear; when, surrounded by the children of their love, they would wend
peaceably, happily, through the evening of their days towards a bourne
robbed of half its terrors by the fact that they would cross it hand-
in-hand.

Oh, that would be well for her; but would it be well for him? When the
first months of passion had passed by, would he not begin to think of
all that he had thrown away for the sake of a woman's love? Would not
the burst of shame and obloquy which would follow him to the remotest
corners of the earth wear away his affection, till at last, as Lady
Honoria said, he learned to curse and hate her. And if it did not--if
he still loved her through it all--as, being what he was, he well
might do--could she be the one to bring this ruin on him? Oh, it would
have been more kind to let him drown on that night of the storm, when
fate first brought them together to their undoing.

No, no; once and for all, once and for ever, she would /not/ do it.
Cruel as was her strait, heavy as was her burden, not one feather's
weight of it should he carry, if by any means in her poor power she
could hold it from his back. She would not even tell him of what had
happened--at any rate, not now. It would distress him; he might take
some desperate step; it was almost certain that he would do so. Her
answer must be very short.

She was quite close to Coed now, and the water lay calm as a pond. So
calm was it that she drew the sheet of paper and the envelope from her
pocket, and leaning forward, rested them on the arched covering of the
canoe, and pencilled those words which we have already read.

 "No, dear Geoffrey. Things must take their course.--B."

Thus she wrote. Then she paddled to the shore. A fisherman standing on
the beach caught her canoe and pulled it up. Leaving it in his charge,
she went into the quaint little town, directed and posted her letter,
and bought some wool. It was an excuse for having been there should
any one ask questions. After that she returned to her canoe. The
fisherman was standing by it. She offered him sixpence for his
trouble, but he would not take it.

"No, miss," he said, "thanking you kindly--but we don't often get a
peep at such sweet looks. It's worth sixpence to see you, it is. But,
miss, if I may make so bold as to say so, it isn't safe for you to
cruise about in that craft, any ways not alone."

Beatrice thanked him and blushed a little. Vaguely it occurred to her
that she must have more than a common share of beauty, when a rough
man could be so impressed with it. That was what men loved women for,
their beauty, as Owen Davies loved and desired her for this same cause
and this only.

Perhaps it was the same with Geoffrey--no, she did not believe it. He
loved her for other things besides her looks. Only if she had not been
beautiful, perhaps he would not have begun to love her, so she was
thankful for her eyes and hair, and form.

Could folly and infatuation go further? This woman in the darkest hour
of her bottomless and unhorizoned despair, with conscience gnawing at
her heart, with present misery pressing on her breast, and shame to
come hanging over her like a thunder cloud, could yet feel thankful
that she had won this barren love, the spring of all her woe. Or was
her folly deep wisdom in disguise?--is there something divine in a
passion that can so override and defy the worst agonies of life?

She was at sea again now, and evening was falling on the waters softly
as a dream. Well, the letter was posted. Would it be the last, she
wondered? It seemed as though she must write no more letters. And what
was to be done? She would /not/ marry Owen Davies--never would she do
it. She could not so shamelessly violate her feelings, for Beatrice
was a woman to whom death would be preferable to dishonour, however
legal. No, for her own sake she would not be soiled with that
disgrace. Did she do this, she would hold herself the vilest of the
vile. And still less would she do it for Geoffrey's sake. Her instinct
told her what he would feel at such a thing, though he might never say
a word. Surely he would loathe and despise her. No, that idea was done
with--utterly done with.

Then what remained to her? She would not fly with Geoffrey, since to
do so would be to ruin him. She would not marry Owen, and not to do so
would still be to ruin Geoffrey. She was no fool, she was innocent in
act, but she knew that her innocence would indeed be hard to prove--
even her own father did not believe in it, and her sister would openly
accuse her to the world. What then should she do? Should she hide
herself in some remote half-civilised place, or in London? It was
impossible; she had no money, and no means of getting any. Besides,
they would hunt her out, both Owen Davies and Geoffrey would track her
to the furthest limits of the earth. And would not the former think
that Geoffrey had spirited her away, and at once put his threats into
execution? Obviously he would. There was no hope in that direction.
Some other plan must be found or her lover would still be ruined.

So argued Beatrice, still thinking not of herself, but of Geoffrey, of
that beloved one who was more to her than all the world, more, a
thousand times, than her own safety or well-being. Perhaps she
overrated the matter. Owen Davies, Lady Honoria, and even Elizabeth
might have done all they threatened; the first of them, perhaps the
first two of them, certainly would have done so. But still Geoffrey
might have escaped destruction. Public opinion, or the sounder part of
it, is sensibly enough hard to move in such a matter, especially when
the person said to have been wronged is heart and soul on the side of
him who is said to have wronged her.

Moreover there might have been ways out of it, of which she knew
nothing. But surrounded as she was by threatening powers--by Lady
Honoria threatening actions in the Courts on one side, by Owen Davies
threatening exposure on another, by Elizabeth ready and willing to
give the most damning evidence on the third, to Beatrice the worst
consequences seemed an absolutely necessary sequence. Then there was
her own conscience arrayed against her. This particular charge was a
lie, but it was not a lie that she loved Geoffrey, and to her the two
things seemed very much the same thing. Hers was not a mind to draw
fine distinctions in such matters. /Se posuit ut culpabilem/: she
"placed herself as guilty," as the old Court rolls put it in miserable
Latin, and this sense of guilt disarmed her. She did not realise the
enormous difference recognised by the whole civilised world between
thought and act, between disposing mind and inculpating deed. Beatrice
looked at the question more from the scriptural point of view,
remembering that in the Bible such fine divisions are expressly stated
to be distinctions without a difference.

Had she gone to Geoffrey and told him her whole story it is probable
that he would have defied the conspiracy, faced it out, and possibly
come off victorious. But, with that deadly reticence of which women
alone are capable, this she did not and would not do. Sweet loving
woman that she was, she would not burden him with her sorrows, she
would bear them alone--little reckoning that thereby she was laying up
a far, far heavier load for him to carry through all his days.

So Beatrice accepted the statements of the plaintiff's attorney for
gospel truth, and from that false standpoint she drew her auguries.



Oh, she was weary! How lovely was the falling night, see how it
brooded on the seas! and how clear were the waters--there a fish
passed by her paddle--and there the first start sprang into the sky!
If only Geoffrey were here to see it with her. Geoffrey! she had lost
him; she was alone in the world now--alone with the sea and the stars.
Well, they were better than men--better than all men except one.
Theirs was a divine companionship, and it soothed her. Ah, how hateful
had been Elizabeth's face, more hateful even than the half-crazed
cunning of Owen Davies, when she stretched her hand towards her and
called her "a scarlet woman." It was so like Elizabeth, this mixing up
of Bible terms with her accusation. And after all perhaps it was true.
--What was it, "Though thy sins be as scarlet, yet shall they be white
as snow." But that was only if one repented. She did not repent, not
in the least. Conscience, it is true, reproached her with a breach of
temporal and human law, but her heart cried that such love as she had
given was immortal and divine, and therefore set beyond the little
bounds of time and man. At any rate, she loved Geoffrey and was proud
and glad to love him. The circumstances were unfortunate, but she did
not make the world or its social arrangements any more than she had
made herself, and she could not help that. The fact remained, right or
wrong--she loved him, loved him!

How clear were the waters! What was that wild dream which she had
dreamt about herself sitting at the bottom of the sea, and waiting for
him--till at last he came. Sitting at the bottom of the sea--why did
it strike her so strangely--what unfamiliar thought did it waken in
her mind? Well, and why not? It would be pleasant there, better at any
rate than on the earth. But things cannot be ended so; one is burdened
with the flesh, and one must wear it till it fails. Why must she wear
it? Was not the sea large enough to hide her bones? Look now, she had
but to slip over the edge of the canoe, slip without a struggle into
those mighty arms, and in a few short minutes it would all be done and
gone!

She gasped as the thought struck home. /Here/ was the answer to her
questionings, the same answer that is given to every human troubling,
to all earthly hopes and fears and strivings. One stroke of that black
knife and everything would be lost or found. Would it be so great a
thing to give her life for Geoffrey?--why she had well nigh done as
much when she had known him but an hour, and now that he was all in
all, oh, would it be so great a thing? If she died--died secretly,
swiftly, surely--Geoffrey would be saved; they would not trouble him
then, there would be no one to trouble about: Owen Davies could not
marry her then, Geoffrey could not ruin himself over her, Elizabeth
could pursue her no further. It would be well to do this thing for
Geoffrey, and he would always love her, and beyond that black curtain
there might be something better.

They said that it was sin. Yes, it might be sin to act thus for
oneself alone. But to do it for another--how of that! Was not the
Saviour whom they preached a Man of Sacrifice? Would it be a sin in
her to die for Geoffrey, to sacrifice herself that Geoffrey might go
free?

Oh, it would be no great merit. Her life was not so easy that she
should fear this pure embrace. It would be better, far better, than to
marry Owen Davies, than to desecrate their love and teach Geoffrey to
despise her. And how else could she ward this trouble from him except
by her death, or by a marriage that in her eyes was more dreadful than
any death?



She could not do it yet. She could not die until she had once more
seen his face, even though he did not see hers. No, not to-night would
she seek this swift solution. She had words to say--or words to write
--before the end. Already they rushed in upon her mind!

But if no better plan presented itself she would do it, she was sure
that she would. It was a sin--well, let it be a sin; what did she care
if she sinned for Geoffrey? He would not think the worse of her for
it. And she had hope, yes, Geoffrey had taught her to hope. If there
was a Hell, why it was here. And yet not all a Hell, for in it she had
found her love!



It grew dark; she could hear the whisper of the waves upon Bryngelly
beach. It grew dark; the night was closing round. She paddled to
within a few fathoms of the shore, and called in her clear voice.

"Ay, ay, miss," answered old Edward from the beach. "Come in on the
next wave."

She came in accordingly and her canoe was caught and dragged high and
dry.

"What, Miss Beatrice," said the old man shaking his head and
grumbling, "at it again! Out all alone in that thing," and he gave the
canoe a contemptuous kick, "and in the dark, too. You want a husband
to look after you, you do. You'll never rest till you're drowned."

"No, Edward," she answered with a little laugh. "I don't suppose that
I shall. There is no peace for the wicked above seas, you know. Now do
not scold. The canoe is as safe as church in this weather and in the
bay."

"Oh, yes, it's safe enough in the calm and the bay," he answered, "but
supposing it should come on to blow and supposing you should drift
beyond the shelter of Rumball Point there, and get the rollers down on
you--why you would be drowned in five minutes. It's wicked, miss,
that's what it is."

Beatrice laughed again and went.

"She's a funny one she is," said the old man scratching his head as he
looked after her, "of all the woman folk as ever I knowed she is the
rummest. I sometimes thinks she wants to get drowned. Dash me if I
haven't half a mind to stave a hole in the bottom of that there damned
canoe, and finish it."

Beatrice reached home a little before supper time. Her first act was
to call Betty the servant and with her assistance to shift her bed and
things into the spare room. With Elizabeth she would have nothing more
to do. They had slept together since they were children, now she had
done with her. Then she went in to supper, and sat through it like a
statue, speaking no word. Her father and Elizabeth kept up a strained
conversation, but they did not speak to her, nor she to them.
Elizabeth did not even ask where she had been, nor take any notice of
her change of room.

One thin