g, however, Beatrice learnt. Her father was going on the
Monday to Hereford by an early train to attend a meeting of clergymen
collected to discuss the tithe question. He was to return by the last
train on the Tuesday night, that is, about midnight. Beatrice now
discovered that Elizabeth proposed to accompany him. Evidently she
wished to see as little as possible of her sister during this week of
truce--possibly she was a little afraid of her. Even Elizabeth might
have a conscience.

So she should be left alone from Monday morning till Tuesday night.
One can do a good deal in forty hours.

After supper Beatrice rose and left the room, without a word, and they
were glad when she went. She frightened them with her set face and
great calm eyes. But neither spoke to the other on the subject. They
had entered into a conspiracy of silence.

Beatrice locked her door and then sat at the window lost in thought.
When once the idea of suicide has entered the mind it is apt to grow
with startling rapidity. She reviewed the whole position; she went
over all the arguments and searched the moral horizon for some
feasible avenue of escape. But she could find none that would save
Geoffrey, except this. Yes, she would do it, as many another wretched
woman had done before her, not from cowardice indeed, for had she
alone been concerned she would have faced the thing out, fighting to
the bitter end--but for this reason only, it would cut off the dangers
which threatened Geoffrey at their very root and source. Of course
there must be no scandal; it must never be known that she had killed
herself, or she might defeat her own object, for the story would be
raked up. But she well knew how to avoid such a possibility; in her
extremity Beatrice grew cunning as a fox. Yes, and there might be an
inquest at which awkward questions would be asked. But, as she well
knew also, before an inquest can be held there must be something to
hold it on, and that something would not be there.



And so in the utter silence of the night and in the loneliness of her
chamber did Beatrice dedicate herself to sacrifice upon the altar of
her immeasurable love. She would face the last agonies of death when
the bloom of her youthful strength and beauty was but opening as a
rose in June. She would do more, she would brave the threatened
vengeance of the most High, coming before Him a self murderess, and
with but one plea for pity--that she loved so well: /quia multum
amavit/. Yes, she would do all this, would leave the warm world in the
dawning summer of her days, and alone go out into the dark--alone
would face those visions which might come--those Shapes of terror, and
those Things of fear, that perchance may wait for sinful human kind.
Alone she would go--oh, hand in hand with him it had been easy, but
this must not be. The door of utter darkness would swing to behind
her, and who could say if in time to come it should open to Geoffrey's
following feet, or if he might ever find the path that she had trod.
It must be done, it should be done! Beatrice rose from her seat with
bright eyes and quick-coming breath, and swore before God, if God
there were, that she would do it, trusting to Him for pardon and for
pity, or failing these--for sleep.

Yes, but first she must once more look upon Geoffrey's dear face--and
then farewell!

Pity her! poor mistaken woman, making of her will a Providence,
rushing to doom. Pity her, but do not blame her overmuch, or if you
do, then blame Judith and Jephtha's daughter and Charlotte Corday, and
all the glorious women who from time to time have risen on this sordid
world of self, and given themselves as an offering upon the altars of
their love, their religion, their honour or their country!



It was finished. Now let her rest while she could, seeing what was to
come. With a sigh for all that was, and all that might have been,
Beatrice lay down and soon slept sweetly as a child.



                            CHAPTER XXVII

                         THE HOUSE OF COMMONS

Next day was Sunday. Beatrice did not go to church. For one thing, she
feared to see Owen Davies there. But she took her Sunday school class
as usual, and long did the children remember how kind and patient she
was with them that day, and how beautifully she told them the story of
the Jewish girl of long ago, who went forth to die for the sake of her
father's oath.

Nearly all the rest of the day and evening she spent in writing that
which we shall read in time--only in the late afternoon she went out
for a little while in her canoe. Another thing Beatrice did also: she
called at the lodging of her assistant, the head school teacher, and
told her it was possible that she would not be in her place on the
Tuesday (Monday was, as it chanced, a holiday). If anybody inquired as
to her absence, perhaps she would kindly tell them that Miss Granger
had an appointment to keep, and had taken a morning's holiday in order
to do so. She should, however, be back that afternoon. The teacher
assented without suspicion, remarking that if Beatrice could not take
a morning's holiday, she was sure she did not know who could.

Next morning they breakfasted very early, because Mr. Granger and
Elizabeth had to catch the train. Beatrice sat through the meal in
silence, her calm eyes looking straight before her, and the others,
gazing on them, and at the lovely inscrutable face, felt an
indefinable fear creep into their hearts. What did this woman mean to
do? That was the question they asked of themselves, though not of each
other. That she meant to do something they were sure, for there was
purpose written on every line of her cold face.

Suddenly, as they sat thinking, and making pretence to eat, a thought
flashed like an arrow into Beatrice's heart, and pierced it. This was
the last meal that they could ever take together, this was the last
time that she could ever see her father's and her sister's faces. For
her sister, well, it might pass--for there are some things which even
a woman like Beatrice can never quite forgive--but she loved her
father. She loved his very faults, even his simple avarice and self-
seeking had become endeared to her by long and wondering
contemplation. Besides, he was her father; he gave her the life she
was about to cast away. And she should never see him more. Not on that
account did she hesitate in her purpose, which was now set in her
mind, like Bryngelly Castle on its rock, but at the thought tears
rushed unbidden to her eyes.

Just then breakfast came to an end, and Elizabeth hurried from the
room to fetch her bonnet.

"Father," said Beatrice, "if you can before you go, I should like to
hear you say that you do not believe that I told you what was false--
about that story."

"Eh, eh!" answered the old man nervously, "I thought that we had
agreed to say nothing about the matter at present."

"Yes, but I should like to hear you say it, father. It cuts me that
you should think that I would lie to you, for in my life I have never
wilfully told you what was not true;" and she clasped her hands about
his arms, and looked into his face.

He gazed at her doubtfully. Was it possible after all she was speaking
the truth? No; it was not possible.

"I can't, Beatrice," he said--"not that I blame you overmuch for
trying to defend yourself; a cornered rat will show fight."

"May you never regret those words," she said; "and now good-bye," and
she kissed him on the forehead.

At this moment Elizabeth entered, saying that it was time to start,
and he did not return the kiss.

"Good-bye, Elizabeth," said Beatrice, stretching out her hand. But
Elizabeth affected not to see it, and in another moment they were
gone. She followed them to the gate and watched them till they
vanished down the road. Then she returned, her heart strained almost
to bursting. But she wept no tear.

Thus did Beatrice bid a last farewell to her father and her sister.

"Elizabeth," said Mr. Granger, as they drew near to the station, "I am
not easy in my thoughts about Beatrice. There was such a strange look
in her eyes; it--in short, it frightens me. I have half a mind to give
up Hereford, and go back," and he stopped upon the road, hesitating.

"As you like," said Elizabeth with a sneer, "but I should think that
Beatrice is big enough and bad enough to look after herself."

"Before the God who made us," said the old man furiously, and striking
the ground with his stick, "she may be bad, but she is not so bad as
you who betrayed her. If Beatrice is a Magdalene, you are a woman
Judas; and I believe that you hate her, and would be glad to see her
dead."

Elizabeth made no answer. They were nearing the station, for her
father had started on again, and there were people about. But she
looked at him, and he never forgot the look. It was quite enough to
chill him into silence, nor did he allude to the matter any more.



When they were gone, Beatrice set about her own preparations. Her wild
purpose was to travel to London, and catch a glimpse of Geoffrey's
face in the House of Commons, if possible, and then return. She put on
her bonnet and best dress; the latter was very plainly made of simple
grey cloth, but on her it looked well enough, and in the breast of it
she thrust the letter which she had written on the previous day. A
small hand-bag, with some sandwiches and a brush and comb in it, and a
cloak, made up the total of her baggage.

The train, which did not stop at Bryngelly, left Coed at ten, and Coed
was an hour and a half's walk. She must be starting. Of course, she
would have to be absent for the night, and she was sorely puzzled how
to account for her absence to Betty, the servant girl; the others
being gone there was no need to do so to anybody else. But here
fortune befriended her. While she was thinking the matter over, who
should come in but Betty herself, crying. She had just heard, she
said, that her little sister, who lived with their mother at a village
about ten miles away, had been knocked down by a cart and badly hurt.
Might she go home for the night? She could come back on the morrow,
and Miss Beatrice could get somebody in to sleep if she was lonesome.

Beatrice sympathised, demurred, and consented, and Betty started at
once. As soon as she was gone, Beatrice locked up the house, put the
key in her pocket, and started on her five miles' tramp. Nobody saw
her leave the house, and she passed by a path at the back of the
village, so that nobody saw her on the road. Reaching Coed Station
quite unobserved, and just before the train was due, she let down her
veil, and took a third-class ticket to London. This she was obliged to
do, for her stock of money was very small; it amounted, altogether, to
thirty-six shillings, of which the fare to London and back would cost
her twenty-eight and fourpence.

In another minute she had entered an empty carriage, and the train had
steamed away.

She reached Paddington about eight that night, and going to the
refreshment room, dined on some tea and bread and butter. Then she
washed her hands, brushed her hair, and started.

Beatrice had never been in London before, and as soon as she left the
station the rush and roar of the huge city took hold of her, and
confused her. Her idea was to walk to the Houses of Parliament at
Westminster. She would, she thought, be sure to see Geoffrey there,
because she had bought a daily paper in which she had read that he was
to be one of the speakers in a great debate on the Irish Question,
which was to be brought to a close that night. She had been told by a
friendly porter to follow Praed Street till she reached the Edgware
Road, then to walk on to the Marble Arch, and ask again. Beatrice
followed the first part of this programme--that is, she walked as far
as the Edgware Road. Then it was that confusion seized her and she
stood hesitating. At this juncture, a coarse brute of a man came up
and made some remark to her. It was impossible for a woman like
Beatrice to walk alone in the streets of London at night, without
running the risk of such attentions. She turned from him, and as she
did so, heard him say something about her beauty to a fellow Arcadian.
Close to where she was stood two hansom cabs. She went to the first
and asked the driver for how much he would take her to the House of
Commons.

"Two bob, miss," he answered.

Beatrice shook her head, and turned to go again. She was afraid to
spend so much on cabs, for she must get back to Bryngelly.

"I'll take yer for eighteenpence, miss," called out the other driver.
This offer she was about to accept when the first man interposed.

"You leave my fare alone, will yer? Tell yer what, miss, I'm a
gentleman, I am, and I'll take yer for a bob."

She smiled and entered the cab. Then came a whirl of great gas-lit
thoroughfares, and in a quarter of an hour they pulled up at the
entrance to the House. Beatrice paid the cabman his shilling, thanked
him, and entered, only once more to find herself confused with a
vision of white statues, marble floors, high arching roofs, and
hurrying people. An automatic policeman asked her what she wanted.
Beatrice answered that she wished to get into the House.

"Pass this way, then, miss--pass this way," said the automatic officer
in a voice of brass. She passed, and passed, and finally found herself
in a lobby, among a crowd of people of all sorts--seedy political
touts, Irish priests and hurrying press-men. At one side of the lobby
were more policemen and messengers, who were continually taking cards
into the House, then returning and calling out names. Insensibly she
drifted towards these policemen.

"Ladies' Gallery, miss?" said a voice; "your order, please, though I
think it's full."

Here was a fresh complication. Beatrice had no order. She had no idea
that one was necessary.

"I haven't got an order," she said faintly. "I did not know that I
must have one. Can I not get in without?"

"Most certainly /not/, miss," answered the voice, while its owner,
suspecting dynamite, surveyed her with a cold official eye. "Now make
way, make way, please."

Beatrice's grey eyes filled with tears, as she turned to go in
bitterness of heart. So all her labour was in vain, and that which
would be done must be done without the mute farewell she sought. Well,
when sorrow was so much, what mattered a little more? She turned to
go, but not unobserved. A certain rather youthful Member of
Parliament, with an eye for beauty in distress, had been standing
close to her, talking to a constituent. The constituent had departed
to wherever constituents go--and many representatives, if asked, would
cheerfully point out a locality suitable to the genus, at least in
their judgment--and the member had overheard the conversation and seen
Beatrice's eyes fill with tears. "What a lovely woman!" he had said to
himself, and then did what he should have done, namely, lifted his hat
and inquired if, as a member of the House, he could be of any service
to her. Beatrice listened, and explained that she was particularly
anxious to get into the Ladies' Gallery.

"I think that I can help you, then," he said. "As it happens a lady,
for whom I got an order, has telegraphed to say that she cannot come.
Will you follow me? Might I ask you to give me your name?"

"Mrs. Everston," answered Beatrice, taking the first that came into
her head. The member looked a little disappointed. He had vaguely
hoped that this lovely creature was unappropriated. Surely her
marriage could not be satisfactory, or she would not look so sad.

Then came more stairs and passages, and formalities, till presently
Beatrice found herself in a kind of bird-cage, crowded to suffocation
with every sort of lady.

"I'm afraid--I am very much afraid----" began her new-found friend,
surveying the mass with dismay.

But at that moment, a stout lady in front feeling faint with the heat,
was forced to leave the Gallery, and almost before she knew where she
was, Beatrice was installed in her place. Her friend had bowed and
vanished, and she was left to all purposes alone, for she never heeded
those about her, though some of them looked at her hard enough,
wondering at her form and beauty, and who she might be.

She cast her eye down over the crowded House, and saw a vision of
hats, collars, and legs, and heard a tumult of sounds: the sharp voice
of a speaker who was rapidly losing his temper, the plaudits of the
Government benches, the interruptions from the Opposition--yes, even
yells, and hoots, and noises, that reminded her remotely of the
crowing of cocks. Possibly had she thought of it, Beatrice would not
have been greatly impressed with the dignity of an assembly, at the
doors of which so many of its members seemed to leave their manners,
with their overcoats and sticks; it might even have suggested the idea
of a bear garden to her mind. But she simply did not think about it.
She searched the House keenly enough, but it was to find one face, and
one only--Ah! there he was.

And now the House of Commons might vanish into the bottomless abyss,
and take with it the House of Lords, and what remained of the British
Constitution, and she would never miss them. For, at the best of
times, Beatrice--in common with most of her sex--in all gratitude be
it said, was /not/ an ardent politician.

There Geoffrey sat, his arms folded--the hat pushed slightly from his
forehead, so that she could see his face. There was her own beloved,
whom she had come so far to see, and whom to-morrow she would dare so
much to save. How sad he looked--he did not seem to be paying much
attention to what was going on. She knew well enough that he was
thinking of her; she could feel it in her head as she had often felt
it before. But she dared not let her mind go out to him in answer,
for, if once she did so, she knew also that he would discover her. So
she sat, and fed her eyes upon his face, taking her farewell of it,
while round her, and beneath her, the hum of the House went on, as
ever present and as unnoticed as the hum of bees upon a summer noon.

Presently the gentleman who had been so kind to her, sat down in the
next seat to Geoffrey, and began to whisper to him, as he did so
glancing once or twice towards the grating behind which she was. She
guessed that he was telling him the story of the lady who was so
unaccountably anxious to hear the debate, and how pretty she was. But
it did not seem to interest Geoffrey much, and Beatrice was feminine
enough to notice it, and to be glad of it. In her gentle jealousy, she
did not like to think of Geoffrey as being interested in accounts of
mysterious ladies, however pretty.

At length a speaker rose--she understood from the murmur of those
around her that he was one of the leaders of the Opposition, and
commenced a powerful and bitter speech. She noticed that Geoffrey
roused himself at this point, and began to listen with attention.

"Look," said one of the ladies near her, "Mr. Bingham is taking notes.
He is going to speak next--he speaks wonderfully, you know. They say
that he is as good as anybody in the House, except Gladstone, and Lord
Randolph."

"Oh!" answered another lady. "Lady Honoria is not here, is she? I
don't see her."

"No," replied the first; "she is a dear creature, and so handsome too
--just the wife for a rising man--but I don't think that she takes
much interest in politics. Are not her dinners charming?"

At this moment, a volley of applause from the Opposition benches
drowned the murmured conversation.

This speaker spoke for about three-quarters of an hour, and then at
last Geoffrey stood up. One or two other members rose at the same
time, but ultimately they gave way.

He began slowly--and somewhat tamely, as it seemed to Beatrice, whose
heart was in her mouth--but when he had been speaking for about five
minutes, he warmed up. And then began one of the most remarkable
oratorical displays of that Parliament. Geoffrey had spoken well
before, and would speak well again, but perhaps he never spoke so well
as he did upon that night. For nearly an hour and a half he held the
House in chains, even the hoots and interruptions died away towards
the end of his oration. His powerful presence seemed to tower in the
place, like that of a giant among pigmies, and his dark, handsome
face, lit with the fires of eloquence, shone like a lamp. He leaned
forward with a slight stoop of his broad shoulders, and addressed
himself, nominally to the Speaker, but really to the Opposition. He
took their facts one by one, and with convincing logic showed that
they were no facts; amid a hiss of anger he pulverised their arguments
and demonstrated their motives. Then suddenly he dropped them
altogether, and addressing himself to the House at large, and the
country beyond the House, he struck another note, and broke out into
that storm of patriotic eloquence which confirmed his growing
reputation, both in Parliament and in the constituencies.

Beatrice shut her eyes and listened to the deep, rich voice as it rose
from height to height and power to power, till the whole place seemed
full of it, and every contending sound was hushed.

Suddenly, after an invocation that would have been passionate had it
not been so restrained and strong, he stopped. She opened her eyes and
looked. Geoffrey was seated as before, with his hat on. He had been
speaking for an hour and a half, and yet, to her, it seemed but a few
minutes since he rose. Then broke out a volley of cheers, in the midst
of which a leader of the Opposition rose to reply, not in the very
best of tempers, for Geoffrey's speech had hit them hard.

He began, however, by complimenting the honourable member on his
speech, "as fine a speech as he had listened to for many years,
though, unfortunately, made from a mistaken standpoint and the wrong
side of the House." Then he twitted the Government with not having
secured the services of a man so infinitely abler than the majority of
their "items," and excited a good deal of amusement by stating, with
some sarcastic humour, that, should it ever be his lot to occupy the
front Treasury bench, he should certainly make a certain proposal to
the honourable member. After this good-natured badinage, he drifted
off into the consideration of the question under discussion, and
Beatrice paid no further attention to him, but occupied herself in
watching Geoffrey drop back into the same apparent state of cold
indifference, from which the necessity of action had aroused him.

Presently the gentleman who had found her the seat came up and spoke
to her, asking her how she was getting on. Very soon he began to speak
of Geoffrey's speech, saying that it was one of the most brilliant of
the session, if not the most brilliant.

"Then Mr. Bingham is a rising man, I suppose?" Beatrice said.

"Rising? I should think so," he answered. "They will get him into the
Government on the first opportunity after this; he's too good to
neglect. Very few men can come to the fore like Mr. Bingham. We call
him the comet, and if only he does not make a mess of his chances by
doing something foolish, there is no reason why he should not be
Attorney-General in a few years."

"Why should he do anything foolish?" she asked.

"Oh, for no reason on earth, that I know of; only, as I daresay you
have noticed, men of this sort are very apt to do ridiculous things,
throw up their career, get into a public scandal, run away with
somebody or something. Not that there should be any fear of such a
thing where Mr. Bingham is concerned, for he has a charming wife, and
they say that she is a great help to him. Why, there is the division
bell. Good-bye, Mrs. Everston, I will come back to see you out."

"Good-bye," Beatrice answered, "and in case I should miss you, I wish
to say something--to thank you for your kindness in helping me to get
in here to-night. You have done me a great service, a very great
service, and I am most grateful to you."

"It is nothing--nothing," he answered. "It has been a pleasure to help
you. If," he added with some confusion, "you would allow me to call
some day, the pleasure will be all the greater. I will bring Mr.
Bingham with me, if you would like to know him--that is, if I can."

Beatrice shook her head. "I cannot," she answered, smiling sadly. "I
am going on a long journey to-morrow, and I shall not return here.
Good-bye."

In another second he was gone, more piqued and interested about this
fair unknown than he had been about any woman for years. Who could she
be? and why was she so anxious to hear the debate? There was a mystery
in it somewhere, and he determined to solve it if he could.

Meanwhile the division took place, and presently the members flocked
back, and amidst ringing Ministerial cheers, and counter Opposition
cheers, the victory of the Government was announced. Then came the
usual formalities, and the members began to melt away. Beatrice saw
the leader of the House and several members of the Government go up to
Geoffrey, shake his hand, and congratulate him. Then, with one long
look, she turned and went, leaving him in the moment of his triumph,
that seemed to interest him so little, but which made Beatrice more
proud at heart than if she had been declared empress of the world.

Oh, it was well to love a man like that, a man born to tower over his
fellow men--and well to die for him! Could she let her miserable
existence interfere with such a life as his should be? Never, never!
There should be no "public scandal" on her account.

She drew her veil over her face, and inquired the way from the House.
Presently she was outside. By one of the gateways, and in the shadow
of its pillars, she stopped, watching the members of the House stream
past her. Many of them were talking together, and once or twice she
caught the sound of Geoffrey's name, coupled with such words as
"splendid speech," and other terms of admiration.

"Move on, move on," said a policeman to her. Lifting her veil,
Beatrice turned and looked at him, and muttering something he moved on
himself, leaving her in peace. Presently she saw Geoffrey and the
gentleman who had been so kind to her walking along together. They
came through the gateway; the lappet of his coat brushed her arm, and
he never saw her. Closer she crouched against the pillar, hiding
herself in its shadow. Within six feet of her Geoffrey stopped and lit
a cigar. The light of the match flared upon his face, that dark,
strong face she loved so well. How tired he looked. A great longing
took possession of her to step forward and speak to him, but she
restrained herself almost by force.

Her friend was speaking to him, and about her.

"Such a lovely woman," he was saying, "with the clearest and most
beautiful grey eyes that I ever saw. But she has gone like a dream. I
can't find her anywhere. It is a most mysterious business."

"You are falling in love, Tom," answered Geoffrey absently, as he
threw away the match and walked on. "Don't do that; it is an unhappy
thing to do," and he sighed.

He was going! Oh, heaven! she would never, never see him more! A cold
horror seized upon Beatrice, her blood seemed to stagnate. She
trembled so much that she could scarcely stand. Leaning forward, she
looked after him, with such a face of woe that even the policeman, who
had repented him of his forbearance, and was returning to send her
away, stood astonished. The two men had gone about ten yards, when
something induced Beatrice's friend to look back. His eye fell upon
the white, agony-stricken face, now in the full glare of the gas lamp.

Beatrice saw him turn, and understood her danger. "Oh, good-bye,
Geoffrey!" she murmured, for a second allowing her heart to go forth
towards him. Then realising what she had done, she dropped her veil,
and went swiftly. The gentleman called "Tom"--she never learnt his
name--stood for a moment dumbfounded, and at that instant Geoffrey
staggered, as though he had been struck by a shot, turned quite white,
and halted.

"Why," said his companion, "there is that lady again; we must have
passed quite close to her. She was looking after us, I saw her face in
the gaslight--and I never want to see such another."

Geoffrey seized him by the arm. "Where is she?" he asked, "and what
was she like?"

"She was there a second ago," he said, pointing to the pillar, "but
I've lost her now--I fancy she went towards the railway station, but I
could not see. Stop, is that she?" and he pointed to a tall person
walking towards the Abbey.

Quickly they moved to intercept her, but the result was not
satisfactory, and they retreated hastily from the object of their
attentions.

Meanwhile Beatrice found herself opposite the entrance to the
Westminster Bridge Station. A hansom was standing there; she got into
it and told the man to drive to Paddington.

Before the pair had retraced their steps she was gone. "She has
vanished again," said "Tom," and went on to give a description of her
to Geoffrey. Of her dress he had unfortunately taken little note. It
might be one of Beatrice's, or it might not. It seemed almost
inconceivable to Geoffrey that she should be masquerading about
London, under the name of Mrs. Everston. And yet--and yet--he could
have sworn--but it was folly!

Suddenly he bade his friend good-night, and took a hansom. "The
mystery thickens," said the astonished "Tom," as he watched him drive
away. "I would give a hundred pounds to find out what it all means.
Oh! that woman's face--it haunts me. It looked like the face of an
angel bidding farewell to Heaven."

But he never did find out any more about it, though the despairing
eyes of Beatrice, as she bade her mute farewell, still sometimes haunt
his sleep.

Geoffrey reflected rapidly. The thing was ridiculous, and yet it was
possible. Beyond that brief line in answer to his letter, he had heard
nothing from Beatrice. Indeed he was waiting to hear from her before
taking any further step. But even supposing she were in London, where
was he to look for her? He knew that she had no money, he could not
stay there long. It occurred to him there was a train leaving Euston
for Wales about four in the morning. It was just possible that she
might be in town, and returning by this train. He told the cabman to
drive to Euston Station, and on arrival, closely questioned a sleepy
porter, but without satisfactory results.

Then he searched the station; there were no traces of Beatrice. He did
more; he sat down, weary as he was, and waited for an hour and a half,
till it was time for the train to start. There were but three
passengers, and none of them in the least resembled Beatrice.

"It is very strange," Geoffrey said to himself, as he walked away. "I
could have sworn that I felt her presence just for one second. It must
have been nonsense. This is what comes of occult influences, and that
kind of thing. The occult is a nuisance."

If he had only gone to Paddington!



                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                         I WILL WAIT FOR YOU

Beatrice drove back to Paddington, and as she drove, though her face
did not change from its marble cast of woe the great tears rolled down
it, one by one.

They reached the deserted-looking station, and she paid the man out of
her few remaining shillings--seeing that she was a stranger, he
insisted upon receiving half-a-crown. Then, disregarding the
astonished stare of a night porter, she found her way to the waiting
room, and sat down. First she took the letter from her breast, and
added some lines to it in pencil, but she did not post it yet; she
knew that if she did so it would reach its destination too soon. Then
she laid her head back against the wall, and utterly outworn, dropped
to sleep--her last sleep upon this earth, before the longest sleep of
all.

And thus Beatrice waited and slept at Paddington, while her lover
waited and watched at Euston.

At five she woke, and the heavy cloud of sorrow, past, present, and to
come, rushed in upon her heart. Taking her bag, she made herself as
tidy as she could. Then she stepped outside the station into the
deserted street, and finding a space between the houses, watched the
sun rise over the waking world. It was her last sunrise, Beatrice
remembered.

She came back filled with such thoughts as might well strike the heart
of a woman about to do the thing she had decreed. The refreshment bar
was open now, and she went to it, and bought a cup of coffee and some
bread and butter. Then she took her ticket, not to Bryngelly or to
Coed, but to the station on this side of Bryngelly, and three miles
from it. She would run less risk of being noticed there. The train was
shunted up; she took her seat in it. Just as it was starting, an early
newspaper boy came along, yawning. Beatrice bought a copy of the
/Standard/, out of the one and threepence that was left of her money,
and opened it at the sheet containing the leading articles. The first
one began, "The most powerful, closely reasoned, and eloquent speech
made last night by Mr. Bingham, the Member for Pillham, will, we feel
certain, produce as great an effect on the country as it did in the
House of Commons. We welcome it, not only on account of its value as a
contribution to the polemics of the Irish Question, but as a positive
proof of what has already been suspected, that the Unionist party has
in Mr. Bingham a young statesman of a very high order indeed, and one
whom remarkable and rapid success at the Bar has not hampered, as is
too often the case, in the larger and less technical field of
politics."

And so on. Beatrice put the paper down with a smile of triumph.
Geoffrey's success was splendid and unquestioned. Nothing could stop
him now. During all the long journey she pleased her imagination by
conjuring up picture after picture of that great future of his, in
which she would have no share. And yet he would not forget her; she
was sure of this. Her shadow would go with him from year to year, even
to the end, and at times he might think how proud she would have been
could she be present to record his triumphs. Alas! she did not
remember that when all is lost which can make life beautiful, when the
sun has set, and the spirit gone out of the day, the poor garish
lights of our little victories can but ill atone for the glories that
have been. Happiness and content are frail plants which can only
flourish under fair conditions if at all. Certainly they will not
thrive beneath the gloom and shadow of a pall, and when the heart is
dead no triumphs, however splendid, and no rewards, however great, can
compensate for an utter and irredeemable loss. She never guessed, poor
girl, that time upon time, in the decades to be, Geoffrey would gladly
have laid his honours down in payment for one year of her dear and
unforgotten presence. She was too unselfish; she did not think that a
man could thus prize a woman's love, and took it for an axiom that to
succeed in life was his one real object--a thing to which so divine a
gift as she had given Geoffrey is as nothing. It was therefore this
Juggernaut of her lover's career that Beatrice would cast down her
life, little knowing that thereby she must turn the worldly and
temporal success, which he already held so cheap, to bitterness and
ashes.

At Chester Beatrice got out of the train and posted her letter to
Geoffrey. She would not do so till then because it might have reached
him too soon--before all was finished! Now it would be delivered to
him in the House after everything had been accomplished in its order.
She looked at the letter; it was, she thought, the last token that
could ever pass between them on this earth. Once she pressed it to her
heart, once she touched it with her lips, and then put it from her
beyond recall. It was done; there was no going back now. And even as
she stood the postman came up, whistling, and opening the box
carelessly swept its contents into his canvas bag. Could he have known
what lay among them he would have whistled no more that day.

Beatrice continued her journey, and by three o'clock arrived safely at
the little station next to Bryngelly. There was a fair at Coed that
day, and many people of the peasant class got in here. Amidst the
confusion she gave up her ticket to a small boy, who was looking the
other way at the time, and escaped without being noticed by a soul.
Indeed, things happened so that nobody in the neighbourhood of
Bryngelly ever knew that Beatrice had been to London and back upon
those dreadful days.

Beatrice walked along the cliff, and in an hour was at the door of the
Vicarage, from which she seemed to have been away for years. She
unlocked it and entered. In the letter-box was a post-card from her
father stating that he and Elizabeth had changed their plans and would
not be back till the train which arrived at half-past eight on the
following morning. So much the better, she thought. Then she
disarranged the clothes upon her bed to make it seem as though it had
been slept it, lit the kitchen fire, and put the kettle on to boil,
and as soon as it was ready she took some food. She wanted all her
nerve, and that could not be kept up without food.

Shortly after this the girl Betty returned, and went about her duties
in the house quite unconscious that Beatrice had been away from it for
the whole night. Her sister was much better, she said, in answer to
Beatrice's inquiries.

When she had eaten what she could--it was not much--Beatrice went to
her room, undressed herself, bathed, and put on clean, fresh things.
Then she unbound her lovely hair, and did it up in a coronet upon her
head. It was a fashion that she did not often adopt, because it took
too much time, but on this day, of all days, she had a strange fancy
to look her best. Also her hair had been done like this on the
afternoon when Geoffrey first met her. Next she put on the grey dress
once more which she had worn on her journey to London, and taking the
silver Roman ring that Geoffrey had given her from the string by which
she wore it about her neck, placed it on the third finger of her left
hand.

All this being done, Beatrice visited the kitchen and ordered the
supper. She went further in her innocent cunning. Betty asked her what
she would like for breakfast on the following morning, and she told
her to cook some bacon, and to be careful how she cut it, as she did
not like thick bacon. Then, after one long last look at the Vicarage,
she started for the lodging of the head teacher of the school, and,
having found her, inquired as to the day's work.

Further, Beatrice told her assistant that she had determined to alter
the course of certain lessons in the school. The Wednesday arithmetic
class had hitherto been taken before the grammar class. On the morrow
she had determined to change this; she would take the grammar class at
ten and the arithmetic class at eleven, and gave her reasons for so
doing. The teacher assented, and Beatrice shook hands with her and
bade her good-night. She would have wished to say how much she felt
indebted to her for her help in the school, but did not like to do so,
fearing lest, in the light of pending events, the remark might be
viewed with suspicion.

Poor Beatrice, these were the only lies she ever told!

She left the teacher's lodgings, and was about to go down to the beach
and sit there till it was time, when she was met by the father of the
crazed child, Jane Llewellyn.

"Oh, Miss Beatrice," he said, "I have been looking for you everywhere.
We are in sad trouble, miss. Poor Jane is in a raving fit, and talking
about hell and that, and the doctor says she's dying. Can you come,
miss, and see if you can do anything to quiet her? It's a matter of
life and death, the doctor says, miss."

Beatrice smiled sadly; matters of life and death were in the air. "I
will come," she said, "but I shall not be able to stay long."

How could she better spend her last hour?

She accompanied the man to his cottage. The child, dressed only in a
night-shirt, was raving furiously, and evidently in the last stage of
exhaustion, nor could the doctor or her mother do anything to quiet
her.

"Don't you see," she screamed, pointing to the wall, "there's the
Devil waiting for me? And, oh, there's the mouth of hell where the
minister said I should go! Oh, hold me, hold me, hold me!"

Beatrice walked up to her, took the thin little hands in hers, and
looked her fixedly in the eyes.

"Jane," she said. "Jane, don't you know me?"

"Yes, Miss Granger," she said, "I know the lesson; I will say it
presently."

Beatrice took her in her arms, and sat down on the bed. Quieter and
quieter grew the child till suddenly an awful change passed over her
face.

"She is dying," whispered the doctor.

"Hold me close, hold me close!" said the child, whose senses returned
before the last eclipse. "Oh, Miss Granger, I shan't go to hell, shall
I? I am afraid of hell."

"No, love, no; you will go to heaven."

Jane lay still awhile. Then seeing the pale lips move, Beatrice put
her ear to the child's mouth.

"Will you come with me?" she murmured; "I am afraid to go alone."

And Beatrice, her great grey eyes fixed steadily on the closing eyes
beneath, whispered back so that no other soul could hear except the
dying child:

"Yes, I will come presently." But Jane heard and understood.

"Promise," said the child.

"Yes, I promise," answered Beatrice in the same inaudible whisper.
"Sleep, dear, sleep; I will join you very soon."

And the child looked up, shivered, smiled--and slept.

Beatrice gave it back to the weeping parents and went her way. "What a
splendid creature," said the doctor to himself as he looked after her.
"She has eyes like Fate, and the face of Motherhood Incarnate. A great
woman, if ever I saw one, but different from other women."

Meanwhile Beatrice made her way to old Edward's boat-shed. As she
expected, there was nobody there, and nobody on the beach. Old Edward
and his son were at tea, with the rest of Bryngelly. They would come
back after dark and lock up the boat-house.

She looked at the sea. There were no waves, but the breeze freshened
every minute, and there was a long slow swell upon the water. The
rollers would be running beyond the shelter of Rumball Point, five
miles away.

The tide was high; it mounted to within ten yards of the end of the
boat-house. She opened the door, and dragged out her canoe, closing
the door again after her. The craft was light, and she was strong for
a woman. Close to the boat-house one of the timber breakwaters, which
are common at sea-side places, ran down into the water. She dragged
the canoe to its side, and then pushed it down the beach till its bow
was afloat. Next, mounting on the breakwater, she caught hold of the
little chain in the bow, and walking along the timber baulks, pulled
with all her force till the canoe was quite afloat. On she went,
dragging it after her, till the waves washing over the breakwater
wetted her shoes.

Then she brought the canoe quite close, and, watching her opportunity,
stepped into it, nearly falling into the water as she did so. But she
recovered her balance, and sat down. In another minute she was
paddling out to sea with all her strength.

For twenty minutes or more she paddled unceasingly. Then she rested
awhile, only keeping the canoe head on to the sea, which, without
being rough, was running more and more freshly. There, some miles
away, was the dark mass of Rumball Point. She must be off it before
the night closed in. There would be sea enough there; no such craft as
hers could live in it for five minutes, and the tide was on the turn.
Anything sinking in those waters would be carried far away, and never
come back to the shore of Wales.

She turned her head and looked at Bryngelly, and the long familiar
stretch of cliff. How fair it seemed, bathed in the quiet lights of
summer afternoon. Oh! was there any afternoon where the child had
gone, and where she was following fast?--or was it all night, black,
eternal night, unbroken by the dram of dear remembered things?

There were the Dog Rocks, where she had stood on that misty autumn
day, and seen the vision of her coffined mother's face. Surely it was
a presage of her fate. There beyond was the Bell Rock, where in that
same hour Geoffrey and she had met, and behind it was the
Amphitheatre, where they had told their love. Hark! what was that
sound pealing faintly at intervals across the deep? It was the great
ship's bell that, stirred from time to time by the wash of the high
tide, solemnly tolled her passing soul.

She paddled on; the sound of that death-knell shook her nerves, and
made her feel faint and weak. Oh, it would have been easier had she
been as she was a year ago, before she learned to love, and hand in
hand had seen faith and hope re-arise from the depths of her stirred
soul. Then being but a heathen, she could have met her end with all a
heathen's strength, knowing what she lost, and believing, too, that
she would find but sleep. And now it was otherwise, for in her heart
she did not believe that she was about utterly to perish. What, could
the body live on in a thousand forms, changed indeed but
indestructible and immortal, while the spiritual part, with all its
hopes and loves and fears, melted into nothingness? It could not be;
surely on some new shore she should once again greet her love. And if
it was not, how would they meet her in that under world, coming self-
murdered, her life-blood on her hands? Would her mother turn away from
her? and the little brother, whom she had loved, would he reject her?
And what Voice of Doom might strike her into everlasting hopelessness?

But, be the sin what it might, yet would she sin it for the sake of
Geoffrey; ay, even if she must reap a harvest of eternal woe. She bent
her head and prayed. "Oh, Power, that art above, from whom I come, to
whom I go, have mercy on me! Oh, Spirit, if indeed thy name is Love,
weigh my love in thy balance, and let it lift the scale of sin. Oh,
God of Sacrifice, be not wroth at my deed of sacrifice and give me
pardon, give me life and peace, that in a time to come I may win the
sight of him for whom I die."

A somewhat heathenish prayer indeed, and far too full of human passion
for one about to leave the human shores. But, then--well, it was
Beatrice who prayed--Beatrice, who could realise no heaven beyond the
limits of her passion, who still thought more of her love than of
saving her own soul alive. Perhaps it found a home--perhaps, like her
who prayed it, it was lost upon the pitiless deep.

Then Beatrice prayed no more. Short was her time. See, there sank the
sun in glory; and there the great rollers swept along past the sullen
headland, where the undertow met wind and tide. She would think no
more of self; it was, it seemed to her, so small, this mendicant
calling on the Unseen, not for others, but for self: aid for self,
well-being for self, salvation for self--this doing of good that good
might come to self. She had made her prayer, and if she prayed again
it should be for Geoffrey, that he might prosper and be happy--that he
might forgive the trouble her love had brought into his life. That he
might forget her she could not pray. She had prayed her prayer and
said her say, and it was done with. Let her be judged as it seemed
good to Those who judge! Now she would fix her thoughts upon her love,
and by its strength would she triumph over the bitterness of death.
Her eyes flashed and her breast heaved: further out to sea, further
yet--she would meet those rollers a knot or more from the point of the
headland, that no record might remain.

Was it her wrong if she loved him? She could not help it, and she was
proud to love him. Even now, she would not undo the past. What were
the lines that Geoffrey had read to her. They haunted her mind with a
strange persistence--they took time to the beat of her falling paddle,
and would not leave her:

 "Of once sown seed, who knoweth what the crop is?
  Alas, my love, Love's eyes are very blind!
  What would they have us do? Sunflowers and poppies
  Stoop to the wind----"[*]

[*] Oliver Madox Brown.

Yes, yes, Love's eyes are very blind, but in their blindness there was
more light than in all other earthly things. Oh, she could not live
for him, and with him--it was denied to her--but she still could die
for him, her darling, her darling!



"Geoffrey, hear me--I die for you; accept my sacrifice, and forget me
not." So!--she is in the rollers--how solemn they are with their hoary
heads of foam, as one by one they move down upon her.

The first! it towers high, but the canoe rides it like a cork. Look!
the day is dying on the distant land, but still his glory shines
across the sea. Presently all will be finished. Here the breeze is
strong; it tears the bonnet from her head, it unwinds the coronet of
braided locks, and her bright hair streams out behind her. Feel how
the spray stings, striking like a whip. No, not this wave, she rides
that also; she will die as she has lived--fighting to the last; and
once more, never faltering, she sets her face towards the rollers and
consigns her soul to doom.

Ah! that struck her full. Oh, see! Geoffrey's ring has slipped from
her wet hand, falling into the bottom of the boat. Can she regain it?
she would die with that ring upon her finger--it is her marriage-ring,
wedding her through death to Geoffrey, upon the altar of the sea. She
stoops! oh, what a shock of water at her breast! What was it--what was
it?--/Of once sown seed, who knoweth what the crop is?/ She must soon
learn now!

"Geoffrey! hear me, Geoffrey!--I die, I die for you! I will wait for
you at the foundations of the sea, on the topmost heights of heaven,
in the lowest deeps of hell--wherever I am I will always wait for
you!"

It sinks--it has sunk--she is alone with God, and the cruel waters.
The sun goes out! Look on that great white wave seething through the
deepening gloom; hear it rushing towards her, big with fate.

"Geoffrey, my darling--I will wait----"



Farewell to Beatrice! The light went out of the sky and darkness
gathered on the weltering sea. Farewell to Beatrice, and all her love
and all her sin.



                             CHAPTER XXIX

                         A WOMAN'S LAST WORD

Geoffrey came down to breakfast about eleven o'clock on the morning of
that day the first hours of which he had spent at Euston Station. Not
seeing Effie, he asked Lady Honoria where she was, and was informed
that Anne, the French /bonne/, said the child was not well and that
she had kept her in bed to breakfast.

"Do you mean to say that you have not been up to see what is the
matter with her?" asked Geoffrey.

"No, not yet," answered his wife. "I have had the dressmaker here with
my new dress for the duchess's ball to-morrow; it's lovely, but I
think that there is a little too much of that creamy lace about it."

With an exclamation of impatience, Geoffrey rose and went upstairs. He
found Effie tossing about in bed, her face flushed, her eyes wide
open, and her little hands quite hot.

"Send for the doctor at once," he said.

The doctor came and examined the child, asking her if she had wet her
feet lately.

"Yes, I did, two days ago. I wet my feet in a puddle in the street,"
she answered. "But Anne did say that they would soon get dry, if I
held them to the fire, because my other boots was not clean. Oh, my
head does ache, daddie."

"Ah," said the doctor, and then covering the child up, took Geoffrey
aside and told him that his daughter had a mild attack of inflammation
of the lungs. There was no cause for anxiety, only she must be looked
after and guarded from chills.

Geoffrey asked if he should send for a trained nurse.

"Oh, no," said the doctor. "I do not think it is necessary, at any
rate at present. I will tell the nurse what to do, and doubtless your
wife will keep an eye on her."

So Anne was called up, and vowed that she would guard the cherished
child like the apple of her eye. Indeed, no, the boots were not wet--
there was a little, a very little mud on them, that was all.

"Well, don't talk so much, but see that you attend to her properly,"
said Geoffrey, feeling rather doubtful, for he did not trust Anne.
However, he thought he would see himself that there was no neglect.
When she heard what was the matter, Lady Honoria was much put out.

"Really," she said, "childr