en are the most vexatious creatures in the
world. The idea of her getting inflammation of the lungs in this
unprovoked fashion. The end of it will be that I shall not be able to
go to the duchess's ball to-morrow night, and she was so kind about
it, she made quite a point of my coming. Besides I have bought that
lovely new dress on purpose. I should never have dreamed of going to
so much expense for anything else."

"Don't trouble yourself," said Geoffrey. "The House does not sit
to-morrow; I will look after her. Unless Effie dies in the interval,
you will certainly be able to go to the ball."

"Dies--what nonsense! The doctor says that it is a very slight attack.
Why should she die?"

"I am sure I hope that there is no fear of anything of the sort,
Honoria. Only she must be properly looked after. I do not trust this
woman Anne. I have half a mind to get in a trained nurse after all."

"Well, if you do, she will have to sleep out of the house, that's all.
Amelia (Lady Garsington) is coming up to-night, and I must have
somewhere to put her maid, and there is no room for another bed in
Effie's room."

"Oh, very well, very well," said Geoffrey, "I daresay that it will be
all right, but if Effie gets any worse, you will please understand
that room must be made."

But Effie did not get worse. She remained much about the same.
Geoffrey sat at home all day and employed himself in reading briefs;
fortunately he had not to go to court. About six o'clock he went down
to the House, and having dined very simply and quietly, took his seat
and listened to some dreary talk, which was being carried on for the
benefit of the reporters, about the adoption of the Welsh language in
the law courts of Wales.

Suddenly he became aware of a most extraordinary sense of oppression.
An indefinite dread took hold of him, his very soul was filled with
terrible apprehensions and alarm. Something dreadful seemed to knock
at the portals of his sense, a horror which he could not grasp. His
mind was confused, but little by little it grew clearer, and he began
to understand that a danger threatened Beatrice, that she was in great
peril. He was sure of it. Her agonised dying cries reached him where
he was, though in no form which he could understand; once more her
thought beat on his thought--once more and for the last time her
spirit spoke to his.

Then suddenly a cold wind seemed to breathe upon his face and lift his
hair, and everything was gone. His mind was as it had been; again he
heard the dreary orator and saw the members slipping away to dinner.
The conditions that disturbed him had passed, things were as they had
been. Nor was this strange! For the link was broken. Beatrice was
/dead/. She had passed into the domains of impenetrable silence.



Geoffrey sat up with a gasp, and as he did so a letter was placed in
his hand. It was addressed in Beatrice's handwriting and bore the
Chester postmark. A chill fear seized him. What did it contain? He
hurried with it into a private room and opened it. It was dated from
Bryngelly on the previous Sunday and had several inclosures.

 "My dearest Geoffrey," it began, "I have never before addressed you
  thus on paper, nor should I do so now, knowing to what risks such
  written words might put you, were it not that occasions may arise
  (as in this case) which seem to justify the risk. For when all
  things are ended between a man and a woman who are to each other
  what we have been, then it is well that the one who goes should
  speak plainly before speech becomes impossible, if only that the
  one who is left should not misunderstand that which has been done.

 "Geoffrey, it is probable--it is almost certain--that before your
  eyes read these words I shall be where in the body they can never
  see me more. I write to you from the brink of the grave; when you
  read it, it will have closed over me.

 "Geoffrey, I shall be dead.

 "I received your dear letter (it is destroyed now) in which you
  expressed a wish that I should come away with you to some other
  country, and I answered it in eight brief words. I dared not
  trust myself to write more, nor had I any time. How could you
  think that I should ever accept such an offer for my own sake,
  when to do so would have been to ruin you? But first I will tell
  you all that has happened here." (Here followed a long and exact
  description of those events with which we are already acquainted,
  including the denunciation of Beatrice by her sister, the threats
  of Owen Davies as regards Geoffrey himself, and the measures which
  she had adopted to gain time.)

 "Further," the letter continued, "I inclose you your wife's letter
  to me. And here I wish to state that I have not one word to say
  against Lady Honoria or her letter. I think that she was perfectly
  justified in writing as she did, for after all, dear Geoffrey, you
  are her husband, and in loving each other we have offended against
  her. She tells me truly that it is my duty to make all further
  communications between us impossible. There is only one way to do
  this, and I take it.

 "And now I have spoken enough about myself, nor do I wish to enter
  into details that could only give you pain. There will be no
  scandal, dear, and if any word should be raised against you after
  I am gone, I have provided an answer in the second letter which I
  have inclosed. You can print it if necessary; it will be a
  sufficient reply to any talk. Nobody after reading it can believe
  that you were in any way connected with the accident which will
  happen. Dear, one word more--still about myself, you see! Do not
  blame yourself in this matter, for you are not to blame; of my own
  free will I do it, because in the extremity of the circumstances I
  think it best that one should go and the other be saved, rather
  than that both should be involved in a common ruin.

 "Dear, do you remember how in that strange vision of mine, I
  dreamed that you came and touched me on the breast and showed me
  light? So it has come to pass, for you have given me love--that is
  light; and now in death I shall seek for wisdom. And this being
  fulfilled, shall not the rest be fulfilled in its season? Shall I
  not sit in those cloudy halls till I see you come to seek me, the
  word of wisdom on your lips? And since I cannot have you to
  myself, and be all in all to you, why I am glad to go. For here on
  the world is neither rest nor happiness; as in my dream, too often
  does 'Hope seem to rend her starry robes.'

 "I am glad to go from such a world, in which but one happy thing
  has found me--the blessing of your love. I am worn out with the
  weariness and struggle, and now that I have lost you I long for
  rest. I do not know if I sin in what I do; if so, may I be
  forgiven. If forgiveness is impossible, so be it! You will forgive
  me, Geoffrey, and you will always love me, however wicked I may
  be; even if, at the last, you go where I am not, you will remember
  and love the erring woman to whom, being so little, you still were
  all in all. We are not married, Geoffrey, according to the customs
  of the world, but two short days hence I shall celebrate a service
  that is greater and more solemn than any of the earth. For Death
  will be the Priest and that oath which I shall take will be to all
  eternity. Who can prophesy of that whereof man has no sure
  knowledge? Yet I do believe that in a time to come we shall look
  again into each other's eyes, and kiss each other's lips, and be
  one for evermore. If this is so, it is worth while to have lived
  and died; if not, then, Geoffrey, farewell!

 "If I may I will always be near you. Listen to the night wind and
  you shall hear my voice; look on the stars, you will see my eyes;
  and my love shall be as the air you breathe. And when at last the
  end comes, remember me, for if I live at all I shall be about you
  then. What have I more to say? So much, my dear, that words cannot
  convey it. Let it be untold; but whenever you hear or read that
  which is beautiful or tender, think 'this is what Beatrice would
  have said to me and could not!'

 "You will be a great man, dear, the foremost or one of the foremost
  of your age. You have already promised me to persevere to this
  end: I will not ask you to promise afresh. Do not be content to
  accept the world as women must. Great men do not accept the world;
  they reform it--and you are of their number. And when you are
  great, Geoffrey, you will use your power, not for self-interest,
  but to large and worthy ends; you will always strive to help the
  poor, to break down oppression from those who have to bar it, and
  to advance the honour of your country. You will do all this from
  your own heart and not because I ask it of you, but remember that
  your fame will be my best monument--though none shall ever know
  the grave it covers.

 "Farewell, farewell, farewell! Oh, Geoffrey, my darling, to whom I
  have never been a wife, to whom I am more than any wife--do not
  forget me in the long years which are to come. Remember me when
  others forsake you. Do not forget me when others flatter you and
  try to win your love, for none can be to you what I have been--
  none can ever love you more than that lost Beatrice who writes
  these heavy words to-night, and who will pass away blessing you
  with her last breath, to await you, if she may, in the land to
  which your feet also draw daily on."

Then came a tear-stained postscript in pencil dated from Paddington
Station on that very morning.

 "I journeyed to London to see you, Geoffrey. I could not die
  without looking on your face once more. I was in the gallery of
  the House and heard your great speech. Your friend found me a
  place. Afterwards I touched your coat as you passed by the pillar
  of the gateway. Then I ran away because I saw your friend turn and
  look at me. I shall kiss this letter--just here before I close it
  --kiss it there too--it is our last cold embrace. Before the end I
  shall put on the ring you gave me--on my hand, I mean. I have
  always worn it upon my breast. When I touched you as you passed
  through the gateway I thought that I should have broken down and
  called to you--but I found strength not to do so. My heart is
  breaking and my eyes are blind with tears; I can write no more; I
  have no more to say. Now once again good-bye. /Ave atque vale/--
  oh, my love!--B."

The second letter was a dummy. That is to say it purported to be such
an epistle as any young lady might have written to a gentleman friend.
It began, "Dear Mr. Bingham," and ended, "Yours sincerely, Beatrice
Granger," was filled with chit-chat, and expressed hopes that he would
be able to come down to Bryngelly again later in the summer, when they
would go canoeing.

It was obvious, thought Beatrice, that if Geoffrey was accused by Owen
Davies or anybody else of being concerned with her mysterious end, the
production of such a frank epistle written two days previously would
demonstrate the absurdity of the idea. Poor Beatrice, she was full of
precautions!



Let him who may imagine the effect produced upon Geoffrey by this
heartrending and astounding epistle! Could Beatrice have seen his face
when he had finished reading it she would never have committed
suicide. In a minute it became like that of an old man. As the whole
truth sank into his mind, such an agony of horror, of remorse, of
unavailing woe and hopelessness swept across his soul, that for a
moment he thought his vital forces must give way beneath it, and that
he should die, as indeed in this dark hour he would have rejoiced to
do. Oh, how pitiful it was--how pitiful and how awful! To think of
this love, so passionately pure, wasted on his own unworthiness. To
think of this divine woman going down to lonely death for him--a
strong man; to picture her crouching behind that gateway pillar and
touching him as he passed, while he, the thrice accursed fool, knew
nothing till too late; to know that he had gone to Euston and not to
Paddington; to remember the matchless strength and beauty of the love
which he had lost, and that face which he should never see again!
Surely his heart would break. No man could bear it!

And of those cowards who hounded her to death, if indeed she was
already dead! Oh, he would kill Owen Davies--yes, and Elizabeth too,
were it not that she was a woman; and as for Honoria he had done with
her. Scandal, what did he care for scandal? If he had his will there
should be a scandal indeed, for he would beat this Owen Davies, this
reptile, who did not hesitate to use a woman's terrors to prosper the
fulfilling of his lust--yes, and then drag him to the Continent and
kill him there. Only vengeance was left to him!

Stop, he must not give way--perhaps she was not dead--perhaps that
horrible presage of evil which had struck him like a storm was but a
dream. Could he telegraph? No, it was too late; the office at
Bryngelly would be closed--it was past eight now. But he could go.
There was a train leaving a little after nine--he should be there by
half-past six to-morrow. And Effie was ill--well, surely they could
look after her for twenty-four hours; she was in no danger, and he
must go--he could not bear this torturing suspense. Great God! how had
she done the deed!

Geoffrey snatched a sheet of paper and tried to write. He could not,
his hand shook so. With a groan he rose, and going to the refreshment
room swallowed two glasses of brandy one after another. The spirit
took effect on him; he could write now. Rapidly he scribbled on a
sheet of paper:

 "I have been called away upon important business and shall probably
  not be back till Thursday morning. See that Effie is properly
  attended to. If I am not back you must not go to the duchess's
  ball.--Geoffrey Bingham."

Then he addressed the letter to Lady Honoria and dispatched a
commissionaire with it. This done, he called a cab and bade the cabman
drive to Euston as fast as his horse could go.



                             CHAPTER XXX

                            AVE ATQUE VALE

That frightful journey--no nightmare was ever half so awful! But it
came to an end at last--there was the Bryngelly Station. Geoffrey
sprang from the train, and gave his ticket to the porter, glancing in
his face as he did so. Surely if there had been a tragedy the man
would know of it, and show signs of half-joyous emotion as is the
fashion of such people when something awful and mysterious has
happened to somebody else. But he showed no such symptoms, and a
glimmer of hope found its way into Geoffrey's tormented breast.

He left the station and walked rapidly towards the Vicarage. Those who
know what a pitch of horror suspense can reach may imagine his
feelings as he did so. But it was soon to be put an end to now. As he
drew near the Vicarage gate he met the fat Welsh servant girl Betty
running towards him. Then hope left Geoffrey.

The girl recognised him, and in her confusion did not seem in the
least astonished to see him walking there at a quarter to seven on a
summer morning. Indeed, even she vaguely connected Geoffrey with
Beatrice in her mind, for she at once said in her thick English:

"Oh, sir, do you know where Miss Beatrice is?"

"No," he answered, catching at a railing for support. "Why do you ask?
I have not seen her for weeks."

Then the girl plunged into a long story. Mr. Granger and Miss Granger
were away from home, and would not be back for another two hours. Miss
Beatrice had gone out yesterday afternoon, and had not come back to
tea. She, Betty, had not thought much of it, believing that she had
stopped to spend the evening somewhere, and, being very tired, had
gone to bed about eight, leaving the door unlocked. This morning, when
she woke, it was to find that Miss Beatrice had not slept in the house
that night, and she came out to see if she could find her.

"Where was she going when she went out?" Geoffrey asked.

She did not know, but she thought that Miss Beatrice was going out in
the canoe. Leastways she had put on her tennis shoes, which she always
wore when she went out boating.

Geoffrey understood it all now. "Come to the boat-house," he said.

They went down to the beach, where as yet none were about except a few
working people. Near the boat-house Geoffrey met old Edward walking
along with a key in his hand.

"Lord, sir!" he said. "You here, sir! and in that there queer hat,
too. What is it, sir?"

"Did Miss Beatrice go out in her canoe yesterday evening, Edward?"
Geoffrey asked hoarsely.

"No, sir; not as I know on. My boy locked up the boat-house last
night, and I suppose he looked in it first. What! You don't mean to
say---- Stop; we'll soon know. Oh, Goad! the canoe's gone!"

There was a silence, an awful silence. Old Edward broke it.

"She's drowned, sir--that's what she is--drowned at last; and she the
finest woman in Wales. I knewed she would be one day, poor dear! and
she the beauty that she was; and all along of that damned unlucky
little craft. Goad help her! She's drowned, I say----"

Betty burst out into loud weeping at his words.

"Stop that noise, girl," said Geoffrey, turning his pale face towards
her. "Go back to the Vicarage, and if Mr. Granger comes home before I
get back, tell him what we fear. Edward, send some men to search the
shore towards Coed, and some more in a sailing boat. I will walk
towards the Bell Rock--you can follow me."

He started and swiftly tramped along the sands, searching the sea with
his eye. On he walked sullenly, desperately striving to hope against
hope. On, past the Dog Rocks, round the long curve of beach till he
came to the Amphitheatre. The tide was high again; he could barely
pass the projecting point. He was round it, and his heart stood still.
For there, bottom upwards, and gently swaying to and fro as the spent
waves rocked it, was Beatrice's canoe.

Sadly, hopelessly, heavily, Geoffrey waded knee deep into the water,
and catching the bow of the canoe, dragged it ashore. There was, or
appeared to be, nothing in it; of course he could not expect anything
else. Its occupant had sunk and been carried out to sea by the ebb,
whereas the canoe had drifted back to shore with the morning tide.

He reared it upon its end to let the water drain out of it, and from
the hollow of the bow arch something came rolling down, something
bright and heavy, followed by a brown object. Hastily he lowered the
canoe again, and picked up the bright trinket. It was his own ring
come back to him--the Roman ring he had given Beatrice, and which she
told him in the letter she would wear in her hour of death. He touched
it with his lips and placed it back upon his hand, this token from the
beloved dead, vowing that it should never leave his hand in life, and
that after death it should be buried on him. And so it will be,
perhaps to be dug up again thousands of years hence, and once more to
play a part in the romance of unborn ages.

/Ave atque vale/--that was the inscription rudely cut within its
round. Greeting and farewell--her own last words to him. Oh, Beatrice,
Beatrice! to you also /ave atque vale/. You could not have sent a
fitter message. Greeting and farewell! Did it not sum it all? Within
the circle of this little ring was writ the epitome of human life:
here were the beginning and the end of Love and Hate, of Hope and
fear, of Joy and Sorrow.

Beatrice, hail! Beatrice, farewell! till perchance a Spirit rushing
earthward shall cry "/Greeting/," in another tongue, and Death,
descending to his own place, shaking from his wings the dew of tears,
shall answer "/Farewell to me and Night, ye Children of Eternal Day!/"

And what was this other relic? He lifted it--it was Beatrice's tennis
shoe, washed from her foot--Geoffrey knew it, for once he had tied it.

Then Geoffrey broke down--it was too much. He threw himself upon the
great rock and sobbed--that rock where he had sat with her and Heaven
had opened to their sight. But men are not given to such exhibitions
of emotion, and fortunately for him the paroxysm did not last. He
could not have borne it for long.

He rose and went again to the edge of the sea. At this moment old
Edward and his son arrived. Geoffrey pointed to the boat, then held up
the little shoe.

"Ah," said the old man, "as I thought. Goad help her! She's gone;
she'll never come ashore no more, she won't. She's twenty miles away
by now, she is, breast up, with the gulls a-screaming over her. It's
that there damned canoe, that's what it is. I wish to Goad I had broke
it up long ago. I'd rather have built her a boat for nothing, I would.
Damn the unlucky craft!" screamed the old man at the top of his voice,
and turning his head to hide the tears that were streaming down his
rugged face. "And her that I nursed and pulled out of the waters once
all but dead. Damn it, I say! There, take that, you Sea Witch, you!"
and he picked up a great boulder and crashed it through the bottom of
the canoe with all his strength. "You shan't never drown no more. But
it has brought you good luck, it has, sir; you'll be a fortunit man
all your life now. It has brought you the /Drowned One's shoe/."

"Don't break it any more," said Geoffrey. "She used to value it. You
had better bring it along between you--it may be wanted. I am going to
the Vicarage."

He walked back. Mr. Granger and Elizabeth had not yet arrived, but
they were expected every minute. He went into the sitting-room. It was
full of memories and tokens of Beatrice. There lay a novel which he
had given her, and there was yesterday's paper that she had brought
from town, the /Standard/, with his speech in it.

Geoffrey covered his eyes with his hand, and thought. None knew that
she had committed suicide except himself. If he revealed it things
might be said of her; he did not care what was said of him, but he was
jealous of her dead name. It might be said, for instance, that the
whole tale was true, and that Beatrice died because she could no
longer face life without being put to an open shame. Yes, he had
better hold his tongue as to how and why she died. She was dead--
nothing could bring her back. But how then should he account for his
presence there? Easily enough. He would say frankly that he came
because Beatrice had written to him of the charges made against her
and the threats against himself--came to find her dead. And on that
point he would still have a word with Owen Davies and Elizabeth.

Scarcely had he made up his mind when Elizabeth and her father
entered. Clearly from their faces they had as yet heard nothing.

Geoffrey rose, and Elizabeth caught sight of him standing with glowing
eyes and a face like that of Death himself. She recoiled in alarm.

"What brings you here, Mr. Bingham?" she said, in her hard voice.

"Cannot you guess, Miss Granger?" he said sternly. "A few days back
you made certain charges against your sister and myself in the
presence of your father and Mr. Owen Davies. These charges have been
communicated to me, and I have come to answer them and to demand
satisfaction for them."

Mr. Granger fidgeted nervously and looked as though he would like to
escape, but Elizabeth, with characteristic courage, shut the door and
faced the storm.

"Yes, I did make those charges, Mr. Bingham," she said, "and they are
true charges. But stop, we had better send for Beatrice first."

"You may send, but you will not find her."

"What do you mean?--what do you mean?" asked her father
apprehensively.

"It means that he has hidden her away, I suppose," said Elizabeth with
a sneer.

"I mean, Mr. Granger, that your daughter Beatrice is /dead/."

For once startled out of her self-command, Elizabeth gave a little
cry, while her father staggered back against the wall.

"Dead! dead! What do you mean? How did she die?" he asked.

"That is known to God and her alone," answered Geoffrey. "She went out
last evening in her canoe. When I arrived here this morning she was
missed for the first time. I walked along the beach and found the
canoe and this inside of it," and he placed the sodden shoe upon the
table.

There was a silence. In the midst of it, Owen Davies burst into the
room with wild eyes and dishevelled hair.

"Is it true?" he cried, "tell me--it cannot be true that Beatrice is
drowned. She cannot have been taken from me just when I was going to
marry her. Say that it is not true!"

A great fury filled Geoffrey's heart. He walked down the room and shut
the door, a red light swimming before his eyes. Then he turned and
gripped Owen Davies's shoulder like a vice.

"You accursed blackguard--you unmanly cur!" he said; "you and that
wicked woman," and he shook his hand at Elizabeth, "conspired together
to bring a slur upon Beatrice. You did more: you threatened to attack
me, to try and ruin me if she would not give herself up to you. You
loathsome hypocrite, you tortured her and frightened her; now I am
here to frighten /you/. You said that you would make the country ring
with your tales. I tell you this--are you listening to me? If you dare
to mention her name in such a sense, or if that woman dares, I will
break every bone in your wretched body--by Heaven I will kill you!"
and he cast Davies from him, and as he did so, struck him heavily
across the face with the back of his hand.

The man took no notice either of his words or of the deadly insult of
the blow.

"Is it true?" he screamed, "is it true that she is dead?"

"Yes," said Geoffrey, following him, and bending his tall square frame
over him, for Davies had fallen against the wall, "yes, it is true--
she is dead--and beyond your reach for ever. Pray to God that you may
not one day be called her murderers, all of you--you shameless
cowards."

Owen Davies gave one shrill cry and sank in a huddled heap upon the
ground.

"There is no God," he moaned; "God promised her to me, to be my own--
you have killed her; you--you seduced her first and then you killed
her. I believe you killed her. Oh, I shall go mad!"

"Mad or sane," said Geoffrey, "say those words once more and I will
stamp the life out of you where you are. You say that God promised her
to you--promised that woman to a hound like you. Ah, be careful!"

Owen Davies made no answer. Crouched there upon the ground he rocked
himself to and fro, and moaned in the madness of his baulked desire.

"This man," said Geoffrey, turning towards and pointing to Elizabeth,
who was glaring at him like a wild cat from the corner of the room,
"said that there is no God. I say that there is a God, and that one
day, soon or late, vengeance will find you out--you murderess, you
writer of anonymous letters; you who, to advance your own wicked ends
whatever they may be, were not ashamed to try to drag your innocent
sister's name into the dirt. I never believed in a hell till now, but
there must be a hell for such as you, Elizabeth Granger. Go your ways;
live out your time; but live every hour of it in terror of the
vengeance that shall come so surely as you shall die.

"Now for you, sir," he went on, addressing the trembling father. "I do
not blame you so much, because I believe that this viper poisoned your
mind. You might have thought that the tale was true. It is not true;
it was a lie. Beatrice, who now is dead, came into my room in her
sleep, and was carried from it as she came. And you, her father,
allowed this villain and your daughter to use her distress against
her; you allowed him to make a lever of it, with which to force her
into a marriage that she loathed. Yes, cover up your face--you may
well do so. Do your worst, one and all of you, but remember that this
time you have to deal with a man who can and will strike back, not a
poor friendless girl."

"Before Heaven, it was not my fault, Mr. Bingham," gasped the old man.
"I am innocent of it. That Judas-woman Elizabeth betrayed her sister
because she wanted to marry him herself," and he pointed to the Heap
upon the floor. "She thought that it would prejudice him against
Beatrice, and he--he believed that she was attached to you, and tried
to work upon her attachment."

"So," said Geoffrey, "now we have it all. And you, sir, stood by and
saw this done. You stood by thinking that you would make a profit of
her agony. Now I will tell you what I meant to hide from you. I did
love her. I do love her--as she loved me. I believe that between you,
you drove her to her grave. Her blood be on your heads for ever and
for ever!"

"Oh, take me home," groaned the Heap upon the floor--"take me home,
Elizabeth! I daren't go alone. Beatrice will haunt me. My brain goes
round and round. Take me away, Elizabeth, and stop with me. You are
not afraid of her, you are afraid of nothing."

Elizabeth sidled up to him, keeping her fierce eyes on Geoffrey all
the time. She was utterly cowed and terrified, but she could still
look fierce. She took the Heap by the hand and drew him thence still
moaning and quite crazed. She led him away to his castle and his
wealth. Six months afterwards she came forth with him to marry him,
half-witted as he was. A year and eight months afterwards she came out
again to bury him, and found herself the richest widow in Wales.



They went forth, leaving Geoffrey and Mr. Granger alone. The old man
rested his head upon the table and wept bitterly.

"Be merciful," he said, "do not say such words to me. I loved her,
indeed I did, but Elizabeth was too much for me, and I am so poor. Oh,
if you loved her also, be merciful! I do not reproach you because you
loved her, although you had no right to love her. If you had not loved
her, and made her love you, all this would never have happened. Why do
you say such dreadful things to me, Mr. Bingham?"

"I loved her, sir," answered Geoffrey, humbly enough now that his fury
had passed, "because being what she was all who looked on her must
love her. There is no woman left like her in the world. But who am I
that I should blame you? God forgive us all! I only live henceforth in
the hope that I may one day rejoin her where she has gone."

There was a pause.

"Mr. Granger," said Geoffrey presently, "never trouble yourself about
money. You were her father; anything you want and what I have is
yours. Let us shake hands and say good-bye, and let us never meet
again. As I said, God forgive us all!"

"Thank you--thank you," said the old man, looking up through the white
hair that fell about his eyes. "It is a strange world and we are all
miserable sinners. I hope there is a better somewhere. I'm well-nigh
tired of this, especially now that Beatrice has gone. Poor girl, she
was a good daughter and a fine woman. Good-bye. Good-bye!"

Then Geoffrey went.



                             CHAPTER XXXI

                          THE DUCHESS'S BALL

Geoffrey reached Town a little before eleven o'clock that night--a
haunted man--haunted for life by a vision of that face still lovely in
death, floating alone upon the deep, and companioned only by the
screaming mews--or perchance now sinking or sunk to an unfathomable
grave. Well might such a vision haunt a man, the man whom alone of all
men those cold lips had kissed, and for whose dear sake this dreadful
thing was done.

He took a cab directing the driver to go to Bolton Street and to stop
at his club as he passed. There might be letters for him there, he
thought--something which would distract his mind a little. As it
chanced there was a letter, marked "private," and a telegram; both had
been delivered that evening, the porter said, the former about an hour
ago by hand.

Idly he opened the telegram--it was from his lawyers: "Your cousin,
the child George Bingham, is, as we have just heard, dead. Please call
on us early to-morrow morning."

He started a little, for this meant a good deal to Geoffrey. It meant
a baronetcy and eight thousand a year, more or less. How delighted
Honoria would be, he thought with a sad smile; the loss of that large
income had always been a bitter pill to her, and one which she had
made him swallow again and again. Well, there it was. Poor boy, he had
always been ailing--an old man's child!

He put the telegram in his pocket and got into the hansom again. There
was a lamp in it and by its light he read the letter. It was from the
Prime Minister and ran thus:

 "My dear Bingham,--I have not seen you since Monday to thank you
  for the magnificent speech you made on that night. Allow me to add
  my congratulations to those of everybody else. As you know, the
  Under Secretaryship of the Home Office is vacant. On behalf of my
  colleagues and myself I write to ask if you will consent to fill
  it for a time, for we do not in any way consider that the post is
  one commensurate with your abilities. It will, however, serve to
  give you practical experience of administration, and us the
  advantage of your great talents to an even larger extent than we
  now enjoy. For the future, it must of course take care of itself;
  but, as you know, Sir ----'s health is not all that could be
  desired, and the other day he told me that it was doubtful if he
  would be able to carry on the duties of the Attorney-Generalship
  for very much longer. In view of this contingency I venture to
  suggest that you would do well to apply for silk as soon as
  possible. I have spoken to the Lord Chancellor about it, and he
  says that there will be no difficulty, as although you have only
  been in active practice for so short a while, you have a good many
  years' standing as a barrister. Or if this prospect does not
  please doubtless some other opening to the Cabinet can be found in
  time. The fact is, that we cannot in our own interest overlook you
  for long."

Geoffrey smiled again as he finished this letter. Who could have
believed a year ago that he would have been to-day in a position to
receive such an epistle from the Prime Minister of England? Ah, here
was the luck of the Drowned One's shoe with a vengeance. And what was
it all worth to him now?

He put the letter in his pocket with the telegram and looked out. They
were turning into Bolton Street. How was little Effie, he wondered?
The child seemed all that was left him to care for. If anything
happened to her--bah, he would not think of it!

He was there now. "How is Miss Effie?" he asked of the servant who
opened the door. At that moment his attention was attracted by the dim
forms of two people, a man and a woman, who were standing not far from
the area gate, the man with his arm round the woman's waist. Suddenly
the woman appeared to catch sight of the cab and retired swiftly down
the area. It crossed his mind that her figure was very like that of
Anne, the French nurse.

"Miss Effie is doing nicely, sir, I'm told," answered the man.

Geoffrey breathed more freely. "Where is her ladyship?" he asked. "In
Effie's room?"

"No, sir," answered the man, "her ladyship has gone to a ball. She
left this note for you in case you should come in."

He took the note from the hall table and opened it.

 "Dear Geoffrey," it ran, "Effie is so much better that I have made
  up my mind to go to the duchess's ball after all. She would be so
  disappointed if I did not come, and my dress is quite /lovely/.
  Had your mysterious business anything to do with /Bryngelly/?--
  Yours, Honoria."

"She would go on to a ball from her mother's funeral," said Geoffrey
to himself, as he walked up to Effie's room; "well, it is her nature
and there's an end of it."

He knocked at the door of Effie's room. There was no answer, so he
walked in. The room was lit but empty--no, not quite! On the floor,
clothed only in her white night-shirt, lay his little daughter, to all
appearance dead.

With something like an oath he sprang to her and lifted her. The face
was pale and the small hands were cold, but the breast was still hot
and fevered, and the heart beat. A glance showed him what had
happened. The child being left alone, and feeling thirsty, had got out
of bed and gone to the water bottle--there was the tumbler on the
floor. Then weakness had overcome her and she had fainted--fainted
upon the cold floor with the inflammation still on her.

At that moment Anne entered the room sweetly murmuring, "Ça va bien,
chérie?"

"Help me to put the child into bed," said Geoffrey sternly. "Now ring
the bell--ring it again.

"And now, woman--go. Leave this house at once, this very night. Do you
hear me? No, don't stop to argue. Look here! If that child dies I will
prosecute you for manslaughter; yes, I saw you in the street," and he
took a step towards her. Then Anne fled, and her face was seen no more
in Bolton Street or indeed in this country.

"James," said Geoffrey to the servant, "send the cook up here--she is
a sensible woman; and do you take a hansom and drive to the doctor,
and tell him to come here at once, and if you cannot find him go for
another doctor. Then go to the Nurses' Home, near St. James' Station,
and get a trained nurse--tell them one must be had from somewhere
instantly."

"Yes, sir. And shall I call for her ladyship at the duchess's, sir?"

"No," he answered, frowning heavily, "do not disturb her ladyship. Go
now."

"That settles it," said Geoffrey, as the man went. "Whatever happens,
Honoria and I must part. I have done with her."

He had indeed, though not in the way he meant. It would have been well
for Honoria if her husband's contempt had not prevented him from
summoning her from her pleasure.

The cook came up, and between them they brought the child back to
life.

She opened her eyes and smiled. "Is that you, daddy," she whispered,
"or do I dreams?"

"Yes, dear, it is I."

"Where has you been, daddy--to see Auntie Beatrice?"

"Yes, love," he said, with a gasp.

"Oh, daddy, my head do feel funny; but I don't mind now you is come
back. You won't go away no more, will you, daddy?"

"No, dear, no more."

After that she began to wander a little, and finally dropped into a
troubled sleep.

Within half an hour both the doctor and the nurse arrived. The former
listened to Geoffrey's tale and examined the child.

"She may pull through it," he said, "she has got a capital
constitution; but I'll tell you what it is--if she had lain another
five minutes in that draught there would have been an end of her. You
came in the nick of time. And now if I were you I should go to bed.
You can do no good here, and you look dreadfully ill yourself."

But Geoffrey shook his head. He said he would go downstairs and smoke
a pipe. He did not want to go to bed at present; he was too tired.



Meanwhile the ball went merrily. Lady Honoria never enjoyed herself
more in her life. She revelled in the luxurious gaiety around her like
a butterfly in the sunshine. How good it all was--the flash of
diamonds, the odour of costly flowers, the homage of well-bred men,
the envy of other women. Oh! it was a delightful world after all--that
is when one did not have to exist in a flat near the Edgware Road. But
Heaven be praised! thanks to Geoffrey's talents, there was an end of
flats and misery. After all, he was not a bad sort of husband, though
in many ways a perfect mystery to her. As for his little weakness for
the Welsh girl, really, provided that there was no scandal, she did
not care twopence about it.

"Yes, I am so glad you admire it. I think it is rather a nice dress,
but then I always say that nobody in London can make a dress like
Madame Jules. Oh, no, Geoffrey did not choose it; he thinks of other
things."

"Well, I'm sure you ought to be proud of him, Lady Honoria," said the
handsome Guardsman to whom she was talking; "they say at mess that he
is one of the cleverest men in England. I only wish I had a fiftieth
part of his brains."

"Oh, please do not become clever, Lord Atleigh; please don't, or I
shall really give you up. Cleverness is all very well, but it isn't
everything, you know. Yes, I will dance if you like, but you must go
slowly; to be quite honest, I am afraid of tearing my lace in this
crush. Why, I declare there is Garsington, my brother, you know," and
she pointed to a small red-haired man who was elbowing his way towards
them. "I wonder what he wants; it is not at all in his line to come to
balls. You know him, don't you? he is always racing horses, like you."

But the Guardsman had vanished. For reasons of his own he did not wish
to meet Garsington. Perhaps he too had been a member of a certain
club.

"Oh, there you are, Honoria," said her brother, "I thought that I
should be sure to find you somewhere in this beastly squash. Look
here, I have something to tell you."

"Good news or bad?" said Lady Honoria, playing with her fan. "If it is
bad, keep it, for I am enjoying myself very much, and I don't want my
evening spoilt."

"Trust you for that, Honoria; but look here, it's jolly good, about as
good as can be for that prig of a husband of yours. What do you think?
that brat of a boy, the son of old Sir Robert Bingham and the cook or
some one, you know, is----"

"Not dead, not dead?" said Honoria in deep agitation.

"Dead as ditch-water," replied his lordship. "I heard it at the club.
There was a lawyer fellow there dining with somebody there, and they
got talking about Bingham, when the lawyer said, 'Oh, he's Sir
Geoffrey Bingham now. Old Sir Robert's heir is dead. I saw the
telegram myself.'"

"Oh, this is almost too good to be true," said Honoria. "Why, it means
eight thousand a year to us."

"I told you it was pretty good," said her brother. "You ought to stand
me a commission out of the swag. At any rate, let's go and drink to
the news. Come on, it is time for supper and I am awfully done. I must
screw myself up."

Lady Honoria took his arm. As they walked down the wide flower-hung
stair they met a very great Person indeed, coming up.

"Ah, Lady Honoria," said the great Person, "I have something to say
that will please you, I think," and he bent towards her, and spoke
very low, then, with a little bow, passed on.

"What is the old boy talking about?" asked her brother.

"Why, what do you think? We are in luck's way to-night. He says that
they are offering Geoffrey the Under Secretaryship of the Home
Office."

"He'll be a bigger prig than ever now," growled Lord Garsington. "Yes,
it is luck though; let us hope it won't turn."

They sat down to supper, and Lord Garsington, who had already been
dining, helped himself pretty freely to champagne. Before them was a
silver candelabra and on each of the candles was fixed a little
painted paper shade. One of them got wrong, and a footman tried to
reach over Lord Garsington's head to put it straight.

"I'll do it," said he.

"No, no; let the man," said Lady Honoria. "Look! it is going to catch
fire!"

"Nonsense," he answered, rising solemnly and reaching his arm towards
the shade. As he touched it, it caught fire; indeed, by touching it he
caused it to catch fire. He seized hold of it, and made an effort to
put it out, but it burnt his fingers.

"Curse the thing!" he said aloud, and threw it from him. It fell
flaming in his sister's dress among the thickest of the filmy laces;
they caught, and instantly two wreathing snakes of fire shot up her.
She sprang from her seat and rushed screaming down the room, an awful
mass of flame!



In ten more minutes Lady Honoria had left this world and its pleasures
to those who still lived to taste them.



An hour passed. Geoffrey still sat brooding heavily over his pipe in
the study in Bolton Street and waiting for Honoria, when a knock came
to his door. The servants had all gone to bed, all except the sick
nurse. He rose and opened it himself. A little red-haired, pale-faced
man staggered in.

"Why, Garsington, is it you? What do you want at this hour?"

"Screw yourself up, Bingham, I've something to tell you," he answered
in a thick voice.

"What is it? another disaster, I suppose. Is somebody else dead?"

"Yes; somebody is. Honoria's dead. Burnt to death at the ball."

"Great God! Honoria burnt to death. I had better go----"

"I advise you not, Bingham. I wouldn't go to the hospital if I were
you. Screw yourself up, and if you can, give me something to drink--
I'm about done--I must screw myself up."



And here we may leave this most fortunate and gifted man. Farewell to
Geoffrey Bingham.



                                ENVOL

Thus, then, did these human atoms work out their destinies, these
little grains of animated dust, blown hither and thither by a breath
which came they knew not whence.

If there be any malicious Principle among the Powers around us that
deigns to find amusement in the futile vagaries of man, well might it
laugh, and laugh again, at the great results of all this scheming, of
all these desires, loves and hates; and if there be any pitiful
Principle, well might it sigh over the infinite pathos of human
helplessness. Owen Davies lost in his own passion; Geoffrey crowned
with prosperity and haunted by undying sorrow; Honoria perishing
wretchedly in her hour of satisfied ambition; Beatrice sacrificing
herself in love and blindness, and thereby casting out her joy.

Oh, if she had been content to humbly trust in the Providence above
her; if she had but left that deed undared for one short week!

But Geoffrey still lived, and the child recovered, after hanging for a
while between life and death, and was left to comfort him. May she
survive to be a happy wife and mother, living under conditions more
favourable to her well-being than those which trampled out the life of
that mistaken woman, the ill-starred, great-souled Beatrice, and broke
her father's heart.



Say--what are we? We are but arrows winged with fears and shot from
darkness into darkness; we are blind leaders of the blind, aimless
beaters of this wintry air; lost travellers by many stony paths ending
in one end. Tell us, you, who have outworn the common tragedy and
passed the narrow way, what lies beyond its gate? You are dumb, or we
cannot hear you speak.



But Beatrice knows to-day!













THE BIRDS
by Aristophanes


[Translator uncredited.  Footnotes have been retained because they
provide the meanings of Greek names, terms and ceremonies and explain
puns and references otherwise lost in translation.  Occasional Greek
words in the footnotes have not been included.  Footnote numbers,
in brackets, start anew at [1] for each piece of dialogue, and each
footnote follows immediately the dialogue to which it refers, labeled
thus: f[1].




INTRODUCTION



'The Birds' differs markedly from all the other Comedies of
Aristophanes which have come down to us in subject and general
conception.  It is just an extravaganza pure and simple--a
graceful, whimsical theme chosen expressly for the sake of the
opportunities it afforded of bright, amusing dialogue, pleasing
lyrical interludes, and charming displays of brilliant stage
effects and pretty dresses. Unlike other plays of the same Author,
there is here apparently no serious political MOTIF underlying
the surface burlesque and buffoonery.

Some critics, it is true, profess to find in it a reference to
the unfortunate Sicilian Expedition, then in progress, and a
prophecy of its failure and the political downfall of Alcibiades.
But as a matter of fact, the whole thing seems rather an attempt
on the dramatist's part to relieve the overwrought minds of his fellow-
citizens, anxious and discouraged at the unsatisfactory reports
from before Syracuse, by a work conceived in a lighter vein
than usual and mainly unconnected with contemporary realities.
The play was produced in the year 414 B.C., just when success or
failure in Sicily hung in the balance, though already the outlook
was gloomy, and many circumstances pointed to impending
disaster. Moreover, the public conscience was still shocked and
perturbed over the mysterious affair of the mutilation of the
Hermae, which had occurred immediately before the sailing
of the fleet, and strongly suspicious of Alcibiades' participation
in the outrage. In spite of the inherent charm of the subject,
the splendid outbursts of lyrical poetry in some of the choruses and
the beauty of the scenery and costumes, 'The Birds' failed to
win the first prize. This was acclaimed to a play of Aristophanes'
rival, Amipsias, the title of which, 'The Comastoe,' or 'Revellers,'
"seems to imply that the chief interest was derived from direct
allusions to the outrage above mentioned and to the individuals
suspected to have been engaged in it."

For this reason, which militated against its immediate success,
viz. the absence of direct allusion to contemporary politics--
there are, of course, incidental references here and there to
topics and personages of the day--the play appeals perhaps
more than any other of our Author's productions to the modern
reader. Sparkling wit, whimsical fancy, poetic charm, are of all
ages, and can be appreciated as readily by ourselves as by
an Athenian audience of two thousand years ago, though, of course,
much is inevitably lost "without the important adjuncts
of music, scenery, dresses and what we may call 'spectacle' generally,
which we know in this instance to have been on the most
magnificent scale."

The plot is this. Euelpides and Pisthetaerus, two old Athenians,
disgusted with the litigiousness, wrangling and sycophancy of
their countrymen, resolve upon quitting Attica. Having heard
of the fame of Epops (the hoopoe), sometime called Tereus,
and now King of the Birds, they determine, under the direction
of a raven and a jackdaw, to seek from him and his subject
birds a city free from all care and strife." Arrived at the Palace
of Epops, they knock, and Trochilus (the wren), in a state of
great flutter, as he mistakes them for fowlers, opens the door
and informs them that his Majesty is asleep. When he awakes,
the strangers appear before him, and after listening to a long
and eloquent harangue on the superior attractions of a residence
among the birds, they propose a notable scheme of their own
to further enhance its advantages and definitely secure the
sovereignty of the universe now exercised by the gods of Olympus.

The birds are summoned to meet in general council. They come
flying up from all quarters of the heavens, and after a brief mis-
understanding, during which they come near tearing the two
human envoys to pieces, they listen to the exposition of the latters'
plan. This is nothing less than the building of a new city,
to be called Nephelococcygia, or 'Cloud-cuckoo-town,' between
earth and heaven, to be garrisoned and guarded by the birds in
such a way as to intercept all communication of the gods with
their worshippers on earth. All steam of sacrifice will be prevented
from rising to Olympus, and the Immortals will very
soon be starved into an acceptance of any terms proposed.
The new Utopia is duly constructed, and the daring plan to secure
the sovereignty is in a fair way to succeed. Meantime various quacks
and charlatans, each with a special scheme for improving things,
arrive from earth, and are one after the other exposed and dismissed.
Presently arrives Prometheus, who informs Epops of the desperate straits
to which the gods are by this time reduced, and advises him to push
his claims and demand the hand of Basileia (Dominion), the handmaid
of Zeus. Next an embassy from the Olympians appears on the scene,
consisting of Heracles, Posidon and a god from the savage regions
of the Triballians. After some disputation, it is agreed
that all reasonable demands of the birds are to be granted, while
Pisthetaerus is to have Basileia as his bride. The comedy winds
up with the epithalamium in honour of the nuptials.



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

EUELPIDES
PISTHETAERUS
EPOPS (the Hoopoe)
TROCHILUS, Servant to Epops
PHOENICOPTERUS
HERALDS
A PRIEST
A POET
A PROPHET
METON, a Geometrician
A COMMISSIONER
A DEALER IN DECREES
IRIS
A PARRICIDE
CINESIAS, a Dithyrambic Bard
AN INFORMER
PROMETHEUS
POSIDON
TRIBALLUS
HERACLES
SLAVES OF PISTHETAERUS
MESSENGERS
CHORUS OF BIRDS




SCENE: A wild, desolate tract of open country; broken rocks
and brushwood occupy the centre of the stage.



EUELPIDES (TO HIS JAY)[1]
Do you think I should walk straight for yon tree?

f[1] Euelpides is holding a jay and Pisthetaerus a crow; they are
the guides who are to lead them to the kingdom of the birds.

PISTHETAERUS (TO HIS CROW)
Cursed beast, what are you croaking to me?...to retrace my steps?

EUELPIDES
Why, you wr