tles that are bought and sold,
Not wit that flashes and is cold,
   But Virtue merely!
Instructed by Jean-Jacques Rousseau
(And Jean-Jacques, surely, ought to know),
You bade the crowd of foplings go,
   You glanced severely,
Dreaming beneath the spreading shade
Of 'that vast hat the Graces made;' {5}
So Rouget sang--while yet he played
   With courtly rhyme,
And hymned great Doisi's red perruque,
And Nice's eyes, and Zulme's look,
And dead canaries, ere he shook
   The sultry time
With strains like thunder.  Loud and low
Methinks I hear the murmur grow,
The tramp of men that come and go
   With fire and sword.
They war against the quick and dead,
Their flying feet are dashed with red,
As theirs the vintaging that tread
   Before the Lord.
O head unfashionably fair,
What end was thine, for all thy care?
We only see thee dreaming there:
   We cannot see
The breaking of thy vision, when
The Rights of Man were lords of men,
When virtue won her own again
   In '93.



THE MOON'S MINION.
(FROM THE PROSE OF C. BAUDELAIRE.)



Thine eyes are like the sea, my dear,
   The wand'ring waters, green and grey;
Thine eyes are wonderful and clear,
   And deep, and deadly, even as they;
The spirit of the changeful sea
   Informs thine eyes at night and noon,
She sways the tides, and the heart of thee,
   The mystic, sad, capricious Moon!

The Moon came down the shining stair
   Of clouds that fleck the summer sky,
She kissed thee, saying, "Child, be fair,
   And madden men's hearts, even as I;
Thou shalt love all things strange and sweet,
   That know me and are known of me;
The lover thou shalt never meet,
   The land where thou shalt never be!"

She held thee in her chill embrace,
   She kissed thee with cold lips divine,
She left her pallor on thy face,
   That mystic ivory face of thine;
And now I sit beside thy feet,
   And all my heart is far from thee,
Dreaming of her I shall not meet,
   And of the land I shall not see!



IN ITHACA.



"And now am I greatly repenting that ever I left my life with thee,
and the immortality thou didst promise me."--Letter of Odysseus to
Calypso.  Luciani Vera Historia.

'Tis thought Odysseus when the strife was o'er
   With all the waves and wars, a weary while,
   Grew restless in his disenchanted isle,
And still would watch the sunset, from the shore,
Go down the ways of gold, and evermore
   His sad heart followed after, mile on mile,
   Back to the Goddess of the magic wile,
Calypso, and the love that was of yore.

Thou too, thy haven gained, must turn thee yet
   To look across the sad and stormy space,
   Years of a youth as bitter as the sea,
Ah, with a heavy heart, and eyelids wet,
   Because, within a fair forsaken place
   The life that might have been is lost to thee.



HOMER.



Homer, thy song men liken to the sea
   With all the notes of music in its tone,
   With tides that wash the dim dominion
Of Hades, and light waves that laugh in glee
Around the isles enchanted; nay, to me
   Thy verse seems as the River of source unknown
   That glasses Egypt's temples overthrown
In his sky-nurtured stream, eternally.

No wiser we than men of heretofore
   To find thy sacred fountains guarded fast;
Enough, thy flood makes green our human shore,
   As Nilus Egypt, rolling down his vast
His fertile flood, that murmurs evermore
   Of gods dethroned, and empires in the past.



THE BURIAL OF MOLIERE.
(AFTER J. TRUFFIER.)



Dead--he is dead!  The rouge has left a trace
   On that thin cheek where shone, perchance, a tear,
   Even while the people laughed that held him dear
But yesterday.  He died,--and not in grace,
And many a black-robed caitiff starts apace
   To slander him whose Tartuffe made them fear,
   And gold must win a passage for his bier,
And bribe the crowd that guards his resting-place.

Ah, Moliere, for that last time of all,
   Man's hatred broke upon thee, and went by,
And did but make more fair thy funeral.
   Though in the dark they hid thee stealthily,
Thy coffin had the cope of night for pall,
   For torch, the stars along the windy sky!



BION.



The wail of Moschus on the mountains crying
   The Muses heard, and loved it long ago;
They heard the hollows of the hills replying,
   They heard the weeping water's overflow;
They winged the sacred strain--the song undying,
   The song that all about the world must go, -
When poets for a poet dead are sighing,
   The minstrels for a minstrel friend laid low.

And dirge to dirge that answers, and the weeping
   For Adonais by the summer sea,
The plaints for Lycidas, and Thyrsis (sleeping
   Far from 'the forest ground called Thessaly'),
These hold thy memory, Bion, in their keeping,
   And are but echoes of the moan for thee.



SPRING.
(AFTER MELEAGER.)



Now the bright crocus flames, and now
   The slim narcissus takes the rain,
And, straying o'er the mountain's brow,
   The daffodilies bud again.
   The thousand blossoms wax and wane
On wold, and heath, and fragrant bough,
But fairer than the flowers art thou,
   Than any growth of hill or plain.

Ye gardens, cast your leafy crown,
That my Love's feet may tread it down,
   Like lilies on the lilies set:
My Love, whose lips are softer far
Than drowsy poppy petals are,
   And sweeter than the violet!



BEFORE THE SNOW.
(AFTER ALBERT GLATIGNY.)



The winter is upon us, not the snow,
   The hills are etched on the horizon bare,
   The skies are iron grey, a bitter air,
The meagre cloudlets shudder to and fro.
One yellow leaf the listless wind doth blow,
   Like some strange butterfly, unclassed and rare.
   Your footsteps ring in frozen alleys, where
The black trees seem to shiver as you go.

Beyond lie church and steeple, with their old
   And rusty vanes that rattle as they veer,
A sharper gust would shake them from their hold,
   Yet up that path, in summer of the year,
And past that melancholy pile we strolled
   To pluck wild strawberries, with merry cheer.



VILLANELLE.
TO LUCIA.



Apollo left the golden Muse
   And shepherded a mortal's sheep,
Theocritus of Syracuse!

To mock the giant swain that woo's
   The sea-nymph in the sunny deep,
Apollo left the golden Muse.

Afield he drove his lambs and ewes,
   Where Milon and where Battus reap,
Theocritus of Syracuse!

To watch thy tunny-fishers cruise
   Below the dim Sicilian steep
Apollo left the golden Muse.

Ye twain did loiter in the dews,
   Ye slept the swain's unfever'd sleep,
Theocritus of Syracuse!

That Time might half with HIS confuse
   Thy songs,--like his, that laugh and leap, -
Theocritus of Syracuse,
   Apollo left the golden Muse!



NATURAL THEOLOGY.
[Greek text which cannot be reproduced] OD. III. 47.



"Once CAGN was like a father, kind and good,
   But He was spoiled by fighting many things;
He wars upon the lions in the wood,
   And breaks the Thunder-bird's tremendous wings;
But still we cry to Him,--'We are thy brood -
   O Cagn, be merciful!' and us He brings
To herds of elands, and great store of food,
   And in the desert opens water-springs."

So Qing, King Nqsha's Bushman hunter, spoke,
   Beside the camp-fire, by the fountain fair,
When all were weary, and soft clouds of smoke
   Were fading, fragrant, in the twilit air:
And suddenly in each man's heart there woke
   A pang, a sacred memory of prayer.



THE ODYSSEY.



As one that for a weary space has lain
   Lulled by the song of Circe and her wine
   In gardens near the pale of Proserpine,
Where that AEaean isle forgets the main,
And only the low lutes of love complain,
   And only shadows of wan lovers pine,
   As such an one were glad to know the brine
Salt on his lips, and the large air again, -
So gladly, from the songs of modern speech
   Men turn, and see the stars, and feel the free
      Shrill wind beyond the close of heavy flowers,
      And through the music of the languid hours,
They hear like ocean on a western beach
   The surge and thunder of the Odyssey.



IDEAL.



Suggested by a female head in wax, of unknown date, but supposed to
be either of the best Greek age, or a work of Raphael or Leonardo.
It is now in the Lille Museum.

Ah, mystic child of Beauty, nameless maid,
   Dateless and fatherless, how long ago,
A Greek, with some rare sadness overweighed,
   Shaped thee, perchance, and quite forgot his woe!
   Or Raphael thy sweetness did bestow,
While magical his fingers o'er thee strayed,
   Or that great pupil taught of Verrocchio
Redeemed thy still perfection from the shade

That hides all fair things lost, and things unborn,
   Where one has fled from me, that wore thy grace,
   And that grave tenderness of thine awhile;
Nay, still in dreams I see her, but her face
   Is pale, is wasted with a touch of scorn,
   And only on thy lips I find her smile.



THE FAIRY'S GIFT.
"Take short views."--SYDNEY SMITH.



The Fays that to my christ'ning came
   (For come they did, my nurses taught me),
They did not bring me wealth or fame,
   'Tis very little that they brought me.
But one, the crossest of the crew,
   The ugly old one, uninvited,
Said, "I shall be avenged on YOU,
   My child; you shall grow up short-sighted!"
With magic juices did she lave
   Mine eyes, and wrought her wicked pleasure.
Well, of all gifts the Fairies gave,
   HERS is the present that I treasure!

The bore whom others fear and flee,
   I do not fear, I do not flee him;
I pass him calm as calm can be;
   I do not cut--I do not see him!
And with my feeble eyes and dim,
   Where YOU see patchy fields and fences,
For me the mists of Turner swim -
   MY "azure distance" soon commences!
Nay, as I blink about the streets
   Of this befogged and miry city,
Why, almost every girl one meets
   Seems preternaturally pretty!
"Try spectacles," one's friends intone;
   "You'll see the world correctly through them."
But I have visions of my own,
   And not for worlds would I undo them.



BENEDETTA RAMUS.
AFTER ROMNEY.



Mysterious Benedetta! who
That Reynolds or that Romney drew
Was ever half so fair as you,
   Or is so well forgot?
These eyes of melancholy brown,
These woven locks, a shadowy crown,
Must surely have bewitched the town;
   Yet you're remembered not.

Through all that prattle of your age,
Through lore of fribble and of sage
I've read, and chiefly Walpole's page,
   Wherein are beauties famous;
I've haunted ball, and rout, and sale;
I've heard of Devonshire and Thrale,
And all the Gunnings' wondrous tale,
   But nothing of Miss Ramus.

And yet on many a lattice pane
'Fair Benedetta,' scrawled in vain
By lovers' diamonds, must remain
   To tell us you were cruel. {6}
But who, of all that sighed and swore -
Wits, poets, courtiers by the score -
Did win and on his bosom wore
   This hard and lovely jewel?

Why, dilettante records say
An Alderman, who came that way,
Woo'd you and made you Lady Day;
   You crowned his civic flame.
It suits a melancholy song
To think your heart had suffered wrong,
And that you lived not very long
   To be a City dame!

Perchance you were a Mourning Bride,
And conscious of a heart that died
With one who fell by Rodney's side
   In blood-stained Spanish bays.
Perchance 'twas no such thing, and you
Dwelt happy with your knight and true,
And, like Aurora, watched a crew
   Of rosy little Days!

Oh, lovely face and innocent!
Whatever way your fortunes went,
And if to earth your life was lent
   For little space or long,
In your kind eyes we seem to see
What Woman at her best may be,
And offer to your memory
   An unavailing song!



PARTANT POUR LA SCRIBIE.
[Scribie, on the north-east littoral of Bohemia, is the land of
stage conventions.  It is named after the discoverer, M. Scribe.]



A pleasant land is Scribie, where
   The light comes mostly from below,
And seems a sort of symbol rare
   Of things at large, and how they go,
In rooms where doors are everywhere
   And cupboards shelter friend or foe.

This is a realm where people tell
   Each other, when they chance to meet,
Of things that long ago befell -
   And do most solemnly repeat
Secrets they both know very well,
   Aloud, and in the public street!

A land where lovers go in fours,
   Master and mistress, man and maid;
Where people listen at the doors
   Or 'neath a table's friendly shade,
And comic Irishmen in scores
   Roam o'er the scenes all undismayed:

A land where Virtue in distress
   Owes much to uncles in disguise;
Where British sailors frankly bless
   Their limbs, their timbers, and their eyes;
And where the villain doth confess,
   Conveniently, before he dies!

A land of lovers false and gay;
   A land where people dread a "curse;"
A land of letters gone astray,
   Or intercepted, which is worse;
Where weddings false fond maids betray,
   And all the babes are changed at nurse.

Oh, happy land, where things come right!
   We of the world where things go ill;
Where lovers love, but don't unite;
   Where no one finds the Missing Will -
Dominion of the heart's delight,
   Scribie, we've loved, and love thee still!



ST. ANDREW'S BAY.



NIGHT.

Ah, listen through the music, from the shore,
The "melancholy long-withdrawing roar";
Beneath the Minster, and the windy caves,
The wide North Ocean, marshalling his waves
Even so forlorn--in worlds beyond our ken -
May sigh the seas that are not heard of men;
Even so forlorn, prophetic of man's fate,
Sounded the cold sea-wave disconsolate,
When none but God might hear the boding tone,
As God shall hear the long lament alone,
When all is done, when all the tale is told,
And the gray sea-wave echoes as of old!

MORNING.

This was the burden of the Night,
   The saying of the sea,
But lo! the hours have brought the light,
The laughter of the waves, the flight
Of dipping sea-birds, foamy white,
   That are so glad to be!
"Forget!" the happy creatures cry,
   "Forget Night's monotone,
With us be glad in sea and sky,
The days are thine, the days that fly,
The days God gives to know him by,
   And not the Night alone!"



WOMAN AND THE WEED.
(FOUNDED ON A NEW ZEALAND MYTH.)



In the Morning of Time, when his fortunes began,
How bleak, how un-Greek, was the Nature of Man!
From his wigwam, if ever he ventured to roam,
There was nobody waiting to welcome him home;
For the Man had been made, but the woman had NOT,
And Earth was a highly detestable spot.
Man hated his neighbours; they met and they scowled,
They did not converse but they struggled and howled,
For Man had no tact--he would ne'er take a hint,
And his notions he backed with a hatchet of flint.

So Man was alone, and he wished he could see
On the Earth some one like him, but fairer than he,
With locks like the red gold, a smile like the sun,
To welcome him back when his hunting was done.
And he sighed for a voice that should answer him still,
Like the affable Echo he heard on the hill:
That should answer him softly and always agree,
AND OH, Man reflected, HOW NICE IT WOULD BE!

So he prayed to the Gods, and they stooped to his prayer,
And they spoke to the Sun on his way through the air,
And he married the Echo one fortunate morn,
And Woman, their beautiful daughter, was born!
The daughter of Sunshine and Echo she came
With a voice like a song, with a face like a flame;
With a face like a flame, and a voice like a song,
And happy was Man, but it was not for long!

For weather's a painfully changeable thing,
Not always the child of the Echo would sing;
And the face of the Sun may be hidden with mist,
And his child can be terribly cross if she list.
And unfortunate Man had to learn with surprise
That a frown's not peculiar to masculine eyes;
That the sweetest of voices can scold and can sneer,
And cannot be answered--like men--with a spear.

So Man went and called to the Gods in his woe,
And they answered him--"Sir, you would needs have it so:
And the thing must go on as the thing has begun,
She's immortal--your child of the Echo and Sun.
But we'll send you another, and fairer is she,
This maiden with locks that are flowing and free.
This maiden so gentle, so kind, and so fair,
With a flower like a star in the night of her hair.
With her eyes like the smoke that is misty and blue,
With her heart that is heavenly, and tender, and true.
She will die in the night, but no need you should mourn,
You shall bury her body and thence shall be born
A weed that is green, that is fragrant and fair,
With a flower like the star in the night of her hair.
And the leaves must ye burn till they offer to you
Soft smoke, like her eyes that are misty and blue.

"And the smoke shall ye breathe and no more shall ye fret,
But the child of the Echo and Sun shall forget:
Shall forget all the trouble and torment she brings,
Shall bethink ye of none but delectable things;
And the sound of the wars with your brethren shall cease,
While ye smoke by the camp-fire the great pipe of peace."
So the last state of Man was by no means the worst,
The second gift softened the sting of the first.

Nor the child of the Echo and Sun doth he heed
When he dreams with the Maid that was changed to the weed;
Though the Echo be silent, the Sun in a mist,
The Maid is the fairest that ever was kissed.
And when tempests are over and ended the rain,
And the child of the Sunshine is sunny again,
He comes back, glad at heart, and again is at one
With the changeable child of the Echo and Sun.



Footnotes:

{1}  Cf. "Suggestions for Academic Reorganization."

{2}  The last three stanzas are by an eminent Anthropologist.

{3}  Thomas of Ercildoune.

{4}  A knavish publisher.

{5}  Vous y verrez, belle Julie,
Que ce chapeau tout maltraite
Fut, dans un instant de folie,
Par les Graces meme invente.

'A Julie.'  Essais en Prose et en Vers, par Joseph Lisle; Paris.
An. V. de la Republique.

{6}  "I have broken many a pane of glass marked Cruel Parthenissa,"
says the aunt of Sophia Western in Tom Jones.










This etext was produced by Donald Lainson, charlie@idirect.com.





BLACK ROCK

A TALE OF THE SELKIRKS

by Ralph Connor




INTRODUCTION


I think I have met "Ralph Conner."  Indeed, I am sure I have--once
in a canoe on the Red River, once on the Assinaboine, and twice or
thrice on the prairies to the West.  That was not the name he gave
me, but, if I am right, it covers one of the most honest and genial
of the strong characters that are fighting the devil and doing good
work for men all over the world.  He has seen with his own eyes the
life which he describes in this book, and has himself, for some
years of hard and lonely toil, assisted in the good influences which
he traces among its wild and often hopeless conditions.  He writes
with the freshness and accuracy of an eye-witness, with the style
(as I think his readers will allow) of a real artist, and with the
tenderness and hopefulness of a man not only of faith but of
experience, who has seen in fulfillment the ideals for which he
lives.

The life to which he takes us, though far off and very strange to
our tame minds, is the life of our brothers.  Into the Northwest of
Canada the young men of Great Britain and Ireland have been pouring
(I was told), sometimes at the rate of 48,000 a year.  Our brothers
who left home yesterday--our hearts cannot but follow them.  With
these pages Ralph Conner enables our eyes and our minds to follow,
too; nor do I think there is any one who shall read this book and
not find also that his conscience is quickened.  There is a warfare
appointed unto man upon earth, and its struggles are nowhere more
intense, nor the victories of the strong, nor the succors brought
to the fallen, more heroic, than on the fields described in this
volume.

GEORGE ADAM SMITH.



BLACK ROCK


The story of the book is true, and chief of the failures in the
making of the book is this, that it is not all the truth.  The
light is not bright enough, the shadow is not black enough to give
a true picture of that bit of Western life of which the writer was
some small part.  The men of the book are still there in the mines
and lumber camps of the mountains, fighting out that eternal fight
for manhood, strong, clean, God-conquered.  And, when the west
winds blow, to the open ear the sounds of battle come, telling the
fortunes of the fight.

Because a man's life is all he has, and because the only hope of
the brave young West lies in its men, this story is told.  It may
be that the tragic pity of a broken life may move some to pray, and
that that divine power there is in a single brave heart to summon
forth hope and courage may move some to fight.  If so, the tale is
not told in vain.

C.W.G.



CONTENTS


CHAPTER I

CHRISTMAS EVE IN A LUMBER CAMP


CHAPTER II

THE BLACK ROCK CHRISTMAS


CHAPTER III

WATERLOO.  OUR FIGHT--HIS VICTORY


CHAPTER IV

MRS. MAVOR'S STORY


CHAPTER V

THE MAKING OF THE LEAGUE


CHAPTER VI

BLACK ROCK RELIGION


CHAPTER VII

THE FIRST BLACK ROCK COMMUNION


CHAPTER VIII

THE BREAKING OF THE LEAGUE


CHAPTER IX

THE LEAGUE'S REVENGE


CHAPTER X

WHAT CAME TO SLAVIN


CHAPTER XI

THE TWO CALLS


CHAPTER XII

LOVE IS NOT ALL


CHAPTER XIII

HOW NELSON CAME HOME


CHAPTER XIV

GRAEME'S NEW BIRTH


CHAPTER XV

COMING TO THEIR OWN




CHAPTER I


CHRISTMAS EVE IN A LUMBER CAMP


It was due to a mysterious dispensation of Providence, and a good
deal to Leslie Graeme, that I found myself in the heart of the
Selkirks for my Christmas Eve as the year 1882 was dying.  It had
been my plan to spend my Christmas far away in Toronto, with such
Bohemian and boon companions as could be found in that cosmopolitan
and kindly city.  But Leslie Graeme changed all that, for,
discovering me in the village of Black Rock, with my traps all
packed, waiting for the stage to start for the Landing, thirty
miles away, he bore down upon me with resistless force, and I found
myself recovering from my surprise only after we had gone in his
lumber sleigh some six miles on our way to his camp up in the
mountains.  I was surprised and much delighted, though I would not
allow him to think so, to find that his old-time power over me was
still there.  He could always in the old 'Varsity days--dear, wild
days--make me do what he liked.  He was so handsome and so
reckless, brilliant in his class-work, and the prince of half-backs
on the Rugby field, and with such power of fascination, as would
'extract the heart out of a wheelbarrow,' as Barney Lundy used to
say.  And thus it was that I found myself just three weeks later--I
was to have spent two or three days,--on the afternoon of the 24th
of December, standing in Graeme's Lumber Camp No. 2, wondering at
myself.  But I did not regret my changed plans, for in those three
weeks I had raided a cinnamon bear's den and had wakened up a
grizzly--  But I shall let the grizzly finish the tale; he probably
sees more humour in it than I.

The camp stood in a little clearing, and consisted of a group of
three long, low shanties with smaller shacks near them, all built
of heavy, unhewn logs, with door and window in each.  The grub
camp, with cook-shed attached, stood in the middle of the clearing;
at a little distance was the sleeping-camp with the office built
against it, and about a hundred yards away on the other side of the
clearing stood the stables, and near them the smiddy.  The
mountains rose grandly on every side, throwing up their great peaks
into the sky.  The clearing in which the camp stood was hewn out of
a dense pine forest that filled the valley and climbed half way up
the mountain-sides, and then frayed out in scattered and stunted
trees.

It was one of those wonderful Canadian winter days, bright, and
with a touch of sharpness in the air that did not chill, but warmed
the blood like draughts of wine.  The men were up in the woods, and
the shrill scream of the blue jay flashing across the open, the
impudent chatter of the red squirrel from the top of the grub camp,
and the pert chirp of the whisky-jack, hopping about on the
rubbish-heap, with the long, lone cry of the wolf far down the
valley, only made the silence felt the more.

As I stood drinking in with all my soul the glorious beauty and the
silence of mountain and forest, with the Christmas feeling stealing
into me, Graeme came out from his office, and, catching sight of
me, called out, 'Glorious Christmas weather, old chap!'  And then,
coming nearer, 'Must you go to-morrow?'

'I fear so,' I replied, knowing well that the Christmas feeling was
on him too.

'I wish I were going with you,' he said quietly.

I turned eagerly to persuade him, but at the look of suffering in
his face the words died at my lips, for we both were thinking of
the awful night of horror when all his bright, brilliant life
crashed down about him in black ruin and shame.  I could only throw
my arm over his shoulder and stand silent beside him.  A sudden
jingle of bells roused him, and, giving himself a little shake, he
exclaimed, 'There are the boys coming home.'

Soon the camp was filled with men talking, laughing, chaffing, like
light-hearted boys.

'They are a little wild to-night,' said Graeme; 'and to morrow
they'll paint Black Rock red.'

Before many minutes had gone, the last teamster was 'washed up,'
and all were standing about waiting impatiently for the cook's
signal--the supper to-night was to be 'something of a feed'--when
the sound of bells drew their attention to a light sleigh drawn by
a buckskin broncho coming down the hillside at a great pace.

'The preacher, I'll bet, by his driving,' said one of the men.

'Bedad, and it's him has the foine nose for turkey!' said Blaney, a
good-natured, jovial Irishman.

'Yes, or for pay-day, more like,' said Keefe, a black-browed,
villainous fellow-countryman of Blaney's, and, strange to say, his
great friend.

Big Sandy M'Naughton, a Canadian Highlander from Glengarry, rose up
in wrath.  'Bill Keefe,' said he, with deliberate emphasis, 'you'll
just keep your dirty tongue off the minister; and as for your pay,
it's little he sees of it, or any one else, except Mike Slavin,
when you're too dry to wait for some one to treat you, or perhaps
Father Ryan, when the fear of hell-fire is on to you.'

The men stood amazed at Sandy's sudden anger and length of speech.

'Bon; dat's good for you, my bully boy,' said Baptiste, a wiry
little French-Canadian, Sandy's sworn ally and devoted admirer ever
since the day when the big Scotsman, under great provocation, had
knocked him clean off the dump into the river and then jumped in
for him.

It was not till afterwards I learned the cause of Sandy's sudden
wrath which urged him to such unwonted length of speech.  It was
not simply that the Presbyterian blood carried with it reverence
for the minister and contempt for Papists and Fenians, but that he
had a vivid remembrance of how, only a month ago, the minister had
got him out of Mike Slavin's saloon and out the clutches of Keefe
and Slavin and their gang of bloodsuckers.

Keefe started up with a curse.  Baptiste sprang to Sandy's side,
slapped him on the back, and called out, 'You keel him, I'll hit
(eat) him up, me.'

It looked as if there might be a fight, when a harsh voice said in
a low, savage tone, 'Stop your row, you blank fools; settle it, if
you want to, somewhere else.'  I turned, and was amazed to see old
man Nelson, who was very seldom moved to speech.

There was a look of scorn on his hard, iron-grey face, and of such
settled fierceness as made me quite believe the tales I had heard
of his deadly fights in the mines at the coast.  Before any reply
could be made, the minister drove up and called out in a cheery
voice, 'Merry Christmas, boys!  Hello, Sandy!  Comment ca va,
Baptiste?  How do you do, Mr. Graeme?'

'First rate.  Let me introduce my friend, Mr. Connor, sometime
medical student, now artist, hunter, and tramp at large, but not a
bad sort.'

'A man to be envied,' said the minister, smiling.  'I am glad to
know any friend of Mr. Graeme's.'

I liked Mr. Craig from the first.  He had good eyes that looked
straight out at you, a clean-cut, strong face well set on his
shoulders, and altogether an upstanding, manly bearing.  He
insisted on going with Sandy to the stables to see Dandy, his
broncho, put up.

'Decent fellow,' said Graeme; 'but though he is good enough to his
broncho, it is Sandy that's in his mind now.'

'Does he come out often?  I mean, are you part of his parish, so to
speak?'

'I have no doubt he thinks so; and I'm blowed if he doesn't make
the Presbyterians of us think so too.'  And he added after a pause,
'A dandy lot of parishioners we are for any man.  There's Sandy,
now, he would knock Keefe's head off as a kind of religious
exercise; but to-morrow Keefe will be sober, and Sandy will be
drunk as a lord, and the drunker he is the better Presbyterian
he'll be; to the preacher's disgust.'  Then after another pause he
added bitterly, 'But it is not for me to throw rocks at Sandy; I am
not the same kind of fool, but I am a fool of several other sorts.'

Then the cook came out and beat a tattoo on the bottom of a dish-
pan.  Baptiste answered with a yell: but though keenly hungry, no
man would demean himself to do other than walk with apparent
reluctance to his place at the table.  At the further end of the
camp was a big fireplace, and from the door to the fireplace
extended the long board tables, covered with platters of turkey not
too scientifically carved, dishes of potatoes, bowls of apple
sauce, plates of butter, pies, and smaller dishes distributed at
regular intervals.  Two lanterns hanging from the roof, and a row
of candles stuck into the wall on either side by means of slit
sticks, cast a dim, weird light over the scene.

There was a moment's silence, and at a nod from Graeme Mr. Craig
rose and said, 'I don't know how you feel about it, men, but to me
this looks good enough to be thankful for.'

'Fire ahead, sir,' called out a voice quite respectfully, and the
minister bent his head and said--

'For Christ the Lord who came to save us, for all the love and
goodness we have known, and for these Thy gifts to us this
Christmas night, our Father, make us thankful.  Amen.'

'Bon, dat's fuss rate,' said Baptiste.  'Seems lak dat's make me
hit (eat) more better for sure,' and then no word was spoken for
quarter of an hour.  The occasion was far too solemn and moments
too precious for anything so empty as words.  But when the white
piles of bread and the brown piles of turkey had for a second time
vanished, and after the last pie had disappeared, there came a
pause and hush of expectancy, whereupon the cook and cookee, each
bearing aloft a huge, blazing pudding, came forth.

'Hooray!' yelled Blaney, 'up wid yez!' and grabbing the cook by the
shoulders from behind, he faced him about.

Mr. Craig was the first to respond, and seizing the cookee in the
same way, called out, 'Squad, fall in! quick march!'  In a moment
every man was in the procession.

'Strike up, Batchees, ye little angel!' shouted Blaney, the
appellation a concession to the minister's presence; and away went
Baptiste in a rollicking French song with the English chorus--


     'Then blow, ye winds, in the morning,
        Blow, ye winds, ay oh!
      Blow, ye winds, in the morning,
        Blow, blow, blow.'


And at each 'blow' every boot came down with a thump on the plank
floor that shook the solid roof.  After the second round, Mr.
Craig jumped upon the bench, and called out--

'Three cheers for Billy the cook!'

In the silence following the cheers Baptiste was heard to say,
'Bon! dat's mak me feel lak hit dat puddin' all hup mesef, me.'

'Hear till the little baste!' said Blaney in disgust.

'Batchees,' remonstrated Sandy gravely, 'ye've more stomach than
manners.'

'Fu sure! but de more stomach dat's more better for dis puddin','
replied the little Frenchman cheerfully.

After a time the tables were cleared and pushed back to the wall,
and pipes were produced.  In all attitudes suggestive of comfort
the men disposed themselves in a wide circle about the fire, which
now roared and crackled up the great wooden chimney hanging from
the roof.  The lumberman's hour of bliss had arrived.  Even old man
Nelson looked a shade less melancholy than usual as he sat alone,
well away from the fire, smoking steadily and silently.  When the
second pipes were well a-going, one of the men took down a violin
from the wall and handed it to Lachlan Campbell.  There were two
brothers Campbell just out from Argyll, typical Highlanders:
Lachlan, dark, silent, melancholy, with the face of a mystic, and
Angus, red-haired, quick, impulsive, and devoted to his brother, a
devotion he thought proper to cover under biting, sarcastic speech.

Lachlan, after much protestation, interspersed with gibes from his
brother, took the violin, and, in response to the call from all
sides, struck up 'Lord Macdonald's Reel.'  In a moment the floor
was filled with dancers, whooping and cracking their fingers in the
wildest manner.  Then Baptiste did the 'Red River Jig,' a most
intricate and difficult series of steps, the men keeping time to
the music with hands and feet.

When the jig was finished, Sandy called for 'Lochaber No More'; but
Campbell said, 'No, no! I cannot play that to-night.  Mr. Craig
will play.'

Craig took the violin, and at the first note I knew he was no
ordinary player.  I did not recognise the music, but it was soft
and thrilling, and got in by the heart, till every one was thinking
his tenderest and saddest thoughts.

After he had played two or three exquisite bits, he gave Campbell
his violin, saying, 'Now, "Lochaber," Lachlan.'

Without a word Lachlan began, not 'Lochaber'--he was not ready for
that yet--but 'The Flowers o' the Forest,' and from that wandered
through 'Auld Robin Gray' and 'The Land o' the Leal,' and so got at
last to that most soul-subduing of Scottish laments, 'Lochaber No
More.'  At the first strain, his brother, who had thrown himself on
some blankets behind the fire, turned over on his face, feigning
sleep.  Sandy M'Naughton took his pipe out of his mouth, and sat up
straight and stiff, staring into vacancy, and Graeme, beyond the
fire, drew a short, sharp breath.  We had often sat, Graeme and I,
in our student-days, in the drawing-room at home, listening to his
father wailing out 'Lochaber' upon the pipes, and I well knew that
the awful minor strains were now eating their way into his soul.

Over and over again the Highlander played his lament.  He had long
since forgotten us, and was seeing visions of the hills and lochs
and glens of his far-away native land, and making us, too, see
strange things out of the dim past.  I glanced at old man Nelson,
and was startled at the eager, almost piteous, look in his eyes,
and I wished Campbell would stop.  Mr. Craig caught my eye, and,
stepping over to Campbell, held out his hand for the violin.
Lingeringly and lovingly the Highlander drew out the last strain,
and silently gave the minister his instrument.

Without a moment's pause, and while the spell of 'Lochaber' was
still upon us, the minister, with exquisite skill, fell into the
refrain of that simple and beautiful camp-meeting hymn, 'The Sweet
By and By.'  After playing the verse through once, he sang softly
the refrain.  After the first verse, the men joined in the chorus;
at first timidly, but by the time the third verse was reached they
were shouting with throats full open, 'We shall meet on that
beautiful shore.'  When I looked at Nelson the eager light had gone
out of his eyes, and in its place was kind of determined
hopelessness, as if in this new music he had no part.

After the voices had ceased, Mr. Craig played again the refrain,
more and more softly and slowly; then laying the violin on
Campbell's knees, he drew from his pocket his little Bible, and
said--

'Men, with Mr. Graeme's permission, I want to read you something
this Christmas Eve.  You will all have heard it before, but you
will like it none the less for that.'

His voice was soft, but clear and penetrating, as he read the
eternal story of the angels and the shepherds and the Babe.  And as
he read, a slight motion of the hand or a glance of an eye made us
see, as he was seeing, that whole radiant drama.  The wonder, the
timid joy, the tenderness, the mystery of it all, were borne in
upon us with overpowering effect.  He closed the book, and in the
same low, clear voice went on to tell us how, in his home years
ago, he used to stand on Christmas Eve listening in thrilling
delight to his mother telling him the story, and how she used to
make him see the shepherds and hear the sheep bleating near by, and
how the sudden burst of glory used to make his heart jump.

'I used to be a little afraid of the angels, because a boy told me
they were ghosts; but my mother told me better, and I didn't fear
them any more.  And the Baby, the dear little Baby--we all love a
baby.'  There was a quick, dry sob; it was from Nelson.  'I used to
peek through under to see the little one in the straw, and wonder
what things swaddling clothes were.  Oh, it was all so real and so
beautiful!'  He paused, and I could hear the men breathing.

'But one Christmas Eve,' he went on, in a lower, sweeter tone,
'there was no one to tell me the story, and I grew to forget it,
and went away to college, and learned to think that it was only a
child's tale and was not for men.  Then bad days came to me and
worse, and I began to lose my grip of myself, of life, of hope, of
goodness, till one black Christmas, in the slums of a faraway city,
when I had given up all, and the devil's arms were about me, I
heard the story again.  And as I listened, with a bitter ache in my
heart, for I had put it all behind me, I suddenly found myself
peeking under the shepherds' arms with a child's wonder at the Baby
in the straw.  Then it came over me like great waves, that His name
was Jesus, because it was He that should save men from their sins.
Save!  Save!  The waves kept beating upon my ears, and before I
knew, I had called out, "Oh! can He save me?"  It was in a little
mission meeting on one of the side streets, and they seemed to be
used to that sort of thing there, for no one was surprised; and a
young fellow leaned across the aisle to me and said, "Why! you just
bet He can!"  His surprise that I should doubt, his bright face and
confident tone, gave me hope that perhaps it might be so.  I held
to that hope with all my soul, and'--stretching up his arms, and
with a quick glow in his face and a little break in his voice, 'He
hasn't failed me yet; not once, not once!'

He stopped quite short, and I felt a good deal like making a fool
of myself, for in those days I had not made up my mind about these
things.  Graeme, poor old chap, was gazing at him with a sad
yearning in his dark eyes; big Sandy was sitting very stiff, and
staring harder than ever into the fire; Baptiste was trembling with
excitement; Blaney was openly wiping the tears away.  But the face
that held my eyes was that of old man Nelson.  It was white,
fierce, hungry-looking, his sunken eyes burning, his lips parted as
if to cry.

The minister went on.  'I didn't mean to tell you this, men, it all
came over me with a rush; but it is true, every word, and not a
word will I take back.  And, what's more, I can tell you this, what
He did for me He can do for any man, and it doesn't make any
difference what's behind him, and'--leaning slightly forward, and
with a little thrill of pathos vibrating in his voice--'O boys, why
don't you give Him a chance at you?  Without Him you'll never be
the men you want to be, and you'll never get the better of that
that's keeping some of you now from going back home.  You know
you'll never go back till you're the men you want to be.'  Then,
lifting up his face and throwing back his head, he said, as if to
himself, 'Jesus!  He shall save His people from their sins,' and
then, 'Let us pray.'

Graeme leaned forward with his face in his hands; Baptiste and
Blaney dropped on their knees; Sandy, the Campbells, and some
others, stood up.  Old man Nelson held his eyes steadily on the
minister.

Only once before had I seen that look on a human face.  A young
fellow had broken through the ice on the river at home, and as the
black water was dragging his fingers one by one from the slippery
edges, there came over his face that same look.  I used to wake up
for many a night after in a sweat of horror, seeing the white face
with its parting lips, and its piteous, dumb appeal, and the black
water slowly sucking it down.

Nelson's face brought it all back; but during the prayer the face
changed, and seemed to settle into resolve of some sort, stern,
almost gloomy, as of a man with his last chance before him.

After the prayer Mr. Craig invited the men to a Christmas dinner
next day in Black Rock.  'And because you are an independent lot,
we'll charge you half a dollar for dinner and the evening show.'
Then leaving a bundle of magazines and illustrated papers on the
table--a godsend to the men--he said good-bye and went out.

I was to go with the minister, so I jumped into the sleigh first,
and waited while he said good-bye to Graeme, who had been hard hit
by the whole service, and seemed to want to say something.  I heard
Mr. Craig say cheerfully and confidently, 'It's a true bill: try
Him.'

Sandy, who had been steadying Dandy while that interesting broncho
was attempting with great success to balance himself on his hind
legs, came to say good-bye.  'Come and see me first thing, Sandy.'

'Ay! I know; I'll see ye, Mr. Craig,' said Sandy earnestly, as
Dandy dashed off at a full gallop across the clearing and over the
bridge, steadying down when he reached the hill.

'Steady, you idiot!'

This was to Dandy, who had taken a sudden side spring into the deep
snow, almost upsetting us.  A man stepped out from the shadow.  It
was old man Nelson.  He came straight to the sleigh, and, ignoring
my presence completely, said--

'Mr. Craig, are you dead sure of this?  Will it work?'

'Do you mean,' said Craig, taking him up promptly, 'can Jesus
Christ save you from your sins and make a man of you?'

The old man nodded, keeping his hungry eyes on the other's face.

'Well, here's His message to you: "The Son of Man is come to seek
and to save that which was lost."'

'To me?  To me?' said the old man eagerly.

'Listen; this, too, is His Word: "Him that cometh unto Me I will in
no wise cast out."  That's for you, for here you are, coming.'

'You don't know me, Mr. Craig.  I left my baby fifteen years ago
because--'

'Stop!' said the minister.  'Don't tell me, at least not to-night;
perhaps never.  Tell Him who knows it all now, and who never
betrays a secret.  Have it out with Him.  Don't be afraid to trust
Him.'

Nelson looked at him, with his face quivering, and said in a husky
voice, 'If this is no good, it's hell for me.'

'If it is no good,' replied Craig, almost sternly, 'it's hell for
all of us.'

The old man straightened himself up, looked up at the stars, then
back at Mr. Craig, then at me, and, drawing a deep breath, said,
'I'll try Him.'  As he was turning away the minister touched him on
the arm, and said quietly, 'Keep an eye on Sandy to-morrow.'

Nelson nodded, and we went on; but before we took the next turn I
looked back and saw what brought a lump into my throat.  It was old
man Nelson on his knees in the snow, with his hands spread upward
to the stars, and I wondered if there was any One above the stars,
and nearer than the stars, who could see.  And then the trees hid
him from my sight


CHAPTER II

THE BLACK ROCK CHRISTMAS


Many strange Christmas Days have I seen, but that wild Black Rock
Christmas stands out strangest of all.  While I was revelling in my
delicious second morning sleep, just awake enough to enjoy it, Mr.
Craig came abruptly, announcing breakfast and adding, 'Hope you are
in good shape, for we have our work before us this day.'

'Hello!' I replied, still half asleep, and anxious to hide from the
minister that I was trying to gain a few more moments of snoozing
delight, 'what's abroad?'.

'The devil,' he answered shortly, and with such emphasis that I sat
bolt upright, looking anxiously about.

'Oh! no need for alarm.  He's not after you particularly--at least
not to-day,' said Craig, with a shadow of a smile.  'But he is
going about in good style, I can tell you.'

By this time I was quite awake.  'Well, what particular style does
His Majesty affect this morning?'

He pulled out a showbill.  'Peculiarly gaudy and effective, is it
not?'

The items announced were sufficiently attractive.  The 'Frisco
Opera Company were to produce the 'screaming farce,' 'The Gay and
Giddy Dude'; after which there was to be a 'Grand Ball,' during
which the 'Kalifornia Female Kickers' were to do some fancy
figures; the whole to be followed by a 'big supper' with 'two free
drinks to every man and one to the lady,' and all for the
insignificant sum of two dollars.

'Can't you go one better?' I said.

He looked inquiringly and a little disgustedly at me.

'What can you do against free drinks and a dance, not to speak of
the "High Kickers"?' he groaned.

'No!' he continued; 'it's a clean beat for us today.  The miners
and lumbermen will have in their pockets ten thousand dollars, and
every dollar burning a hole; and Slavin and his gang will get most
of it.  But,' he added, 'you must have breakfast.  You'll find a
tub in the kitchen; don't be afraid to splash.  It is the best I
have to offer you.'

The tub sounded inviting, and before many minutes had passed I was
in a delightful glow, the effect of cold water and a rough towel,
and that consciousness of virtue that comes to a man who has had
courage to face his cold bath on a winter morning.

The breakfast was laid with fine taste.  A diminutive pine-tree, in
a pot hung round with wintergreen, stood in the centre of the
table.

'Well, now, this looks good; porridge, beefsteak, potatoes, toast,
and marmalade.'

'I hope you will enjoy it all.'

There was not much talk over our meal.  Mr. Craig was evidently
preoccupied, and as blue as his politeness would allow him.
Slavin's victory weighed upon his spirits.  Finally he burst out,
'Look here!  I can't, I won't stand it; something must be done.
Last Christmas this town was for two weeks, as one of the miners
said, "a little suburb of hell."  It was something too awful.  And
at the end of it all one young fellow was found dead in his shack,
and twenty or more crawled back to the camps, leaving their three
months' pay with Slavin and his suckers.

'I won't stand it, I say.'  He turned fiercely on me.  'What's to
be done?'

This rather took me aback, for I had troubled myself with nothing
of this sort in my life before, being fully occupied in keeping
myself out of difficulty, and allowing others the same privilege.
So I ventured the consolation that he had done his part, and that a
spree more or less would not make much difference to these men.
But the next moment I wished I had been slower in speech, for he
swiftly faced me, and his words came like a torrent.

'God forgive you that heartless word!  Do you know--?  But no; you
don't know what you are saying.  You don't know that these men have
been clambering for dear life out of a fearful pit for three months
past, and doing good climbing too, poor chaps.  You don't think
that some of them have wives, most of them mothers and sisters, in
the east or across the sea, for whose sake they are slaving here;
the miners hoping to save enough to bring their families to this
homeless place, the rest to make enough to go back with credit.
Why, there's Nixon, miner, splendid chap; has been here for two
years, and drawing the highest pay.  Twice he has been in sight of
his heaven, for he can't speak of his wife and babies without
breaking up, and twice that slick son of the devil--that's
Scripture, mind you--Slavin, got him, and "rolled" him, as the boys
say.  He went back to the mines broken in body and in heart.  He
says this is his third and last chance.  If Slavin gets him, his
wife and babies will never see him on earth or in heaven.  There is
Sandy, too, and the rest.  And,' he added, in a lower tone, and
with the curious little thrill of pathos in his voice, 'this is the
day the Saviour came to the world.'  He paused, and then with a
little sad smile, 'But I don't want to abuse you.'

'Do, I enjoy it, I'm a beast, a selfish beast'; for somehow his
intense, blazing earnestness made me feel uncomfortably small.

'What have we to offer?' I demanded.

'Wait till I have got these things cleared away, and my
housekeeping done.'

I pressed my services upon him, somewhat feebly, I own, for I can't
bear dishwater; but he rejected my offer.

'I don't like trusting my china to the hands of a tender-foot.'

'Quite right, though your china would prove an excellent means of
defence at long range.'  It was delf, a quarter of an inch thick.
So I smoked while he washed up, swept, dusted, and arranged the
room.

After the room was ordered to his taste, we proceeded to hold
council.  He could offer dinner, magic lantern, music.  'We can
fill in time for two hours, but,' he added gloomily, 'we can't beat
the dance and the "High Kickers."'

'Have you nothing new or startling?'

He shook his head.

'No kind of show?  Dog show?  Snake charmer?'

'Slavin has a monopoly of the snakes.'

Then he added hesitatingly, 'There was an old Punch-and-Judy chap
here last year, but he died.  Whisky again.'

'What happened to his show?'

'The Black Rock Hotel man took it for board and whisky bill.  He
has it still, I suppose.'

I did not much relish the business; but I hated to see him beaten,
so I ventured, 'I have run a Punch and Judy in an amateur way at
the 'Varsity.'

He sprang to his feet with a yell.

'You have! you mean to say it?  We've got them!  We've beaten
them!'  He had an extraordinary way of taking your help for
granted.  'The miner chaps, mostly English and Welsh, went mad over
the poor old showman, and made him so wealthy that in sheer
gratitude he drank himself to death.'

He walked up and down in high excitement and in such evident
delight that I felt pledged to my best effort.

'Well,' I said, 'first the poster.  We must beat them in that.'

He brought me large sheets of brown paper, and after two hours'
hard work I had half a dozen pictorial showbills done in gorgeous
colours and striking designs.  They were good, if I do say it
myself.

The turkey, the magic lantern, the Punch and Judy show were all
there, the last with a crowd before it in gaping delight.  A few
explanatory words were thrown in, emphasising the highly artistic
nature of the Punch and Judy entertainment.

Craig was delighted, and proceeded to perfect his plans.  He had
some half a dozen young men, four young ladies, and eight or ten
matrons, upon whom he could depend for help.  These he organised
into a vigilance committee charged with the duty of preventing
miners and lumbermen from getting away to Slavin's.  'The critical
moments will be immediately before and after dinner, and then again
after the show is over,' he explained.  'The first two crises must
be left to the care of Punch and Judy, and as for the last, I am
not yet sure what shall be done'; but I saw he had something in his
head, for he added, 'I shall see Mrs. Mavor.'

'Who is Mrs. Mavor?' I asked.  But he made no reply.  He was a born
fighter, and he put the fighting spirit into us all.  We were bound
to win.

The sports were to begin at two o'clock.  By lunch-time everything
was in readiness.  After lunch I was having a quiet smoke in
Craig's shack when in he rushed, saying--

'The battle will be lost before it is fought.  If we lose Quatre
Bras, we shall never get to Waterloo.'

'What's up?'

'Slavin, just now.  The miners are coming in, and he will have them
in tow in half an hour.'

He looked at me appealingly.  I knew what he wanted.

'All right; I suppose I must, but it is an awful bore that a man
can't have a quiet smoke.'

'You're not half a bad fellow,' he replied, smiling.  'I shall get
the ladies to furnish coffee inside the booth.  You furnish them
intellectual nourishment in front with dear old Punch and Judy.'

He sent a boy with a bell round the village announcing, 'Punch, and
Judy in front of the Christmas booth beside the church'; and for
three-quarters of an hour I shrieked and sweated in that awful
little pen.  But it was almost worth it to hear the shouts of
approval and laughter that greeted my performance.  It was cold
work standing about, so that the crowd was qu