ything in it.  The trouble with me is I can't face the
music.  It calls for a life where a fellow must go in for straight,
steady work, self-denial, and that sort of thing; and I'm too
Bohemian for that, and too lazy.  But that fellow Craig makes one
feel horribly uncomfortable.'

Graeme put his head on one side, and examined me curiously.

'I believe you're right about yourself.  You always were a
luxurious beggar.  But that's not where it catches me.'

We sat and smoked and talked of other things for an hour, and then
turned in.  As I was dropping off I was roused by Graeme's voice--

'Are you going to the preparatory service on Friday night?'

'Don't know,' I replied rather sleepily.

'I say, do you remember the preparatory service at home?'  There
was something in his voice that set me wide awake.

'Yes.  Rather terrific, wasn't it?  But I always felt better after
it,' I replied.

'To me'--he was sitting up in bed now--'to me it was like a call to
arms, or rather like a call for a forlorn hope.  None but
volunteers wanted.  Do you remember the thrill in the old
governor's voice as he dared any but the right stuff to come on?'

'We'll go in on Friday night,' I said.

And so we did.  Sandy took a load of men with his team, and Graeme
and I drove in the light sleigh.

The meeting was in the church, and over a hundred men were present.
There was some singing of familiar hymns at first, and then Mr.
Craig read the same story as we had heard in the stable, that most
perfect of all parables, the Prodigal Son.  Baptiste nudged Sandy
in delight, and whispered something, but Sandy held his face so
absolutely expressionless that Graeme was moved to say--

'Look at Sandy!  Did you ever see such a graven image?  Something
has hit him hard.'

The men were held fast by the story.  The voice of the reader, low,
earnest, and thrilling with the tender pathos of the tale, carried
the words to our hearts, while a glance, a gesture, a movement of
the body gave us the vision of it all as he was seeing it.

Then, in simplest of words, he told us what the story meant,
holding us the while with eyes, and voice, and gesture.  He
compelled us scorn the gay, heartless selfishness of the young fool
setting forth so jauntily from the broken home; he moved our pity
and our sympathy for the young profligate, who, broken and
deserted, had still pluck enough to determine to work his way back,
and who, in utter desperation, at last gave it up; and then he
showed us the homecoming--the ragged, heart-sick tramp, with
hesitating steps, stumbling along the dusty road, and then the rush
of the old father, his garments fluttering, and his voice heard in
broken cries.  I see and hear it all now, whenever the words are
read.

He announced the hymn, 'Just as I am,' read the first verse, and
then went on: 'There you are, men, every man of you, somewhere on
the road.  Some of you are too lazy'--here Graeme nudged me--'and
some of you haven't got enough yet of the far country to come back.
May there be a chance for you when you want to come!  Men, you all
want to go back home, and when you go you'll want to put on your
soft clothes, and you won't go till you can go in good style; but
where did the prodigal get his good clothes?'  Quick came the
answer in Baptiste's shrill voice--

'From de old fadder!'

No one was surprised, and the minister went on--

'Yes! and that's where we must get the good, clean heart, the good,
clean, brave heart, from our Father.  Don't wait, but, just as you
are, come.  Sing.'

They sang, not loud, as they would 'Stand Up,' or even 'The Sweet
By and By,' but in voices subdued, holding down the power in them.

After the singing, Craig stood a moment gazing down at the men, and
then said quietly--

'Any man want to come?  You all might come.  We all must come.'
Then, sweeping his arm over the audience, and turning half round as
if to move off, he cried, in a voice that thrilled to the heart's
core--

'Oh! come on!  Let's go back!'

The effect was overpowering.  It seemed to me that the whole
company half rose to their feet.  Of the prayer that immediately
followed, I only caught the opening sentence, 'Father, we are
coming back,' for my attention was suddenly absorbed by Abe, the
stage-driver, who was sitting next me.  I could hear him swearing
approval and admiration, saying to himself--

'Ain't he a clinker!  I'll be gee-whizzly-gol-dusted if he ain't a
malleable-iron-double-back-action self-adjusting corn-cracker.'
And the prayer continued to be punctuated with like admiring and
even more sulphurous expletives.  It was an incongruous medley.
The earnest, reverent prayer, and the earnest, admiring profanity,
rendered chaotic one's ideas of religious propriety.  The feelings
in both were akin; the method of expression somewhat widely
diverse.

After prayer, Craig's tone changed utterly.  In a quiet, matter-of-
fact, businesslike way he stated his plan of organisation, and
called for all who wished to join to remain after the benediction.
Some fifty men were left, among them Nelson, Sandy, Lachlan
Campbell, Baptiste, Shaw, Nixon, Geordie, and Billy Breen, who
tried to get out, but was held fast by Geordie.

Graeme was passing out, but I signed him to remain, saying that I
wished 'to see the thing out.'  Abe sat still beside me, swearing
disgustedly at the fellows 'who were going back on the preacher.'
Craig appeared amazed at the number of men remaining, and seemed to
fear that something was wrong.  He put before them the terms of
discipleship, as the Master put them to the eager scribe, and he
did not make them easy.  He pictured the kind of work to be done,
and the kind of men needed for the doing of it.  Abe grew uneasy as
the minister went on to describe the completeness of the surrender,
the intensity of the loyalty demanded.

'That knocks me out, I reckon,' he muttered, in a disappointed
tone; 'I ain't up to that grade.'  And as Craig described the
heroism called for, the magnificence of the fight, the worth of it,
and the outcome of it all, Abe ground out: I'll be blanked if I
wouldn't like to take a hand, but I guess I'm not in it.'  Craig
finished by saying--

'I want to put this quite fairly.  It is not any league of mine;
you're not joining my company; it is no easy business, and it is
for your whole life.  What do you say?  Do I put it fairly?  What
do you say, Nelson?'

Nelson rose slowly, and with difficulty began--

'I may be all wrong, but you made it easier for me, Mr. Craig.  You
said He would see me through, or I should never have risked it.
Perhaps I am wrong,' and the old man looked troubled.  Craig sprang
up.

'No! no!  Thank God, no!  He will see every man through who will
trust his life to Him.  Every man, no matter how tough he is, no
matter how broken.'

Then Nelson straightened himself up and said--

'Well, sir! I believe a lot of the men would go in for this if they
were dead sure they would get through.'

'Get through!' said Craig; 'never a fear of it.  It is a hard
fight, a long fight, a glorious fight,' throwing up his head, but
every man who squarely trusts Him, and takes Him as Lord and
Master, comes out victor!'

'Bon!' said Baptiste 'Das me.  You tink He's take me in dat fight,
M'sieu Craig, heh?'  His eyes were blazing.

'You mean it?' asked Craig almost sternly.

'Yes! by gar!' said the little Frenchman eagerly.

'Hear what He says, then'; and Craig, turning over the leaves of
his Testament, read solemnly the words, 'Swear not at all.'

'Non!  For sure!  Den I stop him,' replied Baptiste earnestly; and
Craig wrote his name down.

Poor Abe looked amazed and distressed, rose slowly, and saying,
'That jars my whisky jug,' passed out.  There was a slight movement
near the organ, and glancing up I saw Mrs. Mavor put her face
hastily in her hands.  The men's faces were anxious and troubled,
and Nelson said in a voice that broke--

'Tell them what you told me, sir.'  But Craig was troubled too, and
replied, 'You tell them, Nelson!' and Nelson told the men the story
of how he began just five weeks ago.  The old man's voice steadied
as he went on, and he grew eager as he told how he had been helped,
and how the world was all different, and his heart seemed new.  He
spoke of his Friend as if He were some one that could be seen out
at camp, that he knew well, and met every day.

But as he tried to say how deeply he regretted that he had not
known all this years before, the old, hard face began to quiver,
and the steady voice wavered.  Then he pulled himself together, and
said--

'I begin to feel sure He'll pull me through--me! the hardest man in
the mountains!  So don't you fear, boys.  He's all right.'

Then the men gave in their names, one by one.  When it came to
Geordie's turn, he gave his name--

'George Crawford, frae the pairish o' Kilsyth, Scotland, an' ye'll
juist pit doon the lad's name, Maister Craig; he's a wee bit fashed
wi' the discoorse, but he has the root o' the maitter in him, I
doot.'  And so Billy Breen's name went down.

When the meeting was over, thirty-eight names stood upon the
communion roll of the Black Rock Presbyterian Church; and it will
ever be one of the regrets of my life that neither Graeme's name
nor my own appeared on that roll.  And two days after, when the cup
went round on that first Communion Sabbath, from Nelson to Sandy,
and from Sandy to Baptiste, and so on down the line to Billy Breen
and Mrs. Mavor, and then to Abe, the driver, whom she had by her
own mystic power lifted into hope and faith, I felt all the shame
and pain of a traitor; and I believe, in my heart that the fire of
that pain and shame burned something of the selfish cowardice out
of me, and that it is burning still.

The last words of the minister, in the short address after the
table had been served, were low, and sweet, and tender, but they
were words of high courage; and before he had spoken them all, the
men were listening with shining eyes, and when they rose to sing
the closing hymn they stood straight and stiff like soldiers on
parade.

And I wished more than ever I were one of them.


CHAPTER VIII

THE BREAKING OF THE LEAGUE


There is no doubt in my mind that nature designed me for a great
painter.  A railway director interfered with that design of nature,
as he has with many another of hers, and by the transmission of an
order for mountain pieces by the dozen, together with a cheque so
large that I feared there was some mistake, he determined me to be
an illustrator and designer for railway and like publications.  I
do not like these people ordering 'by the dozen.'  Why should they
not consider an artist's finer feelings?  Perhaps they cannot
understand them; but they understand my pictures, and I understand
their cheques, and there we are quits.  But so it came that I
remained in Black Rock long enough to witness the breaking of the
League.

Looking back upon the events of that night from the midst of gentle
and decent surroundings, they now seem strangely unreal, but to me
then they appeared only natural.

It was the Good Friday ball that wrecked the League.  For the fact
that the promoters of the ball determined that it should be a ball
rather than a dance was taken by the League men as a concession to
the new public opinion in favour of respectability created by the
League.  And when the manager's patronage had been secured (they
failed to get Mrs. Mavor's), and it was further announced that,
though held in the Black Rock Hotel ballroom--indeed, there was no
other place--refreshments suited to the peculiar tastes of League
men would be provided, it was felt to be almost a necessity that
the League should approve, should indeed welcome, this concession
to the public opinion in favour of respectability created by the
League.

There were extreme men on both sides, of course.  'Idaho' Jack,
professional gambler, for instance, frankly considered that the
whole town was going to unmentionable depths of propriety.  The
organisation of the League was regarded by him, and by many others,
as a sad retrograde towards the bondage of the ancient and dying
East; and that he could not get drunk when and where he pleased,
'Idaho,' as he was called, regarded as a personal grievance.

But Idaho was never enamoured of the social ways of Black Rock.  He
was shocked and disgusted when he discovered that a 'gun' was
decreed by British law to be an unnecessary adornment of a card-
table.  The manner of his discovery must have been interesting to
behold.

It is said that Idaho was industriously pursuing his avocation in
Slavin's, with his 'gun' lying upon the card-table convenient to
his hand, when in walked policeman Jackson, her Majesty's sole
representative in the Black Rock district.  Jackson, 'Stonewall'
Jackson, or 'Stonewall,' as he was called for obvious reasons,
after watching the game for a few moments, gently tapped the pistol
and asked what he used this for.

'I'll show you in two holy minutes if you don't light out,' said
Idaho, hardly looking up, but very angrily, for the luck was
against him.  But Jackson tapped upon the table and said sweetly--

'You're a stranger here.  You ought to get a guide-book and post
yourself.  Now, the boys know I don't interfere with an innocent
little game, but there is a regulation against playing it with
guns; so,' he added even more sweetly, but fastening Idaho with a
look from his steel-grey eyes, 'I'll just take charge of this,'
picking up the revolver; 'it might go off.'

Idaho's rage, great as it was, was quite swallowed up in his amazed
disgust at the state of society that would permit such an outrage
upon personal liberty.  He was quite unable to play any more that
evening, and it took several drinks all round to restore him to
articulate speech.  The rest of the night was spent in retailing
for his instruction stories of the ways of Stonewall Jackson.

Idaho bought a new 'gun,' but he wore it 'in his clothes,' and used
it chiefly in the pastime of shooting out the lights or in picking
off the heels from the boys' boots while a stag dance was in
progress in Slavin's.  But in Stonewall's presence Idaho was a most
correct citizen.  Stonewall he could understand and appreciate.  He
was six feet three, and had an eye of unpleasant penetration.  But
this new feeling in the community for respectability he could
neither understand nor endure.  The League became the object of his
indignant aversion, and the League men of his contempt.  He had
many sympathisers, and frequent were the assaults upon the newly-
born sobriety of Billy Breen and others of the League.  But
Geordie's watchful care and Mrs. Mavor's steady influence, together
with the loyal co-operation of the League men, kept Billy safe so
far.  Nixon, too, was a marked man.  It may be that he carried
himself with unnecessary jauntiness toward Slavin and Idaho,
saluting the former with, 'Awful dry weather! eh, Slavin?' and the
latter with, 'Hello, old sport! how's times?' causing them to swear
deeply; and, as it turned out, to do more than swear.

But on the whole the anti-League men were in favour of a respectable
ball, and most of the League men determined to show their
appreciation of the concession of the committee to the principles of
the League in the important matter of refreshments by attending in
force.

Nixon would not go.  However jauntily he might talk, he could not
trust himself, as he said, where whisky was flowing, for it got
into his nose 'like a fish-hook into a salmon.'  He was from
Nova Scotia.  For like reason, Vernon Winton, the young Oxford
fellow, would not go.  When they chaffed, his lips grew a little
thinner, and the colour deepened in his handsome face, but he went
on his way.  Geordie despised the 'hale hypothick' as a 'daft
ploy,' and the spending of five dollars upon a ticket he considered
a 'sinfu' waste o' guid siller'; and he warned Billy against
'coontenancin' ony sic redeeklus nonsense.'

But no one expected Billy to go; although the last two months he
had done wonders for his personal appearance, and for his position
in the social scale as well.  They all knew what a fight he was
making, and esteemed him accordingly.  How well I remember the
pleased pride in his face when he told me in the afternoon of the
committee's urgent request that he should join the orchestra with
his 'cello!  It was not simply that his 'cello was his joy and
pride, but he felt it to be a recognition of his return to
respectability.

I have often wondered how things combine at times to a man's
destruction.

Had Mr. Craig not been away at the Landing that week, had Geordie
not been on the night-shift, had Mrs. Mavor not been so occupied
with the care of her sick child, it may be Billy might have been
saved his fall.

The anticipation of the ball stirred Black Rock and the camps with
a thrill of expectant delight.  Nowadays, when I find myself forced
to leave my quiet smoke in my studio after dinner at the call of
some social engagement which I have failed to elude, I groan at my
hard lot, and I wonder as I look back and remember the pleasurable
anticipation with which I viewed the approaching ball.  But I do
not wonder now any more than I did then at the eager delight of the
men who for seven days in the week swung their picks up in the dark
breasts of the mines, or who chopped and sawed among the solitary
silences of the great forests.  Any break in the long and weary
monotony was welcome; what mattered the cost or consequence!  To
the rudest and least cultured of them the sameness of the life must
have been hard to bear; but what it was to men who had seen life in
its most cultured and attractive forms I fail to imagine.  From the
mine, black and foul, to the shack, bare, cheerless, and sometimes
hideously repulsive, life swung in heart-grinding monotony till the
longing for a 'big drink' or some other 'big break' became too
great to bear.

It was well on towards evening when Sandy's four horse team, with a
load of men from the woods, came swinging round the curves of the
mountain-road and down the street.  A gay crowd they were with
their bright, brown faces and hearty voices; and in ten minutes the
whole street seemed alive with lumbermen--they had a faculty of
spreading themselves so.  After night fell the miners came down
'done up slick,' for this was a great occasion, and they must be up
to it.  The manager appeared in evening dress; but this was voted
'too giddy' by the majority.

As Graeme and I passed up to the Black Rock Hotel, in the large
store-room of which the ball was to be held, we met old man Nelson
looking very grave.

'Going, Nelson, aren't you?' I said.

'Yes,' he answered slowly; 'I'll drop in, though I don't like the
look of things much.'

'What's the matter, Nelson?' asked Graeme cheerily.  'There's no
funeral on.'

'Perhaps not,' replied Nelson, 'but I wish Mr. Craig were home.'
And then he added, 'There's Idaho and Slavin together, and you may
bet the devil isn't far off.'

But Graeme laughed at his suspicion, and we passed on.  The
orchestra was tuning up.  There were two violins, a concertina, and
the 'cello.  Billy Breen was lovingly fingering his instrument, now
and then indulging himself in a little snatch of some air that came
to him out of his happier past.  He looked perfectly delighted, and
as I paused to listen he gave me a proud glance out of his deep,
little, blue eyes, and went on playing softly to himself.
Presently Shaw came along.

'That's good, Billy,' he called out.  'You've got the trick yet, I
see."

But Billy only nodded and went on playing.

'Where's Nixon?' I asked.

'Gone to bed,' said Shaw, 'and I am glad of it.  He finds that the
safest place on pay-day afternoon.  The boys don't bother him
there.'

The dancing-room was lined on two sides with beer-barrels and
whisky-kegs; at one end the orchestra sat, at the other was a table
with refreshments, where the 'soft drinks' might be had.  Those who
wanted anything else might pass through a short passage into the
bar just behind.

This was evidently a superior kind of ball, for the men kept on
their coats, and went through the various figures with faces of
unnatural solemnity.  But the strain upon their feelings was quite
apparent, and it became a question how long it could be maintained.
As the trips through the passage-way became more frequent the
dancing grew in vigour and hilarity, until by the time supper was
announced the stiffness had sufficiently vanished to give no
further anxiety to the committee.

But the committee had other cause for concern, inasmuch as after
supper certain of the miners appeared with their coats off, and
proceeded to 'knock the knots out of the floor' in break-down
dances of extraordinary energy.  These, however, were beguiled into
the bar-room and 'filled up' for safety, for the committee were
determined that the respectability of the ball should be preserved
to the end.  Their reputation was at stake, not in Black Rock only,
but at the Landing as well, from which most of the ladies had come;
and to be shamed in the presence of the Landing people could not be
borne.  Their difficulties seemed to be increasing, for at this
point something seemed to go wrong with the orchestra.  The 'cello
appeared to be wandering aimlessly up and down the scale,
occasionally picking up the tune with animation, and then dropping
it.  As Billy saw me approaching, he drew himself up with great
solemnity, gravely winked at me, and said--

'Shlipped a cog, Mishter Connor!  Mosh hunfortunate!  Beauchiful
hinstrument, but shlips a cog.  Mosh hunfortunate!'

And he wagged his little head sagely, playing all the while for
dear life, now second and now lead.

Poor Billy!  I pitied him, but I thought chiefly of the beautiful,
eager face that leaned towards him the night the League was made,
and of the bright voice that said, 'You'll sign with me, Billy?'
and it seemed to me a cruel deed to make him lose his grip of life
and hope; for this is what the pledge meant to him.

While I was trying to get Billy away to some safe place, I heard a
great shouting in the direction of the bar, followed by trampling
and scuffling of feet in the passage-way.  Suddenly a man burst
through, crying--

'Let me go!  Stand back!  I know what I'm about!'

It was Nixon, dressed in his best; black clothes, blue shirt, red
tie, looking handsome enough, but half-drunk and wildly excited.
The highland Fling competition was on at the moment, and Angus
Campbell, Lachlan's brother, was representing the lumber camps in
the contest.  Nixon looked on approvingly for a few moments, then
with a quick movement he seized the little Highlander, swung him in
his powerful arms clean off the floor, and deposited him gently
upon a beer-barrel.  Then he stepped into the centre of the room,
bowed to the judges, and began a sailor's hornpipe.

The committee were perplexed, but after deliberation they decided
to humour the new competitor, especially as they knew that Nixon
with whisky in him was unpleasant to cross.

Lightly and gracefully he went through his steps, the men crowding
in from the bar to admire, for Nixon was famed for his hornpipe.
But when, after the hornpipe, he proceeded to execute a clog-dance,
garnished with acrobatic feats, the committee interfered.  There
were cries of 'Put him out!' and 'Let him alone!  Go on, Nixon!'
And Nixon hurled back into the crowd two of the committee who had
laid remonstrating hands upon him, and, standing in the open
centre, cried out scornfully--

'Put me out!  Put me out!  Certainly!  Help yourselves!  Don't mind
me!'  Then grinding his teeth, so that I heard them across the
room, he added with savage deliberation, 'If any man lays a finger
on me, I'll--I'll eat his liver cold.'

He stood for a few moments glaring round upon the company, and then
strode toward the bar, followed by the crowd wildly yelling.  The
ball was forthwith broken up.  I looked around for Billy, but he
was nowhere to be seen.  Graeme touched my arm--

'There's going to be something of a time, so just keep your eyes
skinned.'

'What are you going to do?' I asked.

'Do?  Keep myself beautifully out of trouble,' he replied.

In a few moments the crowd came surging back headed by Nixon, who
was waving a whisky-bottle over his head and yelling as one
possessed.

'Hello!' exclaimed Graeme softly, 'I begin to see.  Look there!'

'What's up?' I asked.

'You see Idaho and Slavin and their pets,' he replied.

'They've got poor Nixon in tow.  Idaho is rather nasty,' he added,
'but I think I'll take a hand in this game; I've seen some of
Idaho's work before.'

The scene was one quite strange to me, and was wild beyond
description.  A hundred men filled the room.  Bottles were passed
from hand to hand, and men drank their fill.  Behind the
refreshment-tables stood the hotelman and his barkeeper with their
coats off and sleeves rolled up to the shoulder, passing out
bottles, and drawing beer and whisky from two kegs hoisted up for
that purpose.  Nixon was in his glory.  It was his night.  Every
man was to get drunk at his expense, he proclaimed, flinging down
bills upon the table.  Near him were some League men he was
treating liberally, and never far away were Idaho and Slavin
passing bottles, but evidently drinking little.

I followed Graeme, not feeling too comfortable, for this sort of
thing was new to me, but admiring the cool assurance with which he
made his way through the crowd that swayed and yelled and swore and
laughed in a most disconcerting manner.

'Hello!' shouted Nixon as he caught sight of Graeme.  'Here you
are!' passing him a bottle.  'You're a knocker, a double-handed
front door knocker.  You polished off old whisky-soak here, old
demijohn,' pointing to Slavin, 'and I'll lay five to one we can
lick any blankety blank thieves in the crowd,' and he held up a
roll of bills.

But Graeme proposed that he should give the hornpipe again, and the
floor was cleared at once, for Nixon's hornpipe was very popular,
and tonight, of course, was in high favour.  In the midst of his
dance Nixon stopped short, his arms dropped to his side, his face
had a look of fear, of horror.

There, before him, in his riding-cloak and boots, with his whip in
his hand as he had come from his ride, stood Mr. Craig.  His face
was pallid, and his dark eyes were blazing with fierce light.  As
Nixon stopped, Craig stepped forward to him, and sweeping his eyes
round upon the circle he said in tones intense with scorn--

'You cowards!  You get a man where he's weak!  Cowards! you'd damn
his soul for his money!'

There was dead silence, and Craig, lifting his hat, said solemnly--

'May God forgive you this night's work!'

Then, turning to Nixon, and throwing his arm over his shoulder, he
said in a voice broken and husky--

'Come on, Nixon! we'll go!'

Idaho made a motion as if to stop him, but Graeme stepped quickly
foreword and said sharply, 'Make way there, can't you?' and the
crowd fell back and we four passed through, Nixon walking as in a
dream, with Craig's arm about him.  Down the street we went in
silence, and on to Craig's shack, where we found old man Nelson,
with the fire blazing, and strong coffee steaming on the stove.  It
was he that had told Craig, on his arrival from the Landing, of
Nixon's fall.

There was nothing of reproach, but only gentlest pity, in tone and
touch as Craig placed the half-drunk, dazed man in his easy-chair,
took off his boots, brought him his own slippers, and gave him
coffee.  Then, as his stupor began to overcome him, Craig put him
in his own bed, and came forth with a face written over with grief.

'Don't mind, old chap,' said Graeme kindly.

But Craig looked at him without a word, and, throwing himself into
a chair, put his face in his hands.  As we sat there in silence the
door was suddenly pushed open and in walked Abe Baker with the
words, 'Where is Nixon?' and we told him where he was.  We were
still talking when again a tap came to the door, and Shaw came in
looking much disturbed.

'Did you hear about Nixon?' he asked.  We told him what we knew.

'But did you hear how they got him?' he asked, excitedly.

As he told us the tale, the men stood listening, with faces growing
hard.

It appeared that after the making of the League the Black Rock
Hotel man had bet Idaho one hundred to fifty that Nixon could not
be got to drink before Easter.  All Idaho's schemes had failed, and
now he had only three days in which to win his money, and the ball
was his last chance.  Here again he was balked, for Nixon,
resisting all entreaties, barred his shack door and went to bed
before nightfall, according to his invariable custom on pay-days.
At midnight some of Idaho's men came battering at the door for
admission, which Nixon reluctantly granted.  For half an hour they
used every art of persuasion to induce him to go down to the ball,
the glorious success of which was glowingly depicted; but Nixon
remained immovable, and they took their departure, baffled and
cursing.  In two hours they returned drunk enough to be dangerous,
kicked at the door in vain, finally gained entrance through the
window, hauled Nixon out of bed, and, holding a glass of whisky to
his lips, bade him drink.  But he knocked the glass sway, spilling
the liquor over himself and the bed.

It was drink or fight, and Nixon was ready to fight; but after
parley they had a drink all round, and fell to persuasion again.
The night was cold, and poor Nixon sat shivering on the edge of his
bed.  If he would take one drink they would leave him alone.  He
need not show himself so stiff.  The whisky fumes filled his
nostrils.  If one drink would get them off, surely that was better
than fighting and killing some one or getting killed.  He
hesitated, yielded, drank his glass.  They sat about him amiably
drinking, and lauding him as a fine fellow after all.  One more
glass before they left.  Then Nixon rose, dressed himself, drank
all that was left of the bottle, put his money in his pocket, and
came down to the dance, wild with his old-time madness, reckless of
faith and pledge, forgetful of home, wife, babies, his whole being
absorbed in one great passion--to drink and drink and drink till he
could drink no more.

Before Shaw had finished his tale, Craig's eyes were streaming with
tears, and groans of rage and pity broke alternately from him.  Abe
remained speechless for a time, not trusting himself; but as he
heard Craig groan, 'Oh, the beasts! the fiends!' he seemed
encouraged to let himself loose, and he began swearing with the
coolest and most blood-curdling deliberation.  Craig listened with
evident approval, apparently finding complete satisfaction in Abe's
performance, when suddenly he seemed to waken up, caught Abe by the
arm, and said in a horror-stricken voice--

'Stop! stop!  God forgive us! we must not swear like this.'

Abe stopped at once, and in a surprised and slightly grieved voice
said--

'Why! what's the matter with that?  Ain't that what you wanted?'

'Yes! yes!  God forgive me!  I am afraid it was,' he answered
hurriedly; 'but I must not.'

'Oh, don't you worry,' went on Abe cheerfully; 'I'll look after
that part; and anyway, ain't they the blankest blankety blank'--
going off again into a roll of curses, till Craig, in an agony of
entreaty, succeeded in arresting the flow of profanity possible to
no one but a mountain stage-driver.  Abe paused looking hurt, and
asked if they did not deserve everything he was calling down upon
them.

'Yes, yes,' urged Craig; 'but that is not our business.'

'Well! so I reckoned,' replied Abe, recognising the limitations of
the cloth; 'you ain't used to it, and you can't be expected to do
it; but it just makes me feel good--let out o' school like--to
properly do 'em up, the blank, blank,' and off he went again.  It
was only under the pressure of Mr. Craig's prayers and commands
that he finally agreed 'to hold in, though it was tough.'

'What's to be done?' asked Shaw.

'Nothing,' answered Craig bitterly.  He was exhausted with his long
ride from the Landing, and broken with bitter disappointment over
the ruin of all that he had laboured so long to accomplish.

'Nonsense,' said Graeme; 'there's a good deal to do.'

It was agreed that Craig should remain with Nixon while the others
of us should gather up what fragments we could find of the broken
League.  We had just opened the door, when we met a man striding up
at a great pace.  It was Geordie Crawford.

'Hae ye seen the lad?' was his salutation.  No one replied.  So I
told Geordie of my last sight of Billy in the orchestra.

'An' did ye no' gang aifter him?' he asked in indignant surprise,
adding with some contempt, 'Man! but ye're a feckless buddie.'

'Billy gone too!' said Shaw.  'They might have let Billy alone.'

Poor Craig stood in a dumb agony.  Billy's fall seemed more than he
could bear.  We went out, leaving him heart-broken amid the ruins
of his League.


CHAPTER IX

THE LEAGUE'S REVENGE


As we stood outside of Craig's shack in the dim starlight, we could
not hide from ourselves that we were beaten.  It was not so much
grief as a blind fury that filled my heart, and looking at the
faces of the men about me I read the same feeling there.  But what
could we do?  The yells of carousing miners down at Slavin's told
us that nothing could be done with them that night.  To be so
utterly beaten, and unfairly, and with no chance of revenge, was
maddening.

'I'd like to get back at 'em,' said Abe, carefully repressing
himself.

'I've got it, men,' said Graeme suddenly.  'This town does not
require all the whisky there is in it'; and he unfolded his plan.
It was to gain possession of Slavin's saloon and the bar of the
Black Rock Hotel, and clear out all the liquor to be found in both
these places.  I did not much like the idea; and Geordie said, 'I'm
ga'en aifter the lad; I'll hae naethin' tae dae wi' yon.  It's' no'
that easy, an' it's a sinfu' waste.'

But Abe was wild to try it, and Shaw was quite willing, while old
Nelson sternly approved.

'Nelson, you and Shaw get a couple of our men and attend to the
saloon.  Slavin and the whole gang are up at the Black Rock, so you
won't have much trouble; but come to us as soon as you can.'

And so we went our ways.

Then followed a scene the like of which I can never hope to see
again, and it was worth a man's seeing.  But there were times that
night when I wished I had not agreed to follow Graeme in his plot.
As we went up to the hotel, I asked Graeme, 'What about the law of
this?'

'Law!' he replied indignantly.  'They haven't troubled much about
law in the whisky business here.  They get a keg of high wines and
some drugs and begin operations.  No!' he went on; 'if we can get
the crowd out, and ourselves in, we'll make them break the law in
getting us out.  The law won't trouble us over smuggled whisky.
It will be a great lark, and they won't crow too loud over the
League.'

I did not like the undertaking at first; but as I thought of the
whole wretched illegal business flourishing upon the weakness of
the men in the mines and camps, whom I had learned to regard as
brothers, and especially as I thought of the cowards that did for
Nixon, I let my scruples go, and determined, with Abe, 'to get back
at 'em.'

We had no difficulty getting them out.  Abe began to yell.  Some
men rushed out to learn the cause.  He seized the foremost man,
making a hideous uproar all the while, and in three minutes had
every man out of the hotel and a lively row going on.

In two minutes more Graeme and I had the door to the ball-room
locked and barricaded with empty casks.  We then closed the door of
the bar-room leading to the outside.  The bar-room was a strongly
built log-shack, with a heavy door secured, after the manner of the
early cabins, with two strong oak bars, so that we felt safe from
attack from that quarter.

The ball-room we could not hold long, for the door was slight and
entrance was possible through the windows.  But as only a few casks
of liquor were left there, our main work would be in the bar, so
that the fight would be to hold the passage-way.  This we
barricaded with casks and tables.  But by this time the crowd had
begun to realise what had happened, and were wildly yelling at door
and windows.  With an axe which Graeme had brought with him the
casks were soon stove in, and left to empty themselves.

As I was about to empty the last cask, Graeme stopped me, saying,
'Let that stand here.  It will help us.'  And so it did.  'Now skip
for the barricade,' yelled Graeme, as a man came crashing through
the window.  Before he could regain his feet, however, Graeme had
seized him and flung him out upon the heads of the crowd outside.
But through the other windows men were coming in, and Graeme rushed
for the barricade, followed by two of the enemy, the foremost of
whom I received at the top and hurled back upon the others.

'Now, be quick!' said Graeme; 'I'll hold this.  Don't break any
bottles on the floor--throw them out there,' pointing to a little
window high up in the wall.

I made all haste.  The casks did not take much time, and soon the
whisky and beer were flowing over the floor.  It made me think of
Geordie's regret over the 'sinfu' waste.'  The bottles took longer,
and glancing up now and then I saw that Graeme was being hard
pressed.  Men would leap, two and three at a time, upon the
barricade, and Graeme's arms would shoot out, and over they would
topple upon the heads of those nearest.  It was a great sight to
see him standing alone with a smile on his face and the light of
battle in his eye, coolly meeting his assailants with those
terrific, lightning-like blows.  In fifteen minutes my work was
done.

'What next?' I asked.  'How do we get out?'

'How is the door?' he replied.

I looked through the port-hole and said, 'A crowd of men waiting.'

'We'll have to make a dash for it, I fancy,' he replied cheerfully,
though his face was covered with blood and his breath was coming in
short gasps.

'Get down the bars and be ready.'  But even as he spoke a chair
hurled from below caught him on the arm, and before he could
recover, a man had cleared the barricade and was upon him like a
tiger.  It was Idaho Jack.

'Hold the barricade,' Graeme called out, as they both went down.

I sprang to his place, but I had not much hope of holding it long.
I had the heavy oak bar of the door in my hands, and swinging it
round my head I made the crowd give back for a few moments.

Meantime Graeme had shaken off his enemy, who was circling about
him upon his tip-toes, with a long knife in his hand, waiting for a
chance to spring.

'I have been waiting for this for some time, Mr. Graeme,' he said
smiling.

'Yes,' replied Graeme, 'ever since I spoiled your cut-throat game
in 'Frisco.  How is the little one?' he added sarcastically.

Idaho's face lost its smile and became distorted with fury as he
replied, spitting out his words, 'She--is--where you will be before
I am done with you.'

'Ah! you murdered her too!  You'll hang some beautiful day, Idaho,'
said Graeme, as Idaho sprang upon him.

Graeme dodged his blow and caught his forearm with his left hand
and held up high the murderous knife.  Back and forward they swayed
over the floor, slippery with whisky, the knife held high in the
air.  I wondered why Graeme did not strike, and then I saw his
right hand hung limp from the wrist.  The men were crowding upon
the barricade.  I was in despair.  Graeme's strength was going
fast.  With a yell of exultant fury Idaho threw himself with all
his weight upon Graeme, who could only cling to him.  They swayed
together towards me, but as they fell I brought down my bar upon
the upraised hand and sent the knife flying across the room.
Idaho's howl of rage and pain was mingled with a shout from below,
and there, dashing the crowd right and left, came old Nelson,
followed by Abe, Sandy, Baptiste, Shaw, and others.  As they
reached the barricade it crashed down and, carrying me with it,
pinned me fast.

Looking out between the barrels, I saw what froze my heart with
horror.  In the fall Graeme had wound his arms about his enemy and
held him in a grip so deadly that he could not strike; but Graeme's
strength was failing, and when I looked I saw that Idaho was slowly
dragging both across the slippery floor to where the knife lay.
Nearer and nearer his outstretched fingers came to the knife.  In
vain I yelled and struggled.  My voice was lost in the awful din,
and the barricade held me fast.  Above me, standing on a barrel-
head, was Baptiste, yelling like a demon.  In vain I called to him.
My fingers could just reach his foot, and he heeded not at all my
touch.  Slowly Idaho was dragging his almost unconscious victim
toward the knife.  His fingers were touching the blade point, when,
under a sudden inspiration, I pulled out my penknife, opened it
with my teeth, and drove the blade into Baptiste's foot.  With a
blood-curdling yell he sprang down and began dancing round in his
rage, peering among the barrels.

'Look! look!' I was calling in agony, and pointing; 'for heaven's
sake, look! Baptiste!'

The fingers had closed upon the knife, the knife was already high
in the air, when, with a shriek, Baptiste cleared the room at a
bound, and, before the knife could fall, the little Frenchman's
boot had caught the uplifted wrist, and sent the knife flying to
the wall.

Then there was a great rushing sound as of wind through the forest,
and the lights went out.  When I awoke, I found myself lying with
my head on Graeme's knees, and Baptiste sprinkling snow on my face.
As I looked up Graeme leaned over me, and, smiling down into my
eyes, he said--

'Good boy!  It was a great fight, and we put it up well'; and then
he whispered, 'I owe you my life, my boy.'

His words thrilled my heart through and through, for I loved him as
only men can love men; but I only answered--

'I could not keep them back.'

'It was well done,' he said; and I felt proud.  I confess I was
thankful to be so well out of it, for Graeme got off with a bone in
his wrist broken, and I with a couple of ribs cracked; but had it
not been for the open barrel of whisky which kept them occupied for
a time, offering too good a chance to be lost, and for the timely
arrival of Nelson, neither of us had ever seen the light again.

We found Craig sound asleep upon his couch.  His consternation on
waking to see us torn, bruised, and bloody was laughable; but he
hastened to find us warm water and bandages, and we soon felt
comfortable.

Baptiste was radiant with pride and light over the fight, and
hovered about Graeme and me giving vent to his feelings in admiring
French and English expletives.  But Abe was disgusted because of
the failure at Slavin's; for when Nelson looked in, he saw Slavin's
French-Canadian wife in charge, with her baby on her lap, and he
came back to Shaw and said, 'Come away, we can't touch this'; and
Shaw, after looking in, agreed that nothing could be done.  A baby
held the fort.

As Craig listened to the account of the fight, he tried hard not to
approve, but he could not keep the gleam out of his eyes; and as I
pictured Graeme dashing back the crowd thronging the barricade till
he was brought down by the chair, Craig laughed gently, and put his
hand on Graeme's knee.  And as I went on to describe my agony while
Idaho's fingers were gradually nearing the knife, his face grew
pale and his eyes grew wide with horror.

'Baptiste here did the business,' I said, and the little Frenchman
nodded complacently and said--

'Dat's me for sure.'

'By the way, how is your foot?' asked Graeme.

'He's fuss-rate.  Dat's what you call--one bite of--of--dat leel
bees, he's dere, you put your finger dere, he's not dere!--what you
call him?'

'Flea!' I suggested.

'Oui!' cried Baptiste.  'Dat's one bite of flea.'

'I was thankful I was under the barrels,' I replied, smiling.

'Oui!  Dat's mak' me ver mad.  I jump an' swear mos' awful bad.
Dat's pardon me, M'sieu Craig, heh?'

But Craig only smiled at him rather sadly.  'It was awfully risky,'
he said to Graeme, 'and it was hardly worth it.  They'll get more
whisky, and anyway the League is gone.'

'Well,' said Graeme with a sigh of satisfaction, 'it is not quite
such a one-sided affair as it was.'

And we could say nothing in reply, for we could hear Nixon snoring
in the next room, and no one had heard of Billy, and there were
others of the League that we knew were even now down at Slavin's.
It was thought best that all should remain in Mr. Craig's shack, not
knowing what might happen; and so we lay where we could and we
needed none to sing us to sleep.

When I awoke, stiff and sore, it was to find breakfast ready and
old man Nelson in charge.  As we were seated, Craig came in, and I
saw that he was not the man of the night before.  His courage had
come back, his face was quiet and his eye clear; he was his own man
again.

'Geordie has been out all night, but has failed to find Billy,' he
announced quietly.

We did not talk much; Graeme and I worried with our broken bones,
and the others suffered from a general morning depression.  But,
after breakfast, as the men were beginning to move, Craig took down
his Bible, and saying--

'Wait a few minutes, men!' he read slowly, in his beautiful clear
voice, that psalm for all fighters--


     'God is our refuge and strength,'


and soon to the noble words--


     'The Lord of Hosts is with us;
      The God of Jacob is our refuge.'


How the mighty words pulled us together, lifted us till we grew
ashamed of our ignoble rage and of our ignoble depression!

And then Craig prayed in simple, straight-going words.  There was
acknowledgement of failure, but I knew he was thinking chiefly of
himself; and there was gratitude, and that was for the men about
him, and I felt my face burn with shame; and there was petition for
help, and we all thought of Nixon, and Billy, and the men wakening
from their debauch at Slavin's this pure, bright morning.  And then
he asked that we might be made faithful and worthy of God, whose
battle it was.  Then we all stood up and shook hands with him in
silence, and every man knew a covenant was being made.  But none
saw his meeting with Nixon.  He sent us all away before that.

Nothing was heard of the destruction of the hotel stock-in-trade.
Unpleasant questions would certainly be asked, and the proprietor
decided to let bad alone.  On the point of respectability the
success of the ball was not conspicuous, but the anti-League men
were content, if not jubilant.

Billy Breen was found by Geordie late in the afternoon in his own
old and deserted shack, breathing heavily, covered up in his
filthy, mouldering bed-clothes, with a half-empty bottle of whisky
at his side.  Geordie's grief and rage were beyond even his Scotch
control.  He spoke few words, but these were of such concentrated
vehemence that no one felt the need of Abe's assistance in
vocabulary.

Poor Billy!  We carried him to Mrs. Mavor's home; put him in a warm
bath, rolled him in blankets, and gave him little sips of hot
water, then of hot milk and coffee; as I had seen a clever doctor
in the hospital treat a similar case of nerve and heart depression.
But the already weakened system could not recover from the awful
shock of the exposure following the debauch; and on Sunday
afternoon we saw that his heart was failing fast.  All day the
miners had been dropping in to inquire after him, for Billy had
been a great favourite in other days, and the attention of the town
had been admiringly centred upon his fight of these last weeks.  It
was with no ordinary sorrow that the news of his condition was
received.  As Mrs. Mavor sang to him, his large coarse hands moved
in time to the music, but he did not open his eyes till he heard
Mr. Craig's voice in the next room; then he spoke his name, and Mr.
Craig was kneeling beside him in a moment.  The words came slowly--

'Oi tried--to fight it hout--but---oi got beaten.  Hit 'urts to
think 'E's hashamed o' me.  Oi'd like t'a done better--oi would.'

'Ashamed of you, Billy!' said Craig, in a voice that broke.  'Not
He.'

'An'--ye hall--'elped me so!' he went on.  'Oi wish oi'd 'a done
better--oi do,' and his eyes sought Geordie, and then rested on
Mrs. Mavor, who smiled back at him with a world of love in her
eyes.

'You hain't hashamed o' me--yore heyes saigh so,' he said looking
at her.

'No, Billy,' she said, and I wondered at her steady voice, 'not a
bit.  Why, Billy, I am proud of you.'

He gazed up at her with wonder and ineffable love in his little
eyes, then lifted his hand slightly toward her.  She knelt quickly
and took it in both of hers, stroking it and kissing it.

'Oi haught t'a done better.  Oi'm hawful sorry oi went back on 'Im.
Hit was the lemonaide.  The boys didn't mean no 'arm--but hit
started the 'ell hinside.'

Geordie hurled out some bitter words.

'Don't be 'ard on 'em, Geordie; they didn't mean no 'arm,' he said,
and his eyes kept waiting till Geordie said hurriedly--

'Na! na! lad--a'll juist leave them till the Almichty.'

Then Mrs. Mavor sang softly, smoothing his hand, 'Just as I am,'
and Billy dozed quietly for half an hour.

When he awoke again his eyes turned to Mr. Craig, and they were
troubled and anxious.

'Oi tried 'ard.  Oi wanted to win,' he struggled to say.  By this
time Craig was master of himself, and he answered in a clear,
distinct voice--

'Listen, Billy!  You made a great fight, and you are going to win
yet.  And besides, do you remember the sheep that got lost over the
mountains?'--this parable was Billy's special delight--'He didn't
beat it when He got it, did he?  He took it in His arms and carried
it home.  And so He will you.'

And Billy, keeping his eyes fastened on Mr. Craig, simply said--

'Will 'E?'

'Sure!' said Craig.

'Will 'E?' he repeated, turning his eyes upon Mrs. Mavor.

'Why, yes, Billy,' she answered cheerily, though the tears were
streaming from her eyes.  'I would, and He loves you far more.'

He looked at her, smiled, and closed his eyes.  I put my hand on
his heart; it was fluttering feebly.  Again a troubled look passed
over his face.

'My--poor--hold--mother,' he whispered, 'she's--hin--the--wukus.'

'I shall take care of her, Billy,' said Mrs. Mavor, in a clear
voice, and again Billy smiled.  Then he turned his eyes to Mr.
Craig, and from him to Geordie, and at last to Mrs. Mavor, where
they rested.  She bent over and kissed him twice on the forehead.

'Tell 'er,' he said, with difficulty, "E's took me 'ome.'

'Yes, Billy!' she cried, gazing into his glazing eyes.  He tried to
lift her hand.  She kissed him again.  He drew one deep breath and
lay quite still.

'Thank the blessed Saviour!' said Mr. Craig, reverently.  'He has
taken him home.'

But Mrs. Mavor held the dead hand tight and sobbed out passionately,
'Oh, Billy, Billy! you helped me once when I needed help!  I cannot
forget!'

And Geordie, groaning, 'Ay, laddie, laddie,' passed out into the
fading light of the early evening.

Next day no one went to work, for to all it seemed a sacred day.
They carried him into the little church, and there Mr. Craig spoke
of his long, hard fight, and of his final victory; for he died
without a fear, and with love to the men who, not knowing, had been
his death.  And there was no bitterness in any heart, for Mr. Craig
read the story of the sheep, and told how gently He had taken Billy
home; but, though no word was spoken, it was there the League was
made again.

They laid him under the pines, beside Lewis Mavor; and the miners
threw sprigs of evergreen into the open grave.  When Slavin,
sobbing bitterly, brought his sprig, no one stopped him, though all
thought it strange.

As we turned to leave the grave, the light from the evening sun
came softly through the gap in the mountains, and, filling the
valley, touched the trees and the little mound beneath with glory.
And I thought of that other glory, which is brighter than the sun,
and was not sorry that poor Billy's weary fight was over; and I
could not help agreeing with Craig that it was there the League had
its revenge.


CHAPTER X

WHAT CAME TO SLAVIN


Billy Breen's legacy to the Black Rock mining camp was a new
League, which was more than the old League re-made.  The League was
new in its spirit and in its methods.  The impression made upon the
camp by Billy Breen'