e would come to you,' I replied.

'I shall wait for him,' she said softly, and the tenderness in her
tone went straight to my heart, and it seemed to me a man might
suffer much to be loved with love such as this.

In the early afternoon Graeme came to her.  She met him with both
hands outstretched, saying in a low voice--

'I am very happy.'

'Are you sure?' he asked anxiously.

'Oh, yes,' she said, but her voice was like a sob; 'quite, quite
sure.'

They talked long together till I saw that Craig must soon be
coming, and I called Graeme away.  He held her hands, looking
steadily into her eyes and said--

'You are better even than I thought; I'm going to be a better man.'

Her eyes filled with tears, but her smile did not fade as she
answered--

'Yes! you will be a good man, and God will give you work to do.'

He bent his head over her hands and stepped back from her as from a
queen, but he spoke no word till we came to Craig's door.  Then he
said with humility that seemed strange in him, 'Connor, that is
great, to conquer oneself.  It is worth while.  I am going to try.'

I would not have missed his meeting with Craig.  Nelson was busy
with tea.  Craig was writing near the window.  He looked up as
Graeme came in, and nodded an easy good-evening; but Graeme strode
to him and, putting one hand on his shoulder, held out his other
for Craig to take.

After a moment's surprise, Craig rose to his feet, and, facing him
squarely, took the offered hand in both of his and held it fast
without a word.  Graeme was the first to speak, and his voice was
deep with emotion--

'You are a great man, a good man.  I'd give something to have your
grit.'

Poor Craig stood looking at him, not daring to speak for some
moments, then he said quietly--

'Not good nor great, but, thank God, not quite a traitor.'

'Good man!' went on Graeme, patting him on the shoulder.  'Good
man!  But it's tough.'

Craig sat down quickly, saying, 'Don't do that, old chap!'

I went up with Craig to Mrs. Mavor's door.  She did not hear us
coming, but stood near the window gazing up at the mountains.  She
was dressed in some rich soft stuff, and wore at her breast a bunch
of wild-flowers.  I had never seen her so beautiful.  I did not
wonder that Craig paused with his foot upon the threshold to look
at her.  She turned and saw us.  With a glad cry, 'Oh! my darling;
you have come to me,' she came with outstretched arms.  I turned
and fled, but the cry and the vision were long with me.

It was decided that night that Mrs. Mavor should go the next week.
A miner and his wife were going east, and I too would join the
party.

The camp went into mourning at the news; but it was understood that
any display of grief before Mrs. Mavor was bad form.  She was not
to be annoyed.

But when I suggested that she should leave quietly, and avoid the
pain of saying good-bye, she flatly refused--

'I must say good-bye to every man.  They love me and I love them.'

It was decided, too, at first, that there should be nothing in the
way of a testimonial, but when Craig found out that the men were
coming to her with all sorts of extraordinary gifts, he agreed that
it would be better that they should unite in one gift.  So it was
agreed that I should buy a ring for her.  And were it not that the
contributions were strictly limited to one dollar, the purse that
Slavin handed her when Shaw read the address at the farewell supper
would have been many times filled with the gold that was pressed
upon the committee.  There were no speeches at the supper, except
one by myself in reply on Mrs. Mavor's behalf.  She had given me
the words to say, and I was thoroughly prepared, else I should not
have got through.  I began in the usual way: 'Mr. Chairman, ladies
and gentlemen, Mrs. Mavor is--' but I got no further, for at the
mention of her name the men stood on the chairs and yelled until
they could yell no more.  There were over two hundred and fifty of
them, and the effect was overpowering.  But I got through my
speech.  I remember it well.  It began--

'Mrs. Mavor is greatly touched by this mark of your love, and she
will wear your ring always with pride.'  And it ended with--

'She has one request to make, that you will be true to the League,
and that you stand close about the man who did most to make it.
She wishes me to say that however far away she may have to go, she
is leaving her heart in Black Rock, and she can think of no greater
joy than to come back to you again.'

Then they had 'The Sweet By and By,' but the men would not join in
the refrain, unwilling to lose a note of the glorious voice they
loved to hear.  Before the last verse she beckoned to me.  I went
to her standing by Craig's side as he played for her.  'Ask them to
sing,' she entreated; 'I cannot bear it.'

'Mrs. Mavor wishes you to sing in the refrain,' I said, and at once
the men sat up and cleared their throats.  The singing was not
good, but at the first sound of the hoarse notes of the men Craig's
head went down over the organ, for he was thinking I suppose of the
days before them when they would long in vain for that thrilling
voice that soared high over their own hoarse tones.  And after the
voices died away he kept on playing till, half turning toward him,
she sang alone once more the refrain in a voice low and sweet and
tender, as if for him alone.  And so he took it, for he smiled up
at her his old smile full of courage and full of love.

Then for one whole hour she stood saying good-bye to those rough,
gentle-hearted men whose inspiration to goodness she had been for
five years.  It was very wonderful and very quiet.  It was
understood that there was to be no nonsense, and Abe had been heard
to declare that he would 'throw out any cotton-backed fool who
couldn't hold himself down,' and further, he had enjoined them to
remember that 'her arm wasn't a pump-handle.'

At last they were all gone, all but her guard of honour--Shaw,
Vernon Winton, Geordie, Nixon, Abe, Nelson, Craig, and myself.

This was the real farewell; for, though in the early light of the
next morning two hundred men stood silent about the stage, and then
as it moved out waved their hats and yelled madly, this was the
last touch they had of her hand.  Her place was up on the driver's
seat between Abe and Mr. Craig, who held little Marjorie on his
knee.  The rest of the guard of honour were to follow with Graeme's
team.  It was Winton's fine sense that kept Graeme from following
them close.  'Let her go out alone,' he said, and so we held back
and watched her go.

She stood with her back towards Abe's plunging four-horse team, and
steadying herself with one hand on Abe's shoulder, gazed down upon
us.  Her head was bare, her lips parted in a smile, her eyes
glowing with their own deep light; and so, facing us, erect and
smiling, she drove away, waving us farewell till Abe swung his team
into the canyon road and we saw her no more.  A sigh shuddered
through the crowd, and, with a sob in his voice, Winton said: 'God
help us all.'

I close my eyes and see it all again.  The waving crowd of dark-
faced men, the plunging horses, and, high up beside the driver, the
swaying, smiling, waving figure, and about all the mountains,
framing the picture with their dark sides and white peaks tipped
with the gold of the rising sun.  It is a picture I love to look
upon, albeit it calls up another that I can never see but through
tears.

I look across a strip of ever-widening water, at a group of men
upon the wharf, standing with heads uncovered, every man a hero,
though not a man of them suspects it, least of all the man who
stands in front, strong, resolute, self-conquered.  And, gazing
long, I think I see him turn again to his place among the men of
the mountains, not forgetting, but every day remembering the great
love that came to him, and remembering, too, that love is not all.
It is then the tears come.

But for that picture two of us at least are better men to-day.


CHAPTER XIII

HOW NELSON CAME HOME


Through the long summer the mountains and the pines were with me.
And through the winter, too, busy as I was filling in my Black Rock
sketches for the railway people who would still persist in ordering
them by the dozen, the memory of that stirring life would come over
me, and once more I would be among the silent pines and the mighty
snow-peaked mountains.  And before me would appear the red-shirted
shantymen or dark-faced miners, great, free, bold fellows, driving
me almost mad with the desire to seize and fix those swiftly
changing groups of picturesque figures.  At such times I would drop
my sketch, and with eager brush seize a group, a face, a figure,
and that is how my studio comes to be filled with the men of Black
Rock.  There they are all about me.  Graeme and the men from the
woods, Sandy, Baptiste, the Campbells, and in many attitudes and
groups old man Nelson; Craig, too, and his miners, Shaw, Geordie,
Nixon, and poor old Billy and the keeper of the League saloon.

It seemed as if I lived among them, and the illusion was greatly
helped by the vivid letters Graeme sent me from time to time.
Brief notes came now and then from Craig too, to whom I had sent a
faithful account of how I had brought Mrs. Mavor to her ship, and
of how I had watched her sail away with none too brave a face, as
she held up her hand that bore the miners' ring, and smiled with
that deep light in her eyes.  Ah! those eyes have driven me to
despair and made me fear that I am no great painter after all, in
spite of what my friends tell me who come in to smoke my good
cigars and praise my brush.  I can get the brow and hair, and mouth
and pose, but the eyes! the eyes elude me--and the faces of Mrs.
Mavor on my wall, that the men praise and rave over, are not such
as I could show to any of the men from the mountains.

Graeme's letters tell me chiefly about Craig and his doings, and
about old man Nelson; while from Craig I hear about Graeme, and how
he and Nelson are standing at his back, and doing what they can to
fill the gap that never can be filled.  The three are much
together, I can see, and I am glad for them all, but chiefly for
Craig, whose face, grief-stricken but resolute, and often gentle as
a woman's, will not leave me nor let me rest in peace.

The note of thanks he sent me was entirely characteristic.  There
were no heroics, much less pining or self-pity.  It was simple and
manly, not ignoring the pain but making much of the joy.  And then
they had their work to do.  That note, so clear, so manly, so nobly
sensible, stiffens my back yet at times.

In the spring came the startling news that Black Rock would soon be
no more.  The mines were to close down on April 1.  The company,
having allured the confiding public with enticing descriptions of
marvellous drifts, veins, assays, and prospects, and having
expended vast sums of the public's money in developing the mines
till the assurance of their reliability was absolutely final,
calmly shut down and vanished.  With their vanishing vanishes Black
Rock, not without loss and much deep cursing on the part of the men
brought some hundreds of miles to aid the company in its
extraordinary and wholly inexplicable game.

Personally it grieved me to think that my plan of returning to
Black Rock could never be carried out.  It was a great compensation,
however, that the three men most representative to me of that life
were soon to visit me actually in my own home and den.  Graeme's
letter said that in one month they might be expected to appear.  At
least he and Nelson were soon to come, and Craig would soon follow.

On receiving the great news, I at once looked up young Nelson and
his sister, and we proceeded to celebrate the joyful prospect with
a specially good dinner.  I found the greatest delight in picturing
the joy and pride of the old man in his children, whom he had not
seen for fifteen or sixteen years.  The mother had died some five
years before, then the farm was sold, and the brother and sister
came into the city; and any father might be proud of them.  The son
was a well-made young fellow, handsome enough, thoughtful, and
solid-looking.  The girl reminded me of her father.  The same
resolution was seen in mouth and jaw, and the same passion
slumbered in the dark grey eyes.  She was not beautiful, but she
carried herself well, and one would always look at her twice.  It
would be worth something to see the meeting between father and
daughter.

But fate, the greatest artist of us all, takes little count of the
careful drawing and the bright colouring of our fancy's pictures,
but with rude hand deranges all, and with one swift sweep paints
out the bright and paints in the dark.  And this trick he served me
when, one June night, after long and anxious waiting for some word
from the west, my door suddenly opened and Graeme walked in upon me
like a spectre, grey and voiceless.  My shout of welcome was choked
back by the look in his face, and I could only gaze at him and wait
for his word.  He gripped my hand, tried to speak, but failed to
make words come.

'Sit down, old man,' I said, pushing, him into my chair, 'and take
your time.'

He obeyed, looking up at me with burning, sleepless eyes.  My heart
was sore for his misery, and I said: 'Don't mind, old chap; it
can't be so awfully bad.  You're here safe and sound at any rate,'
and so I went on to give him time.  But he shuddered and looked
round and groaned.

'Now look here, Graeme, let's have it.  When did you land here?
Where is Nelson?  Why didn't you bring him up?'

'He is at the station in his coffin,' he answered slowly.

'In his coffin?' I echoed, my beautiful pictures all vanishing.
'How was it?'

'Through my cursed folly,' he groaned bitterly.

'What happened?' I asked.  But ignoring my question, he said: 'I
must see his children.  I have not slept for four nights.  I hardly
know what I am doing; but I can't rest till I see his children.  I
promised him.  Get them for me.'

'To-morrow will do.  Go to sleep now, and we shall arrange
everything to-morrow,' I urged.

'No!' he said fiercely; 'to-night--now!'

In half an hour they were listening, pale and grief-stricken, to
the story of their father's death.

Poor Graeme was relentless in his self-condemnation as he told how,
through his 'cursed folly,' old Nelson was killed.  The three,
Craig, Graeme, and Nelson, had come as far as Victoria together.
There they left Craig, and came on to San Francisco.  In an evil
hour Graeme met a companion of other and evil days, and it was not
long till the old fever came upon him.

In vain Nelson warned and pleaded.  The reaction from the monotony
and poverty of camp life to the excitement and luxury of the San
Francisco gaming palaces swung Graeme quite off his feet, and all
that Nelson could do was to follow from place to place and keep
watch.

'And there he would sit,' said Graeme in a hard, bitter voice,
'waiting and watching often till the grey morning light, while my
madness held me fast to the table.  One night,' here he paused a
moment, put his face in his hands and shuddered; but quickly he was
master of himself again, and went on in the same hard voice--'One
night my partner and I were playing two men who had done us up
before.  I knew they were cheating, but could not detect them.
Game after game they won, till I was furious at my stupidity in not
being able to catch them.  Happening to glance at Nelson in the
corner, I caught a meaning look, and looking again, he threw me a
signal.  I knew at once what the fraud was, and next game charged
the fellow with it.  He gave me the lie; I struck his mouth, but
before I could draw my gun, his partner had me by the arms.  What
followed I hardly know.  While I was struggling to get free, I saw
him reach for his weapon; but, as he drew it, Nelson sprang across
the table, and bore him down.  When the row was ever, three men lay
on the floor.  One was Nelson; he took the shot meant for me.'

Again the story paused.

'And the man that shot him?'

I started at the intense fierceness in the voice, and, looking upon
the girl, saw her eyes blazing with a terrible light.

'He is dead,' answered Graeme indifferently.

'You killed him?' she asked eagerly.

Graeme looked at her curiously, and answered slowly--

'I did not mean to.  He came at me.  I struck him harder than I
knew.  He never moved.'

She drew a sigh of satisfaction, and waited.

'I got him to a private ward, had the best doctor in the city, and
sent for Craig to Victoria.  For three days we thought he would
live--he was keen to get home; but by the time Craig came we had
given up hope.  Oh, but I was thankful to see Craig come in, and
the joy in the old man's eyes was beautiful to see.  There was no
pain at last, and no fear.  He would not allow me to reproach
myself, saying over and over, "You would have done the same for
me"--as I would, fast enough--"and it is better me than you.  I am
old and done; you will do much good yet for the boys."  And he kept
looking at me till I could only promise to do my best.

'But I am glad I told him how much good he had done me during the
last year, for he seemed to think that too good to be true.  And
when Craig told him how he had helped the boys in the camp, and how
Sandy and Baptiste and the Campbells would always be better men for
his life among them, the old man's face actually shone, as if light
were coming through.  And with surprise and joy he kept on saying,
"Do you think so?  Do you think so?  Perhaps so, perhaps so."  At
the last he talked of Christmas night at the camp.  You were there,
you remember.  Craig had been holding a service, and something
happened, I don't know what, but they both knew.'

'I know,' I said, and I saw again the picture of the old man under
the pine, upon his knees in the snow, with his face turned up to
the stars.

'Whatever it was, it was in his mind at the very last, and I can
never forget his face as he turned it to Craig.  One hears of such
things: I had often, but had never put much faith in them; but joy,
rapture, triumph, these are what were in his face, as he said, his
breath coming short, "You said--He wouldn't--fail me--you were
right--not once--not once--He stuck to me--I'm glad he told me--
thank God--for you--you showed--me--I'll see Him--and--tell Him--'
And Craig, kneeling beside him so steady--I was behaving like a
fool--smiled down through his streaming tears into the dim eyes so
brightly, till they could see no more.  Thank him for that!  He
helped the old man through, and he helped me too, that night, thank
God!'  And Graeme's voice, hard till now, broke in a sob.

He had forgotten us, and was back beside his passing friend, and
all his self-control could not keep back the flowing tears.

'It was his life for mine,' he said huskily.

The brother and sister were quietly weeping, but spoke no word,
though I knew Graeme was waiting for them.

I took up the word, and told of what I had known of Nelson, and his
influence upon the men of Black Rock.  They listened eagerly
enough, but still without speaking.  There seemed nothing to say,
till I suggested to Graeme that he must get some rest.  Then the
girl turned to him, and, impulsively putting out her hand, said--

'Oh, it is all so sad; but how can we ever thank you?'

'Thank me!' gasped Graeme.  'Can you forgive me?  I brought him to
his death.'

'No, no!  You must not say so,' she answered hurriedly.  'You would
have done the same for him.'

'God knows I would,' said Graeme earnestly; 'and God bless you for
your words!'  And I was thankful to see the tears start in his dry,
burning eyes.

We carried him to the old home in the country, that he might lie by
the side of the wife he had loved and wronged.  A few friends met
us at the wayside station, and followed in sad procession along the
country road, that wound past farms and through woods, and at last
up to the ascent where the quaint, old wooden church, black with
the rains and snows of many years, stood among its silent graves.
The little graveyard sloped gently towards the setting sun, and
from it one could see, far on every side, the fields of grain and
meadowland that wandered off over softly undulating hills to meet
the maple woods at the horizon, dark, green, and cool.  Here and
there white farmhouses, with great barns standing near, looked out
from clustering orchards.

Up the grass-grown walk, and through the crowding mounds, over
which waves, uncut, the long, tangling grass, we bear our friend,
and let him gently down into the kindly bosom of mother earth,
dark, moist, and warm.  The sound of a distant cowbell mingles with
the voice of the last prayer; the clods drop heavily with heart-
startling echo; the mound is heaped and shaped by kindly friends,
sharing with one another the task; the long rough sods are laid
over and patted into place; the old minister takes farewell in a
few words of gentle sympathy; the brother and sister, with
lingering looks at the two graves side by side, the old and the
new, step into the farmer's carriage, and drive away; the sexton
locks the gate and goes home, and we are left outside alone.

Then we went back and stood by Nelson's grave.

After a long silence Graeme spoke.

'Connor, he did not grudge his life to me--and I think'--and here
the words came slowly--'I understand now what that means, "Who
loved me and gave Himself for me."'

Then taking off his hat, he said reverently, 'By God's help
Nelson's life shall not end, but shall go on.  Yes, old man!'
looking down upon the grave, 'I'm with you'; and lifting up his
face to the calm sky, 'God help me to be true.'

Then he turned and walked briskly away, as one might who had
pressing business, or as soldiers march from a comrade's grave to a
merry tune, not that they have forgotten, but they have still to
fight.

And this was the way old man Nelson came home.


CHAPTERS XIV.

GRAEME'S NEW BIRTH


There was more left in that grave than old man Nelson's dead body.
It seemed to me that Graeme left part, at least, of his old self
there, with his dead friend and comrade, in the quiet country
churchyard.  I waited long for the old careless, reckless spirit
to appear, but he was never the same again.  The change was
unmistakable, but hard to define.  He seemed to have resolved his
life into a definite purpose.  He was hardly so comfortable a
fellow to be with; he made me feel even more lazy and useless than
was my wont; but I respected him more, and liked him none the less.
As a lion he was not a success.  He would not roar.  This was
disappointing to me, and to his friends and mine, who had been
waiting his return with eager expectation of tales of thrilling and
bloodthirsty adventure.

His first days were spent in making right, or as nearly right as he
could, the break that drove him to the west.  His old firm (and I
have had more respect for the humanity of lawyers ever since)
behaved really well.  They proved the restoration of their
confidence in his integrity and ability by offering him a place in
the firm, which, however, he would not accept.  Then, when he felt
clean, as he said, he posted off home, taking me with him.  During
the railway journey of four hours he hardly spoke; but when we had
left the town behind, and had fairly got upon the country road that
led toward the home ten miles away, his speech came to him in a
great flow.  His spirits ran over.  He was like a boy returning
from his first college term.  His very face wore the boy's open,
innocent, earnest look that used to attract men to him in his first
college year.  His delight in the fields and woods, in the sweet
country air and the sunlight, was without bound.  How often had we
driven this road together in the old days!

Every turn was familiar.  The swamp where the tamaracks stood
straight and slim out of their beds of moss; the brule, as we used
to call it, where the pine-stumps, huge and blackened, were half-
hidden by the new growth of poplars and soft maples; the big hill,
where we used to get out and walk when the roads were bad; the
orchards, where the harvest apples were best and most accessible--
all had their memories.

It was one of those perfect afternoons that so often come in the
early Canadian summer, before Nature grows weary with the heat.
The white gravel road was trimmed on either side with turf of
living green, close cropped by the sheep that wandered in flocks
along its whole length.  Beyond the picturesque snake-fences
stretched the fields of springing grain, of varying shades of
green, with here and there a dark brown patch, marking a turnip
field or summer fallow, and far back were the woods of maple and
beech and elm, with here and there the tufted top of a mighty pine,
the lonely representative of a vanished race, standing clear above
the humbler trees.

As we drove through the big swamp, where the yawning, haunted gully
plunges down to its gloomy depths, Graeme reminded me of that night
when our horse saw something in that same gully, and refused to go
past; and I felt again, though it was broad daylight, something of
the grue that shivered down my back, as I saw in the moonlight the
gleam of a white thing far through the pine trunks.

As we came nearer home the houses became familiar.  Every house had
its tale: we had eaten or slept in most of them; we had sampled
apples, and cherries, and plums from their orchards, openly as
guests, or secretly as marauders, under cover of night--the more
delightful way, I fear.  Ah! happy days, with these innocent crimes
and fleeting remorses, how bravely we faced them, and how gaily we
lived them, and how yearningly we look back at them now!  The sun
was just dipping into the tree-tops of the distant woods behind as
we came to the top of the last hill that overlooked the valley, in
which lay the village of Riverdale.  Wooded hills stood about it on
three sides, and, where the hills faded out, there lay the mill-
pond sleeping and smiling in the sun.  Through the village ran the
white road, up past the old frame church, and on to the white manse
standing among the trees.  That was Graeme's home, and mine too,
for I had never known another worthy of the name.  We held up our
team to look down over the valley, with its rampart of wooded
hills, its shining pond, and its nestling village, and on past to
the church and the white manse, hiding among the trees.  The
beauty, the peace, the warm, loving homeliness of the scene came
about our hearts, but, being men, we could find no words.

'Let's go,' cried Graeme, and down the hill we tore and rocked and
swayed to the amazement of the steady team, whose education from
the earliest years had impressed upon their minds the criminality
of attempting to do anything but walk carefully down a hill, at
least for two-thirds of the way.  Through the village, in a cloud
of dust, we swept, catching a glimpse of a well-known face here and
there, and flinging a salutation as we passed, leaving the owner of
the face rooted to his place in astonishment at the sight of Graeme
whirling on in his old-time, well-known reckless manner.  Only old
Dunc. M'Leod was equal to the moment, for as Graeme called out,
'Hello, Dunc.!' the old man lifted up his hands, and called back in
an awed voice: 'Bless my soul! is it yourself?'

'Stands his whisky well, poor old chap!' was Graeme's comment.

As we neared the church he pulled up his team, and we went quietly
past the sleepers there, then again on the full run down the gentle
slope, over the little brook, and up to the gate.  He had hardly
got his team pulled up before, flinging me the lines, he was out
over the wheel, for coming down the walk, with her hands lifted
high, was a dainty little lady, with the face of an angel.  In a
moment Graeme had her in his arms.  I heard the faint cry, 'My boy,
my boy,' and got down on the other side to attend to my off horse,
surprised to find my hands trembling and my eyes full of tears.
Back upon the steps stood an old gentleman, with white hair and
flowing beard, handsome, straight, and stately--Graeme's father,
waiting his turn.

'Welcome home, my lad,' was his greeting, as he kissed his son, and
the tremor of his voice, and the sight of the two men kissing each
other, like women, sent me again to my horses' heads.

'There's Connor, mother!' shouted out Graeme, and the dainty little
lady, in her black silk and white lace, came out to me quickly,
with outstretched hands.

'You, too, are welcome home,' she said, and kissed me.

I stood with my hat off, saying something about being glad to come,
but wishing that I could get away before I should make quite a fool
of myself.  For as I looked down upon that beautiful face, pale,
except for a faint flush upon each faded cheek, and read the story
of pain endured and conquered, and as I thought of all the long
years of waiting and of vain hoping, I found my throat dry and
sore, and the words would not come.  But her quick sense needed no
words, and she came to my help.

'You will find Jack at the stable,' she said, smiling; 'he ought to
have been here.'

The stable!  Why had I not thought of that before?  Thankfully now
my words came--

'Yes, certainly, I'll find him, Mrs. Graeme.  I suppose he's as
much of a scapegrace as ever, and off I went to look up Graeme's
young brother, who had given every promise in the old days of
developing into as stirring a rascal as one could desire; but who,
as I found out later, had not lived these years in his mother's
home for nothing.

'Oh, Jack's a good boy,' she answered, smiling again, as she turned
toward the other two, now waiting for her upon the walk.

The week that followed was a happy one for us all; but for the
mother it was full to the brim with joy.  Her sweet face was full
of content, and in her eyes rested a great peace.  Our days were
spent driving about among the hills, or strolling through the maple
woods, or down into the tamarack swamp, where the pitcher plants
and the swamp lilies and the marigold waved above the deep moss.
In the evenings we sat under the trees on the lawn till the stars
came out and the night dews drove us in.  Like two lovers, Graeme
and his mother would wander off together, leaving Jack and me to
each other.  Jack was reading for divinity, and was really a fine,
manly fellow, with all his brother's turn for rugby, and I took to
him amazingly; but after the day was over we would gather about the
supper table, and the talk would be of all things under heaven--
art, football, theology.  The mother would lead in all.  How quick
she was, how bright her fancy, how subtle her intellect, and
through all a gentle grace, very winning and beautiful to see!

Do what I would, Graeme would talk little of the mountains and his
life there.

'My lion will not roar, Mrs. Graeme,' I complained; 'he simply will
not.'

'You should twist his tail,' said Jack.

'That seems to be the difficulty, Jack,' said his mother, 'to get
hold of his tale.'

'Oh, mother,' groaned Jack; 'you never did such a thing before!
How could you?  Is it this baleful Western influence?'

'I shall reform, Jack,' she replied brightly.

'But, seriously, Graeme,' I remonstrated, 'you ought to tell your
people of your life--that free, glorious life in the mountains.'

'Free!  Glorious!  To some men, perhaps!' said Graeme, and then fell
into silence.

But I saw Graeme as a new man the night he talked theology with his
father.  The old minister was a splendid Calvinist, of heroic type,
and as he discoursed of God's sovereignty and election, his face
glowed and his voice rang out.

Graeme listened intently, now and then putting in a question, as
one would a keen knife-thrust into a foe.  But the old man knew his
ground, and moved easily among his ideas, demolishing the enemy as
he appeared, with jaunty grace.  In the full flow of his triumphant
argument, Graeme turned to him with sudden seriousness.

'Look here, father!  I was born a Calvinist, and I can't see how
any one with a level head can hold anything else, than that the
Almighty has some idea as to how He wants to run His universe, and
He means to carry out His idea, and is carrying it out; but what
would you do in a case like this?'  Then he told him the story of
poor Billy Breen, his fight and his defeat.

'Would you preach election to that chap?'

The mother's eyes were shining with tears.

The old gentleman blew his nose like a trumpet, and then said
gravely--

'No, my boy, you don't feed babes with meat.  But what came to
him?'

Then Graeme asked me to finish the tale.  After I had finished the
story of Billy's final triumph and of Craig's part in it, they sat
long silent, till the minister, clearing his throat hard and
blowing his nose more like a trumpet than ever, said with great
emphasis--

'Thank God for such a man in such a place!  I wish there were more
of us like him.'

'I should like to see you out there, sir,' said Graeme admiringly;
'you'd get them, but you wouldn't have time for election.'

'Yes, yes!' said his father warmly; 'I should love to have a chance
just to preach election to these poor lads.  Would I were twenty
years younger!'

'It is worth a man's life,' said Graeme earnestly.  His younger
brother turned his face eagerly toward the mother.  For answer she
slipped her hand into his and said softly, while her eyes shone
like stars--

'Some day, Jack, perhaps!  God knows.'  But Jack only looked
steadily at her, smiling a little and patting her hand.

'You'd shine there, mother,' said Graeme, smiling upon her; 'you'd
better come with me.'  She started, and said faintly--

'With you?'  It was the first hint he had given of his purpose.
'You are going back?'

'What! as a missionary?' said Jack.

'Not to preach, Jack; I'm not orthodox enough,' looking at his
father and shaking his head; 'but to build railroads and lend a
hand to some poor chap, if I can.'

'Could you not find work nearer home, my boy?' asked the father;
'there is plenty of both kinds near us here, surely.'

'Lots of work, but not mine, I fear,' answered Graeme, keeping his
eyes away from his mother's face.  'A man must do his own work.'

His voice was quiet and resolute, and glancing at the beautiful
face at the end of the table, I saw in the pale lips and yearning
eyes that the mother was offering up her firstborn, that ancient
sacrifice.  But not all the agony of sacrifice could wring from her
entreaty or complaint in the hearing of her sons.  That was for
other ears and for the silent hours of the night.  And next morning
when she came down to meet us her face was wan and weary, but it
wore the peace of victory and a glory not of earth.  Her greeting
was full of dignity, sweet and gentle; but when she came to Graeme
she lingered over him and kissed him twice.  And that was all that
any of us ever saw of that sore fight.

At the end of the week I took leave of them, and last of all of the
mother.

She hesitated just a moment, then suddenly put her hands upon my
shoulders and kissed me, saying softly, 'You are his friend; you
will sometimes come to me?'

'Gladly, if I may,' I hastened to answer, for the sweet, brave face
was too much to bear; and, till she left us for that world of which
she was a part, I kept my word, to my own great and lasting good.
When Graeme met me in the city at the end of the summer, he brought
me her love, and then burst forth--

'Connor, do you know, I have just discovered my mother!  I have
never known her till this summer.'

'More fool you,' I answered, for often had I, who had never known a
mother, envied him his.

'Yes, that is true,' he answered slowly; 'but you cannot see until
you have eyes.'

Before he set out again for the west I gave him a supper, asking
the men who had been with us in the old 'Varsity days.  I was
doubtful as to the wisdom of this, and was persuaded only by
Graeme's eager assent to my proposal.

'Certainly, let's have them,' he said; 'I shall be awfully glad to
see them; great stuff they were.'

'But, I don't know, Graeme; you see--well--hang it!--you know--
you're different, you know.'

He looked at me curiously.

'I hope I can still stand a good supper, and if the boys can't
stand me, why, I can't help it.  I'll do anything but roar, and
don't you begin to work off your menagerie act--now, you hear me!'

'Well, it is rather hard lines that when I have been talking up my
lion for a year, and then finally secure him, that he will not
roar.'

'Serve you right,' he replied, quite heartlessly; 'but I'll tell
you what I'll do, I'll feed!  Don't you worry,' he adds soothingly;
'the supper will go.'

And go it did.  The supper was of the best; the wines first-class.
I had asked Graeme about the wines.

'Do as you like, old man,' was his answer; 'it's your supper, but,'
he added, 'are the men all straight?'

I ran them over in my mind.

'Yes; I think so.'

If not, don't you help them down; and anyway, you can't be too
careful.  But don't mind me; I am quit of the whole business from
this out.'  So I ventured wines, for the last time, as it happened.

We were a quaint combination.  Old 'Beetles,' whose nickname was
prophetic of his future fame as a bugman, as the fellows
irreverently said; 'Stumpy' Smith, a demon bowler; Polly Lindsay,
slow as ever and as sure as when he held the half-back line with
Graeme, and used to make my heart stand still with terror at his
cool deliberation.  But he was never known to fumble nor to funk,
and somehow he always got us out safe enough.  Then there was
Rattray--'Rat' for short--who, from a swell, had developed into a
cynic with a sneer, awfully clever and a good enough fellow at
heart.  Little 'Wig' Martin, the sharpest quarter ever seen, and
big Barney Lundy, centre scrimmage, whose terrific roar and rush
had often struck terror to the enemy's heart, and who was Graeme's
slave.  Such was the party.

As the supper went on my fears began to vanish, for if Graeme did
not 'roar,' he did the next best thing--ate and talked quite up to
his old form.  Now we played our matches over again, bitterly
lamenting the 'if's' that had lost us the championships, and wildly
approving the tackles that had saved, and the runs that had made
the 'Varsity crowd go mad with delight and had won for us.  And as
their names came up in talk, we learned how life had gone with
those who had been our comrades of ten years ago.  Some, success
had lifted to high places; some, failure had left upon the rocks,
and a few lay in their graves.

But as the evening wore on, I began to wish that I had left out the
wines, for the men began to drop an occasional oath, though I had
let them know during the summer that Graeme was not the man he had
been.  But Graeme smoked and talked and heeded not, till Rattray
swore by that name most sacred of all ever borne by man.  Then
Graeme opened upon him in a cool, slow way--

'What an awful fool a man is, to damn things as you do, Rat.
Things are not damned.  It is men who are; and that is too bad to
be talked much about but when a man flings out of his foul mouth
the name of Jesus Christ'--here he lowered his voice--'it's a
shame--it's more, it's a crime.'

There was dead silence, then Rattray replied--

'I suppose you're right enough, it is bad form; but crime is rather
strong, I think.'

'Not if you consider who it is,' said Graeme with emphasis.

'Oh, come now,' broke in Beetles.  'Religion is all right, is a
good thing, and I believe a necessary thing for the race, but no
one takes seriously any longer the Christ myth.'

'What about your mother, Beetles?' put in Wig Martin.

Beetles consigned him to the pit and was silent, for his father was
an Episcopal clergyman, and his mother a saintly woman.

'I fooled with that for some time, Beetles, but it won't do.  You
can't build a religion that will take the devil out of a man on a
myth.  That won't do the trick.  I don't want to argue about it,
but I am quite convinced the myth theory is not reasonable, and
besides, it wont work.'

'Will the other work?' asked Rattray, with a sneer.

'Sure!' said Grame; 'I've seen it.'

'Where?' challenged Rattray.  'I haven't seen much of it.'

'Yes, you have, Rattray, you know you have,' said Wig again.  But
Rattray ignored him.

'I'll tell you, boys,' said Graeme.  'I want you to know, anyway,
why I believe what I do.'

Then he told them the story of old man Nelson, from the old coast
days, before I knew him, to the end.  He told the story well.  The
stern fight and the victory of the life, and the self-sacrifice and
the pathos of the death appealed to these men, who loved fight and
could understand sacrifice.

'That's why I believe in Jesus Christ, and that's why I think it a
crime to fling His name about!'

'I wish to Heaven I could say that,' said Beetles.

'Keep wishing hard enough and it will come to you,' said Graeme.

'Look here, old chap,' said Rattray; 'you're quite right about
this; I'm willing to own up.  Wig is correct.  I know a few, at
least, of that stamp, but most of those who go in for that sort of
thing are not much account'

'For ten years, Rattray,' said Graeme in a downright, matter-of-
fact way, 'you and I have tried this sort of thing'--tapping a
bottle--'and we got out of it all there is to be got, paid well for
it, too, and--faugh! you know it's not good enough, and the more
you go in for it, the more you curse yourself.  So I have quit this
and I am going in for the other.'

'What! going in for preaching?'

'Not much--railroading--money in it--and lending a hand to fellows
on the rocks.'

'I say, don't you want a centre forward?' said big Barney in his
deep voice.

'Every man must play his game in his place, old chap.  I'd like to
see you tackle it, though, right well,' said Graeme earnestly.  And
so he did, in the after years, and good tackling it was.  But that
is another story.

'But, I say, Graeme,' persisted Beetles, 'about this business, do
you mean to say you go the whole thing--Jonah, you know, and the
rest of it?'

Graeme hesitated, then said--

'I haven't much of a creed, Beetles; don't really know how much I
believe.  But,' by this time he was standing, 'I do know that good
is good, and bad is bad, and good and bad are not the same.  And I
know a man's a fool to follow the one, and a wise man to follow the
other, and,' lowering his voice, 'I believe God is at the back of a
man who wants to get done with bad.  I've tried all that folly,'
sweeping his hand over the glasses and bottles, 'and all that goes
with it, and I've done with it'

'I'll go you that far,' roared big Barney, following his old
captain as of yore.

'Good man,' said Graeme, striking hands with him.

'Put me down,' said little Wig cheerfully.

Then I took up the word, for there rose before me the scene in the
League saloon, and I saw the beautiful face with the deep shining
eyes, and I was speaking for her again.  I told them of Craig and
his fight for these men's lives.  I told them, too, of how I had
been too indolent to begin.  'But,' I said, 'I am going this far
from to-night,' and I swept the bottles into the champagne tub.

'I say,' said Polly Lindsay, coming up in his old style, slow but
sure, 'let's all go in, say for five years.'  And so we did.  We
didn't sign anything, but every man shook hands with Graeme.

And as I told Craig about this a year later, when he was on his way
back from his Old Land trip to join Graeme in the mountains, he
threw up his head in the old way and said, 'It was well done.  It
must have been worth seeing.  Old man Nelson's work is not done
yet.  Tell me again,' and he made me go over the whole scene with
all the details put in.

But when I told Mrs. Mavor, after two years had gone, she only
said, 'Old things are passed away, all things are become new'; but
the light glowed in her eyes till I could not see their colour.
But all that, too, is another story.


CHAPTER XV

COMING TO THEIR OWN


A man with a conscience is often provoking, sometimes impossible.
Persuasion is lost upon him.  He will not get angry, and he looks
at one with such a far-away expression in his face that in striving
to persuade him one feels earthly and even fiendish.  At least this
was my experience with Craig.  He spent a week with me just before
he sailed for the Old Land, for the purpose, as he said, of getting
some of the coal dust and other grime out of him.

He made me angry the last night of his stay, and all the more that
he remained quite sweetly unmoved.  It was a strategic mistake of
mine to tell him how Nelson came home to us, and how Graeme stood
up before the 'Varsity chaps at my supper and made his confession
and confused Rattray's easy-stepping profanity, and started his own
five-year league.  For all this stirred in Craig the hero, and he
was ready for all sorts of heroic nonsense, as I called it.  We
talked of everything but the one thing, and about that we said not
a word till, bending low to poke my fire and to hide my face, I
plunged--

'You will see her, of course?'

He made no pretence of not understanding but answered--

'Of course.'

'There's really no sense in her staying over there,' I suggested.

'And yet she is a wise woman,' he said, as if carefully considering
the question.

'Heaps of landlords never see their tenants, and they are none the
worse.'

'The landlords?'

'No, the tenants.'

'Probably, having such landlords.'

'And as for the old lady, there must be some one in the connection
to whom it would be a Godsend to care for her.'

'Now, Connor,' he said quietly, 'don't.  We have gone over all
there is to be said.  Nothing new has come.  Don't turn it all up
again.'

Then I played the heathen and raged, as Graeme would have said,
till Craig smiled a little wearily and said--

'You exhaust yourself, old chap.  Have a pipe, do'; and after a
pause he added in his own way, 'What would you have?  The path
lies straight from my feet.  Should I quit it?  I could not so
disappoint you--and all of them.'

And I knew he was thinking of Graeme and the lads in the mountains
he had taught to be true men.  It did not help my rage, but it
checked my speech; so I smoked in silence till he was moved to say--

'And after all, you know, old chap, there are great compensations
for all losses; but for the loss of a good conscience towards God,
what can make up?'

But, all the same, I hoped for some better result from his visit to
Britain.  It seemed to me that something must turn up to change
such an unbearable situation.

The year passed, however, and when I looked into Craig's face again
I knew that nothing had been changed, and that he had come back to
take up again his life alone, more resolutely hopeful than ever.

But the year had left its mark upon him too.  He was a broader and
deeper man.  He had been living and thinking with men of larger
ideas and richer culture, and he was far too quick in sympathy with
life to remain untouched by his surroundings.  He was more tolerant
of opinions other than his own, but more unrelenting in his
fidelity to conscience and more impatient of half-heartedness and
self-indulgence.  He was full of reverence for the great scholars
and the great leaders of men he had come to know.

'Great, noble fellows they are, and extraordinarily modest,' he
said--'that is, the really great are modest.  There are plenty of
the other sort, neither great nor modest.  And the books to be
read!  I am quite hopeless about my reading.  It gave me a queer
sensation to shake hands with a man who had written a great book.
To hear him make commonplace remarks, to witness a faltering in
knowledge--one expects these men to know everything--and to
experience respectful kindness at his hands!'

'What of the younger men?' I asked.

'Bright, keen, generous fellows.  In things theoretical, omniscient;
but in things practical, quite helpless.  They toss about great
ideas as the miners lumps of coal.  They can call them by their book
names easily enough, but I often wondered whether they could put
them into English.  Some of them I coveted for the mountains.  Men
with clear heads and big hearts, and built after Sandy M'Naughton's
model.  It does seem a sinful waste of God's good human stuff to see
these fellows potter away their lives among theories living and
dead, and end up by producing a book!  They are all either making or
going to make a book.  A good thing we haven't to read them.  But
here and there among them is some quiet chap who will make a book
that men will tumble over each other to read.'

Then we paused and looked at each other.

'Well?' I said.  He understood me.

'Yes!' he answered slowly, 'doing great work.  Every one worships
her just as we do, and she is making them all do something worth
while, as she used to make us.'

He spoke cheerfully and readily as if he were repeating a lesson
well learned, but he could not humbug me.  I felt the heartache in
the cheerful tone.

'Tell me about her,' I said, for I knew that if he would talk it
would do him good.  And talk he did, often forgetting me, till, as
I listened, I found myself looking again into the fathomless eyes,
and hearing again the heart-searching voice.  I saw her go in and
out of the little red-tiled cottages and down the narrow back lanes
of the village; I heard her voice in a sweet, low song by the bed
of a dying child, or pouring forth floods of music in the great new
hall of the factory town near by.  But I could not see, though he
tried to show me, the stately gracious lady receiving the country
folk in her home.  He did not linger over that scene, but went back
again to the gate-cottage where she had taken him one day to see
Billy Breen's mother.

'I found the old woman knew all about me,' he said, simply enough;
'but there were many things about Billy she had never heard, and I
was glad to put her right on some points, though Mrs. Mavor would
not hear it.'

He sat silent for a little, looking into the coals; then went on in
a soft, quiet voice--

'It brought back the mountains and the old days to hear again
Billy's tones in his mother's voice, and to see her sitting there
in the very dress she wore the night of the League, you remember--
some soft stuff with black lace about it--and to hear her sing as
she did for Billy--ah! ah!'  His voice unexpectedly broke, but in a
moment he was master of himself and begged me to forgive his
weakness.  I am afraid I said words that should not be said--a
thing I never do, except when suddenly and utterly upset.

'I am getting selfish and weak,' he said; 'I must get to work.  I
am glad to get to work.  There is much to do, and it is worth
while, if only to keep one from getting useless and lazy.'

'Useless and lazy!' I said to myself, thinking of my life beside
his, and trying to get command of my voice, so as not to make quite
a fool of myself.  And for many a day those words goaded me to work
and to the exercise of some mild self-denial.  But more than all
else, after Craig had gone back to the mountains, Graeme's letters
from the railway construction camp stirred one to do unpleasant
duty long postponed, and rendered uncomfortable my hours of most
luxurious ease.  Many of the old gang were with him, both of
lumbermen and miners, and Craig was their minister.  And the
letters told of how he laboured by day and by night along the line
of construction, carrying his tent and kit with him, preaching
straight sermons, watching by sick men, writing their letters, and
winning their hearts; making strong their lives, and helping them
to die well when their hour came.  One day, these letters proved
too much for me, and I packed away my paints and brushes, and made
my vow unto the Lord that I would be 'useless and lazy' no longer,
but would do something with myself.  In consequence, I found myself
within three weeks walking the London hospitals, finishing my
course, that I might join that band of men who were doing something
with life, or, if throwing it away, were not losing it for nothing.
I had finished being a fool, I hoped, at least a fool of the
useless and luxurious kind.  The letter that came from Graeme, in
reply to my request for a position on his staff, was characteristic
of the man, both new and old, full of gayest humour and of most
earnest welcome to the work.

Mrs. Mavor's reply was like herself--

'I knew you would not long be content with the making of pictures,
which the world does not really need, and would jo