in your friends
in the dear West, making lives that the world needs so sorely.'

But her last words touched me strangely--

'But be sure to be thankful every day for your privilege. . . .  It
will be good to think of you all, with the glorious mountains about
you, and Christ's own work in your hands. . . .  Ah! how we would
like to choose our work, and the place in which to do it!'

The longing did not appear in the words, but I needed no words to
tell me how deep and how constant it was.  And I take some credit
to myself, that in my reply I gave her no bidding to join our band,
but rather praised the work she was doing in her place, telling her
how I had heard of it from Craig.

The summer found me religiously doing Paris and Vienna, gaining a
more perfect acquaintance with the extent and variety of my own
ignorance, and so fully occupied in this interesting and wholesome
occupation that I fell out with all my correspondents, with the
result of weeks of silence between us.

Two letters among the heap waiting on my table in London made my
heart beat quick, but with how different feelings: one from Graeme
telling me that Craig had been very ill, and that he was to take
him home as soon as he could be moved.  Mrs. Mavor's letter told me
of the death of the old lady, who had been her care for the past
two years, and of her intention to spend some months in her old
home in Edinburgh.  And this letter it is that accounts for my
presence in a miserable, dingy, dirty little hall running off a
close in the historic Cowgate, redolent of the glories of the
splendid past, and of the various odours of the evil-smelling
present.  I was there to hear Mrs. Mavor sing to the crowd of
gamins that thronged the closes in the neighbourhood, and that had
been gathered into a club by 'a fine leddie frae the West End,' for
the love of Christ and His lost.  This was an 'At Home' night, and
the mothers and fathers, sisters and brothers, of all ages and
sizes were present.  Of all the sad faces I had ever seen, those
mothers carried the saddest and most woe-stricken.  'Heaven pity
us!' I found myself saying; 'is this the beautiful, the cultured,
the heaven-exalted city of Edinburgh?  Will it not, for this, be
cast down into hell some day, if it repent not of its closes and
their dens of defilement?  Oh! the utter weariness, the dazed
hopelessness of the ghastly faces!  Do not the kindly, gentle
church-going folk of the crescents and the gardens see them in
their dreams, or are their dreams too heavenly for these ghastly
faces to appear?'

I cannot recall the programme of the evening, but in my memory-
gallery is a vivid picture of that face, sweet, sad, beautiful,
alight with the deep glow of her eyes, as she stood and sang to
that dingy crowd.  As I sat upon the window-ledge listening to the
voice with its flowing song, my thoughts were far away, and I was
looking down once more upon the eager, coal-grimed faces in the
rude little church in Black Rock.  I was brought back to find
myself swallowing hard by an audible whisper from a wee lassie to
her mother--

'Mither!  See till yon man.  He's greetin'.'

When I came to myself she was singing 'The Land o' the Leal,' the
Scotch 'Jerusalem the Golden,' immortal, perfect.  It needed
experience of the hunger-haunted Cowgate closes, chill with the
black mist of an eastern haar, to feel the full bliss of the vision
in the words--


     'There's nae sorrow there, Jean,
      There's neither cauld nor care, Jean,
      The day is aye fair in
      The Land o' the Leal.'


A land of fair, warm days, untouched by sorrow and care, would be
heaven indeed to the dwellers of the Cowgate.

The rest of that evening is hazy enough to me now, till I find
myself opposite Mrs. Mavor at her fire, reading Graeme's letter;
then all is vivid again.

I could not keep the truth from her.  I knew it would be folly to
try.  So I read straight on till I came to the words--

'He has had mountain fever, whatever that may be, and he will not
pull up again.  If I can, I shall take him home to my mother'--when
she suddenly stretched out her hand, saying, 'Oh, let me read!' and
I gave her the letter.  In a minute she had read it, and began
almost breathlessly--

'Listen! my life is much changed.  My mother-in-law is gone; she
needs me no longer.  My solicitor tells me, too, that owing to
unfortunate investments there is need of money, so great need, that
it is possible that either the estates or the works must go.  My
cousin has his all in the works--iron works, you know.  It would be
wrong to have him suffer.  I shall give up the estates--that is
best.'  She paused.

'And come with me,' I cried.

'When do you sail?'

'Next week,' I answered eagerly.

She looked at me a few moments, and into her eyes there came a
light soft and tender, as she said--

'I shall go with you.'

And so she did; and no old Roman in all the glory of a Triumph
carried a prouder heart than I, as I bore her and her little one
from the train to Graeme's carriage, crying--

'I've got her.'

But his was the better sense, for he stood waving his hat and
shouting--

'He's all right,' at which Mrs. Mavor grew white; but when she
shook hands with him, the red was in her cheek again.

'It was the cable did it,' went on Graeme.  'Connor's a great
doctor!  His first case will make him famous.  Good prescription--
after mountain fever try a cablegram!'  And the red grew deeper in
the beautiful face beside us.

Never did the country look so lovely.  The woods were in their
gayest autumn dress; the brown fields were bathed in a purple haze;
the air was sweet and fresh with a suspicion of the coming frosts
of winter.  But in spite of all the road seemed long, and it was as
if hours had gone before our eyes fell upon the white manse
standing among the golden leaves.

'Let them go,' I cried, as Graeme paused to take in the view, and
down the sloping dusty road we flew on the dead run.

'Reminds one a little of Abe's curves,' said Graeme, as we drew up
at the gate.  But I answered him not, for I was introducing to each
other the two best women in the world.  As I was about to rush into
the house, Graeme seized me by the collar, saying--

'Hold on, Connor! you forget your place, you're next.'

'Why, certainly,' I cried, thankfully enough; 'what an ass I am!'

'Quite true,' said Graeme solemnly.

'Where is he?' I asked.

'At this present moment?' he asked, in a shocked voice.  'Why,
Connor, you surprise me.'

'Oh, I see!'

'Yes,' he went on gravely; 'you may trust my mother to be
discreetly attending to her domestic duties; she is a great woman,
my mother.'

I had no doubt of it, for at that moment she came out to us with
little Marjorie in her arms.

'You have shown Mrs. Mavor to her room, mother, I hope,' said
Graeme; but she only smiled and said--

'Run away with your horses, you silly boy,' at which he solemnly
shook his head.  'Ah, mother, you are deep--who would have thought
it of you?'

That evening the manse overflowed with joy, and the days that
followed were like dreams set to sweet music.

But for sheer wild delight, nothing in my memory can quite come up
to the demonstration organised by Graeme, with assistance from
Nixon, Shaw, Sandy, Abe, Geordie, and Baptiste, in honour of the
arrival in camp of Mr. and Mrs. Craig.  And, in my opinion, it
added something to the occasion, that after all the cheers for Mr.
and Mrs. Craig had died away, and after all the hats had come down,
Baptiste, who had never taken his eyes from that radiant face,
should suddenly have swept the crowd into a perfect storm of cheers
by excitedly seizing his tuque, and calling out in his shrill
voice--

'By gar!  Tree cheer for Mrs. Mavor.'

And for many a day the men of Black Rock would easily fall into the
old and well-loved name; but up and down the line of construction,
in all the camps beyond the Great Divide, the new name became as
dear as the old had ever been in Black Rock.

Those old wild days are long since gone into the dim distance of
the past.  They will not come again, for we have fallen into quiet
times; but often in my quietest hours I feel my heart pause in its
beat to hear again that strong, clear voice, like the sound of a
trumpet, bidding us to be men; and I think of them all--Graeme,
their chief, Sandy, Baptiste, Geordie, Abe, the Campbells, Nixon,
Shaw, all stronger, better for their knowing of him, and then I
think of Billy asleep under the pines, and of old man Nelson with
the long grass waving over him in the quiet churchyard, and all my
nonsense leaves me, and I bless the Lord for all His benefits, but
chiefly for the day I met the missionary of Black Rock in the
lumber-camp among the Selkirks.










This etext was produced by Douglas E. Levy.



THE BLAZED TRAIL

by Stewart Edward White




TO MY FATHER-- From whose early pioneer life are drawn many
of Harry Thorpe's experiences.



TABLE OF CONTENTS


PART I:  THE FOREST

PART II:  THE LANDLOOKER

PART III:  THE BLAZING OF THE TRAIL

PART IV:  THORPE'S DREAM GIRL

PART V:  THE FOLLOWING OF THE TRAIL




PART I:  THE FOREST



Chapter I


When history has granted him the justice of perspective, we
shall know the American Pioneer as one of the most picturesque
of her many figures.  Resourceful, self-reliant, bold; adapting
himself with fluidity to diverse circumstances and conditions;
meeting with equal cheerfulness of confidence and completeness of
capability both unknown dangers and the perils by which he has been
educated; seizing the useful in the lives of the beasts and men
nearest him, and assimilating it with marvellous rapidity; he
presents to the world a picture of complete adequacy which it would
be difficult to match in any other walk of life.  He is a strong
man, with a strong man's virtues and a strong man's vices.  In him
the passions are elemental, the dramas epic, for he lives in the age
when men are close to nature, and draw from her their forces.  He
satisfies his needs direct from the earth.  Stripped of all the
towns can give him, he merely resorts to a facile substitution.
It becomes an affair of rawhide for leather, buckskin for cloth,
venison for canned tomatoes.  We feel that his steps are planted on
solid earth, for civilizations may crumble without disturbing his
magnificent self-poise.  In him we perceive dimly his environment.
He has something about him which other men do not possess--a frank
clearness of the eye, a swing of the shoulder, a carriage of the
hips, a tilt of the hat, an air of muscular well-being which marks
him as belonging to the advance guard, whether he wears buckskin,
mackinaw, sombrero, or broadcloth.  The woods are there, the plains,
the rivers.  Snow is there, and the line of the prairie.  Mountain
peaks and still pine forests have impressed themselves subtly; so
that when we turn to admire his unconsciously graceful swing, we
seem to hear the ax biting the pine, or the prospector's pick
tapping the rock.  And in his eye is the capability of quiet humor,
which is just the quality that the surmounting of many difficulties
will give a man.

Like the nature he has fought until he understands, his disposition
is at once kindly and terrible.  Outside the subtleties of his
calling, he sees only red.  Relieved of the strenuousness of his
occupation, he turns all the force of the wonderful energies that
have carried him far where other men would have halted, to channels
in which a gentle current makes flood enough.  It is the mountain
torrent and the canal.  Instead of pleasure, he seeks orgies.  He
runs to wild excesses of drinking, fighting, and carousing--which
would frighten most men to sobriety--with a happy, reckless spirit
that carries him beyond the limits of even his extraordinary forces.

This is not the moment to judge him.  And yet one cannot help
admiring the magnificently picturesque spectacle of such energies
running riot.  The power is still in evidence, though beyond its
proper application.



Chapter II


In the network of streams draining the eastern portion of
Michigan and known as the Saginaw waters, the great firm of
Morrison & Daly had for many years carried on extensive logging
operations in the wilderness.  The number of their camps was legion,
of their employees a multitude.  Each spring they had gathered
in their capacious booms from thirty to fifty million feet of
pine logs.

Now at last, in the early eighties, they reached the end of their
holdings.  Another winter would finish the cut.  Two summers would
see the great mills at Beeson Lake dismantled or sold, while Mr.
Daly, the "woods partner" of the combination, would flit away to
the scenes of new and perhaps more extensive operations.  At this
juncture Mr. Daly called to him John Radway, a man whom he knew to
possess extensive experience, a little capital, and a desire for
more of both.

"Radway," said he, when the two found themselves alone in the mill
office, "we expect to cut this year some fifty millions, which will
finish our pine holdings in the Saginaw waters.  Most of this timber
lies over in the Crooked Lake district, and that we expect to put
in ourselves.  We own, however, five million on the Cass Branch
which we would like to log on contract.  Would you care to take
the job?"

"How much a thousand do you give?" asked Radway.

"Four dollars," replied the lumberman.

"I'll look at it," replied the jobber.

So Radway got the "descriptions" and a little map divided into
townships, sections, and quarter sections; and went out to look at
it.  He searched until he found a "blaze" on a tree, the marking
on which indicated it as the corner of a section.  From this corner
the boundary lines were blazed at right angles in either direction.
Radway followed the blazed lines.  Thus he was able accurately to
locate isolated "forties" (forty acres), "eighties," quarter
sections, and sections in a primeval wilderness.  The feat, however,
required considerable woodcraft, an exact sense of direction, and a
pocket compass.

These resources were still further drawn upon for the next task.
Radway tramped the woods, hills, and valleys to determine the most
practical route over which to build a logging road from the standing
timber to the shores of Cass Branch.  He found it to be an affair of
some puzzlement.  The pines stood on a country rolling with hills,
deep with pot-holes.  It became necessary to dodge in and out, here
and there, between the knolls, around or through the swamps, still
keeping, however, the same general direction, and preserving always
the requisite level or down grade.  Radway had no vantage point from
which to survey the country.  A city man would promptly have lost
himself in the tangle; but the woodsman emerged at last on the
banks of the stream, leaving behind him a meandering trail of
clipped trees that wound, twisted, doubled, and turned, but kept
ever to a country without steep hills.  From the main road he
purposed arteries to tap the most distant parts.

"I'll take it," said he to Daly.

Now Radway happened to be in his way a peculiar character.  He was
acutely sensitive to the human side of those with whom he had
dealings.  In fact, he was more inclined to take their point of view
than to hold his own.  For that reason, the subtler disputes were
likely to go against him.  His desire to avoid coming into direct
collision of opinion with the other man, veiled whatever of justice
might reside in his own contention.  Consequently it was difficult
for him to combat sophistry or a plausible appearance of right. Daly
was perfectly aware of Radway's peculiarities, and so proceeded to
drive a sharp bargain with him.

Customarily a jobber is paid a certain proportion of the agreed
price as each stage of the work is completed--so much when the
timber is cut; so much when it is skidded, or piled; so much when
it is stacked at the river, or banked; so much when the "drive"
down the waters of the river is finished.  Daly objected to this
method of procedure.

"You see, Radway," he explained, "it is our last season in the
country.  When this lot is in, we want to pull up stakes, so we
can't take any chances on not getting that timber in.  If you don't
finish your Job, it keeps us here another season.  There can be
no doubt, therefore, that you finish your job.  In other words,
we can't take any chances.  If you start the thing, you've got to
carry it 'way through."

"I think I can, Mr. Daly," the jobber assured him.

"For that reason," went on Daly, "we object to paying you as the
work progresses.  We've got to have a guarantee that you don't quit
on us, and that those logs will be driven down the branch as far as
the river in time to catch our drive.  Therefore I'm going to make
you a good price per thousand, but payable only when the logs are
delivered to our rivermen."

Radway, with his usual mental attitude of one anxious to justify
the other man, ended by seeing only his employer's argument.  He
did not perceive that the latter's proposition introduced into the
transaction a gambling element.  It became possible for Morrison &
Daly to get a certain amount of work, short of absolute completion,
done for nothing.

"How much does the timber estimate?" he inquired finally.

"About five millions."

"I'd need a camp of forty or fifty men then.  I don't see how I can
run such a camp without borrowing."

"You have some money, haven't you?"

"Yes; a little.  But I have a family, too."

"That's all right.  Now look here."  Daly drew towards him a sheet
of paper and began to set down figures showing how the financing
could be done.  Finally it was agreed.  Radway was permitted to draw
on the Company's warehouse for what provisions he would need.  Daly
let him feel it as a concession.

All this was in August.  Radway, who was a good practical woodsman,
set about the job immediately.  He gathered a crew, established his
camp, and began at once to cut roads through the country he had
already blazed on his former trip.

Those of us who have ever paused to watch a group of farmers working
out their road taxes, must have gathered a formidable impression of
road-clearing.  And the few of us who, besides, have experienced the
adventure of a drive over the same highway after the tax has been
pronounced liquidated, must have indulged in varied reflections as
to the inadequacy of the result.

Radway's task was not merely to level out and ballast the six feet
of a road-bed already constructed, but to cut a way for five miles
through the unbroken wilderness.  The way had moreover to be not
less than twenty-five feet wide, needed to be absolutely level and
free from any kind of obstructions, and required in the swamps
liberal ballasting with poles, called corduroys.  To one who will take
the trouble to recall the variety of woods, thickets, and jungles
that go to make up a wooded country--especially in the creek bottoms
where a logging road finds often its levelest way--and the piles of
windfalls, vines, bushes, and scrubs that choke the thickets with a
discouraging and inextricable tangle, the clearing of five miles to
street width will look like an almost hopeless undertaking.  Not only
must the growth be removed, but the roots must be cut out, and the
inequalities of the ground levelled or filled up.  Reflect further
that Radway had but a brief time at his disposal,--but a few months
at most,--and you will then be in a position to gauge the first
difficulties of those the American pioneer expects to encounter as
a matter of course.  The cutting of the road was a mere incident in
the battle with the wilderness.

The jobber, of course, pushed his roads as rapidly as possible, but
was greatly handicapped by lack of men.  Winter set in early and
surprised him with several of the smaller branches yet to finish.
The main line, however, was done.

At intervals squares were cut out alongside.  In them two long
timbers, or skids, were laid andiron-wise for the reception of the
piles of logs which would be dragged from the fallen trees.  They
were called skidways.  Then finally the season's cut began.

The men who were to fell the trees, Radway distributed along one
boundary of a "forty."  They were instructed to move forward across
the forty in a straight line, felling every pine tree over eight
inches in diameter.  While the "saw-gangs," three in number,
prepared to fell the first trees, other men, called "swampers,"
were busy cutting and clearing of roots narrow little trails down
through the forest from the pine to the skidway at the edge of the
logging road.  The trails were perhaps three feet wide, and marvels
of smoothness, although no attempt was made to level mere inequalities
of the ground.  They were called travoy roads (French "travois").
Down them the logs would be dragged and hauled, either by means of
heavy steel tongs or a short sledge on which one end of the timber
would be chained.

Meantime the sawyers were busy.  Each pair of men selected a tree,
the first they encountered over the blazed line of their "forty."
After determining in which direction it was to fall, they set to
work to chop a deep gash in that side of the trunk.

Tom Broadhead and Henry Paul picked out a tremendous pine which
they determined to throw across a little open space in proximity
to the travoy road.  One stood to right, the other to left, and
alternately their axes bit deep.  It was a beautiful sight this,
of experts wielding their tools.  The craft of the woodsman means
incidentally such a free swing of the shoulders and hips, such a
directness of stroke as the blade of one sinks accurately in the
gash made by the other, that one never tires of watching the grace
of it.  Tom glanced up as a sailor looks aloft.

"She'll do, Hank," he said.

The two then with a dozen half clips of the ax, removed the
inequalities of the bark from the saw's path.  The long, flexible
ribbon of steel began to sing, bending so adaptably to the hands
and motions of the men manipulating, that it did not seem possible
so mobile an instrument could cut the rough pine.  In a moment the
song changed timbre.  Without a word the men straightened their
backs.  Tom flirted along the blade a thin stream of kerosene oil
from a bottle in his hip pocket, and the sawyers again bent to
their work, swaying back and forth rhythmically, their muscles
rippling under the texture of their woolens like those of a panther
under its skin.  The outer edge of the saw-blade disappeared.

"Better wedge her, Tom," advised Hank.

They paused while, with a heavy sledge, Tom drove a triangle of
steel into the crack made by the sawing.  This prevented the weight
of the tree from pinching the saw, which is a ruin at once to the
instrument and the temper of the filer.  Then the rhythmical z-z-z!
z-z-z! again took up its song.

When the trunk was nearly severed, Tom drove another and thicker
wedge.

"Timber!" hallooed Hank in a long-drawn melodious call that melted
through the woods into the distance.  The swampers ceased work and
withdrew to safety.

But the tree stood obstinately upright.  So the saw leaped back and
forth a few strokes more.

"Crack!" called the tree.

Hank coolly unhooked his saw handle, and Tom drew the blade through
and out the other side.

The tree shivered, then leaded ever so slightly from the
perpendicular, then fell, at first gently, afterwards with a
crescendo rush, tearing through the branches of other trees,
bending the small timber, breaking the smallest, and at last
hitting with a tremendous crash and bang which filled the air with
a fog of small twigs, needles, and the powder of snow, that settled
but slowly.  There is nothing more impressive than this rush of
a pine top, excepting it be a charge of cavalry or the fall of
Niagara.  Old woodsmen sometimes shout aloud with the mere
excitement into which it lifts them.

Then the swampers, who had by now finished the travoy road, trimmed
the prostrate trunk clear of all protuberances.  It required fairly
skillful ax work.  The branches had to be shaved close and clear,
and at the same time the trunk must not be gashed.  And often a man
was forced to wield his instrument from a constrained position.

The chopped branches and limbs had now to be dragged clear and
piled.  While this was being finished, Tom and Hank marked off and
sawed the log lengths, paying due attention to the necessity of
avoiding knots, forks, and rotten places.  Thus some of the logs
were eighteen, some sixteen, or fourteen, and some only twelve feet
in length.

Next appeared the teamsters with their little wooden sledges, their
steel chains, and their tongs.  They had been helping the skidders
to place the parallel and level beams, or skids, on which the logs
were to be piled by the side of the road.  The tree which Tom and
Hank had just felled lay up a gentle slope from the new travoy
road, so little Fabian Laveque, the teamster, clamped the bite of
his tongs to the end of the largest, or butt, log.

"Allez, Molly!" he cried.

The horse, huge, elephantine, her head down, nose close to her
chest, intelligently spying her steps, moved.  The log half rolled
over, slid three feet, and menaced a stump.

"Gee!" cried Laveque.

Molly stepped twice directly sideways, planted her fore foot on a
root she had seen, and pulled sharply.  The end of the log slid
around the stump.

"Allez!" commanded Laveque.

And Molly started gingerly down the hill.  She pulled the timber,
heavy as an iron safe, here and there through the brush, missing no
steps, making no false moves, backing, and finally getting out of
the way of an unexpected roll with the ease and intelligence of
Laveque himself.  In five minutes the burden lay by the travoy road.
In two minutes more one end of it had been rolled on the little
flat wooden sledge and, the other end dragging, it was winding
majestically down through the ancient forest.  The little Frenchman
stood high on the forward end.  Molly stepped ahead carefully, with
the strange intelligence of the logger's horse.  Through the tall,
straight, decorative trunks of trees the little convoy moved with
the massive pomp of a dead warrior's cortege.  And little Fabian
Laveque, singing, a midget in the vastness, typified the indomitable
spirit of these conquerors of a wilderness.

When Molly and Fabian had travoyed the log to the skidway, they
drew it with a bump across the two parallel skids, and left it
there to be rolled to the top of the pile.

Then Mike McGovern and Bob Stratton and Jim Gladys took charge of
it.  Mike and Bob were running the cant-hooks, while Jim stood on
top of the great pile of logs already decked.  A slender, pliable
steel chain, like a gray snake, ran over the top of the pile and
disappeared through a pulley to an invisible horse,--Jenny, the
mate of Molly.  Jim threw the end of this chain down.  Bob passed
it over and under the log and returned it to Jim, who reached down
after it with the hook of his implement.  Thus the stick of timber
rested in a long loop, one end of which led to the invisible horse,
and the other Jim made fast to the top of the pile.  He did so by
jamming into another log the steel swamp-hook with which the chain
was armed.  When all was made fast, the horse started.

"She's a bumper!" said Bob.  "Look out, Mike!"

The log slid to the foot of the two parallel poles laid slanting up
the face of the pile.  Then it trembled on the ascent.  But one end
stuck for an instant, and at once the log took on a dangerous slant.
Quick as light Bob and Mike sprang forward, gripped the hooks of the
cant-hooks, like great thumbs and forefingers, and, while one held
with all his power, the other gave a sharp twist upward.  The log
straightened.  It was a master feat of power, and the knack of
applying strength justly.

At the top of the little incline, the timber hovered for a second.

"One more!" sang out Jim to the driver.  He poised, stepped
lightly up and over, and avoided by the safe hair's breadth being
crushed when the log rolled.  But it did not lie quite straight and
even.  So Mike cut a short thick block, and all three stirred the
heavy timber sufficiently to admit of the billet's insertion.

Then the chain was thrown down for another.

Jenny, harnessed only to a straight short bar with a hook in it,
leaned to her collar and dug in her hoofs at the word of command.
The driver, close to her tail, held fast the slender steel chain
by an ingenious hitch about the ever-useful swamp-hook.  When Jim
shouted "whoa!" from the top of the skidway, the driver did not
trouble to stop the horse,--he merely let go the hook.  So the power
was shut off suddenly, as is meet and proper in such ticklish
business.  He turned and walked back, and Jenny, like a dog, without
the necessity of command, followed him in slow patience.

Now came Dyer, the scaler, rapidly down the logging road, a small
slender man with a little, turned-up mustache.  The men disliked
him because of his affectation of a city smartness, and because he
never ate with them, even when there was plenty of room.  Radway
had confidence in him because he lived in the same shanty with him.
This one fact a good deal explains Radway's character.  The scaler's
duty at present was to measure the diameter of the logs in each
skidway, and so compute the number of board feet.  At the office he
tended van, kept the books, and looked after supplies.

He approached the skidway swiftly, laid his flexible rule across the
face of each log, made a mark on his pine tablets in the column to
which the log belonged, thrust the tablet in the pocket of his coat,
seized a blue crayon, in a long holder, with which he made an 8 as
indication that the log had been scaled, and finally tapped several
times strongly with a sledge hammer.  On the face of the hammer in
relief was an M inside of a delta.  This was the Company's brand,
and so the log was branded as belonging to them.  He swarmed all
over the skidway, rapid and absorbed, in strange contrast of
activity to the slower power of the actual skidding.  In a moment
he moved on to the next scene of operations without having said a
word to any of the men.

"A fine t'ing!" said Mike, spitting.

So day after day the work went on.  Radway spent his time tramping
through the woods, figuring on new work, showing the men how to do
things better or differently, discussing minute expedients with the
blacksmith, the carpenter, the cook.

He was not without his troubles.  First he had not enough men; the
snow lacked, and then came too abundantly; horses fell sick of colic
or caulked themselves; supplies ran low unexpectedly; trees turned
out "punk"; a certain bit of ground proved soft for travoying, and
so on.  At election-time, of course, a number of the men went out.

And one evening, two days after election-time, another and
important character entered the North woods and our story.



Chapter III


On the evening in question, some thirty or forty miles southeast of
Radway's camp, a train was crawling over a badly laid track which
led towards the Saginaw Valley.  The whole affair was very crude.
To the edge of the right-of-way pushed the dense swamp, like a black
curtain shutting the virgin country from the view of civilization.
Even by daylight the sight could have penetrated but a few feet.
The right-of-way itself was rough with upturned stumps, blackened by
fire, and gouged by many and varied furrows.  Across the snow were
tracks of animals.

The train consisted of a string of freight cars, one coach divided
half and half between baggage and smoker, and a day car occupied by
two silent, awkward women and a child.  In the smoker lounged a dozen
men.  They were of various sizes and descriptions, but they all wore
heavy blanket mackinaw coats, rubber shoes, and thick German socks
tied at the knee.  This constituted, as it were, a sort of uniform.
The air was so thick with smoke that the men had difficulty in
distinguishing objects across the length of the car.

The passengers sprawled in various attitudes.  Some hung their legs
over the arms of the seats; others perched their feet on the backs
of the seats in front; still others slouched in corners, half
reclining.  Their occupations were as diverse.  Three nearest the
baggage-room door attempted to sing, but without much success.  A
man in the corner breathed softly through a mouth organ, to the
music of which his seat mate, leaning his head sideways, gave close
attention.  One big fellow with a square beard swaggered back and
forth down the aisle offering to everyone refreshment from a quart
bottle.  It was rarely refused.  Of the dozen, probably three
quarters were more or less drunk.

After a time the smoke became too dense.  A short, thick-set fellow
with an evil dark face coolly thrust his heel through a window.  The
conductor, who, with the brakeman and baggage master, was seated in
the baggage van, heard the jingle of glass.  He arose.

"Guess I'll take up tickets," he remarked.  "Perhaps it will quiet
the boys down a little."

The conductor was a big man, raw-boned and broad, with a hawk face.
His every motion showed lean, quick, panther-like power.

"Let her went," replied the brakeman, rising as a matter of course
to follow his chief.

The brakeman was stocky, short, and long armed.  In the old fighting
days Michigan railroads chose their train officials with an eye to
their superior deltoids.  A conductor who could not throw an
undesirable fare through a car window lived a short official life.
The two men loomed on the noisy smoking compartment.

"Tickets, please!" clicked the conductor sharply.

Most of the men began to fumble about in their pockets, but the
three singers and the one who had been offering the quart bottle
did not stir.

"Ticket, Jack!" repeated the conductor, "come on, now."

The big bearded man leaned uncertainly against the seat.

"Now look here, Bud," he urged in wheedling tones, "I ain't got
no ticket.  You know how it is, Bud.  I blows my stake."  He fished
uncertainly in his pocket and produced the quart bottle, nearly
empty, "Have a drink?"

"No," said the conductor sharply.

"A' right," replied Jack, amiably, "take one myself."  He tipped
the bottle, emptied it, and hurled it through a window.  The
conductor paid no apparent attention to the breaking of the glass.

"If you haven't any ticket, you'll have to get off," said he.

The big man straightened up.

"You go to hell!" he snorted, and with the sole of his spiked boot
delivered a mighty kick at the conductor's thigh.

The official, agile as a wild cat, leaped back, then forward, and
knocked the man half the length of the car.  You see, he was used to
it.  Before Jack could regain his feet the official stood over him.

The three men in the corner had also risen, and were staggering down
the aisle intent on battle.  The conductor took in the chances with
professional rapidity.

"Get at 'em, Jimmy," said he.

And as the big man finally swayed to his feet, he was seized by the
collar and trousers in the grip known to "bouncers" everywhere,
hustled to the door, which someone obligingly opened, and hurled
from the moving train into the snow.  The conductor did not care
a straw whether the obstreperous Jack lit on his head or his feet,
hit a snowbank or a pile of ties.  Those were rough days, and the
preservation of authority demanded harsh measures.

Jimmy had got at 'em in a method of his own.  He gathered himself
into a ball of potential trouble, and hurled himself bodily at the
legs of his opponents which he gathered in a mighty bear hug.  It
would have been poor fighting had Jimmy to carry the affair to a
finish by himself, but considered as an expedient to gain time for
the ejectment proceedings, it was admirable.  The conductor returned
to find a kicking, rolling, gouging mass of kinetic energy knocking
the varnish off all one end of the car.  A head appearing, he coolly
batted it three times against a corner of the seat arm, after which
he pulled the contestant out by the hair and threw him into a seat
where he lay limp.  Then it could be seen that Jimmy had clasped
tight in his embrace a leg each of the other two.  He hugged them
close to his breast, and jammed his face down against them to
protect his features.  They could pound the top of his head and
welcome.  The only thing he really feared was a kick in the side,
and for that there was hardly room.

The conductor stood over the heap, at a manifest advantage.

"You lumber-jacks had enough, or do you want to catch it plenty?"

The men, drunk though they were, realized their helplessness.  They
signified they had had enough.  Jimmy thereupon released them and
stood up, brushing down his tousled hair with his stubby fingers.

"Now is it ticket or bounce?" inquired the conductor.

After some difficulty and grumbling, the two paid their fare and
that of the third, who was still dazed.  In return the conductor
gave them slips.  Then he picked his lantern from the overhead rack
whither he had tossed it, slung it on his left arm, and sauntered
on down the aisle punching tickets.  Behind him followed Jimmy.
When he came to the door he swung across the platform with the
easy lurch of the trainman, and entered the other car, where he
took the tickets of the two women and the boy.  One sitting in the
second car would have been unable to guess from the bearing or
manner of the two officials that anything had gone wrong.

The interested spectators of the little drama included two men near
the water-cooler who were perfectly sober.  One of them was perhaps
a little past the best of life, but still straight and vigorous.
His lean face was leather-brown in contrast to a long mustache and
heavy eyebrows bleached nearly white, his eyes were a clear steady
blue, and his frame was slender but wiry.  He wore the regulation
mackinaw blanket coat, a peaked cap with an extraordinarily high
crown, and buckskin moccasins over long stockings.

The other was younger, not more than twenty-six perhaps, with the
clean-cut, regular features we have come to consider typically
American.  Eyebrows that curved far down along the temples, and
eyelashes of a darkness in contrast to the prevailing note of his
complexion combined to lend him a rather brooding, soft, and
melancholy air which a very cursory second examination showed to
be fictitious.  His eyes, like the woodsman's, were steady, but
inquiring.  His jaw was square and settled, his mouth straight.  One
would be likely to sum him up as a man whose actions would be little
influenced by glamour or even by the sentiments.  And yet, equally,
it was difficult to rid the mind of the impression produced by his
eyes.  Unlike the other inmates of the car, he wore an ordinary
business suit, somewhat worn, but of good cut, and a style that
showed even over the soft flannel shirt.  The trousers were,
however, bound inside the usual socks and rubbers.

The two seat mates had occupied their time each in his own fashion.
To the elder the journey was an evil to be endured with the patience
learned in watching deer runways, so he stared straight before him,
and spat with a certain periodicity into the centre of the aisle.
The younger stretched back lazily in an attitude of ease which spoke
of the habit of travelling.  Sometimes he smoked a pipe.  Thrice he
read over a letter.  It was from his sister, and announced her
arrival at the little rural village in which he had made arrangements
for her to stay.  "It is interesting,--now," she wrote, "though the
resources do not look as though they would wear well.  I am learning
under Mrs. Renwick to sweep and dust and bake and stew and do a
multitude of other things which I always vaguely supposed came
ready-made.  I like it; but after I have learned it all, I do not
believe the practise will appeal to me much.  However, I can stand
it well enough for a year or two or three, for I am young; and then
you will have made your everlasting fortune, of course."

Harry Thorpe experienced a glow of pride each time he read this
part of the letter.  He liked the frankness of the lack of pretence;
he admired the penetration and self-analysis which had taught her
the truth that, although learning a new thing is always interesting,
the practising of an old one is monotonous.  And her pluck appealed
to him.  It is not easy for a girl to step from the position of
mistress of servants to that of helping about the housework of a
small family in a small town for the sake of the home to be found
in it.

"She's a trump!" said Thorpe to himself, "and she shall have
her everlasting fortune, if there's such a thing in the country."

He jingled the three dollars and sixty cents in his pocket, and
smiled.  That was the extent of his everlasting fortune at present.

The letter had been answered from Detroit.

"I am glad you are settled," he wrote.  "At least I know you have
enough to eat and a roof over you.  I hope sincerely that you will
do your best to fit yourself to your new conditions.  I know it is
hard, but with my lack of experience and my ignorance as to where
to take hold, it may be a good many years before we can do any
better."

When Helen Thorpe read this, she cried.  Things had gone wrong that
morning, and an encouraging word would have helped her.  The somber
tone of her brother's communication threw her into a fit of the
blues from which, for the first time, she saw her surroundings in a
depressing and distasteful light.  And yet he had written as he did
with the kindest possible motives.

Thorpe had the misfortune to be one of those individuals who, though
careless of what people in general may think of them, are in a
corresponding degree sensitive to the opinion of the few they
love.  This feeling was further exaggerated by a constitutional
shrinking from any outward manifestation of the emotions.  As a
natural result, he was often thought indifferent or discouraging
when in reality his natural affections were at their liveliest.  A
failure to procure for a friend certain favors or pleasures
dejected him, not only because of that friend's disappointment, but
because, also, he imagined the failure earned him a certain blame.
Blame from his heart's intimates he shrank from.  His life outside
the inner circles of his affections was apt to be so militant and
so divorced from considerations of amity, that as a matter of
natural reaction he became inclined to exaggerate the importance of
small objections, little reproaches, slight criticisms from his real
friends.  Such criticisms seemed to bring into a sphere he would have
liked to keep solely for the mutual reliance of loving kindness,
something of the hard utilitarianism of the world at large.  In
consequence he gradually came to choose the line of least resistance,
to avoid instinctively even the slightly disagreeable.  Perhaps for
this reason he was never entirely sincere with those he loved.  He
showed enthusiasm over any plan suggested by them, for the reason
that he never dared offer a merely problematical anticipation.
The affair had to be absolutely certain in his own mind before he
ventured to admit anyone to the pleasure of looking forward to
it,--and simply because he so feared the disappointment in case
anything should go wrong.  He did not realize that not only is
the pleasure of anticipation often the best, but that even
disappointment, provided it happen through excusable causes,
strengthens the bonds of affection through sympathy.  We do not
want merely results from a friend--merely finished products.  We
like to be in at the making, even though the product spoil.

This unfortunate tendency, together with his reserve, lent him the
false attitude of a rather cold, self-centered man, discouraging
suggestions at first only to adopt them later in the most
inexplicable fashion, and conferring favors in a ready-made
impersonal manner which destroyed utterly their quality as favors.
In reality his heart hungered for the affection which this false
attitude generally repelled.  He threw the wet blanket of doubt
over warm young enthusiasms because his mind worked with a certain
deliberateness which did not at once permit him to see the
practicability of the scheme.  Later he would approve.  But by that
time, probably, the wet blanket had effectually extinguished the
glow.  You cannot always savor your pleasures cold.

So after the disgrace of his father, Harry Thorpe did a great deal
of thinking and planning which he kept carefully to himself.  He
considered in turn the different occupations to which he could turn
his hand, and negatived them one by one.  Few business firms would
care to employ the son of as shrewd an embezzler as Henry Thorpe.
Finally he came to a decision.  He communicated this decision to his
sister.  It would have commended itself more logically to her had
she been able to follow step by step the considerations that had
led her brother to it.  As the event turned, she was forced to accept
it blindly.  She knew that her brother intended going West, but as
to his hopes and plans she was in ignorance.  A little sympathy, a
little mutual understanding would have meant a great deal to her,
for a girl whose mother she but dimly remembers, turns naturally to
her next of kin.  Helen Thorpe had always admired her brother, but
had never before needed him.  She had looked upon him as strong,
self-contained, a little moody.  Now the tone of his letter caused
her to wonder whether he were not also a trifle hard and cold.  So
she wept on receiving it, and the tears watered the ground for
discontent.

At the beginning of the row in the smoking car, Thorpe laid aside
his letter and watched with keen appreciation the direct practicality
of the trainmen's method.  When the bearded man fell before the
conductor's blow, he turned to the individual at his side.

"He knows how to hit, doesn't he!" he observed.  "That fellow was
knocked well off his feet."

"He does," agreed the other dryly.

They fell into a desultory conversation of fits and starts.  Woodsmen
of the genuine sort are never talkative; and Thorpe, as has been
explained, was constitutionally reticent.  In the course of their
disjointed remarks Thorpe explained that he was looking for work in
the woods, and intended, first of all, to try the Morrison & Daly
camps at Beeson Lake.

"Know anything about logging?" inquired the stranger.

"Nothing," Thorpe confessed.

"Ain't much show for anything but lumber-jacks.  What did you think
of doing?"

"I don't know," said Thorpe, doubtfully.  "I have driven horses a
good deal; I thought I might drive team."

The woodsman turned slowly and looked Thorpe over with a quizzical
eye.  Then he faced to the front again and spat.

"Quite like," he replied still more dryly.

The boy's remark had amused him, and he had showed it, as much as
he ever showed anything.  Excepting always the riverman, the driver
of a team commands the highest wages among out-of-door workers.  He
has to be able to guide his horses by little steps over, through,
and around slippery and bristling difficulties.  He must acquire
the knack of facing them square about in their tracks.  He must hold
them under a control that will throw into their collars, at command,
from five pounds to their full power of pull, lasting from five
seconds to five minutes.  And above all, he must be able to keep
them out of the way of tremendous loads of logs on a road which
constant sprinkling has rendered smooth and glassy, at the same
time preventing the long tongue from sweeping them bodily against
leg-breaking debris when a curve in the road is reached.  It is
easier to drive a fire engine than a logging team.

But in spite of the naivete of the remark, the woodsman had seen
something in Thorpe he liked.  Such men become rather expert in the
reading of character, and often in a log shanty you will hear
opinions of a shrewdness to surprise you.  He revised his first
intention to let the conversation drop.

"I think M. & D. is rather full up just now," he remarked.  "I'm
walkin'-boss there.  The roads is about all made, and road-making is
what a greenhorn tackles first.  They's more chance earlier in the
year.  But if the OLD Fellow" (he strongly accented the first
word) "h'aint nothin' for you, just ask for Tim Shearer, an' I'll
try to put you on the trail for some jobber's camp."

The whistle of the locomotive blew, and the conductor appeared in
the doorway.

"Where's that fellow's turkey?" he inquired.

Several men looked toward Thorpe, who, not understanding this argot
of the camps, was a little bewildered.  Shearer reached over his head
and took from the rack a heavy canvas bag, which he handed to the
conductor.

"That's the 'turkey'--" he explained, "his war bag.  Bud'll throw
it off at Scott's, and Jack'll get it there."

"How far back is he?" asked Thorpe.

"About ten mile.  He'll hoof it in all right."

A number of men descended at Scott's.  The three who had come into
collision with Jimmy and Bud were getting noisier.  They had
produced a stone jug, and had collected the remainder of the
passengers,--with the exception of Shearer and Thorpe,--and now were
passing the jug rapidly from hand to hand.  Soon they became musical,
striking up one of the weird long-drawn-out chants so popular with
the shanty boy.  Thorpe shrewdly guessed his companion to be a man
of weight, and did not hesitate to ascribe his immunity from
annoyance to the other's presence.

"It's a bad thing," said the walking-boss, "I used to be at it
myself, and I know.  When I wanted whisky, I needed it worse than a
scalded pup does a snow bank.  The first year I had a hundred and
fifty dollars, and I blew her all in six days.  Next year I had a
little more, but she lasted me three weeks.  That was better.  Next
year, I says to myself, I'll just save fifty of that stake, and blow
the rest.  So I did.  After that I got to be scaler, and sort've
quit.  I just made a deal with the Old Fellow to leave my stake with
headquarters no matter whether I call for it or not.  I got quite a
lot coming, now."

"Bees'n Lake!" cried Jimmy fiercely through an aperture of the door.

"You'll find th' boardin'-house just across over the track," said
the woodsman, holding out his hand, "so long.  See you again if you
don't find a job with the Old Fellow.  My name's Shearer."

"Mine is Thorpe," replied the other.  "Thank you."

The woodsman stepped forward past the carousers to the baggage
compartment, where he disappeared.  The revellers stumbled out the
other door.

Thorpe followed and found himself on the frozen platform of a
little dark railway station.  As he walked, the boards shrieked
under his feet and the sharp air nipped at his face and caught his
lungs.  Beyond the fence-rail protection to the side of the platform
he thought he saw the suggestion of a broad reach of snow, a
distant lurking forest, a few shadowy buildings looming mysterious
in the night.  The air was twinkling with frost and the brilliant
stars of the north country.

Directly across the track from the railway station, a single
building was picked from the dark by a solitary lamp in a lower-
story room.  The four who had descended before Thorpe made over
toward this light, stumbling and laughing uncertainly, so he knew
it was probably in the boarding-house, and prepared to follow them.
Shearer and the station agent,--an individual much muffled,--turned
to the disposition of some light freight that had been dropped from
the baggage car.

The five were met at the steps by the proprietor of the boarding-
house.  This man was short and stout, with a harelip and cleft
palate, which at once gave him the well-known slurring speech of
persons so afflicted, and imparted also to the timbre of his voice
a peculiarly hollow, resonant, trumpet-like note.  He stumped about
energetically on a wooden leg of home manufacture.  It was a
cumbersome instrument, heavy, with deep pine socket for the stump,
and a projecting brace which passed under a leather belt around the
man's waist.  This instrument he used with the dexterity of a third
hand.  As Thorpe watched him, he drove in a projecting nail, kicked
two "turkeys" dexterously inside the open door, and stuck the
armed end of his peg-leg through the top and bottom of the whisky
jug that one of the new arrivals had set down near the door.  The
whisky promptly ran out.  At this the cripple flirted the impale