d
jug from the wooden leg far out over the rail of the verandah into
the snow.

A growl went up.

"What'n hell's that for I!" snarled one of the owners of the
whisky threateningly.

"Don't allow no whisky here," snuffed the harelip.

The men were very angry.  They advanced toward the cripple, who
retreated with astonishing agility to the lighted room.  There he
bent the wooden leg behind him, slipped the end of the brace from
beneath the leather belt, seized the other, peg end in his right
hand, and so became possessed of a murderous bludgeon.  This he
brandished, hopping at the same time back and forth in such perfect
poise and yet with so ludicrous an effect of popping corn, that the
men were surprised into laughing.

"Bully for you, peg-leg!" they cried.

"Rules 'n regerlations, boys," replied the latter, without,
however, a shade of compromising in his tones.  "Had supper?"

On receiving a reply in the affirmative, he caught up the lamp,
and, having resumed his artificial leg in one deft motion, led the
way to narrow little rooms.



Chapter IV


Thorpe was awakened a long time before daylight by the ringing
of a noisy bell.  He dressed, shivering, and stumbled down stairs
to a round stove, big as a boiler, into which the cripple dumped
huge logs of wood from time to time.  After breakfast Thorpe returned
to this stove and sat half dozing for what seemed to him untold
ages.  The cold of the north country was initiating him.

Men came in, smoked a brief pipe, and went out.  Shearer was one of
them.  The woodsman nodded curtly to the young man, his cordiality
quite gone.  Thorpe vaguely wondered why.  After a time he himself
put on his overcoat and ventured out into the town.  It seemed to
Thorpe a meager affair, built of lumber, mostly unpainted, with
always the dark, menacing fringe of the forest behind.  The great
saw mill, with its tall stacks and its row of water-barrels--
protection against fire--on top, was the dominant note.  Near the
mill crouched a little red-painted structure from whose stovepipe a
column of white smoke rose, attesting the cold, a clear hundred feet
straight upward, and to whose door a number of men were directing
their steps through the snow.  Over the door Thorpe could distinguish
the word "Office."  He followed and entered.

In a narrow aisle railed off from the main part of the room waited
Thorpe's companions of the night before.  The remainder of the
office gave accommodation to three clerks.  One of these glanced up
inquiringly as Thorpe came in.

"I am looking for work," said Thorpe.

"Wait there," briefly commanded the clerk.

In a few moments the door of the inner room opened, and Shearer
came out.  A man's head peered from within.

"Come on, boys," said he.

The five applicants shuffled through.  Thorpe found himself in the
presence of a man whom he felt to be the natural leader of these
wild, independent spirits.  He was already a little past middle
life, and his form had lost the elastic vigor of youth.  But his eye
was keen, clear, and wrinkled to a certain dry facetiousness; and
his figure was of that bulk which gives an impression of a subtler
weight and power than the merely physical.  This peculiarity
impresses us in the portraits of such men as Daniel Webster and
others of the old jurists.  The manner of the man was easy, good-
natured, perhaps a little facetious, but these qualities were
worn rather as garments than exhibited as characteristics.  He could
afford them, not because he had fewer difficulties to overcome or
battles to fight than another, but because his strength was so
sufficient to them that mere battles or difficulties could not
affect the deliberateness of his humor.  You felt his superiority
even when he was most comradely with you.  This man Thorpe was to
meet under other conditions, wherein the steel hand would more
plainly clink the metal.

He was now seated in a worn office chair before a littered desk.  In
the close air hung the smell of stale cigars and the clear fragrance
of pine.

"What is it, Dennis?" he asked the first of the men.

"I've been out," replied the lumberman.  "Have you got anything for
me, Mr. Daly?"

The mill-owner laughed.

"I guess so.  Report to Shearer.  Did you vote for the right man,
Denny?"

The lumberman grinned sheepishly.  "I don't know, sir.  I didn't get
that far."

"Better let it alone.  I suppose you and Bill want to come back,
too?" he added, turning to the next two in the line.  "All right,
report to Tim.  Do you want work?" he inquired of the last of the
quartette, a big bashful man with the shoulders of a Hercules.

"Yes, sir," answered the latter uncomfortably.

"What do you do?"

"I'm a cant-hook man, sir."

"Where have you worked?"

"I had a job with Morgan & Stebbins on the Clear River last winter."

"All right, we need cant-hook men.  Report at 'seven,' and if they
don't want you there, go to 'thirteen.'"

Daly looked directly at the man with an air of finality.  The
lumberman still lingered uneasily, twisting his cap in his hands.

"Anything you want?" asked Daly at last.

"Yes, sir," blurted the big man.  "If I come down here and tell
you I want three days off and fifty dollars to bury my mother, I
wish you'd tell me to go to hell!  I buried her three times last
winter!"

Daly chuckled a little.

"All right, Bub," said he, "to hell it is."

The man went out.  Daly turned to Thorpe with the last flickers of
amusement in his eyes.

"What can I do for you?" he inquired in a little crisper tones.
Thorpe felt that he was not treated with the same careless
familiarity, because, potentially, he might be more of a force to
deal with.  He underwent, too, the man's keen scrutiny, and knew
that every detail of his appearance had found its comment in the
other's experienced brain.

"I am looking for work," Thorpe replied.

"What kind of work?"

"Any kind, so I can learn something about the lumber business."

The older man studied him keenly for a few moments.

"Have you had any other business experience?"

"None."

"What have you been doing?"

"Nothing."

The lumberman's eyes hardened.

"We are a very busy firm here," he said with a certain deliberation;
"we do not carry a big force of men in any one department, and each

of those men has to fill his place and slop some over the sides.
We do not pretend or attempt to teach here.  If you want to be a
lumberman, you must learn the lumber business more directly than
through the windows of a bookkeeper's office.  Go into the woods.
Learn a few first principles.  Find out the difference between
Norway and white pine, anyway."

Daly, being what is termed a self-made man, entertained a prejudice
against youths of the leisure class.  He did not believe in their
earnestness of purpose, their capacity for knowledge, nor their
perseverance in anything.  That a man of twenty-six should be
looking for his first situation was incomprehensible to him.  He
made no effort to conceal his prejudice, because the class to which
the young man had belonged enjoyed his hearty contempt.

The truth is, he had taken Thorpe's ignorance a little too much
for granted.  Before leaving his home, and while the project of
emigration was still in the air, the young fellow had, with the
quiet enthusiasm of men of his habit of mind, applied himself
to the mastering of whatever the books could teach.  That is not
much.  The literature on lumbering seems to be singularly limited.
Still he knew the trees, and had sketched an outline into which to
paint experience.  He said nothing of this to the man before him,
because of that strange streak in his nature which prompted him to
conceal what he felt most strongly; to leave to others the task of
guessing out his attitude; to stand on appearances without attempting
to justify them, no matter how simple the justification might be.
A moment's frank, straightforward talk might have caught Daly's
attention, for the lumberman was, after all, a shrewd reader of
character where his prejudices were not concerned.  Then events
would have turned out very differently.

After his speech the business man had whirled back to his desk.

"Have you anything for me to do in the woods, then?" the other
asked quietly.

"No," said Daly over his shoulder.

Thorpe went out.

Before leaving Detroit he had, on the advice of friends, visited
the city office of Morrison & Daly.  There he had been told
positively that the firm were hiring men.  Now, without five dollars
in his pocket, he made the elementary discovery that even in
chopping wood skilled labor counts.  He did not know where to turn
next, and he would not have had the money to go far in any case.
So, although Shearer's brusque greeting that morning had argued a
lack of cordiality, he resolved to remind the riverman of his
promised assistance.

That noon he carried out his resolve.  To his surprise Shearer was
cordial--in his way.  He came afterward to appreciate the subtle
nuances of manner and treatment by which a boss retains his moral
supremacy in a lumber country,--repels that too great familiarity
which breeds contempt, without imperiling the trust and comradeship
which breeds willingness.  In the morning Thorpe had been a
prospective employee of the firm, and so a possible subordinate of
Shearer himself.  Now he was Shearer's equal.

"Go up and tackle Radway.  He's jobbing for us on the Cass Branch.
He needs men for roadin', I know, because he's behind.  You'll get a
job there."

"Where is it?" asked Thorpe.

"Ten miles from here.  She's blazed, but you better wait for th'
supply team, Friday.  If you try to make her yourself, you'll get
lost on some of th' old loggin' roads."

Thorpe considered.

"I'm busted," he said at last frankly.

"Oh, that's all right," replied the walking-boss.  "Marshall, come
here!"

The peg-legged boarding-house keeper stumped in.

"What is it?" he trumpeted snufflingly.

"This boy wants a job till Friday.  Then he's going up to Radway's
with the supply team.  Now quit your hollerin' for a chore-boy for a
few days."

"All right," snorted Marshall, "take that ax and split some dry
wood that you'll find behind the house."

"I'm very much obliged to you," began Thorpe to the walking-boss,
"and---"

"That's all right," interrupted the latter, "some day you can give
me a job."



Chapter V


For five days Thorpe cut wood, made fires, drew water, swept
floors, and ran errands.  Sometimes he would look across the broad
stump-dotted plain to the distant forest.  He had imagination.  No
business man succeeds without it.  With him the great struggle to
wrest from an impassive and aloof nature what she has so long held
securely as her own, took on the proportions of a battle.  The
distant forest was the front.  To it went the new bands of fighters.
From it came the caissons for food, that ammunition of the frontier;
messengers bringing tidings of defeat or victory; sometimes men
groaning on their litters from the twisting and crushing and
breaking inflicted on them by the calm, ruthless enemy; once a dead
man bearing still on his chest the mark of the tree that had killed
him.  Here at headquarters sat the general, map in hand, issuing his
orders, directing his forces.

And out of the forest came mystery.  Hunters brought deer on sledges.
Indians, observant and grave, swung silently across the reaches
on their snowshoes, and silently back again carrying their meager
purchases.  In the daytime ravens wheeled and croaked about the
outskirts of the town, bearing the shadow of the woods on their
plumes and of the north-wind in the somber quality of their voices;
rare eagles wheeled gracefully to and fro; snow squalls coquetted
with the landscape.  At night the many creatures of the forest
ventured out across the plains in search of food,--weasels; big
white hares; deer, planting daintily their little sharp hoofs where
the frozen turnips were most plentiful; porcupines in quest of
anything they could get their keen teeth into;--and often the big
timber wolves would send shivering across the waste a long whining
howl.  And in the morning their tracks would embroider the snow with
many stories.

The talk about the great stove in the boarding-house office also
possessed the charm of balsam fragrance.  One told the other occult
facts about the "Southeast of the southwest of eight."  The second
in turn vouchsafed information about another point of the compass.
Thorpe heard of many curious practical expedients.  He learned that
one can prevent awkward air-holes in lakes by "tapping" the ice
with an ax,--for the air must get out, naturally or artificially;
that the top log on a load should not be large because of the
probability, when one side has dumped with a rush, of its falling
straight down from its original height, so breaking the sleigh;
that a thin slice of salt pork well peppered is good when tied
about a sore throat; that choking a horse will cause him to swell
up and float on the top of the water, thus rendering it easy to
slide him out on the ice from a hole he may have broken into; that
a tree lodged against another may be brought to the ground by
felling a third against it; that snowshoes made of caribou hide do
not become baggy, because caribou shrinks when wet, whereas other
rawhide stretches.  These, and many other things too complicated to
elaborate here, he heard discussed by expert opinion.  Gradually
he acquired an enthusiasm for the woods, just as a boy conceives
a longing for the out-of-door life of which he hears in the
conversation of his elders about the winter fire.  He became eager
to get away to the front, to stand among the pines, to grapple with
the difficulties of thicket, hill, snow, and cold that nature
silently interposes between the man and his task.

At the end of the week he received four dollars from his employer;
dumped his valise into a low bobsleigh driven by a man muffled in a
fur coat; assisted in loading the sleigh with a variety of things,
from Spearhead plug to raisins; and turned his face at last toward
the land of his hopes and desires.

The long drive to camp was at once a delight and a misery to him.
Its miles stretched longer and longer as time went on; and the
miles of a route new to a man are always one and a half at least.
The forest, so mysterious and inviting from afar, drew within
itself coldly when Thorpe entered it.  He was as yet a stranger.
The snow became the prevailing note.  The white was everywhere,
concealing jealously beneath rounded uniformity the secrets of the
woods.  And it was cold.  First Thorpe's feet became numb, then his
hands, then his nose was nipped, and finally his warm clothes were
lifted from him by invisible hands, and he was left naked to
shivers and tremblings.  He found it torture to sit still on the top
of the bale of hay; and yet he could not bear to contemplate the
cold shock of jumping from the sleigh to the ground,--of touching
foot to the chilling snow.  The driver pulled up to breathe his
horses at the top of a hill, and to fasten under one runner a heavy
chain, which, grinding into the snow, would act as a brake on the
descent.

"You're dressed pretty light," he advised; "better hoof it a ways
and get warm."

The words tipped the balance of Thorpe's decision.  He descended
stiffly, conscious of a disagreeable shock from a six-inch jump.

In ten minutes, the wallowing, slipping, and leaping after the
tail of the sled had sent his blood tingling to the last of his
protesting members.  Cold withdrew.  He saw now that the pines were
beautiful and solemn and still; and that in the temple of their
columns dwelt winter enthroned.  Across the carpet of the snow
wandered the trails of her creatures,--the stately regular prints
of the partridge; the series of pairs made by the squirrel; those
of the weasel and mink, just like the squirrels' except that the
prints were not quite side by side, and that between every other
pair stretched the mark of the animal's long, slender body; the
delicate tracery of the deer mouse; the fan of the rabbit; the print
of a baby's hand that the raccoon left; the broad pad of a lynx;
the dog-like trail of wolves;--these, and a dozen others, all equally
unknown, gave Thorpe the impression of a great mysterious multitude
of living things which moved about him invisible.  In a thicket of
cedar and scrub willow near the bed of a stream, he encountered one
of those strangely assorted bands of woods-creatures which are
always cruising it through the country.  He heard the cheerful little
chickadee; he saw the grave nuthatch with its appearance of a total
lack of humor; he glimpsed a black-and-white woodpecker or so, and
was reviled by a ribald blue jay.  Already the wilderness was taking
its character to him.

After a little while, they arrived by way of a hill, over which
they plunged into the middle of the camp.  Thorpe saw three large
buildings, backed end to end, and two smaller ones, all built of
heavy logs, roofed with plank, and lighted sparsely through one or
two windows apiece.  The driver pulled up opposite the space between
two of the larger buildings, and began to unload his provisions.
Thorpe set about aiding him, and so found himself for the first
time in a "cook camp."

It was a commodious building,--Thorpe had no idea a log structure
ever contained so much room.  One end furnished space for two
cooking ranges and two bunks placed one over the other.  Along one
side ran a broad table-shelf, with other shelves over it and numerous
barrels underneath, all filled with cans, loaves of bread, cookies,
and pies.  The center was occupied by four long bench-flanked tables,
down whose middle straggled utensils containing sugar, apple-butter,
condiments, and sauces, and whose edges were set with tin dishes for
about forty men.  The cook, a rather thin-faced man with a mustache,
directed where the provisions were to be stowed; and the "cookee,"
a hulking youth, assisted Thorpe and the driver to carry them in.
During the course of the work Thorpe made a mistake.

"That stuff doesn't come here," objected the cookee, indicating a
box of tobacco the newcomer was carrying.  "She goes to the 'van.'"

Thorpe did not know what the "van" might be, but he replaced the
tobacco on the sleigh.  In a few moments the task was finished,
with the exception of a half dozen other cases, which the driver
designated as also for the "van." The horses were unhitched, and
stabled in the third of the big log buildings.  The driver indicated
the second.

"Better go into the men's camp and sit down 'till th' boss gets
in," he advised.

Thorpe entered a dim, over-heated structure, lined on two sides
by a double tier of large bunks partitioned from one another like
cabins of boats, and centered by a huge stove over which hung
slender poles.  The latter were to dry clothes on.  Just outside
the bunks ran a straight hard bench.  Thorpe stood at the entrance
trying to accustom his eyes to the dimness.

"Set down," said a voice, "on th' floor if you want to; but I'd
prefer th' deacon seat."

Thorpe obediently took position on the bench, or "deacon seat."
His eyes, more used to the light, could make out a thin, tall, bent
old man, with bare cranium, two visible teeth, and a three days'
stubble of white beard over his meager, twisted face.

He caught, perhaps, Thorpe's surprised expression.

"You think th' old man's no good, do you?" he cackled, without the
slightest malice, "looks is deceivin'!"  He sprang up swiftly,
seized the toe of his right foot in his left hand, and jumped his
left foot through the loop thus formed.  Then he sat down again,
and laughed at Thorpe's astonishment.

"Old Jackson's still purty smart," said he.  "I'm barn-boss.  They
ain't a man in th' country knows as much about hosses as I do.  We
ain't had but two sick this fall, an' between you an' me, they's a
skate lot.  You're a greenhorn, ain't you?"

"Yes," confessed Thorpe.

"Well," said Jackson, reflectively but rapidly, "Le Fabian, he's
quiet but bad; and O'Grady, he talks loud but you can bluff him;
and Perry, he's only bad when he gets full of red likker; and Norton
he's bad when he gets mad like, and will use axes."

Thorpe did not know he was getting valuable points on the camp
bullies.  The old man hitched nearer and peered in his face.

"They don't bluff you a bit," he said, "unless you likes them,
and then they can back you way off the skidway."

Thorpe smiled at the old fellow's volubility.  He did not know
how near to the truth the woodsman's shrewdness had hit; for to
himself, as to most strong characters, his peculiarities were the
normal, and therefore the unnoticed.  His habit of thought in
respect to other people was rather objective than subjective.  He
inquired so impersonally the significance of whatever was before
him, that it lost the human quality both as to itself and himself.
To him men were things.  This attitude relieved him of self-
consciousness.  He never bothered his head as to what the other
man thought of him, his ignorance, or his awkwardness, simply
because to him the other man was nothing but an element in his
problem.  So in such circumstances he learned fast.  Once introduce
the human element, however, and his absurdly sensitive self-
consciousness asserted itself.  He was, as Jackson expressed it,
backed off the skidway.

At dark the old man lit two lamps, which served dimly to gloze the
shadows, and thrust logs of wood into the cast-iron stove.  Soon
after, the men came in.  They were a queer, mixed lot.  Some carried
the indisputable stamp of the frontiersman in their bearing and
glance; others looked to be mere day-laborers, capable of performing
whatever task they were set to, and of finding the trail home again.
There were active, clean-built, precise Frenchmen, with small hands
and feet, and a peculiarly trim way of wearing their rough garments;
typical native-born American lumber-jacks powerful in frame, rakish
in air, reckless in manner; big blonde Scandinavians and Swedes,
strong men at the sawing; an Indian or so, strangely in contrast to
the rest; and a variety of Irishmen, Englishmen, and Canadians.
These men tramped in without a word, and set busily to work at
various tasks.  Some sat on the "deacon seat" and began to take
off their socks and rubbers; others washed at a little wooden sink;
still others selected and lit lanterns from a pendant row near the
window, and followed old Jackson out of doors.  They were the
teamsters.

"You'll find the old man in the office," said Jackson.

Thorpe made his way across to the small log cabin indicated as the
office, and pushed open the door.  He found himself in a little room
containing two bunks, a stove, a counter and desk, and a number of
shelves full of supplies.  About the walls hung firearms, snowshoes,
and a variety of clothes.

A man sat at the desk placing figures on a sheet of paper.  He
obtained the figures from statistics pencilled on three thin leaves
of beech-wood riveted together.  In a chair by the stove lounged a
bulkier figure, which Thorpe concluded to be that of the "old man."

"I was sent here by Shearer," said Thorpe directly; "he said you
might give me some work."

So long a silence fell that the applicant began to wonder if his
question had been heard.

"I might," replied the man drily at last.

"Well, will you?" Thorpe inquired, the humor of the situation
overcoming him.

"Have you ever worked in the woods?"

"No."

The man smoked silently.

"I'll put you on the road in the morning," he concluded, as though
this were the deciding qualification.

One of the men entered abruptly and approached the counter.  The
writer at the desk laid aside his tablets.

"What is it, Albert?" he added.

"Jot of chewin'," was the reply.

The scaler took from the shelf a long plug of tobacco and cut off
two inches.

"Ain't hitting the van much, are you, Albert?" he commented, putting
the man's name and the amount in a little book.  Thorpe went out,
after leaving his name for the time book, enlightened as to the
method of obtaining supplies.  He promised himself some warm clothing
from the van, when he should have worked out the necessary credit.

At supper he learned something else,--that he must not talk at
table.  A moment's reflection taught him the common-sense of the
rule.  For one thing, supper was a much briefer affair than it
would have been had every man felt privileged to take his will in
conversation; not to speak of the absence of noise and the presence
of peace.  Each man asked for what he wanted.

"Please pass the beans," he said with the deliberate intonation
of a man who does not expect that his request will be granted.

Besides the beans were fried salt pork, boiled potatoes, canned
corn, mince pie, a variety of cookies and doughnuts, and strong
green tea.  Thorpe found himself eating ravenously of the crude fare.

That evening he underwent a catechism, a few practical jokes, which
he took good-naturedly, and a vast deal of chaffing.  At nine the
lights were all out.  By daylight he and a dozen other men were at
work, hewing a road that had to be as smooth and level as a New
York boulevard.



Chapter VI


Thorpe and four others were set to work on this road, which was
to be cut through a creek bottom leading, he was told, to "seventeen."
The figures meant nothing to him.  Later, each number came to possess
an individuality of its own.  He learned to use a double-bitted ax.

Thorpe's intelligence was of the practical sort that wonderfully
helps experience.  He watched closely one of the older men, and
analyzed the relation borne by each one of his movements to the
object in view.  In a short time he perceived that one hand and arm
are mere continuations of the helve, attaching the blade of the ax
to the shoulder of the wielder; and that the other hand directs the
stroke.  He acquired the knack thus of throwing the bit of steel into
the gash as though it were a baseball on the end of a string; and so
accomplished power.  By experiment he learned just when to slide the
guiding hand down the helve; and so gained accuracy.  He suffered
none of those accidents so common to new choppers.  His ax did not
twist itself from his hands, nor glance to cut his foot.  He
attained the method of the double bit, and how to knock roots by
alternate employment of the edge and flat.  In a few days his hands
became hard and used to the cold.

From shortly after daylight he worked.  Four other men bore him
company, and twice Radway himself came by, watched their operations
for a moment, and moved on without comment.  After Thorpe had caught
his second wind, he enjoyed his task, proving a certain pleasure in
the ease with which he handled his tool.

At the end of an interminable period, a faint, musical halloo
swelled, echoed, and died through the forest, beautiful as a
spirit.  It was taken up by another voice and repeated.  Then by
another.  Now near at hand, now far away it rang as hollow as a
bell.  The sawyers, the swampers, the skidders, and the team men
turned and put on their heavy blanket coats.

Down on the road Thorpe heard it too, and wondered what it might be.

"Come on, Bub! she means chew!" explained old man Heath kindly.
Old man Heath was a veteran woodsman who had come to swamping in
his old age.  He knew the game thoroughly, but could never save
his "stake" when Pat McGinnis, the saloon man, enticed him in.
Throughout the morning he had kept an eye on the newcomer, and was
secretly pleased in his heart of the professional at the readiness
with which the young fellow learned.

Thorpe resumed his coat, and fell in behind the little procession.
After a short time he came upon a horse and sledge.  Beyond it the
cookee had built a little camp fire, around and over which he had
grouped big fifty-pound lard-tins, half full of hot things to eat.
Each man, as he approached, picked up a tin plate and cup from a
pile near at hand.

The cookee was plainly master of the situation.  He issued peremptory
orders.  When Erickson, the blonde Swede, attempted surreptitiously
to appropriate a doughnut, the youth turned on him savagely.

"Get out of that, you big tow-head!" he cried with an oath.

A dozen Canada jays, fluffy, impatient, perched near by or made
little short circles over and back.  They awaited the remains of
the dinner.  Bob Stratton and a devil-may-care giant by the name of
Nolan constructed a joke wherewith to amuse the interim.  They cut a
long pole, and placed it across a log and through a bush, so that
one extremity projected beyond the bush.  Then diplomacy won a piece
of meat from the cookee.  This they nailed to the end of the pole by
means of a pine sliver.  The Canada jays gazed on the morsel with
covetous eyes.  When the men had retired, they swooped.  One big
fellow arrived first, and lit in defiance of the rest.

"Give it to 'im!" whispered Nolan, who had been watching.

Bob hit the other end of the pole a mighty whack with his ax.  The
astonished jay, projected straight upward by the shock, gave a
startled squawk and cut a hole through the air for the tall timber.
Stratton and Nolan went into convulsions of laughter.

"Get at it!" cried the cookee, as though setting a pack of dogs on
their prey.

The men ate, perched in various attitudes and places.  Thorpe found
it difficult to keep warm.  The violent exercise had heated him
through, and now the north country cold penetrated to his bones.
He huddled close to the fire, and drank hot tea, but it did not do
him very much good.  In his secret mind he resolved to buy one of
the blanket mackinaws that very evening.  He began to see that the
costumes of each country have their origin in practicality.

That evening he picked out one of the best.  As he was about to
inquire the price, Radway drew the van book toward him, inquiring,

"Let's see; what's the name?"

In an instant Thorpe was charged on the book with three dollars and
a half, although his work that day had earned him less than a
dollar.  On his way back to the men's shanty he could not help
thinking how easy it would be for him to leave the next morning two
dollars and a half ahead.  He wondered if this method of procedure
obtained in all the camps.

The newcomer's first day of hard work had tired him completely.  He
was ready for nothing so much as his bunk.  But he had forgotten
that it was Saturday night.  His status was still to assure.

They began with a few mild tricks.  Shuffle the Brogan followed
Hot Back.  Thorpe took all of it good-naturedly.  Finally a tall
individual with a thin white face, a reptilian forehead, reddish
hair, and long baboon arms, suggested tossing in a blanket.  Thorpe
looked at the low ceiling, and declined.

"I'm with the game as long as you say, boys," said he, "and I'll
have as much fun as anybody, but that's going too far for a tired
man."

The reptilian gentleman let out a string of oaths whose meaning
might be translated, "We'll see about that!"

Thorpe was a good boxer, but he knew by now the lumber-jack's
method of fighting,--anything to hurt the other fellow.  And in a
genuine old-fashioned knock-down-and-drag-out rough-and-tumble your
woodsman is about the toughest customer to handle you will be likely
to meet.  He is brought up on fighting.  Nothing pleases him better
than to get drunk and, with a few companions, to embark on an
earnest effort to "clean out" a rival town.  And he will accept
cheerfully punishment enough to kill three ordinary men.  It takes
one of his kind really to hurt him.

Thorpe, at the first hostile movement, sprang back to the door,
seized one of the three-foot billets of hardwood intended for the
stove, and faced his opponents.

"I don't know which of you boys is coming first," said he quietly,
"but he's going to get it good and plenty."

If the affair had been serious, these men would never have recoiled
before the mere danger of a stick of hardwood.  The American woodsman
is afraid of nothing human.  But this was a good-natured bit of
foolery, a test of nerve, and there was no object in getting a
broken head for that.  The reptilian gentleman alone grumbled at
the abandonment of the attack, mumbling something profane.

"If you hanker for trouble so much," drawled the unexpected voice
of old Jackson from the corner, "mebbe you could put on th' gloves."

The idea was acclaimed.  Somebody tossed out a dirty torn old set of
buckskin boxing gloves.

The rest was farce.  Thorpe was built on the true athletic lines,
broad, straight shoulders, narrow flanks, long, clean, smooth
muscles.  He possessed, besides, that hereditary toughness and bulk
which no gymnasium training will ever quite supply.  The other man,
while powerful and ugly in his rushes, was clumsy and did not use
his head.  Thorpe planted his hard straight blows at will.  In this
game he was as manifestly superior as his opponent would probably
have been had the rules permitted kicking, gouging, and wrestling.
Finally he saw his opening and let out with a swinging pivot blow.
The other picked himself out of a corner, and drew off the gloves.
Thorpe's status was assured.

A Frenchman took down his fiddle and began to squeak.  In the course
of the dance old Jackson and old Heath found themselves together,
smoking their pipes of Peerless.

"The young feller's all right," observed Heath; "he cuffed Ben up
to a peak all right."

"Went down like a peck of wet fish-nets," replied Jackson tranquilly.



Chapter VII


In the office shanty one evening about a week later, Radway and
his scaler happened to be talking over the situation.  The scaler,
whose name was Dyer, slouched back in the shadow, watching his great
honest superior as a crafty, dainty cat might watch the blunderings
of a St. Bernard.  When he spoke, it was with a mockery so subtle as
quite to escape the perceptions of the lumberman.  Dyer had a precise
little black mustache whose ends he was constantly twisting into
points, black eyebrows, and long effeminate black lashes.  You would
have expected his dress in the city to be just a trifle flashy, not
enough so to be loud, but sinning as to the trifles of good taste.
The two men conversed in short elliptical sentences, using many
technical terms.

"That 'seventeen' white pine is going to underrun," said Dyer.  "It
won't skid over three hundred thousand."

"It's small stuff," agreed Radway, "and so much the worse for us;
but the Company'll stand in on it because small stuff like that
always over-runs on the mill-cut."

The scaler nodded comprehension.

"When you going to dray-haul that Norway across Pike Lake?"

"To-morrow.  She's springy, but the books say five inches of ice
will hold a team, and there's more than that.  How much are we
putting in a day, now?"

"About forty thousand."

Radway fell silent.

"That's mighty little for such a crew," he observed at last,
doubtfully.

"I always said you were too easy with them.  You got to drive them
more."

"Well, it's a rough country," apologized Radway, trying, as was
his custom, to find excuses for the other party as soon as he was
agreed with in his blame, "there's any amount of potholes; and, then,
we've had so much snow the ground ain't really froze underneath.  It
gets pretty soft in some of them swamps.  Can't figure on putting up
as much in this country as we used to down on the Muskegon."

The scaler smiled a thin smile all to himself behind the stove.  Big
John Radway depended so much on the moral effect of approval or
disapproval by those with whom he lived.  It amused Dyer to withhold
the timely word, so leaving the jobber to flounder between his easy
nature and his sense of what should be done.

Dyer knew perfectly well that the work was behind, and he knew the
reason.  For some time the men had been relaxing their efforts.
They had worked honestly enough, but a certain snap and vim had
lacked.  This was because Radway had been too easy on them.

Your true lumber-jack adores of all things in creation a man whom he
feels to be stronger than himself.  If his employer is big enough to
drive him, then he is willing to be driven to the last ounce of his
strength.  But once he gets the notion that his "boss" is afraid
of, or for, him or his feelings or his health, he loses interest in
working for that man.  So a little effort to lighten or expedite his
work, a little leniency in excusing the dilatory finishing of a
job, a little easing-up under stress of weather, are taken as so
many indications of a desire to conciliate.  And conciliation means
weakness every time.  Your lumber-jack likes to be met front to
front, one strong man to another.  As you value your authority, the
love of your men, and the completion of your work, keep a bluff
brow and an unbending singleness of purpose.

Radway's peculiar temperament rendered him liable to just this
mistake.  It was so much easier for him to do the thing himself
than to be harsh to the point of forcing another to it, that he was
inclined to take the line of least resistance when it came to a
question of even ordinary diligence.  He sought often in his own
mind excuses for dereliction in favor of a man who would not have
dreamed of seeking them for himself.  A good many people would call
this kindness of heart.  Perhaps it was; the question is a little
puzzling.  But the facts were as stated.

Thorpe had already commented on the feeling among the men, though,
owing to his inexperience, he was not able to estimate its full
value.  The men were inclined to a semi-apologetic air when they
spoke of their connection with the camp.  Instead of being honored
as one of a series of jobs, this seemed to be considered as merely
a temporary halting-place in which they took no pride, and from
which they looked forward in anticipation or back in memory to
better things.

"Old Shearer, he's the bully boy," said Bob Stratton.  "I remember
when he was foremap for M. & D. at Camp 0.  Say, we did hustle them
saw-logs in!  I should rise to remark!  Out in th' woods by first
streak o' day.  I recall one mornin' she was pretty cold, an' the
boys grumbled some about turnin' out.  'Cold,' says Tim, 'you sons
of guns! You got your ch'ice.  It may be too cold for you in the
woods, but it's a damm sight too hot fer you in hell, an' you're
going to one or the other!'  And he meant it too.  Them was great
days!  Forty million a year, and not a hitch."

One man said nothing in the general discussion.  It was his first
winter in the woods, and plainly in the eyes of the veterans this
experience did not count.  It was a "faute de mieux," in which one
would give an honest day's work, and no more.

As has been hinted, even the inexperienced newcomer noticed the
lack of enthusiasm, of unity.  Had he known the loyalty, devotion,
and adoration that a thoroughly competent man wins from his "hands,"
the state of affairs would have seemed even more surprising.  The
lumber-jack will work sixteen, eighteen hours a day, sometimes up
to the waist in water full of floating ice; sleep wet on the ground
by a little fire; and then next morning will spring to work at
daylight with an "Oh, no, not tired; just a little stiff, sir!" in
cheerful reply to his master's inquiry,--for the right man!  Only it
must be a strong man,--with the strength of the wilderness in his eye.

The next morning Radway transferred Molly and Jenny, with little
Fabian Laveque and two of the younger men, to Pike Lake.  There,
earlier in the season, a number of pines had been felled out on the
ice, cut in logs, and left in expectation of ice thick enough to
bear the travoy "dray."  Owing to the fact that the shores of Pike
Lake were extremely precipitous, it had been impossible to travoy
the logs up over the hill.

Radway had sounded carefully the thickness of the ice with an ax.
Although the weather had of late been sufficiently cold for the
time of year, the snow, as often happens, had fallen before the
temperature.  Under the warm white blanket, the actual freezing
had been slight.  However, there seemed to be at least eight inches
of clear ice, which would suffice.

Some of the logs in question were found to be half imbedded in the
ice.  It became necessary first of all to free them.  Young Henrys
cut a strong bar six or eight feet long, while Pat McGuire chopped
a hole alongside the log.  Then one end of the bar was thrust into
the hole, the logging chain fastened to the other; and, behold, a
monster lever, whose fulcrum was the ice and whose power was applied
by Molly, hitched to the end of the chain.  In this simple manner a
task was accomplished in five minutes which would have taken a dozen
men an hour.  When the log had been cat-a-cornered from its bed, the
chain was fastened around one end by means of the ever-useful steel
swamp-hook, and it was yanked across the dray.  Then the travoy took
its careful way across the ice to where a dip in the shore gave
access to a skidway.

Four logs had thus been safely hauled.  The fifth was on its journey
across the lake.  Suddenly without warning, and with scarcely a
sound, both horses sank through the ice, which bubbled up around
them and over their backs in irregular rotted pieces.  Little Fabian
Laveque shouted, and jumped down from his log.  Pat McGuire and
young Henrys came running.

The horses had broken through an air-hole, about which the ice was
strong.  Fabian had already seized Molly by the bit, and was holding
her head easily above water.

"Kitch Jenny by dat he't!" he cried to Pat.

Thus the two men, without exertion, sustained the noses of the team
above the surface.  The position demanded absolutely no haste, for it
could have been maintained for a good half hour.  Molly and Jenny,
their soft eyes full of the intelligence of the situation, rested
easily in full confidence.  But Pat and Henrys, new to this sort of
emergency, were badly frightened and excited.  To them the affair
had come to a deadlock.

"Oh, Lord!" cried Pat, clinging desperately to Jenny's headpiece.
"What will we'z be doin'?  We can't niver haul them two horses on
the ice."

"Tak' de log-chain," said Fabian to Henrys, "an' tie him around
de nec' of Jenny."

Henrys, after much difficulty and nervous fumbling, managed to
loosen the swamp-hook; and after much more difficulty and nervous
fumbling succeeded in making it fast about the gray mare's neck.
Fabian intended with this to choke the animal to that peculiar
state when she would float like a balloon on the water, and two
men could with ease draw her over the edge of the ice.  Then the
unexpected happened.

The instant Henrys had passed the end of the chain through the
knot, Pat, possessed by some Hibernian notion that now all was
fast, let go of the bit.  Jenny's head at once went under, and
the end of the logging chain glided over the ice and fell plump
in the hole.

Immediately all was confusion.  Jenny kicked and struggled, churning
the water, throwing it about, kicking out in every direction.  Once a
horse's head dips strongly, the game is over.  No animal drowns more
quickly.  The two young boys scrambled away, and French oaths could
not induce them to approach.  Molly, still upheld by Fabian, looked
at him piteously with her strange intelligent eyes, holding herself
motionless and rigid with complete confidence in this master who had
never failed her before.  Fabian dug his heels into the ice, but
could not hang on.  The drowning horse was more than a dead weight.
Presently it became a question of letting go or being dragged into
the lake on top of the animals.  With a sob the little Frenchman
relinquished his hold.  The water seemed slowly to rise and over-
film the troubled look of pleading in Molly's eyes.

"Assassins!" hissed Laveque at the two unfortunate youths.  That
was all.

When the surface of the waters had again mirrored the clouds, they
hauled the carcasses out on the ice and stripped the harness.  Then
they rolled the log from the dray, piled the tools on it, and took
their way to camp.  In the blue of the winter's sky was a single
speck.

The speck grew.  Soon it swooped.  With a hoarse croak it lit on
the snow at a wary distance, and began to strut back and forth.
Presently, its suspicions at rest, the raven advanced, and with
eager beak began its dreadful meal.  By this time another, which
had seen the first one's swoop, was in view through the ether; then
another; then another.  In an hour the brotherhood of ravens, thus
telegraphically notified, was at feast.



Chapter VIII


Fabian Laveque elaborated the details of the catastrophe with
volubility.

"Hee's not fonny dat she bre'ks t'rough," he said.  "I 'ave see
dem bre'k t'rough two, t'ree tam in de day, but nevaire dat she
get drown!  W'en dose dam-fool can't t'ink wit' hees haid--sacre
Dieu! eet is so easy, to chok' dat cheval--she make me cry wit'
de eye!"

"I suppose it was a good deal my fault," commented Radway, doubtfully
shaking his head, after Laveque had left the office.  "I ought to
have been surer about the ice."

"Eight inches is a little light, with so much snow atop," remarked
the scaler carelessly.

By virtue of that same careless remark, however, Radway was so
confirmed in his belief as to his own culpability that he quite
overlooked Fabian's just contention--that the mere thinness of the
ice was in reality no excuse for the losing of the horses.  So Pat
and Henrys were not discharged--were not instructed to "get their
time."  Fabian Laveque promptly demanded his.

"Sacre bleu!" said he to old Jackson.  "I no work wid dat dam-fool
dat no t'ink wit' hees haid."

This deprived the camp at once of a teamster and a team.  When you
reflect that one pair of horses takes care of the exertions of a
crew of sawyers, several swampers, and three or four cant-hook men,
you will readily see what a serious derangement their loss would
cause.  And besides, the animals themselves are difficult to replace.
They are big strong beasts, selected for their power, staying
qualities, and intelligence, worth anywhere from three to six
hundred dollars a pair.  They must be shipped in from a distance.
And, finally, they require a very careful and patient training
before they are of value in co-operating with the nicely adjusted
efforts necessary to place the sawlog where it belongs.  Ready-
trained horses are never for sale during the season.

Radway did his best.  He took three days to search out a big team
of farm horses.  Then it became necessary to find a driver.  After
some deliberation he decided to advance Bob Stratton to the post,
that "decker" having had more or less experience the year before.
Erickson, the Swede, while not a star cant-hook man, was nevertheless
sure and reliable.  Radway placed him in Stratton's place.  But now
he must find a swamper.  He remembered Thorpe.

So the young man received his first promotion toward the ranks of
skilled labor.  He gained at last a field of application for the
accuracy he had so intelligently acquired while road-making, for
now a false stroke marred a saw-log; and besides, what was more to
his taste, he found himself near the actual scene of operation, at
the front, as it were.  He had under his very eyes the process as
far as it had been carried.

In his experience here he made use of the same searching analytical
observation that had so quickly taught him the secret of the ax-
swing.  He knew that each of the things he saw, no matter how
trivial, was either premeditated or the product of chance.  If
premeditated, he tried to find out its reason for being.  If
fortuitous, he wished to know the fact, and always attempted to
figure out the possibility of its elimination.

So he learned why and when the sawyers threw a tree up or down
hill; how much small standing timber they tried to fell it through;
what consideration held for the cutting of different lengths of log;
how the timber was skilfully decked on the skids in such a manner
that the pile should not bulge and fall, and so that the scaler
could easily determine the opposite ends of the same log;--in short,
a thousand and one little details which ordinarily a man learns only
as the exigencies arise to call in experience.  Here, too, he first
realized he was in the firing line.

Thorpe had assigned him as bunk mate the young fellow who assisted
Tom Broadhead in the felling.  Henry Paul was a fresh-complexioned,
clear-eyed, quick-mannered young fellow with an air of steady
responsibility about him.  He came from the southern part of the
State, where, during the summer, he worked on a little homestead
farm of his own.  After a few days he told Thorpe that he was
married, and after a few days more he showed his bunk mate the
photograph of a sweet-faced young woman who looked trustingly out
of the picture.

"She's waitin' down there for me, and it ain't so very long till
spring," said Paul wistfully.  "She's the best little woman a man
ever had, and there ain't nothin' too good for her, chummy!"

Thorpe, soul-sick after his recent experiences with the charity of
the world, discovered a real pleasure in this fresh, clear passion.
As he contemplated the abounding health, the upright carriage, the
sparkling, bubbling spirits of the young woodsman, he could easily
imagine the young girl and the young happiness, too big for a
little backwoods farm.

Three days after the newcomer had started in at the swamping, Paul,
during their early morning walk from camp to the scene of their
operations, confided in him further.

"Got another letter, chummy," said he, "come in yesterday.  She
tells me," he hesitated with a blush, and then a happy laugh, "that
they ain't going to be only two of us at the farm next year."

"You mean!" queried Thorpe.

"Yes," laughed Paul, "and if it's a girl she gets named after her
mother, you bet."

The men separated.  In a moment Thorpe found himself waist-deep in
the pitchy aromatic top of an old bull-sap, clipping away at the
projecting branches.  After a time he heard Paul's gay halloo.

"TimBER!" came the cry, and then the swish-sh-sh,--CRASH of the
tree's fall.

Thorpe knew that now either Hank or Tom must be climbing with the
long measuring pole along the prostrate trunk, marking by means of
shallow ax-clips where the saw was to divide the logs.  Then Tom
shouted something unintelligible.  The other men seemed to understand,
however, for they dropped their work and ran hastily in the direction
of the voice.  Thorpe, after a moment's indecision, did the same.
He arrived to find a group about a prostrate man.  The man was Paul.

Two of the older woodsmen, kneeling, were conducting coolly a hasty
examination.  At the front every man is more or less of a surgeon.

"Is he hurt badly?" asked Thorpe; "what is it?"

"He's dead," answered one of the other men soberly.

With the skill of ghastly practice some of them wove a litter on
which the body was placed.  The pathetic little procession moved in
the solemn, inscrutable forest.

When the tree had fallen it had crashed through the top of another,
leaving suspended in the branches of the latter a long heavy limb.
A slight breeze dislodged it.  Henry Paul was impaled as by a javelin.

This is the chief of the many perils of the woods.  Like crouching
pumas the instruments of a man's destruction poise on the spring,
sometimes for days.  Then swiftly, silently, the leap is made.  It
is a danger unavoidable, terrible, ever-present.  Thorpe was destined
in time to see men crushed and mangled in a hundred ingenious ways
by the saw log, knocked into space and a violent death by the butts
of trees, ground to powder in the mill of a jam, but never would he
be more deeply impressed than by this ruthless silent taking of a
life.  The forces of nature are so tame, so simple, so obedient;
and in the next instant so absolutely beyond human control or
direction, so whirlingly contemptuous of puny human effort, that
in time the wilderness shrouds itself to our eyes in the same
impenetrable mystery as the sea.

That evening the camp was unusually quiet.  Tellier let his
fiddle hang.  After supper Thorpe was approached by Purdy, the
reptilian red-head with whom he had had the row some evenings
before.

"You in, chummy?" he asked in a quiet voice.  "It's a five apiece
for Hank's woman."

"Yes," said Thorpe.

The men were earning from twenty to thirty dollars a month.  They
had, most of them, never seen Hank Paul before this autumn.  He
had not, mainly because of his modest disposi