tion, enjoyed any
extraordinary degree of popularity.  Yet these strangers cheerfully,
as a matter of course, gave up the proceeds of a week's hard work,
and that without expecting the slightest personal credit.  The money
was sent "from the boys."  Thorpe later read a heart-broken letter
of thanks to the unknown benefactors.  It touched him deeply, and
he suspected the other men of the same emotions, but by that time
they had regained the independent, self-contained poise of the
frontiersman.  They read it with unmoved faces, and tossed it aside
with a more than ordinarily rough joke or oath.  Thorpe understood
their reticence.  It was a part of his own nature.  He felt more
than ever akin to these men.

As swamper he had more or less to do with a cant-hook in helping
the teamsters roll the end of the log on the little "dray."  He
soon caught the knack.  Towards Christmas he had become a fairly
efficient cant-hook man, and was helping roll the great sticks of
timber up the slanting skids.  Thus always intelligence counts,
especially that rare intelligence which resolves into the analytical
and the minutely observing.

On Sundays Thorpe fell into the habit of accompanying old Jackson
Hines on his hunting expeditions.  The ancient had been raised in
the woods.  He seemed to know by instinct the haunts and habits of
all the wild animals, just as he seemed to know by instinct when
one of his horses was likely to be troubled by the colic.  His
woodcraft was really remarkable.

So the two would stand for hours in the early morning and late
evening waiting for deer on the edges of the swamps.  They haunted
the runways during the middle of the day.  On soft moccasined feet
they stole about in the evening with a bull's-eye lantern fastened
on the head of one of them for a "jack."  Several times they
surprised the wolves, and shone the animals' eyes like the
scattered embers of a camp fire.

Thorpe learned to shoot at a deer's shoulders rather than his heart,
how to tell when the animal had sustained a mortal hurt from the
way it leaped and the white of its tail.  He even made progress
in the difficult art of still hunting, where the man matches his
senses against those of the creatures of the forest,--and sometimes
wins.  He soon knew better than to cut the animal's throat, and
learned from Hines that a single stab at a certain point of the
chest was much better for the purposes of bleeding.  And, what is
more, he learned not to over-shoot down hill.

Besides these things Jackson taught him many other, minor, details
of woodcraft.  Soon the young man could interpret the thousands of
signs, so insignificant in appearance and so important in reality,
which tell the history of the woods.  He acquired the knack of
winter fishing.

These Sundays were perhaps the most nearly perfect of any of the
days of that winter.  In them the young man drew more directly face
to face with the wilderness.  He called a truce with the enemy;
and in return that great inscrutable power poured into his heart
a portion of her grandeur.  His ambition grew; and, as always with
him, his determination became the greater and the more secret.  In
proportion as his ideas increased, he took greater pains to shut
them in from expression.  For failure in great things would bring
keener disappointment than failure in little.

He was getting just the experience and the knowledge he needed; but
that was about all.  His wages were twenty-five dollars a month,
which his van bill would reduce to the double eagle.  At the end
of the winter he would have but a little over a hundred dollars to
show for his season's work, and this could mean at most only fifty
dollars for Helen.  But the future was his.  He saw now more plainly
what he had dimly perceived before, that for the man who buys timber,
and logs it well, a sure future is waiting.  And in this camp he was
beginning to learn from failure the conditions of success.



Chapter IX


They finished cutting on section seventeen during Thorpe's second
week.  It became necessary to begin on section fourteen, which lay
two miles to the east.  In that direction the character of the
country changed somewhat.

The pine there grew thick on isolated "islands" of not more than
an acre or so in extent,--little knolls rising from the level of a
marsh.  In ordinary conditions nothing would have been easier than
to have ploughed roads across the frozen surface of this marsh.  The
peculiar state of the weather interposed tremendous difficulties.

The early part of autumn had been characterized by a heavy snow-
fall immediately after a series of mild days.  A warm blanket of
some thickness thus overlaid the earth, effectually preventing the
freezing which subsequent cold weather would have caused.  All
the season Radway had contended with this condition.  Even in the
woods, muddy swamp and spring-holes caused endless difficulty and
necessitated a great deal of "corduroying," or the laying of poles
side by side to form an artificial bottom.  Here in the open some
six inches of water and unlimited mud awaited the first horse that
should break through the layer of snow and thin ice.  Between each
pair of islands a road had to be "tramped."

Thorpe and the rest were put at this disagreeable job.  All day long
they had to walk mechanically back and forth on diagonals between
the marks set by Radway with his snowshoes.  Early in the morning
their feet were wet by icy water, for even the light weight of a
man sometimes broke the frozen skin of the marsh.  By night a road
of trampled snow, of greater or less length, was marked out across
the expanse.  Thus the blanket was thrown back from the warm earth,
and thus the cold was given a chance at the water beneath.  In a
day or so the road would bear a horse.  A bridge of ice had been
artificially constructed, on either side of which lay unsounded
depths.  This road was indicated by a row of firs stuck in the snow
on either side.

It was very cold.  All day long the restless wind swept across the
shivering surface of the plains, and tore around the corners of the
islands.  The big woods are as good as an overcoat.  The overcoat
had been taken away.

When the lunch-sleigh arrived, the men huddled shivering in the lee
of one of the knolls, and tried to eat with benumbed fingers before
a fire that was but a mockery.  Often it was nearly dark before their
work had warmed them again.  All of the skidways had to be placed on
the edges of the islands themselves, and the logs had to be travoyed
over the steep little knolls.  A single misstep out on to the plain
meant a mired horse.  Three times heavy snows obliterated the roads,
so that they had to be ploughed out before the men could go to work
again.  It was a struggle.

Radway was evidently worried.  He often paused before a gang to
inquire how they were "making it."  He seemed afraid they might
wish to quit, which was indeed the case, but he should never have
taken before them any attitude but that of absolute confidence in
their intentions.  His anxiety was natural, however.  He realized
the absolute necessity of skidding and hauling this job before the
heavy choking snows of the latter part of January should make it
impossible to keep the roads open.  So insistent was this necessity
that he had seized the first respite in the phenomenal snow-fall of
the early autumn to begin work.  The cutting in the woods could wait.

Left to themselves probably the men would never have dreamed of
objecting to whatever privations the task carried with it.  Radway's
anxiety for their comfort, however, caused them finally to imagine
that perhaps they might have some just grounds for complaint after
all.  That is a great trait of the lumber-jack.

But Dyer, the scaler, finally caused the outbreak.  Dyer was an
efficient enough man in his way, but he loved his own ease.  His
habit was to stay in his bunk of mornings until well after daylight.
To this there could be no objection--except on the part of the cook,
who was supposed to attend to his business himself--for the scaler
was active in his work, when once he began it, and could keep up
with the skidding.  But now he displayed a strong antipathy to the
north wind on the plains.  Of course he could not very well shirk
the work entirely, but he did a good deal of talking on the very
cold mornings.

"I don't pose for no tough son-of-a-gun," said he to Radway, "and
I've got some respect for my ears and feet.  She'll warm up a little
by to-morrow, and perhaps the wind'll die.  I can catch up on you
fellows by hustling a little, so I guess I'll stay in and work on
the books to-day."

"All right," Radway assented, a little doubtfully.

This happened perhaps two days out of the week.  Finally Dyer hung
out a thermometer, which he used to consult.  The men saw it, and
consulted it too.  At once they felt much colder.

"She was stan' ten below," sputtered Baptiste Tellier, the Frenchman
who played the fiddle.  "He freeze t'rou to hees eenside.  Dat is
too cole for mak de work."

"Them plains is sure a holy fright," assented Purdy.

"Th' old man knows it himself," agreed big Nolan; "did you see him
rammin' around yesterday askin' us if we found her too cold?  He
knows damn well he ought not to keep a man out that sort o' weather."

"You'd shiver like a dog in a briar path on a warm day in July,"
said Jackson Hines contemptuously.

"Shut up!" said they.  "You're barn-boss.  You don't have to be out
in th' cold."

This was true.  So Jackson's intervention went for a little worse
than nothing.

"It ain't lak' he has nuttin' besides," went on Baptiste.  "He can
mak' de cut in de meedle of de fores'."

"That's right," agreed Bob Stratton, "they's the west half of eight
ain't been cut yet."

So they sent a delegation to Radway.  Big Nolan was the spokesman.

"Boss," said he bluntly, "she's too cold to work on them plains
to-day.  She's the coldest day we had."

Radway was too old a hand at the business to make any promises on
the spot.

"I'll see, boys," said he.

When the breakfast was over the crew were set to making skidways
and travoy roads on eight.  This was a precedent.  In time the work
on the plains was grumblingly done in any weather.  However, as to
this Radway proved firm enough.  He was a good fighter when he knew
he was being imposed on.  A man could never cheat or defy him openly
without collecting a little war that left him surprised at the
jobber's belligerency.  The doubtful cases, those on the subtle line
of indecision, found him weak.  He could be so easily persuaded that
he was in the wrong.  At times it even seemed that he was anxious to
be proved at fault, so eager was he to catch fairly the justice of
the other man's attitude.  He held his men inexorably and firmly to
their work on the indisputably comfortable days; but gave in often
when an able-bodied woodsman should have seen in the weather no
inconvenience, even.  As the days slipped by, however, he tightened
the reins.  Christmas was approaching.  An easy mathematical
computation reduced the question of completing his contract with
Morrison & Daly to a certain weekly quota.  In fact he was surprised
at the size of it.  He would have to work diligently and steadily
during the rest of the winter.

Having thus a definite task to accomplish in a definite number of
days, Radway grew to be more of a taskmaster.  His anxiety as to
the completion of the work overlaid his morbidly sympathetic human
interest.  Thus he regained to a small degree the respect of his
men.  Then he lost it again.

One morning he came in from a talk with the supply-teamster, and
woke Dyer, who was not yet up.

"I'm going down home for two or three weeks," he announced to Dyer,
"you know my address.  You'll have to take charge, and I guess
you'd better let the scaling go.  We can get the tally at the
banking grounds when we begin to haul.  Now we ain't got all the
time there is, so you want to keep the boys at it pretty well."

Dyer twisted the little points of his mustache.  "All right, sir,"
said he with his smile so inscrutably insolent that Radway never
saw the insolence at all.  He thought this a poor year for a man
in Radway's position to spend Christmas with his family, but it
was none of his business.

"Do as much as you can in the marsh, Dyer," went on the jobber.
"I don't believe it's really necessary to lay off any more there
on account of the weather.  We've simply got to get that job in
before the big snows."

"All right, sir," repeated Dyer.

The scaler did what he considered his duty.  All day long he tramped
back and forth from one gang of men to the other, keeping a sharp
eye on the details of the work.  His practical experience was
sufficient to solve readily such problems of broken tackle, extra
expedients, or facility which the days brought forth.  The fact that
in him was vested the power to discharge kept the men at work.

Dyer was in the habit of starting for the marsh an hour or so after
sunrise.  The crew, of course, were at work by daylight.  Dyer heard
them often through his doze, just as he heard the chore-boy come in
to build the fire and fill the water pail afresh.  After a time the
fire, built of kerosene and pitchy jack pine, would get so hot that
in self-defense he would arise and dress.  Then he would breakfast
leisurely.

Thus he incurred the enmity of the cook and cookee.  Those
individuals have to prepare food three times a day for a half
hundred heavy eaters; besides which, on sleigh-haul, they are
supposed to serve a breakfast at three o'clock for the loaders
and a variety of lunches up to midnight for the sprinkler men.
As a consequence, they resent infractions of the little system
they may have been able to introduce.

Now the business of a foreman is to be up as soon as anybody.  He
does none of the work himself, but he must see that somebody else
does it, and does it well.  For this he needs actual experience
at the work itself, but above all zeal and constant presence.  He
must know how a thing ought to be done, and he must be on hand
unexpectedly to see how its accomplishment is progressing.  Dyer
should have been out of bed at first horn-blow.

One morning he slept until nearly ten o'clock.  It was inexplicable!
He hurried from his bunk, made a hasty toilet, and started for the
dining-room to get some sort of a lunch to do him until dinner
time.  As he stepped from the door of the office he caught sight of
two men hurrying from the cook camp to the men's camp.  He thought
he heard the hum of conversation in the latter building.  The cookee
set hot coffee before him.  For the rest, he took what he could find
cold on the table.

On an inverted cracker box the cook sat reading an old copy of the
Police Gazette.  Various fifty-pound lard tins were bubbling and
steaming on the range.  The cookee divided his time between them
and the task of sticking on the log walls pleasing patterns made
of illustrations from cheap papers and the gaudy labels of canned
goods.  Dyer sat down, feeling, for the first time, a little guilty.
This was not because of a sense of a dereliction in duty, but
because he feared the strong man's contempt for inefficiency.

"I sort of pounded my ear a little long this morning," he remarked
with an unwonted air of bonhomie.

The cook creased his paper with one hand and went on reading; the
little action indicating at the same time that he had heard, but
intended to vouchsafe no attention.  The cookee continued his
occupations.

"I suppose the men got out to the marsh on time," suggested Dyer,
still easily.

The cook laid aside his paper and looked the scaler in the eye.

"You're the foreman; I'm the cook," said he.  "You ought to know."

The cookee had paused, the paste brush in his hand.

Dyer was no weakling.  The problem presenting, he rose to the
emergency.  Without another word he pushed back his coffee cup
and crossed the narrow open passage to the men's camp

When he opened the door a silence fell.  He could see dimly that
the room was full of lounging and smoking lumbermen.  As a matter
of fact, not a man had stirred out that morning.  This was more for
the sake of giving Dyer a lesson than of actually shirking the work,
for a lumber-jack is honest in giving his time when it is paid for.

"How's this, men!" cried Dyer sharply; "why aren't you out on
the marsh?"

No one answered for a minute.  Then Baptiste:

"He mak' too tam cole for de marsh.  Meester Radway he spik dat we
kip off dat marsh w'en he mak' cole."

Dyer knew that the precedent was indisputable.

"Why didn't you cut on eight then?" he asked, still in peremptory
tones.

"Didn't have no one to show us where to begin," drawled a voice in
the corner.

Dyer turned sharp on his heel and went out.

"Sore as a boil, ain't he!" commented old Jackson Hines with a
chuckle.

In the cook camp Dyer was saying to the cook, "Well, anyway, we'll
have dinner early and get a good start for this afternoon."

The cook again laid down his paper.  "I'm tending to this job of
cook," said he, "and I'm getting the meals on time.  Dinner will
be on time to-day not a minute early, and not a minute late."

Then he resumed his perusal of the adventures of ladies to whom the
illustrations accorded magnificent calf-development.

The crew worked on the marsh that afternoon, and the subsequent
days of the week.  They labored conscientiously but not zealously.
There is a deal of difference, and the lumber-jack's unaided
conscience is likely to allow him a certain amount of conversation
from the decks of skidways.  The work moved slowly.  At Christmas
a number of the men "went out."  Most of them were back again after
four or five days, for, while men were not plenty, neither was work.
The equilibrium was nearly exact.

But the convivial souls had lost to Dyer the days of their debauch,
and until their thirst for recuperative "Pain Killer," "Hinckley"
and Jamaica Ginger was appeased, they were not much good.  Instead
of keeping up to fifty thousand a day, as Radway had figured was
necessary, the scale would not have exceeded thirty.

Dyer saw all this plainly enough, but was not able to remedy it.
That was not entirely his fault.  He did not dare give the
delinquents their time, for he would not have known where to fill
their places.  This lay in Radway's experience.  Dyer felt that
responsibilities a little too great had been forced on him, which
was partly true.  In a few days the young man's facile conscience
had covered all his shortcomings with the blanket excuse.  He
conceived that he had a grievance against Radway!



Chapter X


Radway returned to camp by the 6th of January.  He went on snowshoes
over the entire job; and then sat silently in the office smoking
"Peerless" in his battered old pipe.  Dyer watched him amusedly,
secure in his grievance in case blame should be attached to him.
The jobber looked older.  The lines of dry good-humor about his eyes
had subtly changed to an expression of pathetic anxiety.  He attached
no blame to anybody, but rose the next morning at horn-blow, and the
men found they had a new master over them.

And now the struggle with the wilderness came to grapples.  Radway
was as one possessed by a burning fever.  He seemed everywhere at
once, always helping with his own shoulder and arm, hurrying eagerly.
For once luck seemed with him.  The marsh was cut over; the "eighty"
on section eight was skidded without a break.  The weather held cold
and clear.

Now it became necessary to put the roads in shape for hauling.  All
winter the blacksmith, between his tasks of shoeing and mending,
had occupied his time in fitting the iron-work on eight log-sleighs
which the carpenter had hewed from solid sticks of timber.  They were
tremendous affairs, these sleighs, with runners six feet apart, and
bunks nine feet in width for the reception of logs.  The bunks were
so connected by two loosely-coupled rods that, when emptied, they
could be swung parallel with the road, so reducing the width of the
sleigh.  The carpenter had also built two immense tanks on runners,
holding each some seventy barrels of water, and with holes so
arranged in the bottom and rear that on the withdrawal of plugs the
water would flood the entire width of the road.  These sprinklers
were filled by horse power.  A chain, running through blocks attached
to a solid upper framework, like the open belfry of an Italian
monastery, dragged a barrel up a wooden track from the water hole to
the opening in the sprinkler.  When in action this formidable machine
weighed nearly two tons and resembled a moving house.  Other men had
felled two big hemlocks, from which they had hewed beams for a V plow.

The V plow was now put in action.  Six horses drew it down the road,
each pair superintended by a driver.  The machine was weighted down
by a number of logs laid across the arms.  Men guided it by levers,
and by throwing their weight against the fans of the plow.  It was a
gay, animated scene this, full of the spirit of winter--the plodding,
straining horses, the brilliantly dressed, struggling men, the
sullen-yielding snow thrown to either side, the shouts, warnings,
and commands.  To right and left grew white banks of snow.  Behind
stretched a broad white path in which a scant inch hid the bare earth.

For some distance the way led along comparatively high ground.  Then,
skirting the edge of a lake, it plunged into a deep creek bottom
between hills.  Here, earlier in the year, eleven bridges had been
constructed, each a labor of accuracy; and perhaps as many swampy
places had been "corduroyed" by carpeting them with long parallel
poles.  Now the first difficulty began.

Some of the bridges had sunk below the level, and the approaches
had to be corduroyed to a practicable grade.  Others again were
humped up like tom-cats, and had to be pulled apart entirely.  In
spots the "corduroy" had spread, so that the horses thrust their
hoofs far down into leg-breaking holes.  The experienced animals
were never caught, however.  As soon as they felt the ground giving
way beneath one foot, they threw their weight on the other.

Still, that sort of thing was to be expected.  A gang of men who
followed the plow carried axes and cant-hooks for the purpose of
repairing extemporaneously just such defects, which never would
have been discovered otherwise than by the practical experience.
Radway himself accompanied the plow.  Thorpe, who went along as one
of the "road monkeys," saw now why such care had been required of
him in smoothing the way of stubs, knots, and hummocks.

Down the creek an accident occurred on this account.  The plow had
encountered a drift.  Three times the horses had plunged at it, and
three times had been brought to a stand, not so much by the drag of
the V plow as by the wallowing they themselves had to do in the drift.

"No use, break her through, boys," said Radway.  So a dozen men
hurled their bodies through, making an opening for the horses.

"Hi! YUP!" shouted the three teamsters, gathering up their reins.

The horses put their heads down and plunged.  The whole apparatus
moved with a rush, men clinging, animals digging their hoofs in,
snow flying.  Suddenly there came a check, then a CRACK, and then
the plow shot forward so suddenly and easily that the horses all
but fell on their noses.  The flanging arms of the V, forced in a
place too narrow, had caught between heavy stubs.  One of the arms
had broken square off.

There was nothing for it but to fell another hemlock and hew out
another beam, which meant a day lost.  Radway occupied his men with
shovels in clearing the edge of the road, and started one of his
sprinklers over the place already cleared.  Water holes of suitable
size had been blown in the creek bank by dynamite.  There the
machines were filled.  It was a slow process.  Stratton attached
his horse to the chain and drove him back and forth, hauling the
barrel up and down the slideway.  At the bottom it was capsized
and filled by means of a long pole shackled to its bottom and
manipulated by old man Heath.  At the top it turned over by its
own weight.  Thus seventy odd times.

Then Fred Green hitched his team on and the four horses drew the
creaking, cumbrous vehicle spouting down the road.  Water gushed in
fans from the openings on either side and beneath; and in streams
from two holes behind.  Not for an instant as long as the flow
continued dared the teamsters breathe their horses, for a pause
would freeze the runners tight to the ground.  A tongue at either
end obviated the necessity of turning around.

While the other men hewed at the required beam for the broken V
plow, Heath, Stratton, and Green went over the cleared road-length
once.  To do so required three sprinklerfuls.  When the road should
be quite free, and both sprinklers running, they would have to keep
at it until after midnight.

And then silently the wilderness stretched forth her hand and pushed
these struggling atoms back to their place.

That night it turned warmer.  The change was heralded by a shift of
wind.  Then some blue jays appeared from nowhere and began to scream
at their more silent brothers, the whisky jacks.

"She's goin' to rain," said old Jackson.  "The air is kind o' holler."

"Hollow?" said Thorpe, laughing.  "How is that?"

"I don' no," confessed Hines, "but she is.  She jest feels that way."

In the morning the icicles dripped from the roof, and although the
snow did not appreciably melt, it shrank into itself and became
pock-marked on the surface.

Radway was down looking at the road.

"She's holdin' her own," said he, "but there ain't any use putting
more water on her.  She ain't freezing a mite.  We'll plow her out."

So they finished the job, and plowed her out, leaving exposed the
wet, marshy surface of the creek-bottom, on which at night a thin
crust formed.  Across the marsh the old tramped road held up the
horses, and the plow swept clear a little wider swath.

"She'll freeze a little to-night," said Radway hopefully.  "You
sprinkler boys get at her and wet her down."

Until two o'clock in the morning the four teams and the six men
creaked back and forth spilling hardly-gathered water--weird,
unearthly, in the flickering light of their torches.  Then they
crept in and ate sleepily the food that a sleepy cookee set out
for them.

By morning the mere surface of this sprinkled water had frozen, the
remainder beneath had drained away, and so Radway found in his road
considerable patches of shell ice, useless, crumbling.  He looked
in despair at the sky.  Dimly through the gray he caught the tint
of blue.

The sun came out.  Nut-hatches and wood-peckers ran gayly up the
warming trunks of the trees.  Blue jays fluffed and perked and
screamed in the hard-wood tops.  A covey of grouse ventured from the
swamp and strutted vainly, a pause of contemplation between each
step.  Radway, walking out on the tramped road of the marsh, cracked
the artificial skin and thrust his foot through into icy water.
That night the sprinklers stayed in.

The devil seemed in it.  If the thaw would only cease before the ice
bottom so laboriously constructed was destroyed!  Radway vibrated
between the office and the road.  Men were lying idle; teams were
doing the same.  Nothing went on but the days of the year; and four
of them had already ticked off the calendar.  The deep snow of the
unusually cold autumn had now disappeared from the tops of the
stumps.  Down in the swamp the covey of partridges were beginning
to hope that in a few days more they might discover a bare spot in
the burnings.  It even stopped freezing during the night.  At times
Dyer's little thermometer marked as high as forty degrees.

"I often heard this was a sort 'v summer resort," observed Tom
Broadhead, "but danged if I knew it was a summer resort all the
year 'round."

The weather got to be the only topic of conversation.  Each had his
say, his prediction.  It became maddening.  Towards evening the chill
of melting snow would deceive many into the belief that a cold snap
was beginning.

"She'll freeze before morning, sure," was the hopeful comment.

And then in the morning the air would be more balmily insulting
than ever.

"Old man is as blue as a whetstone," commented Jackson Hines, "an'
I don't blame him.  This weather'd make a man mad enough to eat the
devil with his horns left on."

By and by it got to be a case of looking on the bright side of the
affair from pure reaction.

"I don't know," said Radway, "it won't be so bad after all.  A
couple of days of zero weather, with all this water lying around,
would fix things up in pretty good shape.  If she only freezes
tight, we'll have a good solid bottom to build on, and that'll be
quite a good rig out there on the marsh."

The inscrutable goddess of the wilderness smiled, and calmly,
relentlessly, moved her next pawn.

It was all so unutterably simple, and yet so effective.  Something
there was in it of the calm inevitability of fate.  It snowed.

All night and all day the great flakes zig-zagged softly down
through the air.  Radway plowed away two feet of it.  The surface
was promptly covered by a second storm.  Radway doggedly plowed it
out again.

This time the goddess seemed to relent.  The ground froze solid.
The sprinklers became assiduous in their labor.  Two days later the
road was ready for the first sleigh, its surface of thick, glassy
ice, beautiful to behold; the ruts cut deep and true; the grades
sanded, or sprinkled with retarding hay on the descents.  At the
river the banking ground proved solid.  Radway breathed again, then
sighed.  Spring was eight days nearer.  He was eight days more behind.



Chapter XI


As soon as loading began, the cook served breakfast at three
o'clock.  The men worked by the light of torches, which were often
merely catsup jugs with wicking in the necks.  Nothing could be more
picturesque than a teamster conducting one of his great pyramidical
loads over the little inequalities of the road, in the ticklish
places standing atop with the bent knee of the Roman charioteer,
spying and forestalling the chances of the way with a fixed eye and
an intense concentration that relaxed not one inch in the miles of
the haul.  Thorpe had become a full-fledged cant-hook man.

He liked the work.  There is about it a skill that fascinates.  A
man grips suddenly with the hook of his strong instrument, stopping
one end that the other may slide; he thrusts the short, strong stock
between the log and the skid, allowing it to be overrun; he stops
the roll with a sudden sure grasp applied at just the right moment
to be effective.  Sometimes he allows himself to be carried up
bodily, clinging to the cant-hook like an acrobat to a bar, until
the log has rolled once; when, his weapon loosened, he drops
lightly, easily to the ground.  And it is exciting to pile the logs
on the sleigh, first a layer of five, say; then one of six smaller;
of but three; of two; until, at the very apex, the last is dragged
slowly up the skids, poised, and, just as it is about to plunge
down the other side, is gripped and held inexorably by the little
men in blue flannel shirts.

Chains bind the loads.  And if ever, during the loading, or
afterwards when the sleigh is in motion, the weight of the logs
causes the pyramid to break down and squash out;--then woe to the
driver, or whoever happens to be near!  A saw log does not make a
great deal of fuss while falling, but it falls through anything that
happens in its way, and a man who gets mixed up in a load of twenty-
five or thirty of them obeying the laws of gravitation from a height
of some fifteen to twenty feet, can be crushed into strange shapes
and fragments.  For this reason the loaders are picked and careful
men.

At the banking grounds, which lie in and about the bed of the river,
the logs are piled in a gigantic skidway to await the spring freshets,
which will carry them down stream to the "boom."  In that enclosure
they remain until sawed in the mill.

Such is the drama of the saw log, a story of grit, resourcefulness,
adaptability, fortitude and ingenuity hard to match.  Conditions
never repeat themselves in the woods as they do in the factory.  The
wilderness offers ever new complications to solve, difficulties to
overcome.  A man must think of everything, figure on everything,
from the grand sweep of the country at large to the pressure on a
king-bolt.  And where another possesses the boundless resources of
a great city, he has to rely on the material stored in one corner
of a shed.  It is easy to build a palace with men and tools; it is
difficult to build a log cabin with nothing but an ax.  His wits
must help him where his experience fails; and his experience must
push him mechanically along the track of habit when successive
buffetings have beaten his wits out of his head.  In a day he must
construct elaborate engines, roads, and implements which old
civilization considers the works of leisure.  Without a thought
of expense he must abandon as temporary, property which other
industries cry out at being compelled to acquire as permanent.
For this reason he becomes in time different from his fellows.
The wilderness leaves something of her mystery in his eyes, that
mystery of hidden, unknown but guessed, power.  Men look after him
on the street, as they would look after any other pioneer, in vague
admiration of a scope more virile than their own.

Thorpe, in common with the other men, had thought Radway's vacation
at Christmas time a mistake.  He could not but admire the feverish
animation that now characterized the jobber.  Every mischance was as
quickly repaired as aroused expedient could do the work.

The marsh received first attention.  There the restless snow drifted
uneasily before the wind.  Nearly every day the road had to be
plowed, and the sprinklers followed the teams almost constantly.
Often it was bitter cold, but no one dared to suggest to the
determined jobber that it might be better to remain indoors.  The
men knew as well as he that the heavy February snows would block
traffic beyond hope of extrication.

As it was, several times an especially heavy fall clogged the way.
The snow-plow, even with extra teams, could hardly force its path
through.  Men with shovels helped.  Often but a few loads a day, and
they small, could be forced to the banks by the utmost exertions of
the entire crew.  Esprit de corps awoke.  The men sprang to their
tasks with alacrity, gave more than an hour's exertion to each of
the twenty-four, took a pride in repulsing the assaults of the
great enemy, whom they personified under the generic "She."  Mike
McGovern raked up a saint somewhere whom he apostrophized in a
personal and familiar manner.

He hit his head against an overhanging branch.

"You're a nice wan, now ain't ye?" he cried angrily at the
unfortunate guardian of his soul.  "Dom if Oi don't quit ye!
Ye see!"

"Be the gate of Hivin!" he shouted, when he opened the door of
mornings and discovered another six inches of snow, "Ye're a
burrd!  If Oi couldn't make out to be more of a saint than that,
Oi'd quit the biznis!  Move yor pull, an' get us some dacint
weather!  Ye awt t' be road monkeyin' on th' golden streets, thot's
what ye awt to be doin'!"

Jackson Hines was righteously indignant, but with the shrewdness of
the old man, put the blame partly where it belonged.

"I ain't sayin'," he observed judicially, "that this weather ain't
hell.  It's hell and repeat.  But a man sort've got to expec' weather.
He looks for it, and he oughta be ready for it.  The trouble is we
got behind Christmas.  It's that Dyer.  He's about as mean as they
make 'em.  The only reason he didn't die long ago is becuz th'
Devil's thought him too mean to pay any 'tention to.  If ever he
should die an' go to Heaven he'd pry up th' golden streets an' use
the infernal pit for a smelter."

With this magnificent bit of invective, Jackson seized a lantern
and stumped out to see that the teamsters fed their horses properly.

"Didn't know you were a miner, Jackson," called Thorpe, laughing.

"Young feller," replied Jackson at the door, "it's a lot easier
to tell what I AIN'T been."

So floundering, battling, making a little progress every day, the
strife continued.

One morning in February, Thorpe was helping load a big butt log.
He was engaged in "sending up"; that is, he was one of the two
men who stand at either side of the skids to help the ascending log
keep straight and true to its bed on the pile.  His assistant's end
caught on a sliver, ground for a second, and slipped back.  Thus the
log ran slanting across the skids instead of perpendicular to them.
To rectify the fault, Thorpe dug his cant-hook into the timber and
threw his weight on the stock.  He hoped in this manner to check
correspondingly the ascent of his end.  In other words, he took the
place, on his side, of the preventing sliver, so equalizing the
pressure and forcing the timber to its proper position.  Instead of
rolling, the log slid.  The stock of the cant-hook was jerked from
his hands.  He fell back, and the cant-hook, after clinging for a
moment to the rough bark, snapped down and hit him a crushing blow
on the top of the head.

Had a less experienced man than Jim Gladys been stationed at the
other end, Thorpe's life would have ended there.  A shout of
surprise or horror would have stopped the horse pulling on the
decking chain; the heavy stick would have slid back on the
prostrate young man, who would have thereupon been ground to atoms
as he lay.  With the utmost coolness Gladys swarmed the slanting
face of the load; interposed the length of his cant-hook stock
between the log and it; held it exactly long enough to straighten
the timber, but not so long as to crush his own head and arm; and
ducked, just as the great piece of wood rumbled over the end of the
skids and dropped with a thud into the place Norton, the "top" man,
had prepared for it.

It was a fine deed, quickly thought, quickly dared.  No one saw it.
Jim Gladys was a hero, but a hero without an audience.

They took Thorpe up and carried him in, just as they had carried
Hank Paul before.  Men who had not spoken a dozen words to him in
as many days gathered his few belongings and stuffed them awkwardly
into his satchel.  Jackson Hines prepared the bed of straw and warm
blankets in the bottom of the sleigh that was to take him out.

"He would have made a good boss," said the old fellow.  "He's a
hard man to nick."

Thorpe was carried in from the front, and the battle went on
without him.



Chapter XII


Thorpe never knew how carefully he was carried to camp, nor how
tenderly the tote teamster drove his hay-couched burden to Beeson
Lake.  He had no consciousness of the jolting train, in the baggage
car of which Jimmy, the little brakeman, and Bud, and the baggage
man spread blankets, and altogether put themselves to a great deal
of trouble.  When finally he came to himself, he was in a long,
bright, clean room, and the sunset was throwing splashes of light
on the ceiling over his head.

He watched them idly for a time; then turned on his pillow.  At once
he perceived a long, double row of clean white-painted iron beds, on
which lay or sat figures of men.  Other figures, of women, glided
here and there noiselessly.  They wore long, spreading dove-gray
clothes, with a starched white kerchief drawn over the shoulders
and across the breast.  Their heads were quaintly white-garbed in
stiff winglike coifs, fitting close about the oval of the face.
Then Thorpe sighed comfortably, and closed his eyes and blessed the
chance that he had bought a hospital ticket of the agent who had
visited camp the month before.  For these were Sisters, and the
young man lay in the Hospital of St. Mary.

Time was when the lumber-jack who had the misfortune to fall sick
or to meet with an accident was in a sorry plight indeed.  If he
possessed a "stake," he would receive some sort of unskilled
attention in one of the numerous and fearful lumberman's boarding-
houses,--just so long as his money lasted, not one  instant more.
Then he was bundled brutally into the street, no matter what his
condition might be.  Penniless, without friends, sick, he drifted
naturally to the county poorhouse.  There he was patched up quickly
and sent out half-cured.  The authorities were not so much to blame.
With the slender appropriations at their disposal, they found
difficulty in taking care of those who came legitimately under their
jurisdiction.  It was hardly to be expected that they would welcome
with open arms a vast army of crippled and diseased men temporarily
from the woods.  The poor lumber-jack was often left broken in mind
and body from causes which a little intelligent care would have
rendered unimportant.

With the establishment of the first St. Mary's hospital, I think at
Bay City, all this was changed.  Now, in it and a half dozen others
conducted on the same principles, the woodsman receives the best of
medicines, nursing, and medical attendance.  From one of the numerous
agents who periodically visit the camps, he purchases for eight
dollars a ticket which admits him at any time during the year to
the hospital, where he is privileged to remain free of further
charge until convalescent.  So valuable are these institutions, and
so excellently are they maintained by the Sisters, that a hospital
agent is always welcome, even in those camps from which ordinary
peddlers and insurance men are rigidly excluded.  Like a great many
other charities built on a common-sense self-supporting rational
basis, the woods hospitals are under the Roman Catholic Church.

In one of these hospitals Thorpe lay for six weeks suffering from
a severe concussion of the brain.  At the end of the fourth, his
fever had broken, but he was pronounced as yet too weak to be moved.

His nurse was a red-cheeked, blue-eyed, homely little Irish girl,
brimming with motherly good-humor.  When Thorpe found strength to
talk, the two became friends.  Through her influence he was moved
to a bed about ten feet from the window.  Thence his privileges were
three roofs and a glimpse of the distant river.

The roofs were covered with snow.  One day Thorpe saw it sink into
itself and gradually run away.  The tinkle tinkle tank tank of drops
sounded from his own eaves.  Down the far-off river, sluggish reaches
of ice drifted.  Then in a night the blue disappeared from the stream.
It became a menacing gray, and even from his distance Thorpe could
catch the swirl of its rising waters.  A day or two later dark masses
drifted or shot across the field of his vision, and twice he thought
he distinguished men standing upright and bold on single logs as they
rushed down the current.

"What is the date?" he asked of the Sister.

"The eleventh of March."

"Isn't it early for the thaw?"

"Listen to 'im!" exclaimed the Sister delightedly.  "Early is it!
Sure th' freshet co't thim all.  Look, darlint, ye kin see th' drive
from here."

"I see," said Thorpe wearily, "when can I get out?"

"Not for wan week," replied the Sister decidedly.

At the end of the week Thorpe said good-by to his attendant, who
appeared as sorry to see him go as though the same partings did not
come to her a dozen times a year; he took two days of tramping the
little town to regain the use of his legs, and boarded the morning
train for Beeson Lake.  He did not pause in the village, but bent
his steps to the river trail.



Chapter XIII


Thorpe found the woods very different from when he had first
traversed them.  They were full of patches of wet earth and of
sunshine; of dark pine, looking suddenly worn, and of fresh green
shoots of needles, looking deliciously springlike.  This was the
contrast everywhere--stern, earnest, purposeful winter, and gay,
laughing, careless spring.  It was impossible not to draw in fresh
spirits with every step.

He followed the trail by the river.  Butterballs and scoters paddled
up at his approach.  Bits of rotten ice occasionally swirled down the
diminishing stream.  The sunshine was clear and bright, but silvery
rather than golden, as though a little of the winter's snow,--a
last ethereal incarnation,--had lingered in its substance.  Around
every bend Thorpe looked for some of Radway's crew "driving" the
logs down the current.  He knew from chance encounters with several
of the men in Bay City that Radway was still in camp; which meant,
of course, that the last of the season's operations were not yet
finished.  Five miles further Thorpe began to wonder whether this
last conclusion might not be erroneous.  The Cass Branch had
shrunken almost to its original limits.  Only here and there a
little bayou or marsh attested recent freshets.  The drive must
have been finished, even this early, for the stream in its present
condition would hardly float saw logs, certainly not in quantity.

Thorpe, puzzled, walked on.  At the banking ground he found empty
skids.  Evidently the drive was over.  And yet even to Thorpe's
ignorance, it seemed  incredible that the remaining million and a
half of logs had been hauled, banked and driven during the short
time he had lain in the Bay City hospital.  More to solve the
problem than in any hope of work, he set out up the logging road.

Another three miles brought him to camp.  It looked strangely wet
and sodden and deserted.  In fact, Thorpe found a bare half dozen
people in it,--Radway, the cook, and four men who were helping to
pack up the movables, and who later would drive out the wagons
containing them.  The jobber showed strong traces of the strain he
had undergone, but greeted Thorpe almost jovially.  He seemed able
to show more of his real nature now that the necessity of authority
had been definitely removed.

"Hullo, young man," he shouted at Thorpe's mud-splashed figure,
"come back to view, the remains?  All well again, heigh?  That's
good!"

He strode down to grip the young fellow heartily by the hand.  It
was impossible not to be charmed by the sincere cordiality of his
manner.

"I didn't know you were through," explained Thorpe, "I came to see
if I could get a job."

"Well now I AM sorry!" cried Radway, "you can turn in and help
though, if you want to."

Thorpe greeted the cook and old Jackson Hines, the only two whom he
knew, and set to work to tie up bundles of blankets, and to collect
axes, peavies, and tools of all descriptions.  This was evidently the
last wagon-trip, for little remained to be done.

"I ought by rights to take the lumber of the roofs and floors,"
observed Radway thoughtfully, "but I guess she don't matter."

Thorpe had never seen him in better spirits.  He ascribed the older
man's hilarity to relief over the completion of a difficult task.
That evening the seven dined together at one end of the long table.
The big room exhaled already the atmosphere of desertion.

"Not much like old times, is she?" laughed Radway.  "Can't you just
shut your eyes and hear Baptiste say, 'Mak' heem de soup one tam
more for me'? She's pretty empty now."

Jackson Hines looked whimsically down the bare board.  "More room
than God made for geese in Ireland," was his comment.

After supper they even sat outside for a little time to smoke their
pipes, chair-tilted against the logs of the cabins, but soon the
chill of melting snow drove them indoors.  The four teamsters played
seven-up in the cook camp by the light of a barn lantern, while
Thorpe and the cook wrote letters.  Thorpe's was to his sister.

"I have been in the hospital for about a month," he wrote.  "Nothing
serious--a crack on the head, which is all right now.  But I cannot
get home this summer, nor, I am afraid, can we arrange about the
school this year.  I am about seventy dollars ahead of where I was
last fall, so you see it is slow business.  This summer I am going
into a mill, but the wages for green labor are not very high there
either," and so on.

When Miss Helen Thorpe, aged seventeen, received this document she
stamped her foot almost angrily.  "You'd think he was a day-laborer!"
she cried.  "Why doesn't he try for a clerkship or something in the
city where he'd have a chance to use his brains!"

The thought of her big, strong, tanned brother chained to a desk
rose to her, and she smiled a little sadly.

"I know," she went on to herself, "he'd rather be a common laborer
in the woods than railroad manager in the office.  He loves his out-
of-doors."

"Helen!" called a voice from below, "if you're through up there, I
wish you'd come down and help me carry this rug out."

The girl's eyes cleared with a snap.

"So do I!" she cried defiantly, "so do I love out-of-doors!  I like
the woods and the fields and the trees just as much as he does, only
differently; but I don't get out!"

And thus she came to feeling rebelliously that her brother had been
a little selfish in his choice of an occupation, that he sacrificed
her inclinations to his own.  She did not guess,--how could she?--
his dreams for her.  She did not see the future through his thoughts,
but through his words.  A negative hopelessness settled down on her,
which soon her strong spirit, worthy counterpart of her brother's,
changed to more positive rebellion.  Thorpe had aroused antagonism
where he craved only love.  The knowledge of that fact would have
surprised and hurt him, for he was entirely without suspicion of
it.  He lived subjectively to so great a degree that his thoughts
and aims took on a certain tangible objectivity,--they became so
real to him that he quite overlooked the necessity of communication
to make them as real to others.  He assumed unquestioningly that
the other must know.  So entirely had he thrown himself into his
ambition of making a suitable position for Helen, so continually
had he dwelt on it in his thoughts, so earnestly had he striven for
it in every step of the great game he was beginning to play, that
it never occurred to him he should also concede a definite outward
manifestation of his feeling in order to assure its acceptance.
Thorpe believed that he had sacrificed every thought and effort to
his sister.  Helen was becoming convinced that he had considered
only himself.

After finishing the letter which gave occasion to this train of
thought, Thorpe lit his pipe and strolled out into the darkness.
Opposite the little office he stopped amazed.

Through the narrow window he could see Radway seated in front of
the stove.  Every attitude of the man denoted the most profound
dejection.  He had sunk down into his chair until he rested on
almost the small of his back, his legs were struck straight out in
front of him, his chin rested on his breast, and his two arms hung
listless at his side, a pipe half falling from the fingers of one
hand.  All the facetious lines had turned to pathos.  In his face
sorrowed the anxious, questing, wistful look of the St. Bernard
that does not understand.

"What's the matter with the boss, anyway?" asked Thorpe in a low
voice of Jackson Hines, when the seven-up game was finished.

"H'aint ye heard?" inquired the old man in surprise.

"Why, no.  What?"

"Busted," said the old man sententiously.

"How?  What do you mean?"

"What I say.  He's busted.  That freshet caught him too quick.  They's
more'n a million and a half logs left in the woods that can't be got
out this year, and as his contract calls for a finished job, he don't
get nothin' for what he's done."

"That's a queer rig," commented Thorpe.  "He's done a lot of valuable
work here,--the timber's cut and skidded, anyway; and he's delivered
a good deal of it to the main drive.  The M. & D. outfit get all the
advantage of that."

"They do, my son.  When old Daly's hand gets near anything, it
cramps.  I don't know how the old man come to make such a contrac',
but he did.  Result is, he's out his expenses and time."

To understand exactly the catastrophe that had occurred, it is
necessary to follow briefly an outline of the process after the
logs have been piled on the banks.  There they remain until the
break-up attendant on spring shall flood the stream to a freshet.
The rollways are then broken, and the saw logs floated down the
river to the mill where they are to be cut into lumber.

If for any reason this transportation by water is delayed until
the flood goes down, the logs are stranded or left in pools.
Consequently every logg