er puts into the two or three weeks of
freshet water a feverish activity which shall carry his product
through before the ebb.

The exceptionally early break-up of this spring, combined with the
fact that, owing to the series of incidents and accidents already
sketched, the actual cutting and skidding had fallen so far behind,
caught Radway unawares.  He saw his rollways breaking out while his
teams were still hauling in the woods.  In order to deliver to the
mouth of the Cass Branch the three million already banked, he was
forced to drop everything else and attend strictly to the drive.
This left still, as has been stated, a million and a half on
skidways, which Radway knew he would be unable to get out that year.

In spite of the jobber's certainty that his claim was thus annulled,
and that he might as well abandon the enterprise entirely for all he
would ever get out of it, he finished the "drive" conscientiously
and saved to the Company the logs already banked.  Then he had
interviewed Daly.  The latter refused to pay him one cent.  Nothing
remained but to break camp and grin as best he might over the loss
of his winter's work and expenses.

The next day Radway and Thorpe walked the ten miles of the river
trail together, while the teamsters and the cook drove down the
five teams.  Under the influence of the solitude and a certain
sympathy which Thorpe manifested, Radway talked--a very little.

"I got behind; that's all there is to it," he said.  "I s'pose I
ought to have driven the men a little; but still, I don't know.  It
gets pretty cold on the plains.  I guess I bit off more than I could
chew."

His eye followed listlessly a frenzied squirrel swinging from the
tops of poplars.

"I wouldn't 'a done it for myself," he went on.  "I don't like the
confounded responsibility.  They's too much worry connected with it
all.  I had a good snug little stake--mighty nigh six thousand.
She's all gone now.  That'd have been enough for me--I ain't a
drinkin' man.  But then there was the woman and the kid.  This ain't
no country for woman-folks, and I wanted t' take little Lida out o'
here.  I had lots of experience in the woods, and I've seen men make
big money time and again, who didn't know as much about it as I do.
But they got there, somehow.  Says I, I'll make a stake this year--
I'd a had twelve thousand in th' bank, if things'd have gone right--
and then we'll jest move down around Detroit an' I'll put Lida in
school."

Thorpe noticed a break in the man's voice, and glancing suddenly
toward him was astounded to catch his eyes brimming with tears.
Radway perceived the surprise.

"You know when I left Christmas?" he asked.

"Yes."

"I was gone two weeks, and them two weeks done me.  We was going
slow enough before, God knows, but even with the rank weather and
all, I think we'd have won out, if we could have held the same gait."

Radway paused.  Thorpe was silent.

"The boys thought it was a mighty poor rig, my leaving that way."

He paused again in evident expectation of a reply.  Again Thorpe was
silent.

"Didn't they?" Radway insisted.

"Yes, they did," answered Thorpe.

The older man sighed.  "I thought so," he went on.  "Well, I didn't
go to spend Christmas.  I went because Jimmy brought me a telegram
that Lida was sick with diphtheria.  I sat up nights with her for
'leven days."

"No bad after-effects, I hope?" inquired Thorpe.

"She died," said Radway simply.

The two men tramped stolidly on.  This was too great an affair for
Thorpe to approach except on the knees of his spirit.  After a long
interval, during which the waters had time to still, the young man
changed the subject.

"Aren't you going to get anything out of M. & D.?" he asked.

"No.  Didn't earn nothing.  I left a lot of their saw logs hung up
in the woods, where they'll deteriorate from rot and worms.  This is
their last season in this district."

"Got anything left?"

"Not a cent."

"What are you going to do?"

"Do!" cried the old woodsman, the fire springing to his eye.  "Do!
I'm going into the woods, by God!  I'm going to work with my hands,
and be happy!  I'm going to do other men's work for them and take
other men's pay.  Let them do the figuring and worrying.  I'll boss
their gangs and make their roads and see to their logging for 'em,
but it's got to be THEIRS.  No! I'm going to be a free man by the G.
jumping Moses!"



Chapter XIV


Thorpe dedicated a musing instant to the incongruity of rejoicing
over a freedom gained by ceasing to be master and becoming servant.

"Radway," said he suddenly, "I need money and I need it bad.  I
think you ought to get something out of this job of the M. & D.--not
much, but something.  Will you give me a share of what I can collect
from them?"

"Sure!" agreed the jobber readily, with a laugh.  "Sure! But you won't
get anything.  I'll give you ten per cent quick."

"Good enough!" cried Thorpe.

"But don't be too sure you'll earn day wages doing it," warned the
other.  "I saw Daly when I was down here last week."

"My time's not valuable," replied Thorpe.  "Now when we get to town
I want your power of attorney and a few figures, after which I will
not bother you again."

The next day the young man called for the second time at the little
red-painted office under the shadow of the mill, and for the second
time stood before the bulky power of the junior member of the firm.

"Well, young man, what can I do for you?" asked the latter.

"I have been informed," said Thorpe without preliminary, "that
you intend to pay John Radway nothing for the work done on the
Cass Branch this winter.  Is that true?"

Daly studied his antagonist meditatively.  "If it is true, what is
it to you?" he asked at length.

"I am acting in Mr. Radway's interest."

"You are one of Radway's men?"

"Yes."

"In what capacity have you been working for him?"

"Cant-hook man," replied Thorpe briefly.

"I see," said Daly slowly.  Then suddenly, with an intensity of
energy that startled Thorpe, he cried: "Now you get out of here!
Right off!  Quick!"

The younger man recognized the compelling and autocratic boss
addressing a member of the crew.

"I shall do nothing of the kind!" he replied with a flash of fire.

The mill-owner leaped to his feet every inch a leader of men.  Thorpe
did not wish to bring about an actual scene of violence.  He had
attained his object, which was to fluster the other out of his
judicial calm.

"I have Radway's power of attorney," he added.

Daly sat down, controlled himself with an effort, and growled out,
"Why didn't you say so?"

"Now I would like to know your position," went on Thorpe.  "I am
not here to make trouble, but as an associate of Mr. Radway, I have
a right to understand the case.  Of course I have his side of the
story," he suggested, as though convinced that a detailing of the
other side might change his views.

Daly considered carefully, fixing his flint-blue eyes unswervingly
on Thorpe's face.  Evidently his scrutiny advised him that the young
man was a force to be reckoned with.

"It's like this," said he abruptly, "we contracted last fall with
this man Radway to put in five million feet of our timber, delivered
to the main drive at the mouth of the Cass Branch.  In this he was
to act independently except as to the matter of provisions.  Those
he drew from our van, and was debited with the amount of the same.
Is that clear?"

"Perfectly," replied Thorpe.

"In return we were to pay him, merchantable scale, four dollars a
thousand.  If, however, he failed to put in the whole job, the
contract was void."

"That's how I understand it," commented Thorpe.  "Well?"

"Well, he didn't get in the five million.  There's a million and a
half hung up in the woods."

"But you have in your hands three million and a half, which under
the present arrangement you get free of any charge whatever."

"And we ought to get it," cried Daly.  "Great guns!  Here we intend
to saw this summer and quit.  We want to get in every stick of
timber we own so as to be able to clear out of here for good and
all at the close of the season; and now this condigned jobber ties
us up for a million and a half."

"It is exceedingly annoying," conceded Thorpe, "and it is a good
deal of Radway's fault, I am willing to admit, but it's your fault
too."

"To be sure," replied Daly with the accent of sarcasm.

"You had no business entering into any such contract.  It gave him
no show."

"I suppose that was mainly his lookout, wasn't it?  And as I already
told you, we had to protect ourselves."

"You should have demanded security for the completion of the work.
Under your present agreement, if Radway got in the timber, you were
to pay him a fair price.  If he didn't, you appropriated everything
he had already done.  In other words, you made him a bet."

"I don't care what you call it," answered Daly, who had recovered
his good-humor in contemplation of the security of his position.
"The fact stands all right."

"It does," replied Thorpe unexpectedly, "and I'm glad of it.  Now
let's examine a few figures.  You owned five million feet of timber,
which at the price of stumpage" (standing trees) "was worth ten
thousand dollars."

"Well."

"You come out at the end of the season with three million and a
half of saw logs, which with the four dollars' worth of logging
added, are worth twenty-one thousand dollars."

"Hold on!" cried Daly, "we paid Radway four dollars; we could have
done it ourselves for less."

"You could not have done it for one cent less than four-twenty in
that country," replied Thorpe, "as any expert will testify."

"Why did we give it to Radway at four, then?"

"You saved the expense of a salaried overseer, and yourselves some
bother," replied Thorpe.  "Radway could do it for less, because, for
some strange reason which you yourself do not understand, a jobber
can always log for less than a company."

"We could have done it for four," insisted Daly stubbornly, "but
get on.  What are you driving at?  My time's valuable."

"Well, put her at four, then," agreed Thorpe.  "That makes your
saw logs worth over twenty thousand dollars.  Of this value Radway
added thirteen thousand.  You have appropriated that much of his
without paying him one cent."

Daly seemed amused.  "How about the million and a half feet of ours
HE appropriated?" he asked quietly.

"I'm coming to that.  Now for your losses.  At the stumpage rate
your million and a half which Radway 'appropriated' would be only
three thousand.  But for the sake of argument, we'll take the actual
sum you'd have received for saw logs.  Even then the million and a
half would only have been worth between eight and nine thousand.
Deducting this purely theoretical loss Radway has occasioned you,
from the amount he has gained for you, you are still some four or
five thousand ahead of the game.  For that you paid him nothing."

"That's Radway's lookout."

"In justice you should pay him that amount.  He is a poor man.  He
has sunk all he owned in this venture, some twelve thousand dollars,
and he has nothing to live on.  Even if you pay him five thousand,
he has lost considerable, while you have gained."

"How have we gained by this bit of philanthropy?"

"Because you originally paid in cash for all that timber on the
stump just ten thousand dollars and you get from Radway saw logs to
the value of twenty," replied Thorpe sharply.  "Besides you still
own the million and a half which, if you do not care to put them in
yourself, you can sell for something on the skids."

"Don't you know, young man, that white pine logs on skids will spoil
utterly in a summer?  Worms get into em."

"I do," replied Thorpe, "unless you bark them; which process will
cost you about one dollar a thousand.  You can find any amount of
small purchasers at reduced price.  You can sell them easily at
three dollars.  That nets you for your million and a half a little
over four thousand dollars more.  Under the circumstances, I do not
think that my request for five thousand is at all exorbitant."

Daly laughed.  "You are a shrewd figurer, and your remarks are
interesting," said he.

"Will you give five thousand dollars?" asked Thorpe.

"I will not," replied Daly, then with a sudden change of humor, "and
now I'll do a little talking.  I've listened to you just as long as
I'm going to.  I have Radway's contract in that safe and I live up
to it.  I'll thank you to go plumb to hell!"

"That's your last word, is it?" asked Thorpe, rising.

"It is."

"Then," said he slowly and distinctly, "I'll tell you what I'll
do.  I intend to collect in full the four dollars a thousand for the
three million and a half Mr. Radway has delivered to you.  In return
Mr. Radway will purchase of you at the stumpage rates of two dollars
a thousand the million and a half he failed to put in.  That makes
a bill against you, if my figuring is correct, of just eleven thousand
dollars.  You will pay that bill, and I will tell you why: your
contract will be classed in any court as a gambling contract for lack
of consideration.  You have no legal standing in the world.  I call
your bluff, Mr. Daly, and I'll fight you from the drop of the hat
through every court in Christendom."

"Fight ahead," advised Daly sweetly, who knew perfectly well that
Thorpe's law was faulty.  As a matter of fact the young man could
have collected on other grounds, but neither was aware of that.

"Furthermore," pursued Thorpe in addition, "I'll repeat my offer
before witnesses; and if I win the first suit, I'll sue you for the
money we could have made by purchasing the extra million and a half
before it had a chance to spoil."

This statement had its effect, for it forced an immediate settlement
before the pine on the skids should deteriorate.  Daly lounged back
with a little more deadly carelessness.

"And, lastly," concluded Thorpe, playing his trump card, "the suit
from start to finish will be published in every important paper in
this country.  If you do not believe I have the influence to do this,
you are at liberty to doubt the fact."

Daly was cogitating many things.  He knew that publicity was the
last thing to be desired.  Thorpe's statement had been made in
view of the fact that much of the business of a lumber firm is done
on credit.  He thought that perhaps a rumor of a big suit going
against the firm might weaken confidence.  As a matter of fact,
this consideration had no weight whatever with the older man,
although the threat of publicity actually gained for Thorpe what he
demanded.  The lumberman feared the noise of an investigation solely
and simply because his firm, like so many others, was engaged at the
time in stealing government timber in the upper peninsula.  He did
not call it stealing; but that was what it amounted to.  Thorpe's
shot in the air hit full.

"I think we can arrange a basis of settlement," he said finally.
"Be here to-morrow morning at ten with Radway."

"Very well," said Thorpe.

"By the way," remarked Daly, "I don't believe I know your name?"

"Thorpe," was the reply.

"Well, Mr. Thorpe," said the lumberman with cold anger, "if at
any time there is anything within my power or influence that you
want--I'll see that you don't get it."



Chapter XV


The whole affair was finally compromised for nine thousand dollars.
Radway, grateful beyond expression, insisted on Thorpe's acceptance
of an even thousand of it.  With this money in hand, the latter felt
justified in taking a vacation for the purpose of visiting his
sister, so in two days after the signing of the check he walked
up the straight garden path that led to Renwick's home.

It was a little painted frame house, back from the street, fronted
by a precise bit of lawn, with a willow bush at one corner.  A white
picket fence effectually separated it from a broad, shaded, not
unpleasing street.  An osage hedge and a board fence respectively
bounded the side and back.

Under the low porch Thorpe rang the bell at a door flanked by two
long, narrow strips of imitation stained glass.  He entered then a
little dark hall from which the stairs rose almost directly at the
door, containing with difficulty a hat-rack and a table on which
rested a card tray with cards.  In the course of greeting an elderly
woman, he stepped into the parlor.  This was a small square apartment
carpeted in dark Brussels, and stuffily glorified in the bourgeois
manner by a white marble mantel-piece, several pieces of mahogany
furniture upholstered in haircloth, a table on which reposed a
number of gift books in celluloid and other fancy bindings, an
old-fashioned piano with a doily and a bit of china statuary, a
cabinet or so containing such things as ore specimens, dried
seaweed and coins, and a spindle-legged table or two upholding
glass cases garnished with stuffed birds and wax flowers.  The
ceiling was so low that the heavy window hangings depended almost
from the angle of it and the walls.

Thorpe, by some strange freak of psychology, suddenly recalled a
wild, windy day in the forest.  He had stood on the top of a height.
He saw again the sharp puffs of snow, exactly like the smoke from
bursting shells, where a fierce swoop of the storm struck the laden
tops of pines; the dense swirl, again exactly like smoke but now of
a great fire, that marked the lakes.  The picture super-imposed
itself silently over this stuffy bourgeois respectability, like the
shadow of a dream.  He heard plainly enough the commonplace drawl
of the woman before him offering him the platitudes of her kind.

"You are lookin' real well, Mr. Thorpe," she was saying, "an' I
just know Helen will be glad to see you.  She had a hull afternoon
out to-day and won't be back to tea.  Dew set and tell me about what
you've been a-doin' and how you're a-gettin' along."

"No, thank you, Mrs. Renwick," he replied, "I'll come back later.
How is Helen?"

"She's purty well; and sech a nice girL I think she's getting right
handsome."

"Can you tell me where she went?"

But Mrs. Renwick did not know.  So Thorpe wandered about the maple-
shaded streets of the little town.

For the purposes he had in view five hundred dollars would be none
too much.  The remaining five hundred he had resolved to invest in
his sister's comfort and happiness.  He had thought the matter over
and come to his decision in that secretive, careful fashion so
typical of him, working over every logical step of his induction so
thoroughly that it ended by becoming part of his mental fiber.  So
when he reached the conclusion it had already become to him an axiom.
In presenting it as such to his sister, he never realized that she
had not followed with him the logical steps, and so could hardly be
expected to accept the conclusion out-of-hand.

Thorpe wished to give his sister the best education possible in
the circumstances.  She was now nearly eighteen years old.  He
knew likewise that he would probably experience a great deal of
difficulty in finding another family which would afford the young
girl quite the same equality coupled with so few disadvantages.
Admitted that its level of intellect and taste was not high, Mrs.
Renwick was on the whole a good influence.  Helen had not in the
least the position of servant, but of a daughter.  She helped around
the house; and in return she was fed, lodged and clothed for nothing.

So though the money might have enabled Helen to live independently
in a modest way for a year or so, Thorpe preferred that she remain
where she was.  His game was too much a game of chance.  He might
find himself at the end of the year without further means.  Above all
things he wished to assure Helen's material safety until such time
as he should be quite certain of himself.

In pursuance of this idea he had gradually evolved what seemed to him
an excellent plan.  He had already perfected it by correspondence
with Mrs. Renwick.  It was, briefly, this: he, Thorpe, would at
once hire a servant girl, who would make anything but supervision
unnecessary in so small a household.  The remainder of the money he
had already paid for a year's tuition in the Seminary of the town.
Thus Helen gained her leisure and an opportunity for study; and
still retained her home in case of reverse.

Thorpe found his sister already a young lady.  After the first
delight of meeting had passed, they sat side by side on the
haircloth sofa and took stock of each other.

Helen had developed from the school child to the woman.  She was
a handsome girl, possessed of a slender, well-rounded form, deep
hazel eyes with the level gaze of her brother, a clean-cut patrician
face, and a thorough-bred neatness of carriage that advertised her
good blood.  Altogether a figure rather aloof, a face rather
impassive; but with the possibility of passion and emotion, and
a will to back them.

"Oh, but you're tanned and--and BIG!" she cried, kissing her brother.
"You've had such a strange winter, haven't you?"

"Yes," he replied absently.

Another man would have struck her young imagination with the wild,
free thrill of the wilderness.  Thus he would have gained her
sympathy and understanding.  Thorpe was too much in earnest.

"Things came a little better than I thought they were going to,
toward the last," said he, "and I made a little money."

"Oh, I'm so glad!" she cried.  "Was it much?"

"No, not much," he answered.  The actual figures would have been so
much better!  "I've made arrangements with Mrs. Renwick to hire a
servant girl, so you will have all your time free; and I have paid
a year's tuition for you in the Seminary."

"Oh!" said the girl, and fell silent.

After a time, "Thank you very much, Harry dear."  Then after another
interval, "I think I'll go get ready for supper."

Instead of getting ready for supper, she paced excitedly up and down
her room.

"Oh, why DIDN'T he say what he was about?" she cried to herself.
"Why didn't he!  Why didn't he!"


Next morning she opened the subject again.

"Harry, dear," said she, "I have a little scheme, and I want to see
if it is not feasible.  How much will the girl and the Seminary cost?"

"About four hundred dollars."

"Well now, see, dear.  With four hundred dollars I can live for a
year very nicely by boarding with some girls I know who live in a
sort of a club; and I could learn much more by going to the High
School and continuing with some other classes I am interested in
now.  Why see, Harry!" she cried, all interest.  "We have Professor
Carghill come twice a week to teach us English, and Professor
Johns, who teaches us history, and we hope to get one or two more
this winter.  If I go to the Seminary, I'll have to miss all that.
And Harry, really I don't want to go to the Seminary.  I don't think
I should like it.  I KNOW I shouldn't."

"But why not live here, Helen?" he asked.

"Because I'm TIRED of it!" she cried; "sick to the soul of the
stuffiness, and the glass cases, and the--the GOODNESS of it!"

Thorpe remembered his vision of the wild, wind-tossed pines, and
sighed.  He wanted very, very much to act in accordance with his
sister's desires, although he winced under the sharp hurt pang of
the sensitive man whose intended kindness is not appreciated.  The
impossibility of complying, however, reacted to shut his real ideas
and emotions the more inscrutably within him.

"I'm afraid you would not find the girls' boarding-club scheme a
good one, Helen," said he.  "You'd find it would work better in
theory than in practice."

"But it has worked with the other girls!" she cried.

"I think you would be better off here."

Helen bravely choked back her disappointment.

"I might live here, but let the Seminary drop, anyway.  That would
save a good deal," she begged.  "I'd get quite as much good out of
my work outside, and then we'd have all that money besides."

"I don't know; I'll see," replied Thorpe.  "The mental discipline
of class-room work might be a good thing."

He had already thought of this modification himself, but with his
characteristic caution, threw cold water on the scheme until he
could ascertain definitely whether or not it was practicable.  He
had already paid the tuition for the year, and was in doubt as to
its repayment.  As a matter of fact, the negotiation took about two
weeks.

During that time Helen Thorpe went through her disappointment and
emerged on the other side.  Her nature was at once strong and
adaptable.  One by one she grappled with the different aspects of
the case, and turned them the other way.  By a tour de force she
actually persuaded herself that her own plan was not really
attractive to her.  But what heart-breaks and tears this cost her,
only those who in their youth have encountered such absolute
negations of cherished ideas can guess.

Then Thorpe told her.

"I've fixed it, Helen," said he.  "You can attend the High School
and the classes, if you please.  I have put the two hundred and
fifty dollars out at interest for you."

"Oh, Harry!" she cried reproachfully.  "Why didn't you tell me
before!"

He did not understand; but the pleasure of it had all faded.  She no
longer felt enthusiasm, nor gratitude, nor anything except a dull
feeling that she had been unnecessarily discouraged.  And on his
side, Thorpe was vaguely wounded.

The days, however, passed in the main pleasurably for them both.
They were fond of one another.  The barrier slowly rising between
them was not yet cemented by lack of affection on either side, but
rather by lack of belief in the other's affection.  Helen imagined
Thorpe's interest in her becoming daily more perfunctory.  Thorpe
fancied his sister cold, unreasoning, and ungrateful.  As yet this
was but the vague dust of a cloud.  They could not forget that, but
for each other, they were alone in the world.  Thorpe delayed his
departure from day to day, making all the preparations he possibly
could at home.

Finally Helen came on him busily unpacking a box which a dray had
left at the door.  He unwound and laid one side a Winchester rifle,
a variety of fishing tackle, and some other miscellanies of the
woodsman.  Helen was struck by the beauty of the sporting implements.

"Oh, Harry!" she cried, "aren't they fine!  What are you going to
do with them?"

"Going camping," replied Thorpe, his head in the excelsior.

"When?"

"This summer."

Helen's eyes lit up with a fire of delight.  "How nice!  May I go
with you?" she cried.

Thorpe shook his head.

"I'm afraid not, little girl.  It's going to be a hard trip a long
ways from anywhere.  You couldn't stand it."

"I'm sure I could.  Try me."

"No," replied Thorpe.  "I know you couldn't.  We'll be sleeping
on the ground and going on foot through much extremely difficult
country."

"I wish you'd take me somewhere," pursued Helen.  "I can't get
away this summer unless you do.  Why don't you camp somewhere nearer
home, so I can go?"

Thorpe arose and kissed her tenderly.  He was extremely sorry that
he could not spend the summer with his sister, but he believed
likewise that their future depended to a great extent on this very
trip.  But he did not say so.

"I can't, little girl; that's all.  We've got our way to make."

She understood that he considered the trip too expensive for them
both.  At this moment a paper fluttered from the excelsior.  She
picked it up.  A glance showed her a total of figures that made her
gasp.

"Here is your bill," she said with a strange choke in her voice,
and left the room.

"He can spend sixty dollars on his old guns; but he can't afford
to let me leave this hateful house," she complained to the apple
tree.  "He can go 'way off camping somewhere to have a good time,
but he leaves me sweltering in this miserable little town all
summer.  I don't care if he IS supporting me.  He ought to.  He's
my brother.  Oh, I wish I were a man; I wish I were dead!"

Three days later Thorpe left for the north.  He was reluctant to go.
When the time came, he attempted to kiss Helen good-by.  She caught
sight of the rifle in its new leather and canvas case, and on a
sudden impulse which she could not explain to herself, she turned
away her face and ran into the house.  Thorpe, vaguely hurt, a
little resentful, as the genuinely misunderstood are apt to be,
hesitated a moment, then trudged down the street.  Helen too paused
at the door, choking back her grief.

"Harry! Harry!" she cried wildly; but it was too late.

Both felt themselves to be in the right.  Each realized this fact
in the other.  Each recognized the impossibility of imposing his
own point of view over the other's.






PART II


THE LANDLOOKER



Chapter XVI


In every direction the woods.  Not an opening of any kind offered
the mind a breathing place under the free sky.  Sometimes the pine
groves,--vast, solemn, grand, with the patrician aloofness of the
truly great; sometimes the hardwood,--bright, mysterious, full of
life; sometimes the swamps,--dark, dank, speaking with the voices
of the shyer creatures; sometimes the spruce and balsam thickets,--
aromatic, enticing.  But never the clear, open sky.

And always the woods creatures, in startling abundance and tameness.
The solitary man with the packstraps across his forehead and
shoulders had never seen so many of them.  They withdrew silently
before him as he advanced.  They accompanied him on either side,
watching him with intelligent, bright eyes.  They followed him
stealthily for a little distance, as though escorting him out of
their own particular territory.  Dozens of times a day the traveller
glimpsed the flaunting white flags of deer.  Often the creatures
would take but a few hasty jumps, and then would wheel, the
beautiful embodiments of the picture deer, to snort and paw the
leaves.  Hundreds of birds, of which he did not know the name,
stooped to his inspection, whirred away at his approach, or went
about their business with hardy indifference under his very eyes.
Blase porcupines trundled superbly from his path.  Once a mother-
partridge simulated a broken wing, fluttering painfully.  Early one
morning the traveller ran plump on a fat lolling bear, taking his
ease from the new sun, and his meal from a panic stricken army of
ants.  As beseemed two innocent wayfarers they honored each other
with a salute of surprise, and went their way.  And all about and
through, weaving, watching, moving like spirits, were the forest
multitudes which the young man never saw, but which he divined, and
of whose movements he sometimes caught for a single instant the
faintest patter or rustle.  It constituted the mystery of the forest,
that great fascinating, lovable mystery which, once it steals into
the heart of a man, has always a hearing and a longing when it makes
its voice heard.

The young man's equipment was simple in the extreme.  Attached to a
heavy leather belt of cartridges hung a two-pound ax and a sheath
knife.  In his pocket reposed a compass, an air-tight tin of
matches, and a map drawn on oiled paper of a district divided into
sections.  Some few of the sections were colored, which indicated
that they belonged to private parties.  All the rest was State or
Government land.  He carried in his hand a repeating rifle.  The
pack, if opened, would have been found to contain a woolen and a
rubber blanket, fishing tackle, twenty pounds or so of flour, a
package of tea, sugar, a slab of bacon carefully wrapped in oiled
cloth, salt, a suit of underwear, and several extra pairs of thick
stockings.  To the outside of the pack had been strapped a frying
pan, a tin pail, and a cup.

For more than a week Thorpe had journeyed through the forest without
meeting a human being, or seeing any indications of man, excepting
always the old blaze of the government survey.  Many years before,
officials had run careless lines through the country along the
section-boundaries.  At this time the blazes were so weather-beaten
that Thorpe often found difficulty in deciphering the indications
marked on them.  These latter stated always the section, the township,
and the range east or west by number.  All Thorpe had to do was to
find the same figures on his map.  He knew just where he was.  By
means of his compass he could lay his course to any point that suited
his convenience.

The map he had procured at the United States Land Office in Detroit.
He had set out with the scanty equipment just described for the
purpose of "looking" a suitable bunch of pine in the northern
peninsula, which, at that time, was practically untouched.  Access
to its interior could be obtained only on foot or by river.  The
South Shore Railroad was already engaged in pushing a way through
the virgin forest, but it had as yet penetrated only as far as Seney;
and after all, had been projected more with the idea of establishing
a direct route to Duluth and the copper districts than to aid the
lumber industry.  Marquette, Menominee, and a few smaller places
along the coast were lumbering near at home; but they shipped entirely
by water.  Although the rest of the peninsula also was finely wooded,
a general impression obtained among the craft that it would prove
too inaccessible for successful operation.

Furthermore, at that period, a great deal of talk was believed as
to the inexhaustibility of Michigan pine.  Men in a position to know
what they were talking about stated dogmatically that the forests of
the southern peninsula would be adequate for a great many years to
come.  Furthermore, the magnificent timber of the Saginaw, Muskegon,
and Grand River valleys in the southern peninsula occupied entire
attention.  No one cared to bother about property at so great a
distance from home.  As a consequence, few as yet knew even the
extent of the resources so far north.

Thorpe, however, with the far-sightedness of the born pioneer, had
perceived that the exploitation of the upper country was an affair
of a few years only.

The forests of southern Michigan were vast, but not limitless, and
they had all passed into private ownership.  The north, on the other
hand, would not prove as inaccessible as it now seemed, for the
carrying trade would some day realize that the entire waterway of
the Great Lakes offered an unrivalled outlet.  With that elementary
discovery would begin a rush to the new country.  Tiring of a
profitless employment further south he resolved to anticipate it,
and by acquiring his holdings before general attention should be
turned that way, to obtain of the best.

He was without money, and practically without friends; while
Government and State lands cost respectively two dollars and a half
and a dollar and a quarter an acre, cash down.  But he relied on the
good sense of capitalists to perceive, from the statistics which
his explorations would furnish, the wonderful advantage of logging
a new country with the chain of Great Lakes as shipping outlet at
its very door.  In return for his information, he would expect a
half interest in the enterprise.  This is the usual method of
procedure adopted by landlookers everywhere.

We have said that the country was quite new to logging, but the
statement is not strictly accurate.  Thorpe was by no means the
first to see the money in northern pine.  Outside the big mill
districts already named, cuttings of considerable size were already
under way, the logs from which were usually sold to the mills of
Marquette or Menominee.  Here and there along the best streams,
men had already begun operations.

But they worked on a small scale and with an eye to the immediate
present only; bending their efforts to as large a cut as possible
each season rather than to the acquisition of holdings for future
operations.  This they accomplished naively by purchasing one forty
and cutting a dozen.  Thorpe's map showed often near the forks of
an important stream a section whose coloring indicated private
possession.  Legally the owners had the right only to the pine
included in the marked sections; but if anyone had taken the trouble
to visit the district, he would have found operations going on for
miles up and down stream.  The colored squares would prove to be
nothing but so many excuses for being on the ground.  The bulk of
the pine of any season's cut he would discover had been stolen from
unbought State or Government land.

This in the old days was a common enough trick.  One man, at present
a wealthy and respected citizen, cut for six years, and owned just
one forty-acres!  Another logged nearly fifty million feet from an
eighty!  In the State to-day live prominent business men, looked
upon as models in every way, good fellows, good citizens, with sons
and daughters proud of their social position, who, nevertheless,
made the bulk of their fortunes by stealing Government pine.

"What you want to-day, old man?" inquired a wholesale lumber dealer
of an individual whose name now stands for domestic and civic virtue.

"I'll have five or six million saw logs to sell you in the spring,
and I want to know what you'll give for them."

"Go on!" expostulated the dealer with a laugh, "ain't you got that
forty all cut yet?"

"She holds out pretty well," replied the other with a grin.

An official, called the Inspector, is supposed to report such
stealings, after which another official is to prosecute.  Aside
from the fact that the danger of discovery is practically zero in
so wild and distant a country, it is fairly well established that
the old-time logger found these two individuals susceptible to the
gentle art of "sugaring."  The officials, as well as the lumberman,
became rich.  If worst came to worst, and investigation seemed
imminent, the operator could still purchase the land at legal rates,
and so escape trouble.  But the intention to appropriate was there,
and, to confess the truth, the whitewashing by purchase needed but
rarely to be employed.  I have time and again heard landlookers
assert that the old Land Offices were rarely "on the square," but
as to that I cannot, of course, venture an opinion.

Thorpe was perfectly conversant with this state of affairs.  He
knew, also, that in all probability many of the colored districts
on his map represented firms engaged in steals of greater or less
magnitude.  He was further aware that most of the concerns stole
the timber because it was cheaper to steal than to buy; but that
they would buy readily enough if forced to do so in order to
prevent its acquisition by another.  This other might be himself.
In his exploration, therefore, he decided to employ the utmost
circumspection.  As much as possible he purposed to avoid other
men; but if meetings became inevitable, he hoped to mask his real
intentions.  He would pose as a hunter and fisherman.

During the course of his week in the woods, he discovered that
he would be forced eventually to resort to this expedient.  He
encountered quantities of fine timber in the country through which
he travelled, and some day it would be logged, but at present the
difficulties were too great.  The streams were shallow, or they did
not empty into a good shipping port.  Investors would naturally
look first for holdings along the more practicable routes.

A cursory glance sufficed to show that on such waters the little red
squares had already blocked a foothold for other owners.  Thorpe
surmised that he would undoubtedly discover fine unbought timber
along their banks, but that the men already engaged in stealing it
would hardly be likely to allow him peaceful acquisition.

For a week, then, he journeyed through magnificent timber without
finding what he sought, working always more and more to the north,
until finally he stood on the shores of Superior.  Up to now the
streams had not suited him.  He resolved to follow the shore west
to the mouth of a fairly large river called the Ossawinamakee.*
It showed, in common with most streams of its size, land already
taken, but Thorpe hoped to find good timber nearer the mouth.  After
several days' hard walking with this object in view, he found himself
directly north of a bend in the river; so, without troubling to hunt
for its outlet into Superior, he turned through the woods due south,
with the intention of striking in on the stream.  This he succeeded
in accomplishing some twenty miles inland, where also he discovered
a well-defined and recently used trail leading up the river.  Thorpe
camped one night at the bend, and then set out to follow the trail.

*Accent the last syllable.


It led him for upwards of ten miles nearly due south, sometimes
approaching, sometimes leaving the river, but keeping always in its
direction.  The country in general was rolling.  Low parallel ridges
of gentle declivity glided constantly across his way, their valleys
sloping to the river.  Thorpe had never seen a grander forest of
pine than that which clothed them.

For almost three miles, after the young man had passed through a
preliminary jungle of birch, cedar, spruce, and hemlock, it ran
without a break, clear, clean, of cloud-sweeping altitude, without
underbrush.  Most of it was good bull-sap, which is known by the
fineness of the bark, though often in the hollows it shaded gradually
into the rough-skinned cork pine.  In those days few people paid
any attention to the Norway, and hemlock was not even thought of.
With every foot of the way Thorpe became more and more impressed.

At first the grandeur, the remoteness, the solemnity of the virgin
forest fell on his spirit with a kind of awe.  The tall, straight
trunks lifted directly upwards to the vaulted screen through which
the sky seemed as remote as the ceiling of a Roman church.  Ravens
wheeled and croaked in the blue, but infinitely far away.  Some
lesser noises wove into the stillness without breaking the web of
its splendor, for the pine silence laid soft, hushing fingers on
the lips of those who might waken the sleeping sunlight.

Then the spirit of the pioneer stirred within his soul.  The
wilderness sent forth its old-time challenge to the hardy.  In
him awoke that instinct which, without itself perceiving the end on
which it is bent, clears the way for the civilization that has been
ripening in old-world hot-houses during a thousand years.  Men must
eat; and so the soil must be made productive.  We regret, each after
his manner, the passing of the Indian, the buffalo, the great pine
forests, for they are of the picturesque; but we live gladly on the
product of the farms that have taken their places.  Southern Michigan
was once a pine forest: now the twisted stump-fences about the most
fertile farms of the north alone break the expanse of prairie and
of trim "wood-lots."

Thorpe knew little of this, and cared less.  These feathered trees,
standing close-ranked and yet each isolate in the dignity and
gravity of a sphinx of stone set to dancing his blood of the
frontiersman.  He spread out his map to make sure that so valuable
a clump of timber remained still unclaimed.  A few sections lying
near the headwaters were all he found marked as sold.  He resumed
his tramp light-heartedly.

At the ten-mile point he came upon a dam.  It was a crude dam,--built
of logs,--whose face consisted of strong buttresses slanted up-
stream, and whose sheer was made of unbarked timbers laid smoothly
side by side at the required angle.  At present its gate was open.
Thorpe could see that it was an unusually large gate, with a powerful
apparatus for the raising and the lowering of it.

The purpose of the dam in this new country did not puzzle him in
the least, but its presence bewildered him.  Such constructions are
often thrown across logging streams at proper intervals in order
that the operator may be independent of the spring freshets.  When
he wishes to "drive" his logs to the mouth of the stream, he
first accumulates a head of water behind his dams, and then, by
lifting the gates, creates an artificial freshet sufficient to
float his timber to the pool formed by the next dam below.  The
device is common enough; but it is expensive.  People do not build
dams except in the certainty of some years of logging, and quite
extensive logging at that.  If the stream happens to be navigable,
the promoter must first get an Improvement Charter from a board of
control appointed by the State.  So Thorpe knew that he had to deal,
not with a hand-to-mouth-timber-thief, but with a great company
preparing to log the country on a big scale.

He continued his journey.  At noon he came to another and similar
structure.  The pine forest had yielded to knolls of hardwood
separated by swamp-holes of blackthorn.  Here he left his pack and
pushed ahead in light marching order.  About eight miles above the
first dam, and eighteen from the bend of the river, he ran into a
"slashing" of the year before.  The decapitated stumps were already
beginning to turn brown with weather, the tangle of tops and limbs
was partially concealed by poplar growths and wild raspberry vines.
Parenthetically, it may be remarked that the promptitude with which
these growths succeed the cutting of the pine is an inexplicable
marvel.  Clear forty acres at random in the very center of a pine
forest, without a tract of poplar within an hundred miles; the next
season will bring up the fresh shoots.  Some claim that blue jays
bring the seeds in their crops.  Others incline to the theory that
the creative elements lie dormant in the soil, needing only the sun
to start them to life.  Final speculation is impossible, but the
fact stands.

To Thorpe this particular clearing became at once of the greatest
interest.  He scrambled over and through the ugly debris which for a
year or two after logging operations cumbers the ground.  By a rather
prolonged search he found what he sought,--the "section corners" of
the tract, on which the government surveyor had long ago marked the
"descriptions."  A glance at the map confirmed his suspicions.  The
slashing lay some two miles north of the sections designated as
belonging to private parties.  It was Government land.

Thorpe sat down, lit a pipe, and did a little thinking.

As an axiom it may be premised that the shorter the distance logs
have to be transported, the less it costs to get them in.  Now
Thorpe had that very morning passed through beautiful timber lying
much nearer the mouth of the river than either this, or the sections
further south.  Why had these men deliberately ascended the stream?
Why had they stolen timber eighteen miles from the bend, when they
could equally well have stolen just as good fourteen miles nearer
the terminus of their drive?

Thorpe ruminated for some time without hitting upon a solution.
Then suddenly he remembered the two dams, and his idea that the men
in charge of the river must be wealthy and must intend operating on
a large scale.  He thought he glimpsed it.  After another pipe, he
felt sure.

The Unknowns were indeed going in on a large scale.  They intended
eventually to log the whole of the Ossawinamakee basin.  For this
reason they had made their first purchase, planted their first
foot-hold, near the headwaters.  Furthermore, located as they were
far from a present or an immediately future civilization, they had
felt safe in leaving for the moment their holdings represented by
the three sections already described.  Some day they would buy all
the standing Government pine in the basin; but in the meantime they
would steal all they could at a sufficient distance from the lake to
minimize the danger of discovery.  They had not dared to appropriate
the three mile tract Thorpe had passed through, because in that
locality the theft would probably be remarked, so they intended
eventually to buy it.  Until that should become necessary, however,
every stick cut meant so much less to purchase.

"They're going to cut, and keep on cutting, working down river as
fast as they can," argued Thorpe.  "If anything happens so they
have to, they'll buy in the pine that is left; but if things go
well with them, they'll take what they can for nothing.  They're
getting this stuff out up-river first, because they can steal safer
while the country is still unsettled; and even when it does fill up,
there will not be much likelihood of an investigation so far in-
country,--at least until after they have folded their tents."

It seems to us who are accustomed to the accurate policing of our
twentieth century, almost incredible that such wholesale robberies
should have gone on with so little danger of detection.  Certainly
detection was a matter of sufficient simplicity.  Someone happens
along, like Thorpe, carrying a Government map in his pocket.  He
runs across a parcel of unclaimed land already cut over.  It would
seem easy to lodge a complaint, institute a prosecution against the
men known to have put in the timber.  BUT IT IS ALMOST NEVER DONE.

Thorpe knew that men occupied in so precarious a business would be
keenly on the watch.  At the first hint of rivalry, they would buy
in the timber they had selected.  But the situation had set his
fighting blood to racing.  The very fact that these men were thieves
on so big a scale made him the more obstinately determined to thwart
them.  They undoubtedly wanted the tract down river.  Well, so did he!

He purposed to look it over carefully, to ascertain its exact
boundaries and what sections it would be necessary to buy in order
to include it, and perhaps even to estimate it in a rough way.  In
the accomplishment of this he would have to spend the summer, and
perhaps part of the fall, in that district.  He could hardly expect
to escape notice.  By the indications on the river, he judged that a
crew of men had shortly before taken out a drive of logs.  After the
timber had been rafted and towed to Marquette, they would return.
He might be able to hide in the forest, but sooner or later, he was
sure, one of the company's landlookers or hunters would stumble on
his camp.  Then his very concealment would tell them what he was
after.  The risk was too great.  For above all things Thorpe needed
time.  He had, as has been said, to ascertain what he could offer.
Then he had to offer it.  He would be forced to interest capital,
and that is a matter of persuasion and leisure.

Finally his shrewd, intuitive good-sense flashed the solution on him.
He returned rapidly to his pack, assumed the straps, and arrived at
the first dam about dark of the long summer day.

There he looked carefully about him.  Some fifty feet from the
water's edge a birch knoll supported, besides the birches, a single
big hemlock.  With his belt ax, Thorpe cleared away the little white
trees.  He stuck the sharpened end of one of them in the bark of the
shaggy hemlock, fastened the other end in a crotch eight or ten feet
distant, slanted the rest of the saplings along one side of this
ridge pole, and turned in, after a hasty supper, leaving the
completion of his permanent camp to the morrow.



Chapter XVII


In the morning he thatched smooth the roof of the shelter, using
for the purpose the thick branches of hemlocks; placed two green
spruce logs side by side as cooking range; slung his pot on a rod
across two forked sticks; cut and split a quantity of wood; spread
his blankets; and called himself established.  His beard was already
well grown, and his clothes had become worn by the brush and faded
by the sun and rain.  In the course of the morning he lay in wait
very patiently near a spot overflowed by the river, where, the day
before, he had noticed lily-pads growing.  After a time a doe and a
spotted fawn came and stood ankle-deep in the water, and ate of the
lily-pads.  Thorpe lurked motionless behind his screen of leaves;
and as he had taken the precaution so to station himself that his
hiding-place lay downwind, the beautiful animals were unaware of
his presence.

By and by a prong-buck joined them.  He was a two-year-old, young,
tender, with the velvet just off his antlers.  Thorpe aimed at his
shoulder, six inches above the belly-line, and pressed the trigger.
As though by enchantment the three woods creatures disappeared.  But
the hunter had noticed that, whereas the doe and fawn flourished
bravely the broad white flags of their tails, the buck had seemed
but a streak of brown.  By this he knew he had hit.

Sure enough, after two hundred yards of following the prints of
sharp hoofs and occasional gobbets of blood on the leaves, he came
upon his prey dead.  It became necessary to transport the animal to
camp.  Thorpe stuck his hunting knife deep into the front of the
deer's ches