 could look over the passengers without being
seen.  They filed past.  Two only he could accord the role of master
lumbermen--the rest were plainly drummers or hayseeds.  And in
these two Thorpe recognized Daly and Morrison themselves.  They
passed within ten feet of him, talking earnestly together.  At the
curb they hailed a cab and drove away.  Thorpe with satisfaction
heard them call the name of a hotel.

It was still two hours before the Land Office would be open.  Thorpe
ate breakfast at the depot and wandered slowly up Jefferson Avenue
to Woodward, a strange piece of our country's medievalism in modern
surroundings.  He was so occupied with his own thoughts that for some
time he remained unconscious of the attention he was attracting.
Then, with a start, he felt that everyone was staring at him.  The
hour was early, so that few besides the working classes were abroad,
but he passed one lady driving leisurely to an early train whose
frank scrutiny brought him to himself.  He became conscious that his
broad hat was weather-soiled and limp, that his flannel shirt was
faded, that his "pepper and salt" trousers were patched, that
moccasins must seem as anachronistic as chain mail.  It abashed him.
He could not know that it was all wild and picturesque, that his
straight and muscular figure moved with a grace quite its own and
the woods', that the bronze of his skin contrasted splendidly with
the clearness of his eye, that his whole bearing expressed the
serene power that comes only from the confidence of battle.  The
woman in the carriage saw it, however.

"He is magnificent!" she cried.  "I thought such men had died
with Cooper!"

Thorpe whirled sharp on his heel and returned at once to a boarding-
house off Fort Street, where he had "outfitted" three months before.
There he reclaimed his valise, shaved, clothed himself in linen and
cheviot once more, and sauntered slowly over to the Land Office to
await its opening.



Chapter XXIII


At nine o'clock neither of the partners had appeared.  Thorpe entered
the office and approached the desk.

"Is there a telegram here for Harry Thorpe?" he inquired.

The clerk to whom he addressed himself merely motioned with his
head toward a young fellow behind the railing in a corner.  The
latter, without awaiting the question, shifted comfortably and
replied:

"No."

At the same instant steps were heard in the corridor, the door opened,
and Mr. Morrison appeared on the sill.  Then Thorpe showed the stuff
of which he was made.

"Is this the desk for buying Government lands?" he asked hurriedly.

"Yes," replied the clerk.

"I have some descriptions I wish to buy in."

"Very well," replied the clerk, "what township?"

Thorpe detailed the figures, which he knew by heart, the clerk took
from a cabinet the three books containing them, and spread them out
on the counter.  At this moment the bland voice of Mr. Morrison made
itself heard at Thorpe's elbow.

"Good morning, Mr. Smithers," it said with the deliberation of the
consciously great man.  "I have a few descriptions I would like to
buy in the northern peninsula."

"Good morning, Mr. Morrison.  Archie there will attend to you.
Archie, see what Mr. Morrison wishes."

The lumberman and the other clerk consulted in a low voice, after
which the official turned to fumble among the records.  Not finding
what he wanted, he approached Smithers.  A whispered consultation
ensued between these two.  Then Smithers called:

"Take a seat, Mr. Morrison.  This gentleman is looking over these
townships, and will have finished in a few minutes."

Morrison's eye suddenly became uneasy.

"I am somewhat busy this morning," he objected with a shade of
command in his voice.

"If this gentleman---?" suggested the clerk delicately.

"I am sorry," put in Thorpe with brevity, "my time, too, is
valuable."

Morrison looked at him sharply.

"My deal is a big one," he snapped.  "I can probably arrange with
this gentleman to let him have his farm."

"I claim precedence," replied Thorpe calmly.

"Well," said Morrison swift as light, "I'll tell you, Smithers.
I'll leave my list of descriptions and a check with you.  Give me
a receipt, and mark my lands off after you've finished with this
gentleman."

Now Government and State lands are the property of the man who pays
for them.  Although the clerk's receipt might not give Morrison a
valid claim; nevertheless it would afford basis for a lawsuit.
Thorpe saw the trap, and interposed.

"Hold on," he interrupted, "I claim precedence.  You can give no
receipt for any land in these townships until after my business is
transacted.  I have reason to believe that this gentleman and myself
are both after the same descriptions."

"What!" shouted Morrison, assuming surprise.

"You will have to await your turn, Mr. Morrison," said the clerk,
virtuous before so many witnesses.

The business man was in a white rage of excitement.

"I insist on my application being filed at once!" he cried waving
his check.  "I have the money right here to pay for every acre of
it; and if I know the law, the first man to pay takes the land."

He slapped the check down on the rail, and hit it a number of times
with the flat of his hand.  Thorpe turned and faced him with a steel
look in his level eyes.

"Mr. Morrison," he said, "you are quite right.  The first man who
pays gets the land; but I have won the first chance to pay.  You
will kindly step one side until I finish my business with Mr.
Smithers here."

"I suppose you have the amount actually with you," said the clerk,
quite respectfully, "because if you have not, Mr. Morrison's claim
will take precedence."

"I would hardly have any business in a land office, if I did not know
that," replied Thorpe, and began his dictation of the description as
calmly as though his inside pocket contained the required amount in
bank bills.

Thorpe's hopes had sunk to zero.  After all, looking at the matter
dispassionately, why should he expect Carpenter to trust him, a
stranger, with so large a sum?  It had been madness.  Only the blind
confidence of the fighting man led him further into the struggle.
Another would have given up, would have stepped aside from the path
of this bona-fide purchaser with the money in his hand.

But Thorpe was of the kind that hangs on until the last possible
second, not so much in the expectation of winning, as in sheer
reluctance to yield.  Such men shoot their last cartridge before
surrendering, swim the last ounce of strength from their arms
before throwing them up to sink, search coolly until the latest
moment for a way from the burning building,--and sometimes come
face to face with miracles.

Thorpe's descriptions were contained in the battered little note-
book he had carried with him in the woods.  For each piece of land
first there came the township described by latitude and east-and-
west range.  After this generic description followed another figure
representing the section of that particular district.  So 49--17
W--8, meant section 8, of the township on range 49 north, 17 west.
If Thorpe wished to purchase the whole section, that description
would suffice.  On the other hand, if he wished to buy only one
forty, he described its position in the quarter-section.  Thus SW--
NW 49--17--8, meant the southwest forty of the northwest quarter of
section 8 in the township already described.

The clerk marked across each square of his map as Thorpe read them,
the date and the purchaser's name.

In his note-book Thorpe had, of course, entered the briefest
description possible.  Now, in dictating to the clerk, he conceived
the idea of specifying each subdivision.  This gained some time.
Instead of saying simply, "Northwest quarter of section 8," he made
of it four separate descriptions, as follows:--Northwest quarter of
northwest quarter; northeast of northwest quarter; southwest of
northwest quarter; and southeast of northwest quarter.

He was not so foolish as to read the descriptions in succession,
but so scattered them that the clerk, putting down the figures
mechanically, had no idea of the amount of unnecessary work he was
doing.  The minute hands of the clock dragged around.  Thorpe droned
down the long column.  The clerk scratched industriously, repeating
in a half voice each description as it was transcribed.

At length the task was finished.  It became necessary to type
duplicate lists of the descriptions.  While the somnolent youth
finished this task, Thorpe listened for the messenger boy on the
stairs.

A faint slam was heard outside the rickety old building.  Hasty
steps sounded along the corridor.  The landlooker merely stopped
the drumming of his fingers on the broad arm of the chair.  The
door flew open, and Wallace Carpenter walked quickly to him.

Thorpe's face lighted up as he rose to greet his partner.  The
boy had not forgotten their compact after all.

"Then it's all right?" queried the latter breathlessly.

"Sure," answered Thorpe heartily, "got 'em in good shape."

At the same time he was drawing the youth beyond the vigilant
watchfulness of Mr. Morrison.

"You're just in time," he said in an undertone.  "Never had so
close a squeak.  I suppose you have cash or a certified check:
that's all they'll take here."

"What do you mean?" asked Carpenter blankly.

"Haven't you that money?" returned Thorpe quick as a hawk.

"For Heaven's sake, isn't it here?" cried Wallace in consternation.
"I wired Duncan, my banker, here last night, and received a reply
from him.  He answered that he'd see to it.  Haven't you seen him?"

"No," repeated Thorpe in his turn.

"What can we do?"

"Can you get your check certified here near at hand?"

"Yes."

"Well, go do it.  And get a move on you.  You have precisely until
that boy there finishes clicking that machine.  Not a second longer."

"Can't you get them to wait a few minutes?"

"Wallace," said Thorpe, "do you see that white whiskered old lynx in
the corner?  That's Morrison, the man who wants to get our land.  If
I fail to plank down the cash the very instant it is demanded, he gets
his chance.  And he'll take it.  Now, go.  Don't hurry until you get
beyond the door: then FLY!"

Thorpe sat down again in his broad-armed chair and resumed his
drumming.  The nearest bank was six blocks away.  He counted over
in his mind the steps of Carpenter's progress; now to the door, now
in the next block, now so far beyond.  He had just escorted him to
the door of the bank, when the clerk's voice broke in on him.

"Now," Smithers was saying, "I'll give you a receipt for the
amount, and later will send to your address the title deeds of
the descriptions."

Carpenter had yet to find the proper official, to identify himself,
to certify the check, and to return.  It was hopeless.  Thorpe
dropped his hands in surrender.

Then he saw the boy lay the two typed lists before his principal,
and dimly he perceived that the youth, shamefacedly, was holding
something bulky toward himself.

"Wh--what is it?" he stammered, drawing his hand back as though from
a red-hot iron.

"You asked me for a telegram," said the boy stubbornly, as though
trying to excuse himself, "and I didn't just catch the name, anyway.
When I saw it on those lists I had to copy, I thought of this here."

"Where'd you get it?" asked Thorpe breathlessly.

"A fellow came here early and left it for you while I was sweeping
out," explained the boy.  "Said he had to catch a train.  It's yours
all right, ain't it?"

"Oh, yes," replied Thorpe.

He took the envelope and walked uncertainly to the tall window.  He
looked out at the chimneys.  After a moment he tore open the envelope.

"I hope there's no bad news, sir?" said the clerk, startled at the
paleness of the face Thorpe turned to the desk.

"No," replied the landlooker.  "Give me a receipt.  There's a
certified check for your money!"



Chapter XXIV


Now that the strain was over, Thorpe experienced a great weariness.
The long journey through the forest, his sleepless night on the
train, the mental alertness of playing the game with shrewd foes
all these stretched his fibers out one by one and left them limp.
He accepted stupidly the clerk's congratulations on his success,
left the name of the little hotel off Fort Street as the address
to which to send the deeds, and dragged himself off with infinite
fatigue to his bed-room.  There he fell at once into profound
unconsciousness.

He was awakened late in the afternoon by the sensation of a strong
pair of young arms around his shoulders, and the sound of Wallace
Carpenter's fresh voice crying in his ears:

"Wake up, wake up! you Indian!  You've been asleep all day, and I've
been waiting here all that time.  I want to hear about it.  Wake up,
I say!"

Thorpe rolled to a sitting posture on the edge of the bed, and
smiled uncertainly.  Then as the sleep drained from his brain,
he reached out his hand.

"You bet we did 'em, Wallace," said he, "but it looked like a hard
proposition for a while."

"How was it?  Tell me about it!" insisted the boy eagerly.  "You
don't know how impatient I've been.  The clerk at the Land Office
merely told me it was all right.  How did you fix it?"

While Thorpe washed and shaved and leisurely freshened himself, he
detailed his experiences of the last week.

"And," he concluded gravely, "there's only one man I know or ever
heard of to whom I would have considered it worth while even to
think of sending that telegram, and you are he.  Somehow I knew
you'd come to the scratch."

"It's the most exciting thing I ever heard of," sighed Wallace
drawing a full breath, "and I wasn't in it!  It's the sort of thing
I long for.  If I'd only waited another two weeks before coming
down!"

"In that case we couldn't have gotten hold of the money, remember,"
smiled Thorpe.

"That's so."  Wallace brightened.  "I did count, didn't I?"

"I thought so about ten o'clock this morning," Thorpe replied.

"Suppose you hadn't stumbled on their camp; suppose Injin Charley
hadn't seen them go up-river; suppose you hadn't struck that little
mill town JUST at the time you did!" marvelled Wallace.

"That's always the way," philosophized Thorpe in reply.  "It's the
old story of 'if the horse-shoe nail hadn't been lost,' you know.
But we got there; and that's the important thing."

"We did!" cried the boy, his enthusiasm rekindling, "and to-night
we'll celebrate with the best dinner we ran buy in town!"

Thorpe was tempted, but remembered the thirty dollars in his pocket,
and looked doubtful.

Carpenter possessed, as part of his volatile enthusiastic temperament,
keen intuitions.

"Don't refuse!" he begged.  "I've set my heart on giving my senior
partner a dinner.  Surely you won't refuse to be my guest here, as I
was yours in the woods!"

"Wallace," said Thorpe, "I'll go you.  I'd like to dine with you;
but moreover, I'll confess, I should like to eat a good dinner again.
It's been more than a year since I've seen a salad, or heard of
after-dinner coffee."

"Come on then," cried Wallace.

Together they sauntered through the lengthening shadows to a certain
small restaurant near Woodward Avenue, then much in vogue among
Detroit's epicures.  It contained only a half dozen tables, but was
spotlessly clean, and its cuisine was unrivalled.  A large fireplace
near the center of the room robbed it of half its restaurant air; and
a thick carpet on the floor took the rest.  The walls were decorated
in dark colors after the German style.  Several easy chairs grouped
before the fireplace, and a light wicker table heaped with magazines
and papers invited the guests to lounge while their orders were
being prepared.

Thorpe was not in the least Sybaritic in his tastes, but he could
not stifle a sigh of satisfaction at sinking so naturally into the
unobtrusive little comforts which the ornamental life offers to its
votaries.  They rose up around him and pillowed him, and were grateful
to the tired fibers of his being.  His remoter past had enjoyed these
things as a matter of course.  They had framed the background to his
daily habit.  Now that the background had again slid into place on
noiseless grooves, Thorpe for the first time became conscious that
his strenuous life had indeed been in the open air, and that the
winds of earnest endeavor, while bracing, had chilled.  Wallace
Carpenter, with the poet's insight and sympathy, saw and understood
this feeling.

"I want you to order this dinner," said he, handing over to Thorpe
the card which an impossibly correct waiter presented him.  "And I
want it a good one.  I want you to begin at the beginning and skip
nothing.  Pretend you are ordering just the dinner you would like
to offer your sister," he suggested on a sudden inspiration.  "I
assure you I'll try to be just as critical and exigent as she would
be."

Thorpe took up the card dreamily.

"There are no oysters and clams now," said he, "so we'll pass
right on to the soup.  It seems to me a desecration to pretend to
replace them.  We'll have a bisque," he told the waiter, "rich and
creamy.  Then planked whitefish, and have them just a light crisp,
brown.  You can bring some celery, too, if you have it fresh and
good.  And for entree tell your cook to make some macaroni au gratin,
but the inside must be soft and very creamy, and the outside very
crisp.  I know it's a queer dish for a formal dinner like ours," he
addressed Wallace with a little laugh, "but it's very, very good.
We'll have roast beef, rare and juicy;--if you bring it any way but
a cooked red, I'll send it back;--and potatoes roasted with the meat
and brown gravy.  Then the breast of chicken with the salad, in the
French fashion.  And I'll make the dressing.  We'll have an ice and
some fruit for dessert.  Black coffee."

"Yes, sir," replied the waiter, his pencil poised.  "And the wines?"

Thorpe ruminated sleepily.

"A rich red Burgundy," he decided, "for all the dinner.  If your
cellar contains a very good smooth Beaune, we'll have that."

"Yes, sir," answered the waiter, and departed.

Thorpe sat and gazed moodily into the wood fire, Wallace respected
his silence.  It was yet too early for the fashionable world, so the
two friends had the place to themselves.  Gradually the twilight
fell; strange shadows leaped and died on the wall.  A boy dressed
all in white turned on the lights.  By and by the waiter announced
that their repast awaited them.

Thorpe ate, his eyes half closed, in somnolent satisfaction.
Occasionally he smiled contentedly across at Wallace, who smiled
in response.  After the coffee he had the waiter bring cigars.
They went back between the tables to a little upholstered smoking
room, where they sank into the depths of leather chairs, and blew
the gray clouds of smoke towards the ceiling.  About nine o'clock
Thorpe spoke the first word.

"I'm stupid this evening, I'm afraid," said he, shaking himself.
"Don't think on that account I am not enjoying your dinner.  I
believe," he asserted earnestly, "that I never had such an altogether
comfortable, happy evening before in my life."

"I know," replied Wallace sympathetically.

"It seems just now," went on Thorpe, sinking more luxuriously into
his armchair, "that this alone is living--to exist in an environment
exquisitely toned; to eat, to drink, to smoke the best, not like a
gormand, but delicately as an artist would.  It is the flower of our
civilization."

Wallace remembered the turmoil of the wilderness brook; the little
birch knoll, yellow in the evening glow; the mellow voice of the
summer night crooning through the pines.  But he had the rare tact
to say nothing.

"Did it ever occur to you that what you needed, when sort of tired
out this way," he said abruptly after a moment, "is a woman to
understand and sympathize?  Wouldn't it have made this evening
perfect to have seen opposite you a being whom you loved, who
understood your moments of weariness, as well as your moments of
strength?"

"No," replied Thorpe, stretching his arms over his head, "a woman
would have talked.  It takes a friend and a man, to know when to
keep silent for three straight hours."

The waiter brought the bill on a tray, and Carpenter paid it.

"Wallace," said Thorpe suddenly after a long interval, "we'll
borrow enough by mortgaging our land to supply the working
expenses.  I suppose capital will have to investigate, and that'll
take time; but I can begin to pick up a crew and make arrangements
for transportation and supplies.  You can let me have a thousand
dollars on the new Company's note for initial expenses.  We'll
draw up articles of partnership to-morrow."



Chapter XXV


Next day the articles of partnership were drawn; and Carpenter gave
his note for the necessary expenses.  Then in answer to a pencilled
card which Mr. Morrison had evidently left at Thorpe's hotel in
person, both young men called at the lumberman's place of business.
They were ushered immediately into the private office.

Mr. Morrison was a smart little man with an ingratiating manner and
a fishy eye.  He greeted Thorpe with marked geniality.

"My opponent of yesterday!" he cried jocularly.  "Sit down, Mr.
Thorpe!
Although you did me out of some land I had made every preparation to
purchase, I can't but admire your grit and resourcefulness.  How did
you get here ahead of us?"

"I walked across the upper peninsula, and caught a boat," replied
Thorpe briefly.

"Indeed, INDEED!" replied Mr. Morrison, placing the tips of his
fingers together.  "Extraordinary! Well, Mr. Thorpe, you overreached
us nicely; and I suppose we must pay for our carelessness.  We must
have that pine, even though we pay stumpage on it.  Now what would
you consider a fair price for it?"

"It is not for sale," answered Thorpe.

"We'll waive all that.  Of course it is to your interest to make
difficulties and run the price up as high as you can.  But my time
is somewhat occupied just at present, so I would be very glad to
hear your top price--we will come to an agreement afterwards."

"You do not understand me, Mr. Morrison.  I told you the pine is
not for sale, and I mean it."

"But surely--What did you buy it for, then?" cried Mr. Morrison,
with evidences of a growing excitement.

"We intend to manufacture it."

Mr. Morrison's fishy eyes nearly popped out of his head.  He
controlled himself with an effort.

"Mr. Thorpe," said he, "let us try to be reasonable.  Our case
stands this way.  We have gone to a great deal of expense on
the Ossawinamakee in expectation of undertaking very extensive
operations there.  To that end we have cleared the stream, built
three dams, and have laid the foundations of a harbor and boom.
This has been very expensive.  Now your purchase includes most of
what we had meant to log.  You have, roughly speaking, about three
hundred millions in your holding, in addition to which there are
several millions scattering near it, which would pay nobody but
yourself to get in.  Our holdings are further up stream, and
comprise only about the equal of yours."

"Three hundred millions are not to be sneezed at," replied Thorpe.

"Certainly not," agreed Morrison, suavely, gaining confidence from
the sound of his own voice.  "Not in this country.  But you must
remember that a man goes into the northern peninsula only because
he can get something better there than here.  When the firm of
Morrison & Daly establishes itself now, it must be for the last
time.  We want enough timber to do us for the rest of the time we
are in business."

"In that case, you will have to hunt up another locality," replied
Thorpe calmly.

Morrison's eyes flashed.  But he retained his appearance of geniality,
and appealed to Wallace Carpenter.

"Then you will retain the advantage of our dams and improvements,"
said he.  "Is that fair?"

"No, not on the face of it," admitted Thorpe.  "But you did your
work in a navigable stream for private purposes, without the consent
of the Board of Control.  Your presence on the river is illegal.
You should have taken out a charter as an Improvement Company.  Then
as long as you 'tended to business and kept the concern in repair,
we'd have paid you a toll per thousand feet.  As soon as you let it
slide, however, the works would revert to the State.  I won't hinder
your doing that yet; although I might.  Take out your charter and
fix your rate of toll."

"In other words, you force us to stay there and run a little two-by-
four Improvement Company for your benefit, or else lose the value of
our improvements?"

"Suit yourself," answered Thorpe carelessly.  "You can always log
your present holdings."

"Very well," cried Morrison, so suddenly in a passion that Wallace
started back.  "It's war!  And let me tell you this, young man;
you're a new concern and we're an old one.  We'll crush you like
THAT!"  He crisped an envelope vindictively, and threw it in the
waste-basket.

"Crush ahead," replied Thorpe with great good humor.  "Good-day,
Mr. Morrison," and the two went out.

Wallace was sputtering and trembling with nervous excitement.  His
was one of those temperaments which require action to relieve the
stress of a stormy interview.  He was brave enough, but he would
always tremble in the presence of danger until the moment for
striking arrived.  He wanted to do something at once.

"Hadn't we better see a lawyer?" he asked.  "Oughtn't we to look
out that they don't take some of our pine?  Oughtn't we---"

"You just leave all that to me," replied Thorpe.  "The first thing
we want to do is to rustle some money."

"And you can leave THAT to ME," echoed Wallace.  "I know a little
of such things, and I have business connections who know more.  You
just get the camp running."

"I'll start for Bay City to-night," submitted Thorpe.  "There
ought to be a good lot of lumber-jacks lying around idle at this
time of year; and it's a good place to outfit from because we can
probably get freight rates direct by boat.  We'll be a little late
in starting, but we'll get in SOME logs this winter, anyway."






PART III


THE BLAZING OF THE TRAIL



Chapter XXVI


A lumbering town after the drive is a fearful thing.  Men just
off the river draw a deep breath, and plunge into the wildest
reactionary dissipation.  In droves they invade the cities,--wild,
picturesque, lawless.  As long as the money lasts, they blow it in.

"Hot money!" is the cry.  "She's burnt holes in all my pockets
already!"

The saloons are full, the gambling houses overflow, all the places
of amusement or crime run full blast.  A chip rests lightly on
everyone's shoulder.  Fights are as common as raspberries in August.
Often one of these formidable men, his muscles toughened and
quickened by the active, strenuous river work, will set out to "take
the town apart."  For a time he leaves rack and ruin, black eyes and
broken teeth behind him, until he meets a more redoubtable "knocker"
and is pounded and kicked into unconsciousness.  Organized gangs go
from house to house forcing the peaceful inmates to drink from their
bottles.  Others take possession of certain sections of the street
and resist "a l'outrance" the attempts of others to pass.  Inoffensive
citizens are stood on their heads, or shaken upside down until the
contents of their pockets rattle on the street.  Parenthetically,
these contents are invariably returned to their owners.  The
riverman's object is fun, not robbery.

And if rip-roaring, swashbuckling, drunken glory is what he is after,
he gets it.  The only trouble is, that a whole winter's hard work
goes in two or three weeks.  The only redeeming feature is, that he
is never, in or out of his cups, afraid of anything that walks the
earth.

A man comes out of the woods or off the drive with two or three
hundred dollars, which he is only too anxious to throw away by the
double handful.  It follows naturally that a crew of sharpers are
on hand to find out who gets it.  They are a hard lot.  Bold,
unprincipled men, they too are afraid of nothing; not even a
drunken lumber-jack, which is one of the dangerous wild animals
of the American fauna.  Their business is to relieve the man of
his money as soon as possible.  They are experts at their business.

The towns of Bay City and Saginaw alone in 1878 supported over
fourteen hundred tough characters.  Block after block was devoted
entirely to saloons.  In a radius of three hundred feet from the
famous old Catacombs could be numbered forty saloons, where drinks
were sold by from three to ten "pretty waiter girls."  When the
boys struck town, the proprietors and waitresses stood in their
doorways to welcome them.

"Why, Jack!" one would cry, "when did you drift in?  Tickled to
death to see you!  Come in an' have a drink.  That your chum?  Come
in, old man, and have a drink.  Never mind the pay; that's all right."

And after the first drink, Jack, of course, had to treat, and then
the chum.

Or if Jack resisted temptation and walked resolutely on, one of the
girls would remark audibly to another.

"He ain't no lumber-jack!  You can see that easy 'nuff!  He's jest
off th' hay-trail!"

Ten to one that brought him, for the woodsman is above all things
proud and jealous of his craft.

In the center of this whirlpool of iniquity stood the Catacombs as
the hub from which lesser spokes in the wheel radiated.  Any old
logger of the Saginaw Valley can tell you of the Catacombs, just
as any old logger of any other valley will tell you of the "Pen,"
the "White Row," the "Water Streets" of Alpena, Port Huron,
Ludington, Muskegon, and a dozen other lumber towns.

The Catacombs was a three-story building.  In the basement were
vile, ill-smelling, ill-lighted dens, small, isolated, dangerous.
The shanty boy with a small stake, far gone in drunkenness, there
tasted the last drop of wickedness, and thence was flung unconscious
and penniless on the streets.  A trap-door directly into the river
accommodated those who were inconsiderate enough to succumb under
rough treatment.

The second story was given over to drinking.  Polly Dickson there
reigned supreme, an anomaly.  She was as pretty and fresh and
pure-looking as a child; and at the same time was one of the most
ruthless and unscrupulous of the gang.  She could at will exercise
a fascination the more terrible in that it appealed at once to her
victim's nobler instincts of reverence, his capacity for what might
be called aesthetic fascination, as well as his passions.  When she
finally held him, she crushed him as calmly as she would a fly.

Four bars supplied the drinkables.  Dozens of "pretty waiter girls"
served the customers.  A force of professional fighters was maintained
by the establishment to preserve that degree of peace which should
look to the preservation of mirrors and glassware.

The third story contained a dance hall and a theater.  The character
of both would better be left to the imagination.

Night after night during the season, this den ran at top-steam.

By midnight, when the orgy was at its height, the windows brilliantly
illuminated, the various bursts of music, laughing, cursing, singing,
shouting, fighting, breaking in turn or all together from its open
windows, it was, as Jackson Hines once expressed it to me, like hell
let out for noon.

The respectable elements of the towns were powerless.  They could
not control the elections.  Their police would only have risked
total annihilation by attempting a raid.  At the first sign of
trouble they walked straightly in the paths of their own affairs,
awaiting the time soon to come when, his stake "blown-in," the
last bitter dregs of his pleasure gulped down, the shanty boy would
again start for the woods.



Chapter XXVII


Now in August, however, the first turmoil had died.  The "jam" had
boiled into town, "taken it apart," and left the inhabitants to
piece it together again as they could; the "rear" had not yet
arrived.  As a consequence, Thorpe found the city comparatively
quiet.

Here and there swaggered a strapping riverman, his small felt hat
cocked aggressively over one eye, its brim curled up behind; a
cigar stump protruding at an angle from beneath his sweeping
moustache; his hands thrust into the pockets of his trousers,
"stagged" off at the knee; the spikes of his river boots cutting
little triangular pieces from the wooden sidewalk.  His eye was
aggressively humorous, and the smile of his face was a challenge.

For in the last month he had faced almost certain death a dozen
times a day.  He had ridden logs down the rapids where a loss of
balance meant in one instant a ducking and in the next a blow on
the back from some following battering-ram; he had tugged and
strained and jerked with his peavey under a sheer wall of tangled
timber twenty feet high,--behind which pressed the full power of
the freshet,--only to jump with the agility of a cat from one bit
of unstable footing to another when the first sharp CRACK warned him
that he had done his work, and that the whole mass was about to
break down on him like a wave on the shore; he had worked fourteen
hours a day in ice-water, and had slept damp; he had pried at the
key log in the rollways on the bank until the whole pile had begun
to rattle down into the river like a cascade, and had jumped, or
ridden, or even dived out of danger at the last second.  In a
hundred passes he had juggled with death as a child plays with a
rubber balloon.  No wonder that he has brought to the town and his
vices a little of the lofty bearing of an heroic age.  No wonder
that he fears no man, since nature's most terrible forces of the
flood have hurled a thousand weapons at him in vain.  His muscles
have been hardened, his eye is quiet and sure, his courage is
undaunted, and his movements are as quick and accurate as a panther's.
Probably nowhere in the world is a more dangerous man of his hands
than the riverman.  He would rather fight than eat, especially when
he is drunk, as, like the cow-boy, he usually is when he gets into
town.  A history could be written of the feuds, the wars, the raids
instituted by one camp or one town against another.

The men would go in force sometimes to another city with the avowed
purpose of cleaning it out.  One battle I know of lasted nearly all
night.  Deadly weapons were almost never resorted to, unless indeed
a hundred and eighty pounds of muscle behind a fist hard as iron
might be considered a deadly weapon.  A man hard pressed by numbers
often resorted to a billiard cue, or an ax, or anything else that
happened to be handy, but that was an expedient called out by
necessity.  Knives or six-shooters implied a certain premeditation
which was discountenanced.

On the other hand, the code of fair fighting obtained hardly at
all.  The long spikes of river-boots made an admirable weapon in the
straight kick.  I have seen men whose faces were punctured as thickly
as though by small-pox, where the steel points had penetrated.  In a
free-for-all knock-down-and-drag-out, kicking, gouging, and biting
are all legitimate.  Anything to injure the other man, provided
always you do not knife him.  And when you take a half dozen of these
enduring, active, muscular, and fiery men, not one entertaining in
his innermost heart the faintest hesitation or fear, and set them at
each other with the lightning tirelessness of so many wild-cats, you
get as hard a fight as you could desire.  And they seem to like it.

One old fellow, a good deal of a character in his way, used to be
on the "drive" for a firm lumbering near Six Lakes.   He was
intensely loyal to his "Old Fellows," and every time he got a
little "budge" in him, he instituted a raid on the town owned by
a rival firm.  So frequent and so severe did these battles become
that finally the men were informed that another such expedition
would mean instant discharge.  The rule had its effect.  The raids
ceased.

But one day old Dan visited the saloon once too often.  He became
very warlike.  The other men merely laughed, for they were strong
enough themselves to recognize firmness in others, and it never
occurred to them that they could disobey so absolute a command.
So finally Dan started out quite alone.

He invaded the enemy's camp, attempted to clean out the saloon with
a billiard cue single handed, was knocked down, and would have been
kicked to death as he lay on the floor if he had not succeeded in
rolling under the billiard table where the men's boots could not
reach him.  As it was, his clothes were literally torn to ribbons,
one eye was blacked, his nose broken, one ear hung to its place by
a mere shred of skin, and his face and flesh were ripped and torn
everywhere by the "corks" on the boots.  Any but a riverman would
have qualified for the hospital.  Dan rolled to the other side of
the table, made a sudden break, and escaped.

But his fighting blood was not all spilled.  He raided the butcher-
shop, seized the big carving knife, and returned to the battle field.

The enemy decamped--rapidly--some of them through the window.  Dan
managed to get in but one blow.  He ripped the coat down the man's
back as neatly as though it had been done with shears, one clean
straight cut from collar to bottom seam.  A quarter of an inch
nearer would have split the fellow's backbone.  As it was, he
escaped without even a scratch.

Dan commandeered two bottles of whisky, and, gory and wounded as he
was, took up the six-mile tramp home, bearing the knife over his
shoulder as a banner of triumph.

Next morning, weak from the combined effects of war and whisky, he
reported to headquarters.

"What is it, Dan?" asked the Old Fellow without turning.

"I come to get my time," replied the riverman humbly.

"What for?" inquired the lumberman.

"I have been over to Howard City," confessed Dan.

The owner turned and looked him over.

"They sort of got ahead of me a little," explained Dan sheepishly.

The lumberman took stock of the old man's cuts and bruises, and
turned away to hide a smile.

"I guess I'll let you off this trip," said he.  "Go to work--when
you can.  I don't believe you'll go back there again."

"No, sir," replied Dan humbly."

And so the life of alternate work and pleasure, both full of personal
danger, develops in time a class of men whose like is be found only
among the cowboys, scouts, trappers, and Indian fighters of our other
frontiers.  The moralists will always hold up the hands of horror at
such types; the philosopher will admire them as the last incarnation
of the heroic age, when the man is bigger than his work.  Soon the
factories, the machines, the mechanical structures and constructions,
the various branches of co-operation will produce quasi-automatically
institutions evidently more important than the genius or force of
any one human being.  The personal element will have become nearly
eliminated.  In the woods and on the frontier still are many whose
powers are greater than their works; whose fame is greater than their
deeds.  They are men, powerful, virile, even brutal at times; but
magnificent with the strength of courage and resource.

All this may seem a digression from the thread of our tale, but as
a matter of fact it is necessary that you understand the conditions
of the time and place in which Harry Thorpe had set himself the duty
of success.

He had seen too much of incompetent labor to be satisfied with
anything but the best.  Although his ideas were not as yet
formulated, he hoped to be able to pick up a crew of first-class
men from those who had come down with the advance, or "jam," of the
spring's drive.  They should have finished their orgies by now, and,
empty of pocket, should be found hanging about the boarding-houses
and the quieter saloons.  Thorpe intended to offer good wages for
good men.  He would not need more than twenty at first, for during
the approaching winter he purposed to log on a very small scale
indeed.  The time for expansion would come later.

With this object in view he set out from his hotel about half-past
seven on the day of his arrival, to cruise about in the lumber-jack
district already described.  The hotel clerk had obligingly given him
the names of a number of the quieter saloons, where the boys "hung
out" between bursts of prosperity.  In the first of these Thorpe was
helped materially in his vague and uncertain quest by encountering
an old acquaintance.

From the sidewalk he heard the vigorous sounds of a one-sided
altercation punctuated by frequent bursts of quickly silenced
laughter.  Evidently some one was very angry, and the rest amused.
After a moment Thorpe imagined he recognized the excited voice.  So
he pushed open the swinging screen door and entered.

The place was typical.  Across one side ran the hard-wood bar with
foot-rest and little towels hung in metal clasps under its edge.
Behind it was a long mirror, a symmetrical pile of glasses, a
number of plain or ornamental bottles, and a miniature keg or so of
porcelain containing the finer whiskys and brandies.  The bar-keeper
drew beer from two pumps immediately in front of him, and rinsed
glasses in some sort of a sink under the edge of the bar.  The
center of the room was occupied by a tremendous stove capable of
burning whole logs of cordwood.  A stovepipe led from the stove here
and there in wire suspension to a final exit near the other corner.
On the wall were two sporting chromos, and a good variety of
lithographed calendars and illuminated tin signs advertising beers
and spirits.  The floor was liberally sprinkled with damp sawdust,
and was occupied, besides the stove, by a number of wooden chairs
and a single round table.

The latter, a clumsy heavy affair beyond the strength of an ordinary
man, was being deftly interposed between himself and the attacks of
the possessor of the angry voice by a gigantic young riverman in the
conventional stagged (i.e., chopped off) trousers, "cork" shoes, and
broad belt typical of his craft.  In the aggressor Thorpe recognized
old Jackson Hines.

"Damn you!" cried the old man, qualifying the oath, "let me get at
you, you great big sock-stealer, I'll make you hop high!  I'll snatch
you bald-headed so quick that you'll think you never had any hair!"

"I'll settle with you in the morning, Jackson," laughed the riverman.

"You want to eat a good breakfast, then, because you won't have no
appetite for dinner."

The men roared, with encouraging calls.  The riverman put on a
ludicrous appearance of offended dignity.

"Oh, you needn't swell up like a poisoned pup!" cried old Jackson
plaintively, ceasing his attacks from sheer weariness.  "You know
you're as safe as a cow tied to a brick wall behind that table."

Thorpe seized the opportunity to approach.

"Hello, Jackson," said he.

The old man peered at him out of the blur of his excitement.

"Don't you know me?" inquired Thorpe.

"Them lamps gives 'bout as much light as a piece of chalk,"
complained Jackson testily.  "Knows you?  You bet I do! How are
you, Harry?  Where you been keepin' yourself?  You look 'bout as
fat as a stall-fed knittin' needle."

"I've been landlooking in the upper peninsula," explained Thorpe,
"on the Ossawinamakee, up in the Marquette country."

"Sho'" commented Jackson in wonder, "way up there where the moon
changes!"

"It's a fine country," went on Thorpe so everyone could hear, "with
a great cutting of white pine.  It runs as high as twelve hundred
thousand to the forty sometimes."

"Trees clean an' free of limbs?" asked Jackson.

"They're as good as the stuff over on seventeen; you remember that."

"Clean as a baby's leg," agreed Jackson.

"Have a glass of beer?" asked Thorpe.

"Dry as a tobacco box," confessed Hines.

"Have something, the rest of you?" invited Thorpe.

So they all drank.

On a sudden inspiration Thorpe resolved to ask the old man's advice
as to crew and horses.  It might not be good for much, but it would
do no harm.

Jackson listened attentively to the other's brief recital.

"Why don't you see Tim Shearer?  He ain't doin' nothin' since the
jam came down," was his comment.

"Isn't he with the M. & D. people?" asked Thorpe.

"Nope.  Quit."

"How's that?"

"'Count of Morrison.  Morrison he comes up to run things some.  He
does.  Tim he's getting the drive in shape, and he don't want to be
bothered, but old Morrison he's as busy as hell beatin' tan-bark.
Finally Tim, he calls him.  "'Look here, Mr. Morrison,' says he,
'I'm runnin' this drive.  If I don't get her there, all right; you
can give me my time.  'Till then you ain't got nothin' to say.'

"Well, that makes the Old Fellow as sore as a scalded pup.  He's
used to bossin' clerks and such things, and don't have much of an
idea of lumber-jacks.  He has big ideas of respect, so he 'calls'
Tim dignified like.

"Tim didn't hit him; but I guess he felt like th' man who met the
bear without any weapon,--even a newspaper would 'a' come handy.  He
hands in his time t' once and quits.  Sence then he's been as mad as
a bar-keep with a lead quarter, which ain't usual for Tim.  He's been
filin' his teeth for M. & D. right along.  Somethin's behind it all,
I reckon."

"Where'll I find him?" asked Thorpe.

Jackson gave the name of a small boarding-house.  Shortly after,
Thorpe left him to amuse the others with his unique conversation,
and hunted up Shearer's stopping-place.



Chapter XXVIII


The boarding-house proved to be of the typical lumber-jack class, a
narrow "stoop," a hall-way and stairs in the center, and an office
and bar on either side.  Shearer and a half dozen other men about
his own age sat, their chairs on two legs and their "cork" boots on
the rounds of the chairs, smoking placidly in the tepid evening air.
The light came from inside the building, so that while Thorpe was
in plain view, he could not make out which of the dark figures on
the piazza was the man he wanted.  He approached, and attempted an
identifying scrutiny.  The men, with the taciturnity of their class
in the presence of a stranger, said nothing.

"Well, bub," finally drawled a voice from the corner, "blowed that
stake you made out of Radway, yet?"

"That you, Shearer?" inquired Thorpe advancing.  "You're the man I'm
looking for."

"You've found me," replied the old man dryly.

Thorpe was requested elaborately to "shake hands" with the owners
of six names.  Then he had a chance to intimate quietly to Shearer
that he wanted a word with him alone.  The riverman rose silently
and led the way up the straight, uncarpeted stairs, along a narrow,
uncarpeted hall, to a square, uncarpeted bedroom.  The walls and
ceiling of this apartment were of unpainted planed pine.  It
contained a cheap bureau, one chair, and a bed and washstand to
match the bureau.  Shearer lit the lamp and sat on the bed.

"What is it?" he asked.

"I have a little pine up in the northern peninsula within walking
distance of Marquette," said Thorpe, "and I want to get a crew of
about twenty men.  It occurred to me that you might be willing to
help me."

The riverman frowned steadily at his interlocutor from under his
bushy brows.

"How much pine you got?" he asked finally.

"About three hundred millions," replied Thorpe quietly.

The old man's blue eyes fixed themselves with unwavering steadiness
on Thorpe's face.

"You're jobbing some of it, eh?" he submitted finally as the only
probable conclusion.  "Do you think you know enough about it?  Who
does it belong to?"

"It belongs to a man named Carpenter and myself."

The riverman pondered this slowly for an appreciable interval, and
then shot out another question.

"How'd you get it?"

Thorpe told him simply, omitting nothing except the name of the firm
up-river.  When he had finished, Shearer evinced no astonishment nor
approval.

"You done well," he commented finally.  Then after another interval:

"Have you found out who was the men stealin' the pine?"

"Yes," replied Thorpe quietly, "it was Morrison & Daly."

The old man flickered not an eyelid.  He slowly filled his pipe and
lit it.

"I'll get you a crew of men," said he, "if you'll take me as foreman."

"But it's a little job at first," protested Thorpe.  "I only want
a camp of twenty.  It wouldn't be worth your while."

"That's my look-out.  I'll take th' job," replied the logger grimly.
"You got three hundred million there, ain't you?  And you're goin'
to cut it?  It ain't such a small job."

Thorpe could hardly believe his good-fortune in having gained so
important a recruit.  With a practical man as foreman, his mind
would be relieved of a great deal of worry over unfamiliar detail.
He saw at once that he would himself be able to perform all the
duties of scaler, keep in touch with the needs of the camp, and
supervise the campaign.  Nevertheless he answered the older man's
glance with one as keen, and said:

"Look here, Shearer, if you take this job, we may as well understand
each other at the start.  This is going to be my camp, and I'm going
to be boss.  I don't know much about logging, and I shall want you
to take charge of all that, but I shall want to know just why you do
each thing, and if my judgment advises otherwise, my judgment goes.
If I want to discharge a man, he WALKS without any question.  I know
about what I shall expect of each man; and I intend to get it out of
him.  And in questions of policy mine is the say-so every trip.  Now
I know you're a good man, one of the best there is,and I presume I
shall find your judgment the best, but I don't want any mistakes to
start with.  If you want to be my foreman on those terms, just say
so, and I'll be tickled to death to have you."

For the first time the lumberman's face lost, during a single
instant, its mask of immobility.  His steel-blue eyes flashed, his
mouth twitched with some strong emotion.  For the first time, too,
he spoke without his contemplative pause of preparation.

"That's th' way to talk!" he cried.  "Go with you?  Well I should
rise to remark!  You're the boss; and I always said it.  I'll get
you a gang of bully boys that will roll logs till there's skating
in hell!"

Thorpe left, after making an appointment at his own hotel for the
following day, more than pleased with his luck.  Although he had by
now fairly good and practical ideas in regard to the logging of a
bunch of pine, he felt himself to be very deficient in the details.
In fact, he anticipated his next step with shaky confidence.  He
would now be called upon to buy four or five teams of horses, and
enough feed to last them the entire winter; he would have to arrange
for provisions in abundance and variety for his men; he would have to
figure on blankets, harness, cook-camp utensils, stoves, blacksmith
tools, iron, axes, chains, cant-hooks, van-goods, pails, lamps, oil,
matches, all sorts of hardware,--in short, all the thousand and one
things, from needles to court-plaster, of which a self-sufficing
community might come in need.  And he would have to figure out his
requirements for the entire winter.  After navigation closed, he
could import nothing more.

How could he know what to buy,--how many barrels of flour, how much
coffee, raisins, baking powder, soda, pork, beans, dried apples,
sugar, nutmeg, pepper, salt, crackers, molasses, ginger, lard, tea,
corned beef, catsup, mustard,--to last twenty men five or six months?
How could he be expected to think of each item of a list of two
hundred, the lack of which meant measureless bother, and the
desirability of which suggested itself only when the necessity
arose?  It is easy, when the mind is occupied with multitudinous
detail, to forget simple things, like brooms or iron shovels.  With
Tim Shearer to help his inexperience, he felt easy.  He knew he
could attend to advantageous buying, and to making arrangements
with the steamship line to Marquette for the landing of his goods
at the mouth of the Ossawinamakee.

Deep in these thoughts, he wandered on at random.  He suddenly came
to himself in the toughest quarter of Bay City.

Through the summer night shrilled the sound of cachinations painted
to the colors of mirth.  A cheap piano rattled and thumped through
an open window.  Men's and women's voices mingled in rising and
falling gradations of harshness.  Lights streamed irregularly across
the dark.

Thorpe became aware of a figure crouched in the door-way almost at
his feet.  The sill lay in shadow so the bulk was lost, but the
flickering rays of a distant street lamp threw into relief the
high-lights of a violin, and a head.  The face upturned to him was
thin and white and wolf