lace reception she noticed what in a
warmer effusion of feelings she would never have seen,--that her
brother's clothes were out of date and worn; and that, though his
carriage was notably strong and graceful, the trifling constraint
and dignity of his younger days had become almost an awkwardness
after two years among uncultivated men.  It occurred to Helen to be
just a little ashamed of him.

He took a place on the steps and sat without saying a word all the
evening.  There was nothing for him to say.  These young people
talked thoughtlessly, as young people do, of the affairs belonging
to their own little circle.  Thorpe knew nothing of the cotillion,
or the brake ride, or of the girl who visited Alice Southerland;
all of which gave occasion for so much lively comment.  Nor was
the situation improved when some of them, in a noble effort at
politeness, turned the conversation into more general channels.
The topics of the day's light talk were absolutely unknown to him.
The plays, the new books, the latest popular songs, jokes depending
for their point on an intimate knowledge of the prevailing vaudeville
mode, were as unfamiliar to him as Miss Alice Southerland's guest.
He had thought pine and forest and the trail so long, that he found
these square-elbowed subjects refusing to be jostled aside by any
trivialities.

So he sat there silent in the semi-darkness.  This man, whose
lightest experience would have aroused the eager attention of the
entire party, held his peace because he thought he had nothing to
say.

He took Helen back to Mrs. Renwick's about ten o'clock.  They
walked slowly beneath the broad-leaved maples, whose shadows
danced under the tall electric lights,--and talked.

Helen was an affectionate, warm-hearted girl.  Ordinarily she would
have been blind to everything except the delight of having her
brother once more with her.  But his apparently cold reception had
first chilled, then thrown her violently into a critical mood.  His
subsequent social inadequacy had settled her into the common-sense
level of everyday life.

"How have you done, Harry?" she inquired anxiously.  "Your letters
have been so vague."

"Pretty well," he replied.  "If things go right, I hope some day
to have a better place for you than this."

Her heart contracted suddenly.  It was all she could do to keep
from bursting into tears.  One would have to realize perfectly her
youth, the life to which she had been accustomed, the lack of
encouragement she had labored under, the distastefulness of her
surroundings, the pent-up dogged patience she had displayed during
the last two years, the hopeless feeling of battering against a
brick wall she always experienced when she received the replies
to her attempts on Harry's confidence, to appreciate how the
indefiniteness of his answer exasperated her and filled her
with sullen despair.  She said nothing for twenty steps.  Then:

"Harry," she said quietly, "can't you take me away from Mrs.
Renwick's this year?"

"I don't know, Helen.  I can't tell yet.  Not just now, at any rate."

"Harry," she cried, "you don't know what you're doing.  I tell you
I can't STAND Mrs. Renwick any longer."  She calmed herself with an
effort, and went on more quietly.  "Really, Harry, she's awfully
disagreeable.  If you can't afford to keep me anywhere else--" she
glanced timidly at his face and for the first time saw the strong
lines about the jaw and the tiny furrows between the eyebrows.  "I
know you've worked hard, Harry dear," she said with a sudden
sympathy, "and that you'd give me more, if you could.  But so have
I worked hard.  Now we ought to change this in some way.  I can get
a position as teacher, or some other work somewhere.  Won't you let
me do that?"

Thorpe was thinking that it would be easy enough to obtain Wallace
Carpenter's consent to his taking a thousand dollars from the
profits of the year.  But he knew also that the struggle in the
courts might need every cent the new company could spare.  It would
look much better were he to wait until after the verdict.  If
favorable, there would be no difficulty about sparing the money.  If
adverse, there would be no money to spare.  The latter contingency
he did not seriously anticipate, but still it had to be considered.
And so, until the thing was absolutely certain, he hesitated to
explain the situation to Helen for fear of disappointing her!

"I think you'd better wait, Helen," said he.  "There'll be time
enough for all that later when it becomes necessary.  You are very
young yet, and it will not hurt you a bit to continue your education
for a little while longer."

"And in the meantime stay with Mrs. Renwick?" flashed Helen.

"Yes.  I hope it will not have to be for very long."

"How long do you think, Harry?" pleaded the girl.

"That depends on circumstances," replied Thorpe

"Oh!" she cried indignantly.

"Harry," she ventured after a time, "why not write to Uncle Amos?"

Thorpe stopped and looked at her searchingly.

"You can't mean that, Helen," he said, drawing a long breath.

"But why not?" she persisted.

"You ought to know."

"Who would have done any different?  If you had a brother and
discovered that he had--appropriated--most all the money of a
concern of which you were president, wouldn't you think it your
duty to have him arrested?"

"No!" cried Thorpe suddenly excited.  "Never!  If he was my brother,
I'd help him, even if he'd committed murder!"

"We differ there," replied the girl coldly.  "I consider that Uncle
Amos was a strong man who did his duty as he saw it, in spite of his
feelings.  That he had father arrested is nothing against him in my
eyes.  And his wanting us to come to him since, seems to me very
generous.  I am going to write to him."

"You will do nothing of the kind," commanded Thorpe sternly.  "Amos
Thorpe is an unscrupulous man who became unscrupulously rich.  He
deliberately used our father as a tool, and then destroyed him.  I
consider that anyone of our family who would have anything to do
with him is a traitor!"

The girl did not reply.

Next morning Thorpe felt uneasily repentant for his strong language.
After all, the girl did lead a monotonous life, and he could not
blame her for rebelling against it from time to time.  Her remarks
had been born of the rebellion; they had meant nothing in themselves.
He could not doubt for a moment her loyalty to the family.

But he did not tell her so.  That is not the way of men of his stamp.
Rather he cast about to see what he could do.

Injin Charley had, during the winter just past, occupied odd
moments in embroidering with beads and porcupine quills a wonderful
outfit of soft buckskin gauntlets, a shirt of the same material, and
moccasins of moose-hide.  They were beautifully worked, and Thorpe,
on receiving them, had at once conceived the idea of giving them
to his sister.  To this end he had consulted another Indian near
Marquette, to whom he had confided the task of reducing the gloves
and moccasins.  The shirt would do as it was, for it was intended
to be worn as a sort of belted blouse.  As has been said, all were
thickly beaded, and represented a vast quantity of work.  Probably
fifty dollars could not have bought them, even in the north country.

Thorpe tendered this as a peace offering.  Not understanding women
in the least, he was surprised to see his gift received by a burst
of tears and a sudden exit from the room.  Helen thought he had
bought the things; and she was still sore from the pinch of the
poverty she had touched the evening before.  Nothing will exasperate
a woman more than to be presented with something expensive for which
she does not particularly care, after being denied, on the ground of
economy, something she wants very much.

Thorpe stared after her in hurt astonishment.  Mrs. Renwick sniffed.

That afternoon the latter estimable lady attempted to reprove Miss
Helen, and was snubbed; she persisted, and an open quarrel ensued.

"I will not be dictated to by you, Mrs. Renwick," said Helen, "and I
don't intend to have you interfere in any way with my family affairs."

"They won't stand MUCH investigation," replied Mrs. Renwick, goaded
out of her placidity.

Thorpe entered to hear the last two speeches.  He said nothing, but
that night he wrote to Wallace Carpenter for a thousand dollars.
Every stroke of the pen hurt him.  But of course Helen could not
stay here now.

"And to think, just to THINK that he let that woman insult me so,
and didn't say a word!" cried Helen to herself.

Her method would have been to have acted irrevocably on the spot,
and sought ways and means afterwards.  Thorpe's, however, was to
perfect all his plans before making the first step.

Wallace Carpenter was not in town.  Before the letter had followed
him to his new address, and the answer had returned, a week had
passed.  Of course the money was gladly put at Thorpe's disposal.
The latter at once interviewed his sister.

"Helen," he said, "I have made arrangements for some money.  What
would you like to do this year?"

She raised her head and looked at him with clear bright gaze.  If
he could so easily raise the money, why had he not done so before?
He knew how much she wanted it.  Her happiness did not count.  Only
when his quixotic ideas of family honor were attacked did he bestir
himself.

"I am going to Uncle Amos's," she replied distinctly.

"What?" asked Thorpe incredulously.

For answer she pointed to a letter lying open on the table.  Thorpe
took it and read:

"My dear Niece:

"Both Mrs. Thorpe and myself more than rejoice that time and
reflection have removed that, I must confess, natural prejudice
which the unfortunate family affair, to which I will not allude,
raised in your mind against us.  As we said long ago, our home is
your's when you may wish to make it so.  You state your present
readiness to come immediately.  Unless you wire to the contrary, we
shall expect you next Tuesday evening on the four-forty train.  I
shall be at the Central Station myself to meet you.  If your brother
is now with you, I should be pleased to see him also, and will be
most happy to give him a position with the firm.

"Aff. your uncle,

"Amos Thorpe.

"New York, June 6, 1883."

On finishing the last paragraph the reader crumpled the letter and
threw it into the grate.

"I am sorry you did that, Helen," said he, "but I don't blame you,
and it can't be helped.  We won't need to take advantage of his
'kind offer' now."

"I intend to do so, however," replied the girl coldly.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean," she cried, "that I am sick of waiting on your good
pleasure.  I waited, and slaved, and stood unbearable things for
two years.  I did it cheerfully.  And in return I don't get a civil
word, not a decent explanation, not even a--caress," she fairly
sobbed out the last word.  "I can't stand it any longer.  I have
tried and tried and tried, and then when I've come to you for the
littlest word of encouragement, you have pecked at me with those
stingy little kisses, and have told me I was young and ought to
finish my education.  You put me in uncongenial surroundings, and
go off into the woods camping yourself.  You refuse me money enough
to live in a three-dollar boarding-house, and you buy expensive
rifles and fishing tackle for yourself.  You can't afford to send
me away somewhere for the summer, but you bring me back gee-gaws
you have happened to fancy, worth a month's board in the country.
You haven't a cent when it is a question of what I want; but you
raise money quick enough when your old family is insulted.  Isn't
it my family too?  And then you blame me because, after waiting in
vain two years for you to do something, I start out to do the best
I can for myself.  I'm not of age but you're not my guardian!"

During this long speech Thorpe had stood motionless, growing paler
and paler.  Like most noble natures, when absolutely in the right,
he was incapable of defending himself against misunderstandings.
He was too wounded; he was hurt to the soul.

"You know that is not true, Helen," he replied, almost sternly.


"It IS true!" she asseverated, "and I'm THROUGH!"

"It's a little hard," said Thorpe passing his hand wearily before
his eyes, "to work hard this way for years, and then---"

She laughed with a hard little note of scorn.

"Helen," said Thorpe with new energy, "I forbid you to have anything
to do with Amos Thorpe.  I think he is a scoundrel and a sneak."

"What grounds have you to think so?"

"None," he confessed, "that is, nothing definite.  But I know men;
and I know his type.  Some day I shall be able to prove something.
I do not wish you to have anything to do with him."

"I shall do as I please," she replied, crossing her hands behind her.

Thorpe's eyes darkened.

"We have talked this over a great many times," he warned, "and
you've always agreed with me.  Remember, you owe something to the
family."

"Most of the family seem to owe something," she replied with a
flippant laugh.  "I'm sure I didn't choose the family.  If I had,
I'd have picked out a better one!"

The flippancy was only a weapon which she used unconsciously,
blindly, in her struggle.  The man could not know this.  His
face hardened, and his voice grew cold.

"You may take your choice, Helen," he said formally.  "If you go
into the household of Amos Thorpe, if you deliberately prefer your
comfort to your honor, we will have nothing more in common."

They faced each other with the cool, deadly glance of the race, so
similar in appearance but so unlike in nature.

"I, too, offer you a home, such as it is," repeated the man.
"Choose!"

At the mention of the home for which means were so quickly
forthcoming when Thorpe, not she, considered it needful, the girl's
eyes flashed.  She stooped and dragged violently from beneath the
bed a flat steamer trunk, the lid of which she threw open.  A dress
lay on the bed.  With a fine dramatic gesture she folded the garment
and laid it in the bottom of the trunk.  Then she knelt, and without
vouchsafing another glance at her brother standing rigid by the door,
she began feverishly to arrange the folds.

The choice was made.  He turned and went out.



Chapter XXXIV


With Thorpe there could be no half-way measure.  He saw that the
rupture with his sister was final, and the thrust attained him
in one of his few unprotected points.  It was not as though he
felt either himself or his sister consciously in the wrong.  He
acquitted her of all fault, except as to the deadly one of
misreading and misunderstanding.  The fact argued not a perversion
but a lack in her character.  She was other than he had thought her.

As for himself, he had schemed, worked, lived only for her.  He had
come to her from the battle expecting rest and refreshment.  To the
world he had shown the hard, unyielding front of the unemotional;
he had looked ever keenly outward; he had braced his muscles in the
constant tension of endeavor.  So much the more reason why, in the
hearts of the few he loved, he, the man of action, should find
repose; the man of sternness, should discover that absolute peace
of the spirit in which not the slightest motion of the will is
necessary, the man of repression should be permitted affectionate,
care-free expansion of the natural affection, of the full sympathy
which will understand and not mistake for weakness.  Instead of this,
he was forced into refusing where he would rather have given; into
denying where he would rather have assented; and finally into
commanding where he longed most ardently to lay aside the cloak of
authority.  His motives were misread; his intentions misjudged; his
love doubted.

But worst of all, Thorpe's mind could see no possibility of an
explanation.  If she could not see of her own accord how much he
loved her, surely it was a hopeless task to attempt an explanation
through mere words.  If, after all, she was capable of misconceiving
the entire set of his motives during the past two years, expostulation
would be futile.  In his thoughts of her he fell into a great
spiritual dumbness.  Never, even in his moments of most theoretical
imaginings, did he see himself setting before her fully and calmly
the hopes and ambitions of which she had been the mainspring.  And
before a reconciliation, many such rehearsals must take place in the
secret recesses of a man's being.

Thorpe did not cry out, nor confide in a friend, nor do anything
even so mild as pacing the floor.  The only outward and visible sign
a close observer might have noted was a certain dumb pain lurking in
the depths of his eyes like those of a wounded spaniel.  He was hurt,
but did not understand.  He suffered in silence, but without anger.
This is at once the noblest and the most pathetic of human suffering.

At first the spring of his life seemed broken.  He did not care for
money; and at present disappointment had numbed his interest in the
game.  It seemed hardly worth the candle.

Then in a few days, after his thoughts had ceased to dwell constantly
on the one subject, he began to look about him mentally.  Beneath his
other interests he still felt constantly a dull ache, something
unpleasant, uncomfortable.  Strangely enough it was almost identical
in quality with the uneasiness that always underlay his surface-
thoughts when he was worried about some detail of his business.
Unconsciously,--again as in his business,--the combative instinct
aroused.  In lack of other object on which to expend itself, Thorpe's
fighting spirit turned with energy to the subject of the lawsuit.

Under the unwonted stress of the psychological condition just
described, he thought at white heat.  His ideas were clear, and
followed each other quickly, almost feverishly.

After his sister left the Renwicks, Thorpe himself went to Detroit,
where he interviewed at once Northrop, the brilliant young lawyer
whom the firm had engaged to defend its case.

"I'm afraid we have no show," he replied to Thorpe's question.
"You see, you fellows were on the wrong side of the fence in trying
to enforce the law yourselves.  Of course you may well say that
justice was all on your side.  That does not count.  The only
recourse recognized for injustice lies in the law courts.  I'm
afraid you are due to lose your case."

"Well," said Thorpe, "they can't prove much damage."

"I don't expect that they will be able to procure a very heavy
judgment," replied Northrop.  "The facts I shall be able to adduce
will cut down damages.  But the costs will be very heavy."

"Yes," agreed Thorpe.

"And," then pursued Northrop with a dry smile, "they practically own
Sherman.  You may be in for contempt of court at their instigation.
As I understand it, they are trying rather to injure you than to
get anything out of it themselves."

"That's it," nodded Thorpe.

"In other words, it's a case for compromise."

"Just what I wanted to get at," said Thorpe with satisfaction.
"Now answer me a question.  Suppose a man injures Government or
State land by trespass.  The land is afterwards bought by another
party.  Has the latter any claim for damage against the trespasser?
Understand me, the purchaser bought AFTER the trespass was committed."

"Certainly," answered Northrop without hesitation.

"Provided suit is brought within six years of the time the trespass
was committed."

"Good!  Now see here.  These M. & D. people stole about a section of
Government pine up on that river, and I don't believe they've ever
bought in the land it stood on.  In fact I don't believe they
suspect that anyone knows they've been stealing.  How would it do,
if I were to buy that section at the Land Office, and threaten to
sue them for the value of the pine that originally stood on it?"

The lawyer's eyes glimmered behind the lenses of his pince-nez;
but, with the caution of the professional man he made no other
sign of satisfaction.

"It would do very well indeed," he replied, "but you'd have to
prove they did the cutting, and you'll have to pay experts to
estimate the probable amount of the timber.  Have you the
description of the section?"

"No," responded Thorpe, "but I can get it; and I can pick up
witnesses from the woodsmen as to the cutting."

"The more the better.  It is rather easy to discredit the testimony
of one or two.  How much, on a broad guess, would you estimate the
timber to come to?"

"There ought to be about eight or ten million," guessed Thorpe
after an instant's silence, "worth in the stump anywhere from
sixteen to twenty thousand dollars.  It would cost me only eight
hundred to buy it."

"Do so, by all means.  Get your documents and evidence all in shape,
and let me have them.  I'll see that the suit is discontinued then.
Will you sue them?"

"No, I think not," replied Thorpe.  "I'll just hold it back as a
sort of club to keep them in line."

The next day, he took the train north.  He had something definite
and urgent to do, and, as always with practical affairs demanding
attention and resource, he threw himself whole-souled into the
accomplishment of it.  By the time he had bought the sixteen forties
constituting the section, searched out a dozen witnesses to the
theft, and spent a week with the Marquette expert in looking over
the ground, he had fallen into the swing of work again.  His
experience still ached; but dully.

Only now he possessed no interests outside of those in the new
country; no affections save the half-protecting, good-natured
comradeship with Wallace, the mutual self-reliant respect that
subsisted between Tim Shearer and himself, and the dumb,
unreasoning dog-liking he shared with Injin Charley.  His eye
became clearer and steadier; his methods more simple and direct.
The taciturnity of his mood redoubled in thickness.  He was less
charitable to failure on the part of subordinates.  And the new
firm on the Ossawinamakee prospered.



Chapter XXXV


Five years passed.

In that time Thorpe had succeeded in cutting a hundred million feet
of pine.  The money received for this had all been turned back into
the Company's funds.  From a single camp of twenty-five men with
ten horses and a short haul of half a mile, the concern had
increased to six large, well-equipped communities of eighty to a
hundred men apiece, using nearly two hundred horses, and hauling
as far as eight or nine miles.

Near the port stood a mammoth sawmill capable of taking care of
twenty-two million feet a year, about which a lumber town had
sprung up.  Lake schooners lay in a long row during the summer
months, while busy loaders passed the planks from one to the other
into the deep holds.  Besides its original holding, the company had
acquired about a hundred and fifty million more, back near the
headwaters of tributaries to the Ossawinamakee.  In the spring and
early summer months, the drive was a wonderful affair.

During the four years in which the Morrison & Daly Company shared
the stream with Thorpe, the two firms lived in complete amity and
understanding.  Northrop had played his cards skillfully.  The older
capitalists had withdrawn suit.  Afterwards they kept scrupulously
within their rights, and saw to it that no more careless openings
were left for Thorpe's shrewdness.  They were keen enough business
men, but had made the mistake, common enough to established power,
of underrating the strength of an apparently insignificant opponent.
Once they understood Thorpe's capacity, that young man had no more
chance to catch them napping.

And as the younger man, on his side, never attempted to overstep
his own rights, the interests of the rival firms rarely clashed.  As
to the few disputes that did arise, Thorpe found Mr. Daly singularly
anxious to please.  In the desire was no friendliness, however.
Thorpe was watchful for treachery, and could hardly believe the
affair finished when at the end of the fourth year the M. & D.
sold out the remainder of its pine to a firm from Manistee, and
transferred its operations to another stream a few miles east,
where it had acquired more considerable holdings.

"They're altogether too confounded anxious to help us on that
freight, Wallace," said Thorpe wrinkling his brow uneasily.  "I
don't like it.  It isn't natural."

"No," laughed Wallace, "neither is it natural for a dog to draw a
sledge.  But he does it--when he has to.  They're afraid of you,
Harry: that's all."

Thorpe shook his head, but had to acknowledge that he could
evidence no grounds for his mistrust.

The conversation took place at Camp One, which was celebrated in
three states.  Thorpe had set out to gather around him a band of
good woodsmen.  Except on a pinch he would employ no others.

"I don't care if I get in only two thousand feet this winter, and
if a boy does that," he answered Shearer's expostulations, "it's
got to be a good boy."

The result of his policy began to show even in the second year.
Men were a little proud to say that they had put in a winter at
"Thorpe's One."  Those who had worked there during the first year
were loyally enthusiastic over their boss's grit and resourcefulness,
their camp's order, their cook's good "grub."  As they were
authorities, others perforce had to accept the dictum.  There grew
a desire among the better class to see what Thorpe's "One" might be
like.  In the autumn Harry had more applicants than he knew what to
do with.  Eighteen of the old men returned.  He took them all, but
when it came to distribution, three found themselves assigned to
one or the other of the new camps.  And quietly the rumor gained
that these three had shown the least willing spirit during the
previous winter.  The other fifteen were sobered to the industry
which their importance as veterans might have impaired.

Tim Shearer was foreman of Camp One; Scotty Parsons was drafted
from the veterans to take charge of Two; Thorpe engaged two men
known to Tim to boss Three and Four.  But in selecting the "push"
for Five he displayed most strikingly his keen appreciation of a
man's relation to his environment.  He sought out John Radway and
induced him to accept the commission.

"You can do it, John," said he, "and I know it.  I want you to
try; and if you don't make her go, I'll call it nobody's fault
but my own."

"I don't see how you dare risk it, after that Cass Branch deal,
Mr. Thorpe," replied Radway, almost brokenly.  "But I would like
to tackle it, I'm dead sick of loafing.  Sometimes it seems like
I'd die, if I don't get out in the woods again."

"We'll call it a deal, then," answered Thorpe.

The result proved his sagacity.  Radway was one of the best foremen
in the outfit.  He got more out of his men, he rose better to
emergencies, and he accomplished more with the same resources than
any of the others, excepting Tim Shearer.  As long as the work was
done for someone else, he was capable and efficient.  Only when he
was called upon to demand on his own account, did the paralyzing
shyness affect him.

But the one feature that did more to attract the very best element
among woodsmen, and so make possible the practice of Thorpe's theory
of success, was Camp One.  The men's accommodations at the other
five were no different and but little better than those in a
thousand other typical lumber camps of both peninsulas.  They slept
in box-like bunks filled with hay or straw over which blankets were
spread; they sat on a narrow hard bench or on the floor; they read
by the dim light of a lamp fastened against the big cross beam;
they warmed themselves at a huge iron stove in the center of the
room around which suspended wires and poles offered space for the
drying of socks; they washed their clothes when the mood struck them.
It was warm and comparatively clean.  But it was dark, without
ornament, cheerless.

The lumber-jack never expects anything different.  In fact, if he
were pampered to the extent of ordinary comforts, he would be apt
at once to conclude himself indispensable; whereupon he would
become worthless.

Thorpe, however, spent a little money--not much--and transformed
Camp One.  Every bunk was provided with a tick, which the men could
fill with hay, balsam, or hemlock, as suited them.  Cheap but
attractive curtains on wires at once brightened the room and shut
each man's "bedroom" from the main hall.  The deacon seat remained
but was supplemented by a half-dozen simple and comfortable chairs.
In the center of the room stood a big round table over which glowed
two hanging lamps.  The table was littered with papers and magazines.
Home life was still further suggested by a canary bird in a gilt cage,
a sleepy cat, and two pots of red geraniums.  Thorpe had further
imported a washerwoman who dwelt in a separate little cabin under
the hill.  She washed the men's belongings at twenty-five cents a
week, which amount Thorpe deducted from each man's wages, whether he
had the washing done or not.  This encouraged cleanliness.  Phil
scrubbed out every day, while the men were in the woods.

Such was Thorpe's famous Camp One in the days of its splendor.  Old
woodsmen will still tell you about it, with a longing reminiscent
glimmer in the corners of their eyes as they recall its glories and
the men who worked in it.  To have "put in" a winter in Camp One
was the mark of a master; and the ambition of every raw recruit to
the forest.  Probably Thorpe's name is remembered to-day more on
account of the intrepid, skillful, loyal men his strange genius
gathered about it, than for the herculean feat of having carved a
great fortune from the wilderness in but five years' time.

But Camp One was a privilege.  A man entered it only after having
proved himself; he remained in it only as long as his efficiency
deserved the honor.  Its members were invariably recruited from one
of the other four camps; never from applicants who had not been in
Thorpe's employ.  A raw man was sent to Scotty, or Jack Hyland, or
Radway, or Kerlie.  There he was given a job, if he happened to
suit, and men were needed.  By and by, perhaps, when a member of
Camp One fell sick or was given his time, Tim Shearer would send
word to one of the other five that he needed an axman or a sawyer,
or a loader, or teamster, as the case might be.  The best man in
the other camps was sent up.

So Shearer was foreman of a picked crew.  Probably no finer body of
men was ever gathered at one camp.  In them one could study at his
best the American pioneer.  It was said at that time that you had
never seen logging done as it should be until you had visited
Thorpe's Camp One on the Ossawinamakee.

Of these men Thorpe demanded one thing--success.  He tried never to
ask of them anything he did not believe to be thoroughly possible;
but he expected always that in some manner, by hook or crook, they
would carry the affair through.  No matter how good the excuse, it
was never accepted.  Accidents would happen, there as elsewhere; a
way to arrive in spite of them always exists, if only a man is
willing to use his wits, unflagging energy, and time.  Bad luck is
a reality; but much of what is called bad luck is nothing but a want
of careful foresight, and Thorpe could better afford to be harsh
occasionally to the genuine for the sake of eliminating the false.
If a man failed, he left Camp One.

The procedure was very simple.  Thorpe never explained his reasons
even to Shearer.

"Ask Tom to step in a moment," he requested of the latter.

"Tom," he said to that individual, "I think I can use you better
at Four.  Report to Kerlie there."

And strangely enough, few even of these proud and independent men
ever asked for their time, or preferred to quit rather than to work
up again to the glories of their prize camp.

For while new recruits were never accepted at Camp One, neither was
a man ever discharged there.  He was merely transferred to one of
the other foremen.

It is necessary to be thus minute in order that the reader may
understand exactly the class of men Thorpe had about his immediate
person.  Some of them had the reputation of being the hardest
citizens in three States, others were mild as turtle doves.  They
were all pioneers.  They had the independence, the unabashed eye,
the insubordination even, of the man who has drawn his intellectual
and moral nourishment at the breast of a wild nature.  They were
afraid of nothing alive.  From no one, were he chore-boy or
president, would they take a single word--with the exception always
of Tim Shearer and Thorpe.

The former they respected because in their picturesque guild he
was a master craftsman.  The latter they adored and quoted and
fought for in distant saloons, because he represented to them their
own ideal, what they would be if freed from the heavy gyves of vice
and executive incapacity that weighed them down.

And they were loyal.  It was a point of honor with them to stay
"until the last dog was hung."  He who deserted in the hour of
need was not only a renegade, but a fool.  For he thus earned a
magnificent licking if ever he ran up against a member of the
"Fighting Forty."  A band of soldiers they were, ready to attempt
anything their commander ordered, devoted, enthusiastically admiring.
And, it must be confessed, they were also somewhat on the order of
a band of pirates.  Marquette thought so each spring after the
drive, when, hat-tilted, they surged swearing and shouting down
to Denny Hogan's saloon.  Denny had to buy new fixtures when they
went away; but it was worth it.

Proud! it was no name for it.  Boast! the fame of Camp One spread
abroad over the land, and was believed in to about twenty per cent
of the anecdotes detailed of it--which was near enough the actual
truth.  Anecdotes disbelieved, the class of men from it would have
given it a reputation.  The latter was varied enough, in truth.
Some people thought Camp One must be a sort of hell-hole of roaring,
fighting devils.  Others sighed and made rapid calculations of the
number of logs they could put in, if only they could get hold of
help like that.

Thorpe himself, of course, made his headquarters at Camp One.
Thence he visited at least once a week all the other camps,
inspecting the minutest details, not only of the work, but of
the everyday life.  For this purpose he maintained a light box
sleigh and pair of bays, though often, when the snow became deep,
he was forced to snowshoes.

During the five years he had never crossed the Straits of Mackinaw.
The rupture with his sister had made repugnant to him all the
southern country.  He preferred to remain in the woods.  All winter
long he was more than busy at his logging.  Summers he spent at the
mill.  Occasionally he visited Marquette, but always on business.
He became used to seeing only the rough faces of men.  The vision of
softer graces and beauties lost its distinctness before this strong,
hardy northland, whose gentler moods were like velvet over iron, or
like its own summer leaves veiling the eternal darkness of the pines.

He was happy because he was too busy to be anything else.  The
insistent need of success which he had created for himself, absorbed
all other sentiments.  He demanded it of others rigorously.  He
could do no less than demand it of himself.  It had practically
become one of his tenets of belief.  The chief end of any man, as
he saw it, was to do well and successfully what his life found ready.
Anything to further this fore-ordained activity was good; anything
else was bad.  These thoughts, aided by a disposition naturally
fervent and single in purpose, hereditarily ascetic and conscientious
--for his mother was of old New England stock--gave to him in the
course of six years' striving a sort of daily and familiar religion
to which he conformed his life.

Success, success, success.  Nothing could be of more importance.
Its attainment argued a man's efficiency in the Scheme of Things,
his worthy fulfillment of the end for which a divine Providence had
placed him on earth.  Anything that interfered with it--personal
comfort, inclination, affection, desire, love of ease, individual
liking,--was bad.

Luckily for Thorpe's peace of mind, his habit of looking on men as
things helped him keep to this attitude of mind.  His lumbermen were
tools,--good, sharp, efficient tools, to be sure, but only because he
had made them so.  Their loyalty aroused in his breast no pride nor
gratitude.  He expected loyalty.  He would have discharged at once
a man who did not show it.  The same with zeal, intelligence, effort
--they were the things he took for granted.  As for the admiration
and affection which the Fighting Forty displayed for him personally,
he gave not a thought to it.  And the men knew it, and loved him the
more from the fact.

Thorpe cared for just three people, and none of them happened to
clash with his machine.  They were Wallace Carpenter, little Phil,
and Injin Charley.

Wallace, for reasons already explained at length, was always
personally agreeable to Thorpe.  Latterly, since the erection of
the mill, he had developed unexpected acumen in the disposal of the
season's cut to wholesale dealers in Chicago.  Nothing could have
been better for the firm.  Thereafter he was often in the woods,
both for pleasure and to get his partner's ideas on what the firm
would have to offer.  The entire responsibility at the city end of
the business was in his hands.

Injin Charley continued to hunt and trap in the country round about.
Between him and Thorpe had grown a friendship the more solid in that
its increase had been mysteriously without outward cause.  Once or
twice a month the lumberman would snowshoe down to the little cabin
at the forks.  Entering, he would nod briefly and seat himself on a
cracker-box.

"How do, Charley," said he.

"How do," replied Charley.

They filled pipes and smoked.  At rare intervals one of them made a
remark, tersely,

"Catch um three beaver las' week," remarked Charley.

"Good haul," commented Thorpe.

Or:

"I saw a mink track by the big boulder," offered Thorpe.

"H'm!" responded Charley in a long-drawn falsetto whine.

Yet somehow the men came to know each other better and better; and
each felt that in an emergency he could depend on the other to the
uttermost in spite of the difference in race.

As for Phil, he was like some strange, shy animal, retaining all
its wild instincts, but led by affection to become domestic.  He
drew the water, cut the wood, none better.  In the evening he
played atrociously his violin,--none worse--,bending his great white
brow forward with the wolf-glare in his eyes, swaying his shoulders
with a fierce delight in the subtle dissonances, the swaggering
exactitude of time, the vulgar rendition of the horrible tunes he
played.  And often he went into the forest and gazed wondering
through his liquid poet's eyes at occult things.  Above all, he
worshipped Thorpe.  And in turn the lumberman accorded him a
good-natured affection.  He was as indispensable to Camp One as
the beagles.

And the beagles were most indispensable.  No one could have got
along without them.  In the course of events and natural selection
they had increased to eleven.  At night they slept in the men's camp
underneath or very near the stove.  By daylight in the morning they
were clamoring at the door.  Never had they caught a hare.  Never
for a moment did their hopes sink.  The men used sometimes to amuse
themselves by refusing the requested exit.  The little dogs agonized.
They leaped and yelped, falling over each other like a tangle of
angleworms.  Then finally, when the door at last flung wide, they
precipitated themselves eagerly and silently through the opening.
A few moments later a single yelp rose in the direction of the
swamp; the band took up the cry.  From then until dark the glade
was musical with baying.  At supper time they returned straggling,
their expression pleased, six inches of red tongue hanging from the
corners of their mouths, ravenously ready for supper.

Strangely enough the big white hares never left the swamp.  Perhaps
the same one was never chased two days in succession.  Or it is
possible that the quarry enjoyed the harmless game as much as did
the little dogs.

Once only while the snow lasted was the hunt abandoned for a few
days.  Wallace Carpenter announced his intention of joining forces
with the diminutive hounds.

"It's a shame, so it is, doggies!" he laughed at the tried pack.
"We'll get one to-morrow."

So he took his shotgun to the swamp, and after a half hour's wait,
succeeded in killing the hare.  From that moment he was the hero of
those ecstacized canines.  They tangled about him everywhere.  He
hardly dared take a step for fear of crushing one of the open faces
and expectant, pleading eyes looking up at him.  It grew to be
a nuisance.  Wallace always claimed his trip was considerably
shortened because he could not get away from his admirers.



Chapter XXXVI


Financially the Company was rated high, and yet was heavily in
debt.  This condition of affairs by no means constitutes an anomaly
in the lumbering business.

The profits of the first five years had been immediately reinvested
in the business.  Thorpe, with the foresight that had originally led
him into this new country, saw farther than the instant's gain.  He
intended to establish in a few years more a big plant which would
be returning benefices in proportion not only to the capital
originally invested, but also in ratio to the energy, time, and
genius he had himself expended.  It was not the affair of a moment.
It was not the affair of half-measures, of timidity.

Thorpe knew that he could play safely, cutting a few millions a
year, expanding cautiously.  By this method he would arrive, but
only after a long period.

Or he could do as many other firms have done; start on borrowed
money.

In the latter case he had only one thing to fear, and that was
fire.  Every cent, and many times over, of his obligations would
be represented in the state of raw material.  All he had to do
was to cut it out by the very means which the yearly profits of
his business would enable him to purchase.  For the moment, he
owed a great deal; without the shadow of a doubt mere industry
would clear his debt, and leave him with substantial acquisitions
created, practically, from nothing but his own abilities.  The
money obtained from his mortgages was a tool which he picked up
an instant, used to fashion one of his own, and laid aside.

Every autumn the Company found itself suddenly in easy circumstances.
At any moment that Thorpe had chosen to be content with the progress
made, he could have, so to speak, declared dividends with his partner.
Instead of undertaking more improvements, for part of which he
borrowed some money, he could have divided the profits of the
season's cut.  But this he was not yet ready to do.

He had established five more camps, he had acquired over a hundred
and fifty million more of timber lying contiguous to his own, he
had built and equipped a modern high-efficiency mill, he had
constructed a harbor break-water and the necessary booms, he had
bought a tug, built a boarding-house.  All this costs money.  He
wished now to construct a logging railroad.  Then he promised
himself and Wallace that they would be ready to commence paying
operations.

The logging railroad was just then beginning to gain recognition.
A few miles of track, a locomotive, and a number of cars consisting
uniquely of wheels and "bunks," or cross beams on which to chain
the logs, and a fairly well-graded right-of-way comprised the
outfit.  Its use obviated the necessity of driving the river--always
an expensive operation.  Often, too, the decking at the skidways
could be dispensed with; and the sleigh hauls, if not entirely
superseded for the remote districts, were entirely so in the
country for a half mile on either side of the track, and in any
case were greatly shortened.  There obtained, too, the additional
advantage of being able to cut summer and winter alike.  Thus, the
plant once established, logging by railroad was not only easier but
cheaper.  Of late years it has come into almost universal use in
big jobs and wherever the nature of the country will permit.  The
old-fashioned, picturesque ice-road sleigh-haul will last as long
as north-woods lumbering,--even in the railroad districts,--but the
locomotive now does the heavy work.

With the capital to be obtained from the following winter's product,
Thorpe hoped to be able to establish a branch which should run from
a point some two miles behind Camp One, to a "dump" a short distance
above the mill.  For this he had made all the estimates, and even the
preliminary survey.  He was therefore the more grievously
disappointed,
when Wallace Carpenter made it impossible for him to do so.

He was sitting in the mill-office one day about the middle of July.
Herrick, the engineer, had just been in.  He could not keep the
engine in order, although Thorpe knew that it could be done.

"I've sot up nights with her," said Herrick, "and she's no go.  I
think I can fix her when my head gets all right.  I got headachy
lately.  And somehow that last lot of Babbit metal didn't seem to
act just right."

Thorpe looked out of the window, tapping his desk slowly with the
end of a lead pencil.

"Collins," said he to the bookkeeper, without raising his voice or
altering his position, "make out Herrick's time."

The man stood there astonished.

"But I had hard luck, sir," he expostulated.  "She'll go all right
now, I think."

Thorpe turned and looked at him.

"Herrick," he said, not unkindly, "this is the second time this
summer the mill has had to close early on account of that engine.
We have supplied you with everything you asked for.  If you can't
do it, we shall have to get a man who can."

"But I had---" began the man once more.

"I ask every man to succeed in what I give him to do," interrupted
Thorpe.  "If he has a headache, he must brace up or quit.  If his
Babbit doesn't act just right he must doctor it up; or get some more,
even if he has to steal it.  If he has hard luck, he must sit up
nights to better it.  It's none of my concern how hard or how easy
a time a man has in doing what I tell him to.  I EXPECT HIM TO DO IT.
If I have to do all a man's thinking for him, I may as well hire
Swedes and be done with it.  I have too many details to attend to
already without bothering about excuses."

The man stood puzzling over this logic.

"I ain't got any other job," he ventured.

"You can go to piling on the docks," replied Thorpe, "if you want to."

Thorpe was thus explicit because he rather liked Herrick.  It was
hard for him to discharge the man peremptorily, and he proved the
need of justifying himself in his own eyes.

Now he sat back idly in the clean painted little room with the big
square desk and the three chairs.  Through the door he could see
Collins, perched on a high stool before the shelf-like desk.  From
the open window came the clear, musical note of the circular saw,
the fresh aromatic smell of new lumber, the bracing air from
Superior sparkling in the offing.  He felt tired.  In rare moments
such as these, when the muscles of his striving relaxed, his mind
turned to the past.  Old sorrows rose before him and looked at him
with their sad eyes; the sorrows that had helped to make him what
he was.  He wondered where his sister was.  She would be twenty-two
years old now.  A tenderness, haunting, tearful, invaded his heart.
He suffered.  At such moments the hard shell of his rough woods life
seemed to rend apart.  He longed with a great longing for sympathy,
for love, for the softer influences that cradle even warriors
between the clangors of the battles.

The outer door, beyond the cage behind which Collins and his shelf
desk were placed, flew open.  Thorpe heard a brief greeting, and
Wallace Carpenter stood before him.

"Why, Wallace, I didn't know you were coming!" began Thorpe, and
stopped.  The boy, usually so fresh and happily buoyant, looked ten
years older.  Wrinkles had gathered between his eyes.  "Why, what's
the matter?" cried Thorpe.

He rose swiftly and shut the door into the outer office.  Wallace
seated himself mechanically.

"Everything! everything!" he said in despair.  "I've been a fool!
I've been blind!"

So bitter was his tone that Thorpe was startled.  The lumberman sat
down on the other side of the desk.

"That'll do, Wallace," he said sharply.  "Tell me briefly what is
the matter."

"I've been speculating!" burst out the boy.

"Ah!" said his partner.

"At first I bought only dividend-paying stocks outright.  Then I
bought for a rise, but still outright.  Then I got in with a fellow
who claimed to know all about it.  I bought on a margin.  There came
a slump.  I met the margins because I am sure there will be a rally,
but now all my fortune is in the thing.  I'm going to be penniless.
I'll lose it all."

"Ah!" said Thorpe.

"And the name of Carpenter is so old-established, so honorable!"
cried the unhappy boy, "and my sister!"

"Easy!" warned Thorpe.  "Being penniless isn't the worst thing that
can happen to a man."

"No; but I am in debt," went on the boy more calmly.  "I have given
notes.  When they come due, I'm a goner."

"How much?" asked Thorpe laconically.

"Thirty thousand dollars."

"Well, you have that amount in this firm."

"What do you mean?"

"If you want it, you can have it."

Wallace considered a moment.

"That would leave me without a cent," he replied.

"But it would save your commercial honor."

"Harry," cried Wallace suddenly, "couldn't this firm go on my note
for thirty thousand more?  Its credit is good, and that amount
would save my margins."

"You are partner," replied Thorpe, "your signature is as good as
mine in this firm."

"But you know I wouldn't do it without your consent," replied
Wallace reproachfully.  "Oh, Harry!" cried the boy, "when you
needed the amount, I let you have it!"

Thorpe smiled.

"You know you can have it, if it's to be had, Wallace.  I wasn't
hesitating on that account.  I was merely trying to figure out where
we can raise such a sum as sixty thousand dollars.  We haven't got
it."

"But you'll never have to pay it," assured Wallace eagerly.  "If I
can save my margins, I'll be all right."

"A man has to figure on paying whatever he puts his signature to,"
asserted Thorpe.  "I can give you our note payable at the end of a
year.  Then I'll hustle in enough timber to make up the amount.  It
means we don't get our railroad, that's all."

"I knew you'd help me out.  Now it's all right," said Wallace, with
a relieved air.

Thorpe shook his head.  He was already trying to figure how to
increase his cut to thirty million feet.

"I'll do it," he muttered to himself, after Wallace had gone out
to visit the mill.  "I've been demanding success of others for a
good many years; now I'll demand it of myself."






PART IV


THORPE'S DREAM GIRL



Chapter XXXVII


The moment had struck for the woman.  Thorpe did not know it, but
it was true.  A solitary, brooding life in the midst of grand
surroundings, an active, strenuous life among great responsibilities,
a starved, hungry life of the affections whence even the sister had
withdrawn her love,--all these had worked unobtrusively towards the
formation of a single psychological condition.  Such a moment comes
to every man.  In it he realizes the beauties, the powers, the
vastnesses which unconsciously his being has absorbed.  They rise
to the surface as a need, which, being satisfied, is projected into
the visible world as an ideal to be worshipped.  Then is happiness
and misery beside which the mere struggle to dominate men becomes
trivial, the petty striving with the forces of nature seems a little
thing.  And the woman he at that time meets takes on the qualities
of the dream; she is more than woman, less than goddess; she is the
best of that man made visible.

Thorpe found himself for the first time filled with the spirit of
restlessness.  His customary iron evenness of temper was gone, so
that he wandered quickly from one detail of his work to another,
without seeming to penetrate below the surface-need of any one
task.  Out of the present his mind was always escaping to a mystic
fourth dimension which he did not understand.  But a week before, he
had felt himself absorbed in the component parts of his enterprise,
the totality of which arched far over his head, shutting out the
sky.  Now he was outside of it.  He had, without his voli