tion,
abandoned the creator's standpoint of the god at the heart of his
work.  It seemed as important, as great to him, but somehow it had
taken on a strange solidarity, as though he had left it a plastic
beginning and returned to find it hardened into the shapes of
finality.  He acknowledged it admirable,--and wondered how he had
ever accomplished it!  He confessed that it should be finished as
it had begun,--and could not discover in himself the Titan who had
watched over its inception.

Thorpe took this state of mind much to heart, and in combating it
expended more energy than would have sufficed to accomplish the
work.  Inexorably he held himself to the task.  He filled his mind
full of lumbering.  The millions along the bank on section nine must
be cut and travoyed directly to the rollways.  It was a shame that
the necessity should arise.  From section nine Thorpe had hoped to
lighten the expenses when finally he should begin operations on the
distant and inaccessible headwaters of French Creek.  Now there was
no help for it.  The instant necessity was to get thirty millions
of pine logs down the river before Wallace Carpenter's notes came
due.  Every other consideration had to yield before that.  Fifteen
millions more could be cut on seventeen, nineteen, and eleven,--
regions hitherto practically untouched,--by the men in the four
camps inland.  Camp One and Camp Three could attend to section nine.

These were details to which Thorpe applied his mind.  As he pushed
through the sun-flecked forest, laying out his roads, placing his
travoy trails, spying the difficulties that might supervene to mar
the fair face of honest labor, he had always this thought before
him,--that he must apply his mind.  By an effort, a tremendous
effort, he succeeded in doing so.  The effort left him limp.  He
found himself often standing, or moving gently, his eyes staring
sightless, his mind cradled on vague misty clouds of absolute
inaction, his will chained so softly and yet so firmly that he felt
no strength and hardly the desire to break from the dream that lulled
him.  Then he was conscious of the physical warmth of the sun, the
faint sweet woods smells, the soothing caress of the breeze, the
sleepy cicada-like note of the pine creeper.  Through his half-closed
lashes the tangled sun-beams made soft-tinted rainbows.  He wanted
nothing so much as to sit on the pine needles there in the golden
flood of radiance, and dream--dream on--vaguely, comfortably,
sweetly--dream of the summer---

Thorpe, with a mighty and impatient effort, snapped the silken
cords asunder.

"Lord, Lord!" he cried impatiently.  "What's coming to me?  I must
be a little off my feed!"

And he hurried rapidly to his duties.  After an hour of the hardest
concentration he had ever been required to bestow on a trivial
subject, he again unconsciously sank by degrees into the old apathy.

"Glad it isn't the busy season!" he commented to himself.  "Here, I
must quit this!  Guess it's the warm weather.  I'll get down to the
mill for a day or two."

There he found himself incapable of even the most petty routine
work.  He sat to his desk at eight o'clock and began the perusal
of a sheaf of letters, comprising a certain correspondence, which
Collins brought him.  The first three he read carefully; the
following two rather hurriedly; of the next one he seized only the
salient and essential points; the seventh and eighth he skimmed;
the remainder of the bundle he thrust aside in uncontrollable
impatience.  Next day he returned to the woods.

The incident of the letters had aroused to the full his old fighting
spirit, before which no mere instincts could stand.  He clamped the
iron to his actions and forced them to the way appointed.  Once more
his mental processes became clear and incisive, his commands direct
and to the point.  To all outward appearance Thorpe was as before.

He opened Camp One, and the Fighting Forty came back from distant
drinking joints.  This was in early September, when the raspberries
were entirely done and the blackberries fairly in the way of
vanishing.  That able-bodied and devoted band of men was on hand
when needed.  Shearer, in some subtle manner of his own, had let
them feel that this year meant thirty million or "bust."  They
tightened their leather belts and stood ready for commands.  Thorpe
set them to work near the river, cutting roads along the lines he
had blazed to the inland timber on seventeen and nineteen.  After
much discussion with Shearer the young man decided to take out the
logs from eleven by driving them down French Creek.

To this end a gang was put to clearing the creekbed.  It was a
tremendous job.  Centuries of forest life had choked the little
stream nearly to the level of its banks.  Old snags and stumps lay
imbedded in the ooze; decayed trunks, moss-grown, blocked the
current; leaning tamaracks, fallen timber, tangled vines, dense
thickets gave to its course more the appearance of a tropical
jungle than of a north country brook-bed.  All these things had to
be removed, one by one, and either piled to one side or burnt.  In
the end, however, it would pay.  French Creek was not a large stream,
but it could be driven during the time of the spring freshets.

Each night the men returned in the beautiful dreamlike twilight to
the camp.  There they sat, after eating, smoking their pipes in the
open air.  Much of the time they sang, while Phil, crouching wolf-
like over his violin, rasped out an accompaniment of dissonances.
From a distance it softened and fitted pleasantly into the framework
of the wilderness.  The men's voices lent themselves well to the
weird minor strains of the chanteys.  These times--when the men sang,
and the night-wind rose and died in the hemlock tops--were Thorpe's
worst moments.  His soul, tired with the day's iron struggle, fell
to brooding.  Strange thoughts came to him, strange visions.  He
wanted something he knew not what; he longed, and thrilled, and
aspired to a greater glory than that of brave deeds, a softer
comfort than his old foster mother, the wilderness, could bestow.

The men were singing in a mighty chorus, swaying their heads in
unison, and bringing out with a roar the emphatic words of the
crude ditties written by some genius from their own ranks.


  "Come all ye sons of freedom throughout old Michigan,
   Come all ye gallant lumbermen, list to a shanty man.
   On the banks of the Muskegon, where the rapid waters flow,
   OH!--we'll range the wild woods o'er while a-lumbering we go."


Here was the bold unabashed front of the pioneer, here was absolute
certainty in the superiority of his calling,--absolute scorn of all
others.  Thorpe passed his hand across his brow.  The same spirit was
once fully and freely his.


  "The music of our burnished ax shall make the woods resound,
   And many a lofty ancient pine will tumble to the ground.
   At night around our shanty fire we'll sing while rude winds blow,
   OH!--we'll range the wild woods o'er while a-lumbering we go!"


That was what he was here for.  Things were going right.  It would
be pitiful to fail merely on account of this idiotic lassitude, this
unmanly weakness, this boyish impatience and desire for play.  He a
woodsman! He a fellow with these big strong men!

A single voice, clear and high, struck into a quick measure:


  "I am a jolly shanty boy,
     As you will soon discover;
   To all the dodges I am fly,
     A hustling pine-woods rover.
   A peavey-hook it is my pride,
     An ax I well can handle.
   To fell a tree or punch a bull,
     Get rattling Danny Randall."


And then with a rattle and crash the whole Fighting Forty shrieked
out the chorus:


  "Bung yer eye! bung yer eye!"


Active, alert, prepared for any emergency that might arise; hearty,
ready for everything, from punching bulls to felling trees--that
was something like!  Thorpe despised himself.  The song went on.


  "I love a girl in Saginaw,
     She lives with her mother.
   I defy all Michigan
     To find such another.
   She's tall and slim, her hair is red,
     Her face is plump and pretty.
   She's my daisy Sunday best-day girl,
     And her front name stands for Kitty."


And again as before the Fighting Forty howled truculently:


"Bung yer eye! bung yer eye!"


The words were vulgar, the air a mere minor chant.  Yet Thorpe's
mind was stilled.  His aroused subconsciousness had been engaged
in reconstructing these men entire as their songs voiced rudely
the inner characteristics of their beings.  Now his spirit halted,
finger on lip.  Their bravery, pride of caste, resource, bravado,
boastfulness,--all these he had checked off approvingly.  Here now
was the idea of the Mate.  Somewhere for each of them was a "Kitty,"
a "daisy Sunday best-day girl"; the eternal feminine; the softer
side; the tenderness, beauty, glory of even so harsh a world as
they were compelled to inhabit.  At the present or in the past these
woods roisterers, this Fighting Forty, had known love.  Thorpe arose
abruptly and turned at random into the forest.  The song pursued
him as he went, but he heard only the clear sweet tones, not the
words.  And yet even the words would have spelled to his awakened
sensibilities another idea,--would have symbolized however rudely,
companionship and the human delight of acting a part before a woman.


  "I took her to a dance one night,
     A mossback gave the bidding--
   Silver Jack bossed the shebang,
     and Big Dan played the fiddle.
   We danced and drank the livelong night
     With fights between the dancing,
   Till Silver Jack cleaned out the ranch
     And sent the mossbacks prancing."


And with the increasing war and turmoil of the quick water the last
shout of the Fighting Forty mingled faintly and was lost.


  "Bung yer eye! bung yer eye!"


Thorpe found himself at the edge of the woods facing a little glade
into which streamed the radiance of a full moon.



Chapter XXXVIII


There he stood and looked silently, not understanding, not caring
to inquire.  Across the way a white-throat was singing, clear,
beautiful, like the shadow of a dream.  The girl stood listening.

Her small fair head was inclined ever so little sideways and her
finger was on her lips as though she wished to still the very hush
of night, to which impression the inclination of her supple body
lent its grace.  The moonlight shone full upon her countenance.
A little white face it was, with wide clear eyes and a sensitive,
proud mouth that now half parted like a child's.  Here eyebrows
arched from her straight nose in the peculiarly graceful curve
that falls just short of pride on the one side and of power on the
other, to fill the eyes with a pathos of trust and innocence.  The
man watching could catch the poise of her long white neck and the
molten moon-fire from her tumbled hair,--the color of corn-silk,
but finer.

And yet these words meant nothing.  A painter might have caught
her charm, but he must needs be a poet as well,--and a great poet,
one capable of grandeurs and subtleties.

To the young man standing there rapt in the spell of vague desire,
of awakened vision, she seemed most like a flower or a mist.  He
tried to find words to formulate her to himself, but did not succeed.
Always it came back to the same idea--the flower and the mist.  Like
the petals of a flower most delicate was her questioning, upturned
face; like the bend of a flower most rare the stalk of her graceful
throat; like the poise of a flower most dainty the attitude of her
beautiful, perfect body sheathed in a garment that outlined each
movement, for the instant in suspense.  Like a mist the glimmering
of her skin, the shining of her hair, the elusive moonlike quality
of her whole personality as she stood there in the ghost-like
clearing listening, her fingers on her lips.

Behind her lurked the low, even shadow of the forest where the moon
was not, a band of velvet against which the girl and the light-
touched twigs and bushes and grass blades were etched like frost
against a black window pane.  There was something, too, of the
frost-work's evanescent spiritual quality in the scene,--as though
at any moment, with a puff of the balmy summer wind, the radiant
glade, the hovering figure, the filagreed silver of the entire
setting would melt into the accustomed stern and menacing forest
of the northland, with its wolves, and its wild deer, and the voices
of its sterner calling.

Thorpe held his breath and waited.  Again the white-throat lifted
his clear, spiritual note across the brightness, slow, trembling
with.  The girl never moved.  She stood in the moonlight
like a beautiful emblem of silence, half real, half fancy, part
woman, wholly divine, listening to the little bird's message.

For the third time the song shivered across the night, then Thorpe
with a soft sob, dropped his face in his hands and looked no more.

He did not feel the earth beneath his knees, nor the whip of the
sumach across his face; he did not see the moon shadows creep
slowly along the fallen birch; nor did he notice that the white-
throat had hushed its song.  His inmost spirit was shaken.
Something had entered his soul and filled it to the brim, so that
he dared no longer stand in the face of radiance until he had
accounted with himself.  Another drop would overflow the cup.

Ah, sweet God, the beauty of it, the beauty of it!  That questing,
childlike starry gaze, seeking so purely to the stars themselves!
That flower face, those drooping, half parted lips!  That
inexpressible, unseizable something they had meant!  Thorpe searched
humbly--eagerly--then with agony through his troubled spirit, and in
its furthermost depths saw the mystery as beautifully remote as ever.
It approached and swept over him and left him gasping passion-racked.
Ah, sweet God, the beauty of it! the beauty of it! the vision! the
dream!

He trembled and sobbed with his desire to seize it, with his
impotence to express it, with his failure even to appreciate it
as his heart told him it should be appreciated.

He dared not look.  At length he turned and stumbled back through
the moonlit forest crying on his old gods in vain.

At the banks of the river he came to a halt.  There in the velvet
pines the moonlight slept calmly, and the shadows rested quietly
under the breezeless sky.  Near at hand the river shouted as ever
its cry of joy over the vitality of life, like a spirited boy
before the face of inscrutable nature.  All else was silence.  Then
from the waste boomed a strange, hollow note, rising, dying, rising
again, instinct with the spirit of the wilds.  It fell, and far away
sounded a heavy but distant crash.  The cry lifted again.  It was the
first bull moose calling across the wilderness to his mate.

And then, faint but clear down the current of a chance breeze
drifted the chorus of the Fighting Forty.


  "The forests so brown at our stroke go down,
     And cities spring up where they fell;
   While logs well run and work well done
     Is the story the shanty boys tell."


Thorpe turned from the river with a thrust forward of his head.  He
was not a religious man, and in his six years' woods experience had
never been to church.  Now he looked up over the tops of the pines
to where the Pleiades glittered faintly among the brighter stars.

"Thanks, God," said he briefly.



Chapter XXXIX


For several days this impression satisfied him completely.  He
discovered, strangely enough, that his restlessness had left him,
that once more he was able to give to his work his former energy
and interest.  It was as though some power had raised its finger
and a storm had stilled, leaving calm, unruffled skies.

He did not attempt to analyze this; he did not even make an effort
to contemplate it.  His critical faculty was stricken dumb and it
asked no questions of him.  At a touch his entire life had changed.
Reality or vision, he had caught a glimpse of something so entirely
different from anything his imagination or experience had ever
suggested to him, that at first he could do no more than permit
passively its influences to adjust themselves to his being.

Curiosity, speculation, longing,--all the more active emotions
remained in abeyance while outwardly, for three days, Harry Thorpe
occupied himself only with the needs of the Fighting Forty at Camp
One.

In the early morning he went out with the gang.  While they chopped
or heaved, he stood by serene.  Little questions of expediency he
solved.  Dilemmas he discussed leisurely with Tim Shearer.
Occasionally he lent a shoulder when the peaveys lacked of prying a
stubborn log from its bed.  Not once did he glance at the nooning
sun.  His patience was quiet and sure.  When evening came he smoked
placidly outside the office, listening to the conversation and
laughter of the men, caressing one of the beagles, while the rest
slumbered about his feet, watching dreamily the night shadows and
the bats.  At about nine o'clock he went to bed, and slept soundly.
He was vaguely conscious of a great peace within him, a great
stillness of the spirit, against which the metallic events of his
craft clicked sharply in vivid relief.  It was the peace and
stillness of a river before it leaps.

Little by little the condition changed.  The man felt vague
stirrings of curiosity.  He speculated aimlessly as to whether or
not the glade, the moonlight, the girl, had been real or merely the
figments of imagination.  Almost immediately the answer leaped at him
from his heart.  Since she was so certainly flesh and blood, whence
did she come? what was she doing there in the wilderness?  His mind
pushed the query aside as unimportant, rushing eagerly to the
essential point: When could he see her again?  How find for the
second time the vision before which his heart felt the instant need
of prostrating itself.  His placidity had gone.  That morning he made
some vague excuse to Shearer and set out blindly down the river.

He did not know where he was going, any more than did the bull moose
plunging through the trackless wilderness to his mate.  Instinct, the
instinct of all wild natural creatures, led him.  And so, without
thought, without clear intention even,--most would say by accident,--
he saw her again.  It was near the "pole trail"; which was less like
a trail than a rail-fence.

For when the snows are deep and snowshoes not the property of every
man who cares to journey, the old-fashioned "pole trail" comes into
use.  It is merely a series of horses built of timber across which
thick Norway logs are laid, about four feet from the ground, to
form a continuous pathway.  A man must be a tight-rope walker to
stick to the pole trail when ice and snow have sheathed its logs.
If he makes a misstep, he is precipitated ludicrously into feathery
depths through which he must flounder to the nearest timber horse
before he can remount.  In summer, as has been said, it resembles
nothing so much as a thick one-rail fence of considerable height,
around which a fringe of light brush has grown.

Thorpe reached the fringe of bushes, and was about to dodge under
the fence, when he saw her.  So he stopped short, concealed by the
leaves and the timber horse.

She stood on a knoll in the middle of a grove of monster pines.
There was something of the cathedral in the spot.  A hush dwelt in
the dusk, the long columns lifted grandly to the Roman arches of
the frond, faint murmurings stole here and there like whispering
acolytes.  The girl stood tall and straight among the tall, straight
pines like a figure on an ancient tapestry.  She was doing nothing--
just standing there--but the awe of the forest was in her wide,
clear eyes.

The great sweet feeling clutched the young man's throat again.  But
while the other,--the vision of the frost-work glade and the spirit-
like figure of silence,--had been unreal and phantasmagoric, this was
of the earth.  He looked, and looked, and looked again.  He saw the
full pure curve of her cheek's contour, neither oval nor round, but
like the outline of a certain kind of plum.  He appreciated the half-
pathetic downward droop of the corners of her mouth,--her red mouth
in dazzling, bewitching contrast to the milk-whiteness of her skin.
He caught the fineness of her nose, straight as a Grecian's, but
with some faint suggestion about the nostrils that hinted at piquance.
And the waving corn silk of her altogether charming and unruly hair,
the superb column of her long neck on which her little head poised
proudly like a flower, her supple body, whose curves had the long
undulating grace of the current in a swift river, her slender white
hand with the pointed fingers--all these he saw one after the other,
and his soul shouted within him at the sight.  He wrestled with the
emotions that choked him.  "Ah, God! Ah, God!" he cried softly to
himself like one in pain.  He, the man of iron frame, of iron nerve,
hardened by a hundred emergencies, trembled in every muscle before
a straight, slender girl, clad all in brown, standing alone in the
middle of the ancient forest.

In a moment she stirred slightly, and turned.  Drawing herself to
her full height, she extended her hands over her head palm outward,
and, with an indescribably graceful gesture, half mockingly bowed a
ceremonious adieu to the solemn trees.  Then with a little laugh she
moved away in the direction of the river.

At once Thorpe proved a great need of seeing her again.  In his
present mood there was nothing of the awe-stricken peace he had
experienced after the moonlight adventure.  He wanted the sight of
her as he had never wanted anything before.  He must have it, and he
looked about him fiercely as though to challenge any force in Heaven
or Hell that would deprive him of it.  His eyes desired to follow
the soft white curve of her cheek, to dance with the light of her
corn-silk hair, to delight in the poetic movements of her tall,
slim body, to trace the full outline of her chin, to wonder at
the carmine of her lips, red as a blood-spot on the snow.  These
things must be at once.  The strong man desired it.  And finding it
impossible, he raged inwardly and tore the tranquillities of his
heart, as on the shores of the distant Lake of Stars, the bull-
moose trampled down the bushes in his passion.

So it happened that he ate hardly at all that day, and slept ill,
and discovered the greatest difficulty in preserving the outward
semblance of ease which the presence of Tim Shearer and the
Fighting Forty demanded.

And next day he saw her again, and the next, because the need of
his heart demanded it, and because, simply enough, she came every
afternoon to the clump of pines by the old pole trail.

Now had Thorpe taken the trouble to inquire, he could have learned
easily enough all there was to be known of the affair.  But he did
not take the trouble.  His consciousness was receiving too many new
impressions, so that in a manner it became bewildered.  At first,
as has been seen, the mere effect of the vision was enough; then
the sight of the girl sufficed him.  But now curiosity awoke and
a desire for something more.  He must speak to her, touch her hand,
look into her eyes.  He resolved to approach her, and the mere
thought choked him and sent him weak.

When he saw her again from the shelter of the pole trail, he dared
not, and so stood there prey to a novel sensation,--that of being
baffled in an intention.  It awoke within him a vast passion
compounded part of rage at himself, part of longing for that which
he could not take, but most of love for the girl.  As he hesitated
in one mind but in two decisions, he saw that she was walking
slowly in his direction.

Perhaps a hundred paces separated the two.  She took them
deliberately,
pausing now and again to listen, to pluck a leaf, to smell the
fragrant balsam and fir tops as she passed them.  Her progression
was a series of poses, the one of which melted imperceptibly into
the other without appreciable pause of transition.  So subtly did
her grace appeal to the sense of sight, that out of mere sympathy
the other senses responded with fictions of their own.  Almost could
the young man behind the trail savor a faint fragrance, a faint music
that surrounded and preceded her like the shadows of phantoms.  He
knew it as an illusion, born of his desire, and yet it was a noble
illusion, for it had its origin in her.

In a moment she had reached the fringe of brush about the pole trail.
They stood face to face.

She gave a little start of surprise, and her hand leaped to her
breast, where it caught and stayed.  Her childlike down-drooping
mouth parted a little more, and the breath quickened through it.
But her eyes, her wide, trusting, innocent eyes, sought his and
rested.

He did not move.  The eagerness, the desire, the long years of
ceaseless struggle, the thirst for affection, the sob of awe at the
moonlit glade, the love,--all these flamed in his eyes and fixed his
gaze in an unconscious ardor that had nothing to do with convention
or timidity.  One on either side of the spike-marked old Norway log
of the trail they stood, and for an appreciable interval the duel
of their glances lasted,--he masterful, passionate, exigent; she
proud, cool, defensive in the aloofness of her beauty.  Then at
last his prevailed.  A faint color rose from her neck, deepened,
and spread over her face and forehead.  In a moment she dropped
her eyes.

"Don't you think you stare a little rudely--Mr. Thorpe?" she asked.



Chapter XL


The vision was over, but the beauty remained.  The spoken words of
protest made her a woman.  Never again would she, nor any other
creature of the earth, appear to Thorpe as she had in the silver
glade or the cloistered pines.  He had had his moment of insight.
The deeps had twice opened to permit him to look within.  Now they
had closed again.  But out of them had fluttered a great love and the
priestess of it.  Always, so long as life should be with him, Thorpe
was destined to see in this tall graceful girl with the red lips
and the white skin and the corn-silk hair, more beauty, more of the
great mysterious spiritual beauty which is eternal, than her father
or her mother or her dearest and best.  For to them the vision had
not been vouchsafed, while he had seen her as the highest symbol of
God's splendor.

Now she stood before him, her head turned half away, a faint flush
still tingeing the chalk-white of her skin, watching him with a dim,
half-pleading smile in expectation of his reply.

"Ah, moon of my soul! light of my life!" he cried, but he cried
it within him, though it almost escaped his vigilance to his lips.
What he really said sounded almost harsh in consequence.

"How did you know my name?" he asked.

She planted both elbows on the Norway and framed her little face
deliciously with her long pointed hands.

"If Mr. Harry Thorpe can ask that question," she replied, "he is
not quite so impolite as I had thought him."

"If you don't stop pouting your lips, I shall kiss them!" cried
Harry--to himself.

"How is that?" he inquired breathlessly.

"Don't you know who I am?" she asked in return.

"A goddess, a beautiful woman!" he answered ridiculously enough.

She looked straight at him.  This time his gaze dropped.

"I am a friend of Elizabeth Carpenter, who is Wallace Carpenter's
sister, who I believe is Mr. Harry Thorpe's partner."

She paused as though for comment.  The young man opposite was
occupied in many other more important directions.  Some moments
later the words trickled into his brain, and some moments after
that he realized their meaning.

"We wrote Mr. Harry Thorpe that we were about to descend on his
district with wagons and tents and Indians and things, and asked
him to come and see us."

"Ah, heart o' mine, what clear, pure eyes she has!  How they look
at a man to drown his soul!"

Which, even had it been spoken, was hardly the comment one would
have expected.

The girl looked at him for a moment steadily, then smiled.  The
change of countenance brought Thorpe to himself, and at the same
moment the words she had spoken reached his comprehension.

"But I never received the letter.  I'm so sorry," said he.  "It
must be at the mill.  You see, I've been up in the woods for nearly
a month."

"Then we'll have to forgive you."

"But I should think they would have done something for you at the
mill---"

"Oh, we didn't come by way of your mill.  We drove from Marquette."

"I see," cried Thorpe, enlightened.  "But I'm sorry I didn't know.
I'm sorry you didn't let me know.  I suppose you thought I was still
at the mill.  How did you get along?  Is Wallace with you?"

"No," she replied, dropping her hands and straightening her erect
figure.  "It's horrid.  He was coming, and then some business came
up and he couldn't get away.  We are having the loveliest time
though.  I do adore the woods.  Come," she cried impatiently,
sweeping aside to leave a way clear, "you shall meet my friends."

Thorpe imagined she referred to the rest of the tenting party.  He
hesitated.

"I am hardly in fit condition," he objected.

She laughed, parting her red lips.  "You are extremely picturesque
just as you are," she said with rather embarrassing directness.  "I
wouldn't have you any different for the world.  But my friends don't
mind.  They are used to it."  She laughed again.

Thorpe crossed the pole trail, and for the first time found himself
by her side.  The warm summer odors were in the air, a dozen lively
little birds sang in the brush along the rail, the sunlight danced
and flickered through the openings.

Then suddenly they were among the pines, and the air was cool, the
vista dim, and the bird songs inconceivably far away.

The girl walked directly to the foot of a pine three feet through,
and soaring up an inconceivable distance through the still twilight.

"This is Jimmy," said she gravely.  "He is a dear good old rough
bear when you don't know him, but he likes me.  If you put your ear
close against him," she confided, suiting the action to the word,
"you can hear him talking to himself.  This little fellow is Tommy.
I don't care so much for Tommy because he's sticky.  Still, I like
him pretty well, and here's Dick, and that's Bob, and the one just
beyond is Jack."

"Where is Harry?" asked Thorpe.

"I thought one in a woods was quite sufficient," she replied with
the least little air of impertinence.

"Why do you name them such common, everyday names?" he inquired.

"I'll tell you.  It's because they are so big and grand themselves,
that it did not seem to me they needed high-sounding names.  What
do you think?" she begged with an appearance of the utmost anxiety.

Thorpe expressed himself as in agreement.  As the half-quizzical
conversation progressed, he found their relations adjusting
themselves with increasing rapidity.  He had been successively
the mystic devotee before his vision, the worshipper before his
goddess; now he was unconsciously assuming the attitude of the
lover before his mistress.  It needs always this humanizing touch
to render the greatest of all passions livable.

And as the human element developed, he proved at the same time
greater and greater difficulty in repressing himself and greater
and greater fear of the results in case he should not do so.  He
trembled with the desire to touch her long slender hand, and as
soon as his imagination had permitted him that much he had already
crushed her to him and had kissed passionately her starry face.
Words hovered on his lips longing for flight.  He withheld them
by an effort that left him almost incoherent, for he feared with
a deadly fear lest he lose forever what the vision had seemed to
offer to his hand.

So he said little, and that lamely, for he dreaded to say too much.
To her playful sallies he had no riposte.  And in consequence he
fell more silent with another boding--that he was losing his cause
outright for lack of a ready word.

He need not have been alarmed.  A woman in such a case hits as
surely as a man misses.  Her very daintiness and preciosity of
speech indicated it.  For where a man becomes stupid and silent,
a woman covers her emotions with words and a clever speech.  Not
in vain is a proud-spirited girl stared down in such a contest
of looks; brave deeds simply told by a friend are potent to win
interest in advance; a straight, muscular figure, a brown skin, a
clear, direct eye, a carriage of power and acknowledged authority,
strike hard at a young imagination; a mighty passion sweeps aside
the barriers of the heart.  Such a victory, such a friend, such a
passion had Thorpe.

And so the last spoken exchange between them meant nothing; but if
each could have read the unsaid words that quivered on the other's
heart, Thorpe would have returned to the Fighting Forty more
tranquilly, while she would probably not have returned to the
camping party at all for a number of hours.

"I do not think you had better come with me," she said.  "Make
your call and be forgiven on your own account.  I don't want to
drag you in at my chariot wheels."

"All right.  I'll come this afternoon," Thorpe had replied.

"I love her, I must have her.  I must go--at once," his soul had
cried, "quick--now--before I kiss her!"

"How strong he is," she said to herself, "how brave-looking; how
honest!  He is different from the other men.  He is magnificent."



Chapter XLI


That afternoon Thorpe met the other members of the party, offered
his apologies and explanations, and was graciously forgiven.  He
found the personnel to consist of, first of all, Mrs. Cary, the
chaperone, a very young married woman of twenty-two or thereabouts;
her husband, a youth of three years older, clean-shaven, light-haired,
quiet-mannered; Miss Elizabeth Carpenter, who resembled her brother
in the characteristics of good-looks, vivacious disposition and curly
hair; an attendant satellite of the masculine persuasion called
Morton; and last of all the girl whom Thorpe had already so variously
encountered and whom he now met as Miss Hilda Farrand.  Besides these
were Ginger, a squab negro built to fit the galley of a yacht; and
hree Indian guides.  They inhabited tents, which made quite a little
encampment.

Thorpe was received with enthusiasm.  Wallace Carpenter's stories of
his woods partner, while never doing more than justice to the truth,
had been of a warm color tone.  One and all owned a lively curiosity
to see what a real woodsman might be like.  When he proved to be
handsome and well mannered, as well as picturesque, his reception
was no longer in doubt.

Nothing could exceed his solicitude as to their comfort and amusement.
He inspected personally the arrangement of the tents, and suggested
one or two changes conducive to the littler comforts.  This was not
much like ordinary woods-camping.  The largest wall-tent contained
three folding cots for the women, over which, in the daytime, were
flung bright-colored Navajo blankets.  Another was spread on the
ground.  Thorpe later, however, sent over two bear skins, which were
acknowledgedly an improvement.  To the tent pole a mirror of size was
nailed, and below it stood a portable washstand.  The second tent,
devoted to the two men, was not quite so luxurious; but still boasted
of little conveniences the true woodsman would never consider worth
the bother of transporting.  The third, equally large, was the dining
tent.  The other three, smaller, and on the A tent order, served
respectively as sleeping rooms for Ginger and the Indians, and as a
general store-house for provisions and impedimenta.

Thorpe sent an Indian to Camp One for the bearskins, put the rest
to digging a trench around the sleeping tents in order that a rain
storm might not cause a flood, and ordered Ginger to excavate a
square hole some feet deep which he intended to utilize as a larder.

Then he gave Morton and Cary hints as to the deer they wished to
capture, pointed out the best trout pools, and issued advice as
to the compassing of certain blackberries, not far distant.

Simple things enough they were to do--it was as though a city man
were to direct a newcomer to Central Park, or impart to him a test
for the destinations of trolley lines--yet Thorpe's new friends were
profoundly impressed with his knowledge of occult things.  The forest
was to them, as to most, more or less of a mystery, unfathomable
except to the favored of genius.  A man who could interpret it,
even a little, into the speech of everyday comfort and expediency
possessed a strong claim to their imaginations.  When he had finished
these practical affairs, they wanted him to sit down and tell them
more things,to dine with them, to smoke about their camp fire in
the evening.  But here they encountered a decided check.  Thorpe
became silent, almost morose.  He talked in monosyllables, and soon
went away.  They did not know what to make of him, and so were, of
course, the more profoundly interested.  The truth was, his habitual
reticence would not have permitted a great degree of expansion in
any case, but now the presence of Hilda made any but an attitude of
hushed waiting for her words utterly impossible to him.  He wished
well to them all.  If there was anything he could do for them, he
would gladly undertake it.  But he would not act the lion nor tell
of his, to them, interesting adventures.

However, when he discovered that Hilda had ceased visiting the
clump of pines near the pole trail, his desire forced him back
among these people.  He used to walk in swiftly at almost any
time of day, casting quick glances here and there in search of
his divinity.

"How do, Mrs. Cary," he would say.  "Nice weather.  Enjoying
yourself?"

On receiving the reply he would answer heartily,  "That's good!"
and lapse into silence.  When Hilda was about he followed every
movement of hers with his eyes, so that his strange conduct lacked
no explanation nor interpretation, in the minds of the women at
least.  Thrice he redeemed his reputation for being an interesting
character by conducting the party on little expeditions here and
there about the country.  Then his woodcraft and resourcefulness
spoke for him.  They asked him about the lumbering operations, but
he seemed indifferent.

"Nothing to interest you," he affirmed.  "We're just cutting roads
now.  You ought to be here for the drive."

To him there was really nothing interesting in the cutting of roads
nor the clearing of streams.  It was all in a day's work.

Once he took them over to see Camp One.  They were immensely pleased,
and were correspondingly loud in exclamations.  Thorpe's comments
were brief and dry.  After the noon dinner he had the unfortunate
idea of commending the singing of one of the men.

"Oh, I'd like to hear him," cried Elizabeth Carpenter.  "Can't you
get him to sing for us, Mr. Thorpe?"

Thorpe went to the men's camp, where he singled out the unfortunate
lumber-jack in question.

"Come on, Archie," he said.  "The ladies want to hear you sing."

The man objected, refused, pleaded, and finally obeyed what
amounted to a command.  Thorpe reentered the office with triumph,
his victim in tow.

"This is Archie Harris," he announced heartily.  "He's our best
singer just now.  Take a chair, Archie."

The man perched on the edge of the chair and looked straight out
before him.

"Do sing for us, won't you, Mr. Harris?" requested Mrs. Cary in
her sweetest tones.

The man said nothing, nor moved a muscle, but turned a brick-red.
An embarrassed silence of expectation ensued.

"Hit her up, Archie," encouraged Thorpe.

"I ain't much in practice no how," objected the man in a little
voice, without moving.

"I'm sure you'll find us very appreciative," said Elizabeth
Carpenter.

"Give us a song, Archie, let her go," urged Thorpe impatiently.

"All right," replied the man very meekly.

Another silence fell.  It got to be a little awful.  The poor
woodsman, pilloried before the regards of this polite circle, out
of his element, suffering cruelly, nevertheless made no sign nor
movement one way or the other.  At last when the situation had
almost reached the breaking point of hysteria, he began.

His voice ordinarily was rather a good tenor.  Now he pitched it
too high; and went on straining at the high notes to the very end.
Instead of offering one of the typical woods chanteys, he conceived
that before so grand an audience he should give something fancy.  He
therefore struck into a sentimental song of the cheap music-hall type.
There were nine verses, and he drawled through them all, hanging
whiningly on the nasal notes in the fashion of the untrained singer.
Instead of being a performance typical of the strange woods genius, it
was merely an atrocious bit of cheap sentimentalism, badly rendered.

The audience listened politely.  When the song was finished it
murmured faint thanks.

"Oh, give us 'Jack Haggerty,' Archie," urged Thorpe.

But the woodsman rose, nodded his head awkwardly, and made his
escape.  He entered the men's camp, swearing, and for the remainder
of the day made none but blasphemous remarks.

The beagles, however, were a complete success.  They tumbled about,
and lolled their tongues, and laughed up out of a tangle of
themselves in a fascinating manner.  Altogether the visit to Camp
One was a success, the more so in that on the way back, for the
first time, Thorpe found that chance--and Mrs. Cary--had allotted
Hilda to his care.

A hundred yards down the trail they encountered Phil.  The dwarf
stopped short, looked attentively at the girl, and then softly
approached.  When quite near to her he again stopped, gazing at
her with his soul in his liquid eyes.

"You are more beautiful than the sea at night," he said directly.

The others laughed.  "There's sincerity for you, Miss Hilda," said
young Mr. Morton.

"Who is he?" asked the girl after they had moved

"Our chore-boy," answered Thorpe with great brevity, for he was
thinking of something much more important.

After the rest of the party had gone ahead, leaving them sauntering
more slowly down the trail, he gave it voice.

"Why don't you come to the pine grove any more?" he asked bluntly.

"Why?" countered Hilda in the manner of women.

"I want to see you there.  I want to talk with you.  I can't talk
with all that crowd around."

"I'll come to-morrow," she said--then with a little mischievous
laugh, "if that'll make you talk."

"You must think I'm awfully stupid," agreed Thorpe bitterly.

"Ah, no! Ah, no!" she protested softly.  "You must not say that."

She was looking at him very tenderly, if he had only known it, but
he did not, for his face was set in discontented lines straight
before him.

"It is true," he replied.

They walked on in silence, while gradually the dangerous fascination
of the woods crept down on them.  Just before sunset a hush falls
on nature.  The wind has died, the birds have not yet begun their
evening songs, the light itself seems to have left off sparkling and
to lie still across the landscape.  Such a hush now lay on their
spirits.  Over the way a creeper was droning sleepily a little chant,
--the only voice in the wilderness.  In the heart of the man, too,
a little voice raised itself alone.

"Sweetheart, sweetheart, sweetheart!" it breathed over and over
again.  After a while he said it gently in a half voice.

"No, no, hush!" said the girl, and she laid the soft, warm fingers
of one hand across his lips, and looked at him from a height of
superior soft-eyed tenderness as a woman might look at a child.
"You must not.  It is not right."

Then he kissed the fingers very gently before they were withdrawn,
and she said nothing at all in rebuke, but looked straight before
her with troubled eyes.

The voices of evening began to raise their jubilant notes.  From
a tree nearby the olive thrush sang like clockwork; over beyond
carolled eagerly a black-throat, a myrtle warbler, a dozen song
sparrows, and a hundred vireos and creepers.  Down deep in the
blackness of the ancient woods a hermit thrush uttered his solemn
bell note, like the tolling of the spirit of peace.  And in Thorpe's
heart a thousand tumultuous voices that had suddenly roused to
clamor, died into nothingness at the music of her softly protesting
voice.



Chapter XLII


Thorpe returned to Camp One shortly after dark.  He found there
Scotty Parsons, who had come up to take charge of the crew engaged
in clearing French Creek.  The man brought him a number of letters
sent on by Collins, among which was one from Wallace Carpenter.

After commending the camping party to his companion's care, and
giving minute directions as to how and where to meet it, the young
fellow went on to say that affairs were going badly on the Board.

"Some interest that I haven't been able to make out yet has been
hammering our stocks down day after day," he wrote.  "I don't
understand it, for the stocks are good--they rest on a solid
foundation of value and intrinsically are worth more than is bid
for them right now.  Some powerful concern is beating them down for
a purpose of its own.  Sooner or later they will let up, and then
we'll get things back in good shape.  I am amply protected now,
thanks to you, and am not at all afraid of losing my holdings.
The only difficulty is that I am unable to predict exactly when
the other fellows will decide that they have accomplished whatever
they are about, and let up.  It may not be before next year.  In
that case I couldn't help you out on those notes when they come due.
So put in your best licks, old man.  You may have to pony up for a
little while, though of course sooner or later I can put it all back.
Then, you bet your life, I keep out of it.  Lumbering's good enough
for yours truly.

"By the way, you might shine up to Hilda Farrand and join the rest
of the fortune-hunters.  She's got it to throw to the birds, and in
her own right.  Seriously, old fellow, don't put yourself into a
false position through ignorance.  Not that there is any danger to
a hardened old woodsman like you."

Thorpe went to the group of pines by the pole trail the following
afternoon because he had said he would, but with a new attitude of
mind.  He had come into contact with the artificiality of
conventional relations, and it stiffened him.  No wonder she had
made him keep silence the afternoon before!  She had done it gently
and nicely, to be sure, but that was part of her good-breeding.
Hilda found him formal, reserved, polite; and marvelled at it.  In
her was no coquetry.  She was as straightforward and sincere as the
look of her eyes.

They sat down on a log.  Hilda turned to him with her graceful air
of confidence.

"Now talk to me," said she.

"Certainly," replied Thorpe in a practical tone of voice, "what
do you want me to talk about?"

She shot a swift, troubled glance at him, concluded herself
mistaken, and said:

"Tell me about what you do up here--your life--all about it."

"Well--" replied Thorpe formally, "we haven't much to interest a
girl like you.  It is a question of saw logs with us"--and he went
on in his dryest, most technical manner to detail the process of
manufacture.  It might as well have been bricks.

The girl did not understand.  She was hurt.  As surely as the sun
tangled in the distant pine frond, she had seen in his eyes a great
passion.  Now it was coldly withdrawn.

"What has happened to you?" she asked finally out of her great
sincerity.

"Me?  Nothing," replied Thorpe.

A forced silence fell upon him.  Hilda seemed gradually to lose
herself in reverie.  After a time she said softly.

"Don't you love this woods?"

"It's an excellent bunch of pine," replied Thorpe bluntly.  "It'll
cut three million at least."

"Oh!" she cried drawing back, her hands pressed against the log
either side of her, her eyes wide.

After a moment she caught her breath convulsively, and Thorpe
became conscious that she was studying him furtively with a
quickening doubt.

After that, by the mercy of God, there was no more talk between
them.  She was too hurt and shocked and disillusioned to make the
necessary effort to go away.  He was too proud to put an end to the
position.  They sat there apparently absorbed in thought, while all
about them the accustomed life of the woods drew nearer and nearer
to them, as the splash of their entrance into it died away.

A red squirrel poised thirty feet above them, leaped, and clung
swaying to a sapling-top a dozen yards from the tree he had
quitted.  Two chickadees upside down uttering liquid undertones,
searched busily for insects next their heads.  Wilson's warblers,
pine creepers, black-throats, myrtle and magnolia warblers, oven
birds, peewits, blue jays, purple finches, passed silently or
noisily, each according to his kind.  Once a lone spruce hen dusted
herself in a stray patch of sunlight until it shimmered on a tree
trunk, raised upward, and disappeared, to give place to long level
dusty shafts that shot here and there through the pines laying the
spell of sunset on the noisy woods brawlers.

Unconsciously the first strain of opposition and of hurt surprise
had relaxed.  Each thought vaguely his thoughts.  Then in the depths
of the forest, perhaps near at hand, perhaps far away, a single
hermit thrush began to sing.  His song was of three solemn deep
liquid notes; followed by a slight rhetorical pause as of
contemplation; and then, deliberately, three notes more on a
different key--and so on without haste and without pause.  It is
the most dignified, the most spiritual, the holiest of woods
utterances.  Combined with the evening shadows and the warm soft
air, it offered to the heart an almost irresistible appeal.  The
man's artificial antagonism modified; the woman's disenchantment
began to seem unreal.

Then subtly over and through the bird-song another sound became
audible.  At first it merely repeated the three notes faintly, like
an echo, but with a rich, sad undertone that brought tears.  Then,
timidly and still softly, it elaborated the theme, weaving in and
out through the original three the glitter and shimmer of a
splendid web of sound, spreading before the awakened imagination
a broad river of woods-imagery that reflected on its surface all
the subtler moods of the forest.  The pine shadows, the calls of
the wild creatures, the flow of the brook, the splashes of sunlight
through the trees, the sigh of the wind, the shout of the rapid,--
all these were there, distinctly to be felt in their most ethereal
and beautiful forms.  And yet it was all slight and tenuous as
though the crack of a twig would break it through--so that over
it continually like a grand full organ-tone repeated the notes of
the bird itself.

With the first sigh of the wonder-music the girl had started and
caught her breath in the exquisite pleasure of it.  As it went on
they both forgot everything but the harmony and each other.

"Ah, beautiful!" she murmured.

"What is it?" he whispered marvelling.

"A violin,--played by a master."

The bird suddenly hushed, and at once the strain abandoned the
woods-note and took another motif.  At first it played softly
in the higher notes, a tinkling, lightsome little melody that
stirred a kindly surface-smile over a full heart.  Then suddenly,
without transition, it dropped to the lower register, and began
to sob and wail in the full vibrating power of a great passion.

And the theme it treated was love.  It spoke solemnly, fearfully of
the greatness of it, the glory.  These as abstractions it amplified
in fine full-breathed chords that swept the spirit up and up as on
the waves of a mighty organ.  Then one by one the voices of other
things were heard,--the tinkling of laughter, the roar of a city,
the sob of a grief, a cry of pain suddenly shooting across the
sound, the clank of a machine, the tumult of a river, the puff of a
steamboat, the murmuring of a vast crowd,--and one by one, without
seeming in the least to change their character, they merged
imperceptibly into, and were part of the grand-breathed chords,
so that at last all the fames and ambitions and passions of the
world came, in their apotheosis, to be only parts of the master-
passion of them all.

And while the echoes of the greater glory still swept beneath their
uplifted souls like ebbing waves, so that they still sat rigid and
staring with the majesty of it, the violin softly began to whisper.
Beautiful it was as a spiri