t, beautiful beyond words, beautiful
beyond thought.  Its beauty struck sharp at the heart.  And they two
sat there hand in hand dreaming--dreaming--dreaming---

At last the poignant ecstacy seemed slowly, slowly to die.  Fainter
and fainter ebbed the music.  Through it as through a mist the
solemn aloof forest began to show to the consciousness of the two.
They sought each other's eyes gently smiling.  The music was very
soft and dim and sad.  They leaned to each other with a sob.  Their
lips met.  The music ceased.

Alone in the forest side by side they looked out together for a
moment into that eternal vision which lovers only are permitted to
see.  The shadows fell.  About them brooded the inscrutable pines
stretching a canopy over them enthroned.  A single last shaft of
the sun struck full upon them, a single light-spot in the gathering
gloom.  They were beautiful.

And over behind the trees, out of the light and the love and the
beauty, little Phil huddled, his great shaggy head bowed in his
arms.  Beside him lay his violin, and beside that his bow, broken.
He had snapped it across his knee.  That day he had heard at last
the Heart Song of the Violin, and uttering it, had bestowed love.
But in accordance with his prophecy he had that day lost what he
cared for most in all the world, his friend.



Chapter XLIII


That was the moon of delight.  The days passed through the hazy
forest like stately figures from an old masque.  In the pine grove
on the knoll the man and the woman had erected a temple to love,
and love showed them one to the other.

In Hilda Farrand was no guile, no coquetry, no deceit.  So perfect
was her naturalism that often by those who knew her least she was
considered affected.  Her trust in whomever she found herself with
attained so directly its reward; her unconsciousness of pose was so
rhythmically graceful; her ignorance and innocence so triumphantly
effective, that the mind with difficulty rid itself of the belief
that it was all carefully studied.  This was not true.  She honestly
did not know that she was beautiful; was unaware of her grace; did
not realize the potency of her wealth.

This absolute lack of self-consciousness was most potent in overcoming
Thorpe's natural reticence.  He expanded to her.  She came to idolize
him in a manner at once inspiring and touching in so beautiful a
creature.  In him she saw reflected all the lofty attractions of
character which she herself possessed, but of which she was entirely
unaware.  Through his words she saw to an ideal.  His most trivial
actions were ascribed to motives of a dignity which would have been
ridiculous, if it had not been a little pathetic.  The woods-life,
the striving of the pioneer kindled her imagination.  She seized upon
the great facts of them and fitted those facts with reasons of her
own.  Her insight perceived the adventurous spirit, the battle-
courage, the indomitable steadfastness which always in reality lie
back of these men of the frontier to urge them into the life; and
of them constructed conscious motives of conduct.  To her fancy the
lumbermen, of whom Thorpe was one, were self-conscious agents of
advance.  They chose hardship, loneliness, the strenuous life
because they wished to clear the way for a higher civilization.  To
her it seemed a great and noble sacrifice.  She did not perceive
that while all this is true, it is under the surface, the real spur
is a desire to get on, and a hope of making money.  For, strangely
enough, she differentiated sharply the life and the reasons for it.
An existence in subduing the forest was to her ideal; the making of
a fortune through a lumbering firm she did not consider in the
least important.  That this distinction was most potent, the sequel
will show.

In all of it she was absolutely sincere, and not at all stupid.  She
had always had all she could spend, without question.  Money meant
nothing to her, one way or the other.  If need was, she might have
experienced some difficulty in learning how to economize, but none
at all in adjusting herself to the necessity of it.  The material
had become, in all sincerity, a basis for the spiritual.  She
recognized but two sorts of motives; of which the ideal, comprising
the poetic, the daring, the beautiful, were good; and the material,
meaning the sordid and selfish, were bad.  With her the mere money-
getting would have to be allied with some great and poetic excuse.

That is the only sort of aristocracy, in the popular sense of the
word, which is real; the only scorn of money which can be respected.

There are some faces which symbolize to the beholder many subtleties
of soul-beauty which by no other method could gain expression.  Those
subtleties may not, probably do not, exist in the possessor of the
face.  The power of such a countenance lies not so much in what it
actually represents, as in the suggestion it holds out to another.
So often it is with a beautiful character.  Analyze it carefully,
and you will reduce it generally to absolute simplicity and absolute
purity--two elements common enough in adulteration; but place it
face to face with a more complex personality, and mirror-like it
will take on a hundred delicate shades of ethical beauty, while at
the same time preserving its own lofty spirituality.

Thus Hilda Farrand reflected Thorpe.  In the clear mirror of her
heart his image rested transfigured.  It was as though the glass
were magic, so that the gross and material was absorbed and lost,
while the more spiritual qualities reflected back.  So the image was
retained in its entirety, but etherealized, refined.  It is necessary
to attempt, even thus faintly and inadequately, a sketch of Hilda's
love, for a partial understanding of it is necessary to the
comprehension of what followed the moon of delight.

That moon saw a variety of changes.

The bed of French Creek was cleared.  Three of the roads were
finished, and the last begun.  So much for the work of it.

Morton and Cary shot four deer between them, which was unpardonably
against the law, caught fish in plenty, smoked two and a half pounds
of tobacco, and read half of one novel.  Mrs. Cary and Miss Carpenter
walked a total of over a hundred miles, bought twelve pounds of
Indian work of all sorts, embroidered the circle of two embroidery
frames, learned to paddle a birch-bark canoe, picked fifteen quarts
of berries, and gained six pounds in weight.  All the party together
accomplished five picnics, four explorations, and thirty excellent
campfires in the evening.  So much for the fun of it.

Little Phil disappeared utterly, taking with him his violin, but
leaving his broken bow.  Thorpe has it even to this day.  The
lumberman caused search and inquiry on all sides.  The cripple was
never heard of again.  He had lived his brief hour, taken his subtle
artist's vengeance of misplayed notes on the crude appreciation of
men too coarse-fibered to recognize it, brought together by the
might of sacrifice and consummate genius two hearts on the brink
of misunderstanding;--now there was no further need for him, he had
gone.  So much for the tragedy of it.

"I saw you long ago," said Hilda to Thorpe.  "Long, long ago, when
I was quite a young girl.  I had been visiting in Detroit, and was
on my way all alone to catch an early train.  You stood on the corner
thinking, tall and straight and brown, with a weather-beaten old hat
and a weather-beaten old coat and weather-beaten old moccasins, and
such a proud, clear, undaunted look on your face.  I have remembered
you ever since."

And then he told her of the race to the Land Office, while her eyes
grew brighter and brighter with the epic splendor of the story.  She
told him that she had loved him from that moment--and believed her
telling; while he, the unsentimental leader of men, persuaded himself
and her that he had always in some mysterious manner carried her image
prophetically in his heart.  So much for the love of it.

In the last days of the month of delight Thorpe received a second
letter from his partner, which to some extent awakened him to the
realities.

"My dear Harry," it ran.  "I have made a startling discovery.
The other fellow is Morrison.  I have been a blind, stupid dolt,
and am caught nicely.  You can't call me any more names than I
have already called myself.  Morrison has been in it from the start.
By an accident I learned he was behind the fellow who induced me
to invest, and it is he who has been hammering the stock down ever
since.  They couldn't lick you at your game, so they tackled me
at mine.  I'm not the man you are, Harry, and I've made a mess of
it.  Of course their scheme is plain enough on the face of it.
They're going to involve me so deeply that I will drag the firm
down with me.

"If you can fix it to meet those notes, they can't do it.  I have
ample margin to cover any more declines they may be able to bring
about.  Don't fret about that.  Just as sure as you can pay that
sixty thousand, just so sure we'll be ahead of the game at this
time next year.  For God's sake get a move on you, old man.  If you
don't--good Lord!  The firm'll bust because she can't pay; I'll bust
because I'll have to let my stock go on margins--it'll be an awful
smash.  But you'll get there, so we needn't worry.  I've been an
awful fool, and I've no right to do the getting into trouble and
leave you to the hard work of getting out again.  But as partner
I'm going to insist on your having a salary--etc."

The news aroused all Thorpe's martial spirit.  Now at last the
mystery surrounding Morrison & Daly's unnatural complaisance was
riven.  It had come to grapples again.  He was glad of it.  Meet
those notes?  Well I guess so!  He'd show them what sort of a
proposition they had tackled.  Sneaking, underhanded scoundrels!
taking advantage of a mere boy.  Meet those notes?  You bet he
would; and then he'd go down there and boost those stocks until M.
& D. looked like a last year's bird's nest.  He thrust the letter
in his pocket and walked buoyantly to the pines.

The two lovers sat there all the afternoon drinking in half sadly
the joy of the forest and of being near each other, for the moon
of delight was almost done.  In a week the camping party would be
breaking up, and Hilda must return to the city.  It was uncertain
when they would be able to see each other again, though there was
talk of getting up a winter party to visit Camp One in January.
The affair would be unique.

Suddenly the girl broke off and put her fingers to her lips.  For
some time, dimly, an intermittent and faint sound had been felt,
rather than actually heard, like the irregular muffled beating of
a heart.  Gradually it had insisted on the attention.  Now at last
it broke through the film of consciousness.

"What is it?" she asked.

Thorpe listened.  Then his face lit mightily with the joy of battle.

"My axmen," he cried.  "They are cutting the road."

A faint call echoed.  Then without warning, nearer at hand the sharp
ring of an ax sounded through the forest.






PART IV


THE FOLLOWING OF THE TRAIL



Chapter XLIV


For a moment they sat listening to the clear staccato knocking of
the distant blows, and the more forceful thuds of the man nearer at
hand.  A bird or so darted from the direction of the sound and shot
silently into the thicket behind them.

"What are they doing?  Are they cutting lumber?" asked Hilda.

"No," answered Thorpe, "we do not cut saw logs at this time of year.
They are clearing out a road."

"Where does it go to?"

"Well, nowhere in particular.  That is, it is a logging road that
starts at the river and wanders up through the woods where the pine
is."

"How clear the axes sound.  Can't we go down and watch them a little
while?"

"The main gang is a long distance away; sound carries very clearly
in this still air.  As for that fellow you hear so plainly, he is
only clearing out small stuff to get ready for the others.  You
wouldn't see anything different from your Indian chopping the
cordwood for your camp fire.  He won't chop out any big trees."

"Let's not go, then," said Hilda submissively.

"When you come up in the winter," he pursued, "you will see any
amount of big timber felled."

"I would like to know more about it," she sighed, a quaint little
air of childish petulance graving two lines between her eyebrows.
"Do you know, Harry, you are a singularly uncommunicative sort of
being.  I have to guess that your life is interesting and picturesque,
--that is," she amended, "I should have to do so if Wallace Carpenter
had not told me a little something about it.  Sometimes I think you
are not nearly poet enough for the life you are living.  Why, you are
wonderful, you men of the north, and you let us ordinary mortals who
have not the gift of divination imagine you entirely occupied with
how many pounds of iron chain you are going to need during the
winter."  She said these things lightly as one who speaks things
not for serious belief.

"It is something that way," he agreed with a laugh.

"Do you know, sir," she persisted, "that I really don't know
anything at all about the life you lead here?  From what I have
seen, you might be perpetually occupied in eating things in a log
cabin, and in disappearing to perform some mysterious rites in the
forest."  She looked at him with a smiling mouth but tender eyes,
her head tilted back slightly.

"It's a good deal that way, too," he agreed again.  "We use a
barrel of flour in Camp One every two and a half days!"

She shook her head in a faint negation that only half understood
what he was saying, her whole heart in her tender gaze.

"Sit there," she breathed very softly, pointing to the dried needles
on which her feet rested, but without altering the position of her
head or the steadfastness of her look.

He obeyed.

"Now tell me," she breathed, still in the fascinated monotone.

"What?" he inquired.

"Your life; what you do; all about it.  You must tell me a story."

Thorpe settled himself more lazily, and laughed with quiet enjoyment.
Never had he felt the expansion of a similar mood.  The barrier
between himself and self-expression had faded, leaving not the
smallest debris of the old stubborn feeling.

"The story of the woods," he began, "the story of the saw log.  It
would take a bigger man than I to tell it.  I doubt if any one man
ever would be big enough.  It is a drama, a struggle, a battle.
Those men you hear there are only the skirmishers extending the
firing line.  We are fighting always with Time.  I'll have to hurry
now to get those roads done and a certain creek cleared before the
snow.  Then we'll have to keep on the keen move to finish our
cutting before the deep snow; to haul our logs before the spring
thaws; to float them down the river while the freshet water lasts.
When we gain a day we have scored a victory; when the wilderness
puts us back an hour, we have suffered a defeat.  Our ammunition
is Time; our small shot the minutes, our heavy ordnance the hours!"

The girl placed her hand on his shoulder.  He covered it with his
own.

"But we win!" he cried.  "We win!"

"That is what I like," she said softly, "the strong spirit that
wins!"  She hesitated, then went on gently, "But the battlefields,
Harry; to me they are dreadful.  I went walking yesterday morning,
before you came over, and after a while I found myself in the most
awful place.  The stumps of trees, the dead branches, the trunks
lying all about, and the glaring hot sun over everything!  Harry,
there was not a single bird in all that waste, a single green thing.
You don't know how it affected me so early in the morning.  I saw
just one lonesome pine tree that had been left for some reason or
another, standing there like a sentinel.  I could shut my eyes and
see all the others standing, and almost hear the birds singing and
the wind in the branches, just as it is here."  She seized his
fingers in her other hand.  "Harry," she said earnestly, "I don't
believe I can ever forget that experience, any more than I could
have forgotten a battlefield, were I to see one.  I can shut my eyes
now, and can see this place our dear little wooded knoll wasted and
blackened as that was."

The man twisted his shoulder uneasily and withdrew his hand.

"Harry," she said again, after a pause, "you must promise to leave
this woods until the very last.  I suppose it must all be cut down
some day, but I do not want to be here to see after it is all over."

Thorpe remained silent.

"Men do not care much for keepsakes, do they, Harry?--they don't
save letters and flowers as we girls do--but even a man can feel the
value of a great beautiful keepsake such as this, can't he, dear?
Our meeting-place--do you remember how I found you down there by the
old pole trail, staring as though you had seen a ghost?--and that
beautiful, beautiful music!  It must always be our most sacred
memory.  Promise me you will save it until the very, very last."

Thorpe said nothing because he could not rally his faculties.  The
sentimental association connected with the grove had actually never
occurred to him.  His keepsakes were impressions which he carefully
guarded in his memory.  To the natural masculine indifference toward
material bits of sentiment he had added the instinct of the strictly
portable early developed in the rover.  He had never even possessed a
photograph of his sister.  Now this sudden discovery that such things
might be part of the woof of another person's spiritual garment came
to him ready-grown to the proportions of a problem.

In selecting the districts for the season's cut, he had included in
his estimates this very grove.  Since then he had seen no reason for
changing his decision.  The operations would not commence until
winter.  By that time the lovers would no longer care to use it as
at present.  Now rapidly he passed in review a dozen expedients by
which his plan might be modified to permit of the grove's exclusion.
His practical mind discovered flaws in every one.  Other bodies of
timber promising a return of ten thousand dollars were not to be
found near the river, and time now lacked for the cutting of roads
to more distant forties.

"Hilda," he broke in abruptly at last, "the men you hear are clearing
a road to this very timber."

"What do you mean?" she asked.

"This timber is marked for cutting this very winter."

She had not a suspicion of the true state of affairs.  "Isn't it
lucky I spoke of it!" she exclaimed.  "How could you have forgotten
to countermand the order!  You must see to it to-day; now!"

She sprang up impulsively and stood waiting for him.  He arose more
slowly.  Even before he spoke her eyes dilated with the shock from
her quick intuitions.

"Hilda, I cannot," he said.

She stood very still for some seconds.

"Why not?" she asked quietly.

"Because I have not time to cut a road through to another bunch of
pine.  It is this or nothing."

"Why not nothing, then?"

"I want the money this will bring."

His choice of a verb was unfortunate.  The employment of that one
little word opened the girl's mind to a flood of old suspicions
which the frank charm of the northland had thrust outside.  Hilda
Farrand was an heiress and a beautiful girl.  She had been constantly
reminded of the one fact by the attempts of men to use flattery of
the other as a key to her heart and her fortune.  From early girlhood
she had been sought by the brilliant impecunious of two continents.
The continued experience had varnished her self-esteem with a glaze
of cynicism sufficiently consistent to protect it against any but
the strongest attack.  She believed in no man's protestations.  She
distrusted every man's motives as far as herself was concerned.  This
attitude of mind was not unbecoming in her for the simple reason that
it destroyed none of her graciousness as regards other human relations
besides that of love.  That men should seek her in matrimony from a
selfish motive was as much to be expected as that flies should seek
the sugar bowl.  She accepted the fact as one of nature's laws,
annoying enough but inevitable; a thing to guard against, but not
one of sufficient moment to grieve over.

With Thorpe, however, her suspicions had been lulled.  There is
something virile and genuine about the woods and the men who
inhabit them that strongly predisposes the mind to accept as proved
in their entirety all the other virtues.  Hilda had fallen into this
state of mind.  She endowed each of the men whom she encountered
with all the robust qualities she had no difficulty in recognizing
as part of nature's charm in the wilderness.  Now at a word her eyes
were opened to what she had done.  She saw that she had assumed
unquestioningly that her lover possessed the qualities of his
environment.

Not for a moment did she doubt the reality of her love.  She had
conceived one of those deep, uplifting passions possible only to a
young girl.  But her cynical experience warned her that the reality
of that passion's object was not proven by any test besides the
fallible one of her own poetizing imagination.  The reality of the
ideal she had constructed might be a vanishable quantity even though
the love of it was not.  So to the interview that ensued she brought,
not the partiality of a loving heart, nor even the impartiality of
one sitting in judgment, but rather the perverted prejudice of one
who actually fears the truth.

"Will you tell me for what you want the money?" she asked.

The young man caught the note of distrust.  At once, instinctively,
his own confidence vanished.  He drew within himself, again beyond
the power of justifying himself with the needed word.

"The firm needs it in the business," said he.

Her next question countered instantaneously.

"Does the firm need the money more than you do me?"

They stared at each other in the silence of the situation that had
so suddenly developed.  It had come into being without their volition,
as a dust cloud springs up on a plain.

"You do not mean that, Hilda," said Thorpe quietly.  "It hardly
comes to that."

"Indeed it does," she replied, every nerve of her fine organization
strung to excitement.  "I should be more to you than any firm."

"Sometimes it is necessary to look after the bread and butter,"
Thorpe reminded her gently, although he knew that was not the real
reason at all.

"If your firm can't supply it, I can," she answered.  "It seems
strange that you won't grant my first request of you, merely
because of a little money."

"It isn't a little money," he objected, catching manlike at the
practical question.  "You don't realize what an amount a clump of
pine like this stands for.  Just in saw logs, before it is made into
lumber, it will be worth about thirty thousand dollars,--of course
there's the expense of logging to pay out of that," he added, out
of his accurate business conservatism, "but there's ten thousand
dollars' profit in it."

The girl, exasperated by cold details at such a time, blazed out.
"I never heard anything so ridiculous in my life!" she cried.
"Either you are not at all the man I thought you, or you have some
better reason than you have given.  Tell me, Harry; tell me at once.
You don't know what you are doing."

"The firm needs it, Hilda," said Thorpe, "in order to succeed.  If
we do not cut this pine, we may fail."

In that he stated his religion.  The duty of success was to him one
of the loftiest of abstractions, for it measured the degree of a
man's efficiency in the station to which God had called him.  The
money, as such, was nothing to him.

Unfortunately the girl had learned a different language.  She knew
nothing of the hardships, the struggles, the delight of winning for
the sake of victory rather than the sake of spoils.  To her, success
meant getting a lot of money.  The name by which Thorpe labelled his
most sacred principle, to her represented something base and sordid.
She had more money herself than she knew.  It hurt her to the soul
that the condition of a small money-making machine, as she considered
the lumber firm, should be weighed even for an instant against her
love.  It was a great deal Thorpe's fault that she so saw the firm.
He might easily have shown her the great forces and principles for
which it stood.

"If I were a man," she said, and her voice was tense, "if I were
a man and loved a woman, I would be ready to give up everything for
her.  My riches, my pride, my life, my honor, my soul even,--they
would be as nothing, as less than nothing to me,--if I loved.  Harry,
don't let me think I am mistaken.  Let this miserable firm of yours
fail, if fail it must for lack of my poor little temple of dreams,"
she held out her hands with a tender gesture of appeal.  The affair
had gone beyond the preservation of a few trees.  It had become the
question of an ideal.  Gradually, in spite of herself, the conviction
was forcing itself upon her that the man she had loved was no
different from the rest; that the greed of the dollar had corrupted
him too.  By the mere yielding to her wishes, she wanted to prove the
suspicion wrong.

Now the strange part of the whole situation was, that in two words
Thorpe could have cleared it.  If he had explained that he needed
the ten thousand dollars to help pay a note given to save from ruin
a foolish friend, he would have supplied to the affair just the
higher motive the girl's clear spirituality demanded.  Then she
would have shared enthusiastically in the sacrifice, and been the
more loving and repentant from her momentary doubt.  All she needed
was that the man should prove himself actuated by a noble, instead
of a sordid, motive.  The young man did not say the two words,
because in all honesty he thought them unimportant.  It seemed to
him quite natural that he should go on Wallace Carpenter's note.
That fact altered not a bit the main necessity of success.  It was
a man's duty to make the best of himself,--it was Thorpe's duty to
prove himself supremely efficient in his chosen calling; the mere
coincidence that his partner's troubles worked along the same lines
meant nothing to the logic of the situation.  In stating baldly that
he needed the money to assure the firm's existence, he imagined he
had adduced the strongest possible reason for his attitude.  If the
girl was not influenced by that, the case was hopeless.

It was the difference of training rather than the difference of
ideas.  Both clung to unselfishness as the highest reason for human
action; but each expressed the thought in a manner incomprehensible
to the other.

"I cannot, Hilda," he answered steadily.

"You sell me for ten thousand dollars!  I cannot believe it!  Harry!
Harry!  Must I put it to you as a choice?  Don't you love me enough
to spare me that?"

He did not reply.  As long as it remained a dilemma, he would not
reply.  He was in the right.

"Do you need the money more than you do me? more than you do love?"
she begged, her soul in her eyes; for she was begging also for
herself.  "Think, Harry; it is the last chance!"

Once more he was face to face with a vital decision.  To his
surprise he discovered in his mind no doubt as to what the answer
should be.  He experienced no conflict of mind; no hesitation;
for the moment, no regret.  During all his woods life he had been
following diligently the trail he had blazed for his conduct.  Now
his feet carried him unconsciously to the same end.  There was no
other way out.  In the winter of his trouble the clipped trees alone
guided him, and at the end of them he found his decision.  It is
in crises of this sort, when a little reflection or consideration
would do wonders to prevent a catastrophe, that all the forgotten
deeds, decisions, principles, and thoughts of a man's past life
combine solidly into the walls of fatality, so that in spite of
himself he finds he must act in accordance with them.  In answer
to Hilda's question he merely inclined his head.

"I have seen a vision," said she simply, and lowered her head to
conceal her eyes.  Then she looked at him again.  "There can be
nothing better than love," she said.

"Yes, one thing," said Thorpe, "the duty of success."

The man had stated his creed; the woman hers.  The one is born
perfect enough for love; the other must work, must attain the
completeness of a fulfilled function, must succeed, to deserve it.

She left him then, and did not see him again.  Four days later the
camping party left.  Thorpe sent Tim Shearer over, as his most
efficient man, to see that they got off without difficulty, but
himself retired on some excuse to Camp Four.  Three weeks gone in
October he received a marked newspaper announcing the engagement
of Miss Hilda Farrand to Mr. Hildreth Morton of Chicago.

He had burned his ships, and stood now on an unfriendly shore.  The
first sacrifice to his jealous god had been consummated, and now,
live or die, he stood pledged to win his fight.



Chapter XLV


Winter set in early and continued late; which in the end was
a good thing for the year's cut.  The season was capricious,
hanging for days at a time at the brink of a thaw, only to stiffen
again into severe weather.  This was trying on the nerves.  For at
each of these false alarms the six camps fell into a feverish haste
to get the job finished before the break-up.  It was really quite
extraordinary how much was accomplished under the nagging spur of
weather conditions and the cruel rowelling of Thorpe.

The latter had now no thought beyond his work, and that was the
thought of a madman.  He had been stern and unyielding enough
before, goodness knows, but now he was terrible.  His restless
energy permeated every molecule in the economic structure over
which he presided, roused it to intense vibration.  Not for an
instant was there a resting spell.  The veriest chore-boy talked,
thought, dreamed of nothing but saw logs.  Men whispered vaguely
of a record cut.  Teamsters looked upon their success or failure
to keep near the top on the day's haul as a signal victory or a
disgraceful defeat.  The difficulties of snow, accident, topography
which an ever-watchful nature threw down before the rolling car of
this industry, were swept aside like straws.  Little time was wasted
and no opportunities.  It did not matter how smoothly affairs
happened to be running for the moment, every advantage, even the
smallest, was eagerly seized to advance the work.  A drop of five
degrees during the frequent warm spells brought out the sprinklers,
even in dead of night; an accident was white-hot in the forge
almost before the crack of the iron had ceased to echo.  At night
the men fell into their bunks like sandbags, and their last conscious
thought, if indeed they had any at all, was of eagerness for the
morrow in order that they might push the grand total up another
notch.  It was madness; but it was the madness these men loved.

For now to his old religion Thorpe had added a fanaticism, and over
the fanaticism was gradually creeping a film of doubt.  To the
conscientious energy which a sense of duty supplied, was added the
tremendous kinetic force of a love turned into other channels.  And
in the wild nights while the other men slept, Thorpe's half-crazed
brain was revolving over and over again the words of the sentence
he had heard from Hilda's lips: "There can be nothing better than
love."

His actions, his mind, his very soul vehemently denied the
proposition.
He clung as ever to his high Puritanic idea of man's purpose.  But
down deep in a very tiny, sacred corner of his heart a very small
voice sometimes made itself heard when other, more militant voices
were still: "It may be; it may be!"

The influence of this voice was practically nothing.  It made
itself heard occasionally.  Perhaps even, for the time being, its
weight counted on the other side of the scale; for Thorpe took
pains to deny it fiercely, both directly and indirectly by increased
exertions.  But it persisted; and once in a moon or so, when the
conditions were quite favorable, it attained for an instant a shred
of belief.

Probably never since the Puritan days of New England has a community
lived as sternly as did that winter of 1888 the six camps under
Thorpe's management.  There was something a little inspiring about
it.  The men fronted their daily work with the same grim-faced,
clear-eyed steadiness of veterans going into battle;--with the
same confidence, the same sure patience that disposes effectively
of one thing before going on to the next.  There was little merely
excitable bustle; there was no rest.  Nothing could stand against
such a spirit.  Nothing did.  The skirmishers which the wilderness
threw out, were brushed away.  Even the inevitable delays seemed
not so much stoppages as the instant's pause of a heavy vehicle in
a snow drift, succeeded by the momentary acceleration as the plunge
carried it through.  In the main, and by large, the machine moved
steadily and inexorably.

And yet one possessed of the finer spiritual intuitions could not
have shaken off the belief in an impending struggle.  The feel of it
was in the air.  Nature's forces were too mighty to be so slightly
overcome; the splendid energy developed in these camps too vast to
be wasted on facile success.  Over against each other were two great
powers, alike in their calm confidence, animated with the loftiest
and most dignified spirit of enmity.  Slowly they were moving toward
each other.  The air was surcharged with the electricity of their
opposition.  Just how the struggle would begin was uncertain; but its
inevitability was as assured as its magnitude.  Thorpe knew it, and
shut his teeth, looking keenly about him.  The Fighting Forty knew
it, and longed for the grapple to come.  The other camps knew it,
and followed their leader with perfect trust.  The affair was an
epitome of the historic combats begun with David and Goliath.  It
was an affair of Titans.  The little courageous men watched their
enemy with cat's eyes.

The last month of hauling was also one of snow.  In this condition
were few severe storms, but each day a little fell.  By and by the
accumulation amounted to much.  In the woods where the wind could
not get at it, it lay deep and soft above the tops of bushes.  The
grouse ate browse from the slender hardwood tips like a lot of
goldfinches, or precipitated themselves headlong down through five
feet of snow to reach the ground.  Often Thorpe would come across
the irregular holes of their entrance.  Then if he took the trouble
to stamp about a little in the vicinity with his snowshoes, the
bird would spring unexpectedly from the clear snow, scattering a
cloud with its strong wings.  The deer, herded together, tramped
"yards" where the feed was good.  Between the yards ran narrow
trails.  When the animals went from one yard to another in these
trails, their ears and antlers alone were visible.  On either side
of the logging roads the snow piled so high as to form a kind of
rampart.  When all this water in suspense should begin to flow,
and to seek its level in the water-courses of the district, the
logs would have plenty to float them, at least.

So late did the cold weather last that, even with the added plowing
to do, the six camps beat all records.  On the banks at Camp One
were nine million feet; the totals of all five amounted to thirty-
three million.  About ten million of this was on French Creek; the
remainder on the main banks of the Ossawinamakee.  Besides this the
firm up-river, Sadler & Smith, had put up some twelve million more.
The drive promised to be quite an affair.

About the fifteenth of April attention became strained.  Every day
the mounting sun made heavy attacks on the snow: every night the
temperature dropped below the freezing point.  The river began to
show more air holes, occasional open places.  About the center the
ice looked worn and soggy.  Someone saw a flock of geese high in
the air.  Then came rain.

One morning early, Long Pine Jim came into the men's camp bearing a
huge chunk of tallow.  This he held against the hot stove until its
surface had softened, when he began to swab liberal quantities of
grease on his spiked river shoes, which he fished out from under
his bunk.

"She's comin', boys," said he.

He donned a pair of woolen trousers that had been chopped off at
the knee, thick woolen stockings, and the river shoes.  Then he
tightened his broad leather belt about his heavy shirt, cocked his
little hat over his ear, and walked over in the corner to select a
peavey from the lot the blacksmith had just put in shape.  A peavey
is like a cant-hook except that it is pointed at the end.  Thus it
can be used either as a hook or a pike.  At the same moment Shearer,
similarly attired and equipped, appeared in the doorway.  The opening
of the portal admitted a roar of sound.  The river was rising.

"Come on, boys, she's on!" said he sharply.

Outside, the cook and cookee were stowing articles in the already
loaded wanigan.  The scow contained tents, blankets, provisions, and
a portable stove.  It followed the drive, and made a camp wherever
expediency demanded.

"Lively, boys, lively!" shouted Thorpe.  "She'll be down on us
before we know it!"

Above the soft creaking of dead branches in the wind sounded a
steady roar, like the bellowing of a wild beast lashing itself to
fury.  The freshet was abroad, forceful with the strength of a
whole winter's accumulated energy.

The men heard it and their eyes brightened with the lust of battle.
They cheered.



Chapter XLVI


At the banks of the river, Thorpe rapidly issued his directions.
The affair had been all prearranged.  During the week previous he
and his foremen had reviewed the situation, examining the state of
the ice, the heads of water in the three dams.  Immediately above
the first rollways was Dam Three with its two wide sluices through
which a veritable flood could be loosened at will; then four miles
farther lay the rollways of Sadler & Smith, the up-river firm; and
above them tumbled over a forty-five foot ledge the beautiful Siscoe
Falls; these first rollways of Thorpe's--spread in the broad marsh
flat below the dam--contained about eight millions; the rest of
the season's cut was scattered for thirty miles along the bed of
the river.

Already the ice cementing the logs together had begun to weaken.
The ice had wrenched and tugged savagely at the locked timbers
until they had, with a mighty effort, snapped asunder the bonds of
their hibernation.  Now a narrow lane of black rushing water pierced
the rollways, to boil and eddy in the consequent jam three miles
below.

To the foremen Thorpe assigned their tasks, calling them to him one
by one, as a general calls his aids.

"Moloney," said he to the big Irishman, "take your crew and break
that jam.  Then scatter your men down to within a mile of the pond
at Dam Two, and see that the river runs clear.  You can tent for a
day or so at West Bend or some other point about half way down; and
after that you had better camp at the dam.  Just as soon as you get
logs enough in the pond, start to sluicing them through the dam.
You won't need more than four men there, if you keep a good head.
You can keep your gates open five or six hours.  And Moloney."

"Yes, sir."

"I want you to be careful not to sluice too long.  There is a bar
just below the dam, and if you try to sluice with the water too
low, you'll center and jam there, as sure as shooting."

Bryan Moloney turned on his heel and began to pick his way down
stream over the solidly banked logs.  Without waiting the command,
a dozen men followed him.  The little group bobbed away irregularly
into the distance, springing lightly from one timber to the other,
holding their quaintly-fashioned peaveys in the manner of a rope
dancer's balancing pole.  At the lowermost limit of the rollways,
each man pried a log into the water, and, standing gracefully erect
on this unstable craft, floated out down the current to the scene
of his dangerous labor.

"Kerlie," went on Thorpe, "your crew can break rollways with the
rest until we get the river fairly filled, and then you can move
on down stream as fast as you are needed.  Scotty, you will have
the rear.  Tim and I will boss the river."

At once the signal was given to Ellis, the dam watcher.  Ellis and
his assistants thereupon began to pry with long iron bars at the
ratchets of the heavy gates.  The chore-boy bent attentively over
the ratchet-pin, lifting it delicately to permit another inch of
raise, dropping it accurately to enable the men at the bars to
seize a fresh purchase.  The river's roar deepened.  Through the
wide sluice-ways a torrent foamed and tumbled.  Immediately it spread
through the brush on either side to the limits of the freshet banks,
and then gathered for its leap against the uneasy rollways.  Along
the edge of the dark channel the face of the logs seemed to crumble
away.  Farther in towards the banks where the weight of timber still
outbalanced the weight of the flood, the tiers grumbled and stirred,
restless with the stream's calling.  Far down the river, where Bryan
Moloney and his crew were picking at the jam, the water in eager
streamlets sought the interstices between the logs, gurgling
excitedly like a mountain brook.

The jam creaked and groaned in response to the pressure.  From its
face a hundred jets of water spurted into the lower stream.  Logs
up-ended here and there, rising from the bristling surface slowly,
like so many arms from lower depths.  Above, the water eddied back
foaming; logs shot down from the rollways, paused at the slackwater,
and finally hit with a hollow and resounding BOOM! against the tail
of the jam.  A moment later they too up-ended, so becoming an integral
part of the "chevaux de frise."

The crew were working desperately.  Down in the heap somewhere, two
logs were crossed in such a manner as to lock the whole.  They
sought those logs.

Thirty feet above the bed of the river six men clamped their peaveys
into the soft pine; jerking, pulling, lifting, sliding the great logs
from their places.  Thirty feet below, under the threatening face, six
other men coolly picked out and set adrift, one by one, the timbers
not inextricably imbedded.  From time to time the mass creaked,
settled, perhaps even moved a foot or two; but always the practiced
rivermen, after a glance, bent more eagerly to their work.

Outlined against the sky, big Bryan Moloney stood directing the
work.  He had gone at the job on the bias of indirection, picking
out a passage at either side that the center might the more easily
"pull."  He knew by the tenseness of the log he stood on that,
behind the jam, power had gathered sufficient to push the whole
tangle down-stream.  Now he was offering it the chance.

Suddenly the six men below the jam scattered.  Four of them, holding
their peaveys across their bodies, jumped lightly from one floating
log to another in the zigzag to shore.  When they stepped on a small
log they re-leaped immediately, leaving a swirl of foam where the
little timber had sunk under them; when they encountered one larger,
they hesitated for a barely perceptible instant.  Thus their
progression was of fascinating and graceful irregularity.  The other
two ran the length of their footing, and, overleaping an open of
water, landed heavily and firmly on the very ends of two small
floating logs.  In this manner the force of the jump rushed the
little timbers end-on through the water.  The two men, maintaining
marvellously their balance, were thus ferried to within leaping
distance of the other shore.

In the meantime a barely perceptible motion was communicating
itself from one particle to another through the center of the jam.
A cool and observant spectator might have imagined that the broad
timber carpet was changing a little its pattern, just as the earth
near the windows of an arrested railroad train seems for a moment
to retrogress.  The crew redoubled its exertions, clamping its
peaveys here and there, apparently at random, but in reality with
the most definite of purposes.  A sharp crack exploded immediately
underneath.  There could no longer exist any doubt as to the motion,
although it was as yet sluggish, glacial.  Then in silence a log
shifted--in silence and slowly--but with irresistible force.  Jimmy
Powers quietly stepped over it, just as it menaced his leg.  Other
logs in all directions up-ended.  The jam crew were forced continually
to alter their positions, riding the changing timbers bent-kneed, as
a circus rider treads his four galloping horses.

Then all at once down by the face something crashed.  The entire
stream became alive.  It hissed and roared, it shrieked, groaned and
grumbled.  At first slowly, then more rapidly, the very forefront of
the center melted inward and forward and downward until it caught
the fierce rush of the freshet and shot out from under the jam.
Far up-stream, bristling and formidable, the tons of logs, grinding
savagely together, swept forward.

The six men and Bryan Moloney--who, it will be remembered, were
on top--worked until the last moment.  When the logs began to cave
under them so rapidly that even the expert rivermen found difficulty
in "staying on top," the foreman set the example of hunting safety.

"She 'pulls,' boys," he yelled.

Then in a manner wonderful to behold, through the smother of foam
and spray, through the crash and yell of timbers protesting the
flood's hurrying, through the leap of destruction, the drivers
zigzagged calmly and surely to the shore.

All but Jimmy Powers.  He poised tense and eager on the crumbling
face of the jam.  Almost immediately he saw what he wanted, and
without pause sprang boldly and confidently ten feet straight
downward, to alight with accuracy on a single log floating free
in the current.  And then in the very glory and chaos of the jam
itself he was swept down-stream.

After a moment the constant acceleration in speed checked, then
commenced perceptibly to slacken.  At once the rest of the crew
began to ride down-stream.  Each struck the caulks of his river
boots strongly into a log, and on such unstable vehicles floated
miles with the current.  From time to time, as Bryan Moloney
indicated, one of them went ashore.  There, usually at a bend of
the stream where the likelihood of jamming was great, they took
their stands.  When necessary, they ran out over the face of the
river to separate a congestion likely to cause trouble.  The rest
of the time they smoked their pipes.

At noon they ate from little canvas bags which had been filled
that morning by the cookee.  At sunset they rode other logs down
the river to where their camp had been made for them.  There they
ate hugely, hung their ice-wet garments over a tall framework
constructed around a monster fire, and turned in on hemlock
branches.

All night long the logs slipped down the moonlit current, silently,
swiftly, yet without haste.  The porcupines invaded the sleeping
camp.  From the whole length of the river rang the hollow BOOM,
BOOM, BOOM, of timbers striking one against the other.

The drive was on.



Chapter XLVII


In the meantime the main body of the crew under Thorpe and his
foremen were briskly tumbling the logs into the current.  Sometimes
under the urging of the peaveys, but a single stick would slide
down; or again a double tier would cascade with the roar of a
little Niagara.  The men had continually to keep on the tension of
an alert, for at any moment they were called upon to exercise their
best judgment and quickness to keep from being carried downward with
the rush of the logs.  Not infrequently a frowning sheer wall of
forty feet would hesitate on the brink of plunge.  Then Shearer
himself proved his right to the title of riverman.

Shearer wore caulks nearly an inch in length.  He had been known
to ride ten miles, without shifting his feet, on a log so small
that he could carry it without difficulty.  For cool nerve he was
unexcelled.

"I don't need you boys here any longer," he said quietly.

When the men had all withdrawn, he walked confidently under the front
of the rollway, glancing with practiced eye at the perpendicular wall
of logs over him.  Then, as a man pries jack-straws, he clamped his
peavey and tugged sharply.  At once the rollway flattened and toppled.
A mighty splash, a hurl of flying foam and crushing timbers, and the
spot on which the riverman had stood was buried beneath twenty feet
of solid green wood.  To Thorpe it seemed that Shearer must have been
overwhelmed, but the riverman always mysteriously appeared at one
side or the other, nonchalant, urging the men to work before the
logs should have ceased to move.  Tradition claimed that only once
in a long woods life had Shearer been forced to "take water" before
a breaking rollway: and then he saved his peavey.  History stated
that he had never lost a man on the river, simply and solely because
he invariably took the dangerous tasks upon himself.

As soon as the logs had caught the current, a dozen men urged them
on.  With their short peaveys, the drivers were enabled to prevent
the timbers from swirling in the eddies--one of the first causes of
a jam. At last, near the foot of the flats, they abandoned them to
the stream, confident that Moloney and his crew would see to their
passage down the river.

In three days the rollways were broken.  Now it became necessary to
start the rear.

For this purpose Billy Camp, the cook, had loaded his cook-stove, a
quantity of provisions, and a supply of bedding, aboard a scow.  The
scow was built of tremendous hewn timbers, four or five inches thick,
to withstand the shock of the logs.  At either end were long sweeps
to direct its course.  The craft was perhaps forty feet long, but
rather narrow, in order that it might pass easily through the chute
of a dam.  It was called the "wanigan."

Billy Camp, his cookee, and his crew of two were now doomed to
tribulation.  The huge, unwieldy craft from that moment was to
become possessed of the devil.  Down the white water of rapids it
would bump, smashing obstinately against boulders, impervious to
the frantic urging of the long sweeps; against the roots and
branches of the streamside it would scrape with the perverseness
of a vicious horse; in the broad reaches it would sulk, refusing
to proceed; and when expediency demanded its pause, it would drag
Billy Camp and his entire crew at the rope's end, while they tried
vainly to snub it against successively uprooted trees and stumps.
When at last the wanigan was moored fast for the night,--usually
a mile or so below the spot planned,--Billy Camp pushed back his
battered old brown derby hat, the badge of his office, with a sigh
of relief.  To be sure he and his men had still to cut wood,
construct cooking and camp fires, pitch tents, snip browse, and
prepare supper for seventy men; but the hard work of the day was
over.  Billy Camp did not mind rain or cold--he would cheerfully
cook away with the water dripping from his battered derby to his
chubby and cold-purpled nose--but he did mind the wanigan.  And the
worst of it was, he got no sympathy nor aid from the crew.  From
either bank he and his anxious struggling assistants were greeted
with ironic cheers and facetious remarks.  The tribulations of the
wanigan were as the salt of life to the spectators.

Billy Camp tried to keep back of the rear in clear water, but when
the wanigan so disposed, he found himself jammed close in the logs.
There he had a chance in his turn to become spectator, and so to
repay in kind some of the irony and facetiousness.

Along either bank, among the bushes, on sandbars, and in trees,
hundreds and hundreds of logs had been stranded when the main
drive passed.  These logs the rear crew were engaged in restoring
to the current.

And as a man had to be able to ride any kind of a log in any water;
to propel that log by jumping on it, by rolling it squirrel fashion
with the feet, by punting it as one would a canoe; to be skillful
in pushing, prying, and poling other logs from the quarter deck of
the same cranky craft; as he must be prepared at any and all times
to jump waist deep into the river, to work in ice-water hours at a
stretch; as he was called upon to break the most dangerous jams on
the river, representing, as they did, the accumulation which the jam
crew had left behind th