em, it was naturally considered the height
of glory to belong to the rear crew.  Here were the best of the
Fighting Forty,--men with a reputation as "white-water birlers"--
men afraid of nothing.

Every morning the crews were divided into two sections under Kerlie
and Jack Hyland.  Each crew had charge of one side of the river, with
the task of cleaning it thoroughly of all stranded and entangled
logs.  Scotty Parsons exercised a general supervisory eye over both
crews.  Shearer and Thorpe traveled back and forth the length of the
drive, riding the logs down stream, but taking to a partly submerged
pole trail when ascending the current.  On the surface of the river
in the clear water floated two long graceful boats called bateaux.
These were in charge of expert boatmen,--men able to propel their
craft swiftly forwards, backwards and sideways, through all kinds
of water.  They carried in racks a great supply of pike-poles,
peaveys, axes, rope and dynamite, for use in various emergencies.
Intense rivalry existed as to which crew "sacked" the farthest down
stream in the course of the day.  There was no need to urge the
men.  Some stood upon the logs, pushing mightily with the long
pike-poles.  Others, waist deep in the water, clamped the jaws of
their peaveys into the stubborn timbers, and, shoulder bent, slid
them slowly but surely into the swifter waters.  Still others,
lining up on either side of one of the great brown tree trunks,
carried it bodily to its appointed place.  From one end of the
rear to the other, shouts, calls, warnings, and jokes flew back
and forth.  Once or twice a vast roar of Homeric laughter went up
as some unfortunate slipped and soused into the water.  When the
current slacked, and the logs hesitated in their run, the entire
crew hastened, bobbing from log to log, down river to see about
it.  Then they broke the jam, standing surely on the edge of the
great darkness, while the ice water sucked in and out of their shoes.

Behind the rear Big Junko poled his bateau backwards and forwards
exploding dynamite.  Many of the bottom tiers of logs in the
rollways had been frozen down, and Big Junko had to loosen them
from the bed of the stream.  He was a big man, this, as his nickname
indicated, built of many awkwardnesses.  His cheekbones were high,
his nose flat, his lips thick and slobbery.  He sported a wide,
ferocious straggling mustache and long eye-brows, under which
gleamed little fierce eyes.  His forehead sloped back like a
beast's, but was always hidden by a disreputable felt hat.  Big
Junko did not know much, and had the passions of a wild animal,
but he was a reckless riverman and devoted to Thorpe.  Just now
he exploded dynamite.

The sticks of powder were piled amidships.  Big Junko crouched over
them, inserting the fuses and caps, closing the openings with soap,
finally lighting them, and dropping them into the water alongside,
where they immediately sank.  Then a few strokes of a short paddle
took him barely out of danger.  He huddled down in his craft,
waiting.  One, two, three seconds passed.  Then a hollow boom shook
the stream.  A cloud of water sprang up, strangely beautiful.  After
a moment the great brown logs rose suddenly to the surface from below,
one after the other, like leviathans of the deep.  And Junko watched,
dimly fascinated, in his rudimentary animal's brain, by the sight of
the power he had evoked to his aid.

When night came the men rode down stream to where the wanigan had
made camp.  There they slept, often in blankets wetted by the
wanigan's eccentricities, to leap to their feet at the first cry
in early morning.  Some days it rained, in which case they were
wet all the time.  Almost invariably there was a jam to break,
though strangely enough almost every one of the old-timers believed
implicitly that "in the full of the moon logs will run free at night."

Thorpe and Tim Shearer nearly always slept in a dog tent at the
rear; though occasionally they passed the night at Dam Two, where
Bryan Moloney and his crew were already engaged in sluicing the
logs through the chute.

The affair was simple enough.  Long booms arranged in the form of an
open V guided the drive to the sluice gate, through which a smooth
apron of water rushed to turmoil in an eddying pool below.  Two men
tramped steadily backwards and forwards on the booms, urging the
logs forward by means of long pike poles to where the suction could
seize them.  Below the dam, the push of the sluice water forced them
several miles down stream, where the rest of Bryan Moloney's crew
took them in charge.

Thus through the wide gate nearly three-quarters of a million feet
an hour could be run--a quantity more than sufficient to keep pace
with the exertions of the rear.  The matter was, of course, more or
less delayed by the necessity of breaking out such rollways as they
encountered from time to time on the banks.  At length, however, the
last of the logs drifted into the wide dam pool.  The rear had
arrived at Dam Two, and Thorpe congratulated himself that one stage
of his journey had been completed.  Billy Camp began to worry about
shooting the wanigan through the sluice-way.



Chapter XLVIII


The rear had been tenting at the dam for two days, and was about
ready to break camp, when Jimmy Powers swung across the trail to
tell them of the big jam.

Ten miles along the river bed, the stream dropped over a little
half-falls into a narrow, rocky gorge.  It was always an anxious
spot for the river drivers.  In fact, the plunging of the logs
head-on over the fall had so gouged out the soft rock below, that
an eddy of great power had formed in the basin.  Shearer and Thorpe
had often discussed the advisability of constructing an artificial
apron of logs to receive the impact.  Here, in spite of all efforts,
the jam had formed, first a little center of a few logs in the
middle of the stream, dividing the current, and shunting the logs
to right and left; then "wings" growing out from either bank, built
up from logs shunted too violently; finally a complete stoppage of
the channel, and the consequent rapid piling up as the pressure of
the drive increased.  Now the bed was completely filled, far above
the level of the falls, by a tangle that defied the jam crew's
best efforts.

The rear at once took the trail down the river.  Thorpe and Shearer
and Scotty Parsons looked over the ground.

"She may 'pull,' if she gets a good start," decided Tim.

Without delay the entire crew was set to work.  Nearly a hundred
men can pick a great many logs in the course of a day.  Several
times the jam started, but always "plugged" before the motion
had become irresistible.  This was mainly because the rocky walls
narrowed at a slight bend to the west, so that the drive was
throttled, as it were.  It was hoped that perhaps the middle of
the jam might burst through here, leaving the wings stranded.  The
hope was groundless.

"We'll have to shoot," Shearer reluctantly decided.

The men were withdrawn.  Scotty Parsons cut a sapling twelve feet
long, and trimmed it.  Big Junko thawed his dynamite at a little
fire, opening the ends of the packages in order that the steam
generated might escape.  Otherwise the pressure inside the oiled
paper of the package was capable of exploding the whole affair.
When the powder was warm, Scotty bound twenty of the cartridges
around the end of the sapling, adjusted a fuse in one of them, and
soaped the opening to exclude water.  Then Big Junko thrust the long
javelin down into the depths of the jam, leaving a thin stream of
smoke behind him as he turned away.  With sinister, evil eye he
watched the smoke for an instant, then zigzagged awkwardly over the
jam, the long, ridiculous tails of his brown cutaway coat flopping
behind him as he leaped.  A scant moment later the hoarse dynamite
shouted.

Great chunks of timber shot to an inconceivable height; entire logs
lifted bodily into the air with the motion of a fish jumping; a
fountain of water gleamed against the sun and showered down in fine
rain.  The jam shrugged and settled.  That was all; the "shot" had
failed.

The men ran forward, examining curiously the great hole in the log
formation.

"We'll have to flood her," said Thorpe.

So all the gates of the dam were raised, and the torrent tried
its hand.  It had no effect.  Evidently the affair was not one
of violence, but of patience.  The crew went doggedly to work.

Day after day the CLANK, CLANK, CLINK of the peaveys sounded with
the regularity of machinery.  The only practicable method was to
pick away the flank logs, leaving a long tongue pointing down-
stream from the center to start when it would.  This happened time
and again, but always failed to take with it the main jam.  It was
cruel hard work; a man who has lifted his utmost strength into a
peavey knows that.  Any but the Fighting Forty would have grumbled.

Collins, the bookkeeper, came up to view the tangle.  Later a
photographer from Marquette took some views, which, being
exhibited, attracted a great deal of attention, so that by the end
of the week a number of curiosity seekers were driving over every
day to see the Big Jam.  A certain Chicago journalist in search of
balsam health of lungs even sent to his paper a little item.  This,
unexpectedly, brought Wallace Carpenter to the spot.  Although
reassured as to the gravity of the situation, he remained to see.

The place was an amphitheater for such as chose to be spectators.
They could stand or sit on the summit of the gorge cliffs,
overlooking the river, the fall, and the jam.  As the cliff was
barely sixty feet high, the view lacked nothing in clearness.

At last Shearer became angry.

"We've been monkeying long enough," said he.  "Next time we'll
leave a center that WILL go out.  We'll shut the dams down tight
and dry-pick out two wings that'll start her."

The dams were first run at full speed, and then shut down.  Hardly
a drop of water flowed in the bed of the stream.  The crews set
laboriously to work to pull and roll the logs out in such flat
fashion that a head of water should send them out.

This was even harder work than the other, for they had not the
floating power of water to help them in the lifting.  As usual,
part of the men worked below, part above.

Jimmy Powers, curly-haired, laughing-faced, was irrepressible.  He
badgered the others until they threw bark at him and menaced him
with their peaveys.  Always he had at his tongue's end the proper
quip for the occasion, so that in the long run the work was
lightened by him.  When the men stopped to think at all, they
thought of Jimmy Powers with very kindly hearts, for it was known
that he had had more trouble than most, and that the coin was not
made too small for him to divide with a needy comrade.  To those who
had seen his mask of whole-souled good-nature fade into serious
sympathy, Jimmy Powers's poor little jokes were very funny indeed.

"Did 'je see th' Swede at the circus las' summer?" he would howl
to Red Jacket on the top tier.

"No," Red Jacket would answer, "was he there?"

"Yes," Jimmy Powers would reply; then, after a pause--"in a cage!"

It was a poor enough jest, yet if you had been there, you would
have found that somehow the log had in the meantime leaped of its
own accord from that difficult position.

Thorpe approved thoroughly of Jimmy Powers; he thought him a good
influence.  He told Wallace so, standing among the spectators on
the cliff-top.

"He is all right," said Thorpe.  "I wish I had more like him.  The
others are good boys, too."

Five men were at the moment tugging futilely at a reluctant timber.
They were attempting to roll one end of it over the side of another
projecting log, but were continually foiled, because the other end
was jammed fast.  Each bent his knees, inserting his shoulder under
the projecting peavey stock, to straighten in a mighty effort.

"Hire a boy!"  "Get some powder of Junko!"  "Have Jimmy talk it out!"
"Try that little one over by the corner," called the men on top of
the jam.

Everybody laughed, of course.  It was a fine spring day, clear-eyed
and crisp, with a hint of new foliage in the thick buds of the trees.
The air was so pellucid that one distinguished without difficulty
the straight entrance to the gorge a mile away, and even the West
Bend, fully five miles distant.

Jimmy Powers took off his cap and wiped his forehead.

"You boys," he remarked politely, "think you are boring with a
mighty big auger."

"My God!" screamed one of the spectators on top of the cliff.

At the same instant Wallace Carpenter seized his friend's arm and
pointed.

Down the bed of the stream from the upper bend rushed a solid wall
of water several feet high.  It flung itself forward with the
headlong impetus of a cascade.  Even in the short interval between
the visitor's exclamation and Carpenter's rapid gesture, it had
loomed into sight, twisted a dozen trees from the river bank, and
foamed into the entrance of the gorge.  An instant later it collided
with the tail of the jam.

Even in the railroad rush of those few moments several things
happened.  Thorpe leaped for a rope.  The crew working on top
of the jam ducked instinctively to right and left and began to
scramble towards safety.  The men below, at first bewildered and
not comprehending, finally understood, and ran towards the face
of the jam with the intention of clambering up it.  There could
be no escape in the narrow canyon below, the walls of which rose
sheer.

Then the flood hit square.  It was the impact of resistible power.
A great sheet of water rose like surf from the tail of the jam;
a mighty cataract poured down over its surface, lifting the free
logs; from either wing timbers crunched, split, rose suddenly into
wracked prominence, twisted beyond the semblance of themselves.
Here and there single logs were even projected bodily upwards, as
an apple seed is shot from between the thumb and forefinger.  Then
the jam moved.

Scotty Parsons, Jack Hyland, Red Jacket, and the forty or fifty top
men had reached the shore.  By the wriggling activity which is a
riverman's alone, they succeeded in pulling themselves beyond the
snap of death's jaws.  It was a narrow thing for most of them, and
a miracle for some.

Jimmy Powers, Archie Harris, Long Pine Jim, Big Nolan, and Mike
Moloney, the brother of Bryan, were in worse case.  They were,
as has been said, engaged in "flattening" part of the jam about
eight or ten rods below the face of it.  When they finally
understood that the affair was one of escape, they ran towards
the jam, hoping to climb out.  Then the crash came.  They heard
the roar of the waters, the wrecking of the timbers, they saw the
logs bulge outwards in anticipation of the break.  Immediately
they turned and fled, they knew not where.

All but Jimmy Powers.  He stopped short in his tracks, and threw
his battered old felt hat defiantly full into the face of the
destruction hanging over him.  Then, his bright hair blowing in
the wind of death, he turned to the spectators standing helpless
and paralyzed, forty feet above him.

It was an instant's impression,--the arrested motion seen in the
flash of lightning--and yet to the onlookers it had somehow the
quality of time.  For perceptible duration it seemed to them they
stared at the contrast between the raging hell above and the yet
peaceable river bed below.  They were destined to remember that
picture the rest of their natural lives, in such detail that each
one of them could almost have reproduced it photographically by
simply closing his eyes.  Yet afterwards, when they attempted to
recall definitely the impression, they knew it could have lasted
but a fraction of a second, for the reason that, clear and distinct
in each man's mind, the images of the fleeing men retained definite
attitudes.  It was the instantaneous photography of events.

"So long, boys," they heard Jimmy Powers's voice.  Then the rope
Thorpe had thrown fell across a caldron of tortured waters and of
tossing logs.



Chapter XLIX


During perhaps ten seconds the survivors watched the end of Thorpe's
rope trailing in the flood.  Then the young man with a deep sigh
began to pull it towards him.

At once a hundred surmises, questions, ejaculations broke out.

"What happened?" cried Wallace Carpenter.

"What was that man's name?" asked the Chicago journalist with the
eager instinct of his profession.

"This is terrible, terrible, terrible!" a white-haired physician
from Marquette kept repeating over and over.

A half dozen ran towards the point of the cliff to peer down stream,
as though they could hope to distinguish anything in that waste of
flood water.

"The dam's gone out," replied Thorpe.  "I don't understand it.
Everything was in good shape, as far as I could see.  It didn't
act like an ordinary break.  The water came too fast.  Why, it was
as dry as a bone until just as that wave came along.  An ordinary
break would have eaten through little by little before it burst,
and Davis should have been able to stop it.  This came all at once,
as if the dam had disappeared.  I don't see."

His mind of the professional had already began to query causes.

"How about the men?" asked Wallace.  "Isn't there something I can
do?"

"You can head a hunt down the river," answered Thorpe.  "I think
it is useless until the water goes down.  Poor Jimmy.  He was one
of the best men I had.  I wouldn't have had this happen---"

The horror of the scene was at last beginning to filter through
numbness into Wallace Carpenter's impressionable imagination.

"No, no!" he cried vehemently.  "There is something criminal about
it to me!  I'd rather lose every log in the river!"

Thorpe looked at him curiously.  "It is one of the chances of war,"
said he, unable to refrain from the utterance of his creed.  "We all
know it."

"I'd better divide the crew and take in both banks of the river,"
suggested Wallace in his constitutional necessity of doing something.

"See if you can't get volunteers from this crowd," suggested Thorpe.
"I can let you have two men to show you trails.  If you can make it
that way, it will help me out.  I need as many of the crew as
possible to use this flood water."

"Oh, Harry," cried Carpenter, shocked.  "You can't be going to work
again to-day after that horrible sight, before we have made the
slightest effort to recover the bodies!"

"If the bodies can be recovered, they shall be," replied Thorpe
quietly.  "But the drive will not wait.  We have no dams to depend
on now, you must remember, and we shall have to get out on freshet
water."

"Your men won't work.  I'd refuse just as they will!" cried
Carpenter, his sensibilities still suffering.

Thorpe smiled proudly.  "You do not know them.  They are mine.  I
hold them in the hollow of my hand!"

"By Jove!" cried the journalist in sudden enthusiasm.  "By Jove!
that is magnificent!"

The men of the river crew had crouched on their narrow footholds
while the jam went out.  Each had clung to his peavey, as is the
habit of rivermen.  Down the current past their feet swept the
debris of flood.  Soon logs began to swirl by,--at first few, then
many from the remaining rollways which the river had automatically
broken.  In a little time the eddy caught up some of these logs, and
immediately the inception of another jam threatened.  The rivermen,
without hesitation, as calmly as though catastrophe had not thrown
the weight of its moral terror against their stoicism, sprang,
peavey in hand, to the insistent work.

"By Jove!" said the journalist again.  "That is magnificent!  They
are working over the spot where their comrades died!"

Thorpe's face lit with gratification.  He turned to the young man.

"You see," he said in proud simplicity.

With the added danger of freshet water, the work went on.

At this moment Tim Shearer approached from inland, his clothes
dripping wet, but his face retaining its habitual expression of
iron calmness.  "Anybody caught?" was his first question as he
drew near.

"Five men under the face," replied Thorpe briefly.

Shearer cast a glance at the river.  He needed to be told no more.

"I was afraid of it," said he.  "The rollways must be all broken
out.  It's saved us that much, but the freshet water won't last
long.  It's going to be a close squeak to get 'em out now.  Don't
exactly figure on what struck the dam.  Thought first I'd go right
up that way, but then I came down to see about the boys."

Carpenter could not understand this apparent callousness on the
part of men in whom he had always thought to recognize a fund of
rough but genuine feeling.  To him the sacredness of death was
incompatible with the insistence of work.  To these others the
two, grim necessity, went hand in hand.

"Where were you?" asked Thorpe of Shearer.

"On the pole trail.  I got in a little, as you see."

In reality the foreman had had a close call for his life.  A
toughly-rooted basswood alone had saved him.

"We'd better go up and take a look," he suggested.  "Th' boys has
things going here all right."

The two men turned towards the brush.

"Hi, Tim," called a voice behind them.

Red Jacket appeared clambering up the cliff.

"Jack told me to give this to you," he panted, holding out a chunk
of strangely twisted wood.

"Where'd he get this?" inquired Thorpe, quickly.  "It's a piece
of the dam," he explained to Wallace, who had drawn near.

"Picked it out of the current," replied the man.

The foreman and his boss bent eagerly over the morsel.  Then they
stared with solemnity into each other's eyes.

"Dynamite, by God!" exclaimed Shearer.



Chapter L


For a moment the three men stared at each other without speaking.

"What does it mean?" almost whispered Carpenter.

"Mean?  Foul play!" snarled Thorpe.  "Come on, Tim."

The two struck into the brush, threading the paths with the ease
of woodsmen.  It was necessary to keep to the high inland ridges for
the simple reason that the pole trail had by now become impassable.
Wallace Carpenter, attempting to follow them, ran, stumbled, and
fell through brush that continually whipped his face and garments,
continually tripped his feet.  All he could obtain was a vanishing
glimpse of his companions' backs.  Thorpe and his foreman talked
briefly.

"It's Morrison and Daly," surmised Shearer.  "I left them 'count
of a trick like that.  They wanted me to take charge of Perkinson's
drive and hang her a purpose.  I been suspecting something--they've
been layin' too low."

Thorpe answered nothing.  Through the site of the old dam they
found a torrent pouring from the narrowed pond, at the end of which
the dilapidated wings flapping in the current attested the former
structure.  Davis stood staring at the current.

Thorpe strode forward and shook him violently by the shoulder.

"How did this happen?" he demanded hoarsely.  "Speak!"

The man turned to him in a daze.  "I don't know," he answered.

"You ought to know.  How was that 'shot' exploded?  How did they
get in here without you seeing them?  Answer me!"

"I don't know," repeated the man.  "I jest went over in th' bresh
to kill a few pa'tridges, and when I come back I found her this
way.  I wasn't goin' to close down for three hours yet, and I
thought they was no use a hangin' around here."

"Were you hired to watch this dam, or weren't you?" demanded the
tense voice of Thorpe.  "Answer me, you fool."

"Yes, I was," returned the man, a shade of aggression creeping
into his voice.

"Well, you've done it well.  You've cost me my dam, and you've
killed five men.  If the crew finds out about you, you'll go over
the falls, sure.  You get out of here!  Pike!  Don't you ever let
me see your face again!"

The man blanched as he thus learned of his comrades' deaths.  Thorpe
thrust his face at him, lashed by circumstances beyond his habitual
self-control.

"It's men like you who make the trouble," he stormed.  "Damn fools
who say they didn't mean to.  It isn't enough not to mean to.  They
should MEAN NOT TO!  I don't ask you to think.  I just want you to
do what I tell you, and you can't even do that."

He threw his shoulder into a heavy blow that reached the dam watcher's
face, and followed it immediately by another.  Then Shearer caught his
arm, motioning the dazed and bloody victim of the attack to get out of
sight.  Thorpe shook his foreman off with one impatient motion, and
strode away up the river, his head erect, his eyes flashing, his
nostrils distended.

"I reckon you'd better mosey," Shearer dryly advised the dam watcher;
and followed.

Late in the afternoon the two men reached Dam Three, or rather the
spot on which Dam Three had stood.  The same spectacle repeated
itself here, except that Ellis, the dam watcher, was nowhere to
be seen.

"The dirty whelps," cried Thorpe, "they did a good job!"

He thrashed about here and there, and so came across Ellis
blindfolded and tied.  When released, the dam watcher was
unable to give any account of his assailants.

"They came up behind me while I was cooking," he said.  "One of
'em grabbed me and the other one kivered my eyes.  Then I hears
the 'shot' and knows there's trouble."

Thorpe listened in silence.  Shearer asked a few questions.  After
the low-voiced conversation Thorpe arose abruptly.

"Where you going?" asked Shearer.

But the young man did not reply.  He swung, with the same long,
nervous stride, into the down-river trail.

Until late that night the three men--for Ellis insisted on
accompanying them--hurried through the forest.  Thorpe walked
tirelessly, upheld by his violent but repressed excitement.  When
his hat fell from his head, he either did not notice the fact, or
did not care to trouble himself for its recovery, so he glanced
through the trees bare-headed, his broad white brow gleaming in
the moonlight.  Shearer noted the fire in his eyes, and from the
coolness of his greater age, counselled moderation.

"I wouldn't stir the boys up," he panted, for the pace was very
swift.  "They'll kill some one over there, it'll be murder on
both sides."

He received no answer.  About midnight they came to the camp.

Two great fires leaped among the trees, and the men, past the idea
of sleep, grouped between them, talking.  The lesson of twisted
timbers was not lost to their experience, and the evening had
brought its accumulation of slow anger against the perpetrators of
the outrage.  These men were not given to oratorical mouthings, but
their low-voiced exchanges between the puffings of a pipe led to a
steadier purpose than that of hysteria.  Even as the woodsmen joined
their group, they had reached the intensity of execution.  Across
their purpose Thorpe threw violently his personality.

"You must not go," he commanded.

Through their anger they looked at him askance.

"I forbid it," Thorpe cried.

They shrugged their indifference and arose.  This was an affair of
caste brotherhood; and the blood of their mates cried out to them.

"The work," Thorpe shouted hoarsely.  "The work!  We must get those
logs out!  We haven't time!"

But the Fighting Forty had not Thorpe's ideal.  Success meant a
day's work well done; while vengeance stood for a righting of the
realities which had been unrighteously overturned.  Thorpe's dry-
eyed, burning, almost mad insistence on the importance of the
day's task had not its ordinary force.  They looked upon him from
a standpoint apart, calmly, dispassionately, as one looks on a
petulant child.  The grim call of tragedy had lifted them above
little mundane things.

Then swiftly between the white, strained face of the madman trying
to convince his heart that his mind had been right, and the
fanatically exalted rivermen, interposed the sanity of Radway.
The old jobber faced the men calmly, almost humorously, and somehow
the very bigness of the man commanded attention.  When he spoke,
his coarse, good-natured, everyday voice fell through the tense
situation, clarifying it, restoring it to the normal.

"You fellows make me sick," said he.  "You haven't got the sense
God gave a rooster.  Don't you see you're playing right in those
fellows' hands?  What do you suppose they dynamited them dams for?
To kill our boys?  Don't you believe it for a minute.  They never
dreamed we was dry pickin' that jam.  They sent some low-lived whelp
down there to hang our drive, and by smoke it looks like they was
going to succeed, thanks to you mutton-heads.

"'Spose you go over and take 'em apart; what then?  You have a
scrap; probably you lick 'em."  The men growled ominously, but did
not stir.  "You whale daylights out of a lot of men who probably
don't know any more about this here shooting of our dams than a hog
does about a ruffled shirt.  Meanwhile your drive hangs.  Well?
Well?  Do you suppose the men who were back of that shooting, do
you suppose Morrison and Daly give a tinker's dam how many men of
theirs you lick?  What they want is to hang our drive.  If they
hang our drive, it's cheap at the price of a few black eyes."

The speaker paused and grinned good-humoredly at the men's attentive
faces.  Then suddenly his own became grave, and he swung into his
argument all the impressiveness of his great bulk,

"Do you want to know how to get even?" he asked, shading each word.
"Do you want to know how to make those fellows sing so small you
can't hear them?  Well, I'll tell you.  TAKE OUT THIS DRIVE!  Do
it in spite of them!  Show them they're no good when they buck up
against Thorpe's One!  Our boys died doing their duty--the way a
riverman ought to.  NOW HUMP YOURSELVES!  Don't let 'em die in vain!"

The crew stirred uneasily, looking at each other for approval of the
conversion each had experienced.  Radway, seizing the psychological
moment, turned easily toward the blaze.

"Better turn in, boys, and get some sleep," he said.  "We've got a
hard day to-morrow."  He stooped to light his pipe at the fire.  When
he had again straightened his back after rather a prolonged interval,
the group had already disintegrated.  A few minutes later the cookee
scattered the brands of the fire from before a sleeping camp.

Thorpe had listened non-committally to the colloquy.  He had
maintained the suspended attitude of a man who is willing to allow
the trial of other methods, but who does not therefore relinquish
his own.  At the favorable termination of the discussion he turned
away without comment.  He expected to gain this result.  Had he
been in a more judicial state of mind he might have perceived at
last the reason, in the complicated scheme of Providence, for his
long connection with John Radway.



Chapter LI


Before daylight Injin Charley drifted into the camp to find Thorpe
already out.  With a curt nod the Indian seated himself by the fire,
and, producing a square plug of tobacco and a knife, began leisurely
to fill his pipe.  Thorpe watched him in silence.  Finally Injin
Charley spoke in the red man's clear-cut, imitative English, a
pause between each sentence.

"I find trail three men," said he.  "Both dam, three men.  One man
go down river.  Those men have cork-boot.  One man no have cork-boot.
He boss."  The Indian suddenly threw his chin out, his head back,
half closed his eyes in a cynical squint.  As by a flash Dyer, the
scaler, leered insolently from behind the Indian's stolid mask.

"How do you know?" said Thorpe.

For answer the Indian threw his shoulders forward in Dyer's nervous
fashion.

"He make trail big by the toe, light by the heel.  He make trail
big on inside."

Charley arose and walked, after Dyer's springy fashion, illustrating
his point in the soft wood ashes of the immediate fireside.

Thorpe looked doubtful.  "I believe you are right, Charley," said
he.  "But it is mighty little to go on.  You can't be sure."

"I sure," replied Charley.

He puffed strongly at the heel of his smoke, then arose, and without
farewell disappeared in the forest.

Thorpe ranged the camp impatiently, glancing often at the sky.  At
length he laid fresh logs on the fire and aroused the cook.  It was
bitter cold in the early morning.  After a time the men turned out
of their own accord, at first yawning with insufficient rest, and
then becoming grimly tense as their returned wits reminded them of
the situation.

From that moment began the wonderful struggle against circumstances
which has become a by-word among rivermen everywhere.  A forty-day
drive had to go out in ten.  A freshet had to float out thirty
million feet of logs.  It was tremendous; as even the men most
deeply buried in the heavy hours of that time dimly realized.
It was epic; as the journalist, by now thoroughly aroused, soon
succeeded in convincing his editors and his public.  Fourteen,
sixteen, sometimes eighteen hours a day, the men of the driving
crew worked like demons.  Jams had no chance to form.  The phenomenal
activity of the rear crew reduced by half the inevitable sacking.
Of course, under the pressure, the lower dam had gone out.  Nothing
was to be depended on but sheer dogged grit.  Far up-river Sadler &
Smith had hung their drive for the season.  They had stretched heavy
booms across the current, and so had resigned themselves to a
definite but not extraordinary loss.  Thorpe had at least a clear
river.

Wallace Carpenter could not understand how human flesh and blood
endured.  The men themselves had long since reached the point of
practical exhaustion, but were carried through by the fire of their
leader.  Work was dogged until he stormed into sight; then it became
frenzied.  He seemed to impart to those about him a nervous force
and excitability as real as that induced by brandy.  When he looked
at a man from his cavernous, burning eyes, that man jumped.

It was all willing enough work.  Several definite causes, each
adequate alone to something extraordinary, focussed to the necessity.
His men worshipped Thorpe; the idea of thwarting the purposes of
their comrade's murderers retained its strength; the innate pride
of caste and craft--the sturdiest virtue of the riverman--was in
these picked men increased to the dignity of a passion.  The great
psychological forces of a successful career gathered and made head
against the circumstances which such careers always arouse in
polarity.

Impossibilities were puffed aside like thistles.  The men went at
them headlong.  They gave way before the rush.  Thorpe always led.
Not for a single instant of the day nor for many at night was he
at rest.  He was like a man who has taken a deep breath to reach
a definite goal, and who cannot exhale until the burst of speed be
over.  Instinctively he seemed to realize that a let-down would
mean collapse.

After the camp had fallen asleep, he would often lie awake half of
the few hours of their night, every muscle tense, staring at the
sky.  His mind saw definitely every detail of the situation as he
had last viewed it.  In advance his imagination stooped and sweated
to the work which his body was to accomplish the next morning.
Thus he did everything twice.  Then at last the tension would relax.
He would fall into uneasy sleep.  But twice that did not follow.
Through the dissolving iron mist of his striving, a sharp thought
cleaved like an arrow.  It was that after all he did not care.  The
religion of Success no longer held him as its devoutest worshiper.
He was throwing the fibers of his life into the engine of toil, not
because of moral duty, but because of moral pride.  He meant to
succeed in order to prove to himself that he had not been wrong.

The pain of the arrow-wound always aroused him from his doze with a
start.  He grimly laughed the thought out of court.  To his waking
moments his religion was sincere, was real.  But deep down in his
sub-consciousness, below his recognition, the other influence was
growing like a weed.  Perhaps the vision, not the waking, had been
right.  Perhaps that far-off beautiful dream of a girl which Thorpe's
idealism had constructed from; the reactionary necessities of
Thorpe's harsh life had been more real than his forest temples
of his ruthless god!  Perhaps there were greater things than to
succeed, greater things than success.  Perhaps, after all, the
Power that put us here demands more that we cleave one to the other
in loving-kindness than that we learn to blow the penny whistles it
has tossed us.  And then the keen, poignant memory of the dream girl
stole into the young man's mind, and in agony was immediately thrust
forth.  He would not think of her.  He had given her up.  He had
cast the die.  For success he had bartered her, in the noblest, the
loftiest spirit of devotion.  He refused to believe that devotion
fanatical; he refused to believe that he had been wrong.  In the
still darkness of the night he would rise and steal to the edge of
the dully roaring stream.  There, his eyes blinded and his throat
choked with a longing more manly than tears, he would reach out
and smooth the round rough coats of the great logs.

"We'll do it!" he whispered to them--and to himself.  "We'll do it!
We can't be wrong.  God would not have let us!"



Chapter LII


Wallace Carpenter's search expedition had proved a failure, as
Thorpe had foreseen, but at the end of the week, when the water
began to recede, the little beagles ran upon a mass of flesh
and bones.  The man was unrecognizable, either as an individual or
as a human being.  The remains were wrapped in canvas and sent for
interment in the cemetery at Marquette.  Three of the others were
never found.  The last did not come to light until after the drive
had quite finished.

Down at the booms the jam crew received the drive as fast as it
came down.  From one crib to another across the broad extent of the
river's mouth, heavy booms were chained end to end effectually to
close the exit to Lake Superior.  Against these the logs caromed
softly in the slackened current, and stopped.  The cribs were very
heavy with slanting, instead of square, tops, in order that the
pressure might be downwards instead of sidewise.  This guaranteed
their permanency.  In a short time the surface of the lagoon was
covered by a brown carpet of logs running in strange patterns like
windrows of fallen grain.  Finally, across the straight middle
distance of the river, appeared little agitated specks leaping
back and forth.  Thus the rear came in sight and the drive was
all but over.

Up till now the weather had been clear but oppressively hot for
this time of year.  The heat had come suddenly and maintained itself
well.  It had searched out with fierce directness all the patches of
snow lying under the thick firs and balsams of the swamp edge, it
had shaken loose the anchor ice of the marsh bottoms, and so had
materially aided the success of the drive by increase of water.
The men had worked for the most part in undershirts.  They were as
much in the water as out of it, for the icy bath had become almost
grateful.  Hamilton, the journalist, who had attached himself
definitely to the drive, distributed bunches of papers, in which
the men read that the unseasonable condition prevailed all over
the country.

At length, however, it gave signs of breaking.  The sky, which
had been of a steel blue, harbored great piled thunder-heads.
Occasionally athwart the heat shot a streak of cold air.  Towards
evening the thunder-heads shifted and finally dissipated, to be
sure, but the portent was there.

Hamilton's papers began to tell of disturbances in the South and
West.  A washout in Arkansas derailed a train; a cloud-burst in
Texas wiped out a camp; the cities along the Ohio River were
enjoying their annual flood with the usual concomitants of floating
houses and boats in the streets.  The men wished they had some of
that water here.

So finally the drive approached its end and all concerned began in
anticipation to taste the weariness that awaited them.  They had
hurried their powers.  The few remaining tasks still confronting
them, all at once seemed more formidable than what they had
accomplished.  They could not contemplate further exertion.  The
work for the first time became dogged, distasteful.  Even Thorpe
was infected.  He, too, wanted more than anything else to drop on
the bed in Mrs. Hathaway's boarding house, there to sponge from his
mind all colors but the dead gray of rest.  There remained but a few
things to do.  A mile of sacking would carry the drive beyond the
influence of freshet water.  After that there would be no hurry.

He looked around at the hard, fatigue-worn faces of the men about
him, and in the obsession of his wearied mood he suddenly felt a
great rush of affection for these comrades who had so unreservedly
spent themselves for his affair.  Their features showed exhaustion,
it is true, but their eyes gleamed still with the steady half-
humorous purpose of the pioneer.  When they caught his glance they
grinned good-humoredly.

All at once Thorpe turned and started for the bank.

"That'll do, boys," he said quietly to the nearest group.  "She's
down!"

It was noon.  The sackers looked up in surprise.  Behind them, to
their very feet, rushed the soft smooth slope of Hemlock Rapids.
Below them flowed a broad, peaceful river.  The drive had passed
its last obstruction.  To all intents and purposes it was over.

Calmly, with matter-of-fact directness, as though they had not
achieved the impossible; as though they, a handful, had not cheated
nature and powerful enemies, they shouldered their peaveys and
struck into the broad wagon road.  In the middle distance loomed the
tall stacks of the mill with the little board town about it.  Across
the eye spun the thread of the railroad.  Far away gleamed the broad
expanses of Lake Superior.

The cook had, early that morning, moored the wanigan to the bank.
One of the teamsters from town had loaded the men's "turkeys" on
his heavy wagon.  The wanigan's crew had thereupon trudged into
town.

The men paired off naturally and fell into a dragging, dogged walk.
Thorpe found himself unexpectedly with Big Junko.  For a time they
plodded on without conversation.  Then the big man ventured a remark.

"I'm glad she's over," said he.  "I got a good stake comin'."

"Yes," replied Thorpe indifferently.

"I got most six hundred dollars comin'," persisted Junko.

"Might as well be six hundred cents," commented Thorpe, "it'd
make you just as drunk."

Big Junko laughed self-consciously but without the slightest
resentment.

"That's all right," said he, "but you betcher life I don't blow
this stake."

"I've heard that talk before," shrugged Thorpe.

"Yes, but this is different.  I'm goin' to git married on this.
How's THAT?"

Thorpe, his attention struck at last, stared at his companion.  He
noted the man's little twinkling animal eyes, his high cheek bones,
his flat nose, his thick and slobbery lips, his straggling, fierce
mustache and eyebrows, his grotesque long-tailed cutaway coat.  So
to him, too, this primitive man reaching dully from primordial chaos,
the great moment had yielded its vision.

"Who is she?" he asked abruptly.

"She used to wash at Camp Four."

Thorpe dimly remembered the woman now--an overweighted creature
with a certain attraction of elfishly blowing hair, with a certain
pleasing full-cheeked, full-bosomed health.

The two walked on in re-established silence.  Finally the giant,
unable to contain himself longer, broke out again.

"I do like that woman," said he with a quaintly deliberate
seriousness.
"That's the finest woman in this district."

Thorpe felt the quick moisture rush to his eyes.  There was something
inexpressibly touching in those simple words as Big Junko uttered
them.

"And when you are married," he asked, "what are you going to do?  Are
you going to stay on the river?"

"No, I'm goin' to clear a farm.  The woman she says that's the thing
to do.  I like the river, too.  But you bet when Carrie says a thing,
that's plenty good enough for Big Junko."

"Suppose," suggested Thorpe, irresistibly impelled towards the
attempt, "suppose I should offer you two hundred dollars a month
to stay on the river.  Would you stay?"

"Carrie don't like it," replied Junko.

"Two hundred dollars is big wages," persisted Thorpe.  "It's twice
what I give Radway."

"I'd like to ask Carrie."

"No, take it or leave it now."

"Well, Carrie says she don't like it," answered the riverman with
a sigh.

Thorpe looked at his companion fixedly.  Somehow the bestial
countenance had taken on an attraction of its own.  He remembered
Big Junko as a wild beast when his passions were aroused, as a man
whose honesty had been doubted.

"You've changed, Junko," said he.

"I know," said the big man.  "I been a scalawag all right.  I quit
it.  I don't know much, but Carrie she's smart, and I'm goin' to do
what she says.  When you get stuck on a good woman like Carrie, Mr.
Thorpe, you don't give much of a damn for anything else.  Sure!
That's right!  It's the biggest thing top o' earth!"

Here it was again, the opposing creed.  And from such a source.
Thorpe's iron will contracted again.

"A woman is no excuse for a man's neglecting his work," he snapped.

"Shorely not," agreed Junko serenely.  "I aim to finish out my time
all right, Mr. Thorpe.  Don't you worry none about that.  I done my
best for you.  And," went on the riverman in the expansion of this
unwonted confidence with his employer, "I'd like to rise to remark
that you're the best boss I ever had, and we boys wants to stay with
her till there's skating in hell!"

"All right," murmured Thorpe indifferently.

His momentary interest had left him.  Again the reactionary weariness
dragged at his feet.  Suddenly the remaining half mile to town seemed
very long indeed.



Chapter LIII


Wallace Carpenter and Hamilton, the journalist, seated against
the sun-warmed bench of Mrs. Hathaway's boarding-house, commented
on the band as it stumbled in to the wash-room.

"Those men don't know how big they are," remarked the journalist.
That's the way with most big men.  And that man Thorpe belongs to
another age.  I'd like to get him to telling his experiences; he'd
be a gold mine to me."

"And would require about as much trouble to 'work,'" laughed
Wallace.  "He won't talk."

"That's generally the trouble, confound 'em," sighed Hamilton.
"The fellows who CAN talk haven't anything to say; and those who
have something to tell are dumb as oysters.  I've got him in though."
He spread one of a roll of papers on his knees.  "I got a set of
duplicates for you.  Thought you might like to keep them.  The
office tells me," he concluded modestly, "that they are attracting
lots of attention, but are looked upon as being a rather clever
sort of fiction."

Wallace picked up the sheet.  His eye was at once met by the heading,
"'So long, boys,'" in letters a half inch in height, and immediately
underneath in smaller type, "said Jimmy Powers, and threw his hat in
the face of death."

"It's all there," explained the journalist, "--the jam and the break,
and all this magnificent struggle afterwards.  It makes a great yarn.
I feel tempted sometimes to help it out a little--artistically, you
know--but of course that wouldn't do.  She'd make a ripping yarn,
though, if I could get up some motive outside mere trade rivalry
for the blowing up of those dams.  That would just round it off."

Wallace Carpenter was about to reply that such a motive actually
existed, when the conversation was interrupted by the approach of
Thorpe and Big Junko.  The former looked twenty years older after
his winter.  His eye was dull, his shoulders drooped, his gait was
inelastic.  The whole bearing of the man was that of one weary to
the bone.

"I've got something here to show you, Harry," cried Wallace Carpenter,
waving one of the papers.  "It was a great drive and here's something
to remember it by."

"All right, Wallace, by and by," replied Thorpe dully.  "I'm dead.
I'm going to turn in for a while.  I need sleep more than anything
else.  I can't think now."

He passed through the little passage into the "parlor bed-room,"
which Mrs. Hathaway always kept in readiness for members of the
firm.  There he fell heavily asleep almost before his body had
met the bed.

In the long dining room the rivermen consumed a belated dinner.
They had no comments to make.  It was over.

The two on the veranda smoked.  To the right, at the end of the
sawdust street, the mill sang its varying and lulling keys.  The
odor of fresh-sawed pine perfumed the air.  Not a hundred yards away
the river slipped silently to the distant blue Superior, escaping
between the slanting stone-filled cribs which held back the logs.
Down the south and west the huge thunderheads gathered and flashed
and grumbled, as they had done every afternoon for days previous.

"Queer thing," commented Hamilton finally, "these cold streaks in
the air.  They are just as distinct as though they had partitions
around them."

"Queer climate anyway," agreed Carpenter.

Excepting always for the mill, the little settlement appeared asleep.
The main booms were quite deserted.  Not a single figure, armed with
its picturesque pike-pole, loomed athwart the distance.  After awhile
Hamilton noticed something.

"Look here, Carpenter," said he, "what's happening out there?  Have
some of your confounded logs SUNK, or what?  There don't seem to be
near so many of them somehow."

"No, it isn't that," proffered Carpenter after a moment's scrutiny,
"there are just as many logs, but they are getting separated a
little so you can see the open water between them."

"Guess you're right.  Say, look here, I believe that the river is
rising!"

"Nonsense, we haven't had any rain."

"She's rising just the same.  I'll tell you how I know; you see
that spile over there near the left-hand crib?  Well, I sat on the
boom this morning watching the crew, and I whittled the spile with
my knife--you can see the marks from here.  I cut the thing about
two feet above the water.  Look at it now."

"She's pretty near the water line, that's right," admitted
Carpenter.

"I should think that might make the boys hot," commented Hamilton.
"If they'd known this was coming, they needn't have hustled so to
get the drive down.

"That's so," Wallace agreed.

About an hour later the younger man in his turn made a discovery.

"She's been rising right along," he submitted.  "Your marks are
nearer the water, and, do you know, I believe the logs are beginning
to feel it.  See, they've closed up the little openings between them,
and they are beginning to crowd down to the lower end of the pond."

"I don't know anything about this business," hazarded the journalist,
"but by the mere look of the thing I should think there was a good
deal of pressure on that same lower end.  By Jove, look there!  See
those logs up-end?  I believe you're going to have a jam right here
in your own booms!"

"I don't know," hesitated Wallace,  "I never heard of its happening."

"You'd better let someone know."

"I hate to bother Harry or any of the rivermen.  I'll just step down
to the mill.  Mason--he's our mill foreman--he'll know."

Mason came to the edge of the high trestle and took one look.

"Jumping fish-hooks!" he cried.  "Why, the river's up six inches
and still a comin'!  Here you, Tom!" he called to one of the yard
hands, "you tell Solly to get steam on that tug double quick, and
have Dave hustle together his driver crew."

"What you going to do?" asked Wallace.

"I got to strengthen the booms," explained the mill foreman.  "We'll
drive some piles across between the cribs."

"Is there any danger?"

"Oh, no, the river would have to rise a good deal higher than she
is now to make current enough to hurt.  They've had a hard rain up
above.  This will go down in a few hours."

After a time the tug puffed up to the booms, escorting the pile
driver.  The latter towed a little raft of long sharpened piles,
which it at once began to drive in such positions as would most
effectually strengthen the booms.  In the meantime the thunder-
heads had slyly climbed the heavens, so that a sudden deluge of
rain surprised the workmen.  For an hour it poured down in torrents;
then settled to a steady gray beat.  Immediately the aspect had
changed.  The distant rise of land was veiled; the brown expanse
of logs became slippery and glistening; the river below the booms
was picked into staccato points by the drops; distant Superior
turned lead color and seemed to tumble strangely athwart the h