pride; that was all.

"Do not consider its being mine," she answered to his objections.
"Remember the lesson we learned so bitterly.  Nothing can be greater
than love, not even our poor ideals.  You have my love; do not
disappoint me by refusing so little a thing as my money."

"I hate to do it," he replied; "it doesn't look right."

"You must," she insisted.  "I will not take the position of rich
wife to a poor man; it is humiliating to both.  I will not marry
you until you have made your success."

"That is right," said Thorpe heartily.

"Well, then, are you going to be so selfish as to keep me waiting
while you make an entirely new start, when a little help on my part
will bring your plans to completion?"

She saw the shadow of assent in his eyes.

"How much do you need?" she asked swiftly.

"I must take up the notes," he explained.  "I must pay the men.  I
may need something on the stock market.  If I go in on this thing,
I'm going in for keeps.  I'll get after those fellows who have been
swindling Wallace.  Say a hundred thousand dollars."

"Why, it's nothing," she cried.

"I'm glad you think so," he replied grimly.

She ran to her dainty escritoire, where she scribbled eagerly for a
few moments.

"There," she cried, her eyes shining, "there is my check book all
signed in blank.  I'll see that the money is there."

Thorpe took the book, staring at it with sightless eyes.  Hilda,
perched on the arm of his chair, watched his face closely, as later
became her habit of interpretation.

"What is it?" she asked.

Thorpe looked up with a pitiful little smile that seemed to beg
indulgence for what he was about to say.

"I was just thinking, dear.  I used to imagine I was a strong man,
yet see how little my best efforts amount to.  I have put myself
into seven years of the hardest labor, working like ten men in
order to succeed.  I have foreseen all that mortal could foresee.
I have always thought, and think now, that a man is no man unless
he works out the sort of success for which he is fitted.  I have
done fairly well until the crises came.  Then I have been absolutely
powerless, and if left to myself, I would have failed.  At the times
when a really strong man would have used effectively the strength he
had been training, I have fallen back miserably on outer aid.  Three
times my affairs have become critical.  In the crises I have been
saved, first by a mere boy; then by an old illiterate man; now by
a weak woman!"

She heard him through in silence.

"Harry," she said soberly when he had quite finished, "I agree
with you that God meant the strong man to succeed; that without
success the man hasn't fulfilled his reason for being.  But, Harry,
ARE YOU QUITE SURE GOD MEANT HIM TO SUCCEED ALONE?"

The dusk fell through the little room.  Out in the hallway a tall
clock ticked solemnly.  A noiseless servant appeared in the doorway
to light the lamps, but was silently motioned away.

"I had not thought of that," said Thorpe at last.

"You men are so selfish," went on Hilda.  "You would take everything
from us.  Why can't you leave us the poor little privilege of the
occasional deciding touch, the privilege of succor.  It is all that
weakness can do for strength."

"And why," she went on after a moment, "why is not that, too, a
part of a man's success--the gathering about him of people who can
and will supplement his efforts.  Who was it inspired Wallace
Carpenter with confidence in an unknown man?  You.  What did it?
Those very qualities by which you were building your success.  Why
did John Radway join forces with you?  How does it happen that your
men are of so high a standard of efficiency?  Why am I willing to
give you everything, EVERYTHING, to my heart and soul?  Because it
is you who ask it.  Because you, Harry Thorpe, have woven us into
your fortune, so that we have no choice.  Depend upon us in the
crises of your work!  Why, so are you dependent on your ten fingers,
your eyes, the fiber of your brain!  Do you think the less of your
fulfillment for that?"

So it was that Hilda Farrand gave her lover confidence, brought him
out from his fanaticism, launched him afresh into the current of
events.  He remained in Chicago all that summer, giving orders that
all work at the village of Carpenter should cease.  With his affairs
that summer we have little to do.  His common-sense treatment of the
stock market, by which a policy of quiescence following an outright
buying of the stock which he had previously held on margins, retrieved
the losses already sustained, and finally put both partners on a
firm financial footing.  That is another story.  So too is his
reconciliation with and understanding of his sister.  It came
about through Hilda, of course.  Perhaps in the inscrutable way of
Providence the estrangement was of benefit,--even necessary,for it
had thrown him entirely within himself during his militant years.

Let us rather look to the end of the summer.  It now became a
question of re-opening the camps.  Thorpe wrote to Shearer and
Radway, whom he had retained, that he would arrive on Saturday
noon, and suggested that the two begin to look about for men.
Friday, himself, Wallace Carpenter, Elizabeth Carpenter, Morton,
Helen Thorpe, and Hilda Farrand boarded the north-bound train.



Chapter LX


The train of the South Shore Railroad shot its way across the
broad reaches of the northern peninsula.  On either side of the
right-of-way lay mystery in the shape of thickets so dense and
overgrown that the eye could penetrate them but a few feet at
most.  Beyond them stood the forests.  Thus Nature screened her
intimacies from the impertinent eye of a new order of things.

Thorpe welcomed the smell of the northland.  He became almost eager,
explaining, indicating to the girl at his side.

"There is the Canada balsam," he cried.  "Do you remember how I
showed it to you first?  And yonder the spruce.  How stuck up your
teeth were when you tried to chew the gum before it had been heated.
Do you remember?  Look! Look there!  It's a white pine!  Isn't it
a grand tree?  It's the finest tree in the forest, by my way of
thinking, so tall, so straight, so feathery, and so dignified.  See,
Hilda, look quick!  There's an old logging road all filled with
raspberry vines.  We'd find lots of partridges there, and perhaps
a bear.  Wouldn't you just like to walk down it about sunset?"

"Yes, Harry."

"I wonder what we're stopping for.  Seems to me they are stopping
at every squirrel's trail.  Oh, this must be Seney.  Yes, it is.
Queer little place, isn't it? but sort of attractive.  Good deal
like our town.  You have never seen Carpenter, have you?  Location's
fine, anyway; and to me it's sort of picturesque.  You'll like Mrs.
Hathaway.  She's a buxom, motherly woman who runs the boarding-house
for eighty men, and still finds time to mend my clothes for me.  And
you'll like Solly.  Solly's the tug captain, a mighty good fellow,
true as a gun barrel.  We'll have him take us out, some still day.
We'll be there in a few minutes now.  See the cranberry marshes.
Sometimes there's a good deal of pine on little islands scattered
over it, but it's very hard to log, unless you get a good winter.
We had just such a proposition when I worked for Radway.  Oh, you'll
like Radway, he's as good as gold.  Helen!"

"Yes," replied his sister.

"I want you to know Radway.  He's the man who gave me my start."

"All right, Harry," laughed Helen.  "I'll meet anybody or anything
from bears to Indians."

"I know an Indian too--Geezigut, an Ojibwa--we called him Injin
Charley.  He was my first friend in the north woods.  He helped me
get my timber.  This spring he killed a man--a good job, too--and
is hiding now.  I wish I knew where he is.  But we'll see him some
day.  He'll come back when the thing blows over.  See!  See!"

"What?" they all asked, breathless.

"It's gone.  Over beyond the hills there I caught a glimpse of
Superior."

"You are ridiculous, Harry," protested Helen Thorpe laughingly.  "I
never saw you so.  You are a regular boy!"

"Do you like boys?" he asked gravely of Hilda.

"Adore them!" she cried.

"All right, I don't care," he answered his sister in triumph.

The air brakes began to make themselves felt, and shortly the train
came to a grinding stop.

"What station is this?" Thorpe asked the colored porter.

"Shingleville, sah," the latter replied.

"I thought so.  Wallace, when did their mill burn, anyway?  I haven't
heard about it."

"Last spring, about the time you went down."

"Is THAT so?  How did it happen?"

"They claim incendiarism," parried Wallace cautiously.

Thorpe pondered a moment, then laughed.  "I am in the mixed attitude
of the small boy," he observed, "who isn't mean enough to wish
anybody's property destroyed, but who wishes that if there is a
fire, to be where he can see it.  I am sorry those fellows had to
lose their mill, but it was a good thing for us.  The man who set
that fire did us a good turn.  If it hadn't been for the burning of
their mill, they would have made a stronger fight against us in
the stock market."

Wallace and Hilda exchanged glances.  The girl was long since aware
of the inside history of those days.

"You'll have to tell them that," she whispered over the back of
her seat.  "It will please them."

"Our station is next!" cried Thorpe, "and it's only a little ways.
Come, get ready!"

They all crowded into the narrow passage-way near the door, for the
train barely paused.

"All right, sah," said the porter, swinging down his little step.

Thorpe ran down to help the ladies.  He was nearly taken from
his feet by a wild-cat yell, and a moment later that result was
actually accomplished by a rush of men that tossed him bodily onto
its shoulders.  At the same moment, the mill and tug whistles began
to screech, miscellaneous fire-arms exploded.  Even the locomotive
engineer, in the spirit of the occasion, leaned down heartily on
his whistle rope.  The saw-dust street was filled with screaming,
jostling men.  The homes of the town were brilliantly draped with
cheesecloth, flags and bunting.

For a moment Thorpe could not make out what had happened.  This
turmoil was so different from the dead quiet of desertion he had
expected, that he was unable to gather his faculties.  All about him
were familiar faces upturned to his own.  He distinguished the broad,
square shoulders of Scotty Parsons, Jack Hyland, Kerlie, Bryan
Moloney; Ellis grinned at him from the press; Billy Camp, the fat
and shiny drive cook; Mason, the foreman of the mill; over beyond
howled Solly, the tug captain, Rollway Charley, Shorty, the
chore-boy; everywhere were features that he knew.  As his dimming
eyes travelled here and there, one by one the Fighting Forty,
the best crew of men ever gathered in the northland, impressed
themselves on his consciousness.  Saginaw birlers, Flat River
drivers, woodsmen from the forests of Lower Canada, bully boys
out of the Muskegon waters, peavey men from Au Sable, white-water
dare-devils from the rapids of the Menominee--all were there to
do him honor, him in whom they had learned to see the supreme
qualities of their calling.  On the outskirts sauntered the tall
form of Tim Shearer, a straw peeping from beneath his flax-white
mustache, his eyes glimmering under his flax-white eyebrows.  He did
not evidence as much excitement as the others, but the very bearing
of the man expressed the deepest satisfaction.  Perhaps he remembered
that zero morning so many years before when he had watched the
thinly-clad, shivering chore-boy set his face for the first time
towards the dark forest.

Big Junko and Anderson deposited their burden on the raised platform
of the office steps.  Thorpe turned and fronted the crowd.

At once pandemonium broke loose, as though the previous performance
had been nothing but a low-voiced rehearsal.

The men looked upon their leader and gave voice to the enthusiasm
that was in them.  He stood alone there, straight and tall, the
muscles of his brown face set to hide his emotion, his head thrust
back proudly, the lines of his strong figure tense with power,--the
glorification in finer matter of the hardy, reliant men who did him
honor.

"Oh, aren't you PROUD of him?" gasped Hilda, squeezing Helen's arm
with a little sob.

In a moment Wallace Carpenter, his countenance glowing with pride
and pleasure, mounted the platform and stood beside his friend,
while Morton and the two young ladies stopped half way up the steps.

At once the racket ceased.  Everyone stood at attention.

"Mr. Thorpe," Wallace began, "at the request of your friends here,
I have a most pleasant duty to fulfill.  They have asked me to tell
you how glad they are to see you; that is surely unnecessary.  They
have also asked me to congratulate you on having won the fight with
our rivals."

"You done 'em good."  "Can't down the Old Fellow," muttered joyous
voices.

"But," said Wallace, "I think that I first have a story to tell on
my own account.

"At the time the jam broke this spring, we owed the men here for a
year's work.  At that time I considered their demand for wages
ill-timed and grasping.  I wish to apologize.  After the money was
paid them, instead of scattering, they set to work under Jack
Radway and Tim Shearer to salvage your logs.  They have worked long
hours all summer.  They have invested every cent of their year's
earnings in supplies and tools, and now they are prepared to show
you in the Company's booms, three million feet of logs, rescued by
their grit and hard labor from total loss."

At this point the speaker was interrupted.  "Saw off," "Shut up,"
"Give us a rest," growled the audience.  "Three million feet ain't
worth talkin' about," "You make me tired," "Say your little say
the way you oughter," "Found purty nigh two millions pocketed
on Mare's Island, or we wouldn't a had that much," "Damn-fool
undertaking, anyhow."

"Men," cried Thorpe, "I have been very fortunate.  From failure
success has come.  But never have I been more fortunate than in my
friends.  The firm is now on its feet.  It could afford to lose
three times the logs it lost this year---"

He paused and scanned their faces.

"But," he continued suddenly, "it cannot now, nor ever can afford
to lose what those three million feet represent,--the friends it
has made.  I can pay you back the money you have spent and the time
you have put in---"  Again he looked them over, and then for the
first time since they have known him his face lighted up with a
rare and tender smile of affection.  "But, comrades, I shall not
offer to do it: the gift is accepted in the spirit with which it
was offered---"

He got no further.  The air was rent with sound.  Even the members of
his own party cheered.  From every direction the crowd surged inward.
The women and Morton were forced up the platform to Thorpe.  The
latter motioned for silence.

"Now, boys, we have done it," said he, "and so will go back to work.
From now on you are my comrades in the fight."

His eyes were dim; his breast heaved; his voice shook.  Hilda was
weeping from excitement.  Through the tears she saw them all looking
at their leader, and in the worn, hard faces glowed the affection
and admiration of a dog for its master.  Something there was
especially touching in this, for strong men rarely show it.
She felt a great wave of excitement sweep over her.  Instantly
she was standing by Thorpe, her eyes streaming, her breast
trobbing with emotion.

"Oh!" she cried, stretching her arms out to them passionately, "Oh!
I love you; I love you all!"










                       BULFINCH'S MYTHOLOGY
                         THE AGE OF FABLE


                    Revised by Rev.E. E. Hale




CONTENTS

Chapter I
Origin of Greeks and Romans.   The Aryan Family.   The Divinities
of these Nations.   Character of the Romans.   Greek notion of
the World.   Dawn, Sun, and Moon.   Jupiter and the gods of
Olympus.   Foreign gods.    Latin Names.-- Saturn or Kronos.
Titans.   Juno, Vulcan, Mars, Phoebus-Apollo, Venus, Cupid,
Minerva, Mercury, Ceres, Bacchus.   The Muses.   The Graces.
The Fates.   The Furies.   Pan.    The Satyrs.   Momus.   Plutus.
  Roman gods.

Chapter II
Roman Idea of Creation.   Golden Age.   Milky Way.   Parnassus.
The Deluge.   Deucalion and Pyrrha.   Pandora.   Prometheus.
Apollo and Daphne.   Pyramus and Thisbe.   Davy's Safety Lamp.
Cephalus and Procris

Chapter III
Juno.   Syrinx, or Pandean Pipes.   Argus's Eyes.   Io.
Callisto   Constellations of Great and Little Bear.   Pole-star.
  Diana.   Actaeon.   Latona.   Rustics turned to Frogs.   Isle
of Delos.   Phaeton.   Palace of the Sun.   Phoebus.   Day.
Month.   Year.   Hours.   Seasons.   Chariot of the sun.   People
of Aethiopia.   Libyan Desert.   The Wells Dry.   The Sea
Shrinks.   Phaeton's Tomb.   The Heliades

Chapter IV
Silenus.   Midas.   Bacchus's Reward to Midas.   River Pactolus.
  Pan Challenges Apollo.   Midas's Ears.   Gordian Knot.   Baucis
and Philemon.   Aetna.   Perpetual Spring.   Pluto carries off
Prosperine.   Cere's Search.   Prosperine's Release.   Eleusinian
Mysteries.   Glaucis changed to a Fish.   Scylla

Chapter V
Pygmalion's Statue.   Dryope and Iole.   Lotus Tree.   Venus and
Adonis.  Anemone or Wind Flower.   Apollo and Hyacinthus.   Game
of Quoits.   Flower Hyacinthus.   Ceyx and Halcyone.   Palace of
the King of Sleep.   Morpheus.   Halcyon Birds.

Chapter VI
Hamadryads.   Pomona.   Vertumnus.   Iphis.   Cupid and Psyche.
Zephyr.   Temple of Ceres.   Temple of Venus.   The Ant.   Golden
Fleece.   Pluto.   Cerberus.   Charon.   The Treasure.   Stygian
Sleep.   Cup of Ambrosia.   Birth of Pleasure.   Greek name of
Psyche.

Chapter VII
Cadmus.   Origin of City of Thebes.   Tyrians.   Serpent.
Dragon's Teeth.   Harmonia.   Serpent Sacred to Mars.  Myrmidons.
  Cephalus.   Aeacus.   Pestilence Sent by June.   Origin of
Myrmidons.

Chapter VIII
Minos, King of Crete.   Nisus, his purple hair.   Scylla's
Betrayal.   Her Punishment.   Echo.   Juno's Sentence.
Narcissus.   Love for his own image.   Clytie.   Hopeless Love
for Apollo.   Becomes a Flower.   Hero and Leander.   Hellespont

Chapter IX
Goddess of Wisdom.   Arachne.   Her Challenge with Minerva.
Minerva's Web.   Arachne's Web.   Transformation.   Niobe Queen
of Thebes.   Mount Cynthus.  Death of Niobe's Children.   Changed
to stone.   The Gray-haired Sisters.   The Gorgon Medusa.   Tower
of brass.   Danae.   Perseus.   Net of Dicte.   Minerva.   King
Atlas.   Andromeda.   Sea Monster.   Wedding Feast.   Enemies
Turned to Stone.

Chapter X
Attributes of Monsters.   Laius.   Oedipus.   The Oracle.
Sphinx.   The Riddle.   Oedipus made King.   Jocasta.   Origin of
Pegasus.   Fountain of Hippocrene.   The Chimaera.
Bellerophontic Letters.   The Centaurs.   The Pygmies.
Description of the Griffin.   The Native Country.   One-Eyed
People

Chapter XI
The Ram with the Golden Fleece.   The Hellespont.   Jason's
Quest.   Sowing the Dragon's Teeth.   Jason's Father.
Incantations of Medea.   Ancient Name of Greece.   Great
Gatherings of the Greeks.   Wild Boar.   Atalanta's Race.   Three
Golden Apples.   Lovers' Ingratitude.   Venus's Revenge.
Corybantes

Chapter XII
Labors of Hercules.-- Fight with Nemean Lion.-- Slaughter of the
Hydra.  Cleaning the Augean Stables.-- Girdle of the Queen of the
Amazons.-- Oxen of Geryon.-- Golden Apples of Hesperides.--
Victory over Antaeus.-- Cacus Slain.-- Hercules, Descent into
Hades.-- He Becomes the Slave of Omphale.-- Dejanira's Charm.--
Death of Hercules.-- Hebe, Goddess of Youth

Chapter XIII
Theseus Moves the Fated Stone, and Proceeds to Athens.--
Procrustes's Bedstead.-- Tribute to Minos.-- Ariadne.-- Clew of
Thread.-- Encounter with the Minotaur.-- Theseus Becomes King of
Athens.-- Friendship of Theseus and Pirithous.  The Theseum.--
Festival of Panathenaea.-- Elgin Marbles.-- National Greek
Games.-- The Labyrinth.-- Daedalus' Wings.-- Invention of the
Saw.-- Castor and Pollux.-- Argonautic Expedition.-- Orpheus's
Harp.-- Gemini

Chapter XIV
Destruction of Semele.-- Infancy of Bacchus.-- March of Bacchus.-
- One of the Bacchanals taken Prisoner.-- Pentheus.-- Worship of
Bacchus Established in Greece.-- Ariadne.-- Bacchus's Marriage.--
Ariadne's Crown

Chapter XV
Pan.-- Shepherd's Pipe.-- Panic Terror.-- Signification of the
Name Pan.-- Latin Divinities.-- Wood Nymphs.-- Water Nymphs.--
Sea Nymphs.  Pleasing Traits of Old Paganism.-- Mrs. Browning's
Poem.-- Violation of Cere's Grove.-- Erisichthon's Punishment.--
Rhoecus.-- Water Deities.-- Neptune's Symbol of Power.-- Latin
Name for the Muses, and other Deities.-- Personification of the
Winds.   The Harpies.-- Worship of Fortuna

Chapter XVI
Transformation of Achelous.-- Origin of the Cornucopia.-- Ancient
Meaning of fight of Achelous with Hercules.-- Aesculapius.-- The
Cyclops.   Antigone.-- Expedition of the "Seven against Thebes."-
- Antigone's Sisterly Devotion.-- Antigone's Burial.-- Penelope.-
- Statue to Modesty.-- Ulysses.-- Penelope's suitors.--
Penelope's Web

Chapter XVII
Orpheus's Lyre.-- Unhappy Prognostics at Orpheus's Marriage.--
Eurydice's Death.-- Orpheus Descends to the Stygian Realm.--
Orpheus Loses Eurydice Forever.-- Thracian Maidens.-- Honey.--
Aristaeus's Loss and Complaint.-- Cyrene's Apartments.-- Proteus
Captured.-- His Directions to Orpheus.-- Swarm of Bees.--
Celebrated Mythical Poets and Musicians.-- First Mortal Endowed
with Prophetic Powers

Chapter XVIII
Adventures of Real Persons.-- Arion, Famous Musician.--
Description of Ancient Theatres.-- Murder of Ibycus.-- Chorus
Personating the Furies.-- Cranes of Ibycus.-- The Murderers
Seized.-- Simonides.-- Scopa's Jest.   Simonides's Escape.--
Sappho.-- "Lover's Leap"

Chapter XIX
Endymion.-- Mount Latmos. Gift of Perpetual Youth and Perpetual
Sleep.-- Orion.-- Kedalion.-- Orion's Girdle.-- The Fatal Shot
The Pleiads.-- Aurora.-- Memnon.-- statue of Memnon.-- Scylla.--
Acis and Galatea.-- River Acis

Chapter XX
Minerva's Competition.-- Paris's Decision.-- Helen.-- Paris's
Elopement.-- Ulysses's Pretence.-- The Apple of Discord.-- Priam,
King of Troy.-- Commander of Grecian Armament.-- Principal
Leaders of the Trojans.-- Agamemnon Kills the Sacred Stag.--
Iphigenia.-- The Trojan War.-- The Iliad.-- Interest of Dods and
Goddesses in the War.-- Achilles's Suit of Armor.-- Death of
Hector.-- Ransom Sent to Achilles.-- Achilles Grants Priam's
Request.-- Hector's Funeral Solemnities.

Chapter XXI
Achilles Captivated by Polyxena.-- Achilles' Claim.-- Bestowal of
Achilles' Armor.-- The Hyacinth.-- Arrows of Hercules.-- Death of
Paris.-- Celebrated Statue of Minerva.-- Wooden Horse.-- Greeks
Pretend to Abandon the Siege.-- Sea Serpents.-- Laocoon.-- Troy
subdued.-- Helen and Menelaus.-- Nepenthe.-- Agamemnon's
Misfortunes.-- Orestes.-- Electra.-- Site of the City of Troy

Chapter XXII
The Odyssey.-- The Wanderings of Ulysses.-- Country of the
Cyclops.-- The Island of Aeolus.-- The Barbarous Tribe of
Laestrygonians.-- Circe.-- The Sirens.-- Scylla and Charybdis.--
Cattle of Hyperion.-- Ulysses's Raft.-- Calypso Entertains
Ulysses.-- Telemachus and Mentor Escape from Calypso's Isle

Chapter XXIII
Ulysses Abandons the Raft.-- The Country of the Phaeacians.--
Nausicaa's Dream.-- A Game of Ball.-- Ulysses's Dilemma.--
Nausicaa's Courage.-- The Palace of Alcinous.-- Skill of the
Phaeacian Women.-- Hospitality to Ulysses.-- Demodocus, the Blind
Bard.-- Gifts to Ulysses

Chapter XXV
Virgil's Description of the Region of the Dead.-- Descend into
Hades.-- The Black River and Ferryman.-- Cape Palinurus.-- The
Three-Headed Dog.-- Regions of Sadness.-- Shades of Grecian and
Trojan Warriors.-- Judgment Hall of Rhadamanthus.-- The Elysian
Fields.-- Aeneas Meets His Father.-- Anchises Explains the Plan
of Creation.-- Transmigration of Souls.-- Egyptian Name of
Hades.-- Location of Elysium.-- Prophetic Power of the Sibyl.--
Legend of the Nine Books


Stories of Gods and Heroes.

Chapter I

Introduction

The literature of our time, as of all the centuries of
Christendom, is full of allusions to the gods and goddesses of
the Greeks and Romans.  Occasionally, and, in modern days, more
often, it contains allusions to the worship and the superstitions
of the northern nations of Europe.  The object of this book is to
teach readers who are not yet familiar with the writers of Greece
and Rome, or the ballads or legends of the Scandinavians, enough
of the stories which form what is called their mythology, to make
those allusions intelligible which one meets every day, even in
the authors of our own time.

The Greeks and Romans both belong to the same race or stock.  It
is generally known in our time as the Aryan family of mankind;
and so far as we know its history, the Greeks and Romans
descended from the tribes which emigrated from the high table-
lands of Northern India.  Other tribes emigrated in different
directions from the same centre, so that traces of the Aryan
language are found in the islands of the Pacific ocean.

The people of this race, who moved westward, seem to have had a
special fondness for open air nature, and a willingness to
personify the powers of nature.  They were glad to live in the
open air, and they specially encouraged the virtues which an
open-air people prize.  Thus no Roman was thought manly who could
not swim, and every Greek exercised in the athletic sports of the
palaestra.

The Romans and Grecian and German divisions of this great race
are those with which we have most to do in history and in
literature.  Our own English language is made up of the dialects
of different tribes, many of whom agreed in their use of words
which they had derived from our Aryan ancestry.  Thus our
substantive verb I AM appears in the original Sanscrit of the
Aryans as ESMI, and m for ME (MOI), or the first person singular,
is found in all the verbal inflections.  The Greek form of the
same verb was ESMI, which became ASMI,   and in Latin the first
and last vowels have disappeared, the verb is SUM.  Similar
relationships are traced in the numerals, and throughout all the
languages of these nations.

The Romans, like the Etruscans who came before them, were neither
poetical nor imaginative in temperament.  Their activity ran in
practical directions.  They therefore invented few, if any
stories, of the gods whom they worshipped with fixed rites.  Mr.
Macaulay speaks of these gods as "the sober abstractions of the
Roman pantheon."  We owe most of the stories of the ancient
mythology to the wit and fancy of the Greeks,   more playful and
imaginative,   who seized from Egypt and from the East such
legends as pleased them,   and adapted them in their own way.  It
often happens that such stories, resembling each other in their
foundation, are found in the Greek and Roman authors in several
different forms.

To understand these stories, we will here first acquaint
ourselves with the ideas of the structure of the universe, which
the poets and others held, and which will form the scenery, so to
speak, of the narratives.

The Greek poets believed the earth to be flat and circular, their
own country occupying the middle of it, the central point being
either Mount Olympus, the abode of the gods, or Delphi, so famous
for its oracle.

The circular disk of the earth was crossed from west to east, and
divided into two equal parts by the SEA, as they called the
Mediterranean, and its continuation the Euxine.

Around the earth flowed the RIVER OCEAN, its course being from
south to north on the western side of the earth, and in a
contrary direction on the eastern side.  It flowed in a steady,
equable current, unvexed by storm or tempest.  The sea, and all
the rivers on earth, received their waters from it.

The northern portion of the earth was supposed to be inhabited by
a happy race named the Hyperboreans [this word means "who live
beyond the north" from the word "hyper," beyond, and boreas, the
north wind], dwelling in everlasting bliss and spring beyond the
lofty mountains whose caverns were supposed to send forth the
piercing blasts of the north wind, which chilled the people of
Hellas (Greece).  Their country was inaccessible by land or sea.
They lived exempt from disease or old age, from toils and
warfare.  Moore has given us the "Song of a Hyperborean,"
beginning

"I come from a land in the sun-bright deep,
Where golden gardens glow,
Where the winds of the north, becalmed in sleep,
Their conch-shells never blow."

On the south side of the earth, close to the stream of Ocean,
dwelt a people happy and virtuous as the Hyperboreans.  They were
named the AEthiopians.  The gods favored them so highly that they
were wont to leave at times their Olympian abodes, and go to
share their sacrifices and banquets.

On the western margin of the earth, by the stream of Ocean, lay a
happy place named the Elysian Plain, whither mortals favored by
the gods were transported without tasting of death, to enjoy an
immortality of bliss.  This happy region was also called the
"fortunate fields," and the "Isles of the Blessed."

We thus see that the Greeks of the early ages knew little of any
real people except those to the east and south of their own
country, or near the coast of the Mediterranean.  Their
imagination meantime peopled the western portion of this sea with
giants, monsters, and enchantresses; while they placed around the
disk of the earth, which they probably regarded as of no great
width, nations enjoying the peculiar favor of the gods, and
blessed with happiness and longevity.

The Dawn, the Sun, and the Moon were supposed to rise out of the
Ocean, on the western side, and to drive through the air, giving
light to gods and men.  The stars also, except those forming
Charles' Wain or Bear, and others near them, rose out of and sank
into the stream of Ocean.  There the sun-god embarked in a winged
boat, which conveyed him round by the northern part of the earth,
back to his place of rising in the east.  Milton alludes to this
in his "Commmus."

"Now the gilded car of day
His golden axle doth allay
In the steep Atlantic stream,
And the slope sun his upward beam
Shoots against the dusky pole,
Pacing towards the other goal
Of his chamber in the east."

The abode of the gods was on the summit of Mount Olympus, in
Thessaly.  A gate of clouds, kept by the goddesses named the
Seasons, opened to permit the passage of the Celestials to earth,
and to receive them on their return.  The gods had their separate
dwellings; but all, when summoned, repaired to the palace of
Jupiter [Or Zeus.  The relation of these names to each other will
be explained on the next page], as did also those deities whose
usual abode was the earth, the waters, or the underworld.  It was
also in the great hall of the palace of the Olympian king that
the gods feasted each day on ambrosia and nectar, their food and
drink, the latter being handed round by the lovely goddess Hebe.
Here they conversed of the affairs of heaven and earth; and as
they quaffed their nectar, Apollo, the god of music, delighted
them with the tones of his lyre, to which the muses sang in
responsive strains.  When the sun was set, the gods retired to
sleep in their respective dwellings.

The following lines from the Odyssey will show how Homer
conceived of Olympus:--

"So saying, Minerva, goddess azure-eyed,
Rose to Olympus, the reputed seat
Eternal of the gods, which never storms
Disturb, rains drench, or snow invades, but calm
The expanse and cloudless shines with purest day.
There the inhabitants divine rejoice
Forever.:" Cowper

Such were the abodes of the gods as the Greeks conceived them.
The Romans, before they knew the Greek poetry, seem to have had
no definite imagination of such an assembly of gods.  But the
Roman and Etruscan races were by no means irreligious.  They
venerated their departed ancestors,   and in each family the
worship of these ancestors was an important duty.  The images of
the ancestors were kept in a sacred place,   each family
observed, at fixed times, memorial rites in their honor,   and
for these and other religious observances the family hearth was
consecrated.  The earliest rites of Roman worship are supposed to
be connected with such family devotions.

As the Greeks and Romans became acquainted with other nations,
they imported their habits of worship, even in early times.  It
will be remembered that as late as St. Paul's time, he found an
altar at Athens "to an unknown god."  Greeks and Romans alike
were willing to receive from other nations the legends regarding
their gods, and to incorporate them as well as they could with
their own.  It is thus that in the poetical mythology of those
nations, which we are now to study, we frequently find a Latin
and a Greek name for one imagined divinity.  Thus Zeus, of the
Greeks, becomes in Latin   with the addition of the word pater (a
father) [The reader will observe that father is one of the words
derived from an Ayan root.  Let p and t become rough, as the
grammarians say,   let p become ph, and t th, and you have
phather or father], Jupiter   Kronos of the Greeks appears as
"Vulcanus" of the Latins, "Ares" of the Greeks is "Mars" or
Mavors of the Latins, "Poseidon" of the Greeks is "Neptunus" of
the Latins, "Aphrodite" of the Greeks is "Venus" of the Latins.
This variation is not to be confounded with a mere translation,
as where "Paulos" of the Greek becomes "Paulus" in Latin, or
"Odysseus" becomes "Ulysses,"   or as when "Pierre" of the French
becomes "Peter" in English.  What really happened was, that as
the Romans, more cultivated than their fathers, found in Greek
literature a god of fire and smithery,   they transferred his
name "Hephaistos" to their own old god "Vulcanus,"   who had the
same duties,   and in their after literature the Latin name was
used for the stories of Greek and Latin origin.

As the English literature came into being largely on French and
Latin models, and as French is but a degraded Latin and retains
Latin roots largely,   in our older English poets the Latin forms
of these names are generally used.  In our own generation, with
the precision now so much courted, a fashion has come in, of
designating Mars by his Greek name of "Ares," Venus by her name
of "Aphrodite," and so on.  But in this book, as our object is to
make familiar the stores of general English literature which
refer to such subjects, we shall retain, in general, the Latin
names,   only calling the attention of the reader to the Greek
names, as they appear in Greek authors,   and in many writers of
the more recent English schools.

The real monarch of the heavens in the mythology of both Greece
and Rome is Jupiter (Zeus-pater, father-Jove) [Jove appears to be
a word derived from the same root as Zeus, and it appears in the
root dev of the Sanscrit, where devas are gods of different
forms.  Our English word devil probably comes from the French
diable, Italian diavolo, Latin diabolus, one who makes division,-
- literally one who separates balls, or throws balls about,--
instead of throwing them frankly and truly at the batsman.  It is
not to be traced to the Sanscrit deva.]

In the mythological system we are tracing Zeus is himself the
father of many of the gods, and he is often spoken of as father
of gods and men.  He is the father of Vulcan [In Greek
Hephaistos], of Venus [in Greek Aphrodite], of Minerva [in Greek
Pallas Athene, or either name separately], of Apollo [of
Phoebus], Diana [in Greek Artemis], and of Mercury [in Greek
Hermes], who are ranked among the twelve superior gods, and of
many inferior deities.  But Jupiter himself is not the original
deity in these systems.  He is the son of Saturnus, as in the
Greek Zeus is the son of Kronos.  Still the inevitable question
would occur where did Saturnus or Kronos come from.  And, in
forms and statements more and more vague, the answer was that he
was born from Uranus or Ouranos, which is the name of the Heaven
over all which seemed to embrace all things.  The Greek name of
Saturn was spelled Kronos.  The Greek name of Time was spelled
Chronos.  A similarity between the two was imagined.  And the
whole statement, when reduced to rationalistic language, would be
that from Uranus, the infinite, was born Chronos, Time,-- that
from Time, Zeus or Jupiter was born, and that he is the only
child of Time who has complete sway over mortals and immortals.

"The will of Jove I own,
Who mortals and immortals rules alone."
Homer, II.xii

Jupiter was son of Saturn (Kronos) [The names included in
parentheses are the Greek, the others being the Roman or Latin
names] and Ops (Rhea in Greek, sometimes confounded with the
Phrygian Cybele).

Saturn and Rhea were of the race of Titans, who were the children
of Earth and Heaven, which sprang from Chaos, of which we shall
give a further account in our next chapter.

In allusion to the dethronement of Ouranos by Kronos, and of
Kronos or Saturnus by Zeus or Jupiter, Prometheus says in
AEschylus's tragedy,--

"You may deem
Its towers impregnable; but have I not
already seen two monarchs hurled from them."

Thee is another cosmogony, or account of the creation, according
to which Earth, Erebus, and Love were the first of beings.  Love
(Eros)_ issued from the egg of Night, which floated on Chaos.  By
his arrows and torch he pierced and vivified all things,
producing life and joy.

Saturn and Rhea were not the only Titans.  There were others,
whose names were Oceanus, Hyperion, Iapetus, and Ophion, males;
and Themis, Mnemosyne, Eurynome, females.  They are spoken of as
the elder gods, whose dominion was afterwards transferred to
others.  Saturn yielded to Jupiter, Oceanus to Neptune, Hyperion
to Apollo.  Hyperion was the father of the Sun, Moon, and Dawn.
He is therefore the original sun-god, and is painted with the
splendor and beauty which were afterwards bestowed on Apollo.

"Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself."   Shakespeare

Ophion and Eurynome ruled over Olympus till they were dethroned
by Saturn and Rhea.  Milton alludes to them in Paradise Lost.  He
says the heathen seem to have had some knowledge of the
temptation and fall of man,--

"And fabled how the serpent, whom they called
Ophion, with Eurynome (the wide-
Encroaching Eve perhaps), had first the rule
Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driven."

The representations given of Saturn are not very consistent, for
on the one hand his reign is said to have been the golden age of
innocence and purity, and on the other he is described as a
monster who devoured his own children [This inconsistency arises
from considering the Saturn of the Romans the same with the
Grecian deity Chronos (Time), which, as it brings an end to all
things which have had a beginning, may be said to devour its own
offspring.] Jupiter, however, escaped this fate, and when grown
up espoused Metis (Prudence), who administered a draught to
Saturn which caused him to disgorge his children.  Jupiter, with
his brothers and sisters, now rebelled against their father
Saturn, and his brothers the Titans; vanquished them, and
imprisoned some of them in Tartarus, inflicting other penalties
on others.  Atlas was condemned to bear up the heavens on his
shoulders.

On the dethronement of Saturn, Jupiter with his brothers Neptune
(Poseidon) and Pluto (Dis) divided his dominions.  Jupiter's
portion was the heavens, Neptune's the ocean, and Pluto's the
realms of the dead.  Earth and Olympus were common property.
Jupiter was king of gods and men.  The thunder was his weapon,
and he bore a shield called AEgis, made for him by Vulcan.  The
eagle was his favorite bird, and bore his thunderbolts.

Juno (Hera)[pronounce He-re, in two syllables] was the wife of
Jupiter, and queen of the gods.  Iris, the goddess of the
rainbow, was her attendant and messenger.  The peacock was her
favorite bird.

Vulcan (Hephaistos), the celestial artist, was the son of Jupiter
and Juno.  He was born lame, and his mother was so displeased at
the sight of him that she flung him out of heaven.  Other
accounts say that Jupiter kicked him out for taking part with his
mother, in a quarrel which occurred between them.  Vulcan's
lameness, according to this account, was the consequence of his
fall.  He was a whole day falling, and at last alighted in the
island of Lemnos, which was thenceforth sacred to him.  Milton
alludes to this story in Paradise lost, Book I.

"From morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summer's day; and with the setting sun
Dropped from the zenith, like a falling star,
On Lemnos, the AEgean isle."

Mars (Ares), the god of war, was the son of Jupiter and Juno.
Phoebus Apollo [this is a Greek name of a Greek divinity, who
seems to have had no Roman resemblance], the god of archery,
prophecy, and music, was the son of Jupiter and Latona, and
brother of Diana (Artemis).  He was god of the sun, as Diana, his
sister, was the goddess of the moon.

Venus (Aphrodite), the goddess of love and beauty, was the
daughter of Jupiter and Dione.  Others say that Venus sprang from
the foam of the sea.  The zephyr wafted her along the waves to
the Isle of Cyprus, where she was received and attired by the
Seasons, and then led to the assembly of the gods.  All were
charmed with her beauty, and each one demanded her for his wife.
Jupiter gave her to Vulcan, in gratitude for the service he had
rendered in forging thunderbolts.  So the most beautiful of the
goddesses became the wife of the most ill-favored of the gods.
Venus possessed an embroidered girdle called the Cestus, which
had the power of inspiring love.  Her favorite birds were swans
and doves, and the plants sacred to her were the rose and the
myrtle.

Cupid (Eros), the god of love, was the son of Venus.  He was her
constant companion; and, armed with bow and arrows, he shot the
darts of desire into the bosoms of both gods and men.  There was
a deity named Anteros, who was sometimes represented as the
avenger of slighted love, and sometimes as the symbol of
reciprocal affection.  The following legend is told of him:--

Venus, complaining to Themis that her son Eros continued always a
child, was told by her that it was because he was solitary, and
that if he had a brother he would grow apace.  Anteros was soon
afterwards born, and Eros immediately was seen to increase
rapidly in size and strength.

Minerva (Pallas Athene), the goddess of wisdom, was the offspring
of Jupiter, without a mother.  She sprang from his head,
completely armed.  Her favorite bird was the owl, and the plant
sacred to her the olive.

Byron, in "Childe Harold," alludes to the birth of Minerva thus:-
-

"Can tyrants but by tyrants conquered be,
And freedom find no champion and no child,
Such as Columbia saw arise, when she
Sprang forth a Pallas, armed and undefiled?
Or must such minds be nourished in the wild,
Deep in the unpruned forest, 'midst the roar
Of Cataracts, where nursing Nature smiled
On infant Washington?  Has earth no more
Such seeds within her breast, or Europe no such shore?"

Mercury (Hermes), was the son of Jupiter and Maia.  He presided
over commerce, wrestling and other gymnastic exercises; even over
thieving, and everything, in short, which required skill and
dexterity.  He was the messenger of Jupiter, and wore a winged
cap and winged shoes.  He bore in his hand a rod entwined with
two serpents, called the Caduceus.

Mercury is said to have invented the lyre.  Four hours after his
birth he found the shell of a tortoise, made holes in the
opposite edges of it, and drew cords of linen through them, and
the instrument was complete [From this origin of the instrument,
the word "shell" is often used as synonymous with :"lyre," and
figuratively for music and poetry.  Thus Gray, in his ode on the
"Progress of Poesy," says,-- "O Sovereign of the willing soul,
Parent of sweet and solemn-breathing airs, Enchanting shell! The
sullen Cares And Frantic Passions hear thy soft control."] The
cords were nine, in honor of the nine Muses.  Mercury gave the
lyre to Apollo, and received from him in exchange the caduceus.

Ceres (Demeter) was the daughter of Saturn and Rhea.  She had a
daughter named Proserpine (Persephone), who became the wife of
Pluto, and queen of the realms of the dead.  Ceres presided over
agriculture.

Bacchus (Dionysus)_, the god of wine, was the son of Jupiter and
Semele.  He represents not only the intoxicating power of wine,
but its social and beneficent influences likewise; so that he is
viewed as the promoter of civilization, and a lawgiver and lover
of peace.

The muses were the daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne (Memory).
They presided over song, and prompted the memory.  They were nine
in number, to each of whom was assigned the presidency over some
particular department of literature, art, or science.  Calliope
was the muse of epic poetry, Clio of history, Euterpe of lyric
poetry, Melpomene of tragedy, Terpischore of choral dance and
song, Erato of love-poetry, Polyhymnia of sacred poetry, Urania
of astronomy, Thalia [Pronounced Tha-lei-a, with the emphasis on
the second syllable] of comedy.

Spenser described the office of the Graces thus:--

"These three on men all gracious gifts bestow
Which deck the body or adorn the mind,
To make them lovely or well-favored show;
As comely carriage, entertainment kind,
Sweet semblance, friendly offices that bind,
And all the compliments of courtesy;
They teach us how to each degree and kind
We should ourselves demean, to low, to high.
To friends, to foes; which skill men call Civility."

The Fates were also three   Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos.  Their
office was to spin the thread of human destiny, and they were
armed with shears, with which they cut it off when they pleased.
They were the daughters of Themis (Law), who sits by Jove on his
throne to give him counsel.

The Erinnyes, or Furies, were three goddesses who punished crimes
by their secret stings.  The heads of the Furies were wreathed
with serpents, and their whole appearance was terrific and
appalling.  Their names were Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megaera.
They were also called Eumenides.

Nemesis was also an avenging goddess.  She represents the
righteous anger of the gods, particularly towards the proud and
insolent.

Pan [the name Pan means everything, and he is sometimes spoken of
as the god of all nature] was the god of flocks and shepherds.
His favorite residence, as the Greeks describe him, was in
Arcadia.

The Satyrs were deities of the woods and fields.  They were
conceived to be covered with bristly hair, their heads decorated
with short, sprouting horns, and their feet like goats' feet.

Momus was the god of laughter, and Plutus the god of wealth.

ROMAN DIVINITIES

The preceding are Grecian divinities, though received also by the
Romans.  Those which follow are peculiar to Roman mythology.

Saturn was an ancient Italian deity.  The Roman poets tried to
identify him with the Grecian god Kronos, and fabled that after
his dethronement by Jupiter, he fled to Italy, where he reigned
during what was called the Golden Age.  In memory of his
beneficent dominion, the feast of Saturnalia was held every year
in the winter season.  Then all public business was suspended,
declarations of war and criminal executions were postponed,
friends made presents to one another, and the slaves were
indulged with great liberties.  A feast was given them at which
they sat at table, while their masters served them, to show the
natural equality of men, and that all things belonged equally to
all, in the reign of Saturn.

Faunus [there was also a goddess called Fauna, or Bona Dea], the
grandson of Saturn, was worshipped as the god of fields and
shepherds, and also as a prophetic god.  His name in the plural,
Fauns, expressed a class of gamesome deities, like the Satyrs of
the Greeks.

Quirinus was a war god, said to be no other than Romulus the
founder of Rome, exalted after his death to a place among the
gods.

Bellona, a war goddess.

Terminus, the god of landmarks.  His statue was a rude stone or
post, set in the ground to mark the boundaries of fields.

Pales, the goddess presiding over cattle and pastures.

Pomona presided over fruit trees.

Flora, the goddess of flowers.

Lucina, the goddess of childbirth.

Vesta (the Hestia of the Greeks) was a deity presiding over the
public and private hearth.  A sacred fire, tended by six virgin
priestesses called Vestals, flamed in her temple.  As the safety
of the city was held to be connected with its conservation, the
neglect of the virgins, if they let it go out, was severely
punished, and the fire was rekindled from the rays of the sun.

Liber is another Latin name of Bacchus; and Mulciber of Vulcan.

Janus was the porter of heaven.  He opens the year, the first
month being named after him.  He is the guardian deity of gates,
on which account he is commonly represented with two heads,
because every door looks two ways.  His temples at Rome were
numerous.  In war time the gates of the principal one were always
open.  In peace they were closed; but they were shut only once
between the reign of Numa and that of Augustus.

The Penates were the gods who were supposed to attend to the
welfare and prosperity of the family.  Their name is derived from
Penus, the pantry, which was sacred to them.  Every master of a
family was the priest to the Penates of his own house.

The Lares, or Lars, were also household gods, but differed from
the Penates in being regarded as the deified spirits of mortals.
The family Lars were held to be the souls of the ancestors, who
watched over and protected their descendants.  The words Lemur
and Larva more nearly correspond to our word Ghost.

The Romans believed that every man had his Genius, and every
woman her Juno; that is, a spirit who had given them being, and
was regarded as a protector through life.  On birthdays men made
offerings to their Genius, women to their Juno.

Macaulay thus alludes to some of the Roman gods:--

"Pomona loves the orchard,
And Liber loves the vine,
And Pales loves the straw-built shed
Warm with the breath of kine;
And Venus loves the whisper
Of plighted youth and maid
In April's ivory moonlight,
Beneath the Chestnut shade."
"Prophecy of Capys."

N.B.  It is to be observed that in proper names the final e and
es are to be sounded.  Thus Cybele and Penates are words of three
syllables.   But Proserpine and Thebes have been so long used as
English words, that they may be regarded as exceptions, to be
pronounced as if English.  Hecate is sometimes pronounced by the
poets as a dissylable.  In the Index at the close of the volume,
we shall mark the accented syllable, in all words which appear to
require it.


CHAPTER II
Prometheus and Pandora

The Roman poet Ovid gives us a connected narrative of creation.
Before the earth and sea and the all-covering heaven, one aspect,
which we call Chaos, covered all the face of Nature,-- a rough
heap of inert weight and discordant beginnings of things clashing
together.  As yet no sun gave light to the world, nor did the
moon renew her slender horn month by month,-- neither did the
earth hang in the surrounding air, poised by its own weight,--
nor did the sea stretch its long arms around the earth.  Wherever
there was earth, there was also sea and air.  So the earth was
not solid nor was the water fluid, neither was the air
transparent.

God and Nature at last interposed and put an end to this discord,
separating earth from sea, and heaven from both.  The fiery part,
being the lightest, sprang up, and formed the skies; the air was
next in weight and place.  The earth, being heavier, sank below,
and the water took the lowest place and buoyed up the earth.

Here some god, no man knows who, arranged and divided the land.
He placed the rivers and bays, raised mountains and dug out
valleys and distributed woods, fountains, fertile fields and
stony plains.  Now that the air was clear the stars shone out,
the fishes swam the sea and birds flew in the air, while the
four-footed beasts roamed around the earth.  But a nobler animal
was needed, and man was made in the image of the gods with an
upright stature [The two Greek words for man have the root an,
"up], so that while all other animals turn their faces downward
and look to the earth, he raises his face to heaven and gazes on
the stars [Every reader will be interested in comparing this
narrative with that in the beginni