 monsters.  Scylla
remained rooted to the spot.  Her temper grew as ugly as her
form, and she took pleasure in devouring hapless mariners who
came within her grasp.  Thus she destroyed six of the companions
of Ulysses, and tried to wreck the ships of Aeneas, till at last
she was turned into a rock, and as such still continues to be a
terror to mariners.

The following is Glaucus's account of his feelings after his
"sea-change:"

"I plunged for life or death.  To interknit
One's senses with so dense a breathing stuff
Might seem a work of pain; so not enough
Can I admire how crystal-smooth it felt,
And buoyant round my limbs.  At first I dwelt
Whole days and days in sheer astonishment;
Forgetful utterly of self-9ntent,
Moving but with the mighty ebb and flow.
Then like a new-fledged bird that first doth show
His spreaded feathers to the morrow chill,
I tried in fear the pinions of my well.
"Twas freedom!  And at once I visited
The ceaseless wonders of this ocean-bed."
Keats.


Chapter V
Pygmalion.   Dryope.   Venus and Adonis.   Apollo and Hyacinthus.
  Ceyx and Halcyone.

Pygmalion saw so much to blame in women that he came at last to
abhor the sex, and resolved to live unmarried.  He was a
sculptor, and had made with wonderful skill a statue of ivory, so
beautiful that no living woman could be compared to it in beauty.
It was indeed the perfect semblance of a maiden that seemed to be
alive, and only prevented from moving by modesty.  His art was so
perfect that it concealed itself, and its product looked like the
workmanship of nature.  Pygmalion admired his own work, and at
last fell in love with the counterfeit creation.  Oftentimes he
laid his hand upon it, as if to assure himself whether it were
living or not, and could not even then believe that it was only
ivory.  He caressed it, and gave it presents such as young girls
love,   bright shells and polished stones, little birds and
flowers of various hues, beads and amber.  He put raiment on its
limbs, and jewels on its fingers, and a necklace about its neck.
To the ears he hung earrings and strings of pearls upon the
breast.  Her dress became her, and she looked not less charming
than when unattired.  He laid her on a couch spread with cloths
of Tyrian dye, and called her his wife, and put her head upon a
pillow of the softest feathers, as if she could enjoy their
softness.

The festival of Venus was at hand,   a festival celebrated with
great pomp at Cyprus.  Victims were offered, the altars smoked,
and the odor of incense filled the air.  When Pygmalion had
performed his part in the solemnities, he stood before the altar
and timidly said, "Ye gods, who can do all things, give me, I
pray you, for my wife"   he dared not say "my ivory virgin," but
said instead   "one like my ivory virgin."  Venus, who was
present at the festival, heard him and knew the thought he would
have uttered; and, as an omen of her favor, caused the flame on
the altar to shoot up thrice in a fiery point into the air.  When
he returned home, he went to see his statue, and, leaning over
the couch, gave a kiss to the mouth.  It seemed to be warm.  He
pressed its lips again, he laid his hand upon the limbs; the
ivory felt soft to his touch, and yielded to his fingers like the
wax of Hymettus.  While he stands astonished and glad, though
doubting, and fears he may be mistaken, again and again with a
lover's ardor he touches the object of his hopes.  It was indeed
alive!  The veins when pressed yielded to the finger and then
resumed their roundness.  Then at last the votary of Venus found
words to thank the goddess, and pressed his lips upon lips as
real as his own.  The virgin felt the kisses and blushed, and,
opening her timid eyes to the light, fixed them at the same
moment on her lover.  Venus blessed the nuptials she had formed,
and from this union Paphos was born, from whom the city, sacred
to Venus, received its name.

Schiller, in his poem, the Ideals, applies this tale of Pygmalion
to the love of nature in a youthful heart.  In Schiller's
version, as in William Morris's, the statue is of marble.

"As once with prayers in passion flowing,
Pygmalion embraced the stone,
Till from the frozen marble glowing,
The light of feeling o'er him shone,
So did I clasp with young devotion
Bright Nature to a poet's heart;
Till breath and warmth and vital motion
Seemed through the statue form to dart.

"And then in all my ardor sharing,
The silent form expression found;
Returned my kiss of youthful daring,
And understood my heart's quick sound.
Then lived for me the bright creation.
The silver rill with song was rife;
The trees, the roses shared sensation,
An echo of my boundless life."
Rev. A. G. Bulfinch (brother of the author).

Morris tells the story of Pygmalion and the Image in some of the
most beautiful verses of the Earthly Paradise.

This is Galatea's description of her metamorphosis:

"'My sweet,' she said, 'as yet I am not wise,
Or stored with words aright the tale to tell,
But listen: when I opened first mine eyes
I stood within the niche thou knowest well,
And from my hand a heavy thing there fell
Carved like these flowers, nor could I see things clear,
But with a strange confused noise could hear.

"'At last mine eyes could see a woman fair,
But awful as this round white moon o'erhead,
So that I trembled when I saw her there,
For with my life was born some touch of dread,
And therewithal I heard her voice that said,
"Come down and learn to love and be alive,
For thee, a well-prized gift, today I give."'"

DRYOPE

Dryope and Iole were sisters.  The former was the wife of
Andraemon, beloved by her husband, and happy in the birth of her
first child.  One day the sisters strolled to the bank of a
stream that sloped gradually down to the water's edge, while the
upland was overgrown with myrtles.  They were intending to gather
flowers for forming garlands for the altars of the nymphs, and
Dryope carried her child at her bosom, a precious burden, and
nursed him as she walked.  Near the water grew a lotus plant,
full of purple flowers.  Dryope gathered some and offered them to
the baby, and Iole was about to do the same, when she perceived
blood dropping from the places where her sister had broken them
off the stem.  The plant was no other than the Nymph Lotis, who,
running from a base pursuer, had been changed into this form.
This they learned from the country people when it was too late.

Dryope, horror-struck when she perceived what she had done, would
gladly have hastened from the spot, but found her feet rooted to
the ground.  She tried to pull them away, but moved nothing but
her arms.  The woodiness crept upward, and by degrees invested
her body.  In anguish she attempted to tear her hair, but found
her hands filled with leaves.  The infant felt his mother's bosom
begin to harden, and the milk cease to flow.  Iole looked on at
the sad fate of her sister, and could render no assistance.  She
embraced the growing trunk, as if she would hold back the
advancing wood, and would gladly have been enveloped in the same
bark.  At this moment Andraemon, the husband of Dryope, with her
father, approached; and when they asked for Dryope, Iole pointed
them to the new-formed lotus.  They embraced the trunk of the yet
warm tree, and showered their kisses on its leaves.

Now there was nothing left of Dryope but her face.  Her tears
still flowed and fell on her leaves, and while she could she
spoke.  "I am not guilty.  I deserve not this fate.  I have
injured no one.  If I speak falsely, may my foliage perish with
drought and my trunk be cut down and burned.  Take this infant
and give him to a nurse.  Let him often be brought and nursed
under my branches, and play in my shade; and when he is old
enough to talk, let him be taught to call me mother, and to say
with sadness, 'My mother lies hid under this bark' But bid him be
careful of river banks, and beware how he plucks flowers,
remembering that every bush he sees may be a goddess in disguise.
Farewell, dear husband, and sister, and father.  If you retain
any love for me, let not the axe wound me, nor the flocks bite
and tear my branches.  Since I cannot stoop to you, climb up
hither and kiss me; and while my lips continue to feel, lift up
my child that I may kiss him.  I can speak no more, for already
the bark advances up my neck, and will soon shoot over me.  You
need not close my eyes; the bark will close them without your
aid."  Then the lips ceased to move, and life was extinct; but
the branches retained, for some time longer the vital heat.

Keats, in Endymion, alludes to Dryope thus:

"She took a lute from which there pulsing came
A lively prelude, fashioning the way
In which her voice should wander.  'Twas a lay
More subtle-cadenced, more forest-wild
Than Dryope's lone lulling of her child."

VENUS AND ADONIS

Venus, playing one day with her boy Cupid, wounded her bosom with
one of his arrows.  She pushed him away, but the wound was deeper
than she thought.  Before it healed she beheld Adonis, and was
captivated with him.  She no longer took any interest in her
favorite resorts,   Paphos, and Cnidos, and Amathos, rich in
metals.  She absented herself even from Olympus, for Adonis was
dearer to her than heaven.  Him she followed and bore him
company.  She who used to love to recline in the shade, with no
care but to cultivate her charms, now rambled through the woods
and over the hills, dressed like the huntress Diana.  She called
her dogs, and chased hares and stags, or other game that it is
safe to hunt, but kept clear of the wolves and bears, reeking
with the slaughter of the herd.  She charged Adonis, too, to
beware of such dangerous animals.  "Be brave towards the timid,"
said she; "courage against the courageous is not safe.  Beware
how you expose yourself to danger, and put my happiness to risk.
Attack not the beasts that Nature has armed with weapons.  I do
not value your glory so highly as to consent to purchase it by
such exposure.  Your youth, and the beauty that charms Venus,
will not touch the hearts of lions and bristly boars.  Think of
their terrible claws and prodigious strength!  I hate the whole
race of them.  Do you ask why?"  Then she told him the story of
Atalanta and Hippomenes, who were changed into lions for their
ingratitude to her.

Having given him this warning, she mounted her chariot drawn by
swans, and drove away through the air.  But Adonis was too noble
to heed such counsels.  The dogs had roused a wild boar from his
lair, and the youth threw his spear and wounded the animal with a
sidelong stroke.  The beast drew out the weapon with his jaws,
and rushed after Adonis, who turned and ran; but the boar
overtook him, and buried his tusks in his side, and stretched him
dying upon the plain.

Venus, in her swan-drawn chariot, had not yet reached Cyprus,
when she heard coming up through mid air the groans of her
beloved, and turned her white-winged coursers back to earth.  As
she drew near and saw from on high his lifeless body bathed in
blood, she alighted, and bending over it beat her breast and tore
her hair.  Reproaching the Fates, she said, "Yet theirs shall be
but a partial triumph; memorials of my grief shall endure, and
the spectacle of your death, my Adonis, and of my lamentation
shall be annually renewed.  Your blood shall be changed into a
flower; that consolation none can envy me."  Thus speaking, she
sprinkled nectar on the blood; and as they mingled, bubbles rose
as in a pool on which raindrops fall, and in an hour's time there
sprang up a flower of bloody hue like that of a pomegranate.  But
it is short-lived.  It is said the wind blows the blossoms open,
and afterwards blows the petals away; so it is called Anemone, or
wind Flower, from the cause which assists equally in its
production and its decay.

Milton alludes to the story of Venus and Adonis in his Comus:

"Beds of hyacinth and roses
Where young Adonis oft reposes,
Waxing well of his deep wound
In slumber soft, and on the ground
Sadly sits th'Assyrian queen."

And Morris also in Atalanta's Race:

"There by his horn the Dryads well might know
His thrust against the bear's heart had been true,
And there Adonis bane his javelin slew"

APOLLO AND HYACINTHUS

Apollo was passionately fond of a youth named Hyacinthus.  He
accompanied him in his sports, carried the nets when he went
fishing, led the dogs when he went to hunt, followed him in his
excursions in the mountains, and neglected for him his lyre and
his arrows.  One day they played a game of quoits together, and
Apollo, heaving aloft the discus, with strength mingled with
skill, sent it high and far.  Hyacinthus watched it as it flew,
and excited with the sport ran forward to seize it, eager to make
his throw, when the quoit bounded from the earth and struck him
in the forehead.  He fainted and fell.  The god, as pale as
himself, raised him and tried all his art to stanch the wound and
retain the flitting life, but all in vain; the hurt was past the
power of medicine.  As, when one has broken the stem of a lily in
the garden, it hangs its head and turns its flowers to the earth,
so the head of the dying boy, as if too heavy for his neck, fell
over on his shoulder.  "Thou diest, Hyacinth," so spoke Phoebus,
"robbed of thy youth by me.  Thine is the suffering, mine the
crime.  Would that I could die for thee!  But since that may not
be thou shalt live with me in memory and in song.  My lyre shall
celebrate thee, my song shall tell thy fate, and thou shalt
become a flower inscribed with my regrets."  While Apollo spoke,
behold the blood which had flowed on the ground and stained the
herbage, ceased to be blood; but a flower of hue more beautiful
than the Tyrian sprang up, resembling the lily, if it were not
that this is purple and that silvery white (it is evidently not
our modern hyacinth that is here described.  It is perhaps some
species of iris, or perhaps of larkspur, or of pansy.)  And this
was not enough for Phoebus; but to confer still grater honor, he
marked the petals with his sorrow, and inscribed "Ah!  Ah!" upon
them, as we see to this day.  The flower bears the name of
Hyacinthus, and with every returning spring revives the memory of
his fate.

It was said that Zephyrus (the West-wind), who was also fond of
Hyacinthus and jealous of his preference of Apollo, blew the
quoit out of its course to make it strike Hyacinthus.  Keats
alludes to this in his Endymion, where he describes the lookers-
on at the game of quoits:

"Or they might watch the quoit-pitchers, intent
On either side, pitying the sad death
Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath
Of Zephyr slew him; Zephyr penitent,
Who now ere Phoebus mounts the firmament,
Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain."

An allusion to Hyacinthus will also be recognized in Milton's
Lycidas:

"Like to that sanguine flower inscribed with woe."

CEYX AND HALCYONE: OR, THE HALCYON BIRDS

Ceyx was King of Thessaly, where he reigned in peace without
violence or wrong.  He was son of Hesperus, the Day-star, and the
glow of his beauty reminded one of his father.  Halcyone, the
daughter of Aeolus, was his wife, and devotedly attached to him.
Now Ceyx was in deep affliction for the loss of his brother, and
direful prodigies following his brother's death made him feel as
if the gods were hostile to him.  He thought best therefore to
make a voyage to Claros in Ionia, to consult the oracle of
Apollo.  But as soon as he disclosed his intention to his wife
Halcyone, a shudder ran through her frame, and her face grew
deadly pale.  "What fault of mine, dearest husband, has turned
your affection from me?  Where is that love of me that used to be
uppermost in your thoughts?  Have you learned to feel easy in the
absence of Halcyone?  Would you rather have me away?"  She also
endeavored to discourage him, by describing the violence of the
winds, which she had known familiarly when she lived at home in
her father's house, Aeolus being the god of the winds, and having
as much as he could do to restrain them.  "They rush together,"
said she, "with such fury that fire flashes from the conflict.
But if you must go," she added, "dear husband, let me go with
you, Otherwise I shall suffer, not only the real evils which you
must encounter, but those also which my fears suggest."

These words weighed heavily on the mind of king Ceyx, and it was
no less his own wish than hers to take her with him, but he could
not bear to expose her to the dangers of the sea.  He answered,
therefore, consoling her as well as he could, and finished with
these words: "I promise, by the rays of my father the Day-star,
that if fate permits I will return before the moon shall have
twice rounded her orb."  When he had thus spoken he ordered the
vessel to be drawn out of the ship-house, and the oars and sails
to be put aboard.  When Halcyone saw these preparations she
shuddered, as if with a presentiment of evil.  With tears and
sobs she said farewell, and then fell senseless to the ground.

Ceyx would still have lingered, but now the young men grasped
their oars and pulled vigorously through the waves, with long and
measured strokes.  Halcyone raised her streaming eyes, and saw
her husband standing on the deck, waving his hand to her.  She
answered his signal till the vessel had receded so far that she
could no longer distinguish his form from the rest.  When the
vessel itself could no more be seen, she strained her eyes to
catch the last glimmer of the sail, till that too disappeared.
Then, retiring to her chamber, she threw herself on her solitary
couch.

Meanwhile they glide out of the harbor, and the breeze plays
among the ropes.  The seamen draw in their oars, and hoist their
sails.  When half or less of their course was passed, as night
drew on, the sea began to whiten with swelling waves, and the
east wind to blow a gale.  The master gives the word to take in
sail, but the storm forbids obedience, for such is the roar of
the winds and waves that his orders are unheard.  The men, of
their own accord, busy themselves to secure the oars, to
strengthen the ship, to reef the sail.  While they thus do what
to each one seems best, the storm increases.  The shouting of the
men, the rattling of the shrouds, and the dashing of the waves,
mingle with the roar of the thunder.  The swelling sea seems
lifted up to the heavens, to scatter its foam among the clouds;
then sinking away to the bottom assumes the color of the shoal,
a Stygian blackness.

The vessel obeys all these changes.  It seems like a wild beast
that rushes on the spears of the hunters.  Rain falls in
torrents, as if the skies were coming down to unite with the sea.
When the lightning ceases for a moment, the night seems to add
its own darkness to that of the storm; then comes the flash,
rending the darkness asunder, and lighting up all with a glare.
Skill fails, courage sinks, and death seems to come on every
wave.  The men are stupefied with terror.  The thought of
parents, and kindred, and pledges left at home, comes over their
minds.  Ceyx thinks of Halcyone.  No name but hers is on his
lips, and while he yearns for her, he yet rejoices in her
absence.  Presently the mast is shattered by a stroke of
lightning, the rudder broken, and the triumphant surge curling
over looks down upon the wreck, then falls, and crushes it to
fragments.  Some of the seamen, stunned by the stroke, sink, and
rise no more; others cling to fragments of the wreck.  Ceyx, with
the hand that used to grasp the sceptre, holds fast to a plank,
calling for help,   alas, in vain,   upon his father and his
father-in-law.  But oftenest on his lips was the name of
Halcyone.  His thoughts cling to her.  He prays that the waves
may bear his body to her sight, and that it may receive burial at
her hands.  At length the waters overwhelm him, and he sinks.
The Day-star looked dim that night.  Since it could not leave the
heavens, it shrouded its face with clouds.

In the mean while Halcyone, ignorant of all these horrors,
counted the days till her husband's promised return.  Now she
gets ready the garments which he shall put on, and now what she
shall wear when he arrives.  To all the gods she offers frequent
incense but more than all to Juno.  For her husband, who was no
more, she prayed incessantly; that he might be safe; that he
might come home; that he might not, in his absence, see any one
that he would love better than her.  But of all these prayers,
the last was the only one destined to be granted.  The goddess,
at length, could not bear any longer to be pleaded with for one
already dead, and to have hands raised to her altars, that ought
rather to be offering funeral rites.  So, calling Iris, she said,
"Iris, my faithful messenger, go to the drowsy dwelling of
Somnus, and tell him to send a vision to Halcyone, in the form of
Ceyx, to make known to her the event."

Iris puts on her robe of many colors, and tingeing the sky with
her bow, seeks the palace of the King of Sleep. Near the
Cimmerian country, a mountain cave is the abode of the dull god,
Somnus,  Here Phoebus dares not come, either rising, or at
midday, or setting.  Clouds and shadows are exhaled from the
ground, and the light glimmers faintly.  The bird of dawn, with
crested head, never calls aloud there to Aurora, nor watchful
dog, nor more sagacious goose disturbs the silence.  (This
comparison of the dog and the goose is a reference by Ovid to a
passage in Roman history.)  No wild beast, nor cattle, nor branch
moved with the wind, nor sound of human conversation, breaks the
stillness.  Silence reigns there; and from the bottom of the rock
the River Lethe flows, and by its murmur invites to sleep.
Poppies grow abundantly before the door of the cave, and other
herbs, from whose juices Night collects slumbers, which she
scatters over the darkened earth.  There is no gate to the
mansion, to creak on its hinges, nor any watchman; but in the
midst, a couch of black ebony, adorned with black plumes and
black curtains.  There the god reclines, his limbs relaxed with
sleep.  Around him lie dreams, resembling all various forms, as
many as the harvest bears stalks, or the forest leaves, or the
seashore grains of sand.

As soon as the goddess entered and brushed away the dreams that
hovered around her, her brightness lit up all the cave.  The god,
scarce opening his eyes, and ever and anon dropping his beard
upon his breast, at last shook himself free from himself, and
leaning on his arm, inquired her errand,   for he knew who she
was.  She answered, "Somnus, gentlest of the gods, tranquillizer
of minds and soother of careworn hearts, Juno sends you her
commands that you dispatch a dream to Halcyone, in the city of
Trachinae, representing her lost husband and all the events of
the wreck."

Having delivered her message, Iris hasted away, for she could not
longer endure the stagnant air, and as she felt drowsiness
creeping over her, she made her escape, and returned by her bow
the way she came.  Then Somnus called one of his numerous sons,
Morpheus,   the most expert at counterfeiting forms, and in
imitating the walk, the countenance, and mode of speaking, even
the clothes and attitudes most characteristic of each.  But he
only imitates men, leaving it to another to personate birds,
beasts, and serpents.  Him they call Icelos; and Phantasos is a
third, who turns himself into rocks, waters, woods, and other
things without life.  These wait upon kings and great personages
in their sleeping hours, while others move among the common
people.  Somnus chose, from all the brothers, Morpheus, to
perform the command of Iris; then laid his head on his pillow and
yielded himself to grateful repose.

Morpheus flew, making no noise with his wings, and soon came to
the Haemonian city, where, laying aside his wings, he assumed the
form of Ceyx.  Under that form, but pale like a dead man, naked,
he stood before the couch of the wretched wife.  His beard seemed
soaked with water, and water trickled from his drowned locks.
Leaning over the bed, tears streaming from his eyes, he said, "Do
you recognize your Ceyx, unhappy wife, or has death too much
changed my visage?  Behold me, know me, your husband's shade,
instead of himself.  Your prayers, Halcyone, availed me nothing.
I am dead.  No more deceive yourself with vain hopes of my
return.  The stormy winds sunk my ship in the Aegean Sea; waves
filled my mouth while it called aloud on you.  No uncertain
messenger tells you this, no vague rumor brings it to your ears.
I come in person, a shipwrecked man, to tell you my fate.  Arise!
Give me tears, give me lamentations, let me not go down to
Tartarus unwept."  To these words Morpheus added the voice which
seemed to be that of her husband; he seemed to pour forth genuine
tears; his hands had the gestures of Ceyx.

Halcyone, weeping, groaned, and stretched out her arms in her
sleep, striving to embrace his body, but grasping only the air.
"Stay!" she cried; "whither do you fly?  Let us go together."
Her own voice awakened her.  Starting up, she gazed eagerly
around, to see if he was still present, for the servants, alarmed
by her cries, had brought a light.  When she found him not, she
smote her breast and rent her garments.  She cares not to unbind
her hair, but tears it wildly.  Her nurse asks what is the cause
of her grief.  "Halcyone is no more," she answers; "she perished
with her Ceyx.  Utter not words of comfort, he is shipwrecked and
dead.  I have seen him.  I have recognized him.  I stretched out
my hands to seize him and detain him.  His shade vanished, but it
was the true shade of my husband.  Not with the accustomed
features, not with the beauty that was his, but pale, naked, and
with his hair wet with sea-water, he appeared to wretched me.
Here, in this very spot, the sad vision stood,"   and she looked
to find the mark of his footsteps.  "This it was, this that my
presaging mind foreboded, when I implored him not to leave me to
trust himself to the waves.  O, how I wish, since thou wouldst
go, that thou hadst taken me with thee!  It would have been far
better.  Then I should have had no remnant of life to spend
without thee, nor a separate death to die.  If I could bear to
live and struggle to endure, I should be more cruel to myself
than the sea has been to me.  But I will not struggle.  I will
not be separated from thee, unhappy husband.  This time, at least
I will keep thee company.  In death, if one tomb may not include
us, one epitaph shall; if I may not lay my ashes with thine, my
name, at least, shall not be separated."  Her grief forbade more
words, and these were broken with tears and sobs.

It was now morning.  She went to the sea-shore, and sought the
spot where she last saw him, on his departure.  "Here he lingered
and cast off his tacklings and gave me his last kiss."  While she
reviews every moment, and strives to recall every incident,
looking out over the sea, she descries an indistinct object
floating in the water.  At first she was in doubt what it was,
but by degrees the waves bore it nearer, and it was plainly the
body of a man.  Though unknowing of whom, yet, as it was of some
shipwrecked one, she was deeply moved, and gave it her tears,
saying, "Alas!  Unhappy one, and unhappy, if such there be, thy
wife!"  Borne by the waves, it came nearer.  As she more and more
nearly views it, she trembles more and more.  Now, now it
approaches the shore.  Now marks that she recognizes appear.  It
is her husband!  Stretching out her trembling hands towards it,
she exclaims, "O, dearest husband, is it thus you return to me?"

There was built out from the shore a mole, constructed to break
the assaults of the sea, and stem its violent ingress.  She
leaped upon this barrier and (it was wonderful she could do so)
she flew, and striking the air with wings produced on the
instant, skimmed along the surface of the water, an unhappy bird.
As she flew, her throat poured forth sounds full of grief, and
like the voice of one lamenting.  When she touched the mute and
bloodless body, she enfolded its beloved limbs with her new-
formed wings, and tried to give kisses with her horny beak.
Whether Ceyx felt it, or whether it was only the action of the
waves, those who looked on doubted, but the body seemed to raise
its head.  But indeed he did feel it, and by the pitying gods
both of them were changed into birds.  They mate and have their
young ones.  For seven placid days, in winter time, Halcyone
broods over her nest, which floats upon the sea.  Then the way is
safe to seamen.  Aeolus guards the winds, and keeps them from
disturbing the deep.  The sea is given up, for the time, to his
grandchildren.

The following lines from Byron's Bride of Abydos might seem
borrowed from the concluding part of this description, if it were
not stated that the author derived the suggestion from observing
the motion of a floating corpse.

"As shaken on his restless pillow,
His head heaves with the heaving billow;
That hand, whose motion is not life,
Yet feebly seems to menace strife,
Flung by the tossing tide on high,.
Then levelled with the wave  "

Milton, in his Hymn for the Nativity, thus alludes to the fable
of the Halcyon:

"But peaceful was the night
Wherein the Prince of light
His reign of peace upon the earth began;
The winds with wonder whist,
Smoothly the waters kist,
Whispering new joys to the mild ocean
Who now hath quite forgot to rave
While birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave."

Keats, also, in Endymion, says:

"O magic sleep!  O comfortable bird
That broodest o'er the troubled sea of the mind
Till it is hushed and smooth."


Chapter VI
Vertumnus and Pomona.   Cupid and Psyche

The Hamadryads were Wood-nymphs.  Among them was Pomona, and no
one excelled her in love of the garden and the culture of fruit.
She cared not for forests and rivers, but loved the cultivated
country and trees that bear delicious apples.  Her right hand
bore for its weapon not a javelin, but a pruning knife.  Armed
with this, she worked at one time, to repress the too luxuriant
growths, and curtail the branches that straggled out of place; at
another, to split the twig and insert therein a graft, making the
branch adopt a nursling not its own.  She took care, too, that
her favorites should not suffer from drought, and led streams of
water by them that the thirsty roots might drink.  This
occupation was her pursuit, her passion; and she was free from
that which Venus inspires.  She was not without fear of the
country people, and kept her orchard locked, and allowed not men
to enter.  The Fauns and Satyrs would have given all they
possessed to win her, and so would old Sylvanus, who looks young
for his years, and Pan, who wears a garland of pine leaves around
his head.  But Vertumnus loved her best of all; yet he sped no
better than the rest.  Oh, how often, in the disguise of a
reaper, did he bring her corn in a basket, and looked the very
image of a reaper!  With a hay-band tied round him, one would
think he had just come from turning over the grass.  Sometimes he
would have an ox-goad in his hand, and you would have said he had
just unyoked his weary oxen.  Now he bore a pruning-hook, and
personated a vine-dresser; and again with a ladder on his
shoulder, he seemed as if he was going to gather apples.
Sometimes he trudged along as a discharged soldier, and again he
bore a fishing-rod as if going to fish.  In this way, he gained
admission to her, again and again, and fed his passion with the
sight of her.

One day he came in the guise of an old woman, her gray hair
surmounted with a cap, and a staff in her hand.  She entered the
garden and admired the fruit.  "It does you credit, my dear," she
said, and kissed Pomona, not exactly with an old woman's kiss.
She sat down on a bank, and looked up at the branches laden with
fruit which hung over her.  Opposite was an elm entwined with a
vine loaded with swelling grapes.  She praised the tree and its
associated vine, equally.  "But," said Vertumnus, "if the tree
stood alone, and had no vine clinging to it, it would lie
prostrate on the ground.  Why will you not take a lesson from the
tree and the vine, and consent to unite yourself with some one?
I wish you would.  Helen herself had not more numerous suitors,
nor Penelope, the wife of shrewd Ulysses.  Even while you spurn
them, they court you  rural deities and others of every kind that
frequent these mountains.  But if you are prudent and want to
make a good alliance, and will let an old woman advise you,   who
loves you better than you have any idea of,   dismiss all the
rest and accept Vertumnus, on my recommendation.  I know him as
well as he knows himself.  He is not a wandering deity, but
belongs to these mountains.  Nor is he like too many of the
lovers nowadays, who love any one they happen to see; he loves
you, and you only.  Add to this, he is young and handsome, and
has the art of assuming any shape he pleases, and can make
himself just what you command him.  Moreover, he loves the same
things that you do, delights in gardening, and handles your
apples with admiration.  But NOW he cares nothing for fruits, nor
flowers, nor anything else, but only yourself.  Take pity on him,
and fancy him speaking now with my mouth.  Remember that the gods
punish cruelty, and that Venus hates a hard heart, and will visit
such offenses sooner or later.  To prove this, let me tell you a
story, which is well known in Cyprus to be a fact; and I hope it
will have the effect to make you more merciful.

"Iphis was a young man of humble parentage, who saw and loved
Anaxarete, a noble lady of the ancient family of Teucer.  He
struggled long with his passion, but when he found he could not
subdue it, he came a suppliant to her mansion.  First he told his
passion to her nurse, and begged her as she loved her foster-
child to favor his suit.  And then he tried to win her domestics
to his side.  Sometimes he committed his vows to written tablets,
and often hung at her door garlands which he had moistened with
his tears.  He stretched himself on her threshold, and uttered
his complaints to the cruel bolts and bars.  She was deafer than
the surges which rise in the November gale; harder than steel
from the German forges, or a rock that still clings to its native
cliff.  She mocked and laughed at him, adding cruel words to her
ungentle treatment, and gave not the slightest gleam of hope.

"Iphis could not any longer endure the torments of hopeless love,
and standing before her doors, he spake these last words:
'Anaxarete, you have conquered, and shall no longer have to bear
my importunities.  Enjoy your triumph!  Sing songs of joy, and
bind your forehead with laurel,   you have conquered!  I die;
stony heart, rejoice!  This at least I can do to gratify you, and
force you to praise me; and thus shall I prove that the love of
you left me but with life.  Nor will I leave it to rumor to tell
you of my death.  I will come myself, and you shall see me die,
and feast your eyes on the spectacle.  Yet, Oh, ye gods, who look
down on mortal woes, observe my fate!  I ask but this!  Let me be
remembered in coming ages, and add those years to my name which
you have reft from my life.'  Thus he said, and, turning his pale
face and weeping eyes towards her mansion, he fastened a rope to
the gate-post, on which he had hung garlands, and putting his
head into the noose, he murmured, 'This garland at least will
please you, cruel girl!'  And falling, hung suspended with his
neck broken.  As he fell he struck against the gate, and the
sound was as the sound of a groan.  The servants opened the door
and found him dead, and with exclamations of pity raised him and
carried him home to his mother, for his father was not living.
She received the dead body of her son, and folded the cold form
to her bosom; while she poured forth the sad words which bereaved
mothers utter.  The mournful funeral passed through the town, and
the pale corpse was borne on a bier to the place of the funeral
pile.  By chance the home of Anaxarete was on the street where
the procession passed, and the lamentations of the mourners met
the ears of her whom the avenging deity had already marked for
punishment.

"'Let us see this sad procession,' said she, and mounted to a
turret, whence through an open window she looked upon the
funeral.  Scarce had her eyes rested upon the form of Iphis
stretched on the bier, when they began to stiffen, and the warm
blood in her body to become cold.  Endeavoring to step back, she
found she could not move her feet; trying to turn away her face,
she tried in vain; and by degrees all her limbs became stony like
her heart.  That you may not doubt the fact, the statue still
remains, and stands in the temple of Venus at Salamis, in the
exact form of the lady.  Now think of these things, my dear, and
lay aside your scorn and your delays, and accept a lover.  So may
neither the vernal frosts blight your young fruits, nor furious
winds scatter your blossoms!"

When Vertumnus had spoken thus, he dropped the disguise of an old
woman, and stood before her in his proper person, as a comely
youth.  It appeared to her like the sun bursting through a cloud.
He would have renewed his entreaties, but there was no need; his
arguments and the sight of his true form prevailed, and the Nymph
no longer resisted, but owned a mutual flame.

Pomona was the especial patroness of the apple-orchard, and as
such she was invoked by Phillips, the author of a poem on Cider,
in blank verse, in the following lines:

"What soil the apple loves, what care is due
To orchats, timeliest when to press the fruits,
Thy gift, Pomona, in Miltonian verse
Adventurous I presume to sing."

Thomson, in the Seasons, alludes to Phillips:

"Phillips, Pomona's bard, the second thou
Who nobly durst, in rhyme-unfettered verse,
With British freedom, sing the British song."

It will be seen that Thomson refers to the poet's reference to
Milton, but it is not true that Phillips is only the second
writer of English blank verse.  Many other poets beside Milton
had used it long before Phillips' time.

But Pomona was also regarded as presiding over other fruits, and,
as such, is invoked by Thomson:

"Bear me, Pomona, to thy citron groves,
To where the lemon and the piercing lime,
With the deep orange, glowing through the green,
Their lighter glories blend.  Lay me reclined
Beneath the spreading tamarind, that shakes,
Fanned by the breeze, its fever-cooling fruit."


CUPID AND PSYCHE

A certain king had three daughters.  (This seems to be one of the
latest fables of the Greek mythology.  It has not been found
earlier than the close of the second century of the Christian
era.  It bears marks of the higher religious notions of that
time.)  The two elder were charming girls, but the beauty of the
youngest was so wonderful that language is too poor to express
its due praise.  The fame of her beauty was so great that
strangers from neighboring countries came in crowds to enjoy the
sight, and looked on her with amazement, paying her that homage
which is due only to Venus herself.  In fact, Venus found her
altars deserted, while men turned their devotion to this young
virgin.  As she passed along, the people sang her praises, and
strewed her way with chaplets and flowers.

This perversion to a mortal of the homage due only to the
immortal powers gave great offence to the real Venus.  Shaking
her ambrosial locks with indignation, she exclaimed, "Am I then
to be eclipsed in my honors by a mortal girl?  In vain then did
that royal shepherd, whose judgment was approved by Jove himself,
give me the palm of beauty over my illustrious rivals, Pallas and
June.  But she shall not so quietly usurp my honors.  I will give
her cause to repent of so unlawful a beauty."

Thereupon she calls her winged son Cupid, mischievous enough in
his own nature, and rouses and provokes him yet more by her
complaints.  She points out Psyche to him, and says, "My dear
son, punish that contumacious beauty; give thy mother a revenge
as sweet as her injuries are great; infuse into the bosom of that
haughty girl a passion for some low, mean, unworthy being, so
that she may reap a mortification as great as her present
exultation and triumph."

Cupid prepared to obey the commands of his mother.  There are two
fountains in Venus's garden, one of sweet waters, the other of
bitter.  Cupid filled two amber vases, one from each fountain,
and suspending them from the top of his quiver, hastened to the
chamber of Psyche, whom he found asleep.  He shed a few drops
from the bitter fountain over her lips, though the sight of her
almost moved him to pity; then touched her side with the point of
his arrow.  At the touch she awoke, and opened eyes upon Cupid
(himself invisible) which so startled him that in his confusion
he wounded himself with his own arrow.  Heedless of his wound his
whole thought now was to repair the mischief he had done, and he
poured the balmy drops of joy over all her silken ringlets.

Psyche, henceforth frowned upon by Venus, derived no benefit from
all her charms.  True, all eyes were cast eagerly upon her, and
every mouth spoke her praises; but neither king, royal youth, nor
plebeian presented himself to demand her in marriage.  Her two
elder sisters of moderate charms had now long been married to two
royal princes; but Psyche, in her lonely apartment, deplored her
solitude, sick of that beauty, which, while it procured abundance
of flattery, had failed to awaken love.

Her parents, afraid that they had unwittingly incurred the anger
of the gods, consulted the oracle of Apollo, and received this
answer: "The virgin is destined for the bride of no mortal lover.
Her future husband awaits her on the top of the mountain.  He is
a monster whom neither gods nor men can resist."

This dreadful decree of the oracle filled all the people with
dismay, and her parents abandoned themselves to grief.  But
Psyche said, "Why, my dear parents, do you now lament me?  You
should rather have grieved when the people showered upon me
undeserved honors, and with one voice called me a Venus.  I now
perceive that I am a victim to that name.  I submit.  Lead me to
that rock to which my unhappy fate has destined me." Accordingly,
all things being prepared, the royal maid took her place in the
procession, which more resembled a funeral than a nuptial pomp,
and with her parents, amid the lamentations of the people,
ascended the mountain, on the summit of which they left her
alone, and with sorrowful hearts returned home.

While Psyche stood on the ridge of the mountain, panting with
fear and with eyes full of tears, the gentle Zephyr raised her
from the earth and bore her with an easy motion into a flowery
dale.  By degrees her mind became composed, and she laid herself
down on the grassy bank to sleep.  When she awoke, refreshed with
sleep, she looked round and beheld nearby a pleasant grove of
tall and stately trees.  She entered it, and in the midst
discovered a fountain, sending forth clear and crystal waters,
and hard by, a magnificent palace whose August front impressed
the spectator that it was not the work of mortal hands, but the
happy retreat of some god.  Drawn by admiration and wonder, she
approached the building and ventured to enter.  Every object she
met filled her with pleasure and amazement.  Golden pillars
supported the vaulted roof, and the walls were enriched with
carvings and paintings representing beasts of the chase and rural
scenes, adapted to delight the eye of the beholder.  Proceeding
onward she perceived that besides the apartments of state there
were others, filled with all manner of treasures, and beautiful
and precious productions of nature and art.

While her eyes were thus occupied, a voice addressed her, though
she saw no one, uttering these words: "Sovereign lady, all that
you see is yours.  We whose voices you hear are your servants,
and shall obey all your commands with our utmost care and
diligence.  Retire therefore to your chamber and repose on your
bed of down, and when you see fit repair to the bath.  Supper
will await you in the adjoining alcove when it pleases you to
take your seat there."

Psyche gave ear to the admonitions of her vocal attendants, and
after repose and the refreshment of the bath, seated herself in
the alcove, where a table immediately presented itself, without
any visible aid from waiters or servants, and covered with the
greatest delicacies of food and the most nectareous wines.  Her
ears too were feasted with music from invisible performers; of
whom one sang, another played on the lute, and all closed in the
wonderful harmony of a full chorus.

She had not yet seen her destined husband.  He came only in the
hours of darkness, and fled before the dawn of morning, but his
accents were full of love, and inspired a like passion in her.
She often begged him to stay and let her behold him, but he would
not consent.  On the contrary, he charged her to make no attempt
to see him, for it was his pleasure, for the best of reasons, to
keep concealed.  "Why should you wish to behold me?" he said.
"Have you any doubt of my love?  Have you any wish ungratified?
If you saw me, perhaps you would fear me, perhaps adore me, but
all I ask of you is to love me.  I would rather you would love me
as an equal than adore me as a god."

This reasoning somewhat quieted Psyche for a time, and while the
novelty lasted she felt quite happy.  But at length the thought
of her parents, left in ignorance of her fate, and of her
sisters, precluded from sharing with her the delights of her
situation, preyed on her mind and made her begin to feel her
palace as but a splendid prison.  When her husband came one
night, she told him her distress, and at last drew from him an
unwilling consent that her sisters should be brought to see her.

So calling Zephyr, she acquainted him with her husband's
commands, and he, promptly obedient, soon brought them across the
mountain down to their sister's valley.  They embraced her and
she returned their caresses.  "Come," said Psyche, "enter with me
my house and refresh yourselves with whatever your sister has to
offer."  Then taking their hands she led them into her golden
palace, and committed them to the care of her numerous train of
attendant voices, to refresh them in her baths and at her table,
and to show them all her treasures.  The view of these celestial
delights caused envy to enter their bosoms, at seeing their young
sister possessed of such state and splendor, so much exceeding
their own.

They asked her numberless questions, among others what sort of a
person her husband was.  Psyche replied that he was a beautiful
youth, who generally spent the daytime in hunting upon the
mountains.  The sisters, not satisfied with this reply, soon made
her confess that she had never seen him.  Then they proceeded to
fill her bosom with dark suspicions.  "Call to mind," they said,
"the Pythian oracle that declared you destined to marry a direful
and tremendous monster.  The inhabitants of this valley say that
your husband is a terrible and monstrous serpent, who nourishes
you for a while with dainties that he may by and by devour you.
Take our advice.  Provide yourself with a lamp and a sharp knife;
put them in concealment that your husband may not discover them,
and when he is sound asleep, slip out of bed bring forth your
lamp and see for yourself whether what they say is true or not.
If it is, hesitate not to cut off the monster's head, and thereby
recover your liberty."

Psyche resisted these persuasions as well as she could, but they
did not fail to have their effect on her mind, and when her
sisters were gone, their words and her own curiosity were too
strong for her to resist.  So she prepared her lamp and a sharp
knife, and hid them out of sight of her husband.  When he had
fallen into his first sleep, she silently rose and uncovering her
lamp beheld not a hideous monster, but the most beautiful and
charming of the gods, with his golden ringlets wandering over his
snowy neck and crimson cheek, with two dewy wings on his
shoulders, whiter than snow, and with shining feathers like the
tender blossoms of spring.  As she leaned the lamp over to have a
nearer view of his face a drop of burning oil fell on the
shoulder of the god, startled with which he opened his eyes and
fixed them full upon her; then, without saying one word, he
spread his white wings and flew out of the window.  Psyche, in
vain endeavoring to follow him, fell from the window to the
ground.  Cupid, beholding her as she lay in the dust, stopped his
flight for an instant and said, "O foolish Psyche, is it thus you
repay my love?  After having disobeyed my mother's commands and
made you my wife, will you think me a monster and cut off my
head?  But go; return to your sisters, whose advice you seem to
think preferable to mine.  I inflict no other punishment on you
than to leave you forever.  Love cannot dwell with suspicion."
So saying he fled away, leaving poor Psyche prostrate on the
ground, filling the place with mournful lamentations.

When she had recovered some degree of composure she looked around
her, but the palace and gardens had vanished, and she found
herself in the open field not far from the city where her sisters
dwelt.  She repaired thither and told them the whole story of her
misfortunes, at which, pretending to grieve, those spiteful
creatures inwardly rejoiced; "for now," said they, "he will
perhaps choose one of us."  With this idea, without saying a word
of her intentions, each of them rose early the next morning and
ascended the mountain, and having reached the top, called upon
Zephyr to receive her and bear her to his lord; then leaping up,
and not being sustained by Zephyr, fell down the precipice and
was dashed to pieces.

Psyche meanwhile wandered day and night, without food or repose,
in search of her husband.  Casting her eyes on a lofty mountain
having on its brow a magnificent temple, she sighed and said to
herself, "Perhaps my love, my lord, inhabits there," and directed
her steps thither.

She had no sooner entered than she saw heaps of corn, some in
loose ears and some in sheaves, with mingled ears of barley.
Scattered about lay sickles and rakes, and all the instruments of
harvest, without order, as if thrown carelessly out of the weary
reapers' hands in the sultry hours of the day.

This unseemly confusion the pious Psyche put an end to, by
separating and sorting every thing to its proper place and kind,
believing that she ought to neglect none of the gods, but
endeavor by her piety to engage them all in her behalf.  The holy
Ceres, whose temple it was, finding her so religiously employed,
thus spoke to her: "O Psyche, truly worthy of our pity, though I
cannot shield you from the frowns of Venus, yet I can teach you
how best to allay her displeasure.  Go then, voluntarily
surrender yourself to your lady and sovereign, and try by modesty
and submission to win her forgiveness; perhaps her favor will
restore you the husband you have lost."

Psyche obeyed the commands of Ceres and took her way to the
temple of Venus, endeavoring to fortify her mind and thinking of
what she should say and how she should best propitiate the angry
goddess, feeling that the issue was doubtful and perhaps fatal.

Venus received her with angry countenance.  "Most undutiful and
faithless of servants," said she, "do you at last remember that
you really have a mistress?  Or have you rather come to see your
sick husband, yet suffering from the wound given him by his
loving wife?  You are so ill-favored and disagreeable that the
only way you can merit your lover must be by dint of industry and
diligence.  I will make trial of your housewifery."  Then she
ordered Psyche to be led to the storehouse of her temple, where
was laid up a great quantity of wheat, barley, millet, vetches,
beans, and lentils prepared for food for her doves, and said,
"Take and separate all these grains, putting all of the same kind
in a parcel by themselves, and see that you get it done before
evening."  Then Venus departed and left her to her task.

But Psyche, in perfect consternation at the enormous work, sat
stupid and silent, without moving a finger to the inextricable
heap.

While she sat despairing, Cupi