; and behold, the branch
when taken out instantly became green, and before long was
covered with leaves and a plentiful growth of young olives; and
as the liquor boiled and bubbled, and sometimes ran over, the
grass, wherever the sprinklings fell, shot forth with a verdure
like that of spring.

Seeing that all was ready, Medea cut the throat of the old man
and let out all his blood, and poured into his mouth and into his
wound the juices of her caldron.  As soon as he had completely
imbibed them, his hair and beard laid by their whiteness and
assumed the blackness of youth; his paleness and emaciation were
gone; his veins were full of blood, his limbs of vigor and
robustness.  AESON is amazed at himself, and remembers that such
as he now is he was in his youthful days, forty years before.

Medea used her arts here for a good purpose, but not so in
another instance, where she made them the instruments of revenge.
Pelias, our readers will recollect, was the usurping uncle of
Jason, and had kept him out of his kingdom.  Yet he must have had
some good qualities, for his daughters loved him, and when they
saw what Medea had done for AESON, they wished her to do the same
for their father.  Medea pretended to consent, and prepared her
caldron as before.  At her request an old sheep was brought and
plunged into the caldron.  Very soon a bleating was heard in the
kettle, and, when the cover was removed, a lamb jumped forth and
ran frisking away into the meadow.  The daughters of Pelias saw
the experiment with delight, and appointed a time for their
father to undergo the same operation.  But Medea prepared her
caldron for him in a very different way.  She put in only water
and a few simple herbs.  In the night she with the sisters
entered the bed-chamber of the old king, while he and his guards
slept soundly under the influence of a spell cast upon them by
Medea.  The daughters stood by the bedside with their weapons
drawn, but hesitated to strike, till Medea chid their
irresolution.  Then, turning away their faces and giving random
blows, they smote him with their weapons.  He, starting from his
sleep, cried out, "My daughters, what are you doing?  Will you
kill your father?:" Their hearts failed them, and the weapons
fell from their hands, but Medea struck him a fatal blow, and
prevented his saying more.

Then they placed him in the caldron, and Medea hastened to depart
in her serpent-drawn chariot before they discovered her
treachery, for their vengeance would have been terrible.  She
escaped, however, but had little enjoyment of the fruits of her
crime.  Jason, for whom she had done so much, wishing to marry
Creusa, princess of Corinth, put away Medea.  She, enraged at his
ingratitude, called on the gods for vengeance, sent a poisoned
robe as a gift to the bride, and then killing her own children,
and setting fire to the palace, mounted her serpent-drawn chariot
and fled to Athens, where she married King AEgeus, the father of
Theseus; and we shall meet her again when we come to the
adventures of that hero.

The incantations of Medea will remind the reader of those of the
witches in Macbeth.  The following lines are those which seem
most strikingly to recall the ancient model:

"Round about the caldron go;
In the poisoned entrails throw.
                         *    *    *    *    *    *
Fillet of a fenny snake
In the caldron boil and bake;
Eye of newt and toe of frog,
Wool of bat and tongue of dog.
Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,
Lizard's leg and howlet's wing:
                              *    *    *    *    *
Maw of ravening salt-sea shark,
Root of hemlock digged in the dark."
Macbeth, Act IV., Scene 1

And again:

Macbeth.   What is't you do?
Witches.   A deed without a name.

There is another story of Medea almost too revolting for record
even of a sorceress, a class of persons to whom both ancient and
modern poets have been accustomed to attribute every degree of
atrocity.  In her flight from Colchis she had taken her young
brother Absyrtus with her.  Finding the pursuing vessels of
AEETES gaining upon the Argonauts, she caused the lad to be
killed and his limbs to be strewn over the sea.  AEETES on
reaching the place found these sorrowful traces of his murdered
son; but while he tarried to collect the scattered fragments and
bestow upon them an honorable interment, the Argonauts escaped.

In the poems of Campbell will be found a translation of one of
the choruses of the tragedy of Medea, where the poet Euripides
has taken advantage of the occasion to pay a glowing tribute to
Athens, his native city.  It begins thus:

"Oh, haggard queen!  To Athens dost thou guide
Thy glowing chariot, steeped in kindred gore;
Or seek to hide thy damned parricide
Where Peace and Justice dwell for evermore?"


THE CALYDONIAN HUNT.   MELEAGER AND ATALANTA

The search for the Golden Fleece was undertaken by Jason, aided
by heroes from all Greece, or Hellas as it was then called.  It
was the first of their common undertakings which made the Greeks
feel that they were in truth one nation, though split up into
many small kingdoms.  Another of their great gatherings was for
the Calydonian Hunt, and another, the greatest and most famous of
all, for the Trojan War.

The hero of the quest for the golden Fleece was Jason.  With the
other heroes of the Greeks, he was present at the Calydonian
Hunt.  But the chief hero was Meleager, the son of OEneus, king
of Calydon, and Althea, his queen.

Althea, when her son was born, beheld the three Destinies, who,
as they spun their fatal thread, foretold that the life of the
child should last no longer than a brand then burning upon the
hearth.  Althea seized and quenched the brand, and carefully
preserved it for years, while Meleager grew to boyhood, youth,
and manhood.  It chanced, then, that OEneus, as he offered
sacrifices to the gods, omitted to pay due honors to Diana, and
she, indignant at the neglect, sent a wild boar of enormous size
to lay waste the files of Calydon.  Its eyes shone with blood and
fire, its bristles stood like threatening spears, its tusks were
like those of Indian elephants.  The growing corn was trampled,
the vines and olive trees laid waste, the flocks and herds were
driven in wild confusion by the slaughtering foe.  All common aid
seemed vain; but Meleager called on the heroes of Greece to join
in a bold hunt for the ravenous monster.  Theseus and his friend
Pirithous, Jason, Peleus afterwards the father of Achilles,
Telamon the father of Ajax, Nestor, then a youth, but who in his
age bore arms with Achilles and Ajax in the Trojan war,   these
and many more joined in the enterprise.  With them came Atalanta,
the daughter of Iasius, king of Arcadia.  A buckle of polished
gold confined her vest, an ivory quiver hung on her left
shoulder, and her left hand bore the bow.  Her face blent
feminine beauty with the best graces of martial youth.  Meleager
saw and loved.

But now already they were near the monster's lair.  They
stretched strong nets from tree to tree; they uncoupled their
dogs, they tried to find the footprints of their quarry in the
grass.  From the wood was a descent to marshy ground.  Here the
boar, as he lay among the reeds, heard the shouts of his
pursuers, and rushed forth against them.  One and another is
thrown down and slain.  Jason throws his spear with a prayer to
Diana for success; and the favoring goddess allows the weapon to
touch, but not to wound, removing the steel point of the spear
even in its flight.  Nestor, assailed, seeks and finds safety in
the branches of a tree.  Telamon rushes on, but stumbling at a
projecting root, falls prone.  But an arrow from Atalanta at
length for the first time tastes the monster's blood.  It is a
slight wound, but Meleager sees and joyfully proclaims it.
Anceus, excited to envy by the praise given to a female, loudly
proclaims his own valor, and defies alike the boar and the
goddess who had sent it; but as he rushes on, the infuriated
beast lays him low with a mortal wound.  Theseus throws his
lance, but it is turned aside by a projecting bough.  The dart of
Jason misses its object, and kills instead one of their own dogs.
But Meleager, after one unsuccessful stroke, drives his spear
into the monsters side, then rushes on and despatches him with
repeated blows.

Then rose a shout from those around; they congratulated the
conqueror, crowding to touch his hand.  He, placing his foot upon
the slain boar, turned to Atalanta and bestowed on her the head
and the rough hide which were the trophies of his success.  But
at this, envy excited the rest to strife.  Phlexippus and Toxeus,
the uncles of Meleager and Althea's brothers, beyond the rest
opposed the gift, and snatched from the maiden the trophy she had
received.  Meleager, kindling with rage at the wrong done to
himself, and still more at the insult offered to her whom he
loved, forgot the claims of kindred, and plunged his sword into
the offenders' hearts.

As Althea bore gifts of thankfulness to the temples for the
victory of her son, the bodies of her murdered brothers met her
sight.  She shrieks, and beats her breast, and hastens to change
the garments of rejoicing for those of mourning.  But when the
author of the deed is known, grief gives way to the stern desire
of vengeance on her son.  The fatal brand, which once she rescued
from the flames, the brand which the Destinies had linked with
Meleager's life, she brings forth, and commands a fire to be
prepared.  Then four times she essays to place the brand upon the
pile; four times draws back, shuddering at the thought of
bringing destruction on her son.  The feelings of the mother and
the sister contend within her.  Now she is pale at the thought of
the purposed deed, now flushed again with anger at the act of her
son.  As a vessel, driven in one direction by the wind, and in
the opposite by the tide, the mind of Althea hangs suspended in
uncertainty.  But now the sister prevails above the mother, and
she begins as she holds the fatal wood: "Turn, ye Furies,
goddesses of punishment!  Turn to behold the sacrifice I bring!
Crime must atone for crime.  Shall OEneus rejoice in his victor
son, while the house of Thestius (Thestius was father of Toxeus,
Phlexippus and Althea) is desolate?  But, alas! To what deed am I
borne along?  Brothers, forgive a mother's weakness!  My hand
fails me.  He deserves death, but not that I should destroy him.
But shall he then live, and triumph, and reign over Calydon,
while you, my brothers, wander unavenged among the shades?  No!
Thou has lived by my gift; die, now, for thine own crime.  Return
the life which twice I gave thee, first at thy birth, again when
I snatched this brand from the flames.  O that thou hadst then
died!  Alas!  Evil is the conquest; but, brothers, ye have
conquered."  And, turning away her face, she threw the fatal wood
upon the burning pile.

It gave, or seemed to give, a deadly groan.  Meleager, absent and
unknowing of the cause, felt a sudden pang.  He burns and only by
courageous pride conquers the pain which destroys him.  He mourns
only that he perishes by a bloodless and unhonored death.  With
his last breath he calls upon his aged father, his brother, and
his fond sisters, upon his beloved Atalanta, and upon his mother,
the unknown cause of his fate.  The flames increase, and with
them the pain of the hero.  Now both subside; now both are
quenched.  The brand is ashes and the life of Meleager is
breathed forth to the wandering winds.

Althea, when the deed was done, laid violent hands upon herself.
The sisters of Meleager mourned their brother with uncontrollable
grief; till Diana, pitying the sorrows of the house that once had
aroused her anger, turned them into birds.


ATALANTA

The innocent cause of so much sorrow was a maiden whose face you
might truly say was boyish for a girl, yet too girlish for a boy.
Her fortune had been told, and it was to this effect: "Atalanta,
do not marry; marriage will be your ruin."  Terrified by this
oracle, she fled the society of men, and devoted herself to the
sports of the chase.  To all suitors (for she had many) she
imposed a condition which was generally effectual in relieving
her of their persecutions:   "I will be the prize of him who
shall conquer me in the race; but death must be the penalty of
all who try and fail."  In spite of this hard condition some
would try.  Hippomenes was to be judge of the race.  "Can it be
possible that any will be so rash as to risk so much for a wife?"
said he.  But when he saw her lay aside her robe for the race, he
changed his mind, and said, "Pardon me, youths, I knew not the
prize you were competing for." As he surveyed them he wished them
all to be beaten, and swelled with envy of any one that seemed at
all likely to win.  While such were his thoughts, the virgin
darted forward.  As she ran, she looked more beautiful than ever.
The breezes seemed to give wings to her feet; her hair flew over
her shoulders, and the gay fringe of her garment fluttered behind
her.  A ruddy hue tinged the whiteness of her skin, such as a
crimson curtain casts on a marble wall.  All her competitors were
distanced, and were put to death without mercy.  Hippomenes, not
daunted by this result, fixing his eyes on the virgin, said, "Why
boast of beating those laggards?  I offer myself for the
contest."  Atalanta looked at him with a pitying countenance, and
hardly knew whether she would rather conquer him or not.  "What
god can tempt one so young and handsome to throw himself away?  I
pity him, not for his beauty (yet he is beautiful), but for his
youth.  I wish he would give up the race, or if he will be so
mad, I hope he may outrun me."  While she hesitates, revolving
these thoughts, the spectators grow impatient for the race, and
her father prompts her to prepare.  Then Hippomenes addressed a
prayer to Venus; "Help me, Venus, for you have led me on" Venus
heard, and was propitious.

In the garden of her temple, in her own island of Cyprus, is a
tree with yellow leaves and yellow branches, and golden fruit.
Hence Venus gathered three golden apples, and, unseen by all
else, gave them to Hippomenes, and told him how to use them.  The
signal is given; each starts from the goal, and skims over the
sand.  So light their tread, you would almost have thought they
might run over the river surface or over the waving grain without
sinking.  The cries of the spectators cheered on Hippomenes:
"Now, now do your best!  Haste, haste!  You gain on her!  Relax
not!  One more effort!"  It was doubtful whether the youth or the
maiden heard these cries with the greater pleasure.  But his
breath began to fail him, his throat was dry, the goal yet far
off.  At that moment he threw down one of the golden apples.  The
virgin was all amazement.  She stopped to pick it up.  Hippomenes
shot ahead.  Shouts burst forth from all sides.  She redoubled
her efforts, and soon overtook him.  Again he threw an apple.
She stopped again, but again came up with him.  The goal was
near; one chance only remained.  "Now, goddess," said he,
"prosper your gift!" and threw the last apple off at one side.
She looked at it, and hesitated; Venus impelled her to turn aside
for it.  She did so, and was vanquished.  The youth carried off
his prize.

But the lovers were so full of their own happiness that they
forgot to pay due honor to Venus; and the goddess was provoked at
their ingratitude.  She caused them to give offence to Cybele.
That powerful goddess was not to be insulted with impunity.  She
took from them their human form and turned them into animals of
characters resembling their own: of the huntress-heroine,
triumphing in the blood of her lovers, she made a lioness, and of
her lord and master a lion, and yoked them to her ear, there they
are still to be seen in all representations, in statuary or
painting, of the goddess Cybele.

Cybele is the Latin name of the goddess called by the Greeks Rhea
and Ops.  She was the wife of Cronos and mother of Zeus.  In
works of art, she exhibits the matronly air which distinguishes
Juno and Ceres.  Sometimes she is veiled, and seated on a throne
with lions at her side, at other times riding in a chariot drawn
by lions.  She sometimes wears a mural crown, that is, a crown
whose rim is carved in the form of towers and battlements.  Her
priests were called Corybantes.

Byron in describing the city of Venice, which is built on a low
island in the Adriatic Sea, borrows an illustration from Cybele:


"She looks a sea-Cybele fresh from ocean,
Rising with her tiara of proud towers
At airy distance, with majestic motion,
A ruler of the waters and their powers."
Childe Harold, IV

In Moore's Rhymes on the Road, the poet, speaking of Alpine
scenery, alludes to the story of Atalanta and Hippomenes, thus:

"Even here, in this region of wonders, I find
That light-footed Fancy leaves Truth far behind,
Or at least, like Hippomenes, turns her astray
By the golden illusions he flings in her way."


Chapter XII
Hercules.   Hebe and Ganymede

Hercules (in Greek, Heracles) was the son of Jupiter and Alemena.
As Juno was always hostile to the offspring of her husband by
mortal mothers, she declared war against Hercules from his birth.
She sent two serpents to destroy him as he lay in his cradle, but
the precocious infant strangled them with his own hands.  (On
this account the infant Hercules was made the type of infant
America, by Dr. Franklin, and the French artists whom he employed
in the American Revolution.  Horatio Greenough has placed a bas-
relief of the Infant Hercules on the pedestal of his statue of
Washington, which stands in front of the Capitol.)  He was
however by the arts of Juno rendered subject to his cousin
Eurystheus and compelled to perform all his commands.  Eurystheus
enjoined upon him a succession of desperate adventures, which are
called the twelve "Labors of Hercules."  The first was the fight
with the Nemean lion.  The valley of Nemea was infested by a
terrible lion.  Eurystheus ordered Hercules to bring him the skin
of this monster.  After using in vain his club and arrows against
the lion, Hercules strangled the animal with his hands.  He
returned carrying the dead lion on his shoulders; but Eurystheus
was so frightened at the sight of it and at this proof of the
prodigious strength of the hero, that he ordered him to deliver
the account of his exploits in future outside the town.

His next labor was to slaughter the Hydra.  This monster ravaged
the country of Argos, and dwelt in a swamp near the well of
Amymone, of which the story is that when the country was
suffering from drought, Neptune, who loved her, had permitted her
to touch the rock with his trident, and a spring of three outlets
burst forth.  Here the Hydra took up his position, and Hercules
was sent to destroy him.  The Hydra had nine heads, of which the
middle one was immortal.  Hercules struck off its head with his
club, but in the place of the head knocked off, two new ones grew
forth each time.  At length with the assistance of his faithful
servant Iolaus, he burned away the heads of the Hydra, and buried
the ninth or immortal one under a huge rock.

Another labor was the cleaning of the Augean stables.  Augeas,
king of Elis, had a herd of three thousand oxen, whose stalls had
not been cleansed for thirty years.  Hercules brought the rivers
Alpheus and Peneus through them, and cleansed them thoroughly in
one day.

His next labor was of a more delicate kind.  Admeta, the daughter
of Eurystheus, longed to obtain the girdle of the queen of the
Amazons, and Eurystheus ordered Hercules to go and get it.  The
Amazons were a nation of women.  They were very warlike and held
several flourishing cities.  It was their custom to bring up only
the female children; the boys were either sent away to the
neighboring nations or put to death.  Hercules was accompanied by
a number of volunteers, and after various adventures at last
reached the country of the Amazons.  Hippolyta, the queen,
received him kindly, and consented to yield him her girdle; but
Juno, taking the form of an Amazon, went among the other Amazons
and persuaded them that the strangers were carrying off their
queen.  The Amazons instantly armed and came in great numbers
down to the ship.  Hercules, thinking that Hippolyta had acted
treacherously, slew her, and taking her girdle, made sail
homewards.

Another task enjoined him was to bring to Eurystheus the oxen of
Geryon, a monster with three bodies who dwelt in the island
Erytheia (the red), so called because it lay at the west, under
the rays of the setting sun.  This description is thought to
apply to Spain, of which Geryon was said to be king.  After
traversing various countries, Hercules reached at length the
frontiers of Libya and Europe, where he raised the two mountains
of Calpe and Abyla, as monuments of his progress, or according to
another account rent one mountain into two and left half on each
side, forming the Straits of Gibraltar, the two mountains being
called the Pillars of Hercules.  The oxen were guarded by the
giant Eurytion and his two-headed dog, but Hercules killed the
giant and his dog and brought away the oxen in safety to
Eurystheus.

The most difficult labor of all was bringing the golden apples of
the Hesperides, for Hercules did not know where to find them.
These were the apples which Juno had received at her wedding from
the goddess of the Earth, and which she had intrusted to the
keeping of the daughters of Hesperis, assisted by a watchful
dragon.  After various adventures Hercules arrived at Mount Atlas
in Africa.  Atlas was one of the Titans who had warred against
the gods, and after they were subdued, Atlas was condemned to
bear on his shoulders the weight of the heavens.  He was the
father of the Hesperides, and Hercules thought, might, if any one
could, find the apples and bring them to him.  But how to send
Atlas away from his post, or bear up the heavens while he was
gone?  Hercules took the burden on his own shoulders, and sent
Atlas to seek the apples.  He returned with them, and though
somewhat reluctantly, took his burden upon his shoulders again,
and let Hercules return with the apples to Eurystheus.  (Hercules
was a descendant of Perseus.  Perseus changed Atlas to stone.
How could Hercules take his place?  This is only one of the many
anachronisms found in ancient mythology.)

Milton in his Comus makes the Hesperides the daughters of
Hesperus, and nieces of Atlas:

"----- amidst the gardens fair
Of Hesperus and his daughters three,
That sing about the golden tree."

The poets, led by the analogy of the lovely appearance of the
western sky at sunset, viewed the west as a region of brightness
and glory.  Hence they placed in it the Isles of the blest, the
ruddy isle Erytheia, on which the bright oxen of Geryon were
pastured, and the isle of the Hesperides.  The apples are
supposed by some to be the oranges of Spain, of which the Greeks
had heard some obscure accounts.

A celebrated exploit of Hercules was his victory over Antaeus.
Antaeus, the son of Terra (the Earth) was a mighty giant and
wrestler, whose strength was invincible so long as he remained in
contact with his mother Earth.  He compelled all strangers who
came to his country to wrestle with him, on condition that if
conquered (as they all were), they should be put to death.
Hercules encountered him, and finding that it was of no avail to
throw him, for he always rose with renewed strength from every
fall, he lifted him up from the earth and strangled him in the
air.

Cacus was a huge giant, who inhabited a cave on Mount Aventine
(one of the seven hills of Rome), and plundered the surrounding
country.  When Hercules was driving home the oxen of Geryon,
Cacus stole part of the cattle, while the hero slept.  That their
foot-prints might not serve to show where they had been driven,
he dragged them backward by their tails to his cave; so their
tracks all seemed to show that they had gone in the opposite
direction.  Hercules was deceived by this stratagem, and would
have failed to find his oxen, if it had not happened that in
driving the remainder of the herd past the cave where the stolen
ones were concealed, those within began to low, and were thus
discovered.  Cacus was slain by Hercules.

The last exploit we shall record was bringing Cerberus from the
lower world.  Hercules descended into Hades, accompanied by
Mercury and Minerva.  He obtained permission from Pluto to carry
Cerberus to the upper air, provided he could do it without the
use of weapons; and in spite of the monster's struggling he
seized him, held him fast, and carried him to Eurystheus, and
afterwards brought him back again.  When he was in Hades he
obtained the liberty of Theseus, his admirer and imitator, who
had been detained a prisoner there for an unsuccessful attempt to
carry off Proserpine.

Hercules in a fit of madness killed his friend Iphitus and was
condemned for this offence to become the slave of Queen Omphale
for three years.  While in this service the hero's nature seemed
changed.  He lived effeminately, wearing at times the dress of a
woman, and spinning wool with the handmaidens of Omphale, while
the queen wore his lion's skin.  When this service was ended he
married Dejanira and lived in peace with her three years.  On one
occasion as he was travelling with his wife, they came to a
river, across which the Centaur Nessus carried travellers for a
stated fee.  Hercules himself forded the river, but gave Dejanira
to Nessus to be carried across.  Nessus attempted to run away
with her, but Hercules heard her cries, and shot an arrow into
the heart of Nessus.  The dying Centaur told Dejanira to take a
portion of his blood and keep it, as it might be used as a charm
to preserve the love of her husband.

Dejanira did so, and before long fancied she had occasion to use
it.  Hercules in one of his conquests had taken prisoner a fair
maiden, named Iole, of whom he seemed more fond than Dejanira
approved.  When Hercules was about to offer sacrifices to the
gods in honor of his victory, he sent to his wife for a white
robe to use on the occasion.  Dejanira, thinking it a good
opportunity to try her love-spell, steeped the garment in the
blood of Nessus.  We are to suppose she took care to wash out all
traces of it, but the magic power remained, and as soon as the
garment became warm on the body of Hercules, the poison
penetrated into all his limbs and caused him the most intense
agony.  In his frenzy he seized Lichas, who had brought him the
fatal robe, and hurled him into the sea.  He wrenched off the
garment, but it stuck to his flesh, and with it he tore away
whole pieces of his body.  In this state he embarked on board a
ship and was conveyed home.  Dejanira on seeing what she had
unwittingly done, hung herself.  Hercules, prepared to die,
ascended Mount OEta, where he built a funeral pile of trees, gave
his bow and arrows to Philoctetes, and laid himself down on the
pile, his head resting on his club, and his lion's skin spread
over him.  With a countenance as serene as if he were taking his
place at a festal board, he commanded Philoctetes to apply the
torch.  The flames spread apace and soon invested the whole mass.

Milton thus alludes to the frenzy of Hercules:

"As when Alcides (Alcides, a name of Hercules; the word means
"descendant of Alcaeus"), from OEchalia crowned
With conquest, felt the envenomed robe, and tore,
Through pain, up by the roots Thessalian pines
And Lichas from the top of OEta threw
Into the Euboic Sea."

The gods themselves felt troubled at seeing the champion of the
earth so brought to his end; but Jupiter with cheerful
countenance thus addressed them; "I am pleased to see your
concern, my princes, and am gratified to perceive that I am the
ruler of a loyal people, and that my son enjoys your favor.  For
although your interest in him arises from his noble deeds, yet it
is not the less gratifying to me.  But now I say to you, Fear
not.  He who conquered all else is not to be conquered by those
flames which you see blazing on Mount OEta.  Only his mother's
share in him can perish; what he derived from me is immortal.  I
shall take him, dead to earth, to the heavenly shores, and I
require of you all to receive him kindly.  If any of you feel
grieved at his attaining this honor, yet no one can deny that he
has deserved it."  The gods all gave their assent; Juno only
heard the closing words with some displeasure that she should be
so particularly pointed at, yet not enough to make her regret the
determination of her husband.  So when the flames had consumed
the mother's share of Hercules, the diviner part, instead of
being injured thereby, seemed to start forth with new vigor, to
assume a more lofty port and a more awful dignity.  Jupiter
enveloped him in a cloud, and took him up in a four-horse chariot
to dwell among the stars.  As he took his place in heaven, Atlas
felt the added weight.

Juno, now reconciled to him, gave him her daughter Hebe in
marriage.

The poet Schiller, in one of his pieces called the Ideal and
Life, illustrates the contrast between the practical and the
imaginative in some beautiful stanzas, of which the last two may
be thus translated:

"Deep degraded to a coward's slave,
Endless contests bore Alcides brave,
Through the thorny path of suffering led;
Slew the Hydra, crushed the lion's might,
Threw himself, to bring his friend to light,
Living, in the skiff that bears the dead.
All the torments, every toil of earth
Juno's hatred on him could impose,
Well he bore them, from his fated birth
To life's grandly mournful close.
Till the god, the earthly part forsaken,
>From the man in flames asunder taken,
Drank the heavenly ether's purer breath.
Joyous in the new unwonted lightness,
Soared he upwards to celestial brightness,
Earth's dark heavy burden lost in death.
High Olympus gives harmonious greeting
To the hall where reigns his sire adored;
Youth's bright goddess, with a blush at meeting,
Gives the nectar to her lord."
S. G. Bulfinch


HEBE AND GANYMEDE

Hebe, the daughter of Juno, and goddess of youth, was cupbearer
to the gods.  The usual story is, that she resigned her office on
becoming the wife of Hercules.  But there is another statement
which our countryman Crawford, the sculptor, has adopted in his
group of Hebe and Ganymede, now in the gallery of the Boston
Athenaeum.  According to this, Hebe was dismissed from her office
in consequence of a fall which she met with one day when in
attendance on the gods.  Her successor was Ganymede, a Trojan boy
whom Jupiter, in the disguise of an eagle, seized and carried off
from the midst of his playfellows on Mount Ida, bore up to
heaven, and installed in the vacant place.

Tennyson, in his Palace of Art, describes among the decorations
on the walls, a picture representing this legend:

"There, too, flushed Ganymede his rosy thigh
Half buried in the eagle's down,
Sole as a flying star shot through the sky
Above the pillared town."

And in Shelley's Prometheus, Jupiter calls to his cup-bearer
thus:

"Pour forth heaven's wine, Idaean Ganymede,
And let it fill the Daedal cups like fire."

The beautiful legend of the Choice of Hercules may be found in
the Tatler, No. 97.  The same story is told in the Memorabilia of
Xenophon.


Chapter XIII
Theseus.   Daedalus.   Castor and Pollux

Theseus was the son of AEgeus, king of Athens, and of Aethra,
daughter of the king of Troezene.  He was brought up at Troezene,
and, when arrived at manhood, was to proceed to Athens and
present himself to his father.  AEgeus, on parting from Aethra,
before the birth of his son, placed his sword and shoes under a
large stone, and directed her to send his son to him when he
became strong enough to roll away the stone and take them from
under it.  When she thought the time had come, his mother led
Theseus to the stone, and he removed it with ease, and took the
sword and shoes.   As the roads were infested with robbers, his
grandfather pressed him earnestly to take the shorter and safer
way to his father's country, by sea; but the youth, feeling in
himself the spirit and the soul of a hero, and eager to signalize
himself like Hercules, with whose fame all Greece then rang, by
destroying the evil-doers and monsters that oppressed the
country, determined on the more perilous and adventurous journey
by land.

His first day's journey brought him to Epidaurus, where dwelt a
man named Periphetes, a son of Vulcan.  This ferocious savage
always went armed with a club of iron, and all travellers stood
in terror of his violence.  When he saw Theseus approach, he
assailed him, but speedily fell beneath the blows of the young
hero, who took possession of his club, and bore it ever
afterwards as a memorial of his first victory.

Several similar contests with the petty tyrants and marauders of
the country followed, in all of which Theseus was victorious.
One of these evil-doers was called Procrustes, or the Stretcher.
He had an iron bedstead, on which he used to tie all travellers
who fell into his hands.  If they were shorter than the bed, he
stretched their limbs to make them fit it; if they were longer
than the bed, he lopped off a portion.  Theseus served him as he
had served others.

Having overcome all the perils of the road, Theseus at length
reached Athens, where new dangers awaited him.  Medea, the
sorceress, who had fled from Corinth after her separation from
Jason, had become the wife of AEgeus, the father of Theseus.
Knowing by her arts who he was, and fearing the loss of her
influence with her husband, if Theseus should be acknowledged as
his son, she filled the mind of AEgeus with suspicions of the
young stranger, and induced him to present him a cup of poison;
but at the moment when Theseus stepped forward to take it, the
sight of the sword which he wore discovered to his father who he
was, and prevented the fatal draught.  Medea, detected in her
arts, fled once more from deserved punishment, and arrived in
Asia, where the country afterwards called Media received its name
from her.  Theseus was acknowledged by his father, and declared
his successor.

The Athenians were at that time in deep affliction, on account of
the tribute which they were forced to pay to Minos, king of
Crete.  This tribute consisted of seven youths and seven maidens,
who were sent every year to be devoured by the Minotaur, a
monster with a bull's body and a human head.  It was exceedingly
strong and fierce, and was kept in a labyrinth constructed by
Daedalus, so artfully contrived that whoever was enclosed in it
could by no means find his way out unassisted.  Here the Minotaur
roamed, and was fed with human victims.

Theseus resolved to deliver his countrymen from this calamity, or
to die in the attempt.  Accordingly, when the time of sending off
the tribute came, and the youths and maidens were, according to
custom, drawn by lot to be sent, he offered himself as one of the
victims, in spite of the entreaties of his father.  The ship
departed under black sails, as usual, which Theseus promised his
father to change for white, in case of his returning victorious.
When they arrived in Crete, the youths and maidens were exhibited
before Minos; and Ariadne, the daughter of the king, being
present, became deeply enamored of Theseus, by whom her love was
readily returned.  She furnished him with a sword, with which to
encounter the Minotaur, and with a clew of thread by which he
might find his way out of the labyrinth.  He was successful, slew
the Minotaur, escaped from the labyrinth, and taking Ariadne as
the companion of his way, with his rescued companions sailed for
Athens.  On their way they stopped at the island of Naxos, where
Theseus abandoned Ariadne, leaving her asleep.  For Minerva had
appeared to Theseus in a dream, and warned him that Ariadne was
destined to be the wife of Bacchus, the wine-god.  (One of the
finest pieces of sculpture in Italy, the recumbent Ariadne of the
Vatican, represents this incident.  A copy is in the Athenaeum
gallery, Boston.  The celebrated statue of Ariadne, by Danneker,
represents her as riding on the tiger of Bacchus, at a somewhat
later period of her story.)

On approaching the coast of Attica, Theseus, intent on Ariadne,
forgot the signal appointed by his father, and neglected to raise
the white sails, and the old king, thinking his son had perished,
put an end to his own life.  Theseus thus became king of Athens.

One of the most celebrated of the adventures of Theseus is his
expedition against the Amazons.  He assailed them before they had
recovered from the attack of Hercules, and carried off their
queen, Antiope.  The Amazons in their turn invaded the country of
Athens and penetrated into the city itself; and the final battle
in which Theseus overcame them was fought in the very midst of
the city.  This battle was one of the favorite subjects of the
ancient sculptors, and is commemorated in several works of art
that are still extant.

The friendship between Theseus and Pirithous was of a most
intimate nature, yet it originated in the midst of arms.
Pirithous had made an irruption into the plain of Marathon, and
carried off the herds of the king of Athens.  Theseus went to
repel the plunderers.  The moment Pirithous beheld him, he was
seized with admiration; he stretched out his hand as a token of
peace, and cried, "Be judge thyself,   what satisfaction dost
thou require?"  "Thy friendship," replied the Athenian, and they
swore inviolable fidelity.  Their deeds corresponded to their
professions, and they ever continued true brothers in arms.  Each
of them aspired to espouse a daughter of Jupiter.  Theseus fixed
his choice on Helen, then but a child, afterwards so celebrated
as the cause of the Trojan war, and with the aid of his friend he
carried her off.  Pirithous aspired to the wife of the monarch of
Erebus; and Theseus, though aware of the danger, accompanied the
ambitious lover in his descent to the underworld.  But Pluto
seized and set them on an enchanted rock at his palace gate,
where they remained till Hercules arrived and liberated Theseus,
leaving Pirithous to his fate.

After the death of Antiope, Theseus married Phaedra, daughter of
Minos, king of Crete.  Phaedra saw in Hippolytus, the son of
Theseus, a youth endowed with all the graces and virtues of his
father, and of an age corresponding to her own.  She loved him,
but he repulsed her advances, and her love was changed to hate.
She used her influence over her infatuated husband to cause him
to be jealous of his son, and he imprecated the vengeance of
Neptune upon him.  As Hippolytus was one day driving his chariot
along the shore, a sea-monster raised himself above the waters,
and frightened the horses so that they ran away and dashed the
chariot to pieces.  Hippolytus was killed, but by Diana's
assistance Aesculapius restored him to life.  Diana removed
Hippolytus from the power of his deluded father and false
stepmother, and placed him in Italy under the protection of the
nymph Egeria.

Theseus at length lost the favor of his people, and retired to
the court of Lycomedes, king of Scyros, who at first received him
kindly, but afterwards treacherously slew him.  In a later age
the Athenian general Cimon discovered the place where his remains
were laid, and caused them to be removed to Athens, where they
were deposited in a temple called the Theseum, erected in honor
of the hero.

The queen of the Amazons whom Theseus espoused is by some called
Hippolyta.  That is the name she bears in Shakespeare's Midsummer
Night's Dream,   the subject of which is the festivities
attending the nuptials of Theseus and Hippolyta.

Mrs. Hemans has a poem on the ancient Greek tradition that the
"Shade of Theseus" appeared strengthening his countrymen at the
battle of Marathon.

Mr. Lewis Morris has a beautiful poem on Helen, in the Epic of
Hades.  In these lines Helen describes how she was seized by
Theseus and his friend:

----------"There came a night
When I lay longing for my love, and knew
Sudden the clang of hoofs, the broken doors,
The clash of swords, the shouts, the groans, the stain
Of red upon the marble, the fixed gaze
Of dead and dying eyes,   that was the time
When first I looked on death,   and when I woke
>From my deep swoon, I felt the night air cool
Upon my brow, and the cold stars look down,
As swift we galloped o'er the darkling plain
And saw the chill sea-glimpses slowly wake,
With arms unknown around me.  When the dawn
Broke swift, we panted on the pathless steeps,
And so by plain and mountain till we came
to Athens, ----------."

Theseus is a semi-historical personage.  It is recorded of him
that he united the several tribes by whom the territory of Attica
was then possessed into one state, of which Athens was the
capital.  In commemoration of this important event, he instituted
the festival of Panathenaea, in honor of Minerva, the patron
deity of Athens.  This festival differed from the other Grecian
games chiefly in two particulars.  It was peculiar to the
Athenians, and its chief feature was a solemn procession in which
the Peplus or sacred robe of Minerva was carried to the
Parthenon, and suspended before the statue of the goddess.  The
Peplus was covered with embroidery, worked by select virgins of
the noblest families in Athens.  The procession consisted of
persons of all ages and both sexes.  The old men carried olive-
branches in their hands, and the young men bore arms.  The young
women carried baskets on their heads, containing the sacred
utensils, cakes, and all things necessary for the sacrifices.
The procession formed the subject of the bas-reliefs by Phidias
which embellished the outside of the temple of the Parthenon.  A
considerable portion of these sculptures is now in the British
museum among those known as the "Elgin marbles."


OLYMPIC AND OTHER GAMES

We may mention here the other celebrated national games of the
Greeks.  The first and most distinguished were the Olympic,
founded, it was said , by Jupiter himself.  They were celebrated
at Olympia in Elis.  Vast numbers of spectators flocked to them
from every part of Greece, and from Asia, Africa, and Sicily.
They were repeated every fifth year in midsummer, and continued
five days.  They gave rise to the custom of reckoning time and
dating events by Olympiads.  The first Olympiad is generally
considered as corresponding with the year 776 B.C.  The Pythian
games were celebrated in the vicinity of Delphi, the Isthmian on
the Corinthian isthmus, the Nemean at Nemea, a city of Argolis.

The exercises in these games were of five sorts: running,
leaping, wrestling, throwing the quoit, and hurling the javelin,
or boxing.  Besides these exercises of bodily strength and
agility, there were contests in music, poetry, and eloquence.
Thus these games furnished poets, musicians, and authors the best
opportunities to present their productions to the public, and the
fame of the victors was diffused far and wide.


DAEDALUS

The labyrinth from which Theseus escaped by means of the clew of
Ariadne, was built by Daedalus, a most skilful artificer.  It was
an edifice with numberless winding passages and turnings opening
into one another, and seeming to have neither beginning nor end,
like the river Maender, which returns on itself, and flows now
onward, now backward, in its course to the sea.  Daedalus built
the labyrinth for King Minos, but afterwards lost the favor of
the king, and was shut up in a tower.  He contrived to make his
escape from his prison, but could not leave the island by sea, as
the king kept strict watch on all the vessels, and permitted none
to sail without being carefully searched.  "Minos may control the
land and sea,:" said Daedalus, "but not the regions of the air.
I will try that way."  So he set to work to fabricate wings for
himself and his young son Icarus.  He wrought feathers together
beginning with the smallest and adding larger, so as to form an
increasing surface.  The larger ones he secured with thread and
the smaller with wax, and gave the whole a gentle curvature like
the wings of a bird.  Icarus, the boy, stood and looked on,
sometimes running to gather up the feathers which the wind had
blown away, and then handling the wax and working it over with
his fingers, by his play impeding his father in his labors.  When
at last the work was done, the artist, waving his wings, found
himself buoyed upward and hung suspended, poising himself on the
beaten air.  He next equipped his son in the same manner, and
taught him how to fly, as a bird tempts her young ones from the
lofty nest into the air.  When all was prepared for flight, he
said, "Icarus, my son, I charge you to keep at a moderate height,
for if you fly too low the damp will clog your wings, and if too
high the heat will melt them.  Keep near me and you will be
safe."  While he gave him these instructions and fitted the wings
to his shoulders, the face of the father was wet with tears, and
his hands trembled.  He kissed the boy, not knowing that it was
for the last time.  Then rising on his wings he flew off,
encouraging him to follow, and looked back from his own flight to
see how his son managed his wings.  As they flew the ploughman
stopped his work to gaze, and the shepherd learned on his staff
and watched them, astonished at the sight, and thinking they were
gods who could thus cleave the air.

They passed Samos and Delos on the left and Lebynthos on the
right, when the boy, exulting in his career, began to leave the
guidance of his companion and soar upward as if to reach heaven.
The nearness of the blazing sun softened the wax which held the
feathers together, and they came off.  He fluttered with his
arms, but no feathers remained to hold the air.  While his mouth
uttered cries to his father, it was submerged in the blue waters
of the sea, which thenceforth was called by his name.  His father
cried, "Icarus, Icarus, where are you?" At last he saw the
feathers floating on the water, and bitterly lamenting his own
arts, he buried the body and called the land Icaria in memory of
his child.  Daedalus arrived safe in Sicily, where he built a
temple to Apollo, and hung up his wings, an offering to the god.

Daedalus was so proud of his achievements that he could not bear
the idea of a rival.  His sister had placed her son Perdix under
his charge to be taught the mechanical arts.  He was an apt
scholar and gave striking evidences of ingenuity.  Walking
on the seashore he picked up the spine of a fish.  Imitating it,
he took a piece of iron and notched it on the edge, and thus
invented the SAW.  He put two pieces of iron together, connecting
them at one end with a rivet, and sharpening the other ends, and
made a PAIR OF COMPASSES.  Daedalus was so envious of his
nephew's performances that he took an opportunity, when they were
together one day on the top of a high tower, to push him off.
But Minerva, who favors ingenuity, saw him falling, and arrested
his fate by changing him into a bird called after his name, the
Partridge.  This bird does not build his next in the trees, nor
take lofty flights, but nestles in the hedges, and mindful of his
fall, avoids high places.

The death of Icarus is told in the following lines by Darwin:

"---------- with melting wax and loosened strings
Sunk hapless Icarus on unfaithful wings;
Headlong he rushed through the affrighted air,
With limbs distorted and dishevelled hair;
His scattered plumage danced upon the wave,
And sorrowing Nereids decked his watery grave;
O'er his pale corse their pearly sea-flowers shed,
And strewed with crimson moss his marble bed;
Struck in their coral towers the passing bell,
And wide in ocean tolled his echoing knell."


CASTOR AND POLLUX

Castor and Pollux were the offspring of Leda and the Swan, under
which disguise Jupiter had concealed himself.  Leda gave birth to
an egg, from which sprang the twins.  Helen, so famous afterwards
as the cause of the Trojan war, was their sister.

When Theseus and his friend Pirithous had carried off Helen from
Sparta, the youthful heroes Castor and Pollux, with their
followers, hasted to her rescue.  Theseus was absent from Attica,
and the brothers were successful in recovering their sister.

Castor was famous for taming and managing horses, and Pollux for
skill in boxing.  They were united by the warmest affection, and
inseparable in all their enterprises.  They accompanied the
Argonautic expedition.  During the voyage a storm arose, and
Orpheus prayed to the Samothracian gods, and played on his harp,
whereupon the storm ceased and stars appeared on the heads of the
brothers.  From this incident, Castor and Pollux came afterwards
to be considered the patron deities of seamen and voyagers (One
of the ships in which St. Paul sailed was named the Castor and
Pollux.  See Acts xxviii.II.), and the lambent flames, which in
certain sates of the atmosphere play round the sails and masts of
vessels, were called by their names.

After the Argonautic expedition, we find Castor and Pollux
engaged in a war with Idas and Lynceus.  Castor was slain, and
Pollux, inconsolable for the loss of his brother, besought
Jupiter to be permitted to give his own life as a ransom for him.
Jupiter so far consented as to allow the two brothers to enjoy
the boon of life alternately, passing one day under the earth and
the next in the heavenly abodes.  According to another form of
the story, Jupiter rewarded the attachment of the brothers by
placing them among the stars as Gemini, the Twins.

They received divine honors under the name of Dioscuri (sons of
Jove).  They were believed to have appeared occasionally in later
times, taking part with one side or the other, in hard-fought
fields, and were said on such occasions to be mounted on
magnificent white steeds.  Thus, in the early history of Rome,
they are said to have assisted the Romans at the battle of Lake
Regillus, and after the victory a temple was erected in their
honor on the spot where they appeared.

Macaulay, in his Lays of Ancient Rome, thus alludes to the
legend:

"So like they were, no mortal
Might one from other know;
White as snow their armor was,
Their steeds were white as snow.
Never on earthly anvil
Did such rare armor gleam,
And never did such gallant steeds
Drink of an earthly stream.
                                        .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

"Back comes the chief in triumph
Who in the hour of fight
Hath seen the great Twin Brethren
In harness on his right.
Safe comes the ship to haven
Through billows and through gales,
If once the great Twin Brethren
Sit shining on the sails."

In the poem of Atalanta in Calydon Mr. Swinburne thus describes
the little Helen and Clytemnestra, the sisters of Castor and
Pollux:

MELEAGER

"Even such I saw their sisters, one swan white,
The little Helen, and less fair than she,
Fair Clytemnestra, grave as pasturing fawns,
Who feed and fear the arrow; but at whiles,
As one smitten with love or wrung with joy,
She laughs and lightens with her eyes, and then
Weeps; whereat Helen, having laughed, weeps too,
And the other chides her, and she being chid speaks naught,
But cheeks and lips and eyelids kisses her,
Laughing; so fare they, as in their blameless bud,
And full of unblown life, the blood of gods."

ALTHEA

"Sweet days before them, and good loves and lords,
And tender and temperate honors of the hearth;
Peace, and a perfect life and blameless bed"


Chapter XIV
Bacchus.   Ariadne

Bacchus was the son of Jupiter and Semele.  Juno, to gratify her
resentment against Semele, contrived a plan for her destruction.
Assuming the form of Beroe, her aged nurse, she insinuated doubts
whether it was indeed Jove himself who came as a lover.  Heaving
a sigh, she said, "I hope it will turn out so, but I can't help
being afraid.  People are not always what they pretend to be.  If
he is indeed Jove, make him give some proof of it.  Ask him to
come arrayed in all his splendors, such as he wears in heaven.
That will put the matter beyond a doubt."  Semele was persuaded
to try the experiment.  She asks a favor, without naming what it
is.  Jove gives his promise and confirms it with the irrevocable
oath, attesting the river Styx, terrible to the gods themselves.
Then she made kn