revolved
The oracle, upon the silent sea;
And if no worthier led the way, resolved
That of a thousand vessels mine should be
The foremost prow impressing to the strand,
Mine the first blood that tinged the Trojan sand.

"Yet bitter, ofttimes bitter was the pang
When of thy loss I thought, beloved wife!
On thee too fondly did my memory hang,
And on the joys we shared in mortal life,
The paths which we had trod,   these fountains, flowers;
My new planned cities and unfinished towers.

"But should suspense permit the foe to cry,
'Behold they tremble!  Haughty their array,
Yet of their number no one dares to die!'"
In soul I swept the indignity away;
Old frailties then recurred; but lofty thought
In act embodied my deliverance wrought.
. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .
Upon the side
Of Hellespont (such faith was entertained)
A knot of spiry trees for ages grew
>From out the tomb of him for whom she died;
And ever when such stature they had gained
That Ilium's walls were subject to their view,
The trees' tall summits withered at the sight,
A constant interchange of growth and blight!"


THE ILIAD

The war continued without decisive results for nine years.  Then
an event occurred which seemed likely to be fatal to the cause of
the Greeks, and that was a quarrel between Achilles and
Agamemnon.  It is at this point that the great poem of Homer, the
Iliad, begins.  The Greeks, though unsuccessful against Troy, had
taken the neighboring and allied cities, and in the division of
the spoil a female captive, by name Chryseis, daughter of
Chryses, priest of Apollo, had fallen to the share of Agamemnon.
Chryses came bearing the sacred emblems of his office, and begged
the release of his daughter.  Agamemnon refused.  Thereupon
Chryses implored Apollo to afflict the Greeks till they should be
forced to yield their prey.  Apollo granted the prayer of his
priest, and sent pestilence into the Grecian camp.  Then a
council was called to deliberate how to allay the wrath of the
gods and avert the plague.  Achilles boldly charged their
misfortunes upon Agamemnon as caused by his withholding Chryseis.
Agamemnon enraged, consented to relinquish his captive, but
demanded that Achilles should yield to him in her stead Briseis,
a maiden who had fallen to Achilles' share in the division of the
spoil.  Achilles submitted, but forthwith declared that he would
take no further part in the war.  He withdrew his forces from the
general camp and openly avowed his intention of returning home to
Greece.

The gods and goddesses interested themselves as much in this
famous war as the parties themselves.  It was well known to them
that fate had decreed that Troy should fall, at last, if her
enemies should persevere and not voluntarily abandon the
enterprise.  Yet there was room enough left for chance to excite
by turns the hopes and fears of the powers above who took part
with either side.  Juno and Minerva, in consequence of the slight
put upon their charms by Paris, were hostile to the Trojans;
Venus for the opposite cause favored them.  Venus enlisted her
admirer Mars on the same side, but Neptune favored the Greeks.
Apollo was neutral, sometimes taking one side, sometimes the
other, and Jove himself, though he loved the good King Priam, yet
exercised a degree of impartiality; not however without
exceptions.

Thetis, the mother of Achilles, warmly resented the injury done
to her son.  She repaired immediately to Jove's palace, and
besought him to make the Greeks repent of their injustice to
Achilles by granting success to the Trojan arms.  Jupiter
consented; and in the battle which ensued the Trojans were
completely successful.  The Greeks were driven from the field,
and took refuge in their ships.  Then Agamemnon called a council
of his wisest and bravest chiefs.  Nestor advised that an embassy
should be sent to Achilles to persuade him to return to the
field; that Agamemnon should yield the maiden, the cause of the
dispute, with ample gifts to atone for the wrong he had done.
Agamemnon consented, and Ulysses, Ajax, and Phoenix were sent to
carry to Achilles the penitent message.  They performed that
duty, but Achilles was deaf to their entreaties.  He positively
refused to return to the field, and persisted in his resolution
to embark for Greece without delay.  The Greeks had constructed a
rampart around their ships, and now, instead of besieging Troy,
they were in a manner besieged themselves within their rampart.
The next day after the unsuccessful embassy to Achilles, a battle
was fought, and the Trojans, favored by Jove, were successful,
and succeeded in forcing a passage through the Grecian rampart,
and were about to set fire to the ships.  Neptune, seeing the
Greeks so pressed, came to their rescue.  He appeared in the form
of Calchas the prophet, encouraged the warriors with his shouts,
and appealed to each individually till he raised their ardor to
such a pitch that they forced the Trojans to give way.  Ajax
performed prodigies of valor, and at length encountered Hector.
Ajax shouted defiance, to which Hector replied, and hurled his
lance at the huge warrior.  It was well aimed, and struck Ajax
where the belts that bore his sword and shield crossed each other
on the breast.  The double guard prevented its penetrating, and
it fell harmless.  Then Ajax, seeing a huge stone, one of those
that served to prop the ships, hurled it at Hector.  It struck
him in the neck and stretched him on the plain.  His followers
instantly seized him, and bore him off stunned and wounded.

While Neptune was thus aiding the Greeks and driving back the
Trojans, Jupiter saw nothing of what was going on, for his
attention had been drawn from the field by the wiles of Juno.
That goddess had arrayed herself in all her charms, and, to crown
all, had borrowed of Venus her girdle called Cestus, which had
the effect to heighten the wearer's charms to such a degree that
they were quite irresistible.  So prepared, Juno went to join her
husband, who sat on Olympus watching the battle.  When he beheld
her she looked so charming that the fondness of his early love
revived, and, forgetting the contending armies and all other
affairs of state, he thought only of her and let the battle go as
it would.

But this absorption did not continue long, and when, upon turning
his eyes downward, he beheld Hector stretched on the plain almost
lifeless from pain and bruises, he dismissed Juno in a rage,
commanding her to send Iris and Apollo to him.  When Iris came he
sent her with a stern message to Neptune, ordering him instantly
to quit the field.  Apollo was dispatched to heal Hector's
bruises and to inspirit his heart.  These orders were obeyed with
such speed that while the battle still raged, Hector returned to
the field and Neptune betook himself to his own dominions.

An arrow from Paris's bow wounded Machaon, son of Aesculapius,
who inherited his father's art of healing, and was therefore of
great value to the Greeks as their surgeon, besides being one of
their bravest warriors.  Nestor took Machaon in his chariot and
conveyed him from the field.  As they passed the ships of
Achilles, that hero, looking out over the field, saw the chariot
of Nestor and recognized the old chief, but could not discern who
the wounded chief was.  So calling Patroclus, his companion and
dearest friend, he sent him to Nestor's tent to inquire.

Patroclus, arriving at Nestor's tent, saw Machaon wounded, and
having told the cause of his coming would have hastened away, but
Nestor detained him, to tell him the extent of the Grecian
calamities.  He reminded him also how, at the time of departing
for Troy, Achilles and himself had been charged by their
respective fathers with different advice; Achilles to aspire to
the highest pitch of glory, Patroclus, as the elder, to keep
watch over his friend, and to guide his inexperience.  "Now,"
said Nestor, "is the time for such influence.  If the gods so
please, thou mayest win him back to the common cause; but if not
let hm at least send his soldiers to the field, and come thou,
Patroclus, clad in his armor, and perhaps the very sight of it
may drive back the Trojans."

Patroclus was strongly moved with this address, and hastened back
to Achilles, revolving in his mind all he had seen and heard.  He
told the prince the sad condition of affairs at the camp of their
late associates; Diomedes, Ulysses, Agamemnon, Machaon, all
wounded, the rampart broken down, the enemy among the ships
preparing to burn them, and thus to cut off all means of return
to Greece.  While they spoke the flames burst forth from one of
the ships.  Achilles, at the sight, relented so far as to grant
Patroclus his request to lead the Myrmidons (for so were
Achilles' soldiers called) to the field, and to lend him his
armor that he might thereby strike more terror into the minds of
the Trojans.  Without delay the soldiers were marshalled,
Patroclus put on the radiant armor and mounted the chariot of
Achilles, and led forth the men ardent for battle.  But before he
went, Achilles strictly charged him that he should be content
with repelling the foe.  "Seek not," said he, "to press the
Trojans without me, lest thou add still more to the disgrace
already mine."  Then exhorting the troops to do their best he
dismissed them full of ardor to the fight.

Patroclus and his Myrmidons at once plunged into the contest
where it raged hottest; at the sight of which the joyful Grecians
shouted and the ships reechoed the acclaim.  The Trojans, at the
sight of the well-known armor, struck with terror, looked every
where for refuge.  First those who had got possession of the ship
and set it on fire left and allowed the Grecians to retake it and
extinguish the flames.  Then the rest of the Trojans fled in
dismay.  Ajax, Menelaus, and the two sons of Nestor performed
prodigies of valor.  Hector was forced to turn his horses' heads
and retire from the enclosure, leaving his men entangled in the
fosse to escape as they could.  Patroclus drove them before him,
slaying many, none daring to make a stand against him.

At last Sarpedon, son of Jove, ventured to oppose himself in
fight to Patroclus.  Jupiter looked down upon him and would have
snatched him from the fate which awaited him, but Juno hinted
that if he did so it would induce all others of the inhabitants
of heaven to interpose in like manner whenever any of their
offspring were endangered; to which reason Jove yielded.
Sarpedon threw his spear but missed Patroclus, but Patroclus
threw his with better success.  It pierced Sarpedon's breast and
he fell, and, calling to his friends to save his body from the
foe, expired.  Then a furious contest arose for the possession of
the corpse.  The Greeks succeeded and stripped Sarpedon of his
armor; but Jove would not allow the remains of his son to be
dishonored, and by his command Apollo snatched from the midst of
the combatants the body of Sarpedon and committed it to the care
of the twin brothers Death and Sleep, by whom it was transported
to Lycia, the native land of Sarpedon, where it received due
funeral rites.

Thus far Patroclus had succeeded to his utmost wish in repelling
the Trojans and relieving his countrymen, but now came a change
of fortune.  Hector, borne in his chariot, confronted him.
Patroclus threw a vast stone at Hector, which missed its aim, but
smote Cebriones, the charioteer, and knocked him from the car.
Hector leaped from the chariot to rescue his friend, and
Patroclus also decended to complete his victory.  Thus the two
heroes met face to face.  At this decisive moment the poet, as if
reluctant to give Hector the glory, records that Phoebus took
part against Patroclus.  He struck the helmet from his head and
the lance from his hand.  At the same moment an obscure Trojan
wounded him in the back, and Hector pressing forward pierced him
with his spear.  He fell mortally wounded.

Then arose a tremendous conflict for the body of Patroclus, but
his armor was at once taken possession of by Hector, who,
retiring a short distance, divested himself of his own armor and
put on that of Achilles, then returned to the fight.  Ajax and
Menelaus defended the body, and Hector and his bravest warriors
struggled to capture it.  The battle raged with equal fortune,
when Jove enveloped the whole face of heaven with a dark cloud.
The lightning flashed, the thunder roared, and Ajax, looking
round for some one whom he might dispatch to Achilles to tell him
of the death of his friend and of the imminent danger that his
remains would fall into the hands of the enemy, could see no
suitable messenger.  It was then that he exclaimed in those
famous lines so often quoted,

"Father of heaven and earth!  Deliver thou
Achaia's host from darkness; clear the skies;
Give day; and, since thy sovereign will is such,
Destruction with it; but, oh, give us day."
Cowper.

Or, as rendered by Pope,

"Lord of earth and air!
Oh, king!  Oh, father!  Hear my humble prayer!
Dispel this cloud, the light of heaven restore;
Give me to see and Ajax asks no more;
If Greece must perish we thy will obey
But let us perish in the face of day."

 Jupiter heard the prayer and dispersed the clouds.  Then Ajax
sent Antilochus to Achilles with the intelligence of Patroclus's
death, and of the conflict raging for his remains.  The Greeks at
last succeeded in bearing off the body to the ships, closely
pursued by Hector and Aeneas and rest of the Trojans.

Achilles heard the fate of his friend with such distress that
Antilochus feared for a while that he would destroy himself.  His
groans reached the ears of his mother, Thetis, far down in the
deeps of ocean where she abode, and she hastened to him to
inquire the cause.  She found him overwhelmed with self-reproach
that he had indulged his resentment so far, and suffered his
friend to fall a victim to it.  But his only consolation was the
hope of revenge.  He would fly instantly in search of Hector.
But his mother reminded him that he was now without armor, and
promised him, if he would but wait till the morrow, she would
procure for him a suit of armor from Vulcan more than equal to
that he had lost.  He consented, and Thetis immediately repaired
to Vulcan's palace.  She found him busy at his forge making
tripods for his own use, so artfully constructed that they moved
forward of their own accord when wanted, and retired again when
dismissed.  On hearing the request of Thetis, Vulcan immediately
laid aside his work and hastened to comply with her wishes.  He
fabricated a splendid suit of armor for Achilles, first a shield
adorned with elaborate devices, then a helmet crested with gold,
then a corslet and greaves of impenetrable temper, all perfectly
adapted to his form, and of consummate workmanship.  It was all
done in one night, and Thetis, receiving it, descended with it to
earth and laid it down at Achilles' feet at the dawn of day.

The first glow of pleasure that Achilles had felt since the death
of Petroclus was at the sight of this splendid armor.  And now
arrayed in it, he went forth into the camp, calling all the
chiefs to council.  When they were all assembled he addressed
them.  Renouncing his displeasure against Agamemnon and bitterly
lamenting the miseries that had resulted from it, he called on
them to proceed at once to the field.  Agamemnon made a suitable
reply, laying all the blame on Ate, the goddess of discord, and
thereupon complete reconcilement took place between the heroes.

Then Achilles went forth to battle, inspired with a rage and
thirst for vengeance that made him irresistible.  The bravest
warriors fled before him or fell by his lance.  Hector, cautioned
by Apollo, kept aloof, but the god, assuming the form of one of
Priam's sons, Lycaon, urged AEneas to encounter the terrible
warrior.  AEneas, though he felt himself unequal, did not decline
the combat.  He hurled his spear with all his force against the
shield, the work of Vulcan.  It was formed of five metal plates;
two were of brass, two of tin, and one of gold.  The spear
pierced two thicknesses, but was stopped in the third.  Achilles
threw his with better success.  It pierced through the shield of
Aeneas, but glanced near his shoulder and made no wound.  Then
AEneas seized a stone, such as two men of modern times could
hardly lift, and was about to throw it, and Achilles, with sword
drawn, was about to rush upon him, when Neptune, who looked out
upon the contest, moved with pity for AEneas, who he saw would
surely fall a victim if not speedily rescued, spread a cloud
between the combatants, and lifting AEneas from the ground, bore
him over the heads of warriors and steeds to the rear of the
battle.  Achilles, when the mist cleared away, looked round in
vain for his adversary, and acknowledging the prodigy, turned his
arms against other champions.  But none dared stand before him,
and Priam looking down from his city walls beheld his whole army
in full flight towards the city.  He gave command to open wide
the gates to receive the fugitives, and to shut them as soon as
the Trojans should have passed, lest the enemy should enter
likewise.  But Achilles was so close in pursuit that that would
have been impossible if Apollo had not, in the form of Agenor,
Priam's son, encountered Achilles for a while, then turned to
fly, and taken the way apart from the city.  Achilles pursued and
had chased his supposed victim far from the walls, when Apollo
disclosed himself, and Achilles, perceiving how he had been
deluded, gave up the chase.

But when the rest had escaped into the town Hector stood without,
determined to await the combat.  His old father called to him
from the walls and begged him to retire nor tempt the encounter.
His mother, Hecuba, also besought him to the same effect, but all
in vain.  "How can I," said he to himself, "by whose command the
people went to this day's contest, where so many have fallen,
seek safety for myself against a single foe?  But what if I offer
him to yield up Helen and all her treasures and ample of our own
beside?  Ah no!  It is too late.  He would not even hear me
through, but slay me while I spoke."   While he thus ruminated,
Achilles approached, terrible as Mars, his armor flashing
lighting as he moved.  At that sight Hector's heart failed him
and he fled.  Achilles swiftly pursued.  They ran, still keeping
near the walls, till they had thrice encircled the city.  As
often as Hector approached the walls Achilles intercepted him and
forced him to keep out in a wider circle.  But Apollo sustained
Hector's strength, and would not let him sink in weariness.  Then
Pallas, assuming the form of Deiphobus, Hector's bravest brother,
appeared suddenly at his side.  Hector saw him with delight, and,
thus strengthened, stopped his flight and turned to meet
Achilles.  Hector threw his spear, which struck the shield of
Achilles and bounded back.  He turned to receive another from the
hand of Deiphobus, but Deiphobus was gone.  Then Hector
understood his doom and said, "Alas!  It is plain this is my hour
to die!  I thought Deiphobus at hand, but Pallas deceived me, and
he is still in Troy.  But I will not fall inglorious."  So
saying, he drew his falchion from his side and rushed at once to
combat.  Achilles, secured behind his shield, waited the approach
of Hector.  When he came within reach of his spear, Achilles,
choosing with his eye a vulnerable part where the armor leaves
the neck uncovered, aimed his spear at that part, and Hector
fell, death-wounded, and feebly said, "Spare my body!  Let my
parents ransom it, and let me receive funeral rites from the sons
and daughters of Troy."  To which Achilles replied, "Dog, name
not ransom nor pity to me, on whom you have brought such dire
distress.  No!  Trust me, nought shall save thy carcass from the
dogs.  Though twenty ransoms and thy weight in gold were offered,
I would refuse it all."

So saying, he stripped the body of its armor, and fastening cords
to the feet, tied them behind his chariot, leaving the body to
trail along the ground.  Then mounting the chariot he lashed the
steeds, and so dragged the body to and fro before the city.  What
words can tell the grief of King Priam and Queen Hecuba at this
sight!  His people could scarce restrain the old king from
rushing forth.  He threw himself in the dust, and besought them
each by name to give him way.  Hecuba's distress was not less
violent.  The citizens stood round them weeping.  The sound of
the mourning reached the ears of Andromache, the wife of Hector,
as she sat among her maidens at work, and anticipating evil she
went forth to the wall.  When she saw the sight there presented,
she would have thrown herself headlong from the wall, but fainted
and fell into the arms of her maidens.  Recovering, she bewailed
her fate, picturing to herself her country ruined, herself a
captive, and her son dependent for his bread on the charity of
strangers.

When Achilles and the Greeks had taken their revenge on the
killer of Patroclus they busied themselves in paying due funeral
rites to their friend.  A pile was erected, and the body burned
with due solemnity; and then ensued games of strength and skill,
chariot races, wrestling, boxing, and archery.  Then the chiefs
sat down to the funeral banquet and after that retired to rest.
But Achilles neither partook of the feast nor of sleep.  The
recollection of his lost friend kept him awake, remembering their
companionship in toil and dangers, in battle or on the perilous
deep.  Before the earliest dawn he left his tent, and joining to
his chariot his swift steeds, he fastened Hector's body to be
dragged behind.  Twice he dragged him round the tomb of
Patroclus, leaving him at length stretched in the dust.  But
Apollo would not permit the body to be torn or disfigured with
all this abuse, but preserved it free from all taint or
defilement.

When Achilles indulged his wrath in thus disgracing brave Hector,
Jupiter in pity summoned Thetis to his presence.  He told her to
go to her son and prevail on him to restore the body of Hector to
his friends.  Then Jupiter sent Iris to King Priam to encourage
him to go to Achilles and beg the body of his son.  Iris
delivered her message, and Priam immediately prepared to obey.
He opened his treasures and took out rich garments and cloths,
with ten talents in gold and two splendid tripods and a golden
cup of matchless workmanship.  Then he called to his sons and
bade them draw forth his litter and place in it the various
articles designed for a ransom to Achilles.

When all was ready, the old king with a single companion, as aged
as himself, the herald Idaeus, drove forth from the gates,
parting there with Hecuba his queen, and all his friends, who
lamented him as going to certain death.

But Jupiter, beholding with compassion the venerable king, sent
Mercury to be his guide and protector.  Mercury, assuming the
form of a young warrior, presented himself to the aged couple,
and while at the sight of him they hesitated whether to fly or
yield, the god approached, and grasping Priam's hand, offered to
be their guide to Achilles' tent.  Priam gladly accepted his
offered service, and he, mounting the carriage, assumed the reins
and soon conveyed them to the tent of Achilles.  Mercury's wand
put to sleep all the guards, and without hindrance he introduced
Priam into the tent where Achilles sat, attended hy two of his
warriors.  The old king threw himself at the feet of Achilles and
kissed those terrible hands which had destroyed so many of his
sons.  "Think, O Achilles," he said, "of thy own father, full of
days like me, and trembling on the gloomy verge of life.  Perhaps
even now some neighbor chief oppresses him, and there is none at
hand to succor him in his distress.  Yet doubtless knowing that
Achilles lives he still rejoices, hoping that one day he shall
see thy face again.  But no comfort cheers me, whose bravest
sons, so late the flower of Ilium, all have fallen.  Yet one I
had, one more than all the rest the strength of my age, whom
fighting for his country, thou hast slain.  I come to redeem his
body, bringing inestimable ransom with me. Achilles, reverence
the gods!  Recollect thy father!  For his sake show compassion to
me!"  These words moved Achilles and he wept; remembering by
turns his absent father and his lost friend.  Moved with pity of
Priam's silver locks and beard, he raised him from the earth and
thus spake: "Priam, I know that thou has reached this place
conducted by some god, for without divine aid no mortal even in
the prime of youth had dared the attempt.  I grant thy request;
moved thereto by the evident will of Jove."  So saying he arose,
and went forth with his two friends, and unloaded of its charge
the litter, leaving two mantles and a robe for the covering of
the body, which they placed on the litter, and spread the
garments over it, that not unveiled it should be borne back to
Troy.  Then Achilles dismissed the old king with his attendants,
having first pledged himself to allow a truce of twelve days for
the funeral solemnities.

As the litter approached the city and was descried from the
walls, the people poured forth to gaze once more on the face of
their hero.   Foremost of all, the mother and the wife of Hector
came, and at the sight of the lifeless body renewed their
lamentations.  The people all wept with them, and to the going
down of the sun there was no pause or abatement of their grief.

The next day preparations were made for the funeral solemnities.
For nine days the people brought wood and built the pile, and on
the tenth they placed the body on the summit and applied the
torch; while all Troy, thronging forth, encompassed the pile.
When it had completely burned, they quenched the cinders with
wine, collected the bones and placed them in a golden urn, which
they buried in the earth, and reared a pile of stones over the
spot.

"Such honors Ilium to her hero paid,
And peaceful slept the mighty Hector's shade."
Pope's Homer


Chapter XXI
The Fall of Troy.   Return of the Greeks.   Orestes and Electra

The story of the Iliad ends with the death of Hector, and it is
from the Odyssey and later poems that we learn the fate of the
other heroes.  After the death of Hector, Troy did not
immediately fall, but receiving aid from new allies still
continued its resistance.  One of these allies was Memnon, the
AETHIOPIAN prince, whose story we have already told.  Another was
Penthesilea, queen of the Amazons, who came with a band of female
warriors.  All the authorities attest their valor and the fearful
effect of their war-cry.  Penthesilea slew many of the bravest
warriors, but was at last slain by Achilles.  But when the hero
bent over his fallen foe, and contemplated her beauty, youth and
valor, he bitterly regretted his victory.  Thersites, an insolent
brawler and demagogue, ridiculed his grief, and was in
consequence slain by the hero.

Achilles by chance had seen Polyxena, daughter of King Priam,
perhaps on occasion of the truce which was allowed the Trojans
for the burial of Hector.  He was captivated with her charms, and
to win her in marriage agreed to use his influence with the
Greeks to grant peace to Troy.  While in the temple of Apollo,
negotiating the marriage, Paris discharged at him a poisoned
arrow, which guided by Apollo, wounded Achilles in the heel, the
only vulnerable part about him.  For Thetis, his mother, had
dipped him when an infant in the river Styx, which made every
part of him invulnerable except the heel by which she held him.
(The story of the invulnerability of Achilles is not found in
Homer, and is inconsistent with his account.  For how could
Achilles require the aid of celestial armor if he were
invulnerable?)

The body of Achilles, so treacherously slain, was rescued by Ajax
and Ulysses.  Thetis directed the Greeks to bestow her son's
armor on the hero who, of all survivors, should be judged most
deserving of it.  Ajax and Ulysses were the only claimants; a
select number of the other chiefs were appointed to award the
prize.  It was awarded to Ulysses, thus placing wisdom before
valor; whereupon Ajax slew himself.  On the spot where his blood
sank into the earth a flower sprang up, called the hyacinth,
bearing on its leaves the first two letters of the name of Ajax,
Ai, the Greek for "woe."  Thus Ajax is a claimant with the boy
Hyacinthus for the honor of giving birth to this flower.  There
is a species of Larkspur which represents the hyacinth of the
poets in preserving the memory of this event, the Delphinium
Ajacis   Ajax's Larkspur.

It was now discovered that Troy could not be taken but by the
arrows of Hercules.  They were in possession of Philoctetes, the
friend who had been with Hercules at the last, and lighted his
funeral pyre.  Philoctetes had joined the Grecian expedition
against Troy, but had accidentally wounded his foot with one of
the poisoned arrows, and the smell from his wound proved so
offensive that his companions carried him to the Isle of Lemnos
and left him there.  Diomedes was now sent to induce him to
rejoin the army.  He succeeded.  Philoctetes was cured of his
wound by Machaon, and Paris was the first victim of the fatal
arrows.  In his distress Paris bethought him of one whom in his
prosperity he had forgotten.  This was the nymph OEnone, whom he
had married when a youth, and had abandoned for the fatal beauty
Helen.  OEnone, remembering the wrongs she had suffered, refused
to heal the wound, and Paris went back to Troy and died.  OEnone
quickly repented, and hastened after him with remedies, but came
too late, and in her grief hung herself.

Tennyson has chosen OEnone as the subject of a short poem; but he
has omitted the concluding part of the story, the return of Paris
wounded, her cruelty and subsequent repentance.

"__________Hither came at noon
Mournful OENONE, wandering forlorn
Of Paris, once her playmate on the hills.
Her cheek had lost the rose, and round her neck
Floated her hair, or seemed to float in rest.
She, leaning on a fragment twined with vine,
Sang to the stillness, till the mountain-shade
Sloped downward to her seat from the upper cliff.
.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
"'O Mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
Dear Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
I waited underneath the dawning hills,
Aloft the mountain lawn was dewy-dark,
And dewy-dark aloft the mountain pine:
Beautiful Paris, evil-hearted Paris,
Leading a jet-black goat, white-horned, white-hooved,
Come up from reedy Simois, all alone.

"'O Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
Far off the torrent called me from the cliff:
Far up the solitary morning smote
The streaks of virgin snow.  With downdropt eyes
I sat alone: white-breasted like a star
Fronting the dawn he moved; a leopard-skin
Drooped from his shoulder, but his sunny hair
Clustered about his temples like a God's,
And his cheek brightened as the foambow brightens
When the wind blows the foam, and all my heart
Went forth to embrace him coming, ere he came.

"'Dear Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
He smiled, and opening out his milk-white palm
Disclosed a fruit of pure Hesperian gold,
That smelt ambrosially, and while I looked
And listened, the full-flowing river of speech
Came down upon my heart.

"My own OENONE,
Beautiful-browed OENONE, my own soul,
Behold this fruit, whose gleaming rind ingraven
'For the most fair,' would seem award it thine
As lovelier than whatever Oread haunt
The knolls of Ida, loveliest in all grace
Of movement, and the charm of married brows."

"'Dear Mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
He prest the blossom of his lips to mine,
And added, "This was cast upon the board,
When all the full-faced presence of the gods
Hanged in the halls of Peleus; whereupon
Rose feud, with question unto whom 'twas due;
But light-foot Iris brought it yester-eve
Delivering, that to me, by common voice
Elected umpire, Her‚ comes to-day,
Pallas and Aphrodite, claiming each
This meed of fairest.  Thou within the cave
Beyond yon whispering tuft of oldest pine,
May'st well behold them unbeheld, unheard
Hear all, and see thy Paris judge of gods."'"

There was in Troy a celebrated statue of Minerva called the
Palladium.  It was said to have fallen from heaven, and the
belief was that the city could not be taken so long as this
statue remained within it.  Ulysses and Diomedes entered the city
in disguise, and succeeded in obtaining the Palladium, which they
carried off to the Grecian camp.

But Troy still held out, and the Greeks began to despair of ever
subduing it by force, and by advice of Ulysses resolved to resort
to stratagem.  They pretended to be making preparations to
abandon the siege, and a portion of the ships were withdrawn, and
lay hid behind a neighboring island.  The Greeks then constructed
an immense WOODEN HORSE, which they gave out was intended as a
propitiatory offering to Minerva, but in fact was filled with
armed men.  The remaining Greeks then betook themselves to their
ships and sailed away, as if for a final departure.  The Trojans,
seeing the encampment broken up and the fleet gone, concluded the
enemy to have abandoned the siege.  The gates were thrown open,
and the whole population issued forth rejoicing at the long-
prohibited liberty of passing freely over the scene of the late
encampment.  The great horse was the chief object of curiosity.
All wondered what it could be for.  Some recommended to take it
into the city as a trophy; others felt afraid of it.

While they hesitate, Laocoon, the priest of Neptune, exclaims,
"What madness, citizens, is this!  Have you not learned enough of
Grecian fraud to be on your guard against it?  For my part I fear
the Greeks even when they offer gifts."  So saying he threw his
lance at the horse's side.  It struck, and a hollow sound
reverberated like a groan.  Then perhaps the people might have
taken his advice and destroyed the fatal horse and all its
contents; but just at that moment a group of people appeared
dragging forward one who seemed a prisoner and a Greek.
Stupefied with terror he was brought before the chiefs, who
reassured him, promising that his life should be spared on
condition of his returning true answers to the questions asked
him.  He informed them that he was a Greek, Sinon by name, and
that in consequence of the malice of Ulysses he had been left
behind by his countrymen at their departure.  With regard to the
wooden horse, he told them that it was a propitiatory offering to
Minerva, and made so huge for the express purpose of preventing
its being carried within the city; for Calchas the prophet had
told them that if the Trojans took possession of it, they would
assuredly triumph over the Greeks.  This language turned the tide
of the people's feelings, and they began to think how they might
best secure the monstrous horse and the favorable auguries
connected with it, when suddenly a prodigy occurred which left no
room to doubt.  There appeared advancing over the sea two immense
serpents.  They came upon the land, and the crowd fled in all
directions.  The serpents advanced directly to the spot where
Laocoon stood with his two sons.  They first attacked the
children, winding round their bodies and breathing their
pestilential breath in their faces.  The father, attempting to
rescue them, is next seized and involved in the serpents' coils.
He struggles to tear them away, but they overpower all his
efforts and strangle him and the children in their poisonous
folds.  This event was regarded as a clear indication of the
displeasure of the gods at Laocoon's irreverent treatment of the
wooden horse, which they no longer hesitated to regard as a
sacred object and prepared to introduce with due solemnity into
the city.  This was done with songs and triumphal acclamations,
and the day closed with festivity.  In the night the armed men
who were enclosed in the body of the horse, being led out by the
traitor Sinon, opened the gates of the city to their friends who
had returned under cover of the night.  The city was set on fire;
the people, overcome with feasting and sleep, put to the sword,
and Troy completely subdued.

One of the most celebrated groups of statuary in existence is
that of Laocoon and his children in the embrace of the serpents.
"There is a cast of it in the Boston Athenaeum; the original is
in the Vatican at Rome.  The following lines are from the Childe
Harold of Byron:

"Now turning to the Vatican go see
Laocoon's torture dignifying pain;
A father's love and mortal's agony
With as immortal's patience blending;   vain
The struggle!  Vain against the coiling strain
And gripe and deepening of the dragon's grasp
The old man's clinch; the long envenomed chain
Rivets the living links; the enormous asp
Enforces pang on pang and stifles gasp on gasp."

The comic poets will also occasionally borrow a classical
allusion.  The following is from Swift's description of a City
Shower:

"Boxed in a chair the beau impatient sits,
While spouts run clattering o'er the roof by fits,
And over and anon with frightful din
The leather sounds; he trembles from within.
So when Troy chairmen bore the wooden steed
Pregnant with Greeks, impatient to be freed,
(Those bully Greeks, who, as the moderns do,
Instead of paying chairmen, run them through;)
Laocoon struck the outside with a spear,
And each imprisoned champion quaked with fear."

King Priam lived to see the downfall of his kingdom, and was
slain at last on the fatal night when the Greeks took the city.
He had armed himself and was about to mingle with the combatants,
but was prevailed on by Hecuba, his aged queen, to take refuge
with herself and his daughters as a suppliant at the altar of
Jupiter.  While there, his youngest son Polites, pursued by
Pyrrhus (Pyrrhus's exclamation, "Not such aid nor such defenders
does the time require," has become proverbial.), the son of
Achilles, rushed in wounded, and expired at the feet of his
father; whereupon Priam, overcome with indignation, hurled his
spear with feeble hand against Pyrrhus, and was forthwith slain
by him.

Queen Hecuba and her daughter Cassandra were carried captives to
Greece.  Cassandra had been loved by Apollo, and he gave her the
gift of prophecy; but afterwards offended with her, he rendered
the gift unavailing by ordaining that her predictions should
never be believed.  Polyxena, another daughter, who had been
loved by Achilles, was demanded by the ghost of this warrior, and
was sacrificed by the Greeks upon his tomb.

>From Schiller's poem "Cassandra":

"And men my prophet wail deride!
The solemn sorrow dies in scorn;
And lonely in the waste, I hide
The tortured heart that would forewarn.
Amid the happy, unregarded,
Mock'd by their fearful joy, I trod;
Oh, dark to me the lot awarded,
Thou evil Pythian God!

"Thine oracle, in vain to be,
Oh, wherefore am I thus consigned,
With eyes that every truth must see,
Lone in the city of the blind?
Cursed with the anguish of a power
To view the fates I may not thrall,
The hovering tempest still must lower,
The horror must befall!

Boots it th veil to lift, and give
To sight the frowning fates beneath?
For error is the life we live,
And, oh, our knowledge is but death!
Take back the clear and awful mirror,
Shut from my eyes the blood-red glare;
Thy truth is but the gift of terror,
When mortal lips declare.

"My blindness give to me once more,
They gay dim senses that rejoice;
The past's delighted songs are o'er
For lips that speak a prophet's voice.
To me the future thou hast granted;
I miss the moment from the chain
The happy present hour enchanted!
Take back thy gift again!"
Sir Edw. L. Bulwer's translation


MENELAUS AND HELEN

Our readers will be anxious to know the fate of Helen, the fair
but guilty occasion of so much slaughter.  On the fall of Troy
Menelaus recovered possession of his wife, who had not ceased to
love him, though she had yielded to the might of Venus and
deserted him for another.  After the death of Paris she aided the
Greeks secretly on several occasions, and in particular when
Ulysses and Diomedes entered the city in disguise to carry off
the Palladium.  She saw and recognized Ulysses, but kept the
secret, and even assisted them in obtaining the image.  Thus she
became reconciled to her husband, and they were among the first
to leave the shores of Troy for their native land.  But having
incurred the displeasure of the gods they were driven by storms
from shore to shore of the Mediterranean, visiting Cyprus,
Phoenicia and Egypt.  In Egypt they were kindly treated and
presented with rich gifts, of which Helen's share was a golden
spindle and a basket on wheels.  The basket was to hold the wool
and spools for the queen's work.

Dyer, in his poem of The Fleece, thus alludes to the incident:

"_________many yet adhere
To the ancient distaff at the bosom fixed.
Casting the whirling spindle as they walk.
.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
This was of old, in no inglorious days,
The mode of spinning, when the Egyptian prince
A golden distaff gave that beauteous nymph,
Too beauteous Helen; no uncourtly gift."

Milton also alludes to a famous recipe for an invigorating
draught, called Nepenthe, which the Egyptian queen gave to Helen:


"Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Thone
In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena,
Is of such power to stir up joy as this,
To life so friendly or so cool to thirst."
Comus

Menelaus and Helen at length arrived in safety at Sparta, resumed
their royal dignity, and lived and reigned in splendor; and when
Telemachus, the son of Ulysses, in search of his father, arrived
at Sparta, he found Menelaus and Helen celebrating the marriage
of their daughter Hermione to Neoptolemus, son of Achilles.

In "the Victory Feast," Schiller thus reviews the return of the
Greek heroes.

"The son of Atreus, king of men,
The muster of the hosts surveyed,
How dwindled from the thousands, when
Along Scamander first arrayed!
With sorrow and the cloudy thought,
The great king's stately look grew dim,
Of all the hosts to Ilion brought,
How few to Greece return with him!
Still let the song to gladness call,
For those who yet their home shall greet!
For them the blooming life is sweet;
Return is not for all!

"Nor all who reach their native land
May long the joy of welcome feel;
Beside the household gods may stand
Grim Murder, with awaiting steel
And they who 'scape the foe, may die
Beneath the foul, familiar glaive.
Thus he to whom prophetic eye
Her light the wise Minerva gave;
'Ah!  Bless'd, whose hearth, to memory true
The goddess keeps unstained and pure;
For woman's guile is deep and sure,
And falsehood loves the new!'

"The Spartan eyes his Helen's charms,
By the best blood of Greece recaptured;
Round that fair form his glowing arms
(A second bridal) wreath, enraptured.
Woe waits the work of evil birth,
Revenge to deeds unblessed is given!
For watchful o'er the things of earth,
The eternal council-halls of heaven.
Yes, ill shall never ill repay;
Jove to the impious hands that stain
The altar of man's heart,
Again the doomer's doom shall weigh!"
Sir Edw. L. Bulwer's translation


AGAMEMNON, ORESTES, AND ELECTRA

Agamemnon, the general-in-chief of the Greeks, the brother of
Menelaus, who had been drawn into the quarrel to avenge another's
wrongs, was not so fortunate in the issue as his brother.  During
his absence his wife Clytemnestra had been false to him, and when
his return was expected, she, with her paramour, AEgisthus, laid
a plan for his destruction, and at the banquet given to celebrate
his return, murdered him.

The conspirators intended also to slay his son Orestes, a lad not
yet old enough to be an object of apprehension, but from whom, if
he should be suffered to grow up, there might be danger.
Electra, the sister of Orestes, saved her brother's life by
sending him secretly away to his uncle Strophius, king of Phocis.
In the palace of Strophius, Orestes grew up with the king's son,
Pylades, and formed with him that ardent friendship which has
become proverbial.  Electra frequently reminded her brother hy
messengers of the duty of avenging his father's death, and when
grown up he consulted the oracle of Delphi, which confirmed him
in his design.  He therefore repaired in disguise to Argos,
pretending to he a messenger from Strophius, who had come to
announce the death of Orestes, and brought the ashes of the
deceased in a funeral urn.  After visiting his father's tomb and
sacrificing upon it, according to the rites of the ancients, he
made himself known to his sister Electra, and soon after slew
both AEgisthus and Clytemnestra.

This revolting act, the slaughter of a mother by her son, though
alleviated by the guilt of the victim and the express command of
the gods, did not fail to awaken in the breasts of the ancients
the same abhorrence that it does in ours.  The Eumenides,
avenging deities, seized upon Orestes, and drove him frantic from
land to land.  Pylades accompanied him in his wanderings, and
watched over him.  At length in answer to a second appeal to the
oracle, he was directed to go to Tauris in Scythia, and to bring
thence a statue of Diana which was believed to have fallen from
heaven.  Accordingly Orestes and Pylades went to Tauris, where
the barbarous people were accustomed to sacrifice to the goddess
all strangers who fell into their hands.  The two friends were
seized and carried bound to the temple to be made victims.  But
the priestess of Diana was no other than Iphigenia, the sister of
Orestes, who, our readers will remember, was snatched away by
Diana, at the moment when she was about to be sacrificed.
Ascertaining from the prisoners who they were, Iphigenia
disclosed herself to them, and the three made their escape with
the statue of the goddess, and returned to Mycenae.

But Orestes was not yet relieved from the vengeance of the
Erinnyes.  At length he took refuge with Minerva at Athens.  The
goddess afforded him protection, and appointed the court of
Areopagus to decide his fate.  The Erinnyes brought forward their
accusation, and Orestes made the command of the Delphic oracle
his excuse.  When the court voted and the voices were equally
divided, Orestes was acquitted by the command of Minerva.

Byron, in Childe Harold, Canto IV, alludes to the story of
Orestes:

"O thou who never yet of human wrong
Left the unbalanced scale, great Nemesis!
Thou who didst call the Furies from the abyss,
And round Orestes bade them howl and hiss,
For that unnatural retribution,   just,
Had it but been from hands less near,   in this,
Thy former realm, I call thee from the dust!"

One of the most pathetic scenes in the ancient drama is that in
which Sophocles represents the meeting of Orestes and Electra, on
his return from Phocis.  Orestes, mistaking Electra for one of
the domestics, and desirous of keeping his arrival a secret till
the hour of vengeance should arrive, produces the urn in which
his ashes are supposed to rest.  Electra, believing him to be
really dead, takes the urn, and embracing it, pours forth her
grief in language full of tenderness and despair.

Milton, in one of his sonnets, says:

"The repeated air
Of sad Electra's poet had the power
To save the Athenian walls from ruin bare."

This alludes to the story that when, on one occasion, the city of
Athens was at the mercy of her Spartan foes, and it was proposed
to destroy it, the thought was rejected upon the accidental
quotation, by some one, of a chorus of Euripides.


TROY

After hearing so much about the city of Troy and its heroes, the
reader will perhaps be surprised to learn that the exact site of
that famous city is still a matter of dispute.  There are some
vestiges of tombs on the plain which most nearly answers to the
description given by Homer and the ancient geographers, but no
other evidence of the former existence of a great city.  Byron
thus describes the present appearance of the scene:

"The winds are high, and Helle's tide
Rolls darkly heaving to the main;
And night's descending shadows hide
That field with blood bedewed in vain,
The desert of old Priam's pride,
The tombs, sole relics of his reign,
All   save immortal dreams that could beguile
The blind old man of Scio's rocky isle."
Bride of Abydos.


Chapter XXII

Adventures of Ulysses.   The Lotus-Eaters.   Cyclopes.   Circe.
Sirens.   Scylla and Charybdis.   Calypso

The romantic poem of the Odyssey is now to engage our attention.
It narrates the wanderings of Ulysses (Odysseus in the Greek
language) in his return from Troy to his own kingdom of Ithaca.

>From Troy the vessels first made land at Ismarus, a city of the
Ciconians, where, in a skirmish with the inhabitants, Ulysses
lost six men from each ship.  Sailing thence they were overtaken
by a storm which drove them for nine days along the sea till they
reached the country of the Lotus-eaters.  Here, after watering,
Ulysses sent three of his men to discover who the inhabitants
were.  These men on coming among the Lotus-eaters were kindly
entertained by them, and were given some of their own food, the
lotus-plant to eat.  The effect of this food was such that those
who partook of it lost all thoughts of home and wished to remain
in that country.  It was by main force that Ulysses dragged these
men away, and he was even obliged to tie them under the benches
of his ship.  (Tennyson in the Lotus-eaters has charmingly
expressed the dreamy languid feeling which the lotus-food is said
to have produced:

"How sweet it were, hearing the downward stream
With half-shut eyes ever to seem
Falling asleep in a half-dream!
To dream and dream, like yonder amber light
Which will not leave the myrrh-bush on the height;
To hear each other's whispered speech;
Eating the lotus, day by day,
To watch the crisping ripples on the beach,
And tender curving lines of creamy spray;
To lend our hearts and spirits wholly
To the influence of mild-minded melancholy;
To muse and brood and live again in memory,
With those old faces of our infancy
Heaped over with a mound of grass,
Two handfuls of white dust, shut in an urn of brass.")

They next arrived at the country of the Cyclopes.  The Cyclopes
were giants, who inhabited an island of which they were the only
possessors.  The name means "round eye," and these giants were so
called because they had but one eye, and that placed in the
middle of the forehead.  They dwelt in caves and fed on the wild
productions of the island and on what their flocks yielded, for
they were shepherds.  Ulysses left the main body of his ships at
anchor, and with one vessel went to the Cyclopes' island to
explore for supplies.  He landed with his companions, carrying
with them a jar of wine for a present, and coming to a large cave
they entered it, and finding no one within examined its contents.
They found it stored with the riches of the flock, quantities of
cheese, pails and bowls of milk, lambs and kids in their pens,
all in nice order.  Presently arrived the master of the cave,
Polyphemus, bearing an immense bundle of firewood, which he threw
down before the cavern's mouth.  He then drove into the cave the
sheep and goats to be milked, and, entering, rolled to the cave's
mouth an enormous rock, that twenty oxen could not draw.  Next he
sat down and milked his ewes, preparing a part for cheese, and
setting the rest aside for his customary drink.  Then turning
round his great eye he discerned the strangers, and growled out
to them, demanding who they were, and where from.  Ulysses
replied most humbly, stating that they were Greeks, from the
great expedition that had lately won so much glory in the
conquest of Troy; that they were now on their way home, and
finished by imploring his hospitality in the name of the gods.
Polyphemus deigned no answer, but reaching out his hand, seized
two of the Greeks, whom he hurled against the side of the cave,
and dashed out their brains.  He proceeded to devour them with
great relish, and having made a hearty meal, stretched himself
out on the floor to sleep.  Ulysses was tempted to seize the
opportunity and plunge his sword into him as he slept, but
recollected that it would only expose them all to certain
destruction, as the rock with which the giant had closed up the
door was far beyond their power to remove, and they would
therefore be in hopeless imprisonment.  Next morning the giant
seized two m