lenged to make an epigram on the
syllables di,do,dum.  He immediately replied in these lines:

 "When Dido found Aeneas would not come,
She wept in silence, and was Dido dumb.

PALINURUS

After touching at the island of Sicily, where Acestes, a prince
of Trojan lineage, bore sway, who gave them a hospitable
reception, the Trojans re-embarked, and held on their course for
Italy.  Venus now interceded with Neptune to allow her son at
last to attain the wished-for goal, and find an end of his perils
on the deep.  Neptune consented, stipulating only for one life as
a ransom for the rest.  The victim was Palinurus, the pilot.  As
he sat watching the stars, with his hand on the helm, Somnus,
sent by Neptune, approached in the guise of Phorbas and said,
"Palinurus, the breeze is fair, the water smooth, and the ship
sails steadily on her course.  Lie down a while and take needful
rest.  I will stand at the helm in your place."  Palinurus
replied, "Tell me not of smooth seas or favoring winds,   me who
have seen so much of their treachery.  Shall I trust AEneas to
the chances of the weather and winds?"  And he continued to grasp
the helm and to keep his eyes fixed on the stars.  But Somnus
waved over him a branch moistened with Lethaean dew, and his eyes
closed in spite of all his efforts.  Then Somnus pushed him
overboard and he fell; but keeping his hold upon the helm it came
away with him.  Neptune was mindful of his promise, and kept the
ship on her track without helm or pilot, till Aeneas discovered
his loss, and, sorrowing deeply for his faithful steersman, took
charge of the ship himself.

There is a beautiful allusion to the story of Palinurus in
Scott's Marmion, Introduction to Canto I., where the poet,
speaking of the recent death of William Pitt, says:

"Oh, think how, to his latest day,
When death just hovering claimed his prey,
With Palinure's unaltered mood,
Firm at his dangerous post he stood;
Each call for needful rest repelled,
With dying hand the rudder held,
Till in his fall, with fateful sway,
The steerage of the realm gave way."

The ships at last reached the shores of Italy, and joyfully did
the adventurers leap to land.  While his people were employed in
making their encampment AEneas sought the abode of the Sibyl.  It
was a cave connected with a temple and grove, sacred to Apollo
and Diana.  While Aeneas contemplated the scene, the Sibyl
accosted him.  She seemed to know his errand, and under the
influence of the deity of the place burst forth in a prophetic
strain, giving dark intimations of labors and perils through
which he was destined to make his way to final success.  She
closed with the encouraging words which have become proverbial:
"Yield not to disasters, but press onward the more bravely."
AEneas replied that he had prepared himself for whatever might
await him.  He had but one request to make.  Having been directed
in a dream to seek the abode of the dead in order to confer with
his father Anchises to receive from him a revelation of his
future fortunes and those of his race, he asked her assistance to
enable him to accomplish the task.  The Sibyl replied, "The
descent to Avernus is easy; the gate of Pluto stands open night
and day; but to retrace one's steps and return to the upper air,
that is the toil, that the difficulty.  She instructed him to
seek in the forest a tree on which grew a golden branch.  This
branch was to be plucked off, to be borne as a gift to
Proserpine, and if fate was propitious, it would yield to the
hand and quit its parent trunk, but otherwise no force could rend
it away.  If torn away, another would succeed.

AEneas followed the directions of the Sibyl.  His mother Venus
sent two of her doves to fly before him and show him the way, and
by their assistance he found the tree, plucked the branch, and
hastened back with it to the Sibyl.


Chapter XXV
The Infernal Regions   The Sibyl

At the commencement of our series we have given the pagan account
of the creation of the world, so as we approach its conclusion,
we present a view of the regions of the dead, depicted by one of
their most enlightened poets, who drew his doctrines from their
most esteemed philosophers.  The region where Virgil places the
entrance into this abode, is perhaps the most strikingly adapted
to excite ideas of the terrific and preternatural of any on the
face of the earth.  It is the volcanic region near Vesuvius,
where the whole country is cleft with chasms from which
sulphurous flames arise, while the ground is shaken with pent-up
vapors, and mysterious sounds issue from the bowels of the earth.
The lake Avernus is supposed to fill the crater of an extinct
volcano.  It is circular, half a mile wide, and very deep,
surrounded by high banks, which in Virgil's time were covered
with a gloomy forest.  Mephitic vapors rise from its waters, so
that no life is found on its banks, and no birds fly over it.
Here, according to the poet, was the cave which afforded access
to the infernal regions, and here AEneas offered sacrifices to
the infernal deities, Proserpine, Hecate, and the Furies.  Then a
roaring was heard in the earth, the woods on the hill-tops were
shaken, and the howling of dogs announced the approach of the
deities.  "Now," said the Sibyl, "summon up your courage, for you
will need it."  She descended into the cave, and AEneas followed.
Before the threshold of Hades they passed through a group of
beings who are Griefs and avenging Cares, pale Diseases and
melancholy Age, Fear and Hunger that tempt to crime, Toil,
Poverty, and Death, forms horrible to view.  The Furies spread
their couches there, and Discord, whose hair was of vipers tied
up with a bloody fillet.  Here also were the monsters, Briareus
with his hundred arms, Hydras hissing, and Chimaeras breathing
fire.  AEneas shuddered at the sight, drew his sword and would
have struck, had not the Sibyl restrained him.  They then came to
the black river Cocytus, where they found the ferryman, Charon,
old and squalid, but strong and vigorous, who was receiving
passengers of all kinds into his boat, high-souled heroes, boys
and unmarried girls as numerous as the leaves that fall at
autumn, or the flocks that fly southward at the approach of
winter.  They stood pressing for a passage, and longing to touch
the opposite shore.  But the stern ferryman took in only such as
he chose, driving the rest back.  AEneas, wondering at the sight,
asked the Sibyl, "Why this discrimination?: She answered, "Those
who are taken on board the bark are the souls of those who have
received due burial rites; the host of others who have remained
unburied, are not permitted to pass the flood, but wander a
hundred years, and flit to and fro about the shore, till at last
they are taken over."  AEneas grieved at recollecting some of his
own companions who had perished in the storm.  At that moment he
beheld Palinurus, his pilot, who fell overboard and was drowned.
He addressed him and asked him the cause of his misfortune.
Palinurus replied that the rudder was carried away, and he,
clinging to it, was swept away with it.  He besought Aeneas most
urgently to extend to him his hand and take him in company to the
opposite shore.  But the Sibyl rebuked him for the wish thus to
transgress the laws of Pluto, but consoled him by informing him
that the people of the shore where his body had been wafted by
the waves, should be stirred up by the prodigies to give it the
burial, and that the promontory should bear the name of Cape
Palinurus, which it does to this day.  Leaving Palinurus consoled
by these words, they approached the boat.  Charon, fixing his
eyes sternly upon the advancing warrior, demanded by what right
he, living and armed, approached the shore.  To which the Sibyl
replied that they would commit no violence, that AEneas's only
object was to see his father, and finally exhibited the golden
branch, at sight of which Charon's wrath relaxed, and he made
haste to turn his back to the shore, and receive them on board.
The boat, adapted only to the light freight of bodiless spirits,
groaned under the weight of the hero.  They were soon conveyed to
the opposite shore.  There they were encountered by the three-
headed dog Cerberus, with his necks bristling with snakes.  He
barked with all his three throats till the Sibyl threw him a
medicated cake, which he eagerly devoured, and then stretched
himself out in his den and fell asleep.  AEneas and the Sibyl
sprang to land.  The first sound that struck their ears was the
wailing of young children, who had died on the threshold of life,
and near to these were they who had perished under false charges.
Minos presides over them as judge, and examines the deeds of
each.  The next class was of those who had died by their own
hand, hating life and seeking refuge in death.  Oh, how willingly
would they now endure poverty, labor, and any other infliction,
if they might but return to life!  Next were situated the regions
of sadness, divided off into retired paths, leading through
groves of myrtle.  Here roamed those who had fallen victims to
unrequited love, not freed from pain even by death itself.  Among
these, AEneas thought he descried the form of Dido, with a wound
still recent.  In the dim light he was for a moment uncertain,
but approaching perceived it was indeed herself.  Tears fell from
his eyes, and he addressed her in the  accents of love.  "Unhappy
Dido!  Was then the rumor true that you had perished?  And was I,
alas! the cause!  I call the gods to witness that my departure
from you was reluctant, and in obedience to the commands of Jove;
nor could I believe that my absence would have cost you so dear.
Stop, I beseech you, and refuse me not a last farewell."  She
stood for a moment with averted countenance, and eyes fixed on
the ground, and then silently passed on, as insensible to his
pleadings as a rock.   AEneas followed for some distance; then,
with a heavy heart, rejoined his companion and resumed his route.

They next entered the fields where roam the heroes who have
fallen in battle.  Here they saw many shades of Grecian and
Trojan warriors.  The Trojans thronged around him, and could not
be satisfied with the sight.  They asked the cause of his coming,
and plied him with innumerable questions.  But the Greeks, at the
sight of his armor glittering through the murky atmosphere,
recognized the hero, and filled with terror turned their backs
and fled, as they used to flee on the plains of Troy.

AEneas would have lingered long with his Trojan friends but the
Sibyl hurried him away.  They next came to a place where the road
divided, the one leading to Elysium, the other to the regions of
the condemned.  AEneas beheld on one side the walls of a mighty
city, around which Phlegethon rolled its fiery waters.  Before
him was the gate of adamant that neither gods nor men can break
through.   An iron tower stood by the gate, on which Tisiphone,
the avenging Fury, kept guard.  From the city were heard groans,
and the sound of the scourge, the creaking of iron, and the
clanking of chains.  AEneas, horror-struck, inquired of his guide
what crimes were those whose punishments produced the sounds he
hear?   The Sibyl answered, "Here is the judgment-hall of
Rhadamanthus, who brings to light crimes done in life, which the
perpetrator vainly thought impenetrably hid.  Tisiphone applies
her whip of scorpions, and delivers the offender over to her
sister Furies.  At this moment with horrid clang the brazen gates
unfolded, and AEneas saw within, a Hydra with fifty heads,
guarding the entrance.  The Sibyl told him that the Gulf of
Tartarus descended deep, so that its recesses were as far beneath
their feet as heaven was high above their heads.  In the bottom
of this pit, the Titan race, who warred against the gods, lie
prostrate; Salmoneus, also, who presumed to vie with Jupiter, and
built a bridge of brass over which he drove his chariot that the
sound might resemble thunder, launching flaming brands at his
people in imitation of lightning, till Jupiter struck him with a
real thunderbolt, and taught him the difference between mortal
weapons and divine.  Here, also, is Tityus, the giant, whose form
is so immense that as he lies, he stretches over nine acres,
while a vulture preys upon his liver, which as fast as it is
devoured grows again, so that his punishment will have no end.

AEneas saw groups seated at tables loaded with dainties, while
near by stood a Fury who snatched away the viands from their
lips, as fast as they prepared to taste them.  Others beheld
suspended over their heads huge rocks, threatening to fall,
keeping them in a state of constant alarm.  These were they who
had hated their brothers, or struck their parents, or defrauded
the friends who trusted them, or who having grown rich, kept
their money to themselves, and gave no share to others; the last
being the most numerous class.  Here also were those who had
violated the marriage vow, or fought in a bad cause, or failed in
fidelity to their employers.  Here was one who had sold his
country for gold, another who perverted the laws, making them say
one thing today and another tomorrow.

Ixion was there fastened to the circumference of a wheel
ceaselessly revolving; and Sisyphus, whose task was to roll a
huge stone up to a hill-top, but when the steep was well-nigh
gained, the rock, repulsed by some sudden force, rushed again
headlong down to the plain.  Again he toiled at it, while the
sweat bathed all his weary limbs, but all to no effect.  There
was Tantalus, who stood in a pool, his chin level with the water,
yet he was parched with thirst, and found nothing to assuage it;
for when he bowed his hoary head, eager to quaff, the water fled
away, leaving the ground at his feet all dry.  Tall trees laden
with fruit stooped their heads to him, pears, pomegranates,
apples and luscious figs; but when with a sudden grasp he tried
to seize them, winds whirled them high above his reach.

The Sibyl now warned AEneas that it was time to turn from these
melancholy regions and seek the city of the blessed. They passed
through a middle tract of darkness, and came upon the Elysian
fields, the groves where the happy reside.  They breathed a freer
air, and saw all objects clothed in a purple light.  The region
has a sun and stars of its own.  The inhabitants were enjoying
themselves in various ways, some in sports on the grassy turf, in
games of strength or skill, others dancing or singing.  Orpheus
struck the chords of his lyre, and called forth ravishing sounds.
Here AEneas saw the founders of the Trojan state, high-souled
heroes who lived in happier times.  He gazed with admiration on
the war-chariots and glittering arms now reposing in disuse.
Spears stood fixed in the ground, and the horses, unharnessed,
roamed over the plain.  The same pride in splendid armor and
generous steeds which the old heroes felt in life, accompanied
them here.  He saw another group feasting, and listening to the
strains of music.  They were in a laurel grove, whence the great
river Po has its origin, and flows out among men.  Here dwelt
those who fell by wounds received in their country's cause, holy
priests, also, and poets who have uttered thoughts worthy of
Apollo, and others who have contributed to cheer and adorn life
by their discoveries in the useful arts, and have made their
memory blessed by rendering service to mankind.  They wore snow-
white fillets about their brows.  The Sibyl addressed a group of
these, and inquired where Anchises was to be found.  They were
directed where to seek him, and soon found him in a verdant
valley, where he was contemplating the ranks of his posterity,
their destinies and worthy deeds to be achieved in coming times.
When he recognized AEneas approaching, he stretched out both
hands to him, while tears flowed freely.  "Have you come at
last," said he, "long expected and do I behold you after such
perils past?  O my son, how have I trembled for you as I have
watched your career!"  To which AEneas replied, O father!  Your
image was always before me to guide and guard me.  Then he
endeavored to enfold his father in his embrace, but his arms
enclosed only an unsubstantial image.

AEneas perceived before him a spacious valley, with trees gently
waving to the wind, a tranquil landscape, through which the river
Lethe flowed.  Along the banks of the stream wandered a countless
multitude, numerous as insects in the summer air.  AEneas, with
surprise, inquired who were these.  Anchises answered, "They are
souls to which bodies are to be given in due time.  Meanwhile
they dwell on Lethe's bank, and drink oblivion of their former
lives."  "Oh, father!" said AEneas, "is it possible that any can
be so in love with life, as to wish to leave these tranquil seats
for the upper world?"  Anchises replied by explaining the plan of
creation.  The Creator, he told him, originally made the material
of which souls are composed, of the four elements, fire, air,
earth, and water, all which, when united, took the form of the
most excellent part, fire, and became FLAME.  This material was
scattered like seed among the heavenly bodies, the sun, moon, and
stars.  Of this seed the inferior gods created man and all other
animals, mingling it with various proportions of earth, by which
its purity was alloyed and reduced.  Thus the more earth
predominates in the composition, the less pure is the individual;
and we see men and women with their full-grown bodies have not
the purity of childhood.  So in proportion to the time which the
union of body and soul has lasted, is the impurity contracted by
the spiritual part.  This impurity must be purged away after
death, which is done by ventilating the souls in the current of
winds, or merging them in water, or burning out their impurities
by fire.  Some few, of whom Anchises intimates that he is one,
are admitted at once to Elysium, there to remain.  But the rest,
after the impurities of earth are purged away, are sent back to
life endowed with new bodies, having had the remembrance of their
former lives effectually washed away by the waters of Lethe.
Some, however, there still are, so thoroughly corrupted, that
they are not fit to be entrusted with human bodies, and these are
made into brute animals, lions, tigers, cats, dogs, monkeys, etc.
This is what the ancients called Metempsychosis, or the
transmigration of souls; a doctrine which is still held by the
natives of India, who scruple to destroy the life, even of the
most insignificant animal, not knowing but it may be one of their
relations in an altered form.

Anchises, having explained so much, proceeded to point out to
AEneas individuals of his race, who were hereafter to be born,
and to relate to him the exploits they should perform in the
world.  After this he reverted to the present, and told his son
of the events that remained to him to be accomplished before the
complete establishment of himself and his followers in Italy.
Wars were to be waged, battles fought, a bride to be won, and in
the result a Trojan state founded, from which should rise the
Roman power, to be in time the sovereign of the world.

AEneas and the Sybil then took leave of Anchises, and returned by
some short cut, which the poet does not explain, to the upper
world.

The Egyptian name of Hades was Amenti.  In the Revision of the
Scriptures the Revising Commission has substituted the word Hades
where "hell" was used in the version of King James.

ELYSIUM

Virgil, we have seen, places his Elysium under the earth, and
assigns it for a residence to the spirits of the blessed.  But in
Homer Elysium forms no part of the realms of the dead.  He places
it on the west of the earth, near Ocean, and described it as a
happy land, where there is neither snow, nor cold, nor rain, and
always fanned by the delightful breezes of Zephyrus.  Hither
favored heroes pass without dying, and live happy under the rule
of Rhadamanthus.  The Elysium of Hesiod and Pindar is in the
Isles of the Blessed, or Fortunate Islands, in the Western Ocean.
>From these sprang the legend of the happy island Atlantis.  This
blissful region may have been wholly imaginary, but possibly may
have sprung from the reports of some storm-driven mariners who
had caught a glimpse of the coast of America.

James Russell Lowell, in one of his shorter poems, claims for the
present age some of the privileges of that happy realm.
Addressing the Past, he says,

"Whatever of true life there was in thee,
Leaps in our age's veins.
.    .    .    .    .    .
"Here, 'mid the bleak waves of our strife and care,
Float the green 'Fortunate Isles,'
Where all thy hero-spirits dwell and share
Our martyrdoms and toils.
The present moves attended
With all of brave and excellent and fair
That made the old time splendid."

Milton alludes to the same fable in Paradise Lost, Book III.,
1.568.

"Like those Hesperian gardens famed of old,
Fortunate fields and groves and flowery vales,
Thrice happy isles."

And in Book II. he characterizes the rivers of Erebus according
to the meaning of their names in the Greek language:

"Abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate,
Sad Acheron of sorrow black and deep;
Cocytus named of lamentation loud
Heard on the rueful stream; fierce Phlegethon
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Far off from these a slow and silent stream.
Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks
Forthwith his former state and being forgets,
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain."

THE SIBYL

As AEneas and the Sibyl pursued their way back to earth, he said
to her, "Whether thou be a goddess or a mortal beloved by the
gods, by me thou shalt always be held in reverence.  When I reach
the upper air, I will cause a temple to be built to thy honor,
and will myself bring offerings."  "I am no goddess," said the
Sibyl; "I have no claim to sacrifice or offering.  I am mortal;
yet if I could have accepted the love of Apollo, I might have
been immortal.  He promised me the fulfilment of my wish, if I
would consent to be his.  I took a handful of sand, and holding
it forth, said, 'Grant me to see as many birthdays as there are
sand-grains in my hand.'  Unluckily I forgot to ask for enduring
youth.  This also he would have granted, could I have accepted
his love, but offended at my refusal, he allowed me to grow old.
My youth and youthful strength fled long ago.  I have lived seven
hundred years, and to equal the number of the sand-grains, I have
still to see three hundred springs and three hundred harvests.
My body shrinks up as years increase, and in time, I shall be
lost to sight, but my voice will remain, and future ages will
respect my sayings."

These concluding words of the Sibyl alluded to her prophetic
power.  In her cave she was accustomed to inscribe on leaves
gathered from the trees the names and fates of individuals.  The
leaves thus inscribed were arranged in order within the cave, and
might be consulted by her votaries.   But if perchance at the
opening of the door the wind rushed in and dispersed the leaves,
the Sibyl gave no aid to restoring them again, and the oracle was
irreparably lost.

The following legend of the Sibyl is fixed at a later date.  In
the reign of one of the Tarquins there appeared before the king a
woman who offered him nine books for sale.  The king refused to
purchase them, whereupon the woman went away and burned three of
the books, and returning offered the remaining books for the same
price she had asked for the nine.  The king again rejected them;
but when the woman, after burning three books more, returned and
asked for the three remaining the same price which she had before
asked for the nine, his curiosity was excited, and he purchased
the books.  They were found to contain the destinies of the Roman
state.  They were kept in the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus,
preserved in a stone chest, and allowed to be inspected only by
especial officers appointed for that duty, who on great occasions
consulted them and interpreted their oracles to the people.

There were various Sibyls; but the Cumaean Sibyl, of whom Ovid
and Virgil write, is the most celebrated of them.  Ovid's story
of her life protracted to one thousand years may be intended to
represent the various Sibyls as being only reappearances of one
and the same individual.

It is now believed that some of the most distinguished Sibyls
took the inspiration of their oracles from the Jewish scripture.
Readers interested in this subject will consult, "Judaism," by
Prof. F. Huidekoper.

Young, in the Night Thoughts, alludes to the Sibyl.  Speaking of
worldly Wisdom, he says:

"If future fate she plans 'tis all in leaves,
Like Sibyl, unsubstantial, fleeting bliss;
At the first blast it vanishes in air.
     .    .    .    .    .
As worldly schemes resemble Sibyl's leaves,
The good man's days to Sibyl's books compare,
The price still rising as in number less."


Chapter XXVI
Camilla   Evander   Nisus and Euryalus   Mezentius   Turnus

AEneas, having parted from the Sibyl and rejoined his fleet,
coasted along the shores of Italy and cast anchor in the mouth of
the Tiber.  The poet Virgil, having brought his hero to this
spot, the destined termination of his wanderings, invokes his
Muse to tell him the situation of things at that eventful moment.
Latinus, third in descent from Saturn, ruled the country.  He was
now old and had no male descendant, but had one charming
daughter, Lavinia, who was sought in marriage by many neighboring
chiefs, one of whom, Turnus, king of the Rutulians, was favored
by the wishes of her parents.  But Latinus had been warned in a
dream by his father Faunus, that the destined husband of Lavinia
should come from a foreign land.  From that union should spring a
race destined to subdue the world.

Our readers will remember that in the conflict with the Harpies,
one of those half-human birds had threatened the Trojans with
dire sufferings.  In particular she predicted that before their
wanderings ceased they should be pressed by hunger to devour
their tables.  This portent now came true; for as they took their
scanty meal, seated on the grass, the men placed their hard
biscuit on their laps, and put thereon whatever their gleanings
in the woods supplied.  Having dispatched the latter they
finished by eating the crusts.  Seeing which, the boy Iulus said
playfully, "See, we are eating our tables."  AEneas caught the
words and accepted the omen.  "All hail, promised land!" he
exclaimed, "this is our home, this our country!"  He then took
measures to find out who were the present inhabitants of the
land, and who their rulers.  A hundred chosen men were sent to
the village of Latinus, bearing presents and a request for
friendship and alliance.  They went and were favorably received.
Latinus immediately concluded that the Trojan hero was no other
than the promised son-in-law announced by the oracle.  He
cheerfully granted his alliance and sent back the messengers
mounted on steeds from his stables, and loaded with gifts and
friendly messages.

Juno, seeing things go thus prosperously for the Trojans, felt
her old animosity revive, summoned the Fury Alecto from Erebus,
and sent her to stir up discord.  The Fury first took possession
of the queen, Amata, and roused her to oppose in every way the
new alliance.  Alecto then sped to the city of Turnus, and
assuming the form of an old priestess, informed him of the
arrival of the foreigners and of the attempts of their prince to
rob him of his bride.  Next she turned her attention to the camp
of the Trojans.  There she saw the boy Iulus and his companions
amusing themselves with hunting.  She sharpened the scent of the
dogs, and led them to rouse up from the thicket a tame stag, the
favorite of Silvia, the daughter of Tyrrheus, the king's
herdsman.  A javelin from the hand of Iulus wounded the animal,
and he had only strength left to run homewards, and died at his
mistress' feet.  Her cries and tears roused her brothers and the
herdsmen, and they, seizing whatever weapons came to hand,
furiously assaulted the hunting party.  These were protected by
their friends, and the herdsmen were finally driven back with the
loss of two of their number.

These things were enough to rouse the storm of war, and the
queen, Turnus, and the peasants, all urged the old king to drive
the strangers from the country.  He resisted as long as he could,
but finding his opposition unavailing, finally gave way and
retreated to his retirement.

OPENING THE GATES OF JANUS

It was the custom of the country, when war was to be undertaken,
for the chief magistrate, clad in his robes of office, with
solemn pomp to open the gates of the temple of Janus, which were
kept shut as long as peace endured.  His people now urged the old
king to perform that solemn office, but he refused to do so.
While they contested, Juno herself, descending from the skies,
smote the doors with irresistible force and burst them open.
Immediately the whole country was in a flame.  The people rushed
from every side breathing nothing but war.

Turnus was recognized by all as leader; others joined as allies,
chief of whom was Mezentius, a brave and able soldier, but of
detestable cruelty.  He had been the chief of one of the
neighboring cities, but his people drove him out.  With him was
joined his son Lausus, a generous youth worthy of a better sire.

CAMILLA

Camilla, the favorite of Diana, a huntress and warrior, after the
fashion of the Amazons, came with her band of mounted followers,
including a select number of her own sex, and ranged herself on
the side of Turnus.  This maiden had never accustomed her fingers
to the distaff or the loom, but had learned to endure the toils
of war, and in speed to outstrip the wind.  It seemed as if she
might run over the standing corn without crushing it, or over the
surface of the water without dipping her feet.  Camilla's history
had been singular from the beginning.  Her father, Metabus,
driven from his city by civil discord, carried with him in his
flight his infant daughter.  As he fled through the woods, his
enemies in hot pursuit, he reached the bank of the river
Amazenus, which, swelled by rains, seemed to debar a passage.  He
paused for a moment, then decided what to do.  He tied the infant
to his lance with wrappers of bark, and, poising the weapon in
his upraised hand, thus addressed Diana: "Goddess of the woods!
I consecrate this maid to you;" then hurled the weapon with its
burden to the opposite bank.  The spear flew across the roaring
water.  His pursuers were already upon him, but he plunged into
the river and swam across, and found the spear with the infant
safe on the other side.  Thenceforth he lived among the
shepherds, and brought up his daughter in woodland arts.  While a
child she was taught to use the bow and throw the javelin.  With
her sling she could bring down the crane or the wild swan.  Her
dress was a tiger's skin.  Many mothers sought her for a
daughter-in-law, but she continued faithful to Diana,  and
repelled the thought of marriage.

There is an allusion to Camilla in those well-known lines of
Pope, in which, illustrating the rule that "the sound should be
an echo to the sense," he says,

"When Ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw,
The line too labors and the words move slow.
Not so when swift Camilla scours the plain,
Flies o'er th'unbendng corn or skims along the main."
Essay on Criticism

EVANDER

Such were the formidable allies that ranged themselves against
AEneas.  It was night, and he lay stretched in sleep on the bank
of the river, under the open heavens.  The god of the stream,
Father Tiber, seemed to raise his head above the willows, and to
say, "O goddess-born, destined possessor of the Latin realms,
this is the promised land, here is to be your home, here shall
terminate the hostility of the heavenly powers, if only you
faithfully persevere.  There are friends not far distant.
Prepare your boats and row up my stream; I will lead you to
Evander the Arcadian chief.  He has long been at strife with
Turnus and the Rutulians, and is prepared to become an ally of
yours.  Rise!  Offer your vows to Juno, and deprecate her anger.
When you have achieved your victory then think of me."  AEneas
woke and paid immediate obedience to the friendly vision.  He
sacrificed to Juno, and invoked the god of the river and all its
tributary fountains to lend their aid.  Then, for the first time,
a vessel filled with armed warriors floated on the stream of the
Tiber.  The river smoothed its waves and bade its current flow
gently, while, impelled by the vigorous strokes of the rowers,
the vessel shot rapidly up the stream.

About the middle of the day they came in sight of the scattered
buildings of the infant town where in after times the proud city
of Rome grew, whose glory reached the skies.  By chance the old
king, Evander, was that day celebrating annual solemnities in
honor of Hercules and all the gods.  Pallas, his son, and all the
chiefs of the little commonwealth stood by.  When they saw the
tall ship gliding onward through the wood, they were alarmed at
the sight, and rose from the tables.  But Pallas forbade the
solemnities to be interrupted, and seizing a weapon, stepped
forward to the river's bank.  He called aloud, demanding who they
were and what was their object.  AEneas, holding forth an olive-
branch, replied, "We are Trojans, friends to you and enemies to
the Rutulians.  We seek Evander, and offer to join our arms with
yours."  Pallas, in amazement at the sound of so great a name,
invited them to land, and when AEneas touched the shore he seized
his hand and held it long in friendly grasp.  Proceeding through
the wood they joined the king and his party, and were most
favorably received.  Seats were provided for them at the tables,
and the repast proceeded.

When the solemnities were ended all moved towards the city.  The
king, bending with age, walked between his son and AEneas, taking
the arm of one or the other of them, and with much variety of
pleasing talk shortening the way.  AEneas looked and listened
with delight, observing all the beauties of the scene, and
learning much of heroes renowned in ancient times.  Evander said,
"These extensive groves were once inhabited by fauns and nymphs,
and a rude race of men who sprang from the trees themselves, and
had neither laws nor social culture.  They knew not how to yoke
the cattle nor raise a harvest, nor provide from present
abundance for future want; but browsed like beasts upon the leafy
boughs, or fed voraciously on their hunted prey.  Such were they
when Saturn, expelled from Olympus by his sons, came among them
and drew together the fierce savages, formed them into society,
and gave them laws.  Such peace and plenty ensued that men ever
since have called his reign the golden age; but by degrees far
other times succeeded, and the thirst of gold and the thirst of
blood prevailed.  The land was a prey to successive tyrants, till
fortune and resistless destiny brought me hither, an exile from
my native land, Arcadia."

Having thus said, he showed him the Tarpeian rock, and the rude
spot then overgrown with bushes where in after times the Capitol
rose in all its magnificence.  He next pointed to some dismantled
walls, and said, "Here stood Janiculum, built by Janus, and there
Saturnia, the town of Saturn."  Such discourse brought them to
the cottage of poor Evander, whence they saw the lowing herds
roaming over the plain where now the proud and stately Forum
stands.  They entered, and a couch was spread for AEneas, well
stuffed with leaves and covered with the skin of the Libyan bear.

Next morning, awakened by the dawn and the shrill song of birds
beneath the eaves of his low mansion, old Evander rose.  Clad in
a tunic, and a panther's skin thrown over his shoulders, with
sandals on his feet, and his good sword girded to his side, he
went forth to seek his guest.  Two mastiffs followed him, his
whole retinue and body-guard.  He round the hero attended by his
faithful Achates, and, Pallas soon joining them, the old king
spoke thus:

"Illustrious Trojan, it is but little we can do in so great a
cause.  Our state is feeble, hemmed in on one side by the river,
on the other by the Rutulians.  But I propose to ally you with a
people numerous and rich, to whom fate has brought you at the
propitious moment.  The Etruscans hold the country beyond the
river.  Mezentius was their king, a monster of cruelty, who
invented unheard-of torments to gratify his vengeance.  He would
fasten the dead to the living, hand to hand and face to face, and
leave the wretched victims to die in that dreadful embrace.  At
length the people cast him out, him and his house.  They burned
his palace and slew his friends.  He escaped and took refuge with
Turnus, who protects him with arms.  The Etruscans' demand that
he shall be given up to deserved punishment, and would ere now
have attempted to enforce their demand; but their priests
restrain then, telling them that it is the will of heaven that no
native of the land shall guide them to victory, and that their
destined leader must come from across the sea.  They have offered
the crown to me, but I am too old to undertake such great
affairs, and my son is native-born, which precludes him from the
choice.  You, equally by birth and time of life, and fame in
arms, pointed out by the gods, have but to appear to be hailed as
their leader.  With you I will join Pallas, my son, my only hope
and comfort.  Under you he shall learn the art of war, and strive
to emulate your great exploits."

Then the king ordered horses to be furnished for the Trojan
chiefs, and AEneas, with a chosen band of followers and Pallas
accompanying, mounted and took the way to the Etruscan city,
having sent back the rest of his party in the ships.  AEneas and
his band safely arrived at the Etruscan camp and were received
with open arms by Tarchon, the Etruscan leader, and his
countrymen.

NISUS AND EURYALUS

In the meanwhile Turnus had collected his bands and made all
necessary preparations for the war.  Juno sent Iris to him with a
message inciting him to take advantage of the absence of AEneas
and surprise the Trojan camp.  Accordingly the attempt was made,
but the Trojans were found on their guard, and having received
strict orders from AEneas not to fight in his absence, they lay
still in their intrenchments, and resisted all the efforts of the
Rutulians to draw them in to the field.  Night coming on, the
army of Turnus in high spirits at their fancied superiority,
feasted and enjoyed themselves, and finally stretched themselves
on the field and slept secure.

In the camp of the Trojans things were far otherwise.  There all
was watchfulness and anxiety, and impatience for AEneas's return.
Nisus stood guard at the entrance of the camp, and Euryalus, a
youth distinguished above all in the army for graces of person
and fine qualities, was with him.  These two were friends and
brothers in arms.  Nisus said to his friend, "Do you perceive
what confidence and carelessness the enemy display?  Their lights
are few and dim, and the men seem all oppressed with wine or
sleep.  You know how anxiously our chiefs wish to send to AEneas,
and to get intelligence from him.  Now I am strongly moved to
make my way through the enemy's camp and to go in search of our
chief.  If I succeed, the glory of the deed will be enough reward
for me, and if they judge the service deserves anything more, let
them pay it to you."

Euryalus, all on fire with the love of adventure, replied, "Would
you then, Nisus, refuse to share your enterprise with me?  And
shall I let you go into such danger alone?  Not so my brave
father brought me up, nor so have I planned for myself when I
joined the standard of AEneas, and resolved to hold my life cheap
in comparison with honor."  Nisus replied, "I doubt it not, my
friend; but you know the uncertain event of such an undertaking,
and whatever may happen to me, I wish you to be safe.  You are
younger than I and have more of life in prospect.  Nor can I be
the cause of such grief to your mother, who has chosen to be here
in the camp with you rather than stay and live in peace with the
other matrons in Acestes' city."  Euryalus replied, "Say no more.
In vain you seek arguments to dissuade me.  I am fixed in the
resolution to go with you.  Let us lose no time."  They called
the guard, and committing the watch to them, sought the general's
tent.  They found the chief officers in consultation,
deliberating how they should send notice to AEneas of their
situation.  The offer of the two friends was gladly accepted,
they themselves were loaded with praises and promised the most
liberal rewards in case of success.  Iulus especially addressed
Euryalus, assuring him of his lasting friendship.  Euryalus
replied, "I have but one boon to ask.  My aged mother is with me
in the camp.    For me she left the Trojan soil, and would not
stay behind with the other matrons at the city of Acestes.  I go
now without taking leave of her.  I could not bear her tears nor
set at   nought he entreaties.  But do thou, I beseech thee,
comfort her in her distress.  Promise me that, and I shall go
more boldly into whatever dangers may present themselves."  Iulus
and the other chiefs were moved to tears, and promised to do all
his request.  "Your mother shall be mine," said Iulus, "and all
that I have promised to you shall be made good to her, if you do
not return to receive it."

The two friends left the camp and plunged at once into the midst
of the enemy.  They found no watch, no sentinels posted, but all
about, the sleeping soldiers strewn on the grass and among the
wagons.  The laws of war at that early day did not forbid a brave
man to slay a sleeping foe, and the two Trojans slew, as they
passed, such of the enemy as they could without exciting alarm.
In one tent Euryalus made prize of a helmet brilliant with gold
and plumes.  They had passed through the enemy's ranks without
being discovered, but now suddenly appeared a troop directly in
front of them, which, under Volscens, their leader, were
approaching the camp.  The glittering helmet of Euryalus caught
their attention, and Volscens hailed the two, and demanded who
and whence they were.  They made no answer, but plunged into the
wood.  The horsemen scattered in all directions to intercept
their flight.  Nisus had eluded pursuit and was out of danger,
but Euryalus being missing he turned back to seek him.  He again
entered the wood and soon came within sound of voices.  Looking
through the thicket he saw the whole band surrounding Euryalus
with noisy questions.  What should he do?  How extricate the
youth?  Or would it be better to die with him?

Raising his eyes to the moon which now shone clear, he said,
"Goddess!  Favor my effort!"  And aiming his javelin at one of
the leaders of the troop, struck him in the back and stretched
him on the plain with a death-blow.  In the midst of their
amazement another weapon flew, and another of the party fell
dead.  Volscens, the leader, ignorant whence the darts came,
rushed sword in hand upon Euryalus.  "You shall pay the penalty
of both," he said, and would have plunged the sword into his
bosom, when Nisus, who from his concealment saw the peril of his
friend, rushed forward, exclaiming, "'Twas I, 'twas I; turn your
swords against me, Rutulians; I did it; he only followed me as a
friend."  While he spoke the sword fell, and pierced the comely
bosom of Euryalus.  His head fell over on his shoulder, like a
flower cut down by the plough.  Nisus rushed upon Volscens and
plunged his sword into his body, and was himself slain on the
instant by numberless blows.

MEZENTIUS

AEneas, with his Etrurian allies, arrived on the scene of action
in time to rescue his beleaguered camp; and now the two armies
being nearly equal in strength, the war began in good earnest.
We cannot find space for all the details, but must simply record
the fate of the principal characters whom we have introduced to
our readers.  The tyrant Mezentius, finding himself engaged
against his revolted subjects, raged like a wild beast.  He slew
all who dared to withstand him, and put the multitude to flight
wherever he appeared.  At last he encountered AEneas, and the
armies stood still to see the issue.  Mezentius threw his spear,
which striking AEneas's shield glanced off and hit Anthor.  He
was a Grecian by birth, who had left Argos, his native city, and
followed Evander into Italy.  The poet says of him, with simple
pathos which has made the words proverbial, "He fell, unhappy, by
a wound intended for another, looked up to the skies, and dying
remembered sweet Argos."  AEneas now in turn hurled his lance.
It pierced the shield of Mezentius, and wounded him in the thigh.
Lausus, his son, could not bear the sight, but rushed forward and
interposed himself, while the followers pressed round Mezentius
and bore him away.  AEneas held his sword suspended over Lausus
and delayed to strike, but the furious youth pressed on and he
was compelled to deal the fatal blow.  Lausus fell, and AEneas
bent over him in pity.  "Hapless youth," he said, "what can I do
for you worthy of your praise?  Keep those arms in which you
glory, and fear not but that your body shall be restored to your
friends, and have due funeral honors."  So saying, he called the
timid followers, and delivered the body into their hands.

Mezentius meanwhile had been borne to the river-side, and washed
his wound.  Soon the news reached him of Lausus's death, and rage
and despair supplied the place of strength.  He mounted his horse
and dashed into the thickest of the fight, seeking AEneas.
Having found him, he rode round him in a circle, throwing one
javelin after another, while Aeneas stood fenced with his shield,
turning every way to meet them.   At last, after Mezentius had
three times made the circuit, AEneas threw his lance directly at
the horse's head.  It pierced his temples and he fell, while a
shout from both armies rent the skies.  Mezentius asked no mercy,
but only that his body might be spared the insults of his
revolted subjects, and be buried in the same grave with his son.
He received the fatal stroke not unprepared, and poured out his
life and his blood together.

While these things were doing in one part of the field, in
another Turnus encountered the youthful Pallas.  The contest
between champions so unequally matched could not be doubtful.
Pallas bore himself bravely, but fell by the lance of Turnus.
The victor almost relented when he saw the brave youth lying dead
at his feet, and spared to use the privilege of a conqueror in
despoiling him of his arms.  The belt only, adorned with studs
and carvings of gold, he took and clasped round his own body.
The rest he remitted to the friends of the slain.

After the battle there was a cessation of arms for some days to
allow both armies to bury their dead.  In this interval AEneas
challenged Turnus to decide the contest by single combat, but
Turnus evaded the challenge.  Another battle ensued, in which
Camilla, the virgin warrior, was chiefly conspicuous.  Her deeds
of valor surpassed those of the bravest warriors, and many
Trojans and Etruscans fell pierced with her darts or struck down
by her battle-axe.  At last an Etruscan named Aruns, who had
watched her long, seeking for some advantage, observed her
pursuing a flying enemy whose splendid armor offered a tempting
prize.  Intent on the chase she observed not her danger, and the
javelin of Aruns struck her and inflicted a fatal wound.  She
fell and breathed her last in the arms of her attendant maidens.
But Diana, who beheld her fate, suffered not her slaughter to be
unavenged.  Aruns, as he stole away, glad but frightened, was
struck by a secret arrow, launched by one of the nymphs of
Diana's train, and died ignobly and unknown.

At length the final conflict took place between AEneas and
Turnus.  Turnus had avoided the contest as long as he could, but
at last impelled by the ill success of his arms, and by the
murmurs of his followers, he braced himself to the conflict.  It
could not be doubtful.  On the side of AEneas were the expressed
decree of destiny, the aid of his goddess-mother at every
emergency, and impenetrable armor fabricated by Vulcan, at Venus'
request, for her son.  Turnus, on the other hand, was deserted by
his celestial allies, Juno having been expressly forbidden by
Jupiter to assist him any longer.  Turnus threw his lance, but it
recoiled harmless from the shield of AEneas.  The Trojan hero
then threw his, which penetrated the shield of Turnus, and
pierced his thigh.  Then Turnus' fortitude forsook him and he
begged for mercy; and AEneas would have given him his life, but
at the instant his eye fell on the belt of Pallas, which Turnus
had taken from the slaughtered youth.  Instantly his rage
revived, and exclaiming, "Pallas immolates thee with this blow,"
he thrust him through with his sword.

Here the AEneid closes, but the story goes that AEneas, having
triumphed over his foes, obtained Lavinia as his bride.  His son
Iulus founded the city of Alba Longa.  He, and his descendants
after him, reigned over the town for many years.  At length
Numitor and Amulius, two brothers, quarrelled about the kingdom.
Amulius seized the crown by force, cast out Numitor, and made his
daughter, Rhea Silvia, a Vestal Virgin.  The Vestal Virgins, the
priestesses of the goddess Vesta, were sworn to celibacy.  But
Rhea Silvia broke her vow, and gave birth, by the god Mars, to
the twins, Romulus and Remus.  For this offence she was buried
alive, the usual punishment accorded to unfaithful Vestals, while
the children were exposed on the river Tiber.  Romulus and Remus,
however, were rescued by a herdsman, and were educated among the
shepherds in ignorance of their parentage.  But chance revealed
it to them.  They collected a band of friends, and took revenge
on their granduncle for the murder of their mother.  Afterwards
they founded, by the side of the river Tiber, where they had been
exposed in infancy, the city of Rome.


Chapter XXVII
Pythagoras.   Egyptian Deities.   Oracles

The teachings of Anchises to AEneas, respecting the nature of the
human soul, were in conformity with the doctrines of the
Pythagoreans.  Pythagoras (born, perhaps, about five hundred and
forty years B.C.) was a native of the island of Samos, but passed
the chief portion of his life at Crotona in Italy.  He is
therefore sometimes called "the Samian," and sometimes "the
philosopher of Crotona."  When young he travelled extensively and
is said to have visited Egypt, where he was instructed by the
priests in all their learning, and afterwards journeyed to the
East, and visited the Persian and Chaldean Magi, and the Brahmins
of India.

But Pythagoras left no writings which have been preserved.  His
immediate disciples were under a pledge of secrecy.  Though he is
referred to by many writers, at times not far distant from his
own, we have no biography of him written earlier than the end of
the second century of our era.  In the interval between his life
and this time, every sort of fable collected around what was
really known of his life and teaching.

At Crotona, where he finally established himself, it is said that
his extraordinary qualities collected round him a great number of
disciples.  The inhabitants were notorious for luxury and
licentiousness, but the good effects of his influence were soon
visible.  Sobriety and temperance succeeded.  Six hundred of the
inhabitants became his disciples and enrolled themselves in a
society to aid each other in the pursuit of wisdom; uniting their
property in one common stock, for the benefit of the whole.  They
were required to practise the greatest purity and simplicity of
manners.  The first lesson they learned was SILENCE; for a time
they were required to be only hearers.  "He (Pythagoras) said
so," (Ipse dixit,) was to be held by them as sufficient, without
any proof.  It was only the advanced pupils, after years of
patient submission, who were allowed to ask questions and to
state objections.

Pythagoras is said to have considered NUMBERS as the essence and
principle of all things, and attributed to them