rvive him, and be read wherever the Roman name was
known."

The prediction above alluded to is contained in the closing lines
of the Metamorphoses, of which we give a literal translation
below:

"And now I close my work, which not the ire
Of Jove, nor tooth of time, nor sword, nor fire
Shall bring to nought.  Come when it will that day
Which o'er the body, not the mind, has sway,
And snatch the remnant of my life away,
My better part above the stars shall soar,
And my renown endure for evermore.
Where'er the Roman arms and arts shall spread,
There by the people shall my book be read;
And, if aught true in poet's visions be,
My name and fame have immortality."


Chapter XXIX
Modern Monsters:   The Phoenix   Basilisk   Unicorn   Salamander

There is a set of imaginary beings which seem to have been the
successors of the "Gorgons, Hydras, and Chimeras dire" of the old
superstitions, and, having no connection with the false gods of
Paganism, to have continued to enjoy an existence in the popular
belief after Paganism was superseded by Christianity.  They are
mentioned perhaps by the classical writers, but their chief
popularity and currency seem to have been in more modern times.
We seek our accounts of them not so much in the poetry of the
ancients, as in the old natural history books and narrations of
travellers.  The accounts which we are about to give are taken
chiefly from the Penny Cyclopedia.

THE PHOENIX

Ovid tells the story of the Phoenix as follows: "Most beings
spring from other individuals; but there is a certain kind which
reproduces itself.  The Assyrians call it the Phoenix.  It does
not live on fruit or flowers, but on frankincense and odoriferous
gums.  When it has lived five hundred years, it builds itself a
nest in the branches of an oak, or on the top of a palm-tree.  In
this it collects cinnamon, and spikenard, and myrrh, and of these
materials builds a pile on which it deposits itself, and dying,
breathes out its last breath amidst odors.  From the body of the
parent bird a young Phoenix issues forth, destined to live as
long a life as its predecessor.   When this has grown up and
gained sufficient strength, it lifts its nest from the tree (its
own cradle and its parent's sepulchre) and carries it to the city
of Heliopolis in Egypt, and deposits it in the temple of the
Sun."

Such is the account given by a poet.  Now let us see that of a
philosophic historian.  Tacitus says, "In the consulship of
Paulus Fabius (A.D. 34), the miraculous bird known to the world
by the name of Phoenix, after disappearing for a series of ages,
revisited Egypt.  It was attended in its flight by a group of
various birds, all attracted by the novelty, and gazing with
wonder at so beautiful an appearance."  He then gives an account
of the bird, not varying materially from the preceding, but
adding some details.  "The first care of the young bird as soon
as fledged and able to trust to his wings is to perform the
obsequies of his father.  But this duty is not undertaken rashly.
He collects a quantity of myrrh, and to try his strength makes
frequent excursions with a load on his back.  When he has gained
sufficient confidence in his own vigor, he takes up the body of
his father and flies with it to the altar of the Sun, where he
leaves it to be consumed in flames of fragrance."  Other writers
add a few particulars.  The myrrh is compacted in the form of an
egg, in which the dead Phoenix is enclosed.  From the mouldering
flesh of the dead bird a worm springs, and this worm, when grown
large, is transformed into a bird.  Herodotus DESCRIBES the bird,
though he says, "I have not seen it myself, except in a picture.
Part of his plumage is gold-colored, and part crimson; and he is
for the most part very much like an eagle in outline and bulk."

The first writer who disclaimed a belief in the existence of the
Phoenix was Sir Thomas Browne, in his Vulgar Errors, published in
1646.  He was replied to a few years later by Alexander Ross, who
says, in answer to the objection of the Phoenix so seldom making
his appearance, "His instinct teaches him to keep out of the way
of the tyrant of the creation, MAN, for if he were to be got at
some wealthy glutton would surely devour him, though there were
no more in the world."

Dryden, in one of his early poems, has this allusion to the
Phoenix:

"So when the new-born Phoenix first is seen,
Her feathered subjects all adore their queen,
And while she makes her progress through the East,
>From every grove her numerous train's increased;
Each poet of the air her glory sings,
And round him the pleased audience clap their wings."

Milton, in Paradise lost, Book V, compares the angel Raphael
descending to earth to a Phoenix:

"Down thither, prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing,
Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
Winnows the buxom air; till within soar
Of towering eagles, to all the fowls he seems
A Phoenix, gazed by all; as that sole bird
When, to enshrine his relics in the Sun's
Bright temple, to Egyptian Thebes he flies."

 THE COCKATRICE, OR BASILISK

This animal was called the king of the serpents.  In confirmation
of his royalty, he was said to be endowed with a crest or comb
upon the head, constituting a crown.  He was supposed to be
produced from the egg of a cock hatched under toads or serpents.
There were several species of this animal.  One species burned up
whatever they approached; a second were a kind of wandering
Medusa's heads, and their look caused an instant horror, which
was immediately followed by death.  In Shakespeare's play of
Richard the Third, Lady Anne, in answer to Richard's compliment
on her eyes, says, "Would they were basilisk's, to strike thee
dead!"

The basilisks were called kings of serpents because all other
serpents and snakes, behaving like good subjects, and wisely not
wishing to be burned up or struck dead, fled the moment they
heard the distant hiss of their king, although they might be in
full feed upon the most delicious prey, leaving the sole
enjoyment of the banquet to the royal monster.

The Roman naturalist Pliny thus describes him: "He does not impel
his body like other serpents, by a multiplied flexion, but
advances lofty and upright.  He kills the shrubs, not only by
contact but by breathing on them, and splits the rocks, such
power of evil is there in him. It was formally believed that if
killed by a spear from on horseback the power of the poison
conducted through the weapon killed not only the rider but the
horse also.  To this Lucan alludes in these lines:

"What though the Moor the basilisk hath slain,
And pinned him lifeless to the sandy plain,
Up through the spear the subtle venom flies,
The hand imbibes it, and the victor dies."

Such a prodigy was not likely to be passed over in the legends of
the saints.  Accordingly we find it recorded that a certain holy
man going to a fountain in the desert suddenly beheld a basilisk.
He immediately raised his eyes to heaven, and with a pious appeal
to the Deity, laid the monster dead at his feet.

These wonderful powers of the basilisk are attested by a host of
learned persons, such as Galen, Avicenna, Scaliger, and others.
Occasionally one would demur to some part of the tale while he
admitted the rest.  Jonston, a learned physician, sagely remarks,
"I would scarcely believe that it kills with its look, for who
could have seen it and lived to tell the story?"  The worthy sage
was not aware that those who went to hunt the basilisk of this
sort, took with them a mirror, which reflected back the deadly
glare upon its author, and by a kind of poetical justice slew the
basilisk with his own weapon.

But what was to attack this terrible and unapproachable monster?
There is an old saying that "everything has its enemy," and the
cockatrice quailed before the weasel.  The basilisk might look
daggers, the weasel cared not, but advanced boldly to the
conflict.  When bitten, the weasel retired for a moment to eat
some rue, which was the only plant the basilisks could not
wither, returned with renewed strength and soundness to the
charge, and never left the enemy till he was stretched dead on
the plain.  The monster, too, as if conscious of the irregular
way in which he came into the world, was supposed to have a great
antipathy to a cock; and well he might, for as soon as he heard
the cock crow he expired.

The basilisk was of some use after death.  Thus we read that its
carcass was suspended in the temple of Apollo, and in private
houses, as a sovereign remedy against spiders, and that it was
also hung up in the temple of Diana, for which reason no swallow
ever dared enter the sacred place.

The reader will, we apprehend, by this time have had enough of
absurdities, but still he may be interested to know that these
details come from the work of one who was considered in his time
an able and valuable writer on Natural History.  Ulysses
Aldrovandus was a celebrated naturalist of the sixteenth century,
and his work on natural history, in thirteen folio volumes,
contains with much that is valuable a large proportion of fables
and inutilities.  In particular he is so ample on the subject of
the cock and the bull, that from his practice all rambling,
gossiping tales of doubtful credibility are called COCK AND BULL
STORIES.  Still he is to be remembered with respect as the
founder of a botanic garden, and one of the leaders in the modern
habit of making scientific collections for research and inquiry.

Shelley, in his Ode to Naples, full of the enthusiasm excited by
the intelligence of the proclamation of a Constitutional
Government at Naples, in 1820, thus uses an allusion to the
basilisk:

"What though Cimmerian anarchs dare blaspheme
Freedom and thee?  A new Actaeon's error
Shall theirs have been,   devoured by their own bounds!
Be thou like the imperial basilisk,
Killing thy foe with unapparent wounds!
Gaze on oppression, till at that dread risk,
Aghast she pass from the earth's disk.
Fear not, but gaze,   for freemen mightier grow,
And slaves more feeble, gazing on their foe."

THE UNICORN

Pliny, the Roman naturalist, out of whose account of the unicorn
most of the modern unicorns have been described and figured,
records it as "a very ferocious beast, similar in the rest of its
body to a horse, with the head of a deer, the feet of an
elephant, the tail of a boar, a deep bellowing voice, and a
single black horn, two cubits in length, standing out in the
middle of its forehead."  He adds that "it cannot be taken
alive;" and some such excuse may have been necessary in those
days for not producing the living animal upon the arena of the
amphitheatre.

The unicorn seems to have been a sad puzzle to the hunters, who
hardly knew how to come at so valuable a piece of game.  Some
described the horn as moveable at the will of the animal, a kind
of small sword in short, with which ho hunter who was not
exceedingly cunning in fence could have a chance.  Others
maintained that all the animal's strength lay in its horn, and
that when hard pressed in pursuit, it would throw itself from the
pinnacle of the highest rocks horn foremost, so as to pitch upon
it, and then quietly march off not a whit the worse for its fall.

But it seems they found out how to circumvent the poor unicorn at
last.  They discovered that it was a great lover of purity and
innocence, so they took the field with a young VIRGIN, who was
placed in the unsuspecting admirer's way.  When the unicorn spied
her, he approached with all reverence, couched beside her, and
laying his head in her lap, fell asleep.  The treacherous virgin
then gave a signal, and the hunters made in and captured the
simple beast.

Modern zoologists, disgusted as they well may be with such fables
as these, disbelieve generally the existence of the unicorn.  Yet
there are animals bearing on their heads a bony protuberance more
or less like a horn, which may have given rise to the story.  The
rhinoceros horn, as it is called, is such a protuberance, though
it does not exceed a few inches in height, and is far from
agreeing with the descriptions of the horn of the unicorn.  The
nearest approach to a horn in the middle of the forehead is
exhibited in the bony protuberance on the forehead of the
giraffe; but this also is short and blunt, and is not the only
horn of the animal, but a third horn standing in front of the two
others.  In fine, though it would be presumptuous to deny the
existence of a one-horned quadruped other than the rhinoceros, it
may be safely stated that the insertion of a long and solid horn
in the living forehead of a horse-like or deer-like animal, is as
near an impossibility as any thing can be.

THE SALAMANDER

The following is from the Life of Benvenuto Cellini, an Italian
artist of the sixteenth century, written by himself, "When I was
about five years of age, my father happening to be in a little
room in which they had been washing, and where there was a good
fire of oak burning, looked into the flames and saw a little
animal resembling a lizard, which could live in the hottest part
of that element.  Instantly perceiving what it was he called for
my sister and me, and after he had shown us the creature, he gave
me a box on the ear.  I fell a crying, while he, soothing me with
caresses, spoke these words: 'My dear child, I do not give you
that blow for any fault you have committed, but that you may
recollect that the little creature you see in the fire is a
salamander; such a one as never was beheld before to my
knowledge.'  So saying he embraced me, and gave me some money."

It seems unreasonable to doubt a story of which signor Cellini
was both an eye and ear witness.  Add to which the authority of
numerous sage philosophers, at the head of whom are Aristotle and
Pliny, affirms this power of the salamander.  According to them,
the animal not only resists fire, but extinguishes it, and when
he sees the flame, charges it as an enemy which he well knows how
to vanquish.

That the skin of an animal which could resist the action of fire
should be considered proof against that element, is not to be
wondered at.  We accordingly find that a cloth made of the skins
of salamanders (for there really is such an animal, a kind of
lizard) was incombustible, and very valuable for wrapping up such
articles as were too precious to be intrusted to any other
envelopes.  These fire-proof cloths were actually produced, said
to be made of salamander's wool, though the knowing ones detected
that the substance of which they were composed was Asbestos, a
mineral, which is in fine filaments capable of being woven into a
flexible cloth.

The foundation of the above fables is supposed to be the fact
that the salamander really does secrete from the pores of his
body a milky juice, which, when he is irritated, is produced in
considerable quantity, and would doubtless, for a few moments,
defend the body from fire.  Then it is a hibernating animal, and
in winter retires to some hollow tree or other cavity, where it
coils itself up and remains in a torpid state till the spring
again calls it forth.  It may therefore sometimes be carried with
the fuel to the fire, and wake up only time enough to put forth
all its faculties for its defence.  Its viscous juice would do
good service, and all who profess to have seen it acknowledge
that it got out of the fire as fast as its legs could carry it;
indeed too fast for them ever to make prize of one, except in one
instance, and in that one, the animal's feet and some parts of
its body were badly burned.

Dr. Young, in the Night Thoughts, with more quaintness than good
taste, compares the sceptic who can remain unmoved in the
contemplation of the starry heavens, to a salamander unwarmed in
the fire:

"An undevout astronomer is mad!
*    *    *    *    *    *
Oh, what a genius must inform the skies!
And is Lorenzo's salamander-heart
Cold and untouched amid these sacred fires?"


Chapter XXX
Eastern Mythology   Zoroaster   Hindu Mythology   Castes   Buddha
  Grand Lama

During the last fifty years new attention has been paid to the
systems of religion of the Eastern world, especially to that of
Zoroaster among the Persians, and that which is called Brahmanism
and the rival system known as Buddhism in the nations farther
east.  Especial interest belongs to these inquiries for us,
because these religions are religions of the great Aryan race to
which we belong.  The people among whom they were introduced all
used some dialect of the family of language to which our own
belongs.  Even young readers will take an interest in such books
as Clarke's Great Religions and Johnson's Oriental Religions,
which are devoted to careful studies of them.

Our knowledge of the religion of the ancient Persians is
principally derived from the Zendavesta, or sacred books of that
people.  Zoroaster was the founder of their religion, or rather
the reformer of the religion which preceded him. The time when he
lived is doubtful, but it is certain that his system became the
dominant religion of Western Asia from the time of Cyrus (550
B.C.) to the conquest of Persia by Alexander the Great.  Under
the Macedonian monarchy the doctrines of Zoroaster appear to have
been considerably corrupted by the introduction of foreign
opinions, but they afterwards recovered their ascendancy.

Zoroaster taught the existence of a supreme being, who created
two other mighty beings, and imparted to them so much of his own
nature as seemed good to him.  Of these, Ormuzd (called by the
Greeks Oromasdes) remained faithful to his creator, and was
regarded as the source of all good, while Ahriman (Arimanes)
rebelled, and became the author of all evil upon the earth.
Ormuzd created man, and supplied him with all the materials of
happiness; but Ahriman marred this happiness by introducing evil
into the world, and creating savage beasts and poisonous reptiles
and plants.  In consequence of this, evil and good are now
mingled together in every part of the world, and the followers of
good and evil   the adherents of Ormuzd and Ahriman   carry on
incessant war.  But this state of things will not last forever.
The time will come when the adherents of Ormuzd shall everywhere
be victorious, and Ahriman and his followers be consigned to
darkness forever.

The religious rites of the ancient Persians were exceedingly
simple.  They used neither temples, altars, nor statues, and
performed their sacrifices on the tops of mountains.  They adored
fire, light, and the sun, as emblems of Ormuzd, the source of all
light and purity, but did not regard them as independent deities.
The religious rites and ceremonies were regulated by the priests,
who were called Magi.  The learning of the Magi was connected
with astrology and enchantment, in which they were so celebrated
that their name was applied to all orders of magicians and
enchanters.

"As to the age of the books of the Zendavesta, and the period at
which Zoroaster lived, there is the greatest difference of
opinion.  He is mentioned by Plato, who speaks of 'the magic (or
religious doctrines) of Zoroaster the Ormazdian.'  As Plato
speaks of his religion as something established in the form of
Magism, or the system of the Medes in West Iran, which the Avesta
appears to have originated in Bactria, or East Iran, this already
carries the age of Zoroaster back to at least the sixth or
seventh century before Christ.
     *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

"Professor Whitney of New Haven places the epoch of Zoroaster at
'least B.C. 1000,' and adds that all attempts to reconstruct
Persian chronology or history prior to the reign of the first
Sassanid have been relinquished as futile.  Dollinger thinks he
may have been 'somewhat later than Moses, perhaps about B.C.
1300,' but says 'it is impossible to fix precisely' when he
lived.  Rawlinson merely remarks that Berosus places him anterior
to B.C. 2234.  Haug is inclined to date the Gathas, the oldest
songs of the Avesta, as early as the time of Moses.  Rapp, after
a thorough comparison of ancient writers, concludes that
Zoroaster lived B.C. 1200 or 1300.  In this he agrees with
Duncker, who, as we have seen, decided upon the same date.  It is
not far from the period given by the oldest Greek writer who
speaks of Zoroaster,   Xanthus of Sardis, a contemporary of
Darius.  It is the period given by Cephalion, a writer of the
second century, who takes it from three independent sources.  We
have no sources now open to us which enable us to come nearer
than this to the time in which he lived.

"Nor is anything known with certainty of the place where he
lived, or the events of his life.  Most modern writers suppose
that he resided in Bactria.  Haug maintains that the language of
the Zend books is Bactrian.  A highly mythological and fabulous
life of Zoroaster, translated by Anquetil du Perron, called the
Zartrisht-Namah, describes him as going to Iran in his thirtieth
year, spending twenty years in the desert, working miracles
during ten years, and giving lessons of philosophy in Babylon,
with Pythagoras as his pupil.  All this is based on the theory
(now proved to be false) of his living in the time of Darius.
'The language of the Avesta,' says Max Muller, 'is so much more
primitive than the inscriptions of Darius, that many centuries
must have passed between the two periods represented by these two
strata of language.  These inscriptions are in the Achaemenian
dialect, which is the Zend in a later stage of linguistic
growth.;"
J. Freeman Clarke - Ten Great Religions

Wordsworth thus alludes to the worship of the Persians:

"  the Persian,   zealous to reject
Altar and Image, and the inclusive walls
And roofs of temples built by human hands,
The loftiest heights ascending from their tops,
With myrtle-wreathed Tiara on his brows,
Presented sacrifice to Moon and Stars
And to the Winds and mother Elements,
And the whole circle of the Heavens, for him
A sensitive existence and a God."
       Excursion, Book IV

In Childe Harold, Byron speaks thus of the Persian worship:

"Not gainly did the early Persian make
His altar the high places and the peak
Of earth o'ergazing mountains, and thus take
A fit and unwalled temple, there to seek
The Spirit, in whose honor shrines are weak,
Upreared of human hands.  Come and compare
Columns and idol-dwellings, Goth or Greek,
With Nature's realms of worship, earth and air,
Nor fix on fond abodes to circumscribe thy prayer."
  III., 91.

The religion of Zoroaster continued to flourish even after the
introduction of Christianity, and in the third century was the
dominant faith of the East, till the rise of the Mahometan power
and the conquest of Persia by the Arabs in the seventh century,
who compelled the greater number of the Persians to renounce
their ancient faith.  Those who refused to abandon the religion
of their ancestors fled to the deserts of Kerman and to
Hindustan, where they still exist under the name of Parsees, a
name derived from Pars, the ancient name of Persia.  The Arabs
call them Guebers, from an Arabic word signifying unbelievers.
At Bombay the Parsees are at this day a very active, intelligent,
and wealthy class.  For purity of life, honesty, and conciliatory
manners, they are favorably distinguished.  They have numerous
temples to Fire, which they adore as the symbol of the divinity.

The Persian religion makes the subject of the finest tale in
Moore's Lalla Rookh, the Fire Worshippers.  The Gueber chief
says:

"Yes!  I am of that impious race,
Those slaves of Fire, that moan and even
Hail their creator's dwelling place
Among the living lights of heaven;
Yes!  I am of that outcast crew
To lean and to vengeance true,
Who curse the hour your Arabs came
To desecrate our shrines of flame,
And swear before God's burning eye,
To break our country's chains or die."

HINDU MYTHOLOGY

The religion of the Hindus is professedly founded on the Vedas.
To these books of their scripture they attach the greatest
sanctity, and state that Brahma himself composed them at the
creation.  But the present arrangement of the Vedas is attributed
to the sage Vyasa, about five thousand years ago.

The Vedas undoubtedly teach the belief of one supreme God.  The
name of this deity is Brahma.  His attributes are represented by
the three personified powers of CREATION, PRESERVATION, and
DESTRUCTION, which, under the respective names of Brahma, Vishnu,
and Siva, form the TRIMURTI or triad of principal Hindu gods.  Of
the inferior gods the most important are, 1. Indra, the god of
heaven, of thunder, lightning, storm, and rain; 2. Agni, the god
of fire; 3. Yana, the god of the infernal regions; 4. Surya, the
god of the sun.

Brahma is the creator of the universe, and the source from which
all the individual deities have sprung, and into which all will
ultimately be absorbed.  "As milk changes to curd, and water to
ice, so is Brahma variously transformed and diversified, without
aid of exterior means of any sort.  The human soul, according to
the Vedas, is a portion of the supreme ruler, as a spark is of
the fire.

"BRAHMA, at first a word meaning prayer and devotion, becomes in
the laws of Manu the primal God, first-born of the creation, from
the self-existent being, in the form of a golden egg.  He became
the creator of all things by the power of prayer.  In the
struggle for ascendancy, which took place between the priests and
the warriors, Brahma naturally became the deity of the former.
But, meantime, as we have seen, the worship or Vishnu had been
extending itself in one region, and that of Siva in another.
Then took place those mysterious wars between the kings of the
Solar and Lunar races, of which the great epics contain all that
we know.  And at the close of these wars a compromise was
apparently accepted, by which Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva were
united in one supreme God, as creator, preserver, and destroyer,
all in one.

It is almost certain that this Hindoo Triad was the result of an
ingenious and successful attempt, on the part of the Brahmans, to
unite all classes of worshippers in India against the Buddhists.
In this sense the Brahmans edited anew the Mahabharata, inserting
in that epic passages extolling Vishnu in the form of Krishna.
The Greek accounts of India which followed the invasion of
Alexander speak of the worship of Hercules as prevalent in the
East, and by Hercules they apparently mean the god Krishna.  The
struggle between the Brahmans and Buddhists lasted during nine
centuries (from A.D. 500 to A.D. 1400), ending with the total
expulsion of Buddhism and the triumphant establishment of the
Triad as the worship of India.

"Before this Triad or Trimurti (of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva)
there seems to have been another, consisting of Agni, Indra, and
Surya.  This may have given the hint of the second Triad, which
distributed among the three gods the attributes or Creation,
Destruction, and Renovation.  Of these Brahma, the creator,
ceased soon to be popular, and the worship of Siva and Vishnu as
Krishna remain as the popular religion of India. . . ..

"But all the efforts of Brahmanism could not arrest the natural
development of the system.  It passed on into polytheism and
idolatry.  The worship of India for many centuries has been
divided into a multitude of sects.  While the majority of the
Brahmans still profess to recognize the equal divinity of Brahma,
Vishnu, and Siva, the mass of the people worship Krishna, Rama,
the Singam, and many other gods and idols.  There are Hindoo
Atheists, who revile the Vedas; there are the Kabirs, who are a
sort of Hindoo Quakers, and oppose all worship; the RAMANUJAS, an
ancient sect of Vishnu worshippers; the RAMAVATS, living in
monasteries; the PANTHIS, who oppose all austerities; the
MAHARAJAS, whose religion consists with great licentiousness.
Most of these are worshippers of Vishnu or of Siva, for Brahma-
worship has wholly disappeared."  J.  Freeman Clarke.   TEN GREAT
RELIGIONS.

VISHNU

Vishnu occupies the second place in the triad of the Hindus, and
is the personification of the preserving principle.  To protect
the world in various epochs of danger, Vishnu descended to the
earth in different incarnations, or bodily forms, which descents
are called Avatars.  They are very numerous, but ten are more
particularly specified.  The first Avatar was as Matsya, the
Fish, under which form Vishnu preserved Manu, the ancestor of the
human race, during a universal deluge.  The second Avatar was in
the form of a Tortoise, which form he assumed to support the
earth when the gods were churning the sea for the beverage of
immortality, Amrita.

We may omit the other Avatars, which were of the same general
character, that is, interpositions to protect the right or to
punish wrong-doers, and come to the ninth, which is the most
celebrated of the Avatars of Vishnu, in which he appeared in the
human form of Krishna, an invincible warrior, who by his exploits
relieved the earth from the tyrants who oppressed it.

Buddha is by the followers of the Brahmanical religion regarded
as a delusive incarnation of Vishnu, assumed by him in order to
induce the Asuras, opponents of the gods, to abandon the sacred
ordinances of the Vedas, by which means they lost their strength
and supremacy.

Kalki is the name of the TENTH Avatar, in which Vishnu will
appear at the end of the present age of the world to destroy all
vice and wickedness, and to restore mankind to virtue and purity.

SIVA

Siva is the third person of the Hindu triad.  He is the
personification of the destroying principle.  Though the third
named, he is, in respect to the number of his worshippers and the
extension of his worship, before either of the others.  In the
Puranas (the scriptures of the modern Hindu religion) no allusion
is made to the original power of this god as a destroyer; as that
power is not to be called into exercise till after the expiration
of twelve millions of years, or when the universe will come to an
end; and Mahadeva (another name for Siva) is rather the
representative of regeneration than of destruction.

The worshippers of Vishnu and Siva form two sects, each of which
proclaims the superiority of its favorite deity, denying the
claims of the other, and Brahma, the creator, having finished his
work, seems to be regarded as no longer active, and has now only
one temple in India, while Mahadeva and Vishnu have many.  The
worshippers of Vishnu are generally distinguished by a greater
tenderness for life and consequent abstinence from animal food,
and a worship less cruel than that of the followers of Siva.

JUGGERNAUT

Whether the worshippers of Juggernaut are to be reckoned among
the followers of Vishnu or Siva, our authorities differ.  The
temple stands near the shore, about three hundred miles southwest
of Calcutta.  The idol is a carved block of wood, with a hideous
face, painted black, and a distended blood-red mouth.  On
festival days the throne of the image is placed on a tower sixty
feet high, moving on wheels.  Six long ropes are attached to the
tower, by which the people draw it along.  The priests and their
attendants stand round the throne on the tower, and occasionally
turn to the worshippers with songs and gestures.  While the tower
moves along numbers of the devout worshippers throw themselves on
the ground, in order to be crushed by the wheels, and the
multitude shout in approbation of the act, as a pleasing
sacrifice to the idol.  Every year, particularly at two great
festivals in March and July, pilgrims flock in crowds to the
temple.  Not less than seventy or eighty thousand people are said
to visit the place on these occasions, when all castes eat
together.

CASTES

The division of the Hindus into classes or castes, with fixed
occupations, existed from the earliest times.  It is supposed by
some to have been founded upon conquest, the first three castes
being composed of a foreign race, who subdued the natives of the
country and reduced them to an inferior caste.  Others trace it
to the fondness of perpetuating, by descent from father to son,
certain offices or occupations.

The Hindu tradition gives the following account of the origin of
the various castes.  At the creation Brahma resolved to give the
earth inhabitants who should be direct emanations from his own
body.  Accordingly from his mouth came forth the eldest born,
Brahma (the priest), to whom he confided the four Vedas; from his
right arm issued Shatriya (the warrior), and from his left, the
warrior's wife.  His thighs produced Vaissyas, male and female
(agriculturists and traders), and lastly from his feet sprang
Sudras (mechanics and laborers).

The four sons of Brahma, so significantly brought into the world,
became the fathers of the human race, and heads of their
respective castes.  They were commanded to regard the four Vedas
as containing all the rules of their faith, and all that was
necessary to guide them in their religious ceremonies.  They were
also commanded to take rank in the order of their birth, the
Brahmans uppermost, as having sprung from the head of Brahma.

A strong line of demarcation is drawn between the first three
castes and the Sudras.  The former are allowed to receive
instruction from the Vedas, which is not permitted to the Sudras.
The Brahmans possess the privilege of teaching the Vedas, and
were in former times in exclusive possession of all knowledge.
Though the sovereign of the country was chosen from the Shatriya
class, also called Rajputs, the Brahmans possessed the real
power, and were the royal counsellors, the judges and magistrates
of the country; their persons and property were inviolable; and
though they committed the greatest crimes, they could only be
banished from the kingdom.  They were to be treated by sovereigns
with the greatest respect, for "a Brahman, whether learned or
ignorant, is a powerful divinity."

When the Brahman arrives at years of maturity it becomes his duty
to marry.  He ought to be supported by the contributions of the
rich, and not to be obliged to gain his subsistence by any
laborious or productive occupation.  But as all the Brahmans
could not he maintained by the working classes of the community,
it was found necessary to allow them to engage in productive
employments.

We need say little of the two intermediate classes, whose rank
and privileges may be readily inferred from their occupations.
The Sudras or fourth class are bound to servile attendance on the
higher classes, especially the Brahmans, but they may follow
mechanical occupations and practical arts, as painting and
writing, or become traders or husbandmen.  Consequently they
sometimes grow rich, and it will also sometimes happen that
Brahmans become poor.  That fact works its usual consequence, and
rich Sudras sometimes employ poor Brahmans in menial occupations.

There is another class lower even than the Sudras, for it is not
one of the original pure classes, but springs from an
unauthorized union of individuals of different castes.  These are
the Pariahs, who are employed in the lowest services and treated
with the utmost severity.  They are compelled to do what no one
else can do without pollution.  They are not only considered
unclean themselves, but they render unclean every thing they
touch.  They are deprived of all civil rights, and stigmatized by
particular laws, regulating their mode of life, their houses and
their furniture.  They are not allowed to visit the pagodas or
temples of the other castes, but have their own pagodas and
religious exercises.  They are not suffered to enter the houses
of the other castes; if it is done incautiously or from
necessity, the place must be purified by religious ceremonies.
They must not appear at public markets, and are confined to the
use of particular wells, which they are obliged to surround with
bones of animals, to warn others against using them.  They dwell
in miserable hovels, distant from cities and villages, and are
under no restrictions in regard to food, which last is not a
privilege, but a mark of ignominy, as if they were so degraded
that nothing could pollute them.  The three higher castes are
prohibited entirely the use of flesh.  The fourth is allowed to
eat all kinds except beef, but only the lowest caste is allowed
every kind of food without restrictions.

BUDDHA

Buddha, whom the Vedas represent as a delusive incarnation of
Vishnu, is said by his followers to have been a mortal sage,
whose name was Gautama, called also by the complimentary epithets
of Sakyasinha, the Lion, and Buddha, the Sage.

By a comparison of the various epochs assigned to his birth, it
is inferred that he lived about one thousand years before Christ.

He was the son of a king; and when in conformity to the usage of
the country he was, a few days after his birth, presented before
the altar of a deity, the image is said to have inclined its
head, as a presage of the future greatness of the new-born
prophet.  The child soon developed faculties of the first order,
and became equally distinguished by the uncommon beauty of his
person.  No sooner had he grown to years of maturity than he
began to reflect deeply on the depravity and misery of mankind,
and he conceived the idea of retiring from society and devoting
himself to meditation.  His father in vain opposed this design.
Buddha escaped the vigilance of his guards, and having found a
secure retreat, lived for six years undisturbed in his devout
contemplations.  At the expiration of that period he came forward
at Benares as a religious teacher.  At first some who heard him
doubted of the soundness of his mind; but his doctrines soon
gained credit, and were propagated so rapidly that Buddha himself
lived to see them spread all over India.

The young prince distinguished himself by his personal and
intellectual qualities, but still more by his early piety.  It
appears from the laws of Manu that it was not unusual, in the
earliest periods of Brahmanism, for those seeking a superior
piety to turn hermits, and to live alone in the forest, engaged
in acts of prayer, meditation, abstinence, and the study of the
Vedas.  This practice, however, seems to have been confined to
the Brahmans.  It was, therefore, a grief to the king, when his
son, in the flower of his youth and highly accomplished in every
kingly faculty of body and mind, began to turn his thoughts
toward the life of an anchorite.

     *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

He first visited the Brahmans, and listened to their doctrines,
but found no satisfaction therein.  The wisest among them could
not teach him true peace,   that profound inward rest, which was
already called Nirvana.  He was twenty-nine years old.  Although
disapproving of the Brahmanic austerities as an end, he practised
them during six years, in order to subdue the senses.  He then
became satisfied that the path to perfection did not lie that
way.  He therefore resumed his former diet and a more comfortable
mode of life, and so lost many disciples who had been attracted
by his amazing austerity.  Alone in his hermitage, he came at
last to that solid conviction, that KNOWLEDGE never to be shaken,
of the laws of things, which had seemed to him the only
foundation of a truly free life.  The spot where, after a week of
constant meditation, he at last arrived at this beatific vision,
became one of the most sacred places in India.  He was seated
under a tree, his face to the east, not having moved for a day
and night, when he attained the triple science, which was to
rescue mankind from its woes.  Twelve hundred years after the
death of the Buddha, a Chinese pilgrim was shown what then passed
for the sacred tree.

     *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

Having attained this inward certainty of vision, he decided to
teach the world his truth.  He knew well what it would bring him,
  what opposition, insult, neglect, scorn.  But he thought of
three classes of men: those who were already on the way to the
truth and did not need him; those who were fixed in error and
whom he could not help; and the poor doubters, uncertain of their
way.  It was to help these last, the doubters, that the Buddha
went forth to preach.  On his way to the holy city of India,
Benares, a serious difficulty arrested him at the Ganges, namely,
his having no money to pay the boatman for his passage.  At
Benares he made his first converts, "turning the wheel of the
law" for the first time.  His discourses are contained in the
sacred books of the Buddhists.  He converted great numbers, his
father among the rest, but met with fierce opposition from the
Hindu Scribes and Pharisees, the leading Brahmans.  So he lived
and taught, and died at the age of eighty years.

The Buddhists reject entirely the authority of the Vedas, and the
religious observances prescribed in them and kept by the Hindus.
They also reject the distinction of castes, and prohibit all
bloody sacrifices, and allow animal food.  Their priests are
chosen from all classes; they are expected to procure their
maintenance by perambulation and begging, and, among other
things, it is their duty to endeavor to turn to some use things
thrown aside as useless by others, and to discover the medicinal
power of plants.  But in Ceylon three orders of priests are
recognized; those of the highest order are usually men of high
birth and learning, and are supported at the principal temples,
most of which have been richly endowed by the former monarchs of
the country.

For several centuries after the appearance of Buddha, his sect
seems to have been tolerated by the Brahmans, and Buddhism
appears to have penetrated the peninsula of Hindustan in every
direction, and to have been carried to Ceylon, and to the eastern
peninsula.  But afterwards it had to endure in India a long
continued persecution, which ultimately had the effect of
entirely abolishing it in the country where it had originated,
but to scatter it widely over adjacent countries.  Buddhism
appears to have been introduced into China about the year 65 of
our era.  From China it was subsequently extended to Corea,
Japan, and Java.

The charming poem called the Light of Asia, by Mr. Edwin Arnold,
has lately called general attention to Buddhism.  The following
is an extract from it:

"Fondly Siddatha drew the proud head down
Patted the shining neck, and said 'Be still,
White Kantaka!  Be still, and bear me now
The farthest journey ever rider rode;
For this night take I horse to find the truth,
And where my quest will end yet know I not.
Save that it shall not end until I find.
Therefore to-night, good steed, be fierce and bold!
Let nothing stay thee, though a thousand blades
Deny the road!  Let neither wall nor moat
Forbid our flight!  Look!  If I touch thy flank
And cry, "On, Kantaka!" let whirlwinds lag
Behind thy course!  Be fire and air, my horse!
To stead thy lord, so shalt thou share with him
The greatness of this deed which helps the world;
For therefore ride I, not for men alone,
But for all things which, speechless, share our pain,
And have no hope, nor wit to ask for hope.
Now, therefore, hear thy master valorously!'"

THE GRAND LAMA

It is a doctrine alike of the Brahminical Hindus and of the
Buddhist sect that the confinement of the human soul, an
emanation of the divine spirit, in a human body, is a state of
misery, and the consequence of frailties and sins committed
during former existences.  But they hold that some few
individuals have appeared on this earth from time to time, not
under the necessity of terrestrial existence, but who voluntarily
descend to the earth to promote the welfare of mankind.  These
individuals have gradually assumed the character of reappearances
of Buddha himself, in which capacity the line is continued till
the present day in the several Lamas of Thibet, China, and other
countries where Buddhism prevails.  In consequence of the
victories of Gengis Khan and his successors, the Lama residing in
Thibet was raised to the dignity of chief pontiff of the sect.  A
separate province was assigned to him as his own territory, and
besides his spiritual dignity, he became to a limited extent a
temporal monarch.  He is styled the Dalai Lama.

The first Christian missionaries who proceeded to Thibet were
surprised to find there in the heart of Asia a pontifical court
and several other ecclesiastical institutions resembling those of
the Roman Catholic church.  They found convents for priests and
nuns; also, processions and forms of religious worship, attended
with much pomp and splendor; and many were induced by these
similarities to consider Lamaism as a sort of degenerated
Christianity.  It is not improbable that the Lamas derived some
of these practices from the Nestorial Christians, who were
settled in Tartary when Buddhism was introduced into Thibet.

PRESTER JOHN

An early account, communicated probably by travelling merchants,
of a Lama or spiritual chief among the Tartars, seems to have
occasioned in Europe the report of a Presbyter or Prester John, a
Christian pontiff, resident in Upper Asia.  The Pope sent a
mission in search of him, as did also Louis IX of France, some
years later, but both missions were unsuccessful, though the
small communities of Nestorial Christians, which they did find,
served to keep up the belief in Europe that such a personage did
exist somewhere in the East.  At last in the fifteenth century, a
Portuguese traveller, Pedro Covilham, happening to hear that
there was a Christian prince in the country of the Abessines
(Abyssinia), not far from the Red Sea, concluded that this must
be the true Prester John.  He accordingly went thither, and
penetrated to the court of the king, whom he calls Negus.  Milton
alludes to him in Paradise Lost, Book XI, where, describing
Adam's vision of his descendants in their various nations and
cities, scattered over the face of the earth, he says,

"----- Nor did his eyes not ken
The empire of Negus, to his utmost port
Ercoco, and the less maritime kings,
Mombaza and Quiloa and Melind."


Chapter XXXI
Northern Mythology   Valhalla   The Valkyrior

The stories which have engaged our attention thus far relate to
the mythology of southern regions.  But there is another branch
of ancient superstitions which ought not to be entirely
overlooked, especially as it belongs to the nations from which
we, through our English ancestors, derive our origin.  It is that
of the northern nations called Scandinavians, who inhabited the
countries now known as Sweden, Denmark, Norway, and Iceland.
These mythological records are contained in two collections
called the Eddas, of which the oldest is in poetry and dates back
to the year 1056, the more modern, or prose Edda, being of the
date of 1640.

According to the Eddas there was once no heaven above nor earth
beneath, but only a bottomless deep, and a world of mist in which
flowed a fountain.  Twelve rivers issued from this fountain, and
when they had flowed far from their source, they froze into ice,
and one layer accumulating above another, the great deep was
filled up.

Southward from the world of mist was the world of light.  From
this flowed a warm wind upon the ice and melted it.  The vapors
rose in the air and formed clouds, from which sprang Ymir, the
Frost giant and his progeny, and the cow Audhumbla, whose milk
afforded nourishment and food to the giant.  The cow got
nourishment by licking the hoar frost and salt from the ice.
While she was one day licking the salt stones there appeared at
first the hair of a man, on the second day the whole head, and on
the third the entire form endowed with beauty, agility, and
power.  This new being was a god, from whom and his wife, a
daughter of the giant race, sprang the three brothers Odin, Vili,
and Ve.  They slew the giant Ymir, and out of his body formed the
earth, of his blood the seas, of his bones the mountains, of his
hair the trees, of his skull the heavens, and of his brain
clouds, charged with hail and snow.  Of Ymir's eyebrows the gods
formed Midgard (mid earth), destined to become the abode of man.

Odin then regulated the periods of day and night and the seasons
by placing in the heavens the sun and moon, and appointing to
them their respective courses.  As soon as the sun began to shed
its rays upon the earth, it caused the vegetable world to bud and
sprout.  Shortly after the gods had created the world they walked
by the side of the sea, pleased with their new work, but found
that it was still incomplete, for it was without human beings.
They therefore took an ash-tree and made a man out of it, and
they made a woman out of an alder, and called the man Aske and
the woman Embla.  Odin then gave them life and soul, Vili reason
and motion, and Ve bestowed upon them the senses, expressive
features, and speech.  Midgard was then given them as their
residence, and they became the progenitors of the human race.

The mighty ash-tree Ygdrasil was supposed to support the whole
universe.  It sprang from the body of Ymir, and had three immense
roots, extending one into Asgard (the dwelling of the gods), the
other into Jotunheim (the abode of the giants), and the third to
Niffleheim (the regions of darkness and cold).  By the side of
each of these roots is a spring, from which it is watered.  The
root that extends into Asgard is carefully tended by the three
Norns, goddesses who are regarded as the dispensers of fate.
They are Urdur (the past), Verdandi (the present), Skuld (the
future).  The spring at the Jotunheim side is Ymir's well, in
which wisdom and wit lie hidden, but that of Niffleheim feeds the
adder, Nidhogge (darkness), which perpetually gnaws at the root.
Four harts run across the branches of the tree and bite the buds;
they represent the four winds.  Under the tree lies Ymir, and
when he tries to shake off its weight the earth quakes.

Asgard is the name of the abode of the gods, access to which is
only gained by crossing the bridge, Bifrost (the rainbow).
Asgard consists of golden and silver palaces, the dwellings of
the gods, but the most beautiful of these is Valhalla, the
residence of Odin.  When seated on his throne he overlooks all
heaven and earth.  Upon his shoulders are the ravens Hugin and
Munin, who fly every day over the whole world, and on their
return report to him all they have seen and heard.  At his feet
lie his two wolves, Geri, and Freki, to whom Odin gives all the
meat that is set before him, for he himself stands in no need of
food.  Mead is for him both food and drink.  He invented the
Runic characters, and it is the business of the Norns to engrave
the runes of fate upon a metal shield.  From Odin's name, spelt
Wodin, as it sometimes is, came Wednesday, the name of the fourth
day of the week.

Odin is frequently called Alfadur (All-father), but this name is
sometimes used in a way that shows that the Scandinavians had an
idea of a deity superior to Odin, uncreated and eternal.

OF THE JOYS OF VALHALLA

Valhalla is the great hall of Odin, wherein he feasts with his
chosen heroes, all those who have fallen bravely in battle, for
all who die a peaceful death are excluded.  The flesh of the boar
Schrimnir is served up to them, and is abundant for all.  For
although this boar is cooked every morning, he becomes whole
again every night.  For drink the heroes are supplied abundantly
with mead from the she-goat Heidrun.  When the heroes are not
feasting they amuse themselves with fighting.  Every day they
ride out into the court or field and fight until they cut each
other in pieces.  This is their pastime; but when meal-time
comes, they recover from their wounds and return to feast in
Valhalla.

THE VALKYRIOR

The Valkyrior are warlike virgins, mounted upon horses and armed
with helmets, shields, and spears.  Odin, who is desirous to
collect a great many heroes in Valhalla, to be able to meet the
giants in a day when the final contest must come, sends down to
every battle-field to make choice of those who shall be slain.
The Valkyrior are his messengers, and their name means "Choosers
of the slain."  When they ride forth on their errand their armor
shed a strange flickering light, which flashes up over the
northern skies, making what men call the "Aurora Borealis," or
