"Northern Lights."  (Gray's ode, The Fatal Sisters, is founded on
this superstition.)

The following is by Matthew Arnold:

"-----He crew at dawn a cheerful note,
To wake the gods and heroes to their tasks
And all the gods and all the heroes woke.
And from their beds the heroes rose and donned
Their arms, and led their horses from the stall,
And mounted them, and in Valhalla's court
Were ranged; and then the daily fray began,
And all day long they there are hacked and hewn
'Mid dust and groans, and limbs lopped off, and blood;
But all at night return to Odin's hall
Woundless and fresh; such lot is theirs in heaven.
And the Valkyries on their steeds went forth
Toward earth and fights of men; and at their side
Skulda, the youngest of the Nornies, rode;
And over Bifrost, where is Heimdall's watch,
Past Midgard Fortress, down to Earth they came;
There through some battle-field, where men fall fast,
Their horses fetlock-deep in blood, they ride,
And pick the bravest warriors out for death,
Whom they bring back with them at night to heaven,
To glad the gods, and feast in Odin's hall."
BALDER DEAD

This description of The Funeral of Balder is by William Morris:

"----------Guest
Gazed through the cool dusk, till his eyes did rest
Upon the noble stories, painted fair
On the high panelling and roof-boards there;
For over the high sea, in his ship, there lay
The gold-haired Balder, god of the dead day,
The spring-flowers round his high pile, waiting there
Until the gods there to the torch should bear;
And they were wrought on this side and on that,
Drawing on towards him.  There was Frey, and sat
On the gold-bristled boar, who first they say
Ploughed the brown earth, and made it green for Frey;
Then came dark-bearded Niod; and after him
Freyia, thin-robed, about her ankles slim
The grey cats playing.  In another place
Thor's hammer gleamed o'er Thor's red-bearded face;
And Heimdal, with the old horn slung behind,
That in the god's dusk he shall surely wind,
Sickening all hearts with fear; and last of all,
Was Odin's sorrow wrought upon the wall.
As slow-paced, weary faced, he went along,
Anxious with all the tales of woe and wrong
His ravens, Thought and Memory, bring to him."
THE EARTHLY PARADISE: THE LOVERS OF GODRUN

THOR
OF THOR AND THE OTHER GODS

Thor, the thunderer, Odin's eldest son, is the strongest of gods
and men, and possesses three very precious things.  The first is
his hammer, Miolnir, which both the Frost and the Mountain giants
know to their cost, when they see it hurled against them in the
air, for it has split many a skull of their fathers and kindred.
When thrown, it returns to his hand of its own accord.  The
second rare thing he possesses is called the belt of strength.
When he girds it about him his divine might is doubled.  The
third, also very precious, is his iron gloves, which he puts on
whenever he would use his mallet efficiently.  From Thor's name
is derived our word Thursday.

This description of Thor is by Longfellow:

"I am the God Thor,
I am the War God,
I am the Thunderer!
Here in my Northland,
My fastness and fortress,
Reign I forever!

"Here amid icebergs
Rule I the nations;
This is my hammer,
Miolner the mighty;
Giants and sorcerers
Cannot withstand it!

"These are the gauntlets
Wherewith I wield it,
And hurl it afar off;
This is my girdle;
Whenever I brace it
Strength is redoubled!

"The light thou beholdest
Stream through the heavens,
In flashes of crimson,
Is but my red beard
Blown by the night wind,
Affrighting the nations!

"Jove is my brother;
Mine eyes are the lightning;
The wheels of my chariot
Roll in the thunder,
The blows of my hammer
ring in the thunder."
TALES OF A WAYSIDE INN

Frey is one of the most celebrated of the gods.  He presides over
rain and sunshine and all the fruits of the earth.  His sister
Freya is the most propitious of the goddesses.  She loves music,
spring, and flowers, and is particularly fond of the Elves
(fairies).  She is very fond of love-ditties, and all lovers
would do well to invoke her.

Bragi is the god of poetry, and his song records the deeds of
warriors.  His wife, Iduna, keeps in a box the apples which the
gods, when they feel old age approaching, have only to taste of
to become young again.

Heimdall is the watchman of the gods, and is therefore placed on
the borders of heaven to prevent the giants from forcing their
way over the bridge Bifrost (the rainbow.)  He requires less
sleep than a bird, and sees by night as well as by day a hundred
miles all around him.  So acute is his ear that no sound escapes
him, for he can even hear the grass grow and the wool on a
sheep's back.

OF LOKI AND HIS PROGENY

There is another deity who is described as the calumniator of the
gods and the contriver of all fraud and mischief.  His name is
Loki.  He is handsome and well made, but of a very fickle mood
and  most evil disposition.  He is of the giant race, but forced
himself into the company of the gods, and seems to take pleasure
in bringing them into difficulties, and in extricating them out
of the danger by his cunning, wit, and skill.  Loki has three
children.  The first is the wolf Fenris, the second the Midgard
serpent, the third Hela (Death).  The gods were not ignorant that
these monsters were growing up, and that they would one day bring
much evil upon gods and men.  So Odin deemed it advisable to send
one to bring them to him.  When they came he threw the serpent
into that deep ocean by which the earth is surrounded.  But the
monster has grown to such an enormous size that holding his tail
in his mouth he encircles the whole earth.  Hela he cast into
Niffleheim, and gave her power over nine worlds or regions, into
which she distributes those who are sent to her; that is, all who
die of sickness or old age.  Her hall is called Elvidnia.  Hunger
is her table, Starvation her knife, Delay her man, Slowness her
maid, Precipice her threshold, Care her bed, and Burning-anguish
forms the hangings of her apartments.  She may easily be
recognized for her body is half flesh-color and half blue, and
she has a dreadfully stern and forbidding countenance.

The wolf Fenris gave the gods a great deal of trouble before they
succeeded in chaining him.  He broke the strongest fetters as if
they were made of cobwebs.  Finally the gods sent a messenger to
the mountain spirits, who made for them the chain called
Gleipnir.  It is fashioned of six things, viz., th noise made by
the footfall of a cat, the beards of women, the roots of stones,
the breath of fishes, the nerves (sensibilities) of bears, and
the spittle of birds.  When finished it was as smooth and soft as
a silken string.  But when the gods asked the wolf to suffer
himself to be bound with this apparently slight ribbon, he
suspected their design, fearing that it was made by enchantment.
But Tyr (the sword god), to quiet his suspicions, placed his hand
in Fenris' mouth.  Then the other gods bound the wolf with
Gleipnir.  But when the wolf found that he could not break his
fetters, and that the gods would not release him, he bit off
Tyr's hand, and he has ever since remained one-handed.

HOW THOR PAID THE MOUNTAIN GIANT HIS WAGES

Once on a time, when the gods were constructing their abodes and
had already finished Midgard and Valhalla, a certain artificer
came and offered to build them a residence so well fortified that
they should be perfectly safe from the incursions of the Frost
giants and the giants of the mountains.  But he demanded for his
reward the goddess Freya, together with the sun and moon.  The
gods yielded to his terms provided he would finish the whole work
himself without any one's assistance, and all within the space of
one winter.  But if anything remained unfinished on the first day
of summer he should forfeit the recompense agreed on.  On being
told these terms the artificer stipulated that he should be
allowed the use of his horse Svadilfari, and this by the advice
of Loki was granted to him.  He accordingly set to work on the
first day of winter, and during the night let his horse draw
stone for the building.  The enormous size of the stones struck
the gods with astonishment, and they saw clearly that the horse
did one half more of the toilsome work than his mater.  Their
bargain, however, had been concluded, and confirmed by solemn
oaths, for without these precautions a giant would not have
thought himself safe among the gods, especially when Thor should
return from an expedition he had then undertaken against the evil
demons.

As the winter drew to a close, the building was far advanced, and
the bulwarks were sufficiently high and massive to render the
place impregnable.  In short, when it wanted but three days to
summer the only part that remained to be finished was the
gateway.  Then sat the gods on their seats of justice and entered
into consultation, inquiring of one another who among them could
have advised to give Freya away, or to plunge the heavens in
darkness by permitting the giant to carry away the sun and the
moon.

They all agreed that no one but Loki, the author of so many evil
deeds, could have given such bad counsel, and that he should be
put to a cruel death if he did not contrive some way to prevent
the artificer from completing his task and obtaining the
stipulated recompense.  They proceeded to lay hands on Loki, who
in his fright promised upon oath that, let it cost what it would,
he would so manage matters that the man should lose his reward.
That very night when the man went with Svadilfari for building-
stone, a mare suddenly ran out of a forest and began to neigh.
The horse thereat broke loose and ran after the mare into the
forest, which obliged the man also to run after his horse, and
thus between one and another the whole night was lost, so that at
dawn the work had not made the usual progress.  The man, seeing
that he must fail of completing his task, resumed his own
gigantic stature, and the gods now clearly perceived that it was
in reality a mountain giant who had come amongst them.  Feeling
no longer bound by their oaths, they called on Thor, who
immediately ran to their assistance, and lifting up his mallet,
paid the workman his wages, not with the sun and moon, and not
even by sending him back to Jotunheim, for with the first blow he
shattered the giant's skull to pieces and hurled him headlong
into Niffleheim.

 THE RECOVERY OF THE HAMMER

Once upon a time it happened that Thor's hammer fell into the
possession of the giant Thrym, who buried it eight fathoms deep
under the rocks of Jotunheim.  Thor sent Loki to negotiate with
Thrym, but he could only prevail so far as to get the giant's
promise to restore the weapon if Freya would consent to be his
bride.  Loki returned and reported the result of his mission, but
the goddess of love was quite horrified at the idea of bestowing
her charms on the king of the Frost giants.  In this emergency
Loki persuaded Thor to dress himself in Freya's clothes and
accompany him to Jotunheim.  Thrym received his veiled bride with
due courtesy, but was greatly surprised at seeing her eat for her
supper eight salmon and a full-grown ox, besides other
delicacies, washing the whole down with three tuns of mead.
Loki, however, assured him that she had not tasted anything for
eight long nights, so great was her desire to see her lover, the
renowned ruler or Jotunheim.  Thrym had at length the curiosity
to peep under his bride's veil, but started back in affright, and
demanded why Freya's eyeballs glistened with fire.  Loki repeated
the same excuse and the giant was satisfied.  He ordered the
hammer to be brought in and laid on the maiden's lap.  Thereupon
Thor threw off his disguise, grasped his redoubted weapon and
slaughtered Thrum and all his followers.

Frey also possessed a wonderful weapon, a sword which would of
itself spread a field with carnage whenever the owner desired it.
Frey parted with this sword, but was less fortunate than Thor and
never recovered it.  It happened in this way: Frey once mounted
Odin's throne, from whence one can see over the whole universe,
and looking round saw far off in the giant's kingdom a beautiful
maid, at the sight of whom he was struck with sudden sadness,
insomuch that from that moment he could neither sleep, nor drink,
nor speak.  At last Skirnir, his messenger, drew his secret from
him, and undertook to get him the maiden for his bride, if he
would give him his sword as a reward.  Frey consented and gave
him the sword, and Skirnir set off on his journey and obtained
the maiden's promise that within nine nights she would come to a
certain place and there wed Frey.  Skirnir having reported the
success of his errand, Frey exclaimed,

"Long is one night,
Long are two nights,
But how shall I hold out three?
Shorter hath seemed
A month to me oft
Than of this longing time the half."

So Frey obtained Gerda, the most beautiful of all women, for his
wife, but he lost his sword.

This story, entitled Skirnir For, and the one immediately
preceding it, Thrym's Quida, will be found poetically told in
Longfellow's Poets and Poetry of Europe.


Chapter XXXII
Thor's Visit to Jotunheim

One day the god Thor, accompanied by his servant Thialfi, and
also by Loki, set out on a journey to the giant's country.
Thialfi was of all men the swiftest of foot.  He bore Thor's
wallet, containing their provisions.  When night came on they
found themselves in an immense forest, and searched on all sides
for a place where they might pass the night, and at last came to
a very large hall, with an entrance that took the whole breadth
of one end of the building.  Here they lay down to sleep, but
towards midnight were alarmed by an earthquake which shook the
whole edifice.  Thor rising up called on his companion to seek
with him a place of safety.  On the right they found an adjoining
chamber, into which the others entered, but Thor remained at the
doorway with his mallet in his hand, prepared to defend himself,
whatever might happen.  A terrible groaning was heard during the
night, and at dawn of day Thor went out and found lying near him
a huge giant, who slept and snored in the way that had alarmed
them so.  It is said that for once Thor was afraid to use his
mallet, and as the giant soon waked up, Thor contented himself
with simply asking his name.

"My name is Skrymir," said the giant, "but I need not ask thy
name, for I know that thou art the god Tor.  But what has become
of my glove?"  Thor then perceived that what they had taken
overnight for a hall was the giant's glove and the chamber where
his two companions had sought refuge was the thumb.  Skrymir then
proposed that they should travel in company, and Thor consenting,
they sat down to eat their breakfast, and when they had done,
Skrymir packed all the provisions into one wallet, threw it over
his shoulder, and strode on before them, taking such tremendous
strides that they were hard put to it to keep up with him.  So
they travelled the whole day, and at dusk, Skrymir close a place
for them to pass the night in under a large oak-tree.  Skrymir
then told them he would lie down to sleep.  "But take ye the
wallet," he added, "and prepare your supper."Skrymir soon fell
asleep and began to snore strongly, but when Thor tried to open
the wallet, he found the giant had tied it up so tight he could
not untie a single knot.  At last Thor became wroth, and grasping
his mallet with both hands he struck a furious blow on the
giant's head.  Skrymir awakening merely asked whether a leaf had
not fallen on his head, and whether they had supped and were
ready to go to sleep.  Thor answered that they were just going to
sleep, and so saying went and laid himself down under another
tree.  But sleep came not that night to Thor, and when Skrymir
snored again so loud that the forest re-echoed with the noise, he
arose, and grasping his mallet launched it with such force at the
giant's skull that it made a deep dint in it.  Skrymir awakening
cried out, "What's the matter?  Are there any birds perched on
this tree?  I felt some moss from the branches fall on my head.
How fares it with thee, Thor?"  But Thor went away hastily,
saying that he had just then awoke, and that as it was only
midnight, there was still time for sleep.  He however resolved
that if he had an opportunity of striking a third blow, it should
settle all matters between them.  A little before daybreak he
perceived that Skrymir was again fast asleep, and again grasping
his mallet, he dashed it with such violence that it forced its
way into the giant's skull up to the handle.   But Skrymir sat
up, and stroking his cheek, said, "An acorn fell on my head.
What!  Art thou awake, Thor?  Methinks it is time for us to get
up and dress ourselves; but you have not now a long way before
you to the city called Utgard.  I have heard you whispering to
one another that I am not a man of small dimensions; but if you
come to Utgard you will see there many men much taller than I.
Wherefore I advise you, when you come there, not to make too much
of yourselves, for the followers of Utgard-Loki will not brook
the boasting of such little fellows as you are.  You must take
the road that leads eastward, mine lies northward, so we must
part here."

Hereupon he threw his wallet over his shoulders, and turned away
from them into the forest, and Thor had no wish to stop him or to
ask for any more of his company.

Thor and his companions proceeded on their way, and towards noon
descried a city standing in the middle of a plain.  It was so
lofty that they were obliged to bend their necks quite back on
their shoulders in order to see to the top of it.  On arriving
they entered the city, and seeing a large palace before them with
the door wide open, they went in, and found a number of men of
prodigious stature, sitting on benches in the hall. Going
further, they came before the king Utgard-Loki, whom they saluted
with great respect.  The king, regarding them with a scornful
smile, said, "If I do not mistake me, that stripling yonder must
be the god Thor."  Then addressing himself to Thor, he said,
"Perhaps thou mayst be more than thou appearest to be.  What are
the feats that thou and thy fellows deem yourselves skilled in,
for no one is permitted to remain here who does not, in some feat
or other, excel all other men?"

"The feat that I know," said Loki, "is to eat quicker than any
one else, and in this I am ready to give a proof against any one
here who may choose to compete with me."

"That will indeed be a feat," said Utgard-Loki, "if thou
performest what thou promisest, and it shall be tried forthwith."

He then ordered one of his men who was sitting at the farther end
of the bench, and whose name was Logi, to come forward and try
his skill with Loki.  A trough filled with meat having been set
on the hall floor, Loki placed himself at one end, and Logi at
the other, and each of them began to eat as fast as he could,
until they met in the middle of the trough.  But it was found
that Loki had only eaten the flesh, while his adversary had
devoured both flesh and bone, and the trough to boot.  All the
company therefore adjudged that Loki was vanquished.

Utgard-Loki then asked what feat the young man who accompanied
Thor could perform.  Thialfi answered that he would run a race
with any one who might be matched against him.  The king observed
that skill in running was something to boast of, but if the youth
would win the match he must display great agility.  He then arose
and went with all who were present to a plain where there was
good ground for running on, and calling a young man named Hugi,
bade him run a match with Thialfi.  In the first course Hugi so
much outstripped his competitor that he turned back and met him
not far from the starting-place.  Then they ran a second and a
third time, but Thialfi met with no better success.  Utgard-Loki
then asked Thor in what feats he would choose to give proofs of
that prowess for which he was so famous.  Thor answered that he
would try a drinking-match with any one.  Utgard-Loki bade his
cupbearer bring the large horn which his followers were obliged
to empty when they had trespassed in any way against the law of
the feast.  The cupbearer having presented it to Thor, Utgard-
Loki said, "Whoever is a good drinker will empty that horn at a
single draught, though most men make two of it, but the most puny
drinker can do it in three."

Thor looked at the horn, which seemed of no extraordinary size
though somewhat long; however, as he was very thirsty, he set it
to his lips, and without drawing breath, pulled as long and as
deeply as he could, that he might not be obliged to make a second
draught of it; but when he set the horn down and looked in, he
could scarcely perceive that the liquor was diminished.

After taking breath, Thor went to it again with all his might,
but when he took the horn from his mouth, it seemed to him that
he had drunk rather less than before, although the horn could now
be carried without spilling.

"How now, Thor," said Utgard-Loki, "thou must not spare thyself;
if thou meanest to drain the horn at the third draught thou must
pull deeply; and I must needs say that thou wilt not be called so
mighty a man here as thou art at home if thou showest no greater
prowess in other feats than methinks will be shown in this."

Thor, full of wrath, again set the horn to his lips, and did his
best to empty it; but on looking in found the liquor was only a
little lower, so he resolved to make no further attempt, but gave
back the horn to the cupbearer.

"I now see plainly," said Utgard-Loki, "that thou art not quite
so stout as we thought thee; but wilt thou try any other feat,
though methinks thou art not likely to bear any prize away with
thee hence."

"What new trial hast thou to propose?" said Thor.

"We have a very trifling game here," answered Utgard-Loki, "in
which we exercise none but children.  It consists in merely
lifting my cat from the ground; nor should I have dared to
mention such a feat to the great Thor if I had not already
observed that thou art by no means what we took thee for."

As he finished speaking, a large gray cat sprang on the hall
floor.  Thor put his hand under the cat's belly and did his
utmost to raise him from the floor, but the cat, bending his
back, had, notwithstanding all Thor's efforts, only one of his
feet lifted up, seeing which Thor made no further attempt.

"This trial has turned out," said Utgard-Loki, "just as I
imagined it would.  The cat is large, but Thor is little in
comparison to our men."

"Little as ye call me," answered Thor, "let me see who among you
will come hither now I am in wrath and wrestle with me."

"I see no one here," said Utgard-Loki, looking at the men sitting
on the benches, "who would not think it beneath him to wrestle
with thee; let somebody, however, call hither that old crone, my
nurse Elli, and let Thor wrestle with her if he will.  She has
thrown to the ground many a man not less strong than this Thor
is."

A toothless old woman then entered the hall, and was told by
Utgard-Loki to take hold of Thor.  The tale is shortly told.  The
more Thor tightened his hold on the crone the firmer she stood.
At length, after a very violent struggle, Thor began to lose his
footing, and was finally brought down upon one knee.  Utgard-Loki
then told them to desist, adding that Thor had now no occasion to
ask any one else in the hall to wrestle with him, and it was also
getting late; so he showed Thor and his companions to their
seats, and they passed the night there in good cheer.

The next morning at break of day, Thor and his companions dressed
themselves and prepared for their departure.  Utgard-Loki ordered
a table to be set for them, on which there was no lack of
victuals or drink.  After the repast Utgard-Loki led them to the
gate of the city, and on parting asked Thor how he thought his
journey had turned out, and whether he had met with any men
stronger than himself.  Thor told him that he could not deny but
that he had brought great shame on himself.  "And what grieves me
most," he added, is that ye will call me a person of little
worth."

"Nay," said Utgard-Loki, "it behooves me to tell thee the truth,
now thou art out of the city, which so long as I live and have my
way thou shalt never enter again.  And, by my troth, had I known
beforehand that thou hadst so much strength in thee, and wouldst
have brought me so near to a great mishap, I would not have
suffered thee to enter this time.  Know then that I have all
along deceived thee by my illusions; first in the forest where I
tied up the wallet with iron wire so that thou couldst not untie
it.  After this thou gavest me three blows with the mallet; the
first, though the least, would have ended my days had it fallen
on me, but I slipped aside and thy blows fell on the mountain
where thou wilt find three glens, one of them remarkably deep.
These are the dints made by thy mallet.  I have made use of
similar illusions in the contests you have had with my followers.
In the first, Loki, like hunger itself, devoured all that was set
before him, but Logi was in reality nothing else than Fire, and
therefore consumed not only the meat, but the trough which held
it.  Hugi, with whom Thialfi contended in running, was Thought,
and it was impossible for Thialfi to keep pace with that.  When
thou in thy turn didst attempt to empty the horn, thou didst
perform, by my troth, a deed so marvellous, that had I not seen
it myself, I should never have believed it.  For one end of that
horn reached the sea, which thou was not aware of, but when thou
comest to the shore thou wilt perceive how much the sea has sunk
by thy draughts.  Thou didst perform a feat no less wonderful by
lifting up the cat, and to tell thee the truth, when we saw that
one of his paws was off the floor, we were all of us terror-
stricken, for what thou tookest for a cat was in reality the
Midgard serpent that encompasseth the earth, and he was so
stretched by thee, that he was barely long enough to enclose it
between his head and tail.  Thy wrestling with Elli was also a
most astonishing feat, for there was never yet a man, nor ever
will be, whom Old Age, for such in fact was Elli, will not sooner
or later lay low.  But now, as we are going to part, let me tell
thee that it will be better for both of us if thou never come
near me again, for shouldst thou do so, I shall again defend
myself by other illusions, so that thou wilt only lose thy labor
and get no fame from the contest with me."


On hearing these words Thor in a rage laid hold of his mallet and
would have launched it at him, but Utgard-Loki had disappeared,
and when Thor would have returned to the city to destroy it, he
found nothing around him but a verdant plain.

On another occasion Thor was more successful in an encounter with
the giants.  It happened that Thor met with a giant, Hrungnir by
name, who was disputing with Odin as to the merits of their
respective horses, Gullfaxi and Sleipnir, the eight-legged.  Thor
and the giant made an agreement to fight together on a certain
day.  But as the day approached, the giant, becoming frightened
at the thought of encountering Thor alone, manufactured, with the
assistance of his fellow-giants, a great giant of clay.  He was
nine miles high and three miles about the chest, and in his heart
he had the heart of a mare.  Accompanied by the clay giant,
Hrungnir awaited Thor on the appointed day.  Thor approached
preceded by Thialfi, his servant, who, running ahead, shouted out
to Hrungnir that it was useless to hold his shield before him,
for the god Thor would attack him out of the ground.  Hrungnir at
this flung his shield on the ground, and, standing upon it, made
ready.  As Thor approached Hrungnir flung at him an immense club
of stone.  Thor flung his hammer.  Miolnir met the club half way,
broke it in pieces, and burying itself in the stone skull of
Hrungnir, felled him to the ground.  Meanwhile Thialfi had
despatched the clay giant with a spade.  Thor himself received
but a slight wound from a fragment of the giant's hammer.


Chapter XXXIII
The Death of Baldur   The Elves -- Runic Letters -- Scalds --
Iceland

Baldur, the Good, having been tormented with terrible dreams
indicating that his life was in peril, told them to the assembled
gods, who resolved to conjure all things to avert from him the
threatened danger.  Then Frigga, the wife of Odin, exacted an
oath from fire and water, from iron and all other metals, from
stones, trees, diseases, beasts, birds, poisons, and creeping
things, that none of them would do any harm to Baldur.  Odin, not
satisfied with all this, and feeling alarmed for the fate of his
son, determined to consult the prophetess Angerbode, a giantess,
mother of Fenris, Hela, and the Midgard serpent.  She was dead,
and Odin was forced to seek her in Hela's dominions.  This
descent of Odin forms the subject of Gray's fine ode beginning,

"Up rose the king of men with speed
And saddled straight his coal-black steed."

But the other gods, feeling that what Frigga had done was quite
sufficient, amused themselves with using Baldur as a mark, some
hurling darts at him, some stones, while others hewed at him with
their swords and battle-axes, for do what they would none of them
could harm him.  And this became a favorite pastime with them and
was regarded as an honor shown to Baldur.  But when Loki beheld
the scene he was sorely vexed that Baldur was not hurt.
Assuming, therefore, the shape of a woman, he went to Fensalir,
the mansion of Frigga.  That goddess, when she saw the pretended
woman, inquired of her if she knew what the gods were doing at
their meetings.  She replied that they were throwing darts and
stones at Baldur, without being able to hurt him.  "Ay," said
Frigga, "neither stones, nor sticks, nor anything else can hurt
Baldur, for I have exacted an oath from all of them.  " "What,"
exclaimed the woman, "have all things sworn to spare Baldur?"
"All things," replied Frigga, "except one little shrub that grows
on the eastern side of Valhalla, and is called Mistletoe, and
which I thought too young and feeble to crave an oath from."

As soon as Loki heard this he went away, and resuming his natural
shape, cut off the mistletoe, and repaired to the place where the
gods were assembled.  There he found Hodur standing apart,
without partaking of the sports, on account of his blindness, and
going up to him, said, "Why dost thou not also throw something at
Baldur?"

"Because I am blind," answered Hodur, "and see not where Baldur
is, and have moreover nothing to throw."

"Come, then," said Loki, "do like the rest and show honor to
Baldur by throwing this twig at him, and I will direct thy arm
towards the place where he stands."

Hodur then took the mistletoe, and under the guidance of Loki,
darted it at Baldur, who, pierced through and through, fell down
lifeless.  Surely never was there witnessed, either among gods or
men, a more atrocious deed than this.  When Baldur fell, the gods
were struck speechless with horror, and then they looked at each
other, and all were of one mind to lay hands on him who had done
the deed, but they were obliged to delay their vengeance out of
respect for the sacred place where they were assembled.  They
gave vent to their grief by loud lamentations.  When the gods
came to themselves, Frigga asked who among them wished to gain
all her love and good will.  "For this," said she, "shall he have
who will ride to Hel and offer Hela a ransom if she will let
Baldur return to Asgard."  Whereupon Hermod, surnamed the Nimble,
the son of Odin, offered to undertake the journey.  Odin's horse,
Sleipnir, which has eight legs, and can outrun the wind, was then
led forth, on which Hermod mounted and galloped away on his
mission.  For the space of nine days and as many nights he rode
through deep glens so dark that he could not discern anything
until he arrived at the river Gyoll, which he passed over on a
bridge covered with glittering gold.  The maiden who kept the
bridge asked him his name and lineage, telling him that the day
before five bands of dead persons had ridden over the bridge, and
did not shake it as much as he alone.  "But," she added, "thou
hast not death's hue on thee; why then ridest thou here on the
way to Hel?"

"I ride to Hel," answered Hermod, "to seek Baldur.  Hast thou
perchance seen him pass this way?"

She replied, "Baldur hath ridden over Gyoll's bridge, and yonder
lieth the way he took to the abodes of death."

Hermod pursued his journey until he came to the barred gates of
Hel.  Here he alighted, girthed his saddle tighter, and
remounting clapped both spurs to his horse, who cleared the gate
by a tremendous leap without touching it.  Hermod then rode on to
the palace where he found his brother Baldur occupying the most
distinguished seat in the hall, and passed the night in his
company.  The next morning he besought Hela to let Baldur ride
home with him, assuring her that nothing but lamentations were to
be heard among the gods.  Hela answered that it should now be
tried whether Baldur was so beloved as he was said to be.  "If,
therefore," she added, "all things in the world, both living and
lifeless, weep for him, then shall he return to life; but if any
one thing speak against him or refuse to weep, he shall be kept
in Hel."

Hermod then rode back to Asgard and gave an account of all he had
heard and witnessed.

The gods upon this despatched messengers throughout the world to
beg every thing to weep in order that Baldur might be delivered
from Hel.  All things very willingly complied with this request,
both men and every other living being, as well as earths, and
stones, and trees, and metals, just as we have all seen these
things weep when they are brought from a cold place into a hot
one.  As the messengers were returning, they found an old hag
named Thaukt sitting in a cavern, and begged her to weep Baldur
out of Hel.  But she answered,

"Thaukt will wail
With dry tears
Baldur's bale-fire.
Let Hela keep her own."

It was strongly suspected that this hag was no other than Loki
himself, who never ceased to work evil among gods and men.  So
Baldur was prevented from coming back to Asgard.  (In
Longfellow's Poems, vol. 1, page 379, will be found a poem
entitled Tegner's Drapa, upon the subject of Baldur's death.)

Among Matthew Arnold's Poems is one called "Balder Death"
beginning thus:

"So on the floor lay Balder dead; and round
Lay thickly strewn swords, axes, darts and spears,
Which all the Gods in sport had idly thrown
At Balder, whom no weapon pierced or clave;
But in his breast stood fixt the fatal bough
Of mistletoe, which Lok the Accuser gave
To Hoder, and unwitting Hoder threw;
"Gainst that alone had Balder's life no charm.
And all the Gods and all the heroes came
And stood round Balder on the bloody floor
Weeping and wailing; and Valhalla rang
Up to its golden roof with sobs and cries;
And on the table stood the untasted meats,
And in the horns and gold-rimmed skulls the wine;
And now would night have fallen and found them yet
Wailing; but otherwise was Odin's will."

THE FUNERAL OF BALDUR

The gods took up the dead body and bore it to the sea-shore where
stood Baldur's ship Hringham, which passed for the largest in the
world.  Baldur's dead body was put on the funeral pile, on board
the ship, and his wife Nanna was so struck with grief at the
sight that she broke her heart, and her body was burned on the
same pile with her husband's.  There was a vast concourse of
various kinds of people at Baldur's obsequies.  First came Odin
accompanied by Frigga, the Valkyrior, and his ravens; then Frey
in his car drawn by Gullinbursti, the boar; Heimdall rode his
horse Gulltopp, and Freya drove in her chariot drawn by cats.
There were also a great many Frost giants and giants of the
mountain present.  Baldur's horse was led to the pile fully
caparisoned and consumed in the same flames with his master.

But Loki did not escape his deserved punishment.  When he saw how
angry the gods were, he fled to the mountain, and there built
himself a hut with four doors, so that he could see every
approaching danger.  He invented a net to catch the fishes, such
as fishermen have used since his time.  But Odin found out his
hiding-place and the gods assembled to take him.  He, seeing
this, changed himself into a salmon, and lay hid among the stones
of the brook.  But the gods took his net and dragged the brook,
and Loki finding he must be caught, tried to leap over the net;
but Thor caught him by the tail and compressed it so, that
salmons every since have had that part remarkably fine and thin.
They bound him with chains and suspended a serpent over his head,
whose venom falls upon his face drop by drop.  His wife Siguna
sits by his side and catches the drops as they fall, in a cup;
but when she carries it away to empty it, the venom falls upon
Loki, which makes him howl with horror, and twist his body about
so violently that the whole earth shakes, and this produces what
men call earthquakes.

THE ELVES

The Edda mentions another class of beings, inferior to the gods,
but still possessed of great power; these were called Elves.  The
white spirits, or Elves of Light, were exceedingly fair, more
brilliant than the sun, and clad in garments of delicate and
transparent texture.  They loved the light, were kindly disposed
to mankind, and generally appeared as fair and lovely children.
Their country was called Alfheim, and was the domain of Freyr,
the god of the sun, in whose light they were always sporting.

The black of Night Elves were a different kind of creatures.
Ugly, long-nosed dwarfs, of a dirty brown color, they appeared
only at night, for they avoided the sun as their most deadly
enemy, because whenever his beams fell upon any of them they
changed them immediately into stones.  Their language was the
echo of solitudes, and their dwelling-places subterranean caves
and clefts.  They were supposed to have come into existence as
maggots, produced by the decaying flesh of Ymir's body, and were
afterwards endowed by the gods with a human form and great
understanding.  They were particularly distinguished for a
knowledge of the mysterious powers of nature, and for the runes
which they carved and explained.  They were the most skilful
artificers of all created beings, and worked in metals and in
wood.  Among their most noted works were Thor's hammer, and the
ship Skidbladnir, which they gave to Freyr, and which was so
large that it could contain all the deities with their war and
household implements, but so skilfully was it wrought that when
folded together it could be put into a side pocket.

RAGNABOK, THE TWILIGHT OF THE GODS

It was a firm belief of the northern nations that a time would
come when all the visible creation, the gods of Valhalla and
Niffleheim, the inhabitants of Jotunheim, Alfheim, and Midgard,
together with their habitations, would be destroyed.  The fearful
day of destruction will not, however, be without its forerunners.
First will come a triple winter, during which snow will fall from
the four corners of the heavens, the frost be very severe, the
wind piercing, the weather tempestuous, and the sun impart no
gladness.  Three such winters will pass away without being
tempered by a single summer.  Three other similar winters will
then follow, during which war and discord will spread over the
universe.  The earth itself will be frightened and begin to
tremble, the sea leave its basin, the heavens tear asunder, and
men perish in great numbers, and the eagles of the air feast upon
their still quivering bodies.  The wolf Fenris will now break his
bands, the Midgard serpent rise out of her bed in the sea, and
Loki, released from his bonds, will join the enemies of the gods.
Amidst the general devastation the sons of Muspelheim will rush
forth under their leader Surtur, before and behind whom are
flames and burning fire.  Onward they ride over Bifrost, the
rainbow bridge, which breaks under the horses' hoofs.  But they,
disregarding its fall, direct their course to the battle-field
called Vigrid.  Thither also repair the wolf Fenris, the Midgard
serpent, Loki with all the followers of Hela, and the Frost
giants.

Heimdall now stands up and sounds the Giallar horn to assemble
the gods and heroes for the contest.  The gods advance, led on by
Odin, who engages the wolf Fenris, but falls a victim to the
monster, who is, however, slain by Vidar, Odin's son.  Thor gains
great renown by killing the Midgard serpent, but recoils and
falls dead, suffocated with the venom which the dying monster
vomits over him.  Loki and Heimdall meet and fight till they are
both slain.  The Gods and their enemies having fallen in battle,
Surtur, who has killed Dreyr, darts fire and flames over the
world, and the whole universe is burned up.  The sun becomes dim,
the earth sinks into the ocean, the stars fall from heaven, and
time is no more.

After this Alfadur (the almighty) will cause a new heaven and a
new earth to arise out of the sea.  The new earth, filled with
abundant supplies, will spontaneously produce its fruits without
labor or care. Wickedness and misery will no more be known, but
the gods and men will live happily together.

RUNIC LETTERS

One cannot travel far in Denmark, Norway, or Sweden, without
meeting with great stones, of different forms, engraven with
characters called Runic, which appear at first sight very
different from all we know.  The letters consist almost
invariably of straight lines, in the shape of little sticks
either singly or put together.  Such sticks were in early times
used by the northern nations for the purpose of ascertaining
future events.  The sticks were shaken up, and from the figures
that they formed a kind of divination was derived.

The Runic characters were of various kinds.  They were chiefly
used for magical purposes.  The noxious, or, as they called them,
the BITTER runes, were employed to bring various evils on their
enemies; the favorable averted misfortune.  Some were medicinal,
others employed to win love, etc.  In later times they were
frequently used for inscriptions, of which more than a thousand
have been found.  The language is a dialect of the Gothic, called
Norse, still in use in Iceland.  The inscriptions may therefore
be read with certainty, but hitherto very few have been found
which throw the least light on history.  They are mostly epitaphs
on tombstones.

Gray's ode on the Descent of Odin contains an allusion to the use
of Runic letters for incantation:

"Facing to the northern clime,
Thrice he traced the Runic rhyme;
Thrice pronounced, in accents dread,
The thrilling verse that wakes the dead,
Till from out the hollow ground
Slowly breathed a sullen sound."

THE SKALDS

The Skalds were the bards and poets of the nation, a very
important class of men in all communities in an early stage of
civilization.  They are the depositaries of whatever historic
lore there is, and it is their office to mingle something of
intellectual gratification with the rude feasts of the warriors,
by rehearsing, with such accompaniments of poetry and music as
their skill can afford, the exploits of their heroes living or
dead.  The compositions of the Skalds were called Sagas, many of
which have come down to us, and contain valuable materials of
history, and a faithful picture of the state of society at the
time to which they relate.

ICELAND

The Eddas and Sagas have come to us from Iceland.  The following
extract from Carlyle's Lectures on Heroes and Hero worship gives
an animated account of the region where the strange stories we
have been reading had their origin.  Let the reader contrast it
for a moment with Greece, the parent of classical mythology.

"In that strange island, Iceland,   burst up, the geologists say,
by fire from the bottom of the sea, a wild land of barrenness and
lava, swallowed many months of every year in black tempests, yet
with a wild, gleaming beauty in summer time, towering up there
stern and grim in the North Ocean, with its snow yokuls
(mountains), roaring geysers (boiling springs), sulphur pools,
and horrid volcanic chasms, like the vast, chaotic battle-field
of Frost and Fire,   where, of all places, we least looked for
literature or written memorials,   the record of these things was
written down.  On the seaboard of this wild land is a rim of
grassy country, where cattle can subsist, and men by means of
them and of what the sea yields; and it seems they were poetic
men these, men who had deep thoughts in them and uttered
musically their thoughts.  Much would be lost had Iceland not
been burst up from the sea, not been discovered by the Northmen!"


Chapter XXXIV
The Druids   Iona

The Druids were the priests or ministers of religion among the
ancient Celtic nations in Gaul, Britain, and Germany.  Our
information respecting them is borrowed from notices in the Greek
and Roman writers, compared with the remains of Welsh and Gaelic
poetry still extant.

The Druids combined the functions of the priest, the magistrate,
the scholar, and the physician.  They stood to the people of the
Celtic tribes in a relation closely analogous to that in which
the Brahmans of India, the Magi of Persia, and the priests of the
Egyptians stood to the people respectively by whom they were
revered.

The Druids taught the existence of one God, to whom they gave a
name "Be'al," which Celtic antiquaries tell us means "the life of
everything," or "the source of all beings,:" and which seems to
have affinity with the Phoenician Baal.  What renders this
affinity more striking is that the Druids as well as the
Phoenicians identified this, their supreme deity, with the Sun.
Fire was regarded as a symbol of the divinity.  The Latin writers
assert that the Druids also worshipped numerous inferior Gods.
They used no images to represent the object of their worship, nor
did they meet in temples or buildings of any kind for the
performance of their sacred rites.  A circle of stones (each
stone generally of vast size) enclosing an area of from twenty
feet to thirty yards in diameter, constituted their sacred place.
The most celebrated of these now remaining is Stonehenge, on
Salisbury Plain, England.

These sacred circles were generally situated near some stream, or
under the shadow of a grove or wide-spreading oak.  In the centre
of the circle stood the Cromlech or altar, which was a large
stone, placed in the manner of a table upon other stones set up
on end.  The Druids had also their high places, which were large
stones or piles of stones on the summits of hills.  These were
called Cairns, and were used in the worship of the deity under
the symbol of the sun.

That the Druids offered sacrifices to their deity there can be no
doubt.  But there is some uncertainty as to what they offered,
and of the ceremonies connected with their religious services we
know almost nothing.  The classical (Roman) writers affirm that
they offered on great occasions human sacrifices; as for success
in war or for relief from dangerous diseases.  Caesar has given a
detailed account of the manner in which this was done.  "They
have images of immense size, the limbs of which are framed with
twisted twigs and filled with living persons.  These being set on
fire, those within are encompassed by the flames."  Many attempts
have been made by Celtic writers to shake the testimony of the
Roman historians to this fact, but without success.

The Druids observed two festivals in each year.  The former took
place in the beginning of May, and was called Beltane or "fire of
God."  On this occasion a large fire was kindled on some elevated
spot, in honor of the sun, whose returning beneficence they thus
welcomed after the gloom and desolation of winter.  Of this
custom a trace remains in the name given to Whitsunday in parts
of Scotland to this day.  Sir Walter Scott uses the word in the
Boat Song in the Lady of the Lake:

"Ours is no sapling, chance-sown by the fountain,
Blooming at Beltane in winter to fade."

The other great festival of the Druids was called "Samh'in," or
"fire of peace," and was held on Hallow-eve (first of November),
which still retains this designation in the Highlands of
Scotland.  On this occasion the Druids assembled in solemn
conclave, in the most central part of the district, to discharge
the judicial functions of their order.  All questions, whether
public or private, all crimes against person or property, were at
this time brought before them for adjudication.  With these
judicial acts were combined certain superstitious usages,
especially the kindling of the sacred fire, from which all the
fires in the district which had been beforehand scrupulously
extinguished, might be relighted.  This usage of kindling fires
on Hallow-eve lingered in the British Islands long after the
establishment of Christianity.

Besides these two great annual festivals, the Druids were in the
habit of observing the full moon, and especially the sixth day of
the moon.  On the latter they sought the mistletoe, which grew on
their favorite oaks, and to which, as well as to the oak itself,
they ascribed a peculiar virtue and sacredness.  The discovery of
it was an occasion of rejoicing and solemn worship.  "They call
it," says Pliny, "by a word in their language which means 'heal-
all,' and having made solemn preparation for feasting and
sacrifice under the tree, they drive thither two milk-white
bulls, whose horns are then for the first time bound.  The priest
then, robed in white, ascends the tree, and cuts off the
mistletoe with a golden sickle.  It is caught in a white mantle,
after which they proceed to slay the victims, at the same time
praying that god would render his gift prosperous to those to
whom he had given it.  They drink the water in which it has been
infused, and think it a remedy for all diseases.  The mistletoe
is a parasitic plant, and is not always nor often found on the
oak, so that when it is found it is the more precious."

The Druids were the teachers of morality as well as of religion.
Of their ethical teaching a valuable specimen is preserved in the
Triads of the Welsh Bards, and from this we may gather that their
views of moral rectitude were on the whole just, and that they
held and inculcated many very noble and valuable principles of
conduct.  They were also the men of science and learning of their
age and people.  Whether they were acquainted with letters or not
has been disputed, though the probability is strong that they
were, to some extent.  But it is certain that they committed
nothing of their doctrine, their history, or their poetry to
writing.  Their teaching was oral, and their literature (if such
a word may be used in such a case) was preserved solely by
tradition.  But the Roman writers admit that "they paid much
attention to the order and laws of nature, and investigated and
taught to the youth under their charge many things concerning the
stars and their motions, the size of the world and the lands ,
and concerning the might and power of the immortal gods."

Their history consisted in traditional tales, in which the heroic
deeds of their forefathers were celebrated.  These were
apparently in verse, and thus constituted part of the poetry as
well as the history of the Druids.  In the poems of Ossian we
have, if not the actual productions of Druidical times, what may
be considered faithful representations of the songs of the Bards.

The Bards were an essential part of the Druidical hierarchy.  One
author, Pennant, says, "The bards were supposed to be endowed
with powers equal to inspiration.  They were the oral historians
of all past transactions, public and private.  They were also
accomplished genealogists."

Pennant gives a minute account of the Eisteddfods or sessions of
the bards and minstrels, which were held in Wales for many
centuries, long after the Druidical priesthood in its other
departments became extinct.  At these meetings none but bards of
merit were suffered to rehearse their pieces, and minstrels of
skill to perform.  Judges were appointed to decide on their
respective abilities, and suitable degrees were conferred.  In
the earlier period the judges were appointed by the Welsh
princes, and after the conquest