ll.  Antiope stands in the background, a mere lay figure,
and scattered about are numerous small symbolical figures.  Like
the Laocoon the Farnese Bull exhibits surprising mastery of
technical obstacles, but, like the Laocoon, it falls short of
true tragic grandeur.  In a greater degree than the Laocoon it
trenches upon the province of painting.  It is more complicated
in its subject-matter; and the appearance in the group of many
small subsidiary figures, which in a painting might have been
given their proper value, being in the marble of the same relief
and distinction as the major characters, give a somewhat absurd
effect.  The little goddess who sits in the foreground, for
instance, is smaller than the dog.  Again, there is less of the
motive shown than in the Laocoon.  The group is seized at the
moment preceding the frightful catastrophe, but that moment is as
full of agony as the succeeding ones, and in addition there is
the feeling of suspense and oppression that comes from the
unfinished tragedy.  Altogether, the group, in spite of the
marvellous technical skill shown in details, is a failure when
judged on general lines.  Its interest lies in momentary and
apparently ummotived suffering, not in any truly serious
conception of life.

With the conquest of Greece by Rome, the final stage of Greek art
begins.  But the vigor and originality had departed.  The
sculptors aimed at and attained technical correctness, academic
beauty of form, sensuous feeling, perfection of details, but they
lost all imaginative power.   A good example of the work of this
period is found in the Apollo Belvidere now in the Vatican.  This
famous statue is an early Roman copy of a Greek original.  It
represents the god advancing easily, full of vigor and grace.  It
is marvellously correct in drawing, but quite without feeling of
any kind.

Another work of this period is the sleeping Ariadne of the
Vatican.  This represents a woman reclining in a studied
sentimental attitude, her arms thrown about her head, her body
swathed in its protecting drapery.  To the same period also
belongs almost the last notable work of Greek art, the degenerate
and sensuous conception of the Venus de Medici.  In this statue
the goddess stands as if rising from the sea, her attitude
reserved, yet coquettish and self-conscious.  The form is
technically perfect, graceful, and soft in its refinement, but
compared with the earlier Aphrodites it is an unworthy successor.

Still another famous statue is the Borghese Gladiator, of Agasius
of Ephesus, now in the Louvre.  The statue is merely a bit of
display, an effort to parade technical skill and anatomical
knowledge.  The gladiator throws his weight strongly on his right
leg, and holds one arm high above his head, giving to his whole
body an effect of straining.  The figure is strong and wiry.
Agasius was distinctly an imitator, as were most of the artists
of this age, among whom must be reckoned the skilful sculptor of
the crouching Venus, also in the Louvre.  The goddess is shown as
bending down in graceful curves until her body is supported on
the right leg, which is bent double.  The form is strong and
healthy, graceful and easy in its somewhat constrained posture.

During all of this final period Greek art was very largely
influenced by the relations which existed between Greece and
Rome.  About the year 200 B.C. the Roman conquest of Greece led
to an important traffic in works of art between Rome and the
Greek cities.  For a time, indeed, statues formed a recognized
part of the booty which graced every Roman triumph.  M. Fulvius
Nobilior carried away not less than five hundred and fifteen.
After the period of conquest the importation of Greek statues
continued at Rome, and in time Greek artists also began to remove
thither, so that Rome became not only the centre for the
collection of Greek works of art, but the chief seat of their
production.  At this time the Roman religious conceptions were
identified with those of Greece, and the Greek gods received the
Latin names by which we now know them.  The influence of the
Greeks upon Rome was very marked, but the reflex influence of the
material civilization of Italy upon Greek art was altogether bad,
and thus the splendor of classical art went out in
dilletantism and weakness.

The destruction of the Roman Empire by the barbarians makes a
break in the artistic history of the world.  Not for many
centuries was there a vestige of artistic production.  Even when
in Italy and France the monks began to make crude attempts to
reach out for and represent in painting and sculpture imaginative
conceptions of things beautiful, they took their material
exclusively from Christian sources.  The tradition of classical
stories had nearly vanished from the mind of Europe.  Not until
the Renaissance restored the knowledge of classical culture to
Europe do we find artists making any use of the wealth of
imaginative material stored up in the myths of Greece.  Then,
indeed, by the discovery and circulation of the poets of
mythology, the Greek stories and conceptions of characters,
divine and human, became known once more and were used freely,
remaining until the present day one chief source of material and
subject-matter for the use of the painter and sculptor.










This etext was produced from the 1902 Harper and Brothers edition by
David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





MR. BONAPARTE OF CORSICA

by John Kendrick Bangs




CHAPTER I:  CORSICA TO BRIENNE
1769-1779



Napoleon's father, Charles Bonaparte, was the honored progenitor of
thirteen children, of whom the man who subsequently became the
Emperor of the French, by some curious provision of fate, was the
second.  That the infant Napoleon should have followed rather than
led the procession is so foreign to the nature of the man that many
worthy persons unfamiliar with the true facts of history have
believed that Joseph was a purely apocryphal infant, or, as some have
suggested, merely an adopted child; but that Napoleon did upon this
occasion content himself with second place is an incontrovertible
fact.  Nor is it entirely unaccountable.  It is hardly to be supposed
that a true military genius, such as Napoleon is universally conceded
to have been, would plunge into the midst of a great battle without
first having acquainted himself with the possibilities of the future.
A reconnoitre of the field of action is the first duty of a
successful commander; and hence it was that Napoleon, not wishing to
rush wholly unprepared into the battle of life, assigned to his
brother Joseph the arduous task of first entering into the world to
see how the land lay.  Joseph having found everything to his
satisfaction, Napoleon made his appearance in the little island of
Corsica, recently come under French domination the 15th day August,
1769.  Had he been born two months earlier, we are told, he would
have been an Italian.  Had he been born a hundred years later, it is
difficult to say what he would have been.  As it was, he was born a
Frenchman.  It is not pleasant to contemplate what the man's future
would have been had he been born an Italian, nor is it easy to
picture that future with any confidence born of certainty.  Since the
days of Caesar, Italy had not produced any great military commander,
and it is not likely that the powers would have changed their scheme,
confirmed by sixteen centuries of observance, in Napoleon's behalf--a
fact which Napoleon himself realized, for he often said in his latter
days, with a shudder:  "I hate to think how inglorious I should have
become had I been born two months earlier and entered the world as an
Italian.  I should have been another Joseph--not that Joseph is not a
good man, but he is not a great man.  Ah!  Bourrienne, we cannot be
too careful in the selection of our birthdays."

It is the testimony of all who knew him in his infancy that Napoleon
was a good child.  He was obedient and respectful to his mother, and
sometimes at night when, on account of some indigestible quality of
his food or other cause, it was necessary for his father to make a
series of forced marches up and down the spacious nursery in the
beautiful home at Ajaccio, holding the infant warrior in his arms,
certain premonitions of his son's future career dawned upon the
parent.  His anguish was voiced in commanding tones; his wails, like
his subsequent addresses to his soldiers, were short, sharp, clear,
and decisive, nor would he brook the slightest halt in these midnight
marches until the difficulties which stood in his path had been
overcome.  His confidence in himself at this early period was
remarkable.  Quick to make up his mind, he was tenacious of his
purpose to the very end.

It is related that when barely seven months old, while sitting in his
nurse's lap, by means of signs which she could not fail to
comprehend, he expressed the desire, which, indeed, is characteristic
of most healthy Children of that age, to possess the whole of the
outside world, not to mention the moon and other celestial bodies.
Reaching his little hands out in the direction of the Continent,
lying not far distant over the waters of the Mediterranean, he made
this demand; and while, of course, his desire was not granted upon
the instant, it is the testimony of history that he never lost sight
of that cherished object.

After providing Napoleon with eleven other brothers and sisters,
Charles Bonaparte died, and left his good and faithful wife Letitia
to care for the future greatness of his family, a task rendered
somewhat the more arduous than it might otherwise have been by the
lack of income; but the good woman, who had much of Napoleon's nature
in her make-up, was equal to the occasion.  She had her sons to help
her, and was constantly buoyed up by the expressed determination of
her second child to place her beyond the reach of want in that future
day when the whole world lay grovelling at his feet.

"Do not worry, mother," Napoleon said.  "Let Joseph and Lucien and
Louis and Jerome and the girls be educated; as for me, I can take
care of myself.  I, who at the age of three have mastered the Italian
language, have a future before me.  I will go to France, and then--"

"Well! what then?" his mother asked.

"Nous verrons!" Napoleon replied, turning on his heel and walking out
of the house whistling a military march.

From this it will be seen that even in his in fancy Napoleon had his
ideas as to his future course.  Another anecdote, which is taken from
the unpublished memoirs of the grandson of one of his Corsican
nurses, illustrates in an equally vivid manner how, while a mere
infant in arms, he had a passion for and a knowledge of military
terms.  Early one morning the silence was broken by the incipient
Emperor calling loudly for assistance.  His nurse, rushing to him,
discovered that the point of a pin was sticking into his back.
Hastily removing the cause of the disturbance, she endeavored to
comfort him:

"Never mind, sweetheart," she said, "it's only a nasty pin."

"Nasty pin!" roared Napoleon.  "By the revered name of Paoli, I swear
I thought it was a bayonet!"

It was, no doubt, this early realization of the conspicuous part he
was to play in the history of his time that made the youthful
Bonaparte reserved of manner, gloomy, and taciturn, and prone to
irritability.  He felt within him the germ of future greatness, and
so became impatient of restraint.  He completely dominated the
household.  Joseph, his elder brother, became entirely subject to the
imperious will of the future Emperor; and when in fancy Napoleon
dreamed of those battles to come, Joseph was always summoned to take
an active part in the imaginary fight.  Now he was the bridge of
Lodi, and, lying flat on his back, was forced to permit his
bloodthirsty brother to gallop across him, shouting words of
inspiration to a band of imaginary followers; again he was forced to
pose as a snow-clad Alp for Napoleon to climb, followed laboriously
by Lucien and Jerome and the other children.  It cannot be supposed
that this was always pleasing to Joseph, but he never faltered when
the demand was made that he should act, because he did not dare.

"You bring up the girls, mother," Napoleon had said.  "Leave the boys
to me and I'll make kings of them all, if I have to send them over to
the United States, where all men will soon be potentates, and their
rulers merely servants--chosen to do their bidding."

Once, Joseph venturing to assert himself as the eldest son, Napoleon
smiled grimly.

"And what, pray, does that mean?" he asked, scornfully.

"That I and not you am the head of the family," replied Joseph.

"Very well," said Napoleon, rushing behind him, and, by a rapidly
conceived flank movement, giving Joseph a good sound kick.  "How does
the head of the family like the foot of the family?  Don't ever prate
of accidents of birth to me."

From that time on Joseph never murmured again, but obeyed blindly his
brother's slightest behest.  He would have permitted Napoleon to mow
him down with grape-shot without complaint rather than rebel and
incur the wrath which he knew would then fall upon his head.

At school the same defiance of restraint and contempt for superior
strength characterized Napoleon.  Here, too, his taciturn nature
helped him much.  If he were asked a question which he could not
answer, he would decline to speak, so that his instructors were
unable to state whether or not he was in ignorance as to the point
under discussion, and could mark him down conscientiously as
contumelious only.  Hence it was that he stood well in his studies,
but was never remarkable for deportment.  His favorite plaything,
barring his brother Joseph, was a small brass cannon that weighed
some thirty odd pounds, and which is still to be seen on the island
of Corsica.  Of this he once said:  "I'd rather hear its report than
listen to a German band; though if I could get them both playing at
the same time there'd be one German band less in the world."

This remark found its parallel later on when, placed by Barras in
command of the defenders of the Convention against the attacks of the
Sectionists, Napoleon was asked the chairman of the Assembly to send
them occasional reports as to how matters progressed.  His reply was
terse.

"Legislators," he said, "you ask me for an occasional report.  If you
listen you will hear the report of my cannon.  That is all you'll
get, and it will be all you need.  I am here.  I will save you."

"It is a poor time for jokes," said a representative.

"It is a worse time for paper reports," retorted Napoleon.  "It would
take me longer to write out a legislative report than it will to
clean out the mob.  Besides, I want it understood at this end of my
career that autograph-hunters are going to get left."

As he turned, Barras asked him as to his intentions.

"Where are you going?" he asked.

"To make a noise in the world," cried Napoleon; "au revoir."

That he had implanted in him the essential elements of a great
fighter his school-companions were not long in finding out.

When not more than five years of age he fell in love with a little
schoolmate, and, being jeered at for his openly avowed sentiments, he
threatened to thrash the whole school, adding to the little maiden
that he would thrash her as well unless she returned his love, a line
of argument which completely won her heart, particularly in view of
the fact that he proved his sincerity by fulfilling that part of his
assumed obligations which referred to the subjugation of the rest of
the school.  It was upon this occasion that in reference to his
carelessness of dress, his schoolmates composed the rhyme,


"Napoleon di mezza calzetta
Fa l'amore a Giacominetta."


which, liberally translated, means,


"Hi!  Look at Nap!  His socks down of his shin,
Is making love to little Giacomin."


To this Napoleon, on the authority of the Memoirs of his Father's
Hired Man, retorted:


"I would advise you, be not indiscreet,
Or I will yank YOUR socks right of your feet."


All of which goes to show that at no time in his youth was he to be
trifled with.  In poetry or a pitched battle he was quite equal to
any emergency, and his companions were not long in finding it out.

So passed the infancy of Mr. Bonaparte, of Corsica.  It was, after
all, much like the extreme youth of most other children.  In
everything he undertook he was facile princeps, and in nothing that
he said or did is there evidence that he failed to appreciate what
lay before him.  A visitor to the family once ventured the remark, "I
am sorry, Napoleon, for you little Corsicans.  You have no Fourth of
July or Guy Fawkes Day to celebrate."

"Oh, as for that," said Napoleon, "I for one do not mind.  I will
make national holidays when I get to be a man, and at present I can
get along without them.  What's the use of Fourth of July when you
can shoot off fireworks everyday?"

It was a pertinent question, the visitor departed much impressed with
the boy's precocity, which was rendered doubly memorable by
Napoleon's humor in discharging fifteen pounds of wadding from his
cannon into the visitor's back as he went out of the front gate.

At the age of six Napoleon put aside all infantile pleasures, and at
eight assumed all the dignity of that age.  He announced his
intention to cease playing war with his brother Joseph.

"I am no longer a child, Joseph," he said; "I shall no longer thrash
you in play.  Here-after I shall do it in sober earnest."

Which no doubt is why, in 1779, Napoleon having stuck faithfully to
his promise, Joseph heartily seconded his younger brother's demand
that he should leave Corsica and take a course of military
instruction at Brienne.

"I shall no doubt miss my dear brother Napoleon," Joseph said to his
mother; "but I would not stand in the way of his advancement.  Let
him go, even though by his departure I am deprived of all opportunity
to assist him in his pleasing games of war."



CHAPTER II:  BRIENNE
1779-1785



As we have seen, the young Corsican was only ten years of age when,
through the influence of Count Marboeuf, an old friend of the
Bonaparte family, he was admitted to the military school at Brienne.
Those who were present at the hour of his departure from home say
that Napoleon would have wept like any other child had he yielded to
the impulses of his heart, and had be not detected a smile of
satisfaction upon the lips of his brother Joseph.  It was this smile
that drove all tender emotions from his breast.  Taking Joseph to one
side, he requested to know the cause of his mirth.

"I was thinking of something funny," said Joseph, paling slightly as
he observed the stern expression of Napoleon's face.

"Oh, indeed," said Napoleon; "and what was that something?  I'd like
to smile myself."

"H'm!--ah--why," faltered Joseph, "it may not strike you as funny,
you know.  What is a joke for one man is apt to be a serious matter
for another, particularly when that other is of a taciturn and
irritable disposition."

"Very likely," said Napoleon, dryly; "and sometimes what is a joke
for the man of mirth is likewise in the end a serious matter for that
same humorous person.  This may turn out to be the case in the
present emergency.  What was the joke?  If I do not find it a
humorous joke, I'll give you a parting caress which you won't forget
in a hurry."

"I was only thinking," said Joseph, uneasily, "that it is a very good
thing for that little ferry-boat you are going away on that you are
going on it."

Here Joseph smiled weakly, but Napoleon was grim as ever.

"Well," he said, impatiently, "what of that?"

"Why," returned Joseph, "it seemed to me that such a tireless little
worker as the boat is would find it very restful to take a Nap."

For an instant Napoleon was silent.

"Joseph," said he, as he gazed solemnly out of the window, "I thank
you from the bottom of my heart for this.  I had had regrets at
leaving home.  A moment ago I was ready to break down for the sorrow
of parting from my favorite Alp, from my home, from my mother, and my
little brass cannon; but now--now I can go with a heart steeled
against emotion.  If you are going in for humor of that kind, I'm
glad I'm going away.  Farewell."

With this, picking Joseph up in his arms and concealing him beneath
the sofa cushions, Napoleon imprinted a kiss upon his mother's cheek,
rushed aboard the craft that was to bear him to fame, and was soon
but a memory in the little house at Ajaccio.  "Parting is such sweet
sorrow," murmured Joseph, as he watched the little vessel bounding
over the turquoise waters of the imprisoned sea.  "I shall miss him;
but there are those who wax fat on grief, and, if I know myself, I am
of that brand."

Arrived at Paris, Napoleon was naturally awe-stricken by the
splendors of that wonderful city.

"I shall never forget the first sight I had of Paris," he said, years
later, when speaking of his boyhood to Madame Junot, with whom he was
enjoying a tete-a-tete in the palace at Versailles.  "I wondered if I
hadn't died of sea-sickness on the way over, as I had several times
wished I might, and got to heaven.  I didn't know how like the other
place it was at that time, you see.  It was like an enchanted land, a
World's Fair forever, and the prices I had to pay for things quite
carried out the World's Fair idea.  They were enormous.  Weary with
walking, for instance, I hired a fiacre and drove about the city for
an hour, and it cost me fifty francs; but I fell in with pleasant
enough people, one of whom gave me a ten-franc ticket entitling me to
a seat on a park bench--for five francs."

Madame Junot laughed.

"And yet they claim that bunco is a purely American institution," she
said.

"Dame!" cried Napoleon, rising from the throne, and walking excitedly
up and down the palace floor, "I never realized until this moment
that I had been swindled!  Bourrienne, send Fouche to me.  I remember
the man distinctly, and if he lives he has yet to die."

Calming down, he walked to Madame Junot's side, and, taking her by
the hand, continued:

"And then the theatres!  What revelations of delight they were!  I
used to go to the Theatre Francais whenever I could sneak away and
had the money to seat me with the gods in the galleries.  Bernhardt
was then playing juvenile parts, and Coquelin had not been heard of.
Ah! my dear Madame Junot," he added, giving her ear a delicate pinch,
"those were the days when life seemed worth the living--when one of a
taciturn nature and prone to irritability could find real pleasure in
existence.  Oh to be unknown again!"

And then, Madame Junot's husband having entered the room, the Emperor
once more relapsed into a moody silence.

But to return to Brienne.  Napoleon soon found that there is a gulf
measurable by no calculable distance between existence as the
dominating force of a family and life as a new boy at a boarding-
school.  He found his position reversed, and he began for the first
time in his life to appreciate the virtues of his brother Joseph.  He
who had been the victorious general crossing the Alps now found
himself the Alp, with a dozen victorious generals crossing him; he
who had been the gunner was now the target, and his present inability
to express his feelings in language which his tormentors could
understand, for he had not yet mastered the French tongue, kept him
in a state of being which may well be termed volcanic.

"I simply raged within in those days,"  Napoleon once said to Las
Casas.  "I could have swallowed my food raw and it would have been
cooked on its way down, I boiled so.  They took me for a snow-clad
Alp, when, as a matter of fact, I was a small Vesuvius, with a
temperature that would have made Tabasco sauce seem like iced water
by contrast."

His treatment at the hands of his fellow-students did much to
increase his irritability, but he kept himself well in hand, biding
the time when he could repay their insults with interest.  They
jeered him because he was short--short of stature and short of funds;
they twitted him on being an alien, calling him an Italian, and
asking him why he did not seek out a position in the street-cleaning
bureau instead of endeavoring to associate with gentlemen.  To this
the boy made a spirited reply.

"I am fitting myself for that," he said.  "I'll sweep your Parisian
streets some day, and some of you particles will go with the rest of
the dust before my broom."

He little guessed how prophetic were these words.

Again, they tormented Napoleon on being the son of a lawyer, and
asked him who his tailor was, and whether or not his garments were
the lost suits of his father's clients, the result of which was that,
though born of an aristocratic family, the boy became a pronounced
Republican, and swore eternal enmity to the high-born.  Another
result of this attitude towards him was that he retired from the
companionship of all save his books, and he became intimate with
Homer and Ossian and Plutarch--familiar with the rise and fall of
emperors and empires.  Challenged to fight a duel with one of his
classmates for a supposititious insult, he accepted, and, having the
choice in weapons, chose an examination in mathematics, the one first
failing in a demonstration to blow his brains out.  "That is the
safer for you," he said to his adversary.  "You are sure to lose; but
the after-effects will not be fatal, because you have no brains to
blow out, so you can blow out a candle instead."

Whatever came of the duel we are not informed; but it is to be
presumed that it did not result fatally for young Bonaparte, for he
lived many years after the incident, as most of our readers are
probably aware.  Had he not done so, this biography would have had to
stop here, and countless readers of our own day would have been
deprived of much entertaining fiction that is even now being
scattered broadcast over the world with Napoleon as its hero.  His
love of books combined with his fondness for military life was never
more beautifully expressed than when he wrote to his mother:  "With
my sword at my side and my Homer in my pocket, I hope to carve my way
through the world."

The beauty and simplicity of this statement is not at all affected by
Joseph's flippant suggestion that by this Napoleon probably meant
that he would read his enemies to sleep with his Homer, and then use
his sword to cut their heads off.  Joseph, as we have already seen,
had been completely subjugated by his younger brother, and it is not
to be wondered at, perhaps, that, with his younger brother at a safe
distance, he should manifest some jealousy, and affect to treat his
sentiments with an unwarranted levity.

For Napoleon's self-imposed solitude everything at Brienne arranged
itself propitiously.  Each of the students was provided with a small
patch of ground which he could do with as he pleased, and Napoleon's
use of his allotted share was characteristic.  He converted it into a
fortified garden, surrounded by trees and palisades.

"Now I can mope in peace," he said--and he did.

It has been supposed by historians that it was here that Napoleon did
all of his thinking, mapping out his future career, and some of them
have told us what he thought.  He dreamed of future glory always, one
of them states; but whether upon the authority of a palisade or a
tiger-lily is not mentioned.  Others have given us his soliloquies as
he passed to and fro in this little retreat alone, and heard only by
the stars at night; but for ourselves, we must be accurate, and it is
due to the reader at this point that we should confess--having no
stars in our confidence--our entire ignorance as to what Napoleon
Bonaparte said, did, or thought when sitting in solitude in his
fortified bower; though if our candid impression is desired we have
no hesitation in saying that we believe him to have been in Paris
enjoying the sights of the great city during those periods of
solitude.  Boys are boys in all lands, and a knowledge of that
peculiar species of human beings, the boarding-school boy, is
convincing that, given a prospect of five or six hours of
uninterrupted solitude, no youth of proper spirit would fail to avail
himself of the opportunities thus offered to see life, particularly
with a city like Paris within easy "hooky" distance.

It must also be remembered that the French had at this time abolished
the hereafter, along with the idea of a Deity and all pertaining
thereto, so that there was nothing beyond a purely temporal
discipline and lack of funds to interfere with Bonaparte's enjoyment
of all the pleasures which Paris could give.  Of temporal discipline
he need have had no fear, since, it was perforce relaxed while he was
master of his solitude; as for the lack of funds, history has shown
that this never interfered with the fulfilment of Napoleon's hopes,
and hence the belief that the beautiful pictures, drawn by historians
and painted by masters of the brush, of Napoleon in solitude should
be revised to include a few accessories, drawn from such portions of
Parisian life as will readily suggest themselves.

In his studies, however, Napoleon ranked high.  His mathematical
abilities were so marked that it was stated that he could square the
circle with his eyes closed and both hands tied behind his back.

"The only circle I could not square at that time," said he, "was the
family circle, being insufficiently provided with income to do so.  I
might have succeeded better had not Joseph's appetite grown too fast
for the strength of my pocket; that was the only respect, however, in
which I ever had any difficulty in keeping up with my dear elder
brother."  It was here, too, that he learned the inestimably
important military fact that the shortest distance between two points
is in a straight line; and that he had fully mastered that fact was
often painfully evident to such of his schoolmates as seemed to force
him to measure with his right arm the distance between his shoulder
and the ends of their noses.  Nor was he utterly without wit.  Asked
by a cribbing comrade in examination what a corollary was, Napoleon
scornfully whispered back:

"A mathematical camel with two humps."

In German only was he deficient, much to the irritation of his
instructor.

"Will you ever learn anything?" asked M. Bouer, the German teacher.

"Certainly," said Napoleon; "but no more German.  I know the only
word I need in that language."

"And what, pray, is that?"

"Surrender; that's all I'll ever wish to say to the Germans.  But
lest I get it wrong, pray tell me the imperative form of surrender in
your native tongue."

M. Bouer's reply is not known to history, but it was probably not one
which the Master of Etiquette at Brienne could have entirely
commended.

So he lived at Brienne, thoroughly mastering the science of war;
acquiring a military spirit; making no friends, but commanding
ultimately the fearsome respect of his school-mates.  One or two
private interviews with little aristocrats who jeered at him for his
ancestry convinced them that while he might not have had illustrious
ancestors, it was not unlikely that he would in time develop
illustrious descendants, and the jeerings and sneerings soon ceased.
The climax of Bonaparte's career at Brienne was in 1784, when he
directed a snowball fight between two evenly divided branches of the
school with such effect that one boy had his skull cracked and the
rest were laid up for weeks from their wounds.

"It was a wonderful fight," remarked Napoleon, during his campaign in
Egypt.  "I took good care that an occasional missent ball should bowl
off the hat of M. Bouer, and whenever any particularly aristocratic
aristocrat's head showed itself above the ramparts, an avalanche fell
upon his facade with a dull, sickening thud.  I have never seen an
American college football game, but from all I can learn from
accounts in the Paris editions of the American newspapers the effects
physical in our fight and that game are about the same."

In 1784, shortly after this episode, Napoleon left Brienne, having
learned all that those in authority there could teach him, and in
1785 he applied for and received admission to the regular army, much
to the relief of Joseph.

"If he had flunked and come back to Corsica to live," said Joseph, "I
think I should have emigrated.  I love him dearly, but I'm fonder of
myself, and Corsica, large as it is, is too small to contain Napoleon
Bonaparte and his brother Joseph simultaneously, particularly as
Joseph is distinctly weary of being used as an understudy for a gory
battle-field."



CHAPTER III:  PARIS--VALENCE--LYONS--CORSICA
1785-1793



The feeling among the larger boys at Brienne at Napoleon's departure
was much the same as that experienced by Joseph when his soon to-be-
famous brother departed from Corsica.  The smaller boys regretted his
departure, since it had been one of their greatest pleasures to watch
Napoleon disciplining the upper classmen, but Bonaparte was as glad
to go as the elders were to have him.

"Brienne is good enough in its way," said he; "but what's the use of
fighting children?  It's merely a waste of time cracking a
youngster's skull with a snowball when you can go out into the real
world and let daylight into a man's whole system with a few ounces of
grape-shot."

He had watched developments at Paris, too, with the keenest interest,
and was sufficiently far-seeing to know that the troubles of the King
and Queen and their aristocratic friends boded well for a man fond of
a military life who had sense enough to be on the right side.  That
it took an abnormal degree of intelligence to know which was the
right side in those troublous days he also realized, and hence he
cultivated that taciturnity and proneness to irritability which we
have already mentioned.

"If it had not been for my taciturnity, Talleyrand," he observed,
when in the height of his power, "I should have got it in the neck."

"Got what in the neck?" asked Talleyrand.

"The guillotine," rejoined the Emperor.  "It was the freedom of
speech which people of those sanguinary days allowed themselves that
landed many a fine head in the basket.  As for me, I simply held my
tongue with both hands, and when I wearied of that I called some one
in to hold it for me.  If I had filled the newspapers with
'Interviews with Napoleon Bonaparte,' and articles on 'Where is
France at?' with monographs in the leading reviews every month on
'Why I am what I am,' and all such stuff as that, I'd have condensed
my career into one or two years, and ended by having my head divorced
from my shoulders in a most commonplace fashion.  Taciturnity is a
big thing when you know how to work it, and so is proneness to
irritability.  The latter keeps you from making friends, and I didn't
want any friends just then.  They were luxuries which I couldn't
afford.  You have to lend money to friends; you have to give them
dinners and cigars, and send bonbons to their sisters.  A friend in
those days would have meant bankruptcy of the worst sort.
Furthermore, friends embarrass you when you get into public office,
and try to make you conspicuous when you'd infinitely prefer to saw
wood and say nothing.  I took my loneliness straight, and that is one
of the reasons why I am now the Emperor of France, and your master."

Before entering the army a year at a Parisian military school kept
Bonaparte busy.  There, as at Brienne, he made his influence felt.
He found his fellow-pupils at Paris living in a state of luxury that
was not in accord with his ideas as to what a soldier should have.
Whether or not his new school-mates, after the time-honored custom,
tossed him in a blanket on the first night of his arrival, history
does not say, but Bonaparte had hardly been at the school a week when
he complained to the authorities that there was too much luxury in
their system for him.

"Cadets do not need feather-beds and eider-down quilts," he said;
"and as for the sumptuous viands we have served at mealtime, they are
utterly inappropriate.  I'd rather have a plate of Boston baked beans
or steaming buckwheat cakes to put my mind into that state which
should characterize the thinking apparatus of a soldier than a dozen
of the bouchees financieres and lobster Newburgs and other made-
dishes which you have on your menu.  Made-dishes and delicate
beverages make one mellow and genial of disposition.  What we need is
the kind of food that will destroy our amiability and put us in a
frame of mind calculated to make willing to kill our best friends--
nay, our own brothers and sisters--if occasion arises, with a smiling
face.  Look at me.  I could kill my brother Joseph, dear as he is to
me, and never shed a tear, and it's buckwheat-cakes and waffles that
have done it!"

Likewise he abhorred dancing.

"Away with dancing men!" he cried, impatiently, at one time when in
the height of his power, to his Minister of War.  "Suppose when I was
crossing the Alps my soldiers had been of your dancing sort.  How far
would I have got if every time the band played a two-step my
grenadiers had dropped their guns to pirouette over those snow-white
wastes?  Let the diplomats do the dancing.  For soldiers give me men
to whom the polka is a closed book and the waltz an abomination."

Holding these views, he naturally failed to win the sympathy of his
fellows at the Paris school who, young nobles for the most part,
could not understand his point of view.  So, having nothing else to
do, he applied himself solely to his studies and to reflection, and
it was the happiest moment of his life up to that time when, having
passed his examinations for entrance to the regular army, he received
his commission as a second lieutenant.

"Now we're off!" he said to himself, as he surveyed himself in the
mirror, after donning his uniform.

"It does not set very well in the back," remarked one of the maids of
the pension in which he lived, glancing in at the door.

"It does not matter," returned Bonaparte, loftily.  "As long as it
sets well in front I'm satisfied; for you should know, madame, that a
true soldier never shows his back, and that is the kind of a military
person I am.  A false front would do for me.  I am no tin soldier,
which in after-years it will interest you to remember.  When you are
writing your memoirs this will make an interesting anecdote."

From this it is to be inferred that at this time he had no thought of
Moscow.  Immediately after his appointment Bonaparte repaired to
Valence, where his regiment was stationed and where he formed a
strong attachment for the young daughter of Madame du Colombier, with
whom, history records, he ate cherries before breakfast.  This was
his sole dissipation at that time, but his felicity was soon to be
interrupted.  His regiment was ordered to Lyons, and Bonaparte and
his love were parted.

"Duty calls me, my dear," he said, on leaving her.  "I would stay if
I could, but I can't, and, on the whole, it is just as well.  If I
stayed I should marry you, and that would never do.  You cannot
support me, nor I you.  We cannot live on cherries, and as yet my
allowance is an ingrowing one--which is to say that it goes from me
to my parent, and not from my parent to me.  Therefore, my only love,
farewell.  Marry some one else.  There are plenty of men who are fond
of cherries before breakfast, and there is no reason why one so
attractive as you should not find a lover."

The unhappy girl was silent for a moment.  Then, with an ill-
suppressed sob, she bade him go.

"You are right, Napoleon," she said.  "Go.  Go where duty calls you,
and if you get tired of Lyons--"

"Yes?" he interrupted, eagerly.

"Try leopards!" she cried, rushing from his embrace into the house.

Bonaparte never forgave this exhibition of flippancy, though many
years after, when he learned that his former love, who had married,
as he had bade her do, and suffered, was face to face with
starvation, it is said, on the authority of one of his ex-valet's
memoirs, that he sent her a box of candied cherries from one of the
most expensive confectionery-shops of Paris.

After a brief sojourn at Lyons, Napoleon was summoned with his
regiment to quell certain popular tumults at Auxonne.  There he
distinguished himself as a handler of mobs, and learned a few things
that were of inestimable advantage to him later.  Speaking of it in
after-years, he observed:  "It is my opinion, my dear Emperor Joseph,
that grape-shot is the only proper medicine for a mob.  Some people
prefer to turn the hose on them, but none of that for me.  They fear
water as they do death, but they get over water.  Death is more
permanent.  I've seen many a rioter, made respectable by a good
soaking, return to the fray after he had dried out, but in all my
experience I have never known a man who was once punctured by a
discharge of grape-shot who took any further interest in rioting."

About this time he began to regulate his taciturnity.  On occasions
he had opinions which he expressed most forcibly.  In 1790, having
gone to an evening reception at Madame Neckar's, he electrified his
hostess and her guests by making a speech of some five hundred words
in length, too long to be quoted here in full, but so full of import
and delivered with such an air of authority that La Fayette, who was
present, paled visibly, and Mirabeau, drawing Madame de Stael to one
side, whispered, trembling with emotion, "Who is that young person?"

Whether this newly acquired tendency to break in upon the reserve
which had hitherto been the salient feature of his speech had
anything to do with it or not we are not aware, but shortly
afterwards Napoleon deemed it wise to leave his regiment for a while,
and to return to his Corsican home on furlough.  Of course an
affecting scene was enacted by himself and his family when they were
at last reunited.  Letitia, his fond mother, wept tears of joy, and
Joseph, shaking him by the hand, rushed, overcome with emotion, from
the house.  Napoleon shortly after found him weeping in the garden.

"Why so sad, Joseph?" he inquired.  "Are you sorry I have returned?"

"No, dear Napoleon," said Joseph, turning away his head to hide his
tears, "it is not that.  I was only weeping because--because, in the
nature of things, you will have to go away again, and--the--the idea
of parting from you has for the moment upset my equilibrium."

"Then we must proceed to restore it," said Napoleon, and, taking
Joseph by the right arm, he twisted it until Joseph said that he felt
quite recovered.

Napoleon's stay at Corsica was quite uneventful.  Fearing lest by
giving way to love of family, and sitting and talking with them in
the luxuriously appointed parlor below-stairs, he should imbibe too
strong a love for comfort and ease, and thus weaken his soldierly
instincts, as well as break in upon that taciturnity which, as we
have seen, was the keynote of his character, he had set apart for
himself a small room on the attic floor, where he spent most of his
time undisturbed, and at the same time made Joseph somewhat easier in
his mind.

"When he's up-stairs I am comparatively safe," said Joseph.  "If he
stayed below with us I fear I should have a return of my nervous
prostration."

Meantime, Napoleon was promoted to a first lieutenancy, and shortly
after, during the Reign of Terror in Paris, having once more for the
moment yielded to an impulse to speak out in meeting, he denounced
anarchy in unmeasured terms, and was arrested and taken to Paris.

"It was a fortunate arrest for me," he said.  "There I was in Corsica
with barely enough money to pay my way back to the capital.
Arrested, the State had to pay my fare, and I got back to active
political scenes on a free pass.  As for the trial, it was a farce,
and I was triumphantly acquitted.  The jury was out only fifteen
minutes.  I had so little to say for myself that the judges began to
doubt if I had any ideas on any subject--or, as one of them said,
having no head to mention, it would be useless to try and cut it off.
Hence my acquittal and my feeling that taciturnity is the mother of
safety."

Then came the terrible attack of the mob upon the Tuileries on the
20th of June, 1792.  Napoleon was walking in the street with
Bourrienne when the attack began.

"There's nothing like a lamp-post for an occasion like this, it
broadens one's views so," he said, rapidly climbing up a convenient
post, from which he could see all that went on.  "I didn't know that
this was the royal family's reception-day.  Do you want to know what
I think?"

"Mumm is the word," whispered Bourrienne.  "This is no time to have
opinions."

"Mumm may be the word, but water is the beverage.  Mumm is too dry.
What this crowd needs is a good wetting down," retorted Bonaparte.
"If I were Louis XVI. I'd turn the hose on these tramps, and keep
them at bay until I could get my little brass cannon loaded.  When I
had that loaded, I'd let them have a few balls hot from the bat.
This is what comes of being a born king.  Louis doesn't know how to
talk to the people.  He's all right for a state-dinner, but when it
comes to a mass-meeting he is not in it."

And then as the King, to gratify the mob, put the red cap of
Jacobinism upon his head, the man who was destined before many years
to occupy the throne of France let fall an ejaculation of wrath.

"The wretches!" he cried.  "How little they know!  They've only given
him another hat to talk through!  They'll have to do their work all
over again, unless Louis takes my advice and travels abroad for his
health."

These words were prophetic, for barely two months later the second
and most terrible and portentous attack upon the palace took place--
an attack which Napoleon witnessed, as he had witnessed the first,
from a convenient lamp-post, and which filled him with disgust and
shame; and it was upon that night of riot and bloodshed that he gave
utterance to one of his most famous sayings.

"Bourrienne," said he, as with his faithful companions he laboriously
climbed the five flights of stairs leading to his humble apartment,
"I hate the aristocrats, as you know; and to-day has made me hate the
populace as well.  What is there left to like?"

"Alas! lieutenant, I cannot say," said Bourrienne, shaking his head
sadly.

"What," continued Napoleon, "is the good of anything?"

"I give it up," returned Bourrienne, with a sigh.  "I never was good
at riddles.  What IS the good of anything?"

"Nothing!" said Napoleon, laconically, as he took off his uniform and
went to bed.



CHAPTER IV:  SARDINIA--TOULON--NICE--PARIS--BARRAS--JOSEPHINE
1793-1796



Greatness now began to dawn for Napoleon.  Practically penniless, in
a great and heartless city, even the lower classes began to perceive
that here was one before whom there lay a brilliant future.
Restaurateurs, laundresses, confectioners--all trusted him.  An
instance of the regard people were beginning to have for him is shown
in the pathetic interview between Napoleon and Madame Sans Gene, his
laundress.

"Here is your wash, lieutenant," said she, after climbing five
flights of stairs, basket in hand, to the miserable lodging of the
future Emperor.

Napoleon looked up from his books and counted the clothes.

"There is one sock missing," said he, sternly.

"No," returned Sans Gene.  "Half of each sock was washed away, and I
sewed the remaining halves into one.  One good sock is better than
two bad ones.  If you ever lose a leg in battle you may find the odd
one handy."

"How can I ever repay you?" cried Napoleon, touched by her friendly
act.

"I'm sure I don't know," returned Madame Sans Gene, demurely, "unless
you will escort me to the Charity Ball--I'll buy the tickets."

"And, pray, what good will that do?" asked Bonaparte.

"It will make Lefebvre jealous," said Madame Sans Gene, "and maybe
that will bring him to the point.  I want to marry him, but,
encourage him as I will, he does not propose, and as in revising the
calendar the government has abolished leap-year, I really don't know
what to do."

"I cannot go to the ball," said Napoleon, sadly.  "I don't dance,
and, besides, I have loaned my dress-suit to Bourrienne.  But I will
flirt with you on the street if you wish, and perhaps that will
suffice."

It is hardly necessary to tell the reader that the ruse was
successful, and that Lefebvre, thus brought to the point, married
Madame Sans Gene, and subsequently, through his own advancement, made
her the Duchess of Dantzig.  The anecdote suffices to show how
wretchedly poor and yet how full of interest and useful to those
about him Napoleon was at the time.

In February, 1793, a change for the better in his fortunes occurred.
Bonaparte, in cooperation with Admiral Turget, was ordered to make a
descent upon Sardinia.  What immediately followed can best be told in
Bonaparte's own words.  "My descent was all right," he said
afterwards, "and I had the Sardines all ready to put in boxes, when
Turget had a fit of sea-sickness, lost his bearings, and left me in
the lurch.  There was nothing left for me but to go back to Corsica
and take it out of Joseph, which I did, much to Joseph's unhappiness.
It was well for the family that I did so, for hardly had I arrived at
Ajaccio when I found my old friend Paoli wrapping Corsica up in a
brown-paper bundle to send to the King of England with his
compliments.  This I resisted, with the result that our whole family
was banished, and those fools of Corsicans broke into our house and
smashed all of our furniture.  They little knew that that furniture,
if in existence to-day, would bring millions of francs as curios if
sold at auction.  It was thus that the family came to move to France
and that I became in fact what I had been by birth--a Frenchman.  If
I had remained a Corsican, Paoli's treachery would have made me an
Englishman, to which I should never have become reconciled, although
had I been an Englishman I should have taken more real pleasure out
of the battle of Waterloo than I got.

"After this I was ordered to Toulon.  The French forces here were
commanded by General Cartaux, who had learned the science of war
painting portraits in Paris.  He ought to have been called General
Cartoon.  He besieged Toulon in a most impressionistic fashion.  He'd
bombard and bombard and bombard, and then leave the public to guess
at the result.  It's all well enough to be an impressionist in
painting, but when it comes to war the public want more decided
effects.  When I got there, as a brigadier-general, I saw that
Cartaux was wasting his time and ammunition.  His idea seemed to be
that by firing cannon all day he could so deafen the enemy that at
night the French army could sneak into Toulon unheard and capture the
city, which was, to say the least, unscientific.  I saw at once that
Cartaux must go, and I soon managed to make life so unbearable for
him that he resigned, and a man named Doppet, a physician, was placed
in command.  Doppet was worse than Cartaux.  Whenever anybody got
hurt he'd stop the war and prescribe for the injured man.  If he
could have prescribed for the enemy they'd have died in greater
numbers I have no doubt, but, like the idiot he was, he practised on
his own forces.  Besides, he was more interested in surgery than in
capturing Toulon.  He always gave the ambulance corps the right of
line, and I believe to this day that his plan of routing the English
involved a sudden rush upon them, taking them by surprise, and the
subsequent amputation of their legs.  The worst feature of the
situation, as I found it, was that these two men, falling back upon
their rights as my superior officers, refused to take orders from me.
I called their attention to the fact that rank had been abolished,
and that in France one man was now as good as another; but they were
stubborn, so I wrote to Paris and had them removed.  Then came
Dugommier, who backed me up in my plans, and Toulon as a consequence
immediately fell with a dull, sickening thud."

It was during this siege that Bonaparte first encountered Junot.
Having occasion to write a note while under fire from the enemy's
batteries, Napoleon called for a stenographer.  Junot came to him.

"Do you know shorthand?" asked the general, as a bomb exploded at his
feet.

"Slightly," said Junot, calmly.

"Take this message," returned the general, coolly