, dictating.

Junot took down Bonaparte's words, but just as he finished another
bomb exploded near by, scattering dust and earth and sand all over
the paper.

"Confounded boors, interrupting a gentleman at his correspondence!"
said Bonaparte, with an angry glance at the hostile gunners.  "I'll
have to dictate that message all over again."

"Yes, general," returned Junot, quickly, "but you needn't mind that.
There will be no extra charge.  It's really my fault.  I should have
brought an umbrella."

"You are a noble fellow," said Napoleon, grasping his hand and
squeezing it warmly.  "In the heyday of my prosperity, if my
prosperity ever goes a-haying, I shall remember you.  Your name?"

"Junot, General," was the reply.

Bonaparte frowned.  "Ha! ha!" he laughed, acridly.  "You jest, eh?
Well, Junot, when I am Jupiter I'll reward you."

Later on, discovering his error, Bonaparte made a memorandum
concerning Junot, which was the first link in the chain which
ultimately bound the stenographer to fame as a marshal of France.

There have been various other versions of this anecdote, but this is
the only correct one, and is now published for the first time on the
authority of M. le Comte de B--, whose grandfather was the bass
drummer upon whose drum Junot was writing the now famous letter, and
who was afterwards ennobled by Napoleon for his services in Egypt,
where, one dark, drizzly night, he frightened away from Bonaparte's
tent a fierce band of hungry lions by pounding vigorously upon his
instrument.

About this time Napoleon, who had been spelling his name in various
ways, and particularly with a "u," as Buonaparte, decided to settle
finally upon one form of designation.

"People are beginning to bother the life out of me with requests for
my autograph," he said to Bourrienne, "and it is just as well that I
should settle on one.  If I don't, they'll want me to write out a
complete set of them, and I haven't time to do that."

"Buonaparte is a good-looking name," suggested Bourrienne.  "It is
better than Bona Parte, as you sometimes call yourself.  If you
settle on Bona Parte, you'd have really three names; and as you don't
write society verse for the comic papers, what's the use?  Newspaper
reporters will refer to you as Napoleon B. Parte or N. Bona Parte,
and the public hates a man who parts his name in the middle.  Parte
is a good name in its way, but it's too short and abrupt.  Few men
with short, sharp, decisive names like that ever make their mark.
Let it be Buonaparte, which is sort of high-sounding--it makes a
mouthful, as it were."

"If I drop the 'u' the autograph will be shorter, and I'll gain time
writing it," said Napoleon.  "It shall be Bonaparte without 'u.'"

"Humph!" ejaculated Bourrienne.  "Bonaparte without me!  I like that.
Might as well talk of Dr. Johnson without Boswell."

Bonaparte now went to Nice as chief of batallion in the army of
Italy; but having incurred the displeasure of a suspicious home
government, he was shortly superseded, and lived in retirement with
his family at Marseilles for a brief time.  Here he fell in love
again, and would have married Mademoiselle Clery, whom he afterwards
made Queen of Sweden, had he not been so wretchedly poor.

"This, my dear," he said, sadly, to Mademoiselle Clery, "is the
beastly part of being the original ancestor of a family instead of a
descendant.  I've got to make the fortune which will enrich
posterity, while I'd infinitely prefer having a rich uncle somewhere
who'd have the kindness to die and leave me a million.  There's
Joseph--lucky man.  He's gone and got married.  He can afford it.  He
has me to fall back on, but I--I haven't anybody to fall back on, and
so, for the second time in my life, must give up the only girl I ever
loved."

With these words Napoleon left Mademoiselle Clery, and returned to
Paris in search of employment.

"If there's nothing else to do, I can disguise myself as a Chinaman
and get employment in Madame Sans Gene's laundry," he said.  "There's
no disgrace in washing, and in that way I may be able to provide
myself with decent linen, anyhow.  Then I shall belong to the
laundered aristocracy, as the English have it."

But greater things than this awaited Napoleon at Paris.  Falling in
with Barras, a member of the Convention which ruled France at this
time, he learned that the feeling for the restoration of the monarchy
was daily growing stronger, and that the royalists of Paris were a
great menace to the Convention.

"They'll mob us the first thing we know," said Barras.  "The members
look to me to save them in case of attack, but I must confess I'd
like to sublet the contract."

"Give it to me, then.  I'm temporarily out of a job," said Napoleon,
"and the life I'm leading is killing me.  If it weren't for Talma's
kindness in letting me lead his armies on the stage at the Odeon,
with a turn at scene-shifting when they are not playing war dramas, I
don't know what I'd do for my meals; and even when I do get a
sandwich ahead occasionally I have to send it to Marseilles to my
mother.  Give me your contract, and if I don't save your Convention
you needn't pay me a red franc.  I hate aristocrats, and I hate mobs;
and this being an aristocratic mob, I'll go into the work with
enthusiasm."

"You!" cried Barras.  "A man of your size, or lack of it, save the
Convention from a mob of fifty thousand?  Nonsense!"

"Did you ever hear that little slang phrase so much in vogue in
America," queried Napoleon, coldly fixing his eye on Barras--"a
phrase which in French runs, 'Petit, mais O Moi'--or, as they have
it, 'Little, but O My'?  Well, that is me. {1}  Besides, if I am
small, there is less chance of my being killed, which will make me
more courageous in the face of fire than one of your bigger men would
be."

"I will put my mind on it," said Barras, somewhat won over by
Napoleon's self-confidence.

"Thanks," said Napoleon; "and now come into the cafe and have dinner
with me."

"Save your money, Bonaparte," said Barras.  "You can't afford to pay
for your own dinner, much less mine."

"That's precisely why I want you to dine with me," returned Napoleon.
"If I go alone, they won't serve me because they know I can't pay.
If I go in with you, they'll give me everything they've got on the
supposition that you will pay the bill.  Come!  En avant!"

"Vous etes un bouchonnier, vraiment!" said Barras, with a laugh.

"A what?" asked Napoleon, not familiar with the idiom.

"A corker!" explained Barras.

"Very good," said Napoleon, his face lighting up.  "If you'll order a
bottle of Burgundy with the bird I will show you that I am likewise
something of an uncorker."

This readiness on Napoleon's part in the face of difficulty
completely captured Barras, and as a result the young adventurer had
his first real chance to make an impression on Paris, where, on the
13th Vendemiaire (or October 4, 1795), he literally obliterated the
forces of the Sectionists, whose success in their attack upon the
Convention would have meant the restoration of the Bourbons to the
throne of France.  Placed in command of the defenders of the
Convention, Napoleon with his cannon swept the mob from the four
broad avenues leading to the palace in which the legislators sat.

"Don't fire over their heads," said he to his gunners, as the mob
approached.  "Bring our arguments right down to their comprehension,
and remember that the comprehension of a royalist is largely affected
by his digestion.  Therefore, gunners, let them have it there.  If
these assassins would escape appendicitis they would better avoid the
grape I send them."

The result is too well known to need detailed description here.
Suffice it to say that Bonaparte's attentions to the digestive
apparatus of the rioters were so effective that, in token of their
appreciation of his services, the Convention soon afterwards placed
him in command of the Army of the Interior.

Holding now the chief military position in Paris, Bonaparte was much
courted by every one, but he continued his simple manner of living as
of yore, overlooking his laundry and other bills as unostentatiously
as when he had been a poor and insignificant subaltern, and daily
waxing more taciturn and prone to irritability.

"You are becoming gloomy, General," said Barras one morning, as the
two men breakfasted.  "It is time for you to marry and become a
family man."

"Peste!" said Napoleon, "man of family!  It takes too long--it is
tedious.  Families are delightful when the children are grown up; but
I could not endure them in a state of infancy."

"Ah!" smiled Barras, significantly.  "But suppose I told you of a
place where you could find a family ready made?"

Napoleon at once became interested.

"I should marry it," he said, "for truly I do need some one to look
after my clothing, particularly now that, as a man of high rank, my
uniforms hold so many buttons."

Thus it happened that Barras took the young hero to a reception at
the house of Madame Tallien, where he introduced him to the lovely
widow, Josephine de Beauharnais, and her two beautiful children.

"There you are, Bonaparte," he whispered, as they entered the room;
"there is the family complete--one wife, one son, one daughter.  What
more could you want?  It will be yours if you ask for it, for Madame
de Beauharnais is very much in love with you."

"Ha!" said Napoleon.  "How do you know that?"

"She told me so," returned Barras.

"Very well," said Napoleon, making up his mind on the instant.  "I
will see if I can involve her in a military engagement."

Which, as the world knows, he did; and on the 9th of March, 1796,
Napoleon and Josephine were united, and the happy groom, writing to
his mother, announcing his marriage to "the only woman he ever
loved," said:  "She is ten years older than I, but I can soon
overcome that.  The opportunities for a fast life in Paris are
unequalled, and I have an idea that I can catch up with her in six
months if the Convention will increase my salary."



CHAPTER V:  ITALY--MILAN--VIENNA--VENICE
1796-1797



After a honeymoon of ten days Napoleon returned to work.  Assuming
command of the army of Italy, he said:  "I am at last in business for
myself.  Keep your eyes on me, Bourrienne, and you'll wear blue
goggles.  You'll have to, you'll be so dazzled.  We will set off at
once for Italy.  The army is in wretched shape.  It lacks shoes,
clothes, food.  It lacks everything.  I don't think it even has
sense.  If it had it would strike for lower wages."

"Lower wages?" queried Bourrienne.  "You mean higher, don't you?"

"Not I," said Bonaparte.  "They couldn't collect higher wages, but if
their pay was reduced they might get it once in a while.  We can
change all this, however, by invading Italy.  Italy has all things to
burn, from statuary to Leghorn hats.  In three months we shall be at
Milan.  There we can at least provide ourselves with fine collections
of oil-paintings.  Meantime let the army feed on hope and wrap
themselves in meditation.  It's poor stuff, but there's plenty of it,
and it's cheap.  On holidays give the poor fellows extra rations, and
if hope does not sustain them, cheer them up with promises of drink.
Tell them when we get to Italy they can drink in the scenery in
unstinted measure, and meanwhile keep the band playing merrily.
There's nothing like music to drive away hunger.  I understand that
the lamented king's appetite was seriously affected by the
Marseillaise."

To his soldiers he spoke with equal vigor.

"Soldiers," he said, "sartorially speaking, you are a poor lot; but
France does not want a tailor-made army at this juncture.  We are not
about to go on dress parade, but into grim-visaged war, and the
patches on your trousers, if you present a bold front to the enemy,
need never be seen.  You are also hungry, but so am I.  I have had no
breakfast for four hours.  The Republic owes you much; but money is
scarce, and you must whistle for your pay.  The emigres have gone
abroad with all the circulating medium they could lay their hands on,
and the Government has much difficulty in maintaining the gold
reserve.  For my part, I prefer fighting for glory to whistling for
money.  Fighting is the better profession.  You are men.  Leave
whistling to boys.  Follow me into Italy, where there are fertile
plains--plains from whose pregnant soil the olive springs at the rate
of a million bottles a year, plains through whose lovely lengths
there flow rivers of Chianti.  Follow me to Italy, where there are
opulent towns with clothing-stores on every block, and churches
galore, with their poor-boxes bursting with gold.  Soldiers, can you
resist the alluring prospect?"

"Vive l'Empereur!" cried the army, with one voice.

Napoleon frowned.

"Soldiers!" he cried, "Remember this:  you are making history;
therefore, pray be accurate.  I am not yet Emperor, and you are
guilty of an anachronism of a most embarrassing sort.  Some men make
history in a warm room with pen and ink, aided by guide-books and
collections of anecdotes.  Leave anachronisms and inaccuracies to
them.  For ourselves, we must carve it out with our swords and
cannon; we must rubricate our pages with our gore, and punctuate our
periods with our bayonets.  Let it not be said by future ages that we
held our responsibilities lightly and were careless of facts, and to
that end don't refer to me as Emperor until you are more familiar
with dates.  When we have finished with Italy I'll take you to the
land where dates grow.  Meanwhile, restez tranquille, as they say in
French, and breathe all the air you want.  France can afford you that
in unstinted measure."

"Vive Bonaparte!" cried the army, taking the rebuke in good part.

"Now you're shouting," said Napoleon, with a smile.  "You're a good
army, and if you stick by me you'll wear diamonds."

"We have forgotten one thing," said Barras a few days later, on the
eve of Napoleon's departure.  "We haven't any casus belli."

"What's that?" said Napoleon, who had been so busy with his
preparations that he had forgotten most of his Greek and Latin.

"Cause for war," said Barras.  "Where were you educated?  If you are
going to fight the Italians you've got to have some principle to
fight for."

"That's precisely what we are going to fight for," said Napoleon.
"We're a bankrupt people.  We're going to get some principal to set
us up in business.  We may be able to float some bonds in Venice."

"True," returned Barras; "but that, after all, is mere highway
robbery."

"Well, all I've got to say," retorted Napoleon, with a sneer--"all
I've got to say is that if your Directory can't find something in the
attitude of Italy towards the Republic to take offence at, the sooner
it goes out of business the better.  I'll leave that question
entirely to you fellows at Paris.  I can't do everything.  You look
after the casus, and I'll take care of the belli."

This plan was adopted.  The Directory, after discussing various
causes for action, finally decided that an attack on Italy was
necessary for three reasons.  First, because the alliance between the
kings of Sardinia and Austria was a menace to the Republic, and must
therefore be broken.  Second, the Austrians were too near the Rhine
for France's comfort, and must be diverted before they had drunk all
the wine of the country, of which the French were very fond; and,
third, His Holiness the Pope had taken little interest in the now
infidel France, and must therefore be humiliated.  These were the
reasons for the war settled upon by the government, and as they were
as satisfactory to Napoleon as any others, he gave the order which
set the army of Italy in motion.

"How shall we go, General?" asked Augereau, one of his subordinates.
"Over the Alps?"

"Not this time," returned Napoleon.  "It is too cold.  The army has
no ear-tabs.  We'll skirt the Alps, and maybe the skirt will make
them warmer."

This the army proceeded at once to do, and within a month the first
object of the war was accomplished.

The Sardinian king was crushed, and the army found itself in
possession of food, drink, and clothes to a surfeit.  Bonaparte's
pride at his success was great but not over-weening.

"Soldiers!" he cried, "you have done well.  So have I.  Hannibal
crossed the Alps.  We didn't; but we got here just the same.  You
have provided yourselves with food and clothes, and declared a
dividend for the Treasury of France which will enable the Directory
to buy itself a new hat through which to address the people.  You
have reason to be proud of yourselves.  Pat yourselves on your backs
with my compliments, but remember one thing.  Our tickets are to
Milan, and no stop-overs are allowed.  Therefore, do not as yet relax
your efforts.  Milan is an imperial city.  The guide-books tell us
that its cathedral is a beauty, the place is full of pictures, and
the opera-house finished in 1779 is the largest in the world.  It can
be done in two days, and the hotels are good.  Can you, therefore,
sleep here?"

"No, no!" cried the army.

"Then," cried Napoleon, tightening his reins and lifting his horse on
to its hind-legs and holding his sword aloft, "A Milan!"

"How like a statue he looks," said Lannes, admiringly.

"Yes," replied Augereau, "you'd think he was solid brass."

The Austrian troops were now concentrated behind the Po, but Napoleon
soon outgeneralled their leaders, drove them back to the Adda, and
himself pushed on to the Bridge of Lodi, which connected the east and
west branches of that river.

"When I set out for the P. O. P. E.," said Napoleon, "I'm not going
to stop halfway and turn back at the P. O.  We've got the Austrians
over the Adda, and that's just where we want them.  I had a dream
once about the Bridge of Lodi, and it's coming true now or never.
We'll take a few of our long divisions, cross the Adda, and subtract
a few fractions of the remainder now left the Austrians.  This will
destroy their enthusiasm, and Milan will be ours."

The words were prophetic, for on the 10th of May the French did
precisely what their commander had said they would do, and on the
fourteenth day of May the victorious French entered Milan, the
wealthy capital of Lombardy.

"Curious fact," said Napoleon.  "In times of peace if a man needs a
tonic you give him iron, and it builds him up; but in war if you give
the troops iron it bowls 'em down.  Look at those Austrians; they've
got nervous prostration of the worst sort."

"They got too much iron," said Lannes.

"Too much tonic is worse than none.  A man can stand ten or twenty
grains of iron, but forty pounds is rather upsetting."

"True," acquiesced Napoleon.  "Well, it was a great fight, and I have
only one regret.  I do wish you'd had a Kodak to take a few snap-
shots of me at that Bridge of Lodi.  I'd like to send some home to
the family.  It would have reminded brother Joseph of old times to
see me dashing over that bridge, prodding its planks with my heels
until it fairly creaked with pain.  It would have made a good
frontispiece for Bourrienne's book too.  And now, my dear Lannes,
what shall we do with ourselves for the next five days?  Get out your
Baedecker and let us see this imperial city of the Lombards."

"There's one matter we must arrange first," said Augereau; "we
haven't any stable accommodations to speak of."

"What's the matter with the stalls at the opera-house?" suggested
Napoleon.  "As I told the troops the other day, it's the biggest
theatre in the world.  You ought to be able to stable the horses
there and lodge the men in the boxes."

"The horses would look well sitting in orchestra chairs, wouldn't
they?" said Augereau.  "It's not feasible.  As for the boxes, they're
mostly held by subscribers."

"Then stable them in the picture-galleries," said the general.  "It
will be good discipline."

"The people will call that sacrilege," returned Augereau.

"Not if we remove the pictures," said Bonaparte.  "We'll send the
pictures to Paris."

Accordingly this was done, and the galleries of France were thereby
much enriched.  We mention these details at length, because Napoleon
has been severely criticised for thus impoverishing Italy, as well as
for his so-called contempt of art--a criticism which, in the face of
this accurate version, must fall to the ground.  The pictures were
sent by him to Paris merely to preserve them, and, as he himself
said, a propos of the famous Da Vinci, beneath which horses and men
alike were quartered:  "I'd have sent that too, but to do it I'd have
had to send the whole chapel or scrape the picture off the wall.
These Italians should rather thank than condemn me for leaving it
where it was.  Mine was not an army of destruction, but a Salvation
Army of the highest type."

"You made mighty few converts for a Salvation Army," said Talleyrand,
to whom this remark was addressed.

"That's where you are wrong," said Napoleon.  "I made angels of
innumerable Austrians, and converted quite a deal of Italian into
French territory."

It was hardly to be doubted that Napoleon's successes would arouse
jealousies in Paris, and the Directory, fearing the hold the
victorious general was acquiring upon the people, took steps to limit
his powers.  Bonaparte instantly resigned his command and threatened
to return to Paris, which so frightened the government that they
refused to accept his resignation.

From this time on for nearly a year Napoleon's career was a
succession of victories.  He invaded the Papal States, and acquired
millions of francs and hundreds of pictures.  He chastised all who
opposed his sway, and, after pursuing the Austrians as far as Leoben,
within sight of Vienna, he humbled the haughty Emperor Joseph.

"I'll recognize your Republic," said the Emperor at last, finding
that there was nothing else to be done.

"Thanks," said Napoleon--"I thought you would; but I don't know
whether the Republic will recognize you.  She doesn't even know you
by sight."

"Is that all you want?" asked the Emperor, anxiously.

"For the present, yes.  Some day I may come back for something else,"
returned Napoleon, significantly.  "And, by-the-way, when you are
sending your card to the French people just enclose a small
remittance of a few million francs, not necessarily for publication,
but as a guarantee of good faith.  Don't send all you've got, but
just enough.  You may want to marry off one of your daughters some
day, and it will be well to save something for her dowry."

It was in little acts of this nature that Napoleon showed his
wonderful foresight.  One would almost incline to believe from this
particular incident that Bonaparte foresaw the Marie-Louise episode
in his future career.

The Austrians humbled, Napoleon turned his attention to Venice.
Venice had been behaving in a most exasperating fashion, and the
conqueror felt that the time had come to take the proud City of the
Sea in hand.

"If the Venetians have any brains," said he to Bourrienne, who joined
him about this time, secretly representing, it is said, a newspaper-
syndicate service, "they'll put on all the sail they've got and take
their old city out to sea.  They're in for the worst ducking they
ever got."

"I'm afraid you'll find them hard to get at," said Bourrienne.  "That
lagoon is a wet place."

"Oh, as for that," said Bonaparte, "a little water will do the army
good.  We've been fighting so hard it's been months since they've had
a good tubbing, and a swim won't hurt them.  Send Lannes here."  In a
few minutes Lannes entered Bonaparte's tent.

"Lannes, we're off for Venice.  Provide the army with overshoes, and
have our luggage checked through," said Bonaparte.

"Yes, General."

"Can Augereau swim?"

"I don't know, General."

"Well, find out, and if he can't we'll get him a balloon."

Thus, taking every precaution for the comfort of his men and the
safety of his officers, Napoleon set out.  Venice, hearing of his
approach, was filled with consternation, and endeavored to temporize.
The Doges offered millions if Bonaparte would turn his attention to
others, to which Napoleon made this spirited reply:  "Venetians, tell
the Doges, with my compliments, that I am coming.  The wealth of the
Indies couldn't change my mind.  They offer me stocks and bonds;
well, I believe their stocks and bonds to be as badly watered as
their haughty city, and I'll have none of them.  I'll bring my stocks
with me, and your Doges will sit in them.  I'll bring my bonds, and
your nobles shall put them on and make them clank.  You've been
drowning Frenchmen every chance you've had.  It will now be my
pleasing duty to make you do a little gurgling on your own account.
You'll find out for the first time in your lives what it is to be in
the swim.  Put on your bathing-suits and prepare for the avenger.
The lions of St. Marc must lick the dust."

"We have no dust, General," said one of the messengers.

"Then you'd better get some," retorted Napoleon, "for you will have
to come down with it to the tune of millions."

True to his promise, Napoleon appeared at the lagoon on the 31st of
May, and the hitherto haughty Venice fell with a splash that could be
heard for miles, first having sent five ships of war, 3,000,000
francs, as many more in naval stores, twenty of her best pictures,
the bronze horses of the famous church, five hundred manuscripts, and
one apology to the French Republic as the terms of peace.  The bronze
horses were subsequently returned, but what became of the manuscripts
we do not know.  They probably would have been returned also--a large
portion of them, at least--if postage-stamps had been enclosed.  This
is mere theory, of course; but it is rendered reasonable by the fact
that this is the usual fate of most manuscripts; nor is there any
record of their having been published in the Moniteur, the only
periodical which the French government was printing at that time.

As for Bonaparte, it was as balm to his soul to humble the haughty
Doges, whose attitude towards him had always been characterized by a
superciliousness which filled him with resentment.

"It did me good," he said, many years after, with a laugh, "to see
those Doges swimming up and down the Grand Canal in their state
robes, trying to look dignified, while I stood on the sidewalk and
asked them why they didn't come in out of the wet."



CHAPTER VI:  MONTEBELLO--PARIS--EGYPT
1797-1799



Josephine now deemed it well to join her lord at Milan.  There had
been so many only women he had ever loved that she was not satisfied
to remain at Paris while he was conducting garden-parties at the
Castle of Montebello.  Furthermore, Bonaparte himself wished her to
be present.

"This Montebello life is, after all, little else than a dress
rehearsal for what is to come," he said, confidentially, to
Bourrienne, "and Josephine can't afford to be absent.  It's a great
business, this being a Dictator and having a court of your own, and
I'm inclined to think I shall follow it up as my regular profession
after I've conquered a little more of the earth."

Surrounded by every luxury, and in receipt for the first time in his
life of a steady income, Bonaparte carried things with a high hand.
He made treaties with various powers without consulting the
Directory, for whom every day he felt a growing contempt.

"What is the use of my consulting the Directory, anyhow?" he asked.
"If it were an Elite Directory it might be worth while, but it isn't.
I shall, therefore, do as I please, and if they don't like what I do
I'll ratify it myself."

Ambassadors waited upon him as though he were a king, and when one
ventured to disagree with the future Emperor he wished he hadn't.
Cobentzel, the envoy of the Austrian ruler, soon discovered this.

"I refuse to accept your ultimatum," said he one day to Napoleon,
after a protracted conference.

"You do, eh?"--said Napoleon, picking up a vase of delicate
workmanship.  "Do you see this jug?"

"Yes," said Cobentzel.

"Well," continued Napoleon, dropping it to the floor, where it was
shattered into a thousand pieces, "do you see it now?"

"I do," said Cobentzel; "what then?"

"It has a mate," said Napoleon, significantly; "and if you do not
accept my ultimatum I'll smash the other one upon your plain but
honest countenance."

Cobentzel accepted the ultimatum.

Bonaparte's contempt for the Directory was beginning to be shared by
a great many of the French, and, to save themselves, the "Five Sires
of the Luxembourg," as the Directory were called, resolved on a
brilliant stroke, which involved no less a venture than the invasion
of England.  Bonaparte, hearing of this, and anxious to see London,
of which he had heard much, left Italy and returned to Paris.

"If there's a free tour of England to be had, Josephine," said he, "I
am the man to have it.  Besides, this climate of Italy is getting
pretty hot for an honest man.  I've refused twenty million francs in
bribes in two weeks.  If they'd offered another sou I'm afraid I'd
have taken it.  I will therefore go to Paris, secure the command of
the army of England, and pay a few of my respects to George Third,
Esq.  I hear a great many English drop their h's; I'll see if I can't
make 'em drop their l. s. d.'s as well."

Arrived in Paris, Bonaparte was much courted by everybody.

"I have arrived," he said, with a grim smile.  "Even my creditors are
glad to see me, and I'll show them that I have not forgotten them by
running up a few more bills."

This he did, going to the same tradesmen that he had patronized in
his days of poverty.  To his hatter, whom he owed for his last five
hats, he said:

"They call me haughty here; they say I am cold.  Well, I am cold.
I've shivered on the Alps several times since I was here last, and it
has chilled my nature.  It has given me the grip, so to speak, and
when I lose my grip the weather will be even colder.   Give me a hat,
my friend."

"What size?" asked the hatter.

"The same," said Bonaparte, with a frown.  "Why do you ask?"

"I was told your head had swelled," returned the hatter, meekly.

"They shall pay for this," murmured Napoleon, angrily.

"I am glad," said the hatter, with a sigh.  "I was wondering who'd
pay for it."

"Oh, you were, eh?" said Napoleon.  "Well, wonder no more.  Get out
your books."

The hatter did so.

"Now charge it," said Napoleon.

"To whom?" asked the hatter.

"Those eminent financiers, Profit & Loss," said Napoleon, with a
laugh, as he left the shop.  "That's what I call a most successful
hat-talk," he added, as he told Bourrienne of the incident later in
the day.

"How jealous they all are!" said Bourrienne.  "The idea of your
having a swelled head is ridiculous."

"Of course," said Napoleon; "all I've got is a proper realization of
'Whom I Am,' as they say in Boston.  But wait, my boy, wait.  When I
put a crown on my head--"

What Bonaparte would have said will never be known, for at that
moment the general's servant announced Mme. Sans Gene, his former
laundress, and that celebrated woman, unconventional as ever, stalked
into the room.  Napoleon looked at her coldly.

"You are--?" he queried.

"Your former laundress," she replied.

"Ah, and you want--?"

"My pay," she retorted.

"I am sorry, madame," said the General, "but the expenses of my
Italian tour have been very great, and I am penniless.  I will,
however, assist you to the full extent of my power.  Here are three
collars and a dress-shirt.  If you will launder them I will wear them
to the state ball to-morrow evening, and will tell all my rich and
influential friends who did them up, and if you wish I will send you
a letter saying that I patronized your laundry once two years ago,
and have since used no other."

These anecdotes, unimportant in themselves, are valuable in that they
refute the charges made against General Bonaparte at this time--
first, that he returned from Egypt with a fortune, and, second, that
he carried himself with a hauteur which rendered him unapproachable.

For various reasons the projected invasion of England was abandoned,
and the expedition to Egypt was substituted.  This pleased Napoleon
equally as well.

"I wasn't stuck on the English invasion, anyhow," he said, in writing
to Joseph.  "In the first place, they wanted me to go in October,
when the London season doesn't commence until spring, and, in the
second place, I hate fogs and mutton-chops.  Egypt is more to my
taste.  England would enervate me.  Egypt, with the Desert of Sahara
in its backyard, will give me plenty of sand, and if you knew what
projects I have in mind--which, of course, you don't, for you never
knew anything, my dear Joseph--you'd see how much of that I need."

The Directory were quite as glad to have Napoleon go to Egypt as he
was to be sent.  Their jealousy of him was becoming more painful to
witness every day.

"If he goes to England," said Barras, "he'll conquer it, sure as
fate; and it will be near enough for excursion steamers to take the
French people over to see him do it.  If that happens we are lost."

"He'll conquer Egypt, though, and he'll tell about it in such a way
that he will appear twice as great," suggested Carnot.  "Seems to me
we'd better sell out at once and be done with it."

"Not so," said Moulin.  "Let him go to Egypt.  Very likely he'll fall
off a pyramid there and break his neck."

"Or get sunstruck," suggested Barras.

"There's no question about it in my mind," said Gohier.  "Egypt is
the place.  If he escapes the pyramids or sunstroke, there are still
the lions and the simoon, not to mention the rapid tides of the Red
Sea.  Why, he just simply can't get back alive.  I vote for Egypt."

Thus it happened that on the 19th day of May, 1798, with an army of
forty thousand men and a magnificant staff of picked officers,
Napoleon embarked for Egypt.

"I'm glad we're off," said he to the sailor who had charge of his
steamer-chair.  "I've got to hurry up and gain some more victories or
these French will forget me.  A man has to make a three-ringed circus
of himself to keep his name before the public these days."

"What are you fightin' for this time, sir?" asked the sailor, who had
not heard that war had been declared--"ile paintin's or pyramids?"

"I am going to free the people of the East from the oppressor," said
Napoleon, loftily.

"And it's a noble work, your honor," said the sailor.  "Who is it
that's oppressin' these people down East?"

"You'll have to consult the Directory," said Napoleon, coldly.
"Leave me; I have other things to think of."

On the 10th of June Malta was reached, and the Knights of St. John,
long disused to labor of any sort, like many other knights of more
modern sort, surrendered in most hospitable fashion, inviting
Napoleon to come ashore and accept the freedom of the island or
anything else he might happen to want.  His reply was characteristic:

"Tell the Knights of Malta to attend to their cats.  I'm after
continents, not islands," said he; and with this, leaving a
detachment of troops to guard his new acquisition, he proceeded to
Alexandria, which he reached on the 1st of July.  Here, in the midst
of a terrible storm and surf, Napoleon landed his forces, and
immediately made a proclamation to the people.

"Fellahs!" he cried, "I have come.  The newspapers say to destroy
your religion.  As usual, they prevaricate.  I have come to free you.
All you who have yokes to shed prepare to shed them now.  I come with
the olive-branch in my hand.  Greet me with outstretched palms.  Do
not fight me for I am come to save you, and I shall utterly
obliterate any man, be he fellah, Moujik, or even the great Marmalade
himself, who prefers fighting to being saved.  We may not look it,
but we are true Mussulmen.  If you doubt it, feel our muscle.  We
have it to burn.  Desert the Mamelukes and be saved.  The Pappylukes
are here."

On reading this proclamation Alexandria immediately fell, and
Bonaparte, using the Koran as a guide-book, proceeded on his way up
the Nile.  The army suffered greatly from the glare and burning of
the sun-scorched sand, and from the myriads of pestiferous insects
that infested the country; but Napoleon cheered them on.  "Soldiers!"
he cried, when they complained, "if this were a summer resort, and
you were paying five dollars a day for a room at a bad hotel, you'd
think yourselves in luck, and you'd recommend your friends to come
here for a rest.  Why not imagine this to be the case now?  Brace up.
We'll soon reach the pyramids, and it's a mighty poor pyramid that
hasn't a shady side.  On to Cairo!"

"It's easy enough for you to talk," murmured one.  "You've got a
camel to ride on and we have to walk."

"Well, Heaven knows," retorted Napoleon, pointing to his camel,
"camel riding isn't like falling off a log.  At first I was carried
away with it, but for the last two days it has made me so sea-sick I
can hardly see that hump."

After this there was no more murmuring, but Bonaparte did not for an
instant relax his good-humor.

"The water is vile," said Dessaix, one morning.

"Why not drink milk, then?" asked the commander.

"Milk!  I'd love to," returned Dessaix; "but where shall I find
milk?"

"At the dairy," said Napoleon, with a twinkle in his eye.

"What dairy?" asked Dessaix, not observing the twinkle.

"The dromedary," said Napoleon, with a roar.

Little incidents like this served to keep the army in good spirits
until the 21st of July, when they came in sight of the pyramids.
Instantly Napoleon called a halt, and the army rested.  The next day,
drawing them up in line, the General addressed them.  "Soldiers!" he
cried, pointing to the pyramids, "from the summits of those pyramids
forty centuries look down upon you.  You can't see them, but they are
there.  No one should look down upon the French, not even a century.
Therefore, I ask you, shall we allow the forces of the Bey, his
fellahs and his Tommylukes, to drive us into the desert of Sahara,
bag and baggage, to subsist on a sea-less seashore for the balance of
our days, particularly when they haven't any wheels on their cannon?"

"No, no!" cried the army.

"Then up sail and away!" cried Bonaparte.  "This is to be no naval
affair, but the army of the Bey awaits us."

"Tell the band to play a Wagner march," he whispered, hastily, to his
aide-de-camp.  "It'll make the army mad, and what we need now is
wrath."

So began the battle of the Pyramids.  The result is too well known to
readers of contemporary history to need detailed statement here.  All
day long it raged, and when night fell Cairo came with it.  Napoleon,
worn out with fatigue, threw himself down on a pyramid to rest.

"Ah!" he said, as he breathed a sigh of relief, "what a glorious day!
We've beat 'em!  Won't the Directory be glad?  M. Barras will be more
M. Barrassed than ever."  Then, turning and tapping on the door of
the massive pile, he whispered, softly:  "Ah!  Ptolemy, my man, it's
a pity you've no windows in this tomb.  You'd have seen a pretty
sight this day.  Kleber," he added, turning to that general, "do you
know why Ptolemy inside this pyramid and I outside of it are alike?"

"I cannot guess, General," said Kleber.  "Why?"

"We're both 'in it'!" returned Napoleon, retiring to his tent.

Later on in the evening, summoning Bourrienne, the victor said to
him:

"Mr. Secretary, I have a new autograph.  If Ptolemy can spell his
name with a 'p,' why shouldn't I?  I'm not going to have history say
that a dead mummy could do things I couldn't.  Pnapoleon would look
well on a state paper."

"No doubt," said Bourrienne; "but every one now says that you copy
Caesar.  Why give them the chance to call you an imitator of Ptolemy
also?"

"True, my friend, true," returned Napoleon, in a tone of
disappointment.  "I had not thought of that.  When you write my
autographs for the children of these Jennylukes--"

"Mamelukes, General," corrected Bourrienne.

"Ah, yes--I always get mixed in these matters--for the children of
these Mamelukes, you may stick to the old form.  Good-night."

And with that the conqueror went to sleep as peacefully as a little
child.

Had Bonaparte now returned to France he would have saved himself much
misery.  King of fire though he had become in the eyes of the
vanquished, his bed was far from being one of roses.

"In a climate like that," he observed, sadly, many years after, "I'd
rather have been an ice baron.  Africa got entirely too hot to cut
any ice with me.  Ten days after I had made my friend Ptolemy turn
over in his grave, Admiral Nelson came along with an English fleet
and challenged our Admiral Brueys to a shooting-match for the
championship of Aboukir Bay.  Brueys, having heard of what magazine
writers call the ships of the desert in my control, supposing them to
be frigates and not camels, imagined himself living in Easy Street,
and accepted the challenge.  He expected me to sail around to the
other side of Nelson, and so have him between two fires.  Well, I
don't go to sea on camels, as you know, and the result was that after
a twenty-four-hour match the camels were the only ships we had left.
Nelson had won the championship, laid the corner-stone of monuments
to himself all over English territory, cut me off from France, and
added three thousand sea-lubbers to my force, for that number of
French sailors managed to swim ashore during the fight.  I manned the
camels with them immediately, but it took them months to get their
land legs on, and the amount of grog they demanded would have made a
quick-sand of the Desert of Sahara, all of which was embarrassing."

But Napoleon did not show his embarrassment to those about him.  He
took upon himself the government of Egypt, opened canals, and
undertook to behave like a peaceable citizen for a while.

"I needed rest, and I got it," he said.  "Sitting on the apex of the
pyramids, I could see the whole world at my feet, and whatever others
may say to the contrary, it was there that I began to get a clear
view of my future.  It seemed to me that from that lofty altitude,
chumming, as I was, with the forty centuries I have already alluded
to, I could see two ways at once, that every glance could penetrate
eternity; but I realize now that what I really got was only a bird's-
eye view of the future.  I didn't see that speck of a St. Helena.  If
I had, in the height of my power I should have despatched an
expedition of sappers and miners to blow it up."

Quiescence might as well be expected of a volcano, however, as from a
man of Bonaparte's temperament, and it was not long before he was
again engaged in warfare, but not with his old success; and finally,
the plague having attacked his army, Bonaparte, too tender-hearted to
see it suffer, leaving opium for the sick and instructions for
Kleber, whom he appointed his successor, set sail for France once
more in September, 1799.

"Remember, Kleber, my boy," he said, in parting, "these Mussulmen are
a queer lot.  Be careful how you treat them.  If you behave like a
Christian you're lost.  I don't want to go back to France, but I
must.  I got a view of the next three years from the top of Cheops
last night just before sunset, and if that view is to be carried out
my presence in Paris is positively required.  The people are tired of
the addresses given by the old Directory, and they're seriously
thinking of getting out a new one, and I want to be on hand either to
edit it or to secure my appointment to some lucrative consulship."

"You!--a man of your genius after a consulship?" queried Kleber,
astonished.

"Yes, I have joined the office-seekers, General; but wait till you
hear what consulship it is.  The American consul-generalship at
London is worth $70,000 a year, but mine--mine in contrast to that is
as golf to muggins."

"And what shall I tell the reporters about that Jaffa business if
they come here?  That poison scandal is sure to come up," queried
Kleber.

"Treat them well.  Tell the truth if you know it, and--ah--invite
them to dinner," said Bonaparte.  "Give them all the delicacies of
the season.  When you serve the poisson, let it be with one 's,' and,
to make assurance doubly sure, flavor the wines with the quickest you
have."

"Quickest what?" asked Kleber, who was slightly obtuse.

"Humph!" sneered Napoleon.  "On second thoughts, if reporters bother
you, take them swimming where the crocodiles are thickest--only
either don't bathe with them yourself, or wear your mail bathing-
suit.  Furthermore, remember that what little of the army is left are
my children."

"What?" cried the obtuse Kleber.  "All those?"

"They are my children, Kleber," said Napoleon, his voice shaking with
emotion.  "I am young to be the head of so large a family, but the
fact remains as I have said.  They may feel badly at my going away
and leaving them even with so pleasing a hired man as yourself, but
comfort them, let them play in the sand all they please, and if they
want to know why papa has gone away, tell them I've gone to Paris to
buy them some candy."

With these words Napoleon embarked, and on the 16th of October Paris
received him with open arms.  That night the members of the Directory
came down with chills and fever.



CHAPTER VII:  THE 19TH BRUMAIRE--CONSUL--THE TUILERIES--CAROLINE
1799



"There is no question about my greatness now," said Napoleon, as he
meditated upon his position.  "Even if the Directory were not jealous
and the people enthusiastic, the number of relatives I have
discovered in the last ten days would show that things are going my
way.  I have had congratulatory messages from 800 aunts, 950 uncles,
and about 3800 needy cousins since my arrival.  It is queer how big a
family a lonely man finds he has when his star begins to twinkle.
Even Joseph is glad see me now, and I am told that the ice-cream men
serve little vanilla Napoleons at all the swell dinners.  Bourrienne,
our time has come!  Get out my most threadbare uniform, fray a few of
my collars at the edges, and shoot a few holes in my hat.  I'll go
out and take a walk along the Avenue de l'Opera, where the people can
see me."

"There isn't any such street in Paris yet, General," said Bourrienne,
getting out his Paris guide-book.

"Well, there ought to be," said Napoleon.

"What streets are there?  I must be seen or I'll be forgotten."

"What's the matter with a lounge in front of the Luxembourg?  That
will make a contrast that can't help affect the populace.  You, the
conqueror, ill-clad, unshaven, and with a hat full of bullet-holes,
walking outside the palace, with the incompetent Directors lodged
comfortably inside, will make a scene that is bound to give the
people food for thought."

"Well said!" cried Bonaparte.  "Here are the pistols go out into the
woods and prepare the hat.  I'll fray the collars."

This was done, and the effect was instantaneous.  The public
perceived the point, and sympathy ran so high that a public dinner
was offered to the returned warrior.

"I have no use for pomp, Mr. Toast-master," he said, as he rose to
speak at this banquet.  "I am not a good after-dinner speaker, but I
want the people of France to know that I am grateful for this meal.
I rise only to express the thanks of a hungry man for this timely
contribution to his inner self, and I wish to add that I should not
willingly have added to the already heavy tax upon the pockets of a
patriotic people by accepting this dinner, if it were not for the
demands of nature.  It is only the direst necessity that brings me
here; for one must eat, and I cannot beg."

These remarks, as may well be imagined, sent a thrill of enthusiasm
throughout France and filled the Directory with consternation.  The
only cloud upon Bonaparte's horizon was a slight coldness which arose
between himself and Josephine.  She had gone to meet him on his
arrival at Frejus, but by some odd mistake took the road to Burgundy,
while Napoleon came by way of Lyons.  They therefore missed each
other.

"I could not help it," she said, when Napoleon jealously chided her.
"I've travelled very little, and the geography of France always did
puzzle me."

"It is common sense that should have guided you, not knowledge of
geography.  When I sail into Port, you sail into Burgundy--you, the
only woman I ever loved!" cried Napoleon, passionately.  "Hereafter,
madame, for the sake of our step-children, be more circumspect.  At
this time I cannot afford a trip to South Dakota for the purpose of a
quiet divorce, nor would a public one pay at this juncture; but I
give you fair warning that I shall not forget this escapade, and once
we are settled in the--the Whatistobe, I shall remember, and another
only woman I have ever loved will dawn upon your horizon."

Bonaparte was now besieged by all the military personages of France.
His home became the Mecca of soldiers of all kinds, and in order to
hold their interest the hero of the day found it necessary to draw
somewhat upon the possessions which the people were convinced he was
without.  Never an admirer of consistency, France admired this more
than ever.  It was a paradox that this poverty-stricken soldier
should entertain so lavishly, and the people admired the nerve which
prompted him to do it, supposing, many of them, that his creditors
were men of a speculative nature, who saw in the man a good-paying
future investment.

Thus matters went until the evening of the 17th Brumaire, when
Napoleon deemed that he had been on parade long enough, and that the
hour demanded action.

"This is the month of Bromide," he said.

"Brumaire," whispered Bourrienne.

"I said Bromide," retorted Napoleon, "and the people are asleep.
Bromide has that effect.  That is why I call it Bromide, and I have
as much right to name my months as any one else.  Wherefore I repeat,
this is the month of Bromide, and the people are asleep!  I will now
wake them up.  The garrisons of Paris and the National Guard have
asked me to review them, and I'm going to do it, and I've a new set
of tictacs."

"Tactics, General, tactics," implored Bourrienne.

"There is no use discussing words, Mr. Secretary," retorted
Bonaparte.  "It has always been the criticism of my opponents that I
didn't know a tactic from a bedtick--well, perhaps I don't; and for
that reason I am not going to talk about tactics with which I am not
familiar, but I shall speak of tictacs, which is a game I have played
from infancy, and of which I am a master.  I'm going to get up a new
government, Bourrienne.  Summon all the generals in town, including
Bernadotte.  They're all with me except Bernadotte, and he'll be so
unpleasant about what I tell him to do that he'll make all the others
so mad they'll stick by me through thick and thin.  If there's any
irritating work to be done, let Joseph do it.  He has been well
trained in the art of irritation.  I have seen Sieyes and Ducos, and
have promised them front seats in the new government which my tictacs
are to bring about.  Barras won't have the nerve to oppose me, and
Gohier and Moulin have had the ague for weeks.  We'll have the
review, and my first order to the troops will be to carry humps; the
second will be to forward march; and the third will involve the
closing of a long lease, in my name, of the Luxembourg Palace, with a
salary connected with every room in the house."

It is needless for us to go into details.  The review came off as
Napoleon wished, and his orders were implicitly obeyed, with the
result that on the 19th of Brumaire the Directory was filed away, and
Napoleon Bonaparte, with Sieyes and Ducos as fellow-consuls, were
called upon to save France from anarchy.

"Well, Josephine," said Bonaparte, on the evening of the 19th, as he
put his boots outside of the door of his new apartment in the
Luxembourg, "this is better than living in a flat, and I must confess
I find the feather-beds of the palace more inviting than a couch of
sand under a date-tree in Africa."

"And what are you going to do next?" asked Josephine.

"Ha!" laughed Napoleon, blowing out the candle.  "There's a woman's
curiosity for you!  The continuation of this entertaining story, my
love, will be found in volume two of Bourrienne's attractive history,
From the Tow-path to the Tuileries, now in course of preparation, and
for sale by all accredited agents at the low price of ten francs a
copy."

With this remark Napoleon jumped into bed, and on the authority of M.
le Comte de Q-, at this time Charge a Affaires of the Luxembourg, and
later on Janitor of the Tuiler