time now than Louis XVIII., and, after all, I regard this
merely as a vacation.  I'll have a good rest at Elba while Louis is
pushing the button of government at Paris.  After a while I'll come
back and press the buttons and Louis will do the rest.  There's some
honey in the old Bees yet."

At Valence, however, the Emperor had a bitter cup to drain.  Meeting
Augereau there, with whom he had fallen out, he addressed him in his
old-time imperial style, asking him what right he had to still live,
and requesting him to stand out of his light.  Augereau, taking
advantage of the Emperor's fallen estate, replied in a spirited
manner, calling Napoleon an ex-Emperor and a tin soldier, as well as
applying several other epithets to his dethroned majesty which might
be printed in a French book, but can have no place in this.

"We shall meet again," retorted Bonaparte, with a threatening
gesture.

"Not if I see you first," replied Augereau.  "If we do, however, it
will be under a new system of etiquette."

"I'll bet you a crown you'll be singing a new tune inside of a year,"
cried the exasperated Bonaparte.

"I'll go you," said Augereau, snapping his fingers.  "Put up your
crown."

Napoleon felt keenly the stinging satire of this retort.  Bowing his
head with a groan, he had to acknowledge that he had no crown, but in
an instant he recovered.

"But I have a Napoleon left in my clothes!" he cried, with a dry
laugh at his own wit.  "I'll bet it against your income for the next
forty centuries, which is giving you large odds, that I shall return,
and when I do, Monsieur Augereau, your name will be Denis."

The appreciation of those about them of this sally so enraged
Augereau that he was discomfited utterly, and he left Bonaparte's
presence muttering words which are fortunately forgotten.

Arrived at Cannes, Bonaparte had his choice of vessels upon which to
make his voyage to Elba, one English and one French.  "I'll take the
English.  I shall not trust my life to a Bourbon ship if I know
myself.  I'd rather go to sea in a bowl," said he.

Hence it was that an English vessel, the Undaunted, had the honor of
transporting the illustrious exile to his island dominion.  On the
4th of May he landed, and immediately made a survey of his new
kingdom.

"It isn't large," he observed, as he made a memorandum of its
dimensions, "but neither is a canvas-back duck.  I think we can make
something of it, particularly as the people seem glad to see me."

This was indeed the truth.  The Elbese were delighted to have
Bonaparte in their midst.  They realized that excursion steamers
which had hitherto passed them by would now come crowded from main-
top to keel with persons desirous of seeing the illustrious captive.
Hotel rates rose 200 per cent., and on the first Sunday of his stay
on the island the receipts of the Island Museum, as it was now
called, were sufficient to pay its taxes to the French government,
which had been in arrears for some time, ten times over.

"I feel like an ossified man or a turtle-boy," said the Emperor to
Bertrand, as the curious visitors gaped awe-stricken at the caged
lion.  "If I only had a few pictures of myself to sell these people I
could buy up the national debt, foreclose the mortgage, and go back
to France as its absolute master."

The popularity of Bonaparte as an attraction to outsiders so endeared
him to the hearts of his new subjects that he practically had greater
sway here than he ever had in the palmy days of the Empire.  The
citizens made him master of everything, and Bonaparte filled the role
to the full.  Provided with guards and servants, he surrounded
himself with all the gaud and glitter of a military despotism, and,
in default of continents to capture, he kept his hand in trim as a
commander by the conquest of such small neighboring islands as nature
had placed within reach, but it could hardly be expected that he
could long remain tranquil.  His eyes soon wearied of the
circumscribed limits of Elba.

"It's all very well to be monarch of all you survey, Bertrand," said
he, mournfully, "but as for me, give me some of the things that can't
be seen.  I might as well be that old dried-up fig of a P. T. Olemy
over there in Egypt as Emperor of a vest-pocket Empire like this.
Isn't there any news from France?"

"Yes," returned Bertrand, "Paris is murmuring again.  Louis hasn't
stopped eating yet, and the French think it's time his dinner was
over."

"Ha!" cried Bonaparte in ecstasy.  "I thought so.  He's too much of a
revivalist to suit Paris.  Furthermore, I'm told he's brought out his
shop-worn aristocracy to dazzle France again.  They're all wool and a
yard wide, but you needn't think my handmade nobility is going to
efface itself just because the Montmorencies and the Rohans don't ask
it out to dine.  My dukes and duchesses will have something to say, I
fancy, and if my old laundress, the Duchess of Dantzig, doesn't take
the starch out of the old regime I'll be mightily mistaken."

And this was the exact situation.  As Bonaparte said, the old regime
by their hauteur so enraged the new regime that by the new year of
1815 it was seen by all except those in authority that the return of
the exile, Corporal Violet, as he was now called, was inevitable.  So
it came about that on the 20th of February, his pockets stuffed with
impromptu addresses to the people and the army, Bonaparte, eluding
those whose duty it was to watch him, set sail, and on the 1st of
March he reached Cannes, whence he immediately marched, gaining
recruits at every step, to Paris.

At Lyons he began to issue his impromptu addresses, and they were in
his best style.

"People of France," ran one, "I am refreshed, and have returned to
resume business at the old stand.  March 21st will be bargain day,
and I have on hand a select assortment of second-hand goods.  One
king, one aristocracy, much worn and slightly dog-eared, and a
monarchy will be disposed of at less than cost.  Come early and avoid
the rush.  A dukedom will be given away with every purchase.  Do not
forget the address--The Tuileries, Paris."

This was signed "Napoleon, Emperor."  Its effect was instantaneous,
and the appointment was faithfully kept, for on the evening of March
20th the Emperor, amid great enthusiasm, entered the Tuileries, where
he was met by all his old friends, including Fouche.

"Fouche," he said, as he entered the throne-room, "give my card to
Louis the XVIII., and ask him if his luggage is ready.  Make out his
bill, and when he has paid it, tell him that I have ordered the 6:10
train to start at 9:48.  He can easily catch it."

"He has already departed, Sire," returned Fouche.  "He had an
imperative engagement in the Netherlands.  In his haste he left his
crown hanging on the hat-rack in the hall."

"Well, send it to him," replied Bonaparte.  "I don't want HIS crown.
I want my own.  It shall never be said that I robbed a poor fellow
out of work of his hat."

Settled once more upon his imperial throne, the main question which
had previously agitated the Emperor and his advisers, and
particularly his stage-manager, Fouche, whom he now restored to his
old office, came up once more.  "What next?" and it was harder to
answer than ever, for Bonaparte's mind was no longer alert.  He was
listless and given to delay, and, worst of all, invariably sleepy.
It was evident that Elba had not proved as restful as had been hoped.

"You should not have returned," said Fouche, firmly.  "America was
the field for you.  That's where all great actors go sooner or later,
and they make fortunes.  A season in New York would have made you a
new man.  As it is you are an old man.  It seems to me that if an
Irishman can leave Queenstown with nothing but his brogue and the
clothes on his back and become an alderman of New York or Chicago
inside of two years, you with all the advertising you've had ought to
be able to get into Congress anyhow--you've got money enough for the
Senate."

"But they are not my children, those Americans," remonstrated
Napoleon, rubbing his eyes sleepily.

"Well, France isn't the family affair it once was, either," retorted
Fouche, "and you'll find it out before long.  However, we've got to
do the best we can.  Swear off your old ways and come out as a man of
Peace.  Flatter the English, and by all means don't ask your mother-
in-law Francis Joseph to send back the only woman you ever loved.
He's got her in Vienna, and he's going to keep her if he has to put
her in a safe-deposit vault."

It would have been well for Napoleon had he heeded this advice, but
as he walked about the Tuileries alone, and listened in vain for the
King of Rome's demands for more candy, and failed to see that
interesting infant sliding down the banisters and loading his toy
cannons with his mother's face-powder, he was oppressed by a sense of
loneliness, and could not resist the temptation to send for them.

"This will be the last chip I'll put on my shoulder, Fouche," he
pleaded.

"Very well," returned Fouche.  "Put it there, but I warn you.  This
last chip will break the Empire's back."

The demand was made upon Austria, and, as Fouche had said, the answer
was a most decided refusal, and the result was war.  Again the other
powers allied against Napoleon.  The forces of the enemy were placed
under Wellington.  Bonaparte led his own in person, buying a new
uniform for the purpose.  "We can handle them easily enough," said
he, "if I can only keep awake.  My situation at present reminds me so
much of the old Bromide days that I fall asleep without knowing it by
a mere association of ideas.  Still, we'll whip 'em out of their
boots."

"What boots?" demanded Fouche.

"Their Wellingtons and their Bluchers," retorted the Emperor, thereby
showing that, sleepy as he was, he had not lost his old-time ability
at repartee.

For once he was over-confident.  He fought desperately and
triumphantly for three or four days, but the fates held Waterloo in
store.  Routing the enemy at Ligny and Quatre Bras, he pushed on to
where Wellington stood in Belgium, where, on the 18th of June, was
fought the greatest of his battles.

"Now for the transformation scene," said Bonaparte on the eve of the
battle.  "If the weather is good we'll make these foreigners wish
they had worn running-shoes instead of Wellingtons."

But the weather was not clear.  It was excessively wet, and by
nightfall Bonaparte realized that all was over.  His troops were in
fine condition, but the rain seemed to have put out the fires of the
Commander's genius.  As the Imperial Guard marched before him in
review the Emperor gazed upon them fondly.

"They're like a picture!" he cried, enthusiastically.  "Just see that
line."

"Yes," returned Ney.  "Very like a picture; they remind me in a way
of a comic paper print, but that is more suitable for framing than
for fighting."

The Emperor making no response, Ney looked up and observed that his
Majesty had fallen asleep.  "That settles it," he sighed.  "To-day is
the Waterloo of Napoleon Bonaparte.  When a man sleeps at a moment
like this his friends would better prepare for a wake."

And Ney was right.  Waterloo was the Waterloo of Napoleon Bonaparte.
The opposing armies met in conflict, and, as the world knows, the
star of the great soldier was obscured forever, and France was
conquered.  Ruined in his fortunes, Bonaparte at once returned to
Paris.

"Is there a steamer for New York to-night, Fouche?" he asked, as,
completely worn out, he threw himself upon his throne and let his
chin hang dejectedly over his collar.

"No, Sire," returned Fouche, with an ill-concealed chuckle.  "There
is not.  You've missed your chance by two days.  Then isn't another
boat for ten days."

"Then I am lost," sobbed Napoleon.

"Yes, Sire, you are," returned Fouche.  "Shall I offer a reward to
anybody who will find you and return you in good order?"

"No," replied the Emperor.  "I will give myself up."

"Wise man!" said Fouche, unsympathetically.  "You're such a
confounded riddle that I wonder you didn't do it long ago."

"Ah, Fouche!" sighed the Emperor, taking his crown out of his
wardrobe and crushing it in his hands until the diamonds fell out
upon the floor, "this shows the futility of making war without
preparing for it by study.  When I was a young man I was a student.
I knew the pages of history by heart, and I learned my lessons well.
While I was the student I was invincible.  In mimic as in real war I
was the conqueror.  Everything I undertook came about as I had willed
because I was the master of facts--I dealt in facts, and I made no
mistakes.  To-day I am a conquered man, and all because I have
neglected to continue the study of the history of my people--of my
adopted native land."

"Humph!" retorted Fouche.  "I don't see how that would have helped
matters any.  All the history in creation could not have won the
battle of Waterloo for you."

"Fool that you are!" cried Napoleon, desperately, rising.  "Can't you
see?  Anybody who knows anything about the history of France knows
that the battle of Waterloo resulted fatally for me.  Had I known
that, do you suppose I'd have gone there?  Not I!  I'd have gone
fishing in the South of France instead, and this would not have
happened.  Leave me!  I wish to be alone."

Left to his own reflections Bonaparte paced his room for hours.
Then, tapping his bell, he summoned one of his faithful adherents.

"Monsieur le B-," he said, as the attendant entered, "you have heard
the news?"

"Yes, Sire," sobbed Le B-.

"Do I not carry myself well in the hour of defeat?"

"You do, Your Majesty."

"Am I pale, Le B-?"

"No--no--oh, no, not at all, Sire."

"Tell me the truth, Le B-.  We must not let the enemy find us broken
when they arrive.  How do I look?  Out with it."

"Out of sight, Sire!" replied Le B-, bending backward as far as he
could, and gazing directly at the ceiling.

"Then bring on your invader, and let us hear the worst," ordered
Napoleon, encouraged by Le B-'s assurances.

A few days later, Bonaparte, having nothing else to do, once more
abdicated, and threw himself upon the generosity of the English
people.

"I was only fooling, anyhow," he said, with a sad smile.  "If you
hadn't sent me to Elba I wouldn't have come back.  As for the
fighting, you all said I was outside of the pale of civilization, and
I had to fight.  I didn't care much about getting back into the pail,
but I really objected to having it said that I was in the tureen."

This jest completely won the hearts of the English who were used to
just such humor, who loved it, and who, many years later, showed that
love by the establishment of a comic journal as an asylum for bon-
mots similarly afflicted.  The result was, not death, but a new
Empire, the Island of St. Helena.

"This," said Wellington, "will serve to make his jokes more far-
fetched than ever; so that by sending him there we shall not only be
gracious to a fallen foe, but add to the gayety of our nation."



CHAPTER XII:  1815-1821-1895



It is with St. Helena that all biographies of Napoleon Bonaparte
hitherto published have ended, and perhaps it is just as well that
these entertaining works, prepared by purely finite minds, should end
there.  It is well for an historian not to tell more than he knows, a
principle which has guided our pen from the inception of this work to
this point, and which must continue to the bitter end.  We shall be
relentless and truthful to the last, even though in so doing we are
compelled to overthrow all historical precedent.

Bonaparte arrived at St. Helena in October, 1815.  He had embarked,
every one supposed, with the impression that he was going to America,
and those about him, fearing a passionate outbreak when he learned
the truth, tried for a time to convince him that he had taken the
wrong steamer; then when they found that he could not be deceived in
this way, they made allusions to the steering-gear having got out of
order, but the ex-Emperor merely smiled.

"You cannot fool me," he said.  "I know whither I am drifting.  I
went to a clairvoyant before leaving Paris, who cast a few dozen
horoscopes for me and they all ended at St. Helena.  It is
inevitable.  I must go there, and all these fairy tales about wrong
steamers and broken rudders and so on are useless.  I submit.  I
could return if I wished, but I do not wish to return.  By a mere
speech to these sailors I could place myself in command of this ship
to-day, turn her about and proclaim myself Emperor of the Seas; but I
don't want to.  I prefer dry land and peace to a coup de tar and the
throne of Neptune."

All of which shows that the great warrior was weary.

Then followed a dreary exile of uneventful years, in which the ex-
Emperor conducted paper campaigns of great fierceness against the
English government, which with unprecedented parsimony allowed him no
more than $60,000 a year and house rent.

"The idea of limiting me to five thousand dollars a month," he
remarked, savagely, to Sir Hudson Lowe.  "It's positively low."

"It strikes me as positively high," retorted the governor.  "You know
well enough that you couldn't spend ten dollars a week in this place
if you put your whole mind on it, if you hadn't insisted on having
French waiters in your dining-room, whom you have to tip every time
they bring you anything."

"Humph!" said Bonaparte.  "That isn't any argument.  I'm a man used
to handling large sums.  It isn't that I want to spend money; it's
that I want to have it about me in case of emergency.  However, I
know well enough why they keep my allowance down to $60,000."

"Why is it?" asked Sir Hudson.

"They know that you can't be bought for $60,000, but they wouldn't
dare make it $60,000 and one cent," retorted the captive.  "Put that
in your cigarette and smoke it, Sir Harlem, and hereafter call me
Emperor.  That's my name, Emperor N. Bonaparte."

"And I beg that you will not call me Sir Harlem," returned the
governor, irritated by the Emperor's manner.  "My name is Hudson, not
Harlem."

"Pray excuse the slip," said the Emperor, scornfully.  "I knew you
were named after some American river, I didn't know which.  However,
I imagined that the Harlem was nearer your size than the Hudson,
since the latter has some pretensions to grandeur.  Now please flow
down to the sea and lose yourself, I'm getting sleepy again."

So, in constant conflict with Sir Hudson, who refused to call him by
his title, and whom in consequence he refused to call by his proper
name, answering such epithets as "Corporal" and "Major" with a
savagely-spoken "Delaware" or an ironically respectful "Mohawk,"
Bonaparte dwelt at St. Helena until the 5th of May, 1821, when,
historians tell us, he died.  This is an error, for upon that date
Bonaparte escaped.  He had fought death too many times to succumb to
him now, and, while the writers of history have in a sense stated the
truth when they say that he passed away in the night, their readers
have gained a false impression.  It is the fact that Napoleon
Bonaparte, like Dante and Virgil, passed over the dark river Styx as
the honored leader of the rebellious forces  of Hades.  He did pass
away in the night, but he went as he went from Elba, and, as we shall
see, with more successful results.

For years the Government of Erebus had been unsatisfactory to many of
its subjects, mainly on account of the arbitrary methods of the
Weather Department.

"We are in a perpetual broil here," Caesar had said, "and I for one
am getting tired of it.  The country demands a change.  This
administration doesn't give us anything but dog-days."

For this the Roman warrior had been arrested and kept in an oven at
the rear of the Erebian Tuileries, as Apollyon's Palace was called,
for two centuries.

"The next rebel gets a gridiron, and the third will be served to
Cerberus en brochette," cried Apollyon.

Thus matters had gone on for five or six hundred years, and no one
had ventured to complain further, particularly in view of Caesar's
comments upon the horrid details of his incarceration published
several years after his release, under the title of "Two Centuries in
an Oven; or, Four Thousand and Six in the Shade."

At the end of the eighteenth century, however, the aspect of affairs
had changed.  Apollyon had spent a great deal of his time abroad, and
had failed to note how the revolution in America, the Reign of Terror
in France, and the subsequent wars in Europe had materially increased
the forces of the Republican Party in Hades.  The French arrivals
alone should have been sufficient to convince Apollyon that his
attention to domestic affairs was needed, and that the
Americanization of his domain was gaining a most considerable
headway.  All the movement really needed was a leader, but there was
none to lead.

"Caesar's book has made us timid.  I don't want any of it," said
Alcibiades.

"I've had enough of public life," said Charlemagne.

"It's hot enough for us as it is," said all four of the "Three
Musketeers."

"We'll have to get somebody who is not aware of the possibilities of
our climate," observed Frederick the Great.

"Try Napoleon Bonaparte," suggested Louis XIV., with a chuckle,
feeling that here was an opportunity to do one of two things, to get
even with Apollyon, or, in case of the failure of the rebellion, to
be revenged upon Bonaparte for his treatment of the Bourbons by
securing for him the warmest reception the Kingdom of Hades could
afford.

The suggestion, according to documents at hand which seem to be
veracious, was adopted with enthusiasm.  The exile was communicated
with, and joy settled upon the people of Hades when word was received
that Bonaparte was on his way.  As we have seen, on the night of the
5th of May he left St. Helena, and on the 10th he landed on the right
bank of the Styx.  A magnificent army awaited him.  To the Old Guard,
many of whom had preceded him, was accorded the position of honor,
and as Bonaparte stepped ashore the roof of Erebus was rent with
vivas.  Such a scene has never been witnessed before, and may never
be witnessed again.  The populace flocked about him, and strove to
kiss his hand; some went so far as to clip off samples of his uniform
to treasure in their homes.  It was evident that the government must
look to itself.

"What is this noise?" asked Apollyon, who had returned to his domain
only the night before.

"Bonaparte has arrived," returned the head Imp, "and the people are
in revolt."

Apollyon paled and summoned his ministers.

Meanwhile Bonaparte had held a council of war, appointing Caesar,
Pompey, Alcibiades, and Charlemagne marshals of Hades.

"The first thing to be done is to capture the coal-yards," he said,
taking in the situation at a glance.  "Caesar, let the coal-yards be
your care.  Alcibiades will take the Three Musketeers, and by night
will make a detour to the other side of the palace and open the
sluices of the vitriol reservoir, which I understand run into the
Styx.  Pompey will surprise the stokers in the national engine-room
with a force of ten thousand, put out the fires, and await further
orders.  Charlemagne will accompany me with the army to the palace,
where I shall demand an audience with the king."

It will be seen at once that, granting the success of all these
manoeuvres, Apollyon could not possibly hold out.  As the Hollanders
had only water with which to flood their country and rout their
enemies, so Apollyon had only fire with which to wither an invader or
a rebellious force.  The quick mind of Bonaparte took this in on the
instant.  He was no longer listless and sleepy, for here was the
grandest opportunity of his life, and he knew it.

Fortune favored him.  In Hades fortune was a material personality,
and not an abstract idea as she is with us, and when she met
Bonaparte on his triumphal march along the Styx, she yielded to that
fascination which even phlegmatic Englishmen could not deny that he
possessed; and when at this meeting the man of the hour took her by
the hand and breathed softly into her ear that she was in very truth
the only woman he had ever loved, she instinctively felt that he had
at last spoken from his heart of hearts.

"I believe you, Bonaparte," she murmured softly, "and I think I have
shown you in the past that I am not indifferent to you.  I am with
you--Apollyon is doomed."

Thus encouraged, Bonaparte, followed by his constantly growing army,
proceeded to the palace.

Apollyon received him with dignity.

"I am glad to receive so distinguished a person," he said.

"Thank you," said Bonaparte, "but this is not a society function,
Your Highness--I have come here on business, so spare me your
flatteries."

Apollyon turned purple with rage.

"Insolent!" he cried.  "Consider yourself under arrest."

"Certainly," said Bonaparte, calmly.  "Will you kindly hand me your
crown?"

Apollyon rose in his wrath, and ordered his aides to arrest
Bonaparte, and to cast him into the furnace.  "Make it a million
degrees Farenheit," he roared.

"I regret to inform your majesty," said the chief aide, "that word
has just been received that the fires are out, the coal-yard has been
captured by the rebels, and five adventurous spirits have let all the
vitriol out of the reservoir into the Styx."

"Summon my guards, and have this man boned, then!" raged Apollyon.

"It is also with regret that I have to tell you," returned the aide,
"that the Royal Guard has gone over to the enemy, having been
promised higher wages."

"We have Cerberus left," cried Apollyon, "let him take this base
intruder and tear him limb from limb."

Napoleon burst out into a laugh.  "You will excuse me, Your Majesty,"
he said.  "But Cerberus is already fixed.  We poisoned two of his
heads, and he is even now whining for his life with the third."

"Then am I undone," moaned Apollyon, covering his face with his
hands.

"You are," said Bonaparte, "but we'll tie you up again in short
order.  We'll put you on one of your own gridirons and do you to a
turn."

Of course this was the end.

In three days Napoleon had made himself master of the kingdom, had
proclaimed the Empire with himself at its head.  Apollyon was treated
with consideration.  His life was spared, but he was shorn of his
power.  Bonaparte sent him into exile at Paris, where, according to
report, he still lives.

"Now for a new coronation," said the victor.  "Send for the pope."

"Not this tune!" cried Caesar with a laugh.  "The popes have always
studiously avoided this place."

"Then," said Napoleon with a smile, "let Fortune crown me.  After
all, it has always been she who did it--why not now?"

Hence it was that at the dawning of New Year's day of 1822, Napoleon
Bonaparte opened a new and most highly successful career.  His power
has increased day by day until now, when there is evidence that he
has the greater part of the world in his firm grasp.

Some years later his beloved Bourrienne arrived.

"Remember, Bourrienne," he said, as he installed his old and faithful
secretary in his new office, "you have always written my autographs
for me, and shall still continue to do so, only please note the
change.  It is no longer Bonaparte, or Napoleon, Emperor of the
French, it has become Napollyon, Emperor of Hades."

And to Fouche, when that worthy arrived, he said:

"Fouche, this is different from the old show.  That original Empire
of mine was ruined by just one thing.  I was eternally anxious to
provide for the succession, and out of that grew all my troubles; but
here, as the little girl said about the apple-core, there ain't a-
goin' to be no succession.  I am here to stay.  Meanwhile, Fouche, I
have an impression that you and Augureau took more pleasure out of my
misfortunes than I did; wherefore I authorize you to send for
Augereau and take him swimming in the vitriol tank.  It will do you
both good."

As for Joseph, when he heard of his brother's new acquisition he
reformed at once, led an irreproachable life in America, whither he
had fled, and when he died went to the other place.



Footnote:

{1}  Napoleon's English at this time was not of the best quality









This Etext Prepared by Alan Earls <alanearls@mediaone.net>





Ballads of Peace in War

by Michael Earls




HIS LIGHT

Gray mist on the sea,
And the night coming down,
She stays with sorrow
In a far town.

He goes the sea-ways
By channel lights dim,
Her love, a true light,
Watches for him.

They would be wedded
On a fair yesterday,
But the quick regiment
Saw him away.

Gray mist in her eyes
And the night coming down:
He feels a prayer
>From a far town.

He goes the sea-ways,
The land lights are dim;
She and an altar light
Keep watch for him.







1








THE COUNTERSIGN


Along Virginia's wondering roads
While armies hastened on,
To Beauregard's great Southern host,
Manassas fields upon,
Came Colonel Smith's good regiment,
Eager for Washington.

But Colonel Smith must halt his men
In a dangerous delay,
Though well he knows the countryside
To the distant host of grey.
He cannot join with Beauregard
For Bull Run's bloody fray.

And does he halt for storm or ford,
Or does he stay to dine?
Say, No! but death will meet his men,
Onward if moves the line:
He dares not hurry to Beauregard,
Not knowing the countersign.

Flashed in the sun his waving sword;
"Who rides for me?" he cried,
"And ask of the Chief the countersign,
Upon a daring ride;
Though never the lad come back again
With the good that will betide.

"I will send a letter to Beauregard,"
The Colonel slowly said;
"The bearer dies at the pickets' line,
But the letter shall be read
When the pickets find it for the Chief,
In the brave hand of the dead."








2








The Countersign


"Ready I ride to the Chief for the sign,"
Said little Dan O'Shea,
"Though never I come from the picket's line,
But a faded suit of grey:
Yet over my death will the road be safe,
And the regiment march away."

"In a mother's name, I bless thee, lad,"
The Colonel drew him near:
"But first in the name of God," said Dan,
"And then is my mother's dear---
Her own good lips that taught me well,
With the Cross of Christ no fear."

Quickly he rode by valley and hill,
On to the outpost line,
Till the pickets arise by wall and mound,
And the levelled muskets shine;
"Halt!" they cried, "count three to death,
Or give us the countersign."

Lightly the lad leaped from his steed,
No fear was in his sigh,
But a mother's face and a home he loved
Under an Irish sky:
He made the Sign of the Cross and stood,
Bravely he stood to die.

Lips in a prayer at the blessed Sign,
And calmly he looked around,
And wonder seized his waiting soul
To hear no musket sound,
But only the pickets calling to him,
Heartily up the mound.

For this was the order of Beauregard
Around his camp that day---
The Sign of the Cross was countersign,
(And a blessing to Dan O'Shea)
And the word came quick to Colonel Smith
For the muster of the grey.


3








A HILL O' LIGHTS


Turn from Kerry crossroads and leave the wooded dells,
Take the mountain path and find where Tip O'Leary dwells;
Tip O'Leary is the name, I sing it all day long,
And every bird whose heart is wise will have it for a song.

Tip O'Leary keeps the lights of many lamps aglow,
Little matters it to him the seasons come or go,
Sure if spring is in the air his hedges are abloom,
And fairy buds like candles shine across his garden room.

Roses in the June days are light the miles around,
Tapers of the fuchsias move along the August ground,
Sumachs light the flaming torches by October's grave
And like the campfires on the hills the oaks and maples wave.

All the lights but only one die out when summer goes,
One that Tip O'Leary keeps is brighter than the rose,
Through the window comes the bloom on any winter night,
And every sense goes wild to it, soft and sweet and bright.

Lamps are fair that have the light from flowers all day long,
When the birds are here and sing the Tip O'Leary song,
But a winter window is the fairest rose of all,
When Tip O'Leary's hearth is lit and lamps upon the wall.


















4








OFF TO THE WAR

(For Jack)


In a little ship and down the bay,
Out to the calling sea,
A young brave lad sailed off today,
To the one great war went he:
The one long war all men must know
Greater than land or gold,
Soul is the prince and flesh the foe
Of a kingdom Christ will hold.

With arms of faith and hope well-wrought
The brave lad went away,
And the voice of Christ fills all his thought,
Under two hands that pray:
The tender love of a mother's hands
That guarded all his years,
Fitted the armor, plate and bands,
And blessed them with her tears.


Older than Rhodes and Ascalon
And the farthest forts of sea,
Is the Master voice that calls him on
>From the hills in Galilee:
>From hills where Christ in gentle guise
Called, as He calls again,
With His heart of love and His love-lit eyes
Unto His warrior men.

Christ with the brave young lad to-day
Who goes to the sweet command,
Strengthen his heart wherever the way,
Whether he march or stand:
And whether he die in a peaceful cell,
Or alone in the lonely night,
The Cross of Christ shall keep him well,
And be his death's delight.





5








THE TOWERS OF HOLY CROSS

(For W. M. Letts)


The roads look up to Holy Cross,
The sturdy towers look down,
And show a kindly word to all
Who pass by Worcester Town;
And once you'd see the boys at play,
Or marching cap and gown.

The gallant towers at Holy Cross
Are silent night and day,
A few young lads are left behind
Who still may take their play;
The Cross and Flag look out afar
For them that went away.

And mine are gone, says Beaven Hall,
To camps by hill and plain,
And mine along by Newport Sea,
Says the high tower of O'Kane;
I follow mine, Alumni calls,
Across the watery main.

Their sires were in the old Brigade
That won at Fontenoy,
Stood true at Washington's right hand,
that were his faith and joy:
>From Holy Cross to Fredericksburg
Is many a gallant boy.

Then God be with you, says the Cross,
And the brave towers looking down;
I'll be your cloth, sings out the Flag,
For other cap and gown,
And may we see you safe again,
On the hills of Worcester Town.







6








ALWAYS MAYTIME

   (for  Gerry)


When May has spent its little song,
And richer comes the June,
Through former eyes the heart will long
For May again in tune;
Though large with promise hope may be,
By future visions cast,
Our memoried thoughts will yearn to see
The happy little past.

And you, my loyal little friend,
(From May to June you go),
What years of loyalty attend
Great comradeship we know;
Yet joy have me in place of tears
To see your road depart,
For whether east or west your years,
A friend stays home at heart.

Then gladly let the Springtime pass
And Summer in its wake;
Ahead are fields of flower and grass
All fragrant for your sake:
With hearts of joy we say farewell,
With laughter, wave and nod,
It's always May for us who dwell
In seasons close to God.














7








THE STORYTELLER


Tim of the Tales they call me,
With a welcome heart and hand;
But little they hold my brother
For all his cattle and land.

If I be walking the high road
>From Clare that goes to the sea,
A troop of the young run leaping
To gather a story from me.

Tim of the Tales, the folk say,
Is known the world around,
For children by taking his stories
To their homes in foreign ground.

I pity my brother his fortunes,
And how he sits alone,
With the money that keeps his body,
But leaves his heart a stone.

And sometimes do I be feeling
A dream of death in my ear,
And a heaven of children calling,
"Tim of the Tales is here."


















8








MY FATHER'S TUNES


My father had the gay good tunes, the like you'd seldom hear,
A whole day could he whistle them, an' thin he'd up an' sing,
The merry tunes an' twists o'them that suited all the year,
An' you wouldn't ask but listen if yourself stood there a king.
Early of a mornin' would he give "The Barefoot Boy" to us,
An' later on "The Rocky Road" or maybe "Mountain Lark,"
"Trottin' to the Fair" was a liltin' heart of joy to us,
An' whin we heard "The Coulin" sure the night was never dark.

An' what's the good o' foolish tunes, the moilin' folks 'ud say,
It's better teach the children work an' get the crock o' gold;
Thin sorra take their wisdom whin it makes them sad an' gray,--
A man is fitter have a song that never lets him old.
A stave of "Gillan's Apples" or a snatch of "Come Along With Me"
Will warm the cockles o' your heart, an' life will keep its prime.
Yarra, gold is all the richer whin it's "Danny, sing a song for me"
Or what's the good o' money if you're dead afore your time.

It's sense to do your turn o' work, it's healthy to be wise,
An' have the little crock o' gold agin the day o' rain;
But whin the ground is heaviest, your heart will feel the skies,
If you know a little Irish song to lift the road o' pain.
The learnin' an' the wealth we have are never sad an' gray with us,
The dullest times in all the year are merry as the June:
For we've the heart to up an' sing "Arise, an' come away with us,"
The way my father gave it, an' we laughin' in the tune.
















9








A SONG

(For John McCormack)


June of the trees in glory,
June of the meadows gay!
O, and it works a story
To tell an October day.

Blooms of the apple and cherry
Toil for the far-off hours;
Never is idleness merry,
In song of the garden bowers.

Brooks to the sea from mountains,
Yea, and from field and vine:
Rain and the sun are fountains
That gather for wheat and wine.

Cellar and loft shall glory,
Table and hearth shall praise,
Hearing October's story
Of June and the merry days.






















10








A BALLAD OF FRANCE


Ye who heed a nation's call
And speed to arms therefor,
Ye who fear your children's march
To perils of the war,--
Soldiers of the deck and camp
And mothers of our men,
Hearken to a tale of France
And tell it oft again.

*     *     *

In the east of France by the roads of war,
(God save us evermore from Mars and Thor!}
Up and down the fair land iron armies came,
(Pity, Jesu, all who fell, calling Thy name).

Pleasant all the fields were round every town,
Garden airs went sweetly up, heaven smiled down;
Till under leaden hail with flaming breath,
Graves and ashen harvest were the keep of death.

One little town stood, white on a hill,
Chapel and hostel gates, farms and windmill,
Chapel and countryside met the gunner's path,
Till no blade of kindly grass hid from his wrath.

Lo! When the terrain cleared out of murky air,
When mid the ruins stalked death and despair,
One figure stood erect, bright with day,--
Christ the Crucified, though His Cross was shot away.

Flame and shot tore away all the tender wood,
Yet with arms uplifted Christ His Figure stood;
Out reached the blessing hands, meek bowed the head,
Christ! The saving solace o'er the waste of dead.








11








A Ballad of France


France tells the story, make our hearts know well,
Christ His Figure stands against the gates of hell:
Flame and shot may rive the fortress walls apart,
Christ the Crucified will heal the breaking heart.

Wear Him day and night, wherever be the war,
(God save us evermore from Mars and Thor!)
Flag and heart that keep Him fear not shot and flame,
(Strengthen, Jesu, all who stand, calling Thy name).

     *     *     *

Ye who guard a nation's call
And speed to arms therefor,
Ye who pray for brave lads gone
To perils of the war;
Soldiers of the fleet and fort
And mothers of our men,
In the shadow of the Cross
Shall we find peace again.























12








TO ONE IN SUCCESS


A world's new faces greet you,
Ten thousand quick with praise,
But truer stay to meet you
Old friends and other days:
Let fickle changes hurt you,
(The new go quick apart)
One fame shall ne'er desert you
In true hearts like this heart.


































13








THE LIFELONG WAR


Still goes the strife; the anguish does not die.
Stronger the flesh is grown from earthy years,
In siege about my soul that upward peers
To see and hold its Good.  The spirit's eye
Approves the better things; but senses spy
The passing sweets, spurning the present fears,
And take their moment's prize.  Ah, then hot tears
Deluge my soul, and contrite moans my cry!

Courage, my heart: bright patience to the end!
Few years remain; then goes the warring wall
Of sensely flesh, that men will throw to earth.
So be it; so the contrite soul shall wend
A homeward way unto the Captain's call,
Eternally to know contrition's worth.



























14








LINDEN LANE

 HOLY CROSS: MAY, 1917

(For Major Joseph W. O'Connor, '03)


Birds are merry and the buds
Come along with May:
Lonely is the linden land
For lads that went today.

What calls the May of song
But the fair young spring?
Heard our boys another tune
Sterner voices sing.

Bugles blew by land and sea,
And the tocsin drum;
See, brave hearts go down the hill,
Shouting, "Hail, we come."

>From the towers that show the Cross,
Staunch the Flag waved out,
And the royal Purple shook
Joyous with the shout.

Heigh-ho! And a lusty cheer,
Down the linden lane:
The pine grove looked but cannot tell
If they'll come home again.

Few may take the homeward road
When the war is done:
Where they fall or when they come,
Hail, to the cause they won.

Till the buds and the merry birds
Come another May,
Cross and Flag aloft shall bless
Brave lads who went today.





15








THE BOUNDARIES OF A HOUSE


Along the north a mountain crest,
A row of trees runs towards the west;
The south is all a field for play,
For work the east has marked a way;
The night shows all the stars above,
And the long, long day, a mother's love.





































16








ATTAINMENT


Let me go back again.  There is the road,
O memory! The humble garden lane
So young with me.  Let me rebuild again
The start of faith and hope by that abode;
Amend with morning freshness all the code
Of youth's desire; remap my chart's demesne
With tuneful joy, and plan a far campaign
For better marches in ambition's mode.

Ah, no, my heart! More certain now the skies
For joy abide: the cage of tree and sod,
Horizons firm that faith and hope attain,
Far realms of innocence in children's eyes,
And hearts harmonious with the will of God:--
These might I miss if I were back again.




























17








THE PHILOSOPHERS


The best of true philosophers
Are the children, after all,--
The children with laughing hearts
And the serious field and ball:
They have a bowl and bubbles,
And hours where rainbows are;
They find, if ever the sun is hid,
In every dark a star.

But, O, the sorry men that make
The wise books of our day!
They cannot smile athwart a cloud,
When black thoughts lead astray;
They cannot add a simple sum,
But talk like drunken men,
And shut their eyes to keep out God
When spring comes in again.

Far simpler than the Rule of Three
Are the laws of earth and sky;
Yet fools will muddle all true thought,
And pride will have its cry;
The banners with their deadly words
Go reeling on unfurled,
And sin and sadness march along
To the heartbreak of the world.
















18








The Philosophers


But the children are the wise men,
With the clearest heart and mind;
If two and one are three, they say,
Then truth is near to find;
If this be now that once was not,
If things must have a cause,
Then very simple is the sum
That God is in His laws.

The world's men that are fools enough,
They will not speak that way,
But with a cloud of muddled thought
They hide the light of day;
Yet laughing words and candid truth
Abide by field and hall,
Where the best of true philosophers
Are the children, after all.


























19








PREPAREDNESS

~~~~~~~~~~

I.

THE DRUMMER BOY

You never know when war may come,
And that is why I keep a drum:
	For if all sudden in the night
	From east or west came battle fright,
	And you were sound asleep in bed,
	And very soon to join the dead,
	You then would gladly wish my drum
	Would warn you that the war had come.

So that is why on afternoons
I tell the neighborhood my tunes:
	Sometimes behind a fortress bench,
	Or where the hedges make a trench,
	I beat the drum with all my might,
	While people look with awful fright,
	Just as they would if war had come,
	And heard the warning of my drum.

	They must be thankful, I am sure,
	Because they now may feel secure,
	And rest so safe and sound in bed,
	Without wild dreams of fearful dread;
	For now they hear me all the day,
	As round the yard I march and play,
	To let them know if war should come
	They'll get the warning of my drum.


~~~~~~~~~~








20








Preparedness


II.

THE SAILOR

A sailor that rides the ocean wave,
And I in my room at home:
	Where are the seas I fear to brave,
	Or the lands I may not roam?
	At the attic window I take my stand,
	And tighten the curtain sail,
	Then, ahoy!  I ride the leagues of land,
	Whether in calm or gale.

Tree at anchor along the road
Bow as I speed along;
	At sunny brooks in the valley I load
	Cargoes of blossom and song;
	Stories I take on the passing wind
	From the plains and forest seas,
	And the Golden Fleece I yet will find,
	And the fruit of Hesperides.

	Steady I keep my watchful eyes,
	As I range the thousand miles,
	Till evening tides in western skies
	Turn gold the cloudland isles;
	Then fast is the hatch and dark the screen,
	And I bring my cabin light;
	With a wink I change to a submarine
	And drop in the sea of Night.













21








WAR IN THE NORTH


Not from Mars and not from Thor
Comes the war, the welcome war,
Many months we waited for
To free us from the bondage
Of Winter's gloomy reign:
Valor to our hope is bound,
Songs of courage loud resound,
Vowed is Spring to win her ground
Through all our northern country,
>From Oregon to Maine.

All our loyal brave allies
In the Southlands mobilize,
Faith is sworn to our emprise,
The scouting breezes whisper
That help is sure today:
Vanguards of the springtime rains
Cannonade the hills and plains,
Freeing them from Winter's chains,
So birds and buds may flourish
Around the throne of May.

Hark! and hear the clarion call
Bluebirds give by fence and wall!
Look!  The darts of sunlight fall,
And red shields of the robins
Ride boldly down the leas;
Hail!  The cherry banners shine,
Onward comes the battle line,--
On!  White dogwood waves the sign,
And exile troops of blossoms
Are sailing meadow seas.










22









War in the North



Winter's tyrant king retires;
Spring leads on her legion choirs
Where the hedges sound their lyres;
The victor hills and valleys
Ring merrily the tune:
April cohorts guard the way
For the great enthroning day,
When the Princess of May
Shall wed within our northlands
The charming Prince of June.































23








THE HAPPY TIME


Two gloomy scenes may be,
Or count you three:
	A building hope all crushed at morn,
	A bridal day in clouds of rain,
	And night that keeps a mother's pain
	For tidings of a child forlorn.

Of happy times count more,
Admit these four:
	A flower of promise rich with day,
	A son with victories that wear
	A halo on his mother's way:
	And friends whose hearts ring like a chime
	Across the world at Christmas time.




























24








THE TIME OF TRUCE


Two young lads from childhood up
Drank together friendship's cup:
Joe was glad with Bill at play,
Bill was home to Joe alway.

On their friendship came the blight
Of a little thoughtless fight;
Then, alas! each passing day
Farther bore these friends away.

There was grief in either heart,
Bleeding deep from sorrow's dart,
When in thoughtfulness again
Each beheld the other's pain.

But the shades of night are furled
When the morning takes the world,
And the Christmas days of peace
Make our little quarrels cease.

Bill and Joe on Christmas Day
Met as in the olden way;
Bill put out his hand to Joe,--
It was Christmas Day, you know.

Bill and Joe are friends again,
And to them long years remain;
Time may take them far away,
They keep Christmas every day.













25








BETHLEHEM


O ye who sail Potomac's even tide
To Vernon's shades, our Chieftain's hallowed mound;
Or who at distant shrines high paeans sound
In Alfred's cult, old England's morning pride;
Or seek Versailles, conceited as a bride,
With garish memories of kins strewn round;
Or lay your spirit's cheek on Forum ground,
For here a mighty Caesar lived and died:
To these and other stones, O ye who speed,
Since there, forsooth, a prince was passing great,
More zealous let your heart's adoring heed
The Child most Royal in a crib's estate.
No poor so poor, no king more king than He:
Come, better pilgrims, to this mystery.




























26








A VOW-DAY FLOWER

(POVERTY, CHASTITY, OBEDIENCE)


Three little leaves like shamrock,
And the trefoil's love-lit eyes,
Whether it takes the sunshine
Or the shadows from the skies.

And richer than rose or lily
Is the flower he wears today,
With triune bloom and fragrance
>From earth to heaven alway.

Poverty is the low leaf,
And one is chastely white,
And the red love of obedience
Goes up to God a light.

Grow, good flower, and keep him
Who wears your bloom today,
Shadow and sunshine bless him,
And the trefoil's heavenward way.






















27








THE TREE IN THE TENEMENT YARD

(For T. A. Daly)


America, Ireland and Italy,
All have known this poor old tree.

*     *     *

A rickety fence goes round the yard
And the noisy streets stand high:
The grassless ground is brown and hard,
And the cinder pathways, lined with shard,
Sees but a bit of sky.

Once the yard was fertile and fair,
And lilac bushes near:
And a Yankee counted with fretful care,
Under the solacing shadows there,
The gain of every year.

The crowded walls of trade arose
And gloomed the avenue:
But a Munster man at each day's close
Built in the tree his hope's rainbows,
And saw his dreams come true.

The years have thickened the darkened air,
But the tree is still on guard:
It comforts the young Italian there,
Who sees the future blossoming fair
>From the tree in the tenement yard.

*     *     *

America, Ireland and Italy
All have loved this poor old tree.








28








OLD HUDSON ROVERS

(For Joyce Kilmer)


When the dreamy night is on, up the Hudson river,
And the sheen of modern taste is dim and far away,
Ghostly men on phantom rafts make the waters shiver,
Laughing in the sibilance of the silver spray.
Yea, and up the woodlands, staunch in moonlit weather,
Go the ghostly horsemen, adventuresome to ride,
White as mist the doublet-braize, bandolier and feather,
Fleet as gallant Robin Hood in an eventide.

Times are gone that knew the craft in the role of rovers,
Fellows of the open, care could never load:
Unalarmed for bed or board, they were leisure's lovers,
Summer bloomed in story on the Hyde Park Road.
Summer was a blossom, but the fruit was autumn,
Fragrant haylofts for a bed, cider-cakes in store,
Warmer was a cup they know, when the north wind caught 'em
Down at Benny Havens' by the West Point shore.

Idlers now-and loafers pass, joy is out of fashion,
Honest fun that fooled a dog or knew a friendly gate,
Now the craft are vagabonds, sick with modern passion,
Riding up and down the shore, on an aching freight;
Sullen are the battered looks, cheerless talk or tipsy,
Sickly in the smoky air, starving in the day,
Pining for a city's noise at Kingston or Po'keepsie,
Eager more for Gotham and a great White Way.

Rich is all the countryside, but glory has departed,
What if yachts and mansions be, by the river's marge!
Dim though was a hillside, lamps were happy-hearted,
Near the cove of Rondout in a hut or barge.
Silken styles are tyrants, fashion kills the playtime,
Robs the heart of largess that is kindly to the poor,
Richer were the freemen, welcome as the Maytime,
Glad was boy or maiden, seeing Brennan of the moor.






29








Old Hudson Rovers


Send us back the olden knights, tell no law to track 'em,
Give to boy and maid the storytellers as of yore,
Millionaires in legend-wealth, though no bank would back 'em,
But old Benny Havens by the West Point Shore.
Off with lazy vagabonds, social ghosts that shiver,
Give to worthy road-men the great green way,
And we'll hear a song again up the Hudson river,
Ringing from a drifting raft, set in silver spray.


























