ould not be withheld but that some day 
    Into their vastness I should steal away, 
    Fearless of ever finding open land, 
    Or highway where the slow wheel pours the sand. 
    I do not see why I should e'er turn back, 
    Or those should not set forth upon my track 
    To overtake me, who should miss me here 
    And long to know if still I held them dear. 
    They would not find me changed from him they knew-- 
    Only more sure of all I thought was true. 

Ghost House

    I DWELL in a lonely house I know 
    That vanished many a summer ago, 
    And left no trace but the cellar walls, 
    And a cellar in which the daylight falls, 
    And the purple-stemmed wild raspberries grow. 
    O'er ruined fences the grape-vines shield 
    The woods come back to the mowing field; 
    The orchard tree has grown one copse 
    Of new wood and old where the woodpecker chops; 
    The footpath down to the well is healed. 
    I dwell with a strangely aching heart 
    In that vanished abode there far apart 
    On that disused and forgotten road 
    That has no dust-bath now for the toad. 
    Night comes; the black bats tumble and dart; 
    The whippoorwill is coming to shout 
    And hush and cluck and flutter about: 
    I hear him begin far enough away 
    Full many a time to say his say 
    Before he arrives to say it out. 
    It is under the small, dim, summer star. 
    I know not who these mute folk are 
    Who share the unlit place with me-- 
    Those stones out under the low-limbed tree 
    Doubtless bear names that the mosses mar. 
    They are tireless folk, but slow and sad, 
    Though two, close-keeping, are lass and lad,-- 
    With none among them that ever sings, 
    And yet, in view of how many things, 
    As sweet companions as might be had. 

My November Guest

    MY Sorrow, when she's here with me, 
    Thinks these dark days of autumn rain 
    Are beautiful as days can be; 
    She loves the bare, the withered tree; 
    She walks the sodden pasture lane. 
    Her pleasure will not let me stay. 
    She talks and I am fain to list: 
    She's glad the birds are gone away, 
    She's glad her simple worsted gray 
    Is silver now with clinging mist. 
    The desolate, deserted trees, 
    The faded earth, the heavy sky, 
    The beauties she so truly sees, 
    She thinks I have no eye for these, 
    And vexes me for reason why. 
    Not yesterday I learned to know 
    The love of bare November days 
    Before the coming of the snow, 
    But it were vain to tell her so, 
    And they are better for her praise. 

Love and a Question

    A STRANGER came to the door at eve, 
    And he spoke the bridegroom fair. 
    He bore a green-white stick in his hand, 
    And, for all burden, care. 
    He asked with the eyes more than the lips 
    For a shelter for the night, 
    And he turned and looked at the road afar 
    Without a window light. 
    The bridegroom came forth into the porch 
    With, 'Let us look at the sky, 
    And question what of the night to be, 
    Stranger, you and I.' 
    The woodbine leaves littered the yard, 
    The woodbine berries were blue, 
    Autumn, yes, winter was in the wind; 
    'Stranger, I wish I knew.' 
    Within, the bride in the dusk alone 
    Bent over the open fire, 
    Her face rose-red with the glowing coal 
    And the thought of the heart's desire. 
    The bridegroom looked at the weary road, 
    Yet saw but her within, 
    And wished her heart in a case of gold 
    And pinned with a silver pin. 
    The bridegroom thought it little to give 
    A dole of bread, a purse, 
    A heartfelt prayer for the poor of God, 
    Or for the rich a curse; 
    But whether or not a man was asked 
    To mar the love of two 
    By harboring woe in the bridal house, 
    The bridegroom wished he knew. 

A Late Walk

    WHEN I go up through the mowing field, 
    The headless aftermath, 
    Smooth-laid like thatch with the heavy dew, 
    Half closes the garden path. 
    And when I come to the garden ground, 
    The whir of sober birds 
    Up from the tangle of withered weeds 
    Is sadder than any words. 
    A tree beside the wall stands bare, 
    But a leaf that lingered brown, 
    Disturbed, I doubt not, by my thought, 
    Comes softly rattling down. 
    I end not far from my going forth 
    By picking the faded blue 
    Of the last remaining aster flower 
    To carry again to you. 

Stars

    HOW countlessly they congregate 
    O'er our tumultuous snow, 
    Which flows in shapes as tall as trees 
    When wintry winds do blow!-- 
    As if with keenness for our fate, 
    Our faltering few steps on 
    To white rest, and a place of rest 
    Invisible at dawn,-- 
    And yet with neither love nor hate, 
    Those stars like some snow-white 
    Minerva's snow-white marble eyes 
    Without the gift of sight. 

Storm Fear

    WHEN the wind works against us in the dark, 
    And pelts with snow 
    The lowest chamber window on the east, 
    And whispers with a sort of stifled bark, 
    The beast, 
    'Come out! Come out!'-- 
    It costs no inward struggle not to go, 
    Ah, no! 
    I count our strength, 
    Two and a child, 
    Those of us not asleep subdued to mark 
    How the cold creeps as the fire dies at length,-- 
    How drifts are piled, 
    Dooryard and road ungraded, 
    Till even the comforting barn grows far away 
    And my heart owns a doubt 
    Whether 'tis in us to arise with day 
    And save ourselves unaided. 

Wind and Window Flower

    LOVERS, forget your love, 
    And list to the love of these, 
    She a window flower, 
    And he a winter breeze. 
    When the frosty window veil 
    Was melted down at noon, 
    And the cagèd yellow bird 
    Hung over her in tune, 
    He marked her through the pane, 
    He could not help but mark, 
    And only passed her by, 
    To come again at dark. 
    He was a winter wind, 
    Concerned with ice and snow, 
    Dead weeds and unmated birds, 
    And little of love could know. 
    But he sighed upon the sill, 
    He gave the sash a shake, 
    As witness all within 
    Who lay that night awake. 
    Perchance he half prevailed 
    To win her for the flight 
    From the firelit looking-glass 
    And warm stove-window light. 
    But the flower leaned aside 
    And thought of naught to say, 
    And morning found the breeze 
    A hundred miles away. 


To the Thawing Wind (audio)

    COME with rain, O loud Southwester! 
    Bring the singer, bring the nester; 
    Give the buried flower a dream; 
    Make the settled snow-bank steam; 
    Find the brown beneath the white; 
    But whate'er you do to-night, 
    Bathe my window, make it flow, 
    Melt it as the ices go; 
    Melt the glass and leave the sticks 
    Like a hermit's crucifix; 
    Burst into my narrow stall; 
    Swing the picture on the wall; 
    Run the rattling pages o'er; 
    Scatter poems on the floor; 
    Turn the poet out of door. 

A Prayer in Spring

    OH, give us pleasure in the flowers to-day; 
    And give us not to think so far away 
    As the uncertain harvest; keep us here 
    All simply in the springing of the year. 
    Oh, give us pleasure in the orchard white, 
    Like nothing else by day, like ghosts by night; 
    And make us happy in the happy bees, 
    The swarm dilating round the perfect trees. 
    And make us happy in the darting bird 
    That suddenly above the bees is heard, 
    The meteor that thrusts in with needle bill, 
    And off a blossom in mid air stands still. 
    For this is love and nothing else is love, 
    The which it is reserved for God above 
    To sanctify to what far ends He will, 
    But which it only needs that we fulfil. 

Flower-gathering

    I LEFT you in the morning, 
    And in the morning glow, 
    You walked a way beside me 
    To make me sad to go. 
    Do you know me in the gloaming, 
    Gaunt and dusty grey with roaming? 
    Are you dumb because you know me not, 
    Or dumb because you know? 
    All for me? And not a question 
    For the faded flowers gay 
    That could take me from beside you 
    For the ages of a day? 
    They are yours, and be the measure 
    Of their worth for you to treasure, 
    The measure of the little while 
    That I've been long away. 

Rose Pogonias

    A SATURATED meadow, 
    Sun-shaped and jewel-small, 
    A circle scarcely wider 
    Than the trees around were tall; 
    Where winds were quite excluded, 
    And the air was stifling sweet 
    With the breath of many flowers,-- 
    A temple of the heat. 
    There we bowed us in the burning, 
    As the sun's right worship is, 
    To pick where none could miss them 
    A thousand orchises; 
    For though the grass was scattered, 
    Yet every second spear 
    Seemed tipped with wings of color, 
    That tinged the atmosphere. 
    We raised a simple prayer 
    Before we left the spot, 
    That in the general mowing 
    That place might be forgot; 
    Or if not all so favoured, 
    Obtain such grace of hours, 
    That none should mow the grass there 
    While so confused with flowers. 

Asking for Roses

    A HOUSE that lacks, seemingly, mistress and master, 
    With doors that none but the wind ever closes, 
    Its floor all littered with glass and with plaster; 
    It stands in a garden of old-fashioned roses. 
    I pass by that way in the gloaming with Mary; 
    'I wonder,' I say, 'who the owner of those is. 
    'Oh, no one you know,' she answers me airy, 
    'But one we must ask if we want any roses.' 
    So we must join hands in the dew coming coldly 
    There in the hush of the wood that reposes, 
    And turn and go up to the open door boldly, 
    And knock to the echoes as beggars for roses. 
    'Pray, are you within there, Mistress Who-were-you?' 
    'Tis Mary that speaks and our errand discloses. 
    'Pray, are you within there? Bestir you, bestir you! 
    'Tis summer again; there's two come for roses. 
    'A word with you, that of the singer recalling-- 
    Old Herrick: a saying that every maid knows is 
    A flower unplucked is but left to the falling, 
    And nothing is gained by not gathering roses.' 
    We do not loosen our hands' intertwining 
    (Not caring so very much what she supposes), 
    There when she comes on us mistily shining 
    And grants us by silence the boon of her roses. 

Waiting 
Afield at Dusk

    WHAT things for dream there are when spectre-like, 
    Moving among tall haycocks lightly piled, 
    I enter alone upon the stubble field, 
    From which the laborers' voices late have died, 
    And in the antiphony of afterglow 
    And rising full moon, sit me down 
    Upon the full moon's side of the first haycock 
    And lose myself amid so many alike. 
    I dream upon the opposing lights of the hour, 
    Preventing shadow until the moon prevail; 
    I dream upon the night-hawks peopling heaven, 
    Each circling each with vague unearthly cry, 
    Or plunging headlong with fierce twang afar; 
    And on the bat's mute antics, who would seem 
    Dimly to have made out my secret place, 
    Only to lose it when he pirouettes, 
    And seek it endlessly with purblind haste; 
    On the last swallow's sweep; and on the rasp 
    In the abyss of odor and rustle at my back, 
    That, silenced by my advent, finds once more, 
    After an interval, his instrument, 
    And tries once--twice--and thrice if I be there; 
    And on the worn book of old-golden song 
    I brought not here to read, it seems, but hold 
    And freshen in this air of withering sweetness; 
    But on the memory of one absent most, 
    For whom these lines when they shall greet her eye. 

In a Vale

    WHEN I was young, we dwelt in a vale 
    By a misty fen that rang all night, 
    And thus it was the maidens pale 
    I knew so well, whose garments trail 
    Across the reeds to a window light. 
    The fen had every kind of bloom, 
    And for every kind there was a face, 
    And a voice that has sounded in my room 
    Across the sill from the outer gloom. 
    Each came singly unto her place, 
    But all came every night with the mist; 
    And often they brought so much to say 
    Of things of moment to which, they wist, 
    One so lonely was fain to list, 
    That the stars were almost faded away 
    Before the last went, heavy with dew, 
    Back to the place from which she came-- 
    Where the bird was before it flew, 
    Where the flower was before it grew, 
    Where bird and flower were one and the same. 
    And thus it is I know so well 
    Why the flower has odor, the bird has song. 
    You have only to ask me, and I can tell. 
    No, not vainly there did I dwell, 
    Nor vainly listen all the night long. 

A Dream Pang

    I HAD withdrawn in forest, and my song 
    Was swallowed up in leaves that blew alway; 
    And to the forest edge you came one day 
    (This was my dream) and looked and pondered long, 
    But did not enter, though the wish was strong: 
    You shook your pensive head as who should say, 
    'I dare not--too far in his footsteps stray-- 
    He must seek me would he undo the wrong. 
    Not far, but near, I stood and saw it all 
    Behind low boughs the trees let down outside; 
    And the sweet pang it cost me not to call 
    And tell you that I saw does still abide. 
    But 'tis not true that thus I dwelt aloof, 
    For the wood wakes, and you are here for proof. 

In Neglect

    THEY leave us so to the way we took, 
    As two in whom they were proved mistaken, 
    That we sit sometimes in the wayside nook, 
    With mischievous, vagrant, seraphic look, 
    And try if we cannot feel forsaken. 

The Vantage Point

    IF tired of trees I seek again mankind, 
    Well I know where to hie me--in the dawn, 
    To a slope where the cattle keep the lawn. 
    There amid lolling juniper reclined, 
    Myself unseen, I see in white defined 
    Far off the homes of men, and farther still, 
    The graves of men on an opposing hill, 
    Living or dead, whichever are to mind. 
    And if by moon I have too much of these, 
    I have but to turn on my arm, and lo, 
    The sun-burned hillside sets my face aglow, 
    My breathing shakes the bluet like a breeze, 
    I smell the earth, I smell the bruisèd plant, 
    I look into the crater of the ant. 

Mowing

    THERE was never a sound beside the wood but one, 
    And that was my long scythe whispering to the ground. 
    What was it it whispered? I knew not well myself; 
    Perhaps it was something about the heat of the sun, 
    Something, perhaps, about the lack of sound-- 
    And that was why it whispered and did not speak. 
    It was no dream of the gift of idle hours, 
    Or easy gold at the hand of fay or elf: 
    Anything more than the truth would have seemed too weak 
    To the earnest love that laid the swale in rows, 
    Not without feeble-pointed spikes of flowers 
    (Pale orchises), and scared a bright green snake. 
    The fact is the sweetest dream that labor knows. 
    My long scythe whispered and left the hay to make. 

Going for Water

    THE well was dry beside the door, 
    And so we went with pail and can 
    Across the fields behind the house 
    To seek the brook if still it ran; 
    Not loth to have excuse to go, 
    Because the autumn eve was fair 
    (Though chill), because the fields were ours, 
    And by the brook our woods were there. 
    We ran as if to meet the moon 
    That slowly dawned behind the trees, 
    The barren boughs without the leaves, 
    Without the birds, without the breeze. 
    But once within the wood, we paused 
    Like gnomes that hid us from the moon, 
    Ready to run to hiding new 
    With laughter when she found us soon. 
    Each laid on other a staying hand 
    To listen ere we dared to look, 
    And in the hush we joined to make 
    We heard, we knew we heard the brook. 
    A note as from a single place, 
    A slender tinkling fall that made 
    Now drops that floated on the pool 
    Like pearls, and now a silver blade.

Revelation

    WE make ourselves a place apart 
    Behind light words that tease and flout, 
    But oh, the agitated heart 
    Till someone find us really out. 
    'Tis pity if the case require 
    (Or so we say) that in the end 
    We speak the literal to inspire 
    The understanding of a friend. 
    But so with all, from babes that play 
    At hide-and-seek to God afar, 
    So all who hide too well away 
    Must speak and tell us where they are. 

The Trial by Existence

    EVEN the bravest that are slain 
    Shall not dissemble their surprise 
    On waking to find valor reign, 
    Even as on earth, in paradise; 
    And where they sought without the sword 
    Wide fields of asphodel fore'er, 
    To find that the utmost reward 
    Of daring should be still to dare. 
    The light of heaven falls whole and white 
    And is not shattered into dyes, 
    The light for ever is morning light; 
    The hills are verdured pasture-wise; 
    The angel hosts with freshness go, 
    And seek with laughter what to brave;-- 
    And binding all is the hushed snow 
    Of the far-distant breaking wave. 
    And from a cliff-top is proclaimed 
    The gathering of the souls for birth, 
    The trial by existence named, 
    The obscuration upon earth. 
    And the slant spirits trooping by 
    In streams and cross- and counter-streams 
    Can but give ear to that sweet cry 
    For its suggestion of what dreams! 
    And the more loitering are turned 
    To view once more the sacrifice 
    Of those who for some good discerned 
    Will gladly give up paradise. 
    And a white shimmering concourse rolls 
    Toward the throne to witness there 
    The speeding of devoted souls 
    Which God makes his especial care. 
    And none are taken but who will, 
    Having first heard the life read out 
    That opens earthward, good and ill, 
    Beyond the shadow of a doubt; 
    And very beautifully God limns, 
    And tenderly, life's little dream, 
    But naught extenuates or dims, 
    Setting the thing that is supreme. 
    Nor is there wanting in the press 
    Some spirit to stand simply forth, 
    Heroic in its nakedness, 
    Against the uttermost of earth. 
    The tale of earth's unhonored things 
    Sounds nobler there than 'neath the sun; 
    And the mind whirls and the heart sings, 
    And a shout greets the daring one. 
    But always God speaks at the end: 
    'One thought in agony of strife 
    The bravest would have by for friend, 
    The memory that he chose the life; 
    But the pure fate to which you go 
    Admits no memory of choice, 
    Or the woe were not earthly woe 
    To which you give the assenting voice.' 
    And so the choice must be again, 
    But the last choice is still the same; 
    And the awe passes wonder then, 
    And a hush falls for all acclaim. 
    And God has taken a flower of gold 
    And broken it, and used therefrom 
    The mystic link to bind and hold 
    Spirit to matter till death come. 
    'Tis of the essence of life here, 
    Though we choose greatly, still to lack 
    The lasting memory at all clear, 
    That life has for us on the wrack 
    Nothing but what we somehow chose; 
    Thus are we wholly stripped of pride 
    In the pain that has but one close, 
    Bearing it crushed and mystified. 

In Equal Sacrifice

    THUS of old the Douglas did: 
    He left his land as he was bid 
    With the royal heart of Robert the Bruce 
    In a golden case with a golden lid, 
    To carry the same to the Holy Land; 
    By which we see and understand 
    That that was the place to carry a heart 
    At loyalty and love's command, 
    And that was the case to carry it in. 
    The Douglas had not far to win 
    Before he came to the land of Spain, 
    Where long a holy war had been 
    Against the too-victorious Moor; 
    And there his courage could not endure 
    Not to strike a blow for God 
    Before he made his errand sure. 
    And ever it was intended so, 
    That a man for God should strike a blow, 
    No matter the heart he has in charge 
    For the Holy Land where hearts should go. 
    But when in battle the foe were met, 
    The Douglas found him sore beset, 
    With only strength of the fighting arm 
    For one more battle passage yet-- 
    And that as vain to save the day 
    As bring his body safe away-- 
    Only a signal deed to do 
    And a last sounding word to say. 
    The heart he wore in a golden chain 
    He swung and flung forth into the plain, 
    And followed it crying 'Heart or death!' 
    And fighting over it perished fain. 
    So may another do of right, 
    Give a heart to the hopeless fight, 
    The more of right the more he loves; 
    So may another redouble might 
    For a few swift gleams of the angry brand, 
    Scorning greatly not to demand 
    In equal sacrifice with his 
    The heart he bore to the Holy Land. 

The Tuft of Flowers

    I WENT to turn the grass once after one 
    Who mowed it in the dew before the sun. 
    The dew was gone that made his blade so keen 
    Before I came to view the leveled scene. 
    I looked for him behind an isle of trees; 
    I listened for his whetstone on the breeze. 
    But he had gone his way, the grass all mown, 
    And I must be, as he had been,--alone, 
    'As all must be,' I said within my heart, 
    'Whether they work together or apart.' 
    But as I said it, swift there passed me by 
    On noiseless wing a 'wildered butterfly, 
    Seeking with memories grown dim o'er night 
    Some resting flower of yesterday's delight. 
    And once I marked his flight go round and round, 
    As where some flower lay withering on the ground. 
    And then he flew as far as eye could see, 
    And then on tremulous wing came back to me. 
    I thought of questions that have no reply, 
    And would have turned to toss the grass to dry; 
    But he turned first, and led my eye to look 
    At a tall tuft of flowers beside a brook, 
    A leaping tongue of bloom the scythe had spared 
    Beside a reedy brook the scythe had bared. 
    I left my place to know them by their name, 
    Finding them butterfly weed when I came. 
    The mower in the dew had loved them thus, 
    By leaving them to flourish, not for us, 
    Nor yet to draw one thought of ours to him. 
    But from sheer morning gladness at the brim. 
    The butterfly and I had lit upon, 
    Nevertheless, a message from the dawn, 
    That made me hear the wakening birds around, 
    And hear his long scythe whispering to the ground, 
    And feel a spirit kindred to my own; 
    So that henceforth I worked no more alone; 
    But glad with him, I worked as with his aid, 
    And weary, sought at noon with him the shade; 
    And dreaming, as it were, held brotherly speech 
    With one whose thought I had not hoped to reach. 
    'Men work together,' I told him from the heart, 
    'Whether they work together or apart.' 

Spoils of the Dead

    TWO fairies it was 
    On a still summer day 
    Came forth in the woods 
    With the flowers to play. 
    The flowers they plucked 
    They cast on the ground 
    For others, and those 
    For still others they found. 
    Flower-guided it was 
    That they came as they ran 
    On something that lay 
    In the shape of a man. 
    The snow must have made 
    The feathery bed 
    When this one fell 
    On the sleep of the dead. 
    But the snow was gone 
    A long time ago, 
    And the body he wore 
    Nigh gone with the snow. 
    The fairies drew near 
    And keenly espied 
    A ring on his hand 
    And a chain at his side. 
    They knelt in the leaves 
    And eerily played 
    With the glittering things, 
    And were not afraid. 
    And when they went home 
    To hide in their burrow, 
    They took them along 
    To play with to-morrow. 
    When you came on death, 
    Did you not come flower-guided 
    Like the elves in the wood? 
    I remember that I did. 
    But I recognised death 
    With sorrow and dread, 
    And I hated and hate 
    The spoils of the dead. 

Pan with Us

    PAN came out of the woods one day,-- 
    His skin and his hair and his eyes were gray, 
    The gray of the moss of walls were they,-- 
    And stood in the sun and looked his fill 
    At wooded valley and wooded hill. 
    He stood in the zephyr, pipes in hand, 
    On a height of naked pasture land; 
    In all the country he did command 
    He saw no smoke and he saw no roof. 
    That was well! and he stamped a hoof. 
    His heart knew peace, for none came here 
    To this lean feeding save once a year 
    Someone to salt the half-wild steer, 
    Or homespun children with clicking pails 
    Who see no little they tell no tales. 
    He tossed his pipes, too hard to teach 
    A new-world song, far out of reach, 
    For a sylvan sign that the blue jay's screech 
    And the whimper of hawks beside the sun 
    Were music enough for him, for one. 
    Times were changed from what they were: 
    Such pipes kept less of power to stir 
    The fruited bough of the juniper 
    And the fragile bluets clustered there 
    Than the merest aimless breath of air. 
    They were pipes of pagan mirth, 
    And the world had found new terms of worth. 
    He laid him down on the sun-burned earth 
    And ravelled a flower and looked away-- 
    Play? Play?--What should he play? 

The Demiurge's Laugh

    IT was far in the sameness of the wood; 
    I was running with joy on the Demon's trail, 
    Though I knew what I hunted was no true god. 
    It was just as the light was beginning to fail 
    That I suddenly heard--all I needed to hear: 
    It has lasted me many and many a year. 
    The sound was behind me instead of before, 
    A sleepy sound, but mocking half, 
    As of one who utterly couldn't care. 
    The Demon arose from his wallow to laugh, 
    Brushing the dirt from his eye as he went; 
    And well I knew what the Demon meant. 
    I shall not forget how his laugh rang out. 
    I felt as a fool to have been so caught, 
    And checked my steps to make pretence 
    It was something among the leaves I sought 
    (Though doubtful whether he stayed to see). 
    Thereafter I sat me against a tree. 

Now Close the Windows

    NOW close the windows and hush all the fields; 
    If the trees must, let them silently toss; 
    No bird is singing now, and if there is, 
    Be it my loss. 
    It will be long ere the marshes resume, 
    It will be long ere the earliest bird: 
    So close the windows and not hear the wind, 
    But see all wind-stirred. 


A Line-storm Song

    THE line-storm clouds fly tattered and swift, 
    The road is forlorn all day, 
    Where a myriad snowy quartz stones lift, 
    And the hoof-prints vanish away. 
    The roadside flowers, too wet for the bee, 
    Expend their bloom in vain. 
    Come over the hills and far with me, 
    And be my love in the rain. 
    The birds have less to say for themselves 
    In the wood-world's torn despair 
    Than now these numberless years the elves, 
    Although they are no less there: 
    All song of the woods is crushed like some 
    Wild, easily shattered rose. 
    Come, be my love in the wet woods; come, 
    Where the boughs rain when it blows. 
    There is the gale to urge behind 
    And bruit our singing down, 
    And the shallow waters aflutter with wind 
    From which to gather your gown. 
    What matter if we go clear to the west, 
    And come not through dry-shod? 
    For wilding brooch shall wet your breast 
    The rain-fresh goldenrod. 
    Oh, never this whelming east wind swells 
    But it seems like the sea's return 
    To the ancient lands where it left the shells 
    Before the age of the fern; 
    And it seems like the time when after doubt 
    Our love came back amain. 
    Oh, come forth into the storm and rout 
    And be my love in the rain. 

October

    O HUSHED October morning mild, 
    Thy leaves have ripened to the fall; 
    To-morrow's wind, if it be wild, 
    Should waste them all. 
    The crows above the forest call; 
    To-morrow they may form and go. 
    O hushed October morning mild, 
    Begin the hours of this day slow, 
    Make the day seem to us less brief. 
    Hearts not averse to being beguiled, 
    Beguile us in the way you know; 
    Release one leaf at break of day; 
    At noon release another leaf; 
    One from our trees, one far away; 
    Retard the sun with gentle mist; 
    Enchant the land with amethyst. 
    Slow, slow! 
    For the grapes' sake, if they were all, 
    Whose leaves already are burnt with frost, 
    Whose clustered fruit must else be lost-- 
    For the grapes' sake along the wall. 

My Butterfly

    THINE emulous fond flowers are dead, too, 
    And the daft sun-assaulter, he 
    That frighted thee so oft, is fled or dead: 
    Save only me 
    (Nor is it sad to thee!) 
    Save only me 
    There is none left to mourn thee in the fields. 
    The gray grass is not dappled with the snow; 
    Its two banks have not shut upon the river; 
    But it is long ago-- 
    It seems forever-- 
    Since first I saw thee glance, 
    With all the dazzling other ones, 
    In airy dalliance, 
    Precipitate in love, 
    Tossed, tangled, whirled and whirled above, 
    Like a limp rose-wreath in a fairy dance. 
    When that was, the soft mist 
    Of my regret hung not on all the land, 
    And I was glad for thee, 
    And glad for me, I wist. 
    Thou didst not know, who tottered, wandering on high, 
    That fate had made thee for the pleasure of the wind, 
    With those great careless wings, 
    Nor yet did I. 
    And there were other things: 
    It seemed God let thee flutter from his gentle clasp: 
    Then fearful he had let thee win 
    Too far beyond him to be gathered in, 
    Snatched thee, o'er eager, with ungentle grasp. 
    Ah! I remember me 
    How once conspiracy was rife 
    Against my life-- 
    The languor of it and the dreaming fond; 
    Surging, the grasses dizzied me of thought, 
    The breeze three odors brought, 
    And a gem-flower waved in a wand! 
    Then when I was distraught 
    And could not speak, 
    Sidelong, full on my cheek, 
    What should that reckless zephyr fling 
    But the wild touch of thy dye-dusty wing! 
    I found that wing broken to-day! 
    For thou are dead, I said, 
    And the strange birds say. 
    I found it with the withered leaves 
    Under the eaves. 

Reluctance
 
   OUT through the fields and the woods 
    And over the walls I have wended; 
    I have climbed the hills of view 
    And looked at the world, and descended; 
    I have come by the highway home, 
    And lo, it is ended. 
    The leaves are all dead on the ground, 
    Save those that the oak is keeping 
    To ravel them one by one 
    And let them go scraping and creeping 
    Out over the crusted snow, 
    When others are sleeping. 
    And the dead leaves lie huddled and still, 
    No longer blown hither and thither; 
    The last lone aster is gone; 
    The flowers of the witch-hazel wither; 
    The heart is still aching to seek, 
    But the feet question 'Whither?' 
    Ah, when to the heart of man 
    Was it ever less than a treason 
    To go with the drift of things, 
    To yield with a grace to reason, 
    And bow and accept tand accept the end 
    Of a love or a season? 









This etext was scanned by JC Byers and typed by L.M. Shaffer.
LMShaf@aol.com & jcbyers@capitalnet.com





                      The Brown Fairy Book
                                
                           Edited by
                          Andrew Lang
                                
                           Dedicated
                               to
                        Diana Scott Lang



Preface



The stories in this Fairy Book come from all quarters of the
world.  For example, the adventures of 'Ball-Carrier and the Bad
One' are told by Red Indian grandmothers to Red Indian children
who never go to school, nor see pen and ink.  'The Bunyip' is
known to even more uneducated little ones, running about with no
clothes at all in the bush, in Australia.  You may see
photographs of these merry little black fellows before their
troubles begin, in 'Northern Races of Central Australia,' by
Messrs. Spencer and Gillen.  They have no lessons except in
tracking and catching birds, beasts, fishes, lizards, and snakes,
all of which they eat.  But when they grow up to be big boys and
girls, they are cruelly cut about with stone knives and
frightened with sham bogies all for their good' their parents
say and I think they would rather go to school, if they had their
choice, and take their chance of being birched and bullied. 
However, many boys might think it better fun to begin to learn
hunting as soon as they can walk.  Other stories, like 'The
Sacred Milk of Koumongoe,' come from the Kaffirs in Africa, whose
dear papas are not so poor as those in Australia, but have plenty
of cattle and milk, and good mealies to eat, and live in houses
like very big bee-hives, and wear clothes of a sort, though not
very like our own.  'Pivi and Kabo' is a tale from the brown
people in the island of New Caledonia, where a boy is never
allowed to speak to or even look at his own sisters; nobody knows
why, so curious are the manners of this remote island.  The story
shows the advantages of good manners and pleasant behaviour; and
the natives do not now cook and eat each other, but live on fish,
vegetables, pork, and chickens, and dwell in houses.  'What the
Rose did to the Cypress,' is a story from Persia, where the
people, of course, are civilised, and much like those of whom you
read in 'The Arabian Nights.'  Then there are tales like 'The Fox
and the Lapp ' from the very north of Europe, where it is dark
for half the year and day-light for the other half.  The Lapps
are a people not fond of soap and water, and very much given to
art magic.  Then there are tales from India, told to Major
Campbell, who wrote them out, by Hindoos; these stories are 'Wali
Dad the Simple-hearted,' and 'The King who would be Stronger than
Fate,' but was not so clever as his daughter.  From Brazil, in
South America, comes 'The Tortoise and the Mischievous Monkey,'
with the adventures of other animals.  Other tales are told in
various parts of Europe, and in many languages; but all people,
black, white, brown, red, and yellow, are like each other when
they tell stories; for these are meant for children, who like the
same sort of thing, whether they go to school and wear clothes,
or, on the other hand, wear skins of beasts, or even nothing at
all, and live on grubs and lizards and hawks and crows and
serpents, like the little Australian blacks.

The tale of 'What the Rose did to the Cypress,' is translated out
of a Persian manuscript by Mrs. Beveridge.  'Pivi and Kabo' is
translated by the Editor from a French version; 'Asmund and
Signy' by Miss Blackley; the Indian stories by Major Campbell,
and all the rest are told by Mrs. Lang, who does not give them
exactly as they are told by all sorts of outlandish natives, but
makes them up in the hope white people will like them, skipping
the pieces which they will not like.  That is how this Fairy Book
was made up for your entertainment.




Contents



What the Rose did to the Cypress
Ball-Carrier and the Bad One
How Ball-Carrier finished his Task
The Bunyip
Father Grumbler
The Story of the Yara
The Cunning Hare
The Turtle and his Bride
How Geirald the Coward was Punished
Habogi
How the Little Brother set Free his Big Brothers
The Sacred Milk of Koumongoe
The Wicked Wolverine
The Husband of the Rat's Daughter
The Mermaid and the Boy
Pivi and Kabo
The Elf Maiden
How Some Wild Animals became Tame Ones
Fortune and the Wood-Cutter
The Enchanted Head
The Sister of the Sun
The Prince and the Three Fates
The Fox and the Lapp
Kisa the Cat
The Lion and the Cat
Which was the Foolishest?
Asmund and Signy
Rubezahl
Story of the King who would be Stronger then Fate
Story of Wali Dad the Simple-hearted
Tale of a Tortoise and of a Mischievous Monkey
The Knights of the Fish







                      The Brown Fairy Book




What the Rose did to the Cypress[FN#1]



Once upon a time a great king of the East, named
Saman-lalposh,[FN#2] had three brave and clever sons--Tahmasp,
Qamas, and Almas-ruh-baksh.[FN#3] One day, when the king was
sitting in his hall of audience, his eldest son, Prince Tahmasp,
came before him, and after greeting his father with due respect,
said: 'O my royal father!  I am tired of the town; if you will
give me leave, I will take my servants to-morrow and will go into
the country and hunt on the hill-skirts; and when I have taken
some game I will come back, at evening-prayer time.'  His father
consented, and sent with him some of his own trusted servants,
and also hawks, and falcons, hunting dogs, cheetahs and leopards.

At the place where the prince intended to hunt he saw a most
beautiful deer.  He ordered that it should not be killed, but
trapped or captured with a noose.  The deer looked about for a
place where he might escape from the ring of the beaters, and
spied one unwatched close to the prince himself.  It bounded high
and leaped right over his head, got out of the ring, and tore
like the eastern wind into the waste.  The prince put spurs to
his horse and pursued it; and was soon lost to the sight of his
followers.  Until the world-lighting sun stood above his head in
the zenith he did not take his eyes off the deer; suddenly it
disappeared behind some rising ground, and with all his search he
could not find any further trace of it.  He was now drenched in
sweat, and he breathed with pain; and his horse's tongue hung
from its mouth with thirst.  He dismounted and toiled on, with
bridle on arm, praying and casting himself on the mercy of
heaven.  Then his horse fell and surrendered its life to God.  On
and on he went across the sandy waste, weeping and with burning
breast, till at length a hill rose into sight.  He mustered his
strength and climbed to the top, and there he found a giant tree
whose foot kept firm the wrinkled earth, and whose crest touched
the very heaven.  Its branches had put forth a glory of leaves,
and there were grass and a spring underneath it, and flowers of
many colours.

Gladdened by this sight, he dragged himself to the water's edge,
drank his fill, and returned thanks for his deliverance from
thirst.

He looked about him and, to his amazement, saw close by a royal
seat.  While he was pondering what could have brought this into
the merciless desert, a man drew near who was dressed like a
faqir, and had bare head and feet, but walked with the free
carriage of a person of rank.  His face was kind, and wise and
thoughtful, and he came on and spoke to the prince.

'O good youth! how did you come here?  Who are you?  Where do you
come from?'

The prince told everything just as it had happened to him, and
then respectfully added: 'I have made known my own circumstances
to you, and now I venture to beg you to tell me your own.  Who
are you?  How did you come to make your dwelling in this
wilderness?'

To this the faqir replied: 'O youth! it would be best for you to
have nothing to do with me and to know nothing of my fortunes,
for my story is fit neither for telling nor for hearing.'  The
prince, however, pleaded so hard to be told, that at last there
was nothing to be done but to let him hear.

'Learn and know, O young man! that I am King Janangir[FN#4] of
Babylon, and that once I had army and servants, family and
treasure; untold wealth and belongings.  The Most High God gave
me seven sons who grew up well versed in all princely arts.  My
eldest son heard from travellers that in Turkistan, on the
Chinese frontier, there is a king named Quimus, the son of Timus,
and that he has an only child, a daughter named Mihr-afruz,[FN#5]
who, under all the azure heaven, is unrivalled for beauty. 
Princes come from all quarters to ask her hand, and on one and
all she imposes a condition.  She says to them: "I know a riddle;
and I will marry anyone who answers it, and will bestow on him
all my possessions.  But if a suitor cannot answer my question I
cut off his head and hang it on the battlements of the citadel."
The riddle she asks is, "What did the rose do to the cypress?"

'Now, when my son heard this tale, he fell in love with that
unseen girl, and he came to me lamenting and bewailing himself. 
Nothing that I could say had the slightest effect on him.  I
said: "Oh my son! if there must be fruit of this fancy of yours,
I will lead forth a great army against King Quimus.  If he will
give you his daughter freely, well and good; and if not, I will
ravage his kingdom and bring her away by force." This plan did
not please him; he said: "It is not right to lay a kingdom waste
and to destroy a palace so that I may attain my desire.  I will
go alone; I will answer the riddle, and win her in this way." At
last, out of pity for him, I let him go.  He reached the city of
King Quimus.  He was asked the riddle and could not give the true
answer; and his head was cut off and hung upon the battlements. 
Then I mourned him in black raiment for forty days.

After this another and another of my sons were seized by the same
desire, and in the end all my seven sons went, and all were
killed.  In grief for their death I have abandoned my throne, and
I abide here in this desert, withholding my hand from all State
business and wearing myself away in sorrow.'

Prince Tahmasp listened to this tale, and then the arrow of love
for that unseen girl struck his heart also.  Just at this moment
of his ill-fate his people came up, and gathered round him like
moths round a light.  They brought him a horse, fleet as the
breeze of the dawn; he set his willing foot in the stirrup of
safety and rode off.  As the days went by the thorn of love
rankled in his heart, and he became the very example of lovers,
and grew faint and feeble.  At last his confidants searched his
heart and lifted the veil from the face of his love, and then set
the matter before his father, King Saman-lal-posh.  'Your son,
Prince Tahmasp, loves distractedly the Princess Mihr-afruz,
daughter of King Quimus, son of Timus.'  Then they told the king
all about her and her doings.  A mist of sadness clouded the
king's mind, and he said to his son: 'If this thing is so, I will
in the first place send a courier with friendly letters to King
Quimus, and will ask the hand of his daughter for you.  I will
send an abundance of gifts, and a string of camels laden with
flashing stones and rubies of Badakhsham In this way I will bring
her and her suite, and I will give her to you to be your solace. 
But if King Quimus is unwilling to give her to you, I will pour a
whirlwind of soldiers upon him, and I will bring to you, in this
way, that most consequential of girls.'  But the prince said that
this plan would not be right, and that he would go himself, and
would answer the riddle.  Then the king's wise men said: 'This is
a very weighty matter; it would be best to allow the prince to
set out accompanied by some persons in whom you have confidence. 
Maybe he will repent and come back.'  So King Saman ordered all
preparations for the journey to be made, and then Prince Tahmasp
took his leave and set out, accompanied by some of the courtiers,
and taking with him a string of two-humped and raven-eyed camels
laden with jewels, and gold, and costly stuffs.

By stage after stage, and after many days' journeying, he arrived
at the city of King Quimus.  What did he see?  A towering citadel
whose foot kept firm the wrinkled earth, and whose battlements
touched the blue heaven.  He saw hanging from its battlements
many heads, but it had not the least effect upon him that these
were heads of men of rank; he listened to no advice about laying
aside his fancy, but rode up to the gate and on into the heart of
the city.  The place was so splendid that the eyes of the ages
have never seen its like, and there, in an open square, he found
a tent of crimson satin set up, and beneath it two jewelled drums
with jewelled sticks.  These drums were put there so that the
suitors of the princess might announce their arrival by beating
on them, after which some one would come and take them to the
king's presence.  The sight of the drums stirred the fire of
Prince Tahmasp's love.  He dismounted, and moved towards them;
but his companions hurried after and begged him first to let them
go and announce him to the king, and said that then, when they
had put their possessions in a place of security, they would
enter into the all important matter of the princess.  The prince,
however, replied that he was there for one thing only; that his
first duty was to beat the drums and announce himself as a
suitor, when he would be taken, as such, to the king, who would
then give him proper lodgment.  So he struck upon the drums, and
at once summoned an officer who took him to King Quimus.

When the king saw how very young the prince looked, and that he
was still drinking of the fountain of wonder, he said: 'O youth!
leave aside this fancy which my daughter has conceived in the
pride of her beauty.  No one can answer er her riddle, and she
has done to death many men who had had no pleasure in life nor
tasted its charms.  God forbid that your spring also should be
ravaged by the autumn winds of martyrdom.'  All his urgency,
however, had no effect in making the prince withdraw.  At length
it was settled between them that three days should be given to
pleasant hospitality and that then should follow what had to be
said and done.  Then the prince went to his own quarters and was
treated as became his station.

King Quimus now sent for his daughter and for her mother,
Gulrukh,[FN#6] and talked to them.  He said to Mibrafruz: '
Listen to me, you cruel flirt!  Why do you persist in this folly? 
Now there has come to ask your hand a prince of the east, so
handsome that the very sun grows modest before the splendour of
his face; he is rich, and he has brought gold and jewels, all for
you, if you will marry him.  A better husband you will not find.'

But all the arguments of father and mother were wasted, for her
only answer was: 'O my father!  I have sworn to myself that I
will not marry, even if a thousand years go by, unless someone
answers my riddle, and that I will give myself to that man only
who does answer it.'

The three days passed; then the riddle was asked: 'What did the
rose do to the cypress?'  The prince had an eloquent tongue,
which could split a hair, and without hesitation he replied to
her with a verse: 'Only the Omnipotent has knowledge of secrets;
if any man says, " I know " do not believe him.'

Then a servant fetched in the polluted, blue-eyed headsman, who
asked: 'Whose sun of life has come near its setting?' took the
prince by the arm, placed him upon the cloth of execution, and
then, all merciless and stony hearted, cut his head from his body
and hung it on the battlements.

The news of the death of Prince Tahmasp plunged his father into
despair and stupefaction.  He mourned for him in black raiment
for forty days; and then, a few days later, his second son,
Prince Qamas, extracted from him leave to go too; and he, also,
was put to death.  One son only now remained, the brave,
eloquent, happy-natured Prince Almas-ruh-bakhsh.  One day, when
his father sat brooding over his lost children, Almas came before
him and said: 'O father mine! the daughter of King Quimus has
done my two brothers to death; I wish to avenge them upon her.' 
These words brought his father to tears.  'O light of your
father! ' he cried, 'I have no one left but you, and now you ask
me to let you go to your death.'

'Dear father!' pleaded the prince, 'until I have lowered the
pride of that beauty, and have set her here before you, I cannot
settle down or indeed sit down off my feet.'

In the end he, too, got leave to go; but he went a without a
following and alone.  Like his brothers, he made the long journey
to the city of Quimus the son of Timus; like them he saw the
citadel, but he saw there the heads of Tahmasp and Qamas.  He
went about in the city, saw the tent and the drums, and then went
out again to a village not far off.  Here he found out a very old
man who had a wife 120 years old, or rather more.  Their lives
were coming to their end, but they had never beheld face of child
of their own.  They were glad when the prince came to their
house, and they dealt with him as with a son.  He put all his
belongings into their charge, and fastened his horse in their
out-house.  Then he asked them not to speak of him to anyone, and
to keep his affairs secret.  He exchanged his royal dress for
another, and next morning, just as the sun looked forth from its
eastern oratory, he went again into the city.  He turned over in
his mind without ceasing how he was to find out the meaning of
the riddle, and to give them a right answer, and who could help
him, and how to avenge his brothers.  He wandered about the city,
but heard nothing of service, for there was no one in all that
land who understood the riddle of Princess Mihr-afruz.

One day he thought he would go to her own palace and see if he
could learn anything there, so he went out to her garden-house. 
It was a very splendid place, with a wonderful gateway, and walls
like Alexander's ramparts.  Many gate-keepers were on guard, and
there was no chance of passing them.  His heart was full of
bitterness, but he said to himself: 'All will be well! it is here
I shall get what I want.'  He went round outside the garden wall
hoping to find a gap, and he made supplication in the Court of
Supplications and prayed, 'O Holder of the hand of the helpless!
show me my way.'

While he prayed he bethought himself that he could get into the
garden with a stream of inflowing water.  He looked carefully
round, fearing to be seen, stripped, slid into the stream and was
carried within the great walls.  There he hid himself till his
loin cloth was dry.  The garden was a very Eden, with running
water amongst its lawns, with flowers and the lament of doves and
the jug-jug of nightingales.  It was a place to steal the senses
from the brain, and he wandered about and saw the house, but
there seemed to be no one there.  In the forecourt was a royal
seat of polished jasper, and in the middle of the platform was a
basin of purest water that flashed like a mirror.  He pleased
himself with these sights for a while, and then went back to the
garden and hid himself from the gardeners and passed the night. 
Next morning he put on the appearance of a madman and wandered
about till he came to a lawn where several pert-faced girls were
amusing themselves.  On a throne, jewelled and overspread with
silken stuffs, sat a girl the splendour of whose beauty lighted
up the place, and whose ambergris and attar perfumed the whole
air.  'That must be Mihrafruz,' he thought, 'she is indeed
lovely.'  Just then one of the attendants came to the water's
edge to fill a cup, and though the prince was in hiding, his face
was reflected in the water.  When she saw this image she was
frightened, and let her cup fall into the stream, and thought,
'Is it an angel, or a peri, or a man?' Fear and trembling took
hold of her, and she screamed as women scream.  Then some of the
other girls came and took her to the princess who asked: 'What is
the matter, pretty one?'

'O princess! I went for water, and I saw an image, and I was
afraid.'  So another girl went to the water and saw the same
thing, and came back with the same story.  The princess wished to
see for herself; she rose and paced to the spot with the march of
a prancing peacock.  When she saw the image she said to her
nurse: 'Find out who is reflected in the water, and where he
lives.'  Her words reached the prince's ear, he lifted up his
head; she saw him and beheld beauty such as she had never seen
before.  She lost a hundred hearts to him, and signed to her
nurse to b