ring him to her presence.  The prince let himself be
persuaded to go with the nurse, but when the princess questioned
him as to who he was and how he had got into her garden, he
behaved like a man out of his mind--sometimes smiling, sometimes
crying, and saying: ' I am hungry,'Or words misplaced and random,
civil mixed with the rude.

'What a pity!' said the princess, 'he is mad!' As she liked him
she said: 'He is my madman; let no one hurt him.'  She took him
to her house and told him not to go away, for that she would
provide for all his wants.  The prince thought, 'It would be
excellent if here, in her very house, I could get the answer to
her riddle; but I must be silent, on pain of death.'

Now in the princess's household there was a girl called
Dil-aram[FN#7]; she it was who had first seen the image of the
prince.  She came to love him very much, and she spent day and
night thinking how she could make her affection known to him. 
One day she escaped from the princess's notice and went to the
prince, and laid her head on his feet and said: ' Heaven has
bestowed on you beauty and charm.  Tell me your secret; who are
you, and how did you come here?  I love you very much, and if you
would like to leave this place I will go with you.  I have wealth
equal to the treasure of the miserly Qarun.'  But the prince only
made answer like a man distraught, and told her nothing.  He said
to himself, ' God forbid that the veil should be taken in vain
from my secret; that would indeed disgrace me.'  So, with
streaming eyes and burning breast, Dil-aram arose and went to her
house and lamented and fretted.

Now whenever the princess commanded the prince's attendance,
Dil-aram, of all the girls, paid him attention and waited on him
best.  The princess noticed this, and said: 'O Dil-aram! you must
take my madman into your charge and give him whatever he wants.' 
This was the very thing Dil- aram had prayed for.  A little later
she took the prince into a private place and she made him take an
oath of secrecy, and she herself took one and swore, ' By Heaven!
I will not tell your secret.  Tell me all about yourself so that
I may help you to get what you want.'  The prince now recognised
in her words the perfume of true love, and he made compact with
her.  'O lovely girl! I want to know what the rose did to the
cypress.  Your mistress cuts off men's heads because of this
riddle; what is at the bottom of it, and why does she do it?'
Then Dil-aram answered: ' If you will promise to marry me and to
keep me always amongst those you favour, I will tell you all I
know, and I will keep watch about the riddle.'

'O lovely girl,' rejoined he, 'if I accomplish my purpose, so
that I need no longer strive for it, I will keep my compact with
you.  When I have this woman in my power and have avenged my
brothers, I will make you my solace.'

'O wealth of my life and source of my joy!' responded Dil-aram,
'I do not know what the rose did to the cypress; but so much I
know that the person who told Mihr-afruz about it is a negro whom
she hides under her throne.  He fled here from Waq of the
Caucasus--it is there you must make inquiry; there is no other
way of getting at the truth.'On hearing these words, the prince
said to his heart, 'O my heart! your task will yet wear away much
of your life.'

He fell into long and far thought, and Dil-aram looked at him and
said: 'O my life and my soul! do not be sad.  If you would like
this woman killed, I will put poison into her cup so that she
will never lift her head from her drugged sleep again.'

'O Dil-aram! such a vengeance is not manly.  I shall not rest
till I have gone to Waq of the Caucasus and have cleared up the
matter.'  Then they repeated the agreement about their marriage,
and bade one another goodbye.

The prince now went back to the village, and told the old man
that he was setting out on a long journey, and begged him not to
be anxious, and to keep safe the goods which had been entrusted
to him.

The prince had not the least knowledge of the way to Waq of the
Caucasus, and was cast down by the sense of his helplessness.  He
was walking along by his horse's side when there appeared before
him an old man of serene countenance, dressed in green and
carrying a staff, who resembled Khizr.[FN#8] The prince thanked
heaven, laid the hands of reverence on his breast and salaamed. 
The old man returned the greeting graciously, and asked: 'How
fare you?  Whither are you bound?  You look like a traveller.'

'O revered saint!  I am in this difficulty: I do not know the way
to Waq of the Caucasus.'  The old man of good counsel looked at
the young prince and said: 'Turn back from this dangerous
undertaking.  Do not go; choose some other task!  If you had a
hundred lives you would not bring one out safe from this
journey.'  But his words had no effect on the prince's resolve. 
'What object have you,' the old man asked, 'in thus consuming
your life?'

'I have an important piece of business to do, and only this
journey makes it possible.  I must go; I pray you, ill God's
name, tell me the way.'

When the saint saw that the prince was not to be moved, he said:
' Learn and know, O youth! that Waq of Qaf is in the Caucasus and
is a dependency of it.  In it there are jins, demons, and peris. 
You must go on along this road till it forks into three; take
neither the right hand nor the left, but the middle path.  Follow
this for a day and a night.  Then you will come to a column on
which is a marble slab inscribed with Cufic characters.  Do what
is written there; beware of disobedience.'  Then he gave his good
wishes for the journey and his blessing, and the prince kissed
his [Bet, said good-bye, and, with thanks to the Causer of
Causes, took the road.

After a day and a night he saw the column rise in silent beauty
to the heavens.  Everything was as the wise old man had said it
would be, and the prince, who was skilled in all tongues, read
the following Cufic inscription: 'O travellers! be it known to
you that this column has been set up with its tablet to give true
directions about these roads.  If a man would pass his life in
ease and pleasantness, let him take the right-hand path.  If he
take the left, he will have some trouble, but he will reach his
goal without much delay.  Woe to him who chooses the middle path!
if he had a thousand lives he would not save one; it is very
hazardous; it leads to the Caucasus, and is an endless road. 
Beware of it!'

The prince read and bared his head and lifted his hands in
supplication to Him who has no needs, and prayed, 'O Friend of
the traveller! I, Thy servant, come to Thee for succour.  My
purpose lies in the land of Qaf and my road is full of peril. 
Lead me by it.'  Then he took a handful of earth and cast it on
his collar, and said: 'O earth! be thou my grave; and O vest! tee
thou my winding-sheet!' Then he took the middle road and went
along it, day after day, with many a silent prayer, till he saw
trees rise from the weary waste of sand.  They grew in a garden,
and he went up to the gate and found it a slab of beautifully
worked marble, and that near it there lay sleeping, with his head
on a stone, a negro whose face was so black that it made darkness
round him.  His upper lip, arched like an eyebrow, curved upwards
to his nostrils and his lower hung down like a camel's.  Four
millstones formed his shield, and on a box- tree close by hung
his giant sword.  His loin-cloth was fashioned of twelve skins of
beasts, and was bound round his waist by a chain of which each
link was as big as an elephant's thigh.

The prince approached and tied up his horse near the negro's
head.  Then he let fall the Bismillah from his lips, entered the
garden and walked through it till he came to the private part,
delighting in the great trees, the lovely verdure, and the
flowery borders.  In the inner garden there were very many deer. 
These signed to him with eye and foot to go back, for that this
was enchanted ground; but he did not understand them, and thought
their pretty gestures were a welcome.  After a while he reached a
palace which had a porch more splendid than Caesar's, and was
built of gold and silver bricks.  In its midst was a high seat,
overlaid with fine carpets, and into it opened eight doors, each
having opposite to it a marble basin.

Banishing care, Prince Almas walked on through the garden, when
suddenly a window opened and a girl, who was lovely enough to
make the moon writhe with jealousy, put out her head.  She lost
her heart to the good looks of the prince, and sent her nurse to
fetch him so that she might learn where he came from and how he
had got into her private garden where even lions and wolves did
not venture.  The nurse went, and was struck with amazement at
the sun-like radiance of his face; she salaamed and said: 'O
youth! welcome! the lady of the garden calls you; come!' He went
with her and into a palace which was like a house in Paradise,
and saw seated on the royal carpets of the throne a girl whose
brilliance shamed the shining sun.  He salaamed; she rose, took
him by the hand and placed him near her.  'O young man! who are
you?  Where do you come from?  How did you get into this garden?'
He told her his story from beginning to end, and Lady
Latifa[FN#9]  replied: 'This is folly! It will make you a
vagabond of the earth, and lead you to destruction.  Come, cease
such talk! No one can go to the Caucasus.  Stay with me and be
thankful, for here is a throne which you can share with me, and
in my society you can enjoy my wealth.  I will do whatever you
wish; I will bring here King Qulmus and his daughter, and you can
deal with them as you will.'

'O Lady Latifa,' he said, 'I have made a compact with heaven not
to sit down off my feet till I have been to Waq of Qaf and have
cleared up this matter, and have taken Mihr- afruz from her
father, as brave men take, and have put her in prison.  When I
have done all this I will come back to you in state and with a
great following, and I will marry you according to the law.' 
Lady Latifa argued and urged her wishes, but in vain; the prince
was not to be moved.  Then she called to the cupbearers for new
wine, for she thought that when his head was hot with it he might
consent to stay.  The pure, clear wine was brought; she filled a
cup and gave to him.  He said: 'O most enchanting sweetheart! it
is the rule for the host to drink first and then the guest.'  So
to make him lose his head, she drained the cup; then filled it
again and gave him.  He drank it off, and she took a lute from
one of the singers and played upon it with skill which witched
away the sense of all who heard.  But it was all in vain; three
days passed in such festivities, and on the fourth the prince
said: 'O joy of my eyes! I beg now that you will bid me farewell,
for my way is long and the fire of your love darts flame into the
harvest of my heart.  By heaven's grace I may accomplish my
purpose, and, if so, I will come back to you.'

Now she saw that she could not in any way change his resolve, she
told her nurse to bring a certain casket which contained, she
said, something exhilarating which would help the prince on his
journey.  The box was brought, and she divided off a portion of
what was within and gave it to the prince to eat.  Then, and
while he was all unaware, she put forth her hand to a stick
fashioned like a snake; she said some words over it and struck
him so sharply on the shoulder that he cried out; then he made a
pirouette and found that he was a deer.

When he knew what had been done to him he thought, 'All the
threads of affliction are gathered together; I have lost my last
chance!' He tried to escape, but the magician sent for her
goldsmith, who, coming, overlaid the deer-horns with gold and
jewels.  The kerchief which that day she had had in her hand was
then tied round its neck, and this freed it from her attentions.

The prince-deer now bounded into the garden and at once sought
some way of escape.  It found none, and it joined the other deer,
which soon made it their leader.  Now, although the prince had
been transformed into the form of a deer, he kept his man's heart
and mind.  He said to himself, 'Thank heaven that the Lady Latifa
has changed me into this shape, for at least deer are beautiful.' 
He remained for some time living as a deer amongst the rest, but
at length resolved that an end to such a life must be put ill
some way.  He looked again for some place by which he could get
out of the magic garden.  Following round the wall he reached a
lower part; he remembered the Divine Names and flung himself
over, saying, 'Whatever happens is by the will of God.'  When he
looked about he found that he was in the very same place he had
jumped from; there was the palace, there the garden and the deer! 
Eight times he leaped over the wall and eight times found himself
where he had started from; but after the ninth leap there was a
change, there was a palace and there was a garden, but the deer
were gone.

Presently a girl of such moon-like beauty opened a window that
the prince lost to her a hundred hearts.  She was delighted with
the beautiful deer, and cried to her nurse: 'Catch it! if you
will I will give you this necklace, every pearl of which is worth
a kingdom.'  The nurse coveted the pearls, but as she was three
hundred years old she did not know how she could catch a deer. 
However, she went down into the garden and held out some grass,
but when she went near the creature ran away.  The girl watched
with great excitement from the palace window, and called: 'O
nurse, if you don't catch it, I will kill you!' 'I am killing
myself,' shouted back the old woman.  The girl saw that nurse
tottering along and went down to help, marching with the gait of
a prancing peacock.  When she saw the gilded horns and the
kerchief she said: 'It must be accustomed to the hand, and be
some royal pet!' The prince had it in mind that this might be
another magician who could give him some other shape, but still
it seemed best to allow himself to be caught.  So he played about
the girl and let her catch him by the neck.  A leash was brought,
fruits were given, and it was caressed with delight.  It was
taken to the palace and tied at the foot of the Lady Jamila's
raised seat, but she ordered a longer cord to be brought so that
it might be able to jump up beside her.

When the nurse went to fix the cord she saw tears falling from
its eyes, and that it was dejected and sorrowful 'O Lady Jamila!
this is a wonderful deer, it is crying; I never saw a deer cry
before.'  Jamila darted down like a flash of lightning, and saw
that it was so.  It rubbed its head on her feet and then shook it
so sadly that the girl cried for sympathy.  She patted it and
said: 'Why are you sad, my heart?  Why do you cry, my soul?  Is
it because I have caught you?  I love you better than my own
life.'  But, spite of her comforting, it cried the more.  Then
Jamila said: 'Unless I am mistaken, this is the work of my wicked
sister Latifa, who by magic art turns servants of God into beasts
of the field.'  At these words the deer uttered sounds, and laid
its head on her feet.  Then Jamila was sure it was a man, and
said: ' Be comforted, I will restore you to your own shape.'  She
bathed herself and ordered the deer to be bathed, put on clean
raiment, called for a box which stood in an alcove, opened it and
gave a portion of what was in it to the deer to eat.  Then she
slipped her hand under her carpet and produced a stick to which
she said something.  She struck the deer hard, it pirouetted and
became Prince Almas.

The broidered kerchief and the jewels lay upon the ground.  The
prince prostrated himself in thanks to heaven and Jamila, and
said: 'O delicious person! O Chinese Venus! how shall I excuse
myself for giving you so much trouble?  With what words can I
thank you?' Then she called for a clothes-wallet and chose out a
royal dress of honour.  Her attendants dressed him in it, and
brought him again before the tender-hearted lady.  She turned to
him a hundred hearts, took his hand and seated him beside her,
and said: 'O youth! tell me truly who you are and where you come
from, and how you fell into the power of my sister.'

Even when he was a deer the prince had much admired Jamila now he
thought her a thousand times more lovely than before.  He judged
that in truth alone was safety, and so told her his whole story. 
Then she asked: 'O Prince Almas-ruh-bakhsh, do you still wish so
much to make this journey to Waq of Qaf?  What hope is there in
it?  The road is dangerous even near here, and this is not yet
the borderland of the Caucasus.  Come, give it up!  It is a great
risk, and to go is not wise.  It would be a pity for a man like
you to fall into the hands of jins and demons.  Stay with me, and
I will do whatever you wish.'

'O most delicious person!' he answered, 'you are very generous,
and the choice of my life lies in truth in your hands; but I beg
one favour of you.  If you love me, so do I too love you.  If you
really love me, do not forbid me to make this journey, but help
me as far as you can.  Then it may be that I shall succeed, and
if I return with my purpose fulfilled I will marry you according
to the law, and take you to my own country, and we will spend the
rest of our lives together in pleasure and good companionship. 
Help me, if you can, and give me your counsel.'

'O very stuff of my life,' replied Jamila 'I will give you things
that are not in kings' treasuries, and which will be of the
greatest use to you.  First, there are the bow and arrows of his
Reverence the Prophet Salih.  Secondly, there is the Scorpion of
Solomon (on whom be peace), which is a sword such as no king has;
steel and stone are one to it; if you bring it down on a rock it
will not be injured, and it will cleave whatever you strike. 
Thirdly, there is the dagger which the sage Timus himself made;
this is most useful, and the man who wears it would not bend
under seven camels' loads.  What you have to do first is to get
to the home of the Simurgh,[FN#10] and to make friends with him. 
If he favours you, he will take you to Waq of Qaf; if not, you
will never get there, for seven seas are on the way, and they are
such seas that if all the kings of the earth, and all their
wazirs, and all their wise men considered for a thousand years,
they would not be able to cross them.'

'O most delicious person! where is the Simurgh's home?  How shall
I get there?'

'O new fruit of life! you must just do what I tell you, and you
must use your eyes and your brains, for if you don't you will
find yourself at the place of the negroes, who are a bloodthirsty
set; and God forbid they should lay hands on your precious
person.'

Then she took the bow and quiver of arrows, the sword, and the
dagger out of a box, and the prince let fall a Bismillah, and
girt them all on.  Then Jamila of the houri-face, produced two
saddle-bags of ruby-red silk, one filled with roasted fowl and
little cakes, and the other with stones of price.  Next she gave
him a horse as swift as the breeze of the morning, and she said:
' Accept all these things from me; ride till you come to a rising
ground, at no great distance from here, where there is a spring. 
It is called the Place of Gifts, and you must stay there one
night.  There you will see many wild beasts--lions, tigers,
leopards, apes, and so on.  Before you get there you must capture
some game.  On the long road beyond there dwells a lion-king,
alla if other beasts did not fear him they would ravage the whole
country and let no one pass.  The lion is a red transgressor, so
when he comes rise and do him reverence; take a cloth and rub the
dust and earth from his face, then set the game you have taken
before him, well cleansed, and lay the hands of respect on your
breast.  When he wishes to eat, take your knife and cut pieces of
the meat and set them before him with a bow.  In this way you
will enfold that lion-king in perfect friendship, and he will be
most useful to you, and you will be safe from molestation by the
negroes.  When you go on from the Place of Gifts, be sure you do
not take the right-hand road; take the left, for the other leads
by the negro castle, which is known as the Place of Clashing
Swords, and where there are forty negro captains each over three
thousand or four thousand more.  Their chief is Taramtaq.[FN#11] 
Further on than this is the home of the Simurgh.'

Having stored these things in the prince's memory, she said: 'You
will see everything happen just as I have said.'  Then she
escorted him a little way; they parted, and she went home to
mourn his absence.

Prince Almas, relying on the Causer of Causes, rode on to the
Place of Gifts and dismounted at the platform.  Everything
happened just as Jamila had foretold; when one or two watches of
the night had passed, he saw that the open ground around him was
full of such stately and splendid animals as he had never seen
before.  By-and-by, they made way for a wonderfully big lion,
which was eighty yards from nose to tail-tip, and was a
magnificent creature.  The prince advanced and saluted it; it
proudly drooped its head and forelocks and paced to the platform. 
Seventy or eighty others were with it, and now encircled it at a
little distance.  It laid its right paw over its left, and the
prince took the kerchief Jamila had given him for the purpose,
and rubbed the dust and earth from its face; then brought forward
the game he had prepared, and crossing his hands respectfully on
his breast stood waiting before it.  When it wished for food he
cut off pieces of the meat and put them in its mouth.  The
serving lions also came near and the prince would have stayed his
hand, but the king-lion signed to him to feed them too.  This he
did, laying the meat on the platform.  Then the king-lion
beckoned the prince to come near and said: 'Sleep at ease; my
guards will watch.'.  So, surrounded by the lion-guard, he slept
till dawn, when the king lion said good-bye, and gave him a few
of his own hairs and said: 'When you are in any difficulty, burn
one of these and I will be there.'  Then it went off into the
jungle.

Prince Almas immediately started; he rode till he came to the
parting of the ways.  He remembered quite well that the
right-hand way was short and dangerous, but he bethought himself
too that whatever was written on his forehead would happen, and
took the forbidden road.  By-and-by he saw a castle, and knew
from what Jamila had told him that it was the Place of Clashing
Swords.  He would have liked to go back by the way ho had come,
but courage forbade, and he said, 'What has been preordained from
eternity will happen to me,' and went on towards the castle.  He
was thinking of tying his horse to a tree which grew near the
gate when a negro came out and spied him.  ' Ha!' said the wretch
to himself, 'this is good; Taram-taq has not eaten man-meat for a
long time, and is craving for some.  I will take this creature to
him.'  He took hold of the prince's reins, and said: 'Dismount,
man-child!  Come to my master.  He has wanted to eat man-meat
this long time back.'  'What nonsense are you saying?' said the
prince, and other such words.  When the negro understood that he
was being abused, he cried: 'Come along! I will put you into such
a state that the birds of the air will weep for you.'  Then the
prince drew the Scorpion of So]omon and struck him--struck him on
the leathern belt and shore him through so that the sword came
out on the other side.  He stood upright for a little while,
muttered some words, put out his hand to seize the prince, then
fell in two and surrendered his life.

There was water close at hand, and the prince made his ablution,
and then said: 'O my heart! a wonderful task lies upon you.'  A
second negro came out of the fort, and seeing what had been done,
went back and told his chief.  Others wished to be doubled, and
went out, and of every one the Scorpion of Solomon made two. 
Then Taram-taq sent for a giant negro named Chil-maq, who in the
day of battle was worth three hundred, and said to him: 'I shall
thank you to fetch me that man.'

Chil-maq went out, tall as a tower, and bearing a shield of eight
millstones, and as he walked he shouted: 'Ho! blunder- head! by
what right do you come to our country and kill our people?  Come!
make two of me.'  As the prince was despicable in his eyes, he
tossed aside his club and rushed to grip him with his hands.  He
caught him by the collar, tucked him under his arm and set off
with him to Taram-taq.  But the prince drew the dagger of Timus
and thrust it upwards through the giant's armpit, for its full
length.  This made Chil-maq drop him and try to pick up his club;
but when he stooped the mighty sword shore him through at the
waist.

When news of his champion's death reached Taram-taq he put
himself at the head of an army of his negroes and led them forth. 
Many fell before the magic sword, and the prince laboured on in
spite of weakness and fatigue till he was almost worn out.  In a
moment of respite from attack he struck his fire-steel and burned
a hair of the king-lion; and he had just succeeded in this when
the negroes charged again and all but took him prisoner. 
Suddenly from behind the distant veil of the desert appeared an
army of lions led by their king.  'What brings these scourges of
heaven here?' cried the negroes.  They came roaring up, and put
fresh life into the prince.  He fought on, and when he struck on
a belt the wearer fell in two, and when on a head he cleft to the
waist.  Then the ten thousand mighty lions joined the fray and
tore in pieces man and horse.

Taram-taq was left alone; he would have retired into his fort,
but the prince shouted: 'Whither away, accursed one?  Are you
fleeing before me?' At these defiant words the chief shouted
back, 'Welcome, man! Come here and I will soften you to wax
beneath my club.'  Then he hurled his club at the prince's head,
but it fell harmless because the prince had quickly spurred his
horse forward.  The chief, believing he had hit him, was looking
down for him, when all at once he came up behind and cleft him to
the waist and sent him straight to hell.

The king-lion greatly praised the dashing courage of Prince
Almas.  They went together into the Castle of Clashing Swords and
found it adorned and fitted in princely fashion.  In it was a
daughter of Taram taq, still a child She sent a message to Prince
Almas saying, 'O king of the world! choose this slave to be your
handmaid.  Keep her with you; where you go, there she will go! '
He sent for her and she kissed his feet and received the
Mussulman faith at his hands.  He told her he was going a long
journey on important business, and that when he came back he
would take her and her possessions to his own country, but that
for the present she must stay in the castle.  Then he made over
the fort and all that was in it to the care of the lion, saying:
'Guard them, brother! let no one lay a hand on them.'  He said
goodbye, chose a fresh horse from the chief's stable and once
again took the road.

After travelling many stages and for many days, he reached a
plain of marvellous beauty and refreshment.  It was carpeted with
flowers--roses, tulips, and clover; it had lovely lawns, and
amongst them running water.  This choicest place of earth filled
him with wonder.  There was a tree such as he had never seen
before; its branches were alike, but it bore flowers and fruit of
a thousand kinds.  Near it a reservoir had been fashioned of four
sorts of stone--touchstone, pure stone, marble, and loadstone. 
In and out of it flowed water like attar.  The prince felt sure
this must be the place of the Simurgh.'  he dismounted, turned
his horse loose to graze, ate some of the food Jamila had given
him, drank of the stream and lay down to sleep.

He was still dozing when he was aroused by the neighing and
pawing of his horse.  When he could see clearly he made out a
mountain-like dragon whose heavy breast crushed the stones
beneath it into putty.  He remembered the Thousand Names of God
and took the bow of Salih from its case and three arrows from
their quiver.  He bound the dagger of Tlmus firmly to his waist
and hung the scorpion of Solomon round his neck.  Then he set an
arrow on the string and released it with such force that it went
in at the monster's eye right up to the notch.  The dragon
writhed on itself, and belched forth an evil vapour, and beat the
ground with its head till the earth quaked.  Then the prince took
a second arrow and shot into its throat.  It drew in its breath
and would have sucked the prince into its maw, but when he was
within striking distance he drew his sword and, having committed
himself to God, struck a mighty blow which cut the creature's
neck down to the gullet.  The foul vapour of the beast and horror
at its strangeness now overcame the prince, and he fainted.  When
he came to himself he found that he was drenched in the gore of
the dead monster.  He rose and thanked God for his deliverance.

The nest of the Simurgh was in the wonderful tree above him, and
in it were young birds; the parents were away searching for food. 
They always told the children, before they left them, not to put
their heads out of the nest; but, to-day, at the noise of the
fight below, they looked down and so saw the whole affair.  By
the time the dragon had been killed they were very hungry and set
up a clamour for food.  The prince therefore cut up the dragon
and fed them with it, bit by bit, till they had eaten the whole. 
He then washed himself and lay down to rest, and he was still
asleep when the Simurgh came home.  As a rule, the young birds
raised a clamour of welcome when their parents came near, but on
this day they were so full of dragon-meat that they had no
choice, they had to go to sleep.

As they flew nearer, the old birds saw the prince lying under the
tree and no sign of life in the nest.  They thought that the
misfortune which for so many earlier years had befallen them had
again happened and that their nestlings had disappeared.  They
had never been able to find out the murderer, and now suspected
the prince.  ' He has eaten our children and sleeps after it; he
must die,' said the father-bird, and flew back to the hills and
clawed up a huge stone which he meant to let fall on the prince's
head.  But his mate said, 'Let us look into the nest first for to
kill an innocent person would condemn us at the Day of
Resurrection.'  They flew nearer, and presently the young birds
woke and cried, 'Mother, what have you brought for us?' and they
told the whole story of the fight, and of how they were alive
only by the favour of the young man under the tree, and of his
cutting up the dragon and of their eating it.  The mother-bird
then remarked, 'Truly, father! you were about to do a strange
thing, and a terrible sin has been averted from you.'  Then the
Simurgh flew off to a distance with the great stone and dropped
it.  It sank down to the very middle of the earth.

Coming back, the Simurgh saw that a little sunshine fell upon the
prince through the leaves, and it spread its wings and shaded him
till he woke.  When he got up he salaamed to it, who returned his
greeting with joy and gratitude, and caressed him and said: 'O
youth, tell me true! who are you, and where are you going?  And
how did you cross that pitiless desert where never yet foot of
man had trod?' The prince told his story from beginning to end,
and finished by saying: 'Now it is my heart's wish that you
should help me to get to Waq of the Caucasus.  Perhaps, by your
favour, I shall accomplish my task and avenge my brothers.'  In
reply the Simurgh.'  first blessed the deliverer of his children,
and then went on: ' What you have done no child of man has ever
done before; you assuredly have a claim on all my help, for every
year up till now that dragon has come here and has destroyed my
nestlings, and I have never been able to find who was the
murderer and to avenge myself.  By God's grace you have removed
my children's powerful foe.  I regard you as a child of my own. 
Stay with me; I will give you everything you desire, and I will
establish a city here for you, and will furnish it with every
requisite; I will give you the land of the Caucasus, and will
make its princes subject to you.  Give up the journey to Waq, it
is full of risk, and the jins there will certainly kill you.' 
But nothing could move the prince, and seeing this the bird went
on: 'Well, so be it! When you wish to set forth you must go into
the plain and take seven head of deer, and must make water-tight
bags of their hides and keep their flesh in seven portions. 
Seven seas lie on our way-- I will carry you over them; but if I
have not food and drink we shall fall into the sea and be
drowned.  When I ask for it you must put food and water into my
mouth.  So we shall make the journey safely.'

The prince did all as he was told, then they took flight; they
crossed the seven seas, and at each one the prince fed the
Simurgh When they alighted on the shore of the last sea, it said:
'O my son! there lies your road; follow it to the city.  Take
thee three feathers of mine, and, if you are in a difficulty,
burn one and I will be with you in the twinkling of an eye.'

The prince walked on in solitude till he reached the city.  He
went in and wandered about through all quarters, and through
bazaars and lanes and squares, in the least knowing from whom he
could ask information about the riddle of Mihr-afruz.  He spent
seven days thinking it over in silence.  From the first day of
his coming he had made friends with a young cloth-merchant, and a
great liking had sprung up between them.  One day he said
abruptly to his companion: 'O dear friend! I wish you would tell
me what the rose did to the cypress, and what the sense of the
riddle is.'  The merchant started, and exclaimed: 'If there were
not brotherly affection between us, I would cut off your head for
asking me this! ' 'If you meant to kill me,' retorted the prince,
' you would still have first to tell me what I want to know.' 
When the merchant saw that the prince was in deadly earnest, he
said: ' If you wish to hear the truth of the matter you must wait
upon our king.  There is no other way; no one else will tell you. 
I have a well-wisher at the Court, named Farrukh-fal,[FN#12] and
will introduce you to him.'  'That would be excellent,' cried the
prince.  A meeting was arranged between Farrukhfal and Almas, and
then the amir took him to the king's presence and introduced him
as a stranger and traveller who had come from afar to sit in the
shadow of King Sinaubar.

Now the Simurgh had given the prince a diamond weighing thirty
misqals, and he ordered this to the king, who at once recognised
its value, and asked where it had been obtained.  'I, your slave,
once had riches and state and power; there are many such stones
in my country.  On my way here I was plundered at the Castle of
Clashing Swords, and I saved this one thing only, hidden in my
bathing-cloth.'  In return for the diamond, King Sinaubar
showered gifts of much greater value, for he remembered that it
was the last possession of the prince.  He showed the utmost
kindness and hospitality, and gave his wazir orders to instal the
prince in the royal guest-house.  He took much pleasure in his
visitor's society; they were together every day and spent the
time most pleasantly.  Several times the king said: 'Ask me for
something, that I may give it you.'One day he so pressed to know
what would pleasure the prince, that the latter said: 'I have
only one wish, and that I will name to you in private.'  The king
at once commanded every one to withdraw, and then Prince Almas
said: ' The desire of my life is to know what the rose did to the
cypress, and what meaning there is in the words.'  The king was
astounded.  'In God's name! if anyone else had said that to me I
should have cut off his head instantly.'  The prince heard this
in silence, and presently so beguiled the king with pleasant talk
that to kill him was impossible.

Time flew by, the king again and again begged the prince to ask
some gift of him, and always received this same reply: 'I wish
for your Majesty's welfare, what more can I desire?'One night
there was a banquet, and cupbearers carried round gold and silver
cups of sparkling wine, and singers with sweetest voices
contended for the prize.  The prince drank from the king's own
cup, and when his head was hot with wine he took a lute from one
of the musicians and placed himself on the carpet border and sang
and sang till he witched away the sense of all who listened. 
Applause and compliments rang from every side.  The king filled
his cup and called the prince and gave it him and said: 'Name
your wish! it is yours.'  The prince drained off the wine and
answered: 'O king of the world! learn and know that I have only
one aim in life, and this is to know what the rose did to the
cypress.'

'Never yet,' replied the king, 'has any man come out from that
question alive.  If this is your only wish, so be it; I will tell
you.  But I will do this on one condition only, namely, that when
you have heard you will submit yourself to death.'  To this the
prince agreed, and said: ' I set my foot firmly on this compact.'

The king then gave an order to an attendant; a costly carpet
overlaid with European velvet was placed near him, and a dog was
led in by a golden and jewelled chain and set upon the splendid
stuffs.  A band of fair girls came in and stood round it in
waiting.

Then, with ill words, twelve negroes dragged in a lovely woman,
fettered on hands and feet and meanly dressed, and they set her
down on the bare floor.  She was extraordinarily beautiful, and
shamed the glorious sun.  The king ordered a hundred stripes to
be laid on her tender body; she sighed a long sigh.  Food was
called for and table-cloths were spread.  Delicate meats were set
before the dog, and water given it in a royal cup of Chinese
crystal.  When it had eaten its fill, its leavings were placed
before the lovely woman and she was made to eat of them.  She
wept and her tears were pearls; she smiled and her lips shed
roses.  Pearls and flowers were gathered up and taken to the
treasury.

'Now,' said the king, ' you have seen these things and your
purpose is fulfilled.'  'Truly,' said the prince, 'I have seen
things which I have not understood; what do they mean, and what
is the story of them?  Tell me and kill me.'

Then said the king: 'The woman you see there in chains is my
wife; she is called Gul, the Rose, and I am Sinaubar, the
Cypress.  One day I was hunting and became very thirsty.  After
great search I discovered a well in a place so secret that
neither bird nor beast nor man could find it without labour.  I
was alone, I took my turban for a rope and my cap for a bucket. 
There was a good deal of water, but when I let down my rope,
something caught it, and I could not in any way draw it back.  I
shouted down into the well: "O! servant of God! whoever you are,
why do you deal unfairly with me?  I am dying of thirst, let go!
in God's name." A cry came up in answer, "O servant of God! we
have been in the well a long time; in God's name get us out!"
After trying a thousand schemes, I drew up two blind women.  They
said they were peris, and that their king had blinded them in his
anger and had left them in the well alone.

' "Now," they said, "if you will get us the cure for our
blindness we will devote ourselves to your service, and will do
whatever you wish."

' "What is the cure for your blindness?"

' "Not far from this place," they said, "a cow comes up from the
great sea to graze; a little of her dung would cure us.  We
should be eternally your debtors.  Do not let the cow see you, or
she will assuredly kill you."

'With renewed strength and spirit I went to the shore.  There I
watched the cow come up from the sea, graze, and go back.  Then I
came out of my hiding, took a little of her dung and conveyed it
to the peris.  They rubbed it on their eyes, and by the Divine
might saw again.

'They thanked heaven and me, and then considered what they could
do to show their gratitude to me.  "Our peri-king," they said,
"has a daughter whom he keeps under his own eye and thinks the
most lovely girl on earth.  In good sooth, she has not her equal!
Now we will get you into her house and you must win her heart,
and if she has an inclination for another, you must drive it out
and win her for yourself.  Her mother loves her so dearly that
she has no ease but in her presence, and she will give her to no
one in marriage.  Teach her to love you so that she cannot exist
without you.  But if the matter becomes known to her mother she
will have you burned in the fire.  Then you must beg, as a last
favour, that your body may be anointed with oil so that you may
burn the more quickly and be spared torture.  If the peri-king
allows this favour, we two will manage to be your anointers, and
we will put an oil on you such that if you were a thousand years
in the fire not a trace of burning would remain."

'In the end the two peris.  took me to the girl's house.  I saw
her sleeping daintily.  She was most lovely, and I was so amazed
at the perfection of her beauty that I stood with senses lost,
and did not know if she were real or a dream.  When at last I saw
that she was a real girl, I returned thanks that I, the runner,
had come to my goal, and that I, the seeker, had found my
treasure.

'When the peri opened her eyes she asked in affright: "Who are
you?  Have you come to steal?  How did you get here?  Be quick!
save yourself from this whirlpool of destruction, for the demons
and peris.  who guard me will wake and seize you."

'But love's arrow had struck me deep, and the girl, too, looked
kindly on me.  I could not go away.  For some months I remained
hidden in her house.  'We did not dare to let her mother know of
our love.  Sometimes the girl was very sad and fearful lest her
mother should come to know.  One day her father said to her:
"Sweetheart, for some time I have noticed that your beauty is not
what it was.  How is this?  Has sickness touched you?  Tell me
that I may seek a cure." Alas! there was now no way of concealing
the mingled delight and anguish of our love; from secret it
became known.  I was put in prison and the world grew dark to my
rose, bereft of her lover.

'The peri-king ordered me to be burnt, and said: "Why have you, a
man, done this perfidious thing in my house?" His demons and
peris.  collected amber-wood and made a pile, and would have set
me on it, when I remembered the word of life which the two peris. 
I had rescued had breathed into my ear, and I asked that my body
might be rubbed with oil to release me the sooner from torture. 
This was allowed, and those two contrived to be the anointers.  I
was put into the fire and it was kept up for seven days and
nights.  By the will of the Great King it left no trace upon me. 
At the end of a week the pert-king ordered the ashes to be cast
upon the dust-heap, and I was found alive and unharmed.

'Peris who had seen Gul consumed by her love for me now
interceded with the king, and said: "It is clear that your
daughter's fortunes are bound up with his, for the fire has not
hurt him.  It is best to give him the girl, for they love one
another.  He is King of Waq of Qaf, and you will find none
better."

'To this the king agreed, and made formal marriage between Gul
and me.  You now know the price I paid for this faithless
creature.  O prince! remember our compact.'

'I remember,' said the prince; ' but tell me what brought Queen
Gul to her present pass?'

'One night,' continued King Sinaubar,'I was aroused by feeling
Gul's hands and feet, deadly cold, against my body.  I asked her
where she had been to get so cold, and she said she had had to go
out.  Next morning, when I went to my stable I saw that two of my
horses, Windfoot and Tiger, were thin and worn out.  I
reprimanded the groom and beat him.  He asked where his fault
lay, and said that every night my wife took one or other of these
horses and rode away, and came back only just before dawn.  A
flame kindled in my heart, and I asked myself where she could go
and what she could do.  I told the groom to be silent, and when
next Gul took a horse from the stable to saddle another quickly
and bring it to me.  That day I did not hunt, but stayed at home
to follow the matter up.  I lay down as usual at night and
pretended to fall asleep.  When I seemed safely off Gul got up
and went to the stable as her custom was.  That night it was
Tiger's turn.  She rode off on him, and I took Windfoot and
followed.  With me went that dog you see, a faithful friend who
never left me.

'When I came to the foot of those hills which lie outside the
city I saw Gul dismount and go towards a house which some negroes
have built there.  Over against the door was a high seat, and on
it lay a giant negro, before whom she salaamed.  He got up and
beat her till she was marked with weals, but she uttered no
complaint.  I was dumfounded, for once when I had struck her with
a rose stalk she had complained and fretted for three days! Then
the negro said to her: " How now, ugly one and shaven head! Why
are you so late, and why are you not wearing wedding garments?"
She answered him: "That person did not go to sleep quickly, and
he stayed at home all day, so that I was not able to adorn
myself.  I came as soon as I could." In a little while he called
her to sit beside him; but this was more than I could bear.  I
lost control of myself and rushed upon him.  He clutched my
collar and we grappled in a death struggle.  Suddenly she came
behind me, caught my feet and threw me.  While he held me on the
ground, she drew out my own knife and gave it to him.  I should
have been killed but for that faithful dog which seized his
throat and pulled him down and pinned him to the ground.  Then I
got up and despatched the wretch.  There were four other negroes
at the place; three I killed and the fourth got away, and has
taken refuge beneath the throne of Mihr-afruz, daughter of King
Quimus.  I took Gul back to my palace, and from that time till
now I have treated her as a dog is treated, and I have cared for
my dog as though it were my wife.  Now you know what the rose did
to the cypress; and now you must keep compact with me.'

'I shall keep my word,' said the prince; 'but may a little water
be taken to the roof so that I may make my last ablution?'

To this request the king consented.  The prince mounted to the
roof, and, getting into a corner, struck his fire-steel and
burned one of the Sirurgh's feathers in the flame.  Straightway
it appeared, and by the majesty of its presence made the city
quake.  It took the prince on its back and soared away to the
zenith.

After a time King Sinaubar said: 'That young man is a long time
on the roof; go and bring him here.'  But there was no sign of
the prince upon the roof; only, far away in the sky, the Simurgh
was seen carrying him off.  When the king heard of his escape he
thanked heaven that his hands were clean of this blood.

Up and up flew the Simurgh, till earth looked like an egg resting
on an ocean.  At length it dropped straight down to its own
place, where the kind prince was welcomed by the young birds and
most hospitably entertained.  He told the whole story of the rose
and the cypress, and then, laden with gifts which the Simurgh had
gathered from cities far and near, he set his face for the Castle
of Clashing Swords.  The king-lion came out to meet him; he took
the negro chief's daughter---whose name was also Gul--in lawful
marriage, and then marched with her and her possessions and her
attendants to the Place of Gifts.  Here they halted for a night,
and at dawn said good-bye to the king-lion and set out for
Jamila's country.

When the Lady Jamila heard that Prince Almas was near, she went
out, with many a fair handmaid, to give him loving reception. 
Their meeting was joyful, and they went together to the
garden-palace.  Jamila summoned all her notables, and in their
presence her marriage with the prince was solemnised.  A few days
later she entrusted her affairs to her wazir, and made
preparation to go with the prince to his own country.  Before she
started she restored all the men whom her sister, Latifa, had
bewitched, to their own forms, and received their blessings, and
set them forward to their homes.  The wicked Latifa herself she
left quite alone in her garden-house.  When all was ready they
set out with all her servants and slaves, all her treasure and
goods, and journeyed at ease to the city of King Quimus.

When King Quimus heard of the approach of such a great company,
he sent out his wazir to give the prince honourable meeting, and
to ask what had procured him the favour of the visit.  The prince
sent back word that he had no thought of war, but he wrote: '
Learn and know, King Quimus, that I am here to end the crimes of
your insolent daughter who has tyrannously done to death many
kings and kings sons, and has hung their heads on your citadel. 
I am here to give her the answer to her riddle.'  Later on he
entered the city, beat boldly on the drums, and was conducted to
the presence.

The king entreated him to have nothing to do with the riddle, for
that no man had come out of it alive.  'O king!' replied the
prince, 'it is to answer it that I am here; I will not withdraw.'

Mihr-afruz was told that one man more had staked his head on her
question, and that this was one who said he knew the answer.  At
the request of the prince, all the officers and notables of the
land were summoned to hear his reply to the princess.  All
assembled, and the king and his queen Gul-rakh, and the girl and
the prince were there.

The prince addressed Mihr-afruz: 'What is the question you ask?'

'What did the rose do to the cypress?' she rejoined.

The prince smiled, and turned and addressed the assembly.

'You who are experienced men and versed in affairs, did you ever
know or hear and see anything of this matter?'

'No!' they answered, 'no one has ever known or heard or seen
aught about it; it is an empty fancy.'

'From whom, then, did the princess hear of it?  This empty fancy
it is that has done many a servant of God to death!'

All saw the good sense of his words and showed their approval. 
Then he turned to the princess: 'Tell us the truth, princess; who
told you of this thing?  I know it hair by hair, and in and out;
but if I tell you what I know, who is there that can say I speak
the truth?  You must produce the person who can confirm my
words.'

Her heart sank, for she feared that her long-kept secret was now
to be noised abroad.  But she said merely: 'Explain yourself.'

'I shall explain myself fully when you bring here the negro whom
you hide beneath your throne.'

Here the king shouted in wonderment: 'Explain yourself, young
man! What negro does my daughter hide beneath her throne?'

'That,' said the prince, 'you will see if you order to be brought
here the negro who will be found beneath the throne of the
princess.'

Messengers were forthwith despatched to the garden house, and
after awhile they returned bringing a negro whom they had
discovered in a secret chamber underneath the throne of
Mihr-afruz, dressed in a dress of honour, and surrounded with
luxury.  The king was overwhelmed with astonishment, but the girl
had taken heart again.  She had had time to think that perhaps
the prince had heard of the presence of the negro, and knew no
more.  So she said haughtily: 'Prince!  you have not answered my
riddle.'

'O most amazingly impudent person,' cried he, 'do you not yet
repent?'

Then he turned to the people, and told them the whole story of
the rose and the cypress, of King Sinaubar and Queen Gul.  When
he came to the killing of the negroes, he said to the one who
stood before them: 'You, too, were present.'

'That is so; all happened as you have told it!'

There was great rejoicing in the court and all through the
country over the solving of the riddle, and because now no more
kings and princes would be killed.  King Quimus made over his
daughter to Prince Almas, but the latter refused to marry her,