
and took her as his captive.  He then asked that the heads should
be removed from the battlements and given decent burial.  This
was done.  He received from the king everything that belonged to
Mihr-afruz; her treasure of gold and silver; her costly stuffs
and carpets; her household plenishing; her horses and camels; her
servants and slaves.

Then he returned to his camp and sent for Dil-aram, who came
bringing her goods and chattels, her gold and her jewels.  When
all was ready, Prince Almas set out for home, taking with him
Jamila, and Dil-aram and Gul, daughter of Taram-taq, and the
wicked Mihr-afruz, and all the belongings of the four, packed on
horses and camels, and in carts without number.

As he approached the borders of his father's country word of his
coming went before him, and all the city came forth to give him
welcome.  King Saman-lal-posh-- Jessamine, wearer of rubies--had
so bewept the loss of his sons that he was now blind.  When the
prince had kissed his feet and received his blessing, he took
from a casket a little collyrium of Solomon, which the Simurgh
had given him, and which reveals the hidden things of earth, and
rubbed it on his father's eyes.  Light came, and the king saw his
son.

Mihr-afruz was brought before the king, and the prince said:
'This is the murderer of your sons; do with her as you will.' 
The king fancied that the prince might care for the girl's
beauty, and replied: 'You have humbled her; do with her as you
will.'

Upon this the prince sent for four swift and strong horses, and
had the negro bound to each one of them; then each was driven to
one of the four quarters, and he tore in pieces like muslin.

This frightened Mihr-afruz horribly, for she thought the same
thing might be done to herself.  She cried out to the prince: 'O
Prince Almas! what is hardest to get is most valued.  Up till now
I have been subject to no man, and no man had had my love.  The
many kings and kings sons who have died at my hands have died
because it was their fate to die like this.  In this matter I
have not sinned.  That was their fate from eternity; and from the
beginning it was predestined that my fate should be bound up with
yours.'

The prince gave ear to the argument from pre-ordainment, and as
she was a very lovely maiden he took her too in lawful marriage. 
She and Jamila, set up house together, and Dil-aram and Gul set
up theirs; and the prince passed the rest of his life with the
four in perfect happiness, and in pleasant and sociable
entertainment.

Now has been told what the rose did to the cypress.

Finished, finished, finished!


Footnotes for What The Rose Did to the Cypress


[FN#1]   Translated from two Persian MSS.  in the possession of
the British Museum and the India Office, and adapted, with some
reservations, by Annette S.  Beveridge.

[FN#2]   Jessamine, ruby-decked.

[FN#3]   Life-giving diamond.

[FN#4]   World-gripper.

[FN#5]   Love-enkindler.

[FN#6]   Rose-cheek.

[FN#7]   Heartsease.

[FN#8]   Elias.

[FN#9]   Pleasure.

[FN#10]  Thirty-birds.

[FN#11]  Pomp and Pride.

[FN#12]  Of happy omen.




Ball-carrier and the Bad One



Far, far in the forest there were two little huts, and in each of
them lived a man who was a famous hunter, his wife, and three or
four children.  Now the children were forbidden to play more than
a short distance from the door, as it was known that, away on the
other side of the wood near the great river, there dwelt a witch
who had a magic ball that she used as a means of stealing
children.

Her plan was a very simple one, and had never yet failed.  When
she wanted a child she just flung her ball in the direction of
the child's home, and however far off it might be, the ball was
sure to reach it.  Then, as soon as the child saw it, the ball
would begin rolling slowly back to the witch, just keeping a
little ahead of the child, so that he always thought that he
could catch it the next minute.  But he never did, and, what was
more, his parents never saw him again.

Of course you must not suppose that all the fathers and mothers
who had lost children made no attempts to find them, but the
forest was so large, and the witch was so cunning in knowing
exactly where they were going to search, that it was very easy
for her to keep out of the way.  Besides, there was always the
chance that the children might have been eaten by wolves, of
which large herds roamed about in winter.

One day the old witch happened to want a little boy, so she threw
her ball in the direction of the hunters' huts.  A child was
standing outside, shooting at a mark with his bow and arrows, but
the moment he saw the ball, which was made of glass whose blues
and greens and whites, all frosted over, kept changing one into
the other, he flung down his bow, and stooped to pick the ball
up.  But as he did so it began to roll very gently downhill.  The
boy could not let it roll away, when it was so close to him, so
he gave chase.  The ball seemed always within his grasp, yet he
could never catch it; it went quicker and quicker, and the boy
grew more and more excited.  That time he almost touched it--no,
he missed it by a hair's breadth! Now, surely, if he gave a
spring he could get in front of it! He sprang forward, tripped
and fell, and found himself in the witch's house!

'Welcome! welcome! grandson!' said she; 'get up and rest
yourself, for you have had a long walk, and I am sure you must be
tired!' So the boy sat down, and ate some food which she gave him
in a bowl.  It was quite different from anything he had tasted
before, and he thought it was delicious.  When he had eaten up
every bit, the witch asked him if he had ever fasted.

'No,' replied the boy, 'at least I have been obliged to
sometimes, but never if there was any food to be had.'

'You will have to fast if you want the spirits to make you strong
and wise, and the sooner you begin the better.'

'Very well,' said the boy, 'what do I do first?'

'Lie down on those buffalo skins by the door of the hut,'
answered she; and the boy lay down, and the squirrels and little
bears and the birds came and talked to him.

At the end of ten days the old woman came to him with a bowl of
the same food that he had eaten before.

'Get up, my grandson, you have fasted long enough.  Have the good
spirits visited you, and granted you the strength and wisdom that
you desire?'

'Some of them have come, and have given me a portion of both,'
answered the boy, 'but many have stayed away from me.'

'Then,' said she, 'you must fast ten days more.'

So the boy lay down again on the buffalo skins, and fasted for
ten days, and at the end of that time he turned his face to the
wall, and fasted for twenty days longer.  At length the witch
called to him, and said:

'Come and eat something, my grandson.'  At the sound of her voice
the boy got up and ate the food she gave him.  When he had
finished every scrap she spoke as before: 'Tell me, my grandson,
have not the good spirits visited you all these many days that
you have fasted?'

'Not all, grandmother,' answered he; 'there are still some who
keep away from me and say that I have not fasted long enough.'

'Then you must fast again,' replied the old woman, 'and go on
fasting till you receive the gifts of all the good spirits.  Not
one must be missing.'

The boy said nothing, but lay down for the third time on the
buffalo skins, and fasted for twenty days more.  And at the end
of that time the witch thought he was dead, his face was so white
and his body so still.  But when she had fed him out of the bowl
he grew stronger, and soon was able to sit up.

'You have fasted a long time,' said she, 'longer than anyone ever
fasted before.  Surely the good spirits must be satisfied now?'

'Yes, grandmother,' answered the boy, 'they have all come, and
have given me their gifts.'

This pleased the old woman so much that she brought him another
basin of food, and while he was eating it she talked to him, and
this is what she said: 'Far away, on the other side of the great
river, is the home of the Bad One.  In his house is much gold,
and what is more precious even than the gold, a little bridge,
which lengthens out when the Bad One waves his hand, so that
there is no river or sea that he cannot cross.  Now I want that
bridge and some of the gold for myself, and that is the reason
that I have stolen so many boys by means of my ball.  I have
tried to teach them how to gain the gifts of the good spirits,
but none of them would fast long enough, and at last I had to
send them away to perform simple, easy little tasks.  But you
have been strong and faithful, and you can do this thing if you
listen to what I tell you! When you reach the river tie this ball
to your foot, and it will take you across--you cannot manage it
in any other way.  But do not be afraid; trust to the ball, and
you will be quite safe!'

The boy took the ball and put it in a bag.  Then he made himself
a club and a bow, and some arrows which would fly further than
anyone else's arrows, because of the strength the good spirits
had given him.  They had also bestowed on him the power of
changing his shape, and had increased the quickness of his eyes
and ears so that nothing escaped him.  And in some way or other
they made him understand that if he needed more help they would
give it to him.

When all these things were ready the boy bade farewell to the
witch and set out.  He walked through the forest for several days
without seeing anyone but his friends the squirrels and the bears
and the birds, but though he stopped and spoke to them all, he
was careful not to let them know where he was going.

At last, after many days, he came to the river, and beyond it he
noticed a small hut standing on a hill which he guessed to be the
home of the Bad One.  But the stream flowed so quickly that he
could not see how he was ever to cross it, and in order to test
how swift the current really was, he broke a branch from a tree
and threw it in.  It seemed hardly to touch the water before it
was carried away, and even his magic sight could not follow it. 
He could not help feeling frightened, but he hated giving up
anything that he had once undertaken, and, fastening the ball on
his right foot, he ventured on the river.  To his surprise he was
able to stand up; then a panic seized him, and he scrambled up
the bank again.  In a minute or two he plucked up courage to go a
little further into the river, but again its width frightened
him, and a second time he turned back.  However, he felt rather
ashamed of his cowardice, as it was quite clear that his ball
could support him, and on his third trial he got safely to the
other side.

Once there he replaced the ball in the bag, and looked carefully
round him.  The door of the Bad One's hut was open, and he saw
that the ceiling was supported by great wooden beams, from which
hung the bags of gold and the little bridge.  He saw, too, the
Bad One sitting in the midst of his treasures eating his dinner,
and drinking something out of a horn.  It was plain to the boy
that he must invent some plan of getting the Bad One out of the
way, or else he would never be able to steal the gold or the
bridge.

What should he do?  Give horrible shrieks as if he were in pain? 
But the Bad One would not care whether he were murdered or not!
Call him by his name?  But the Bad One was very cunning, and
would suspect some trick.  He must try something better than
that! Then suddenly an idea came to him, and he gave a little
jump of joy.  'Oh, how stupid of me not to think of that before!'
said he, and he wished with all his might that the Bad One should
become very hungry--so hungry that he could not wait a moment for
fresh food to be brought to him.  And sure enough at that instant
the Bad One called out to his servant, 'You did not bring food
that would satisfy a sparrow Fetch some more at once, for I am
perfectly starving.'  Then, without giving the woman time to go
to the larder, he got up from his chair, and rolled, staggering
from hunger, towards the kitchen.

Directly the door had closed on the Bad One the boy ran in,
pulled down a bag of gold from the beam, and tucked it under his
left arm.  Next he unhooked the little bridge and put it under
his right.  He did not try to escape, as most boys of his age
would have done, for the wisdom put into his mind by the good
spirits taught him that before he could reach the river and make
use of the bridge the Bad One would have tracked him by his
footsteps and been upon him.  So, making himself very small and
thin, he hid himself behind a pile of buffalo skins in the
corner, first tearing a slit through one of them, so that he
could see what was going on.

He had hardly settled himself when the servant entered the room,
and, as she did so, the last bag of gold on the beam fell to the
ground--for they had begun to fall directly the boy had taken the
first one.  She cried to her master that someone had stolen both
the bag and the bridge, and the Bad One rushed in, mad with
anger, and bade her go and seek for footsteps outside, that they
might find out where the thief had gone.  In a few minutes she
returned, saying that he must be in the house, as she could not
see any footsteps leading to the river, and began to move all the
furniture in the room, without discovering Ball Carrier.

'But he must be here somewhere,' she said to herself, examining
for the second time the pile of buffalo skins; and Ball-Carrier,
knowing that he could not possibly escape now, hastily wished
that the Bad One should be unable to eat any more food at
present.

'Ah, there is a slit in this one,' cried the servant, shaking the
skin; 'and here he is.'  And she pulled out Ball-Carrier, looking
so lean and small that he would hardly have made a mouthful for a
sparrow.

'Was it you who took my gold and bridge?' asked the Bad One.

'Yes,' answered Ball-Carrier, 'it was I who took them.'

The Bad One made a sign to the woman, who inquired where he had
hidden them.  He lifted his left arm where the gold was, and she
picked up a knife and scraped his skin so that no gold should be
left sticking to it.

'What have you done with the bridge?' said she.  And he lifted
his right arm, from which she took the bridge, while the Bad One
looked on, well pleased.  'Be sure that he does not run away,'
chuckled he.  'Boil some water, and get him ready for cooking,
while I go and invite my friends the water-demons to the feast.'

The woman seized Ball-Carrier between her finger and thumb, and
was going to carry him to the kitchen, when the boy spoke:

'I am very lean and small now,' he said, 'hardly worth the
trouble of cooking; but if you were to keep me two days, and gave
me plenty of food, I should get big and fat.  As it is, your
friends the water-demons would think you meant to laugh at them,
when they found that I was the feast.'

'Well, perhaps you are right,' answered the Bad One; 'I will keep
you for two days.'  And he went out to visit the water-demons.

Meanwhile the servant, whose name was Lung Woman, led him into a
little shed, and chained him up to a ring in the wall.  But food
was given him every hour, and at the end of two days he was as
fat and big as a Christmas turkey, and could hardly move his head
from one side to the other.

'He will do now,' said the Bad One, who came constantly to see
how he was getting on.  'I shall go and tell the water-demons
that we expect them to dinner to-night.  Put the kettle on the
fire, but be sure on no account to taste the broth.'

Lung-Woman lost no time in obeying her orders.  She built up the
fire, which had got very low, filled the kettle with water, and
passing a rope which hung from the ceiling through the handle,
swung it over the flames.  Then she brought in Ball-Carrier, who,
seeing all these preparations, wished that as long as he was in
the kettle the water might not really boil, though it would hiss
and bubble, and also, that the spirits would turn the water into
fat.

The kettle soon began to sing and bubble, and Ball Carrier was
lifted in.  Very soon the fat which was to make the sauce rose to
the surface, and Ball-Carrier, who was bobbing about from one
side to the other, called out that Lung-Woman had better taste
the broth, as he though that some salt should be added to it. 
The servant knew quite well that her master had forbidden her to
do any thing of the kind, but when once the idea was put into her
head, she found the smell from the kettle so delicious that she
unhooked a long ladle from the wall and plunged it into the
kettle.

'You will spill it all, if you.  stand so far off,' said the boy;
' why don't you come a little nearer?' And as she did so he cried
to the spirits to give him back his usual size and strength and
to make the water scalding hot Then he gave the kettle a kick,
which upset all the boiling water upon her, and jumping over her
body he seized once more the gold and the bridge, picked up his
club and bow and arrows, and after setting fire to the Bad One's
hut, ran down to the river, which he crossed safely by the help
of the bridge.

The hut, which was made of wood, was burned to the ground before
the Bad One came back with a large crowd of water-demons.  There
was not a sign of anyone or anything, so he started for the
river, where he saw Ball Carrier sitting quietly on the other
side.  Then the Bad One knew what had happened, and after telling
the water demons that there would be no feast after all, he
called to Ball-Carrier, who was eating an a,pple.

'I know your name now,' he said, 'and as you have ruined me, and
I am not rich any more, will you take me as your servant?'

'Yes, I will, though you have tried to kill me,' answered
Ball-Carrier, throwing the bridge across the water as he spoke. 
But when the Bad One was in the midst of the stream, the boy
wished it to become small; and the Bad One fell into the water
and was drowned, and the world was rid of him.

[U.S..  Bureau of Ethnology.]





How Ball-carrier Finished His Task



After Ball-Carrier had managed to drown the Bad One so that he
could not do any more mischief, he forgot the way to his
grandmother's house, and could not find it again, though he
searched everywhere.  During this time he wandered into many
strange places, and had many adventures; and one day he came to a
hut where a young girl lived.  He was tired and hungry and begged
her to let him in and rest, and he stayed a long while, and the
girl became his wife.  One morning he saw two children playing in
front of the hut, and went out to speak to them.  But as soon as
they saw him they set up cries of horror and ran away.  'They are
the children of my sister who has been on a long journey,'
replied his wife, 'and now that she knows you are my husband she
wants to kill you.'

'Oh, well, let her try,' replied Ball-Carrier.  'It is not the
first time people have wished to do that.  And here I am still,
you see!'

'Be careful,' said the wife, ' she is very cunning.'  But at this
moment the sister-in-law came up.

'How do you do, brother-in-law?  I have heard of you so often
that I am very glad to meet you.  I am told that you are more
powerful than any man on earth, and as I am powerful too, let us
try which is the strongest.'

'That will be delightful,' answered he.  'Suppose we begin with a
short race, and then we will go on to other things.'

' That will suit me very well,' replied the woman, who was a
witch.  'And let us agree that the one who wins shall have the
right to kill the other.'

'Oh, certainly,' said Ball-Carrier;' and I don't think we shall
find a flatter course than the prairie itself--no one knows how
many miles it stretches.  We will run to the end and back again.'

This being settled they both made ready for the race, and
Ball-Carrier silently begged the good spirits to help him, and
not to let him fall into the hands of this wicked witch.

'When the sun touches the trunk of that tree we will start,' said
she, as they both stood side by side.  But with the first step
Ball-Carrier changed himself into a wolf and for a long way kept
ahead.  Then gradually he heard her creeping up behind him, and
soon she was in front.  So Ball-Carrier took the shape of a
pigeon and flew rapidly past her, but in a little while she was
in front again and the end of the prairie was in sight.  'A crow
can fly faster than a pigeon,' thought he, and as a crow he
managed to pass her and held his ground so long that he fancied
she was quite beaten.  The witch began to be afraid of it too,
and putting out all her strength slipped past him.  Next he put
on the shape of a hawk, and in this form he reached the bounds of
the prairie, he and the witch turning homewards at the moment.

Bird after bird he tried, but every time the witch gained on him
and took the lead.  At length the goal was in sight, and
Ball-Carrier knew that unless he could get ahead now he would be
killed before his own door, under the eyes of his wife.  His eyes
had grown dim from fatigue, his wings flapped wearily and hardly
bore him along, while the witch seemed as fresh as ever.  What
bird was there whose flight was swifter than his?  Would not the
good spirits tell him?  Ah, of course he knew; why had he not
thought of it at first and spared himself all that fatigue?  And
the next instant a humming bird, dressed in green and blue,
flashed past the woman and entered the house.  The witch came
panting up, furious at having lost the race which she felt
certain of winning; and Ball-Carrier, who had by this time
changed back into his own shape, struck her on the head and
killed her.

For a long while Ball-Carrier was content to stay quietly at home
with his wife and children, for he was tired of adventures, and
only did enough hunting to supply the house with food.  But one
day he happened to eat some poisonous berries that he had found
in the forest, and grew so ill that he felt he was going to die.

'When I am dead do not bury me in the earth,' he said, 'but put
me over there, among that clump of trees.'  So his wife and her
three children watched by him as long as he was alive, and after
he was dead they took him up and laid the body on a platform of
stakes which they had prepared in the grove.  And as they
returned weeping to the hut they caught a glimpse of the ball
rolling away down the path back to the old grandmother.  One of
the sons sprang forward to stop it, for Ball-Carrier had often
told them the tale of how it had helped him to cross the river,
but it was too quick for him, and they had to content themselves
with the war club and bow and arrows, which were put carefully
away.

By-and-by some travellers came past, and the chief among them
asked leave to marry Ball-Carrier's daughter.  The mother said
she must have a little time to think over it, as her daughter was
still very young; so it was settled that the man should go away
for a month with his friends, and then come back to see if the
girl was willing.

Now ever since Ball-Carrier's death the family had been very
poor, and often could not get enough to eat.  One morning the
girl, who had had no supper and no breakfast, wandered off to
look for cranberries, and though she was quite near home was
astonished at noticing a large hut, which certainly had not been
there when last she had come that way.  No one was about, so she
ventured to peep in, and her surprise was increased at seeing,
heaped up in one corner, a quantity of food of all sorts, while a
little robin redbreast stood perched on a beam looking down upon
her.

'It is my father, I am sure,' she cried; and the bird piped in
answer.

From that day, whenever they wanted food they went to the hut,
and though the robin could not speak, he would hop on their
shoulders and let them feed him with the food they knew he liked
best.

When the man came back he found the girl looking so much prettier
and fatter than when he had left her, that he insisted that they
should be married on the spot.  And the mother, who did not know
how to get rid of him, gave in.

The husband spent all his time in hunting, and the family had
never had so much meat before; but the man, who had seen for
himself how poor they were, noticed with amazement that they did
not seem to care about it, or to be hungry.  'They must get food
from somewhere,' he thought, and one morning, when he pretended
to be going out to hunt, he hid in a thicket to watch.  Very soon
they all left the house together, and walked to the other hut,
which the girl's husband saw for the first time, as it was hid in
a hollow.  He followed, and noticed that each one went up to the
redbreast, and shook him by the claw; and he then entered boldly
and shook the bird's claw too.  The whole party afterwards sat
down to dinner, after which they all returned to their own hut.

The next day the husband declared that he was very ill, and could
not eat anything; but this was only a presence so that he might
get what he wanted.  The family were all much distressed, and
begged him to tell them what food he fancied.

'Oh!  I could not eat any food,' he answered every time, and at
each answer his voice grew fainter and fainter, till they thought
he would die from weakness before their eyes.

'There must be some thing you could take, if you would only say
what it is,' implored his wife.

'No, nothing, nothing; except, perhaps--but of course that is
impossible!'

'No, I am sure it is not,' replied she; ' you shall have it, I
promise--only tell me what it is.'

'I think--but I could not ask you to do such a thing.  Leave me
alone, and let me die quietly.'

'You shall not die,' cried the girl, who was very fond of her
husband, for he did not beat her as most girls' husbands did. 
'Whatever it is, I will manage to get it for you.'

'Well, then, I think, if I had that--redbreast, nicely roasted, I
could eat a little bit of his wing!'

The wife started back in horror at such a request; but the man
turned his face to the wall, and took no notice, as he thought it
was better to leave her to herself for a little.

Weeping and wringing her hands, the girl went down to her mother. 
The brothers were very angry when they heard the story, and
declared that, if any one were to die, it certainly should not be
the robin.  But all that night the man seemed getting weaker and
weaker, and at last, quite early, the wife crept out, and
stealing to the hut, killed the bird, and brought him home to her
husband.

Just as she was going to cook it her two brothers came in.  They
cried out in horror at the sight, and, rushing out of the hut,
declared they would never see her any more.  And the poor girl,
with a heavy heart, took the body of the redbreast up to her
husband.

But directly she entered the room the man told her that he felt a
great deal better, and that he would rather have a piece of
bear's flesh, well boiled, than any bird, however tender.  His
wife felt very miserable to think that their beloved redbreast
had been sacrificed for nothing, and begged him to try a little
bit.

'You felt so sure that it would do you good before,' said she,
'that I can't help thinking it would quite cure you now.'  But
the man only flew into a rage, and flung the bird out of the
window.  Then he got up and went out.

Now all this while the ball had been rolling, rolling, rolling to
the old grandmother's hut on the other side of the world, and
directly it rolled into her hut she knew that her grandson must
be dead.  Without wasting any time she took a fox skin and tied
it round her forehead, and fastened another round her waist, as
witches always do when they leave their own homes.  When she was
ready she said to the ball: ' Go back the way you came, and lead
me to my grandson.'  And the ball started with the old woman
following.

It was a long journey, even for a witch, but, like other things,
it ended at last; and the old woman stood before the platform of
stakes, where the body of Ball-Carrier lay.

'Wake up, my grandson, it is time to go home,' the witch said. 
And Ball-Carrier stepped down oft the platform, and brought his
club and bow and arrows out of the hut, and set out, for the
other side of the world, behind the old woman.

When they reached the hut where Ball-Carrier had fasted so many
years ago, the old woman spoke for the first time since they had
started on their way.

'My grandson, did you ever manage to get that gold from the Bad
One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got it.'

'Where is it?' she asked.

'Here, in my left arm-pit,' answered he.

So she picked up a knife and scraped away all the gold which had
stuck to his skin, and which had been sticking there ever since
he first stole it.  After she had finished she asked again:

'My grandson, did you manage to get that bridge from the Bad
One?'

'Yes, grandmother, I got that too,' answered he.

'Where is it?' she asked, and Ball-Carrier lifted his right arm,
and pointed to his arm-pit.

'Here is the bridge, grandmother,' said he.

Then the witch did something that nobody in the world could have
guessed that she would do.  First, she took the gold and said to
Ball-carrier:

'My grandson, this gold must be hidden in the earth, for if
people think they can get it when they choose, they will become
lazy and stupid.  But if we take it and bury it in different
parts of the world they will have to work for it if they want it,
and then will only find a little at a time.'  And as she spoke,
she pulled up one of the poles of the hut, and Ball-Carrier saw
that underneath was a deep, deep hole, which seemed to have no
bottom.  Down this hole she poured all the gold, and when it was
out of sight it ran about all over the world, where people that
dig hard sometimes find it.  And after that was done she put the
pole back again.

Next she lifted down a spade from a high shelf, where it had
grown quite rusty, and dug a very small hole on the opposite side
of the hut--very small, but very deep.

'Give me the bridge,' said she, ' for I am going to bury it here. 
If anyone was to get hold of it, and find that they could cross
rivers and seas without any trouble, they would never discover
how to cross them for themselves.  I am a witch, and if I had
chosen I could easily have cast my spells over the Bad One, and
have made him deliver them to you the first day you came into my
hut.  But then you would never have fasted, and never have
planned how to get what you wanted, and never have known the good
spirits, and would have been fat and idle to the end of your
days.  And now go; in that hut, which you can just see far away,
live your father and mother, who are old people now, and need a
son to hunt for them.  You have done what you were set to do, and
I need you no more.'

Then Ball-Carrier remembered his parents and went back to them.

[From Bureau of Ethnology.  'Indian Folklore.']




The Bunyip



Long, long ago, far, far away on the other side of the world,
some young men left the camp where they lived to get some food
for their wives and children.  The sun was hot, but they liked
heat, and as they went they ran races and tried who could hurl
his spear the farthest, or was cleverest in throwing a strange
weapon called a boomerang, which always returns to the thrower. 
They did not get on very fast at this rate, but presently they
reached a flat place that in time of flood was full of water, but
was now, in the height of summer, only a set of pools, each
surrounded with a fringe of plants, with bulrushes standing in
the inside of all.  In that country the people are fond of the
roots of bulrushes, which they think as good as onions, and one
of the young men said that they had better collect some of the
roots and carry them back to the camp.  It did not take them long
to weave the tops of the willows into a basket, and they were
just going to wade into the water and pull up the bulrush roots
when a youth suddenly called out: 'After all, why should we waste
our time in doing work that is only fit for women and children? 
Let them come and get the roots for themselves; but we will fish
for eels and anything else we can get.'

This delighted the rest of the party, and they all began to
arrange their fishing lines, made from the bark of the yellow
mimosa, and to search for bait for their hooks.  Most of them
used worms, but one, who had put a piece of raw meat for dinner
into his skin wallet, cut off a little bit and baited his line
with it, unseen by his companions.

For a long time they cast patiently, without receiving a single
bite; the sun had grown low in the sky, and it seemed as if they
would have to go home empty-handed, not even with a basket of
roots to show; when the youth, who had baited his hook with raw
meat, suddenly saw his line disappear under the water. 
Something, a very heavy fish he supposed, was pulling so hard
that he could hardly keep his feet, and for a few minutes it
seemed either as if he must let go or be dragged into the pool. 
He cried to his friends to help him, and at last, trembling with
fright at what they were going to see, they managed between them
to land on the bank a creature that was neither a calf nor a
seal, but something of both, with a long, broad tail.  They
looked at each other with horror, cold shivers running down their
spines; for though they had never beheld it, there was not a man
amongst them who did not know what it was-- the cub of the awful
Bunyip!

All of a sudden the silence was broken by a low wail, answered by
another from the other side of the pool, as the mother rose up
from her den and came towards them, rage flashing from her
horrible yellow eyes.  'Let it go! let it go!' whispered the
young men to each other; but the captor declared that he had
caught it, and was going to keep it.  'He had promised his
sweetheart,' he said, 'that he would bring back enough meat for
her father's house to feast on for three days, and though they
could not eat the little Bunyip, her brothers and sisters should
have it to play with.'  So, flinging his spear at the mother to
keep her back, he threw the little Bunyip on to his shoulders,
and set out for the camp, never heeding the poor mother's cries
of distress.

By this time it was getting near sunset, and the plain was in
shadow, though the tops of the mountains were still quite bright. 
The youths had all ceased to be afraid, when they were startled
by a low rushing sound behind them, and, looking round, saw that
the pool was slowly rising, and the spot where they had landed
the Bunyip was quite covered.  'What could it be?' they asked one
of another; ' there was not a cloud in the sky, yet the water had
risen higher already than they had ever known it do before.'  For
an instant they stood watching as if they were frozen, then they
turned and ran with all their might, the man with the Bunyip run-
ning faster than all.  When he reached a high peak over- looking
all the plain he stopped to take breath, and turned to see if he
was safe yet.  Safe! why only the tops of the trees remained
above that sea of water, and these were fast disappearing.  They
must run fast indeed if they were to escape.  So on they flew,
scarcely feeling the ground as they went, till they flung
themselves on the ground before the holes scooped out of the
earth where they had all been born.  The old men were sitting in
front, the children were playing, and the women chattering
together, when the little Bunyip fell into their midst, and there
was scarcely a child among them who did not know that something
terrible was upon them.  'The water! the water!' gasped one of
the young men; and there it was, slowly but steadily mounting the
ridge itself.  Parents and children clung together, as if by that
means they could drive back the advancing flood; and the youth
who had caused all this terrible catastrophe, seized his
sweetheart, and cried: 'I will climb with you to the top of that
tree, and there no waters can reach us.'  But, as he spoke,
something cold touched him, and quickly he glanced down at his
feet.  Then with a shudder he saw that they were feet no longer,
but bird's claws.  He looked at the girl he was clasping, and
beheld a great black bird standing at his side; he turned to his
friends, but a flock of great awkward flapping creatures stood in
their place He put up his hands to cover his face, but they were
no more hands, only the ends of wings; and when he tried to
speak, a noise such as he had never heard before seemed to come
from his throat, which had suddenly become narrow and slender. 
Already the water had risen to his waist, and he found himself
sitting easily upon it, while its surface reflected back the
image of a black swan, one of many.

Never again did the swans become men; but they are still
different from other swans, for in the night-time those who
listen can hear them talk in a language that is certainly not
swan's language; and there are even sounds of laughing and
talking, unlike any noise made by the swans whom we know.

The little Bunyip was carried home by its mother, and after that
the waters sank back to their own channels.  The side of the pool
where she lives is always shunned by everyone, as nobody knows
when she may suddenly put out her head and draw him into her
mighty jaws.  But people say that underneath the black waters of
the pool she has a house filled with beautiful things, such as
mortals who dwell on the earth have no idea of.  Though how they
know I cannot tell you, as nobody has ever seen it.

[From Journal of Anthropological-Institute.]




Father Grumbler



Once upon a time there lived a man who had nearly as many
children as there were sparrows in the garden.  He had to work
very hard all day to get them enough to eat, and was often tired
and cross, and abused everything and everybody, so that people
called him 'Father Grumbler.'

By-and-by he grew weary of always working, and on Sundays he lay
a long while in bed, instead of going to church.  Then after a
time he found it dull to sit so many hours by himself, thinking
of nothing but how to pay the rent that was owing, and as the
tavern across the road looked bright and cheerful, he walked in
one day and sat down with his friends.  'It was just to chase
away Care,' he said; but when he came out, hours and hours after,
Care came out with him.

Father Grumbler entered his house feeling more dismal than when
he left it, for he knew that he had wasted both his time and his
money.

'I will go and see the Holy Man in the cave near the well,' he
said to himself, 'and perhaps he can tell me why all the luck is
for other people, and only misfortunes happen to me.'  And he set
out at once for the cave.

It was a long way off, and the road led over mountains and
through valleys; but at last he reached the cave where the Holy
Man dwelt, and knocked at the door.

'Who is there?' asked a voice from within.

'It is I, Holy Man, Father Grumbler, you know, who has as many
children as sparrows in the garden.'

'Well, and what is it that you want?'

'I want to know why other people have all the luck, and only
misfortunes happen to me!'

The Holy Man did not answer, but went into an inner cave, from
which he came out bearing something in his hand.  'Do you see
this basket?' said he.  'It is a magical basket, and if you are
hungry you have only got to say: "Little basket, little basket,
do your duty," and you will eat the best dinner you ever had in
your life.  But when you have had enough, be sure you don't
forget to cry out: "That will do for to-day." Oh!--and one thing
more--you need not show it to everybody and declare that I have
give it to you.  Do you understand?'

Father Grumbler was always accustomed to think of himself as so
unlucky that he did not know whether the Holy Man was not playing
a trick upon him; but he took the basket without being polite
enough to say either 'Thank you,' or 'Good-morning,' and went
away.  However, he only waited till he was out of sight of the
cave before he stooped down and whispered: 'Little basket, little
basket, do your duty.'

Now the basket had a lid, so that he could not see what was
inside, but he heard quite clearly strange noises, as if a sort
of scuffling was going on.  Then the lid burst open, and a
quantity of delicious little white rolls came tumbling out one
after the other, followed by a stream of small fishes all ready
cooked.  What a quantity there were to be sure! The whole road
was covered with them, and the banks on each side were beginning
to disappear.  Father Grumbler felt quite frightened at the
torrent, but at last he remembered what the Holy Man had told
him, and cried at the top of his voice: 'Enough! enough! That
will do for to-day!' And the lid of the basket closed with a
snap.

Father Grumbler sighed with relief and happiness as he looked
around him, and sitting down on a heap of stones, he ate till he
could eat no more.  Trout, salmon, turbot, soles, and a hundred
other fishes whose names he did not know, lay boiled, fried, and
grilled within reach of his hands.  As the Holy Man had said, he
had never eaten such a dinner; still, when he had done, he shook
his head, and grumbled; 'Yes, there is plenty to eat, of course,
but it only makes me thirsty, and there is not a drop to drink
anywhere.'

Yet, somehow, he could never tell why, he looked up and saw the
tavern in front of him, which he thought was miles, and miles,
and miles away.

'Bring the best wine you have got, and two glasses, good mother,'
he said as he entered, 'and if you are fond of fish there is
enough here to feed the house.  Only there is no need to chatter
about it all over the place.  You understand?  Eh?' And without
waiting for an answer he whispered to the basket: 'Little basket,
little basket, do your duty.'  The innkeeper and his wife thought
that their customer had gone suddenly mad, and watched him
closely, ready to spring on him if he became violent; but both
instinctively jumped backwards, nearly into the fire, as rolls
and fishes of every kind came tumbling out of the basket,
covering the tables and chairs and the floor, and even
overflowing into the street.

'Be quick, be quick, and pick them up,' cried the man.  'And if
these are not enough, there are plenty more to be had for the
asking.'

The innkeeper and his wife did not need telling twice.  Down they
went on their knees and gathered up everything they could lay
hands on.  But busy though they seemed, they found time to
whisper to each other:

'If we can only get hold of that basket it will make our
fortune!'

So they began by inviting Father Grumbler to sit down to the
table, and brought out the best wine in the cellar, hoping it
might loosen his tongue.  But Father Grumbler was wiser than they
gave him credit for, and though they tried in all manner of ways
to find out who had given him the basket, he put them off, and
kept his secret to himself.  Unluckily, though he did not SPEAK,
he did drink, and it was not long before he fell fast asleep. 
Then the woman fetched from her kitchen a basket, so like the
magic one that no one, without looking very closely, could tell
the difference, and placed it in Father Grumbler's hand, while
she hid the other carefully away.

It was dinner time when the man awoke, and, jumping up hastily,
he set out for home, where he found all the children gathered
round a basin of thin soup, and pushing their wooden bowls
forward, hoping to have the first spoonful.  Their father burst
into the midst of them, bearing his basket, and crying:

'Don't spoil your appetites, children, with that stuff.  Do you
see this basket?  Well, I have only got to say, "Little basket,
little basket, do your duty," and you will see what will happen. 
Now you shall say it instead of me, for a treat.'

The children, wondering and delighted, repeated the words, but
nothing happened.  Again and again they tried, but the basket was
only a basket, with a few scales of fish sticking to the bottom,
for the innkeeper's wife had taken it to market the day before.

'What is the matter with the thing?' cried the father at last,
snatching the basket from them, and turning it all over,
grumbling and swearing while he did so, under the eyes of his
astonished wife and children, who did not know whether to cry or
to laugh.

'It certainly smells of fish,' he said, and then he stopped, for
a sudden thought had come to him.

'Suppose it is not mine at all; supposing-- Ah, the scoundrels!'

And without listening to his wife and children, who were
frightened at his strange conduct and begged him to stay at home,
he ran across to the tavern and burst open the door.

'Can I do anything for you, Father Grumbler?' asked the
innkeeper's wife in her softest voice.

'I have taken the wrong basket--by mistake, of course,' said he. 
'Here is yours, will you give me back my own?'

'Why, what are you talking about?' answered she.  'You can see
for yourself that there is no basket here.'

And though Father Grumbler DID look, it was quite true that none
was to be seen.

'Come, take a glass to warm you this cold day,' said the woman,
who was anxious to keep him in a good temper, and as this was an
invitation Father Grumbler never refused, he tossed it off and
left the house.

He took the road that led to the Holy Man's cave, and made such
haste that it was not long before he reached it.

'Who is there?' said a voice in answer to his knock.

'It is me, it is me, Holy man.  You know quite well.  Father
Grumbler, who has as many children as sparrows in the garden.'

'But, my good man, it was only yesterday that I gave you a
handsome present.'

'Yes, Holy Man, and here it is.  But something has happened, I
don't know what, and it won't work any more.'

'Well, put it down.  I will go and see if I can find anything for
you.'

In a few minutes the Holy Man returned with a cock under his arm.

'Listen to me,' he said, 'whenever you want money, you only have
to say: "Show me what you can do, cock," and you will see some
wonderful things.  But, remember, it is not necessary to let all
the world into the secret.'

'Oh no, Holy Man, I am not so foolish as that.'

'Nor to tell everybody that I gave it to you,' went on the Holy
Man.  'I have not got these treasures by the dozen.'

And without waiting for an answer he shut the door.

As before, the distance seemed to have wonderfully shortened, and
in a moment the tavern rose up in front of Father Grumbler. 
Without stopping to think, he went straight in, and found the
innkeeper's wife in the kitchen making a cake.

'Where have you come from, with that fine red cock in your
basket,' asked she, for the bird was so big that the lid would
not shut down properly.

'Oh, I come from a place where they don't keep these things by
the dozen,' he replied, sitting down in front of the table.

The woman said no more, but set before him a bottle of his
favourite wine, and soon he began to wish to display his prize.

'Show me what you can do, cock,' cried he.  And the cock stood up
and flapped his wings three times, crowing 'coquerico' with a
voice like a trumpet, and at each crow there fell from his beak
golden drops, and diamonds as large as peas.

This time Father Grumbler did not invite the innkeeper's wife to
pick up his treasures, but put his own hat under the cock's beak,
so as to catch everything he let fall; and he did not see the
husband and wife exchanging glances with each other which said,
'That would be a splendid cock to put with our basket.'

'Have another glass of wine?' suggested the innkeeper, when they
had finished admiring the beauty of the cock, for they pretended
not to have seen the gold or the diamonds.  And Father Grumbler,
nothing loth, drank one glass after another, till his head fell
forward on the table, and once more he was sound asleep.  Then
the woman gently coaxed the cock from the basket and carried it
off to her own poultry yard, from which she brought one exactly
like it, and popped it in its place.

Night was falling when the man awoke, and throwing proudly some
grains of gold on the table to pay for the wine he had drunk, he
tucked the cock comfortably into his basket and set out for home.

His wife and all the children were waiting for him at the door,
and as soon as she caught sight of him she broke out:

'You are a nice man to go wasting your time and your money
drinking in that tavern, and leaving us to starve! Aren't you
ashamed of yourself?'

'You don't know what you are talking of,' he answered.  'Money? 
Why, I have gold and diamonds now, as much as I want.  Do you see
that cock?  Well, you have only to say to him, "Show me what you
can do, cock," and something splendid will happen.'

Neither wife nor children were inclined to put much faith in him
after their last experience; however, they thought it was worth
trying, and did as he told them.  The cock flew round the room
like a mad thing, and crowed till their heads nearly split with
the noise; but no gold or diamonds dropped on the brick floor--
not the tiniest grain of either.

Father Grumbler stared in silence for an instant, and then he
began to swear so loudly that even his family, accustomed as they
were to his language, wondered at him.

At last he grew a little quieter, but remained as puzzled as
ever.

'Can I have forgotten the words?  But I KNOW that was what he
said! And I saw the diamonds with my own eyes!' Then suddenly he
seized the cock, shut it into the basket, and rushed out of the
house.

His heavy wooden shoes clattered as he ran along the road, and he
made such haste that the stars were only just beginning to come
out when he reached the cave of the Holy Man.

'Who is that knocking?' asked a voice from within.

'It is me! It is me! Holy Man! you know! Father--'

'But, my good fellow, you really should give some one else a
chance.  This is the third time you have been--and at such an
hour, too!'

'Oh, yes, Holy Man, I know it is very late, but you will forgive
me! It is your cock--there is something the matter.  It is like
the basket.  Look!'

'THAT my cock?  THAT my basket?  Somebody has played you a trick,
my good man!'

'A trick?' repeated Father Grumbler, who began to understand what
had happened.  'Then it must have been those two--'

'I warned you not to show them to anybody,' said the Holy Man. 
'You deserve--but I will give you one more chance.'  And,
turning, he unhooked something from the wall.

'When you wish to dust your own jacket or those of your friends,'
he said, 'you have only got to say, "Flack, flick, switch, be
quick," and you will see what happens.  That is all I have to
tell you.'  And, smiling to himself, the Holy Man pushed Father
Grumbler out of the cave.

 'Ah, I understand now,' muttered the good man, as he took the
road home; 'but I think I have got you two rascals!' and he
hurried on to the tavern with his basket under his arm, and the
cock and the switch both inside.

'Good evening, friends!' he said, as he entered the inn.  'I am
very hungry, and should be glad if you would roast this cock for
me as soon as possible.  THIS cock and no other--mind what I
say,' he went on.  'Oh, and another thing! You can light the fire
with this basket.  When you have done that I will show you
something I have in my bag,' and, as he spoke, he tried to
imitate the smile that the Holy Man had given HIM.

These directions made the innkeeper's wife very uneasy.  However,
she said nothing, and began to roast the cock, while her husband
did his best to make the man sleepy with wine, but all in vain.

After dinner, which he did not eat without grumbling, for the
cock was very tough, the man struck his hand on the table, and
said: 'Now listen to me.  Go and fetch my cock and my basket, at
once.  Do you hear?'

'Your cock, and your basket, Father Grumbler?  But you have just-
-'

'MY cock and MY basket!' interrupted he.  'And, if you are too
deaf and too stupid to understand what that means, I have got
something which may help to teach you.'  And opening the bag, he
cried: 'Flack, flick, switch, be quick.'

And flack! flick! like lightening a white switch sprang out of
the bag, and gave such hearty blows to the innkeeper and his
wife, and to Father Grumbler into the bargain, that they all
jumped as high as feathers when a mattress is shaken.

'Stop! stop! make it stop, and you shall have back your cock and
basket,' cried the man and his wife.  And Father Grumbler,