s to be yours,' said Habogi, as he jumped
down and held out his arms to lift Helga from the horse.  The
girl's heart sank a little, as she thought that the man who
possessed such wonderful sheep, and cows, and horses, might have
built himself a prettier place to live in; but she did not say
so.  And, taking her arm, he led her up the steps.

But when she got inside, she stood quite bewildered at the beauty
of all around her.  None of her friends owned such things, not
even the miller, who was the richest man she knew.  There were
carpets everywhere, thick and soft, and of deep rich colours; and
the cushions were of silk, and made you sleepy even to look at
them; and curious little figures in china were scattered about. 
Helga felt as if it would take her all her life to see everything
properly, and it only seemed a second since she had entered the
house, when Habogi came up to her.

'I must begin the preparations for our wedding at once,' he said;
'but my foster-brother will take you home, as I promised.  In
three days he will bring you back here, with your parents and
sisters, and any guests you may invite, in your company.  By that
time the feast will be ready.'

Helga had so much to think about, that the ride home appeared
very short.  Her father and mother were delighted to see her, as
they did not feel sure that so ugly and cross-looking a man as
Habogi might not have played her some cruel trick.  And after
they had given her some supper they begged her to tell them all
she had done.  But Helga only told them that they should see for
themselves on the third day, when they would come to her wedding.

It was very early in the morning when the party set out, and
Helga's two sisters grew green with envy as they passed the
flocks of sheep, and cows, and horses, and heard that the best of
each was given to Helga herself; but when they caught sight of
the poor little house which was to be her home their hearts grew
light again.

'I should be ashamed of living in such a place,' whispered each
to the other; and the eldest sister spoke of the carved stone
over HER doorway, and the second boasted of the number of rooms
SHE had.  But the moment they went inside they were struck dumb
with rage at the splendour of everything, and their faces grew
white and cold with fury when they saw the dress which Habogi had
prepared for his bride--a dress that glittered like sunbeams
dancing upon ice.

'She SHALL not look so much finer than us,' they cried
passionately to each other as soon as they were alone; and when
night came they stole out of their rooms, and taking out the
wedding-dress, they laid it in the ash-pit, and heaped ashes upon
it.  But Habogi, who knew a little magic, and had guessed what
they would do, changed the ashes into roses, and cast a spell
over the sisters, so that they could not leave the spot for a
whole day, and every one who passed by mocked at them.

The next morning when they all awoke the ugly tumble-down house
had disappeared, and in its place stood a splendid palace.  The
guests' eyes sought in vain for the bridegroom, but could only
see a handsome young man, with a coat of blue velvet and silver
and a gold crown upon his head.

'Who is that?' they asked Helga.

'That is my Habogi,' said she.

[From Neuislandischem Volksmarcher.]



How the Little Brother Set Free His Big Brothers



In a small hut, right in the middle of the forest, lived a man,
his wife, three sons and a daughter.  For some reason, all the
animals seemed to have left that part of the country, and food
grew very scarce; so, one morning, after a night of snow, when
the tracks of beasts might be easily seen, the three boys started
off to hunt.

They kept together for some time, till they reached a place where
the path they had been following split into two, and one of the
brothers called his dog and went to the left, while the others
took the trail to the right.  These had not gone far when their
dogs scented a bear, and drove him out from the thicket.  The
bear ran across a clearing, and the elder brother managed to
place an arrow right in his head.

They both took up the bear, and carried it towards home, meeting
the third at the spot where they had parted from him.  When they
reached home they threw the bear down on the floor of the hut
saying,

'Father, here is a bear which we killed; now we can have some
dinner.'

But the father, who was in a bad temper, only said:

'When I was a young man we used to get two bears in one day.'

The sons were rather disappointed at hearing this, and though
there was plenty of meat to last for two or three days, they
started off early in the morning down the same trail that they
had followed before.  As they drew near the fork a bear suddenly
ran out from behind a tree, and took the path on the right.  The
two elder boys and their dogs pursued him, and soon the second
son, who was also a good shot, killed him instantly with an
arrow.  At the fork of the trail, on their way home, they met the
youngest, who had taken the left-hand road, and had shot a bear
for himself.  But when they threw the two bears triumphantly on
the floor of the hut their father hardly looked at them, and only
said:

'When I was a young man I used to get three bears in one day.'

The next day they were luckier than before, and brought back
three bears, on which their father told them that HE had always
killed four.  However, that did not prevent him from skinning the
bears and cooking them in a way of his own, which he thought very
good, and they all ate an excellent supper.

Now these bears were the servants of the great bear chief who
lived in a high mountain a long way off.  And every time a bear
was killed his shadow returned to the house of the bear chief,
with the marks of his wounds plainly to bee seen by the rest.

The chief was furious at the number of bears the hunters had
killed, and determined that he would find some way of destroying
them.  So he called another of his servants, and said to him:

'Go to the thicket near the fork, where the boys killed your
brothers, and directly they or the dogs see you return here as
fast as ever you can.  The mountain will open to let you in, and
the hunters will follow you.  Then I shall have them in my power,
and be able to revenge myself.'

The servant bowed low, and started at once for the fork, where he
hid himself in the bushes.

By-and-by the boys came in sight, but this time there were only
two of them, as the youngest had stayed at home.  The air was
warm and damp, and the snow soft and slushy, and the elder
brother's bowstring hung loose, while the bow of the younger
caught in a tree and snapped in half.  At that moment the dogs
began to bark loudly, and the bear rushed out of the thicket and
set off in the direction of the mountain.  Without thinking that
they had nothing to defend themselves with, should the bear turn
and attack them, the boys gave chase.  The bear, who knew quite
well that he could not be shot, sometimes slackened his pace and
let the dogs get quite close; and in this way the elder son
reached the mountain without observing it, while his brother, who
had hurt his foot, was still far behind.

As he ran up, the mountain opened to admit the bear, and the boy,
who was close on his heels, rushed in after him, and did not know
where he was till he saw bears sitting on every side of him,
holding a council.  The animal he had been chasing sank panting
in their midst, and the boy, very much frightened, stood still,
letting his bow fall to the ground.

'Why are you trying to kill all my servants?' asked the chief. 
'Look round and see their shades, with arrows sticking in them. 
It was I who told the bear to-day how he was to lure you into my
power.  I shall take care that you shall not hurt my people any
more, because you will become a bear yourself.'

At this moment the second brother came up--for the mountain had
been left open on purpose to tempt him also--and cried out
breathlessly: 'Don't you see that the bear is lying close to you? 
Why don't you shoot him?' And, without waiting for a reply,
pressed forward to drive his arrow into the heart of the bear. 
But the elder one caught his raised arm, and whispered: 'Be
quiet! can't you tell where you are?' Then the boy looked up and
saw the angry bears about him.  On the one side were the servants
of the chief, and on the other the servants of the chief's
sister, who was sorry for the two youths, and begged that their
lives might be spared.  The chief answered that he would not kill
them, but only cast a spell over them, by which their heads and
bodies should remain as they were, but their arms and legs should
change into those of a bear, so that they would go on all fours
for the rest of their lives.  And, stooping over a spring of
water, he dipped a handful of moss in it and rubbed it over the
arms and legs of the boys.  In an instant the transformation took
place, and two creatures, neither beast nor human stood before
the chief.

Now the bear chief of course knew that the boys' father would
seek for his sons when they did not return home, so he sent
another of his servants to the hiding-place at the fork of the
trail to see what would happen.  He had not waited long, when the
father came in sight, stooping as he went to look for his sons'
tracks in the snow.  When he saw the marks of snow-shoes along
the path on the right he was filled with joy, not knowing that
the servant had made some fresh tracks on purpose to mislead him;
and he hastened forward so fast that he fell headlong into a pit,
where the bear was sitting.  Before he could pick himself up the
bear had quietly broken his neck, and, hiding the body under the
snow, sat down to see if anyone else would pass that way.

Meanwhile the mother at home was wondering what had become of her
two sons, and as the hours went on, and their father never
returned, she made up her mind to go and look for him.  The
youngest boy begged her to let him undertake the search, but she
would not hear of it, and told him he must stay at home and take
care of his sister.  So, slipping on her snow-shoes, she started
on her way.

As no fresh snow had fallen, the trail was quite easy to find,
and she walked straight on, till it led her up to the pit where
the bear was waiting for her.  He grasped her as she fell and
broke her neck, after which he laid her in the snow beside her
husband, and went back to tell the bear chief.

Hour after hour dragged heavily by in the forest hut, and at last
the brother and sister felt quite sure that in some way or other
all the rest of the family had perished.  Day after day the boy
climbed to the top of a tall tree near the house, and sat there
till he was almost frozen, looking on all sides through the
forest openings, hoping that he might see someone coming along. 
Very soon all the food in the house was eaten, and he knew he
would have to go out and hunt for more.  Besides, he wished to
seek for his parents.

The little girl did not like being left alone in the hut, and
cried bitterly; but her brother told her that there was no use
sitting down quietly to starve, and that whether he found any
game or not he would certainly be back before the following
night.  Then he cut himself some arrows, each from a different
tree, and winged with the feathers of four different birds.  He
then made himself a bow, very light and strong, and got down his
snow-shoes.  All this took some time, and he could not start that
day, but early next morning he called his little dog Redmouth,
whom he kept in a box, and set out.

After he had followed the trail for a great distance he grew very
tired, and sat upon the branch of a tree to rest.  But Redmouth
barked so furiously that the boy thought that perhaps his parents
might have been killed under its branches, and stepping back,
shot one of his arrows at the root of the tree.  Whereupon a
noise like thunder shook it from top to bottom, fire broke out,
and in a few minutes a little heap of ashes lay in the place
where it had stood.

Not knowing quite what to make of it all, the boy continued on
the trail, and went down the right-hand fork till he came to the
clump of bushes where the bears used to hide.

Now, as was plain by his being able to change the shape of the
two brothers, the bear chief knew a good deal of magic, and he
was quite aware that the little boy was following the trail, and
he sent a very small but clever bear servant to wait for him in
the bushes and to try to tempt him into the mountain.  But
somehow his spells could not have worked properly that day, as
the bear chief did not know that Redmouth had gone with his
master, or he would have been more careful.  For the moment the
dog ran round the bushes barking loudly, the little bear servant
rushed out in a fright, and set out for the mountains as fast as
he could.

The dog followed the bear, and the boy followed the dog, until
the mountain, the house of the great bear chief, came in sight. 
But along the road the snow was so wet and heavy that the boy
could hardly get along, and then the thong of his snow-shoes
broke, and he had to stop and mend it, so that the bear and the
dog got so far ahead that he could scarcely hear the barking. 
When the strap was firm again the boy spoke to his snow-shoes and
said:

'Now you must go as fast as you can, or, if not, I shall lose the
dog as well as the bear.'  And the snow-shoes sang in answer that
they would run like the wind.

As he came along, the bear chief's sister was looking out of the
window, and took pity on this little brother, as she had on the
two elder ones, and waited to see what the boy would do, when he
found that the bear servant and the dog had already entered the
mountain.

The little brother was certainly very much puzzled at not seeing
anything of either of the animals, which had vanished suddenly
out of his sight.  He paused for an instant to think what he
should do next, and while he did so he fancied he heard
Redmouth's voice on the opposite side of the mountain.  With
great difficulty he scrambled over steep rocks, and forced a path
through tangled thickets; but when he reached the other side the
sound appeared to start from the place from which he had come. 
Then he had to go all the way back again, and at the very top,
where he stopped to rest, the barking was directly beneath him,
and he knew in an instant where he was and what had happened.

'Let my dog out at once, bear chief!' cried he.  'If you do not,
I shall destroy your palace.'  But the bear chief only laughed,
and said nothing.  The boy was very angry at his silence, and
aiming one of his arrows at the bottom of the mountain, shot
straight through it.

As the arrow touched the ground a rumbling was heard, and with a
roar a fire broke out which seemed to split the whole mountain
into pieces.  The bear chief and all his servants were burnt up
in the flames, but his sister and all that belonged to her were
spared because she had tried to save the two elder boys from
punishment.

As soon as the fire had burnt itself out the little hunter
entered what was left of the mountain, and the first thing he saw
was his two brothers--half bear, half boy.

'Oh, help us! help us!' cried they, standing on their hind legs
as they spoke, and stretching out their fore-paws to him.

'But how am I to help you?' asked the little brother, almost
weeping.  'I can kill people, and destroy trees and mountains,
but I have no power over men.'  And the two elder brothers came
up and put their paws on his shoulders, and they all three wept
together.

The heart of the bear chief's sister was moved when she saw their
misery, and she came gently up behind, and whispered:

'Little boy, gather some moss from the spring over there, and let
your brothers smell it.'

With a bound all three were at the spring, and as the youngest
plucked a handful of wet moss, the two others sniffed at it with
all their might.  Then the bearskin fell away from them, and they
stood upright once more.

'How can we thank you?  how can we thank you?' they stammered,
hardly able to speak; and fell at her feet in gratitude.  But the
bear's sister only smiled, and bade them go home and look after
the little girl, who had no one else to protect her.

And this the boys did, and took such good care of their sister
that, as she was very small, she soon forgot that she had ever
had a father and mother.

[From the Bureau of Ethnology, U.S.]




The Sacred Milk of Koumongoe



Far way, in a very hot country, there once lived a man and woman
who had two children, a son named Koane and a daughter called
Thakane.

Early in the morning and late in the evenings the parents worked
hard in the fields, resting, when the sun was high, under the
shade of some tree.  While they were absent the little girl kept
house alone, for her brother always got up before the dawn, when
the air was fresh and cool, and drove out the cattle to the
sweetest patches of grass he could find.

One day, when Koane had slept later than usual, his father and
mother went to their work before him, and there was only Thakane
to be seen busy making the bread for supper.

'Thakane,' he said, 'I am thirsty.  Give me a drink from the tree
Koumongoe, which has the best milk in the world.'

'Oh, Koane,' cried his sister, 'you know that we are forbidden to
touch that tree.  What would father say when he came home?  For
he would be sure to know.'

'Nonsense,' replied Koane, 'there is so much milk in Koumongoe
that he will never miss a little.  If you won't give it to me, I
sha'n't take the cattle out.  They will just have to stay all day
in the hut, and you know that they will starve.'  And he turned
from her in a rage, and sat down in the corner.

After a while Thakane said to him: 'It is getting hot, had you
better drive out the cattle now?'

But Koane only answered sulkily: 'I told you I am not going to
drive them out at all.  If I have to do without milk, they shall
do without grass.'

Thakane did not know what to do.  She was afraid to disobey her
parents, who would most likely beat her, yet the beasts would be
sure to suffer if they were kept in, and she would perhaps be
beaten for that too.  So at last she took an axe and a tiny
earthen bowl, she cut a very small hole in the side of Koumongoe,
and out gushed enough milk to fill the bowl.

'Here is the milk you wanted,' said she, going up to Koane, who
was still sulking in his corner.

'What is the use of that?' grumbled Koane; 'why, there is not
enough to drown a fly.  Go and get me three times as much!'

Trembling with fright, Thakane returned to the tree, and struck
it a sharp blow with the axe.  In an instant there poured forth
such a stream of milk that it ran like a river into the hut.

'Koane! Koane!' cried she, 'come and help me to plug up the hole. 
There will be no milk left for our father and mother.'  But Koane
could not stop it any more than Thakane, and soon the milk was
flowing through the hut downhill towards their parents in the
fields below.

The man saw a white stream a long way off, and guessed what had
happened.

'Wife, wife,' he called loudly to the woman, who was working at a
little distance: 'Do you see Koumongoe running fast down the
hill?  That is some mischief of the children's, I am sure.  I
must go home and find out what is the matter.'  And they both
threw down their hoes and hurried to the side of Koumongoe.

Kneeling on the grass, the man and his wife made a cup of their
hands and drank the milk from it.  And no sooner had they done
this, than Koumongoe flowed back again up the hill, and entered
the hut.

'Thakane,' said the parents, severely, when they reached home
panting from the heat of the sun, 'what have you been doing?  Why
did Koumongoe come to us in the fields instead of staying in the
garden?'

'It was Koane's fault,' answered Thakane.  'He would not take the
cattle to feed until he drank some of the milk from Koumongoe. 
So, as I did not know what else to do, I gave it to him.'

The father listened to Thakane's words, but made no answer. 
Instead, he went outside and brought in two sheepskins, which he
stained red and sent for a blacksmith to forge some iron rings. 
The rings were then passed over Thakane's arms and legs and neck,
and the skins fastened on her before and behind.  When all was
ready, the man sent for his servants and said:

'I am going to get rid of Thakane.'

'Get rid of your only daughter?' they answered, in surprise. 
'But why?'

'Because she has eaten what she ought not to have eaten.  She has
touched the sacred tree which belongs to her mother and me
alone.'  And, turning his back, he called to Thakane to follow
him, and they went down the road which led to the dwelling of an
ogre.

They were passing along some fields where the corn was ripening,
when a rabbit suddenly sprang out at their feet, and standing on
its hind legs, it sang:

Why do you give to the ogre Your child, so fair, so fair?

'You had better ask her,' replied the man, 'she is old enough to
give you an answer.'

Then, in her turn, Thakane sang:

I gave Koumongoe to Koane, Koumongoe to the keeper of beasts; For
without Koumongoe they could not go to the meadows: Without
Koumongoe they would starve in the hut; That was why I gave him
the Koumongoe of my father.

And when the rabbit heard that, he cried: 'Wretched man! it is
you whom the ogre should eat, and not your beautiful daughter.'

But the father paid no heed to what the rabbit said, and only
walked on the faster, bidding Thakane to keep close behind him. 
By-and-by they met with a troop of great deer, called elands, and
they stopped when they saw Thakane and sang:

Why do you give to the ogre Your child, so fair, so fair?

'You had better ask her, replied the man, 'she is old enough to
give you an answer.'

Then, in her turn, Thakane sang:

I gave Koumongoe to Koane, Koumongoe to the keeper of beasts; For
without Koumongoe they could not go to the meadows: Without
Koumongoe they would starve in the hut; That was why I gave him
the Koumongoe of my father.

And the elands all cried: 'Wretched man! it is you whom the ogre
should eat, and not your beautiful daughter.'

By this time it was nearly dark, and the father said they could
travel no further that night, and must go to sleep where they
were.  Thakane was thankful indeed when she heard this, for she
was very tired, and found the two skins fastened round her almost
too heavy to carry.  So, in spite of her dread of the ogre, she
slept till dawn, when her father woke her, and told her roughly
that he was ready to continue their journey.

Crossing the plain, the girl and her father passed a herd of
gazelles feeding.  They lifted their heads, wondering who was out
so early, and when they caught sight of Thakane, they sang:

Why do you give to the ogre Your child, so fair, so fair?

'You had better ask her, replied the man, 'she is old enough to
answer for herself.'

Then, in her turn, Thakane sang:

I gave Koumongoe to Koane, Koumongoe to the keeper of beasts; For
without Koumongoe they could not go to the meadows: Without
Koumongoe they would starve in the hut; That was why I gave him
the Koumongoe of my father.

And the gazelles all cried: 'Wretched man! it is you whom the
ogre should eat, and not your beautiful daughter.'

At last they arrived at the village where the ogre lived, and
they went straight to his hut.  He was nowhere to be seen, but in
his place was his son Masilo, who was not an ogre at all, but a
very polite young man.  He ordered his servants to bring a pile
of skins for Thakane to sit on, but told her father he must sit
on the ground.  Then, catching sight of the girl's face, which
she had kept down, he was struck by its beauty, and put the same
question that the rabbit, and the elands, and the gazelles had
done.

Thakane answered him as before, and he instantly commanded that
she should be taken to the hut of his mother, and placed under
her care, while the man should be led to his father.  Directly
the ogre saw him he bade the servant throw him into the great pot
which always stood ready on the fire, and in five minutes he was
done to a turn.  After that the servant returned to Masilo and
related all that had happened.

Now Masilo had fallen in loved with Thakane the moment he saw
her.  At first he did not know what to make of this strange
feeling, for all his life he had hated women, and had refused
several brides whom his parents had chosen for him.  However,
they were so anxious that he should marry, that they willingly
accepted Thakane as their daughter-in-law, though she did bring
any marriage portion with her.

After some time a baby was born to her, and Thakane thought it
was the most beautiful baby that ever was seen.  But when her
mother-in-law saw it was a girl, she wrung her hands and wept,
saying:

'O miserable mother! Miserable child! Alas for you! why were you
not a boy!'

Thakane, in great surprise, asked the meaning of her distress;
and the old woman told her that it was the custom in that country
that all the girls who were born should be given to the ogre to
eat.

Then Thakane clasped the baby tightly in her arms, and cried:

'But it is not the customer in MY country! There, when children
die, they are buried in the earth.  No one shall take my baby
from me.'

That night, when everyone in the hut was asleep, Thakane rose,
and carrying her baby on her back, went down to a place where the
river spread itself out into a large lake, with tall willows all
round the bank.  Here, hidden from everyone, she sat down on a
stone and began to think what she should do to save her child.

Suddenly she heard a rustling among the willows, and an old woman
appeared before her.

'What are you crying for, my dear?' said she.

And Thakane answered: 'I was crying for my baby--I cannot hide
her for ever, and if the ogre sees her, he will eat her; and I
would rather she was drowned than that.'

'What you say is true,' replied the old woman.  'Give me your
child, and let me take care of it.  And if you will fix a day to
meet me here I will bring the baby.'

Then Thakane dried her eyes, and gladly accepted the old woman's
offer.  When she got home she told her husband she had thrown it
in the river, and as he had watched her go in that direction he
never thought of doubting what she said.

On the appointed day, Thakane slipped out when everybody was
busy, and ran down the path that led to the lake.  As soon as she
got there, she crouched down among the willows, and sang softly:

Bring to me Dilah, Dilah the rejected one, Dilah, whom her father
Masilo cast out!

And in a moment the old woman appeared holding the baby in her
arms.  Dilah had become so big and strong, that Thakane's heart
was filled with joy and gratitude, and she stayed as long as she
dared, playing with her baby.  At last she felt she must return
to the village, lest she should be missed, and the child was
handed back to the old woman, who vanished with her into the
lake.

Children grow up very quickly when they live under water, and in
less time than anyone could suppose, Dilah had changed from a
baby to a woman.  Her mother came to visit her whenever she was
able, and one day, when they were sitting talking together, they
were spied out by a man who had come to cut willows to weave into
baskets.  He was so surprised to see how like the face of the
girl was to Masilo, that he left his work and returned to the
village.

'Masilo,' he said, as he entered the hut, 'I have just beheld
your wife near the river with a girl who must be your daughter,
she is so like you.  We have been deceived, for we all thought
she was dead.'

When he heard this, Masilo tried to look shocked because his wife
had broken the law; but in his heart he was very glad.

'But what shall we do now?' asked he.

'Make sure for yourself that I am speaking the truth by hiding
among the bushes the first time Thakane says she is going to
bathe in the river, and waiting till the girl appears.'

For some days Thakane stayed quietly at home, and her husband
began to think that the man had been mistaken; but at last she
said to her husband: 'I am going to bathe in the river.'

'Well, you can go,' answered he.  But he ran down quickly by
another path, and got there first, and hid himself in the bushes. 
An instant later, Thakane arrived, and standing on the bank, she
sang:

Bring to me Dilah, Dilah the rejected one, Dilah, whom her father
Masilo cast out!

Then the old woman came out of the water, holding the girl, now
tall and slender, by the hand.  And as Masilo looked, he saw that
she was indeed his daughter, and he wept for joy that she was not
lying dead in the bottom of the lake.  The old woman, however,
seemed uneasy, and said to Thakane: 'I feel as if someone was
watching us.  I will not leave the girl to-day, but will take her
back with me'; and sinking beneath the surface, she drew the girl
after her.  After they had gone, Thakane returned to the village,
which Masilo had managed to reach before her.

All the rest of the day he sat in a corner weeping, and his
mother who came in asked: 'Why are you weeping so bitterly, my
son?'

'My head aches,' he answered; 'it aches very badly.'  And his
mother passed on, and left him alone.

In the evening he said to his wife: 'I have seen my daughter, in
the place where you told me you had drowned her.  Instead, she
lives at the bottom of the lake, and has now grown into a young
woman.'

'I don't know what you are talking about,' replied Thakane.  'I
buried my child under the sand on the beach.'

Then Masilo implored her to give the child back to him; but she
would not listen, and only answered: 'If I were to give her back
you would only obey the laws of your country and take her to your
father, the ogre, and she would be eaten.'

But Masilo promised that he would never let his father see her,
and that now she was a woman no one would try to hurt her; so
Thakane's heart melted, and she went down to the lake to consult
the old woman.

'What am I to do?' she asked, when, after clapping her hands, the
old woman appeared before her.  'Yesterday Masilo beheld Dilah,
and ever since he has entreated me to give him back his
daughter.'

'If I let her go he must pay me a thousand head of cattle in
exchange,' replied the old woman.  And Thakane carried her answer
back to Masilo.

'Why, I would gladly give her two thousand!' cried he, 'for she
has saved my daughter.'  And he bade messengers hasten to all the
neighbouring villages, and tell his people to send him at once
all the cattle he possessed.  When they were all assembled he
chose a thousand of the finest bulls and cows, and drove them
down to the river, followed by a great crowd wondering what would
happen.

Then Thakane stepped forward in front of the cattle and sang:

Bring to me Dilah, Dilah the rejected one, Dilah, whom her father
Masilo cast out!

And Dilah came from the waters holding out her hands to Masilo
and Thakane, and in her place the cattle sank into the lake, and
were driven by the old woman to the great city filled with
people, which lies at the bottom.

[Contes Populaires des Bassoutos.]




The Wicked Wolverine



One day a wolverine was out walking on the hill-side, when, on
turning a corner, he suddenly saw a large rock.

'Was that you I heard walking about just now?' he asked, for
wolverines are cautious animals, and always like to know the
reasons of things.

'No, certainly not,' answered the rock; 'I don't know how to
walk.'

'But I SAW you walking,' continued the wolverine.

'I am afraid that you were not taught to speak the truth,'
retorted the rock.

'You need not speak like that, for I have SEEN you walking,'
replied the wolverine, 'though I am quite sure that you could
never catch ME!' and he ran a little distance and then stopped to
see if the rock was pursuing him; but, to his vexation, the rock
was still in the same place.  Then the wolverine went up close,
and struck the rock a blow with his paw, saying: 'Well, will you
catch me NOW?'

'I can't walk, but I can ROLL,' answered the rock.

And the wolverine laughed and said: 'Oh, that will do just as
well'; and began to run down the side of the mountain.

At first he went quite slowly, 'just to give the rock a chance,'
he thought to himself; but soon he quickened his pace, for he
found that the rock was almost at his heels.  But the faster the
wolverine ran, the faster the rock rolled, and by-and-by the
little creature began to get very tired, and was sorry he had not
left the rock to itself.  Thinking that if he could manage to put
on a spurt he would reach the forest of great trees at the bottom
of the mountain, where the rock could not come, he gathered up
all his strength, and instead of running he leaped over sticks
and stones, but, whatever he did, the rock was always close
behind him.  At length he grew so weary that he could not even
see where he was going, and catching his foot in a branch he
tripped and fell.  The rock stopped at once, but there came a
shriek from the wolverine:

'Get off, get off! can't you see that you are on my legs?'

'Why did you not leave me alone?' asked the rock.  'I did not
want to move--I hate moving.  But you WOULD have it, and I
certainly sha'n't move now till I am forced to.'

'I will call my brothers,' answered the wolverine.  'There are
many of them in the forest, and you will soon see that they are
stronger than you.'  And he called, and called, and called, till
wolves and foxes and all sorts of other creatures all came
running to see what was the matter.

'How DID you get under that rock?' asked they, making a ring
round him; but they had to repeat their question several times
before the wolverine would answer, for he, like many other
persons, found it hard to confess that he had brought his
troubles on himself.

'Well, I was dull, and wanted someone to play with me,' he said
at last, in sulky voice, 'and I challenged the rock to catch me. 
Of course I thought I could run the fastest; but I tripped, and
it rolled on me.  It was just an accident.'

'It serves you right for being so silly,' said they; but they
pushed and hauled at the rock for a long time without making it
move an inch.

'You are no good at all,' cried the wolverine crossly, for it was
suffering great pain, 'and if you cannot get me free, I shall see
what my friends the lightning and thunder can do.'  And he called
loudly to the lightning to come and help him as quickly as
possible.

In a few minutes a dark cloud came rolling up the sky, giving out
such terrific claps of thunder that the wolves and the foxes and
all the other creatures ran helter-skelter in all directions. 
But, frightened though they were, they did not forget to beg the
lightning to take off the wolverine's coat and to free his legs,
but to be careful not to hurt him.  So the lightning disappeared
into the cloud for a moment to gather up fresh strength, and then
came rushing down, right upon the rock, which it sent flying in
all directions, and took the wolverine's coat so neatly that,
though it was torn into tiny shreds, the wolverine himself was
quite unharmed.

'That was rather clumsy of you,' said he, standing up naked in
his flesh.  'Surely you could have split the rock without tearing
my coat to bits!' And he stooped down to pick up the pieces.  It
took him a long time, for there were a great many of them, but at
last he had them all in his hand.

'I'll go to my sister the frog,' he thought to himself, 'and she
will sew them together for me'; and he set off at once for the
swamp in which his sister lived.

'Will you sew my coat together?  I had an unlucky accident, and
it is quite impossible to wear,' he said, when he found her.

'With pleasure,' she answered, for she had always been taught to
be polite; and getting her needle and thread she began to fit the
pieces.  But though she was very good-natured, she was not very
clever, and she got some of the bits wrong.  When the wolverine,
who was very particular about his clothes, came to put it on, he
grew very angry.

'What a useless creature you are!' cried he.  'Do you expect me
to go about in such a coat as that?  Why it bulges all down the
back, as if I had a hump, and it is so tight across the chest
that I expect it to burst every time I breathe.  I knew you were
stupid, but I did not think you were as stupid as that.'  And
giving the poor frog a blow on her head, which knocked her
straight into the water, he walked off in a rage to his younger
sister the mouse.

'I tore my coat this morning,' he began, when he had found her
sitting at the door of her house eating an apple.  'It was all in
little bits, and I took it to our sister the frog to ask her to
sew it for me.  But just look at the way she has done it! You
will have to take it to pieces and fit them together properly,
and I hope I shall not have to complain again.'  For as the
wolverine was older than the mouse, he was accustomed to speak to
her in this manner.  However, the mouse was used to it and only
answered: 'I think you had better stay here till it is done, and
if there is any alteration needed I can make it.'  So the
wolverine sat down on a heap of dry ferns, and picking up the
apple, he finished it without even asking the mouse's leave.

At last the coat was ready, and the wolverine put it on.

'Yes, it fits very well,' said he, 'and you have sewn it very
neatly.  When I pass this way again I will bring you a handful of
corn, as a reward'; and he ran off as smart as ever, leaving the
mouse quite grateful behind him.

He wandered about for many days, till he reached a place where
food was very scarce, and for a whole week he went without any. 
He was growing desperate, when he suddenly came upon a bear that
was lying asleep.  'Ah! here is food at last!' thought he; but
how was he to kill the bear, who was so much bigger than himself? 
It was no use to try force, he must invent some cunning plan
which would get her into his power.  At last, after thinking
hard, he decided upon something, and going up to the bear, he
exclaimed: 'Is that you, my sister?'

The bear turned round and saw the wolverine, and murmuring to
herself, so low that nobody could hear, 'I never heard before
that I had a brother,' got up and ran quickly to a tree, up which
she climbed.  Now the wolverine was very angry when he saw his
dinner vanishing in front of him, especially as HE could not
climb trees like the bear, so he followed, and stood at the foot
of the tree, shrieking as loud as he could, 'Come down, sister;
our father has sent me to look for you! You were lost when you
were a little girl and went out picking berries, and it was only
the other day that we heard from a beaver where you were.'  At
these words, the bear came a little way down the tree, and the
wolverine, seeing this, went on:

'Are you not fond of berries?  I am! And I know a place where
they grow so thick the ground is quite hidden.  Why, look for
yourself! That hillside is quite red with them!'

'I can't see so far,' answered the bear, now climbing down
altogether.  'You must have wonderfully good eyes! I wish I had;
but my sight is very short.'

'So was mine till my father smashed a pailful of cranberries, and
rubbed my eyes with them,' replied the wolverine.  'But if you
like to go and gather some of the berries I will do just as he
did, and you will soon be able to see as far as me.'

It took the bear a long while to gather the berries, for she was
slow about everything, and, besides, it made her back ache to
stoop.  But at last she returned with a sackful, and put them
down beside the wolverine.  'That is splendid, sister!' cried the
wolverine.  'Now lie flat on the ground with your head on this
stone, while I smash them.'

The bear, who was very tired, was only too glad to do as she was
bid, and stretched herself comfortably on the grass.

'I am ready now,' said the wolverine after a bit; 'just at first
you will find that the berries make your eyes smart, but you must
be careful not to move, or the juice will run out, and then it
will have to be done all over again.'

So the bear promised to lie very still; but the moment the
cranberries touched her eyes she sprang up with a roar.

'Oh, you mustn't mind a little pain,' said the wolverine, 'it
will soon be over, and then you will see all sorts of things you
have never dreamt of.'  The bear sank down with a groan, and as
her eyes were full of cranberry juice, which completely blinded
her, the wolverine took up a sharp knife and stabbed her to the
heart.

Then he took off the skin, and, stealing some fire from a tent,
which his sharp eyes had perceived hidden behind a rock, he set
about roasting the bear bit by bit.  He thought the meat was the
best he ever had tasted, and when dinner was done he made up his
mind to try that same trick again, if ever he was hungry.

And very likely he did!

[Adapted from Bureau of Ethnology.] 




The Husband of the Rat's Daughter



Once upon a time there lived in Japan a rat and his wife who came
of an old and noble race, and had one daughter, the loveliest
girl in all the rat world.  Her parents were very proud of her,
and spared no pains to teach her all she ought to know.  There
was not another young lady in the whole town who was as clever as
she was in gnawing through the hardest wood, or who could drop
from such a height on to a bed, or run away so fast if anyone was
heard coming.  Great attention, too, was paid to her personal
appearance, and her skin shone like satin, while her teeth were
as white as pearls, and beautifully pointed.

Of course, with all these advantages, her parents expected her to
make a brilliant marriage, and, as she grew up, they began to
look round for a suitable husband.

But here a difficulty arose.  The father was a rat from the tip
of his nose to the end of his tail, outside as well as in, and
desired that his daughter should wed among her own people.  She
had no lack of lovers, but her father's secret hopes rested on a
fine young rat, with moustaches which almost swept the ground,
whose family was still nobler and more ancient than his own. 
Unluckily, the mother had other views for her precious child. 
She was one of those people who always despise their own family
and surroundings, and take pleasure in thinking that they
themselves are made of finer material than the rest of the world. 
'HER daughter should never marry a mere rat,' she declared,
holding her head high.  'With her beauty and talents she had a
right to look for someone a little better than THAT.'

So she talked, as mothers will, to anyone that would listen to
her.  What the girl thought about the matter nobody knew or
cared--it was not the fashion in the rat world.

Many were the quarrels which the old rat and his wife had upon
the subject, and sometimes they bore on their faces certain marks
which looked as if they had not kept to words only.

'Reach up to the stars is MY motto,' cried the lady one day, when
she was in a greater passion than usual.  'My daughter's beauty
places her higher than anything upon earth,' she cried; 'and I am
certainly not going to accept a son-in-law who is beneath her.'

'Better offer her in marriage to the sun,' answered her husband
impatiently.  'As far as I know there is nothing greater than
he.'

'Well, I WAS thinking of it,' replied the wife, 'and as you are
of the same mind, we will pay him a visit to-morrow.'

So the next morning, the two rats, having spent hours in making
themselves smart, set out to see the sun, leading their daughter
between them.

The journey took some time, but at length they came to the golden
palace where the sun lived.

'Noble king,' began the mother, 'behold our daughter! She is so
beautiful that she is above everything in the whole world. 
Naturally, we wish for a son-in-law who, on his side, is greater
than all.  Therefore we have come to you.'

'I feel very much flattered,' replied the sun, who was so busy
that he had not the least wish to marry anybody.  'You do me
great honour by your proposal.  Only, in one point you are
mistaken, and it would be wrong of me to take advantage of your
ignorance.  There is something greater than I am, and that is the
cloud.  Look!' And as he spoke a cloud spread itself over the
sun's face, blotting out his rays.

'Oh, well, we will speak to the cloud,' said the mother.  And
turning to the cloud she repeated her proposal.

'Indeed I am unworthy of anything so charming,' answered the
cloud; 'but you make a mistake again in what you say.  There is
one thing that is even more powerful than I, and that is the
wind.  Ah, here he comes, you can see for yourself.'

And she DID see, for catching up the cloud as he passed, he threw
it on the other side of the sky.  Then, tumbling father, mother
and daughter down to the earth again, he paused for a moment
beside them, his foot on an old wall.

When she had recovered her breath, the mother began her little
speech once more.

'The wall is the proper husband for your daughter,' answered the
wind, whose home consisted of a cave, which he only visited when
he was not rushing about elsewhere; 'you can see for yourself
that he is greater than I, for he has power to stop me in my
flight.'  And the mother, who did not trouble to conceal her
wishes, turned at once to the wall.

Then something happened which was quite unexpected by everyone.

'I won't marry that ugly old wall, which is as old as my
grandfather,' sobbed the girl, who had not uttered one word all
this time.  'I would have married the sun, or the cloud, or the
wind, because it was my duty, although I love the handsome young
rat, and him only.  But that horrid old wall--I would sooner
die!'

And the wall, rather hurt in his feelings, declared that he had
no claim to be the husband of so beautiful a girl.

'It is quite true,' he said, 'that I can stop the wind who can
part the clouds who can cover the sun; but there is someone who
can do more than all these, and that is the rat.  It is the rat
who passes through me, and can reduce me to powder, simply with
his teeth.  If, therefore, you want a son-in-law who is greater
than the whole world, seek him among the rats.'

'Ah, what did I tell you?' cried the father.  And his wife,
though for the moment angry at being beaten, soon thought that a
rat son-in-law was what she had always desired.

So all three returned happily home, and the wedding was
celebrated three days after.

[Contes Populaires.]



The Mermaid and the Boy



Long, long ago, there lived a king who ruled over a country by
the sea.  When he had been married about a year, some of his
subjects, inhabiting a distant group of islands, revolted against
his laws, and it became needful for him to leave his wife and go
in person to settle their disputes.  The queen feared that some
ill would come of it, and implored him to stay at home, but he
told her that nobody could do his work for him, and the next
morning the sails were spread, and the king started on his
voyage.

The vessel had not gone very far when she ran upon a rock, and
stuck so fast in a cleft that the strength of the whole crew
could not get her off again.  To make matters worse, the wind was
rising too, and it was quite plain that in a few hours the ship
would be dashed to pieces and everybody would be drowned, when
suddenly the form of a mermaid was seen dancing on the waves
which threatened every moment to overwhelm them.

'There is only one way to free yourselves,' she said to the king,
bobbing up and down in the water as she spoke, 'and that is to
give me your solemn word that you will deliver to me the first
child that is born to you.'

The king hesitated at this proposal.  He hoped that some day he
might have children in his home, and the thought that he must
yield up the heir to his crown was very bitter to him; but just
then a huge wave broke with great force on the ship's side, and
his men fell on their knees and entreated him to save them.

So he promised, and this time a wave lifted the vessel clean off
the rocks, and she was in the open sea once more.

The affairs of the islands took longer to settle than the king
had expected, and some months passed away before he returned to
his palace.  In his absence a son had been born to him, and so
great was his joy that he quite forgot the mermaid and the price
he had paid for the safety of his ship.  But as the years went
on, and the baby grew into a fine big boy, the remembrance of it
came back, and one day he told the queen the whole story.  From
that moment the happiness of both their lives was ruined.  Every
night they went to bed wondering if they should find his room
empty in the morning, and every day they kept him by their sides,
expecting him to be snatched away before their very eyes.

At last the king felt that this state of things could not
continue, and he said to his wife:

'After all, the most foolish thing in the world one can do is to
keep the boy here in exactly the place in which the mermaid will
seek him.  Let us give him food and send him on his travels, and
perhaps, if the mermaid ever blocs come to seek him, she may be
content with some other child.'  And the queen agreed that his
plan seemed the wisest.

So the boy was called, and his father told him the story of the
voyage, as he had told his mother before him.  The prince
listened eagerly, and was delighted to think that he was to go
away all by himself to see the world, and was not in the least
frightened; for though he was now sixteen, he had scarcely been
allowed to walk alone beyond the palace gardens.  He began busily
to make his preparations, and took off his smart velvet coat,
putting on instead one of green cloth, while he refused a
beautiful bag which the queen offered him to hold his food, and
slung a leather knapsack over his shoulders instead, just as he
had seen other travellers do.  Then he bade farewell to his
parents and went his way.

All through the day he walked, watching with interest the strange
birds and animals that darted across his path in the forest or
peeped at him from behind a bush.  But as evening drew on he
became tired, and looked about as he walked for some place where
he could sleep.  At length he reached a soft mossy bank under a
tree, and was just about to stretch himself out on it, when a
fearful roar made him start and tremble all over.  In another
moment something passed swiftly through the air and a lion stood
before him.

'What are you doing here?' asked the lion, his eyes glaring
fiercely at the boy.

'I am flying from the mermaid,' the prince answered, in a quaking
voice.

'Give me some food then,' said the lion, 'it is past my supper
time, and I am very hungry.'

The boy was so thankful that the lion did not want to eat him,
that he gladly picked up his knapsack which lay on the ground,
and held out some bread and a flask of wine.

'I feel better now,' said the lion when he had done, 'so now I
shall go to sleep on this nice soft moss, and if you like you can
lie down beside me.'  So the boy and the lion slept soundly side
by side, till the sun rose.

'I must be off now,' remarked the lion, shaking the boy as he
spoke; 'but cut off the tip of my ear, and keep it carefully, and
if you are in any danger just wish yourself a lion and you will
become one on the spot.  One good turn deserves another, you
know.'

The prince thanked him for his kindness, and did as he was bid,
and the two then bade each other farewell.

'I wonder how it feels to be a lion,' thought the boy, after he
had gone a little way; and he took out the tip of the ear from
the breast of his jacket and wished with all his might.  In an
instant his head had swollen to several times its usual size, and
his neck seemed very hot and heavy; and, somehow, his hands
became paws, and his skin grew hairy and yellow.  But what
pleased him most was his long tail with a tuft at the end, which
he lashed and switched proudly.  'I like being a lion very much,'
he said to himself, and trotted gaily along the road.

After a while, however, he got tired of walking in this
unaccustomed way--it made his back ache and his front paws felt
sore.  So he wished himself a boy again, and in the twinkling of
an eye his tail disappeared and his head shrank, and the long
thick mane became short and curly.  Then he looked out for a
sle