eclare
that the prince had not fulfilled his conditions.  So she spoke
cheering words to her donkey, who brayed in reply, and the two
pushed steadily on.

Oh! how glad they both were when they caught sight of a tall rock
in the distance.  They forgot that they were thirsty, and that
the sun was hot; and the ground seemed to fly under their feet,
till the donkey stopped of its own accord in the cool shadow. 
But though the donkey might rest the princess could not, for the
plant, as she knew, grew on the very top of the rock, and a wide
chasm ran round the foot of it.  Luckily she had brought a rope
with her, and making a noose at one end, she flung it across with
all her might.  The first time it slid back slowly into the
ditch, and she had to draw it up, and throw it again, but at
length the noose caught on something, the princess could not see
what, and had to trust her whole weight to this little bridge,
which might snap and let her fall deep down among the rocks.  And
in that case her death was as certain as that of the prince.

But nothing so dreadful happened.  The princess got safely to the
other side, and then became the worst part of her task.  As fast
as she put her foot on a ledge of the rock the stone broke away
from under her, and left her in the same place as before. 
Meanwhile the hours were passing, and it was nearly noon.

The heart of the poor princess was filled with despair, but she
would not give up the struggle.  She looked round till she saw a
small stone above her which seemed rather stronger than the rest,
and by only poising her foot lightly on those that lay between,
she managed by a great effort to reach it.  In this way, with
torn and bleeding hands, she gained the top; but here such a
violent wind was blowing that she was almost blinded with dust,
and was obliged to throw herself on the ground, and feel about
after the precious herb.

For a few terrible moments she thought that the rock was bare,
and that her journey had been to no purpose.  Feel where she
would, there was nothing but grit and stones, when, suddenly, her
fingers touched something soft in a crevice.  It was a plant,
that was clear; but was it the right one?  See she could not, for
the wind was blowing more fiercely than ever, so she lay where
she was and counted the leaves.  One, two, three--yes! yes! there
were four! And plucking a leaf she held it safe in her hand while
she turned, almost stunned by the wind, to go down the rock.

When once she was safely over the side all became still in a
moment, and she slid down the rock so fast that it was only a
wonder that she did not land in the chasm.  However, by good
luck, she stopped quite close to her rope bridge and was soon
across it.  The donkey brayed joyfully at the sight of her, and
set off home at his best speed, never seeming to know that the
earth under his feet was nearly as hot as the sun above him.

On the bank of the great river he halted, and the princess rushed
up to where the prince was standing by the pit he had digged in
the dry sand, with a huge water pot beside it.  A little way off
the crocodile lay blinking in the sun, with his sharp teeth and
whity-yellow jaws wide open.

At a signal from the princess the prince poured the water in the
hole, and the moment it reached the brim the princess flung in
the four-leaved plant.  Would the charm work, or would the water
trickle away slowly through the sand, and the prince fall a
victim to that horrible monster?  For half an hour they stood
with their eyes rooted to the spot, but the hole remained as full
as at the beginning, with the little green leaf floating on the
top.  Then the prince turned with a shout of triumph, and the
crocodile sulkily plunged into the river.

The prince had escape for ever the second of his three fates!

He stood there looking after the crocodile, and rejoicing that he
was free, when he was startled by a wild duck which flew past
them, seeking shelter among the rushes that bordered the edge of
the stream.  In another instant his dog dashed by in hot pursuit,
and knocked heavily against his master's legs.  The prince
staggered, lost his balance and fell backwards into the river,
where the mud and the rushes caught him and held him fast.  He
shrieked for help to his wife, who came running; and luckily
brought her rope with her.  The poor old dog was drowned, but the
prince was pulled to shore.  'My wife,' he said, 'has been
stronger than my fate.'

[Adapted from Les Contes Populaires de l'Egypte Ancienne.]




The Fox and the Lapp



Once upon a time a fox lay peeping out of his hole, watching the
road that ran by at a little distance, and hoping to see
something that might amuse him, for he was feeling very dull and
rather cross.  For a long while he watched in vain; everything
seemed asleep, and not even a bird stirred overhead.  The fox
grew crosser than ever, and he was just turning away in disgust
from his place when he heard the sound of feet coming over the
snow.  He crouched eagerly down at the edge of the road and said
to himself: 'I wonder what would happen if I were to pretend to
be dead! This is a man driving a reindeer sledge, I know the
tinkling of the harness.  And at any rate I shall have an
adventure, and that is always something!'

So he stretched himself out by the side of the road, carefully
choosing a spot where the driver could not help seeing him, yet
where the reindeer would not tread on him; and all fell out just
as he had expected.  The sledge-driver pulled up sharply, as his
eyes lighted on the beautiful animal lying stiffly beside him,
and jumping out he threw the fox into the bottom of the sledge,
where the goods he was carrying were bound tightly together by
ropes.  The fox did not move a muscle though his bones were sore
from the fall, and the driver got back to his seat again and
drove on merrily.

But before they had gone very far, the fox, who was near the
edge, contrived to slip over, and when the Laplander saw him
stretched out on the snow he pulled up his reindeer and put the
fox into one of the other sledges that was fastened behind, for
it was market-day at the nearest town, and the man had much to
sell.

They drove on a little further, when some noise in the forest
made the man turn his head, just in time to see the fox fall with
a heavy thump on to the frozen snow.  'That beast is bewitched!'
he said to himself, and then he threw the fox into the last
sledge of all, which had a cargo of fishes.  This was exactly
what the cunning creature wanted, and he wriggled gently to the
front and bit the cord which tied the sledge to the one before it
so that it remained standing in the middle of the road.

Now there were so many sledges that the Lapp did not notice for a
long while that one was missing; indeed, he would have entered
the town without knowing if snow had not suddenly begun to fall. 
Then he got down to secure more firmly the cloths that kept his
goods dry, and going to the end of the long row, discovered that
the sledge containing the fish and the fox was missing.  He
quickly unharnessed one of his reindeer and rode back along the
way he had come, to find the sledge standing safe in the middle
of the road; but as the fox had bitten off the cord close to the
noose there was no means of moving it away.

The fox meanwhile was enjoying himself mightily.  As soon as he
had loosened the sledge, he had taken his favourite fish from
among the piles neatly arranged for sale, and had trotted off to
the forest with it in his mouth.  By-and-by he met a bear, who
stopped and said: 'Where did you find that fish, Mr.  Fox?'

'Oh, not far off,' answered he; 'I just stuck my tail in the
stream close by the place where the elves dwell, and the fish
hung on to it of itself.'

'Dear me,' snarled the bear, who was hungry and not in a good
temper, 'if the fish hung on to your tail, I suppose he will hang
on to mine.'

'Yes, certainly, grandfather,' replied the fox, 'if you have
patience to suffer what I suffered.'

'Of course I can,' replied the bear, 'what nonsense you talk!
Show me the way.'

So the fox led him to the bank of a stream, which, being in a
warm place, had only lightly frozen in places, and was at this
moment glittering in the spring sunshine.

'The elves bathe here,' he said, 'and if you put in your tail the
fish will catch hold of it.  But it is no use being in a hurry,
or you will spoil everything.'

Then he trotted off, but only went out of sight of the bear, who
stood still on the bank with his tail deep in the water.  Soon
the sun set and it grew very cold and the ice formed rapidly, and
the bear's tail was fixed as tight as if a vice had held it; and
when the fox saw that everything had happened just as he had
planned it, he called out loudly:

'Be quick, good people, and come with your bows and spears.  A
bear has been fishing in your brook!'

And in a moment the whole place was full of little creatures each
one with a tiny bow and a spear hardly big enough for a baby; but
both arrows and spears could sting, as the bear knew very well,
and in his fright he gave such a tug to his tail that it broke
short off, and he rolled away into the forest as fast as his legs
could carry him.  At this sight the fox held his sides for
laughing, and then scampered away in another direction.  By-and-
by he came to a fir tree, and crept into a hole under the root. 
After that he did something very strange.

Taking one of his hind feet between his two front paws, he said
softly:

'What would you do, my foot, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would run so quickly that he should not catch you.'

'What would you do, mine ear, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would listen so hard that I should hear all his plans.'

'What would you do, my nose, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would smell so sharply that I should know from afar that he
was coming.'

'What would you do, my tail, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would steer you so straight a course that you would soon be
beyond his reach.  Let us be off; I feel as if danger was near.'

But the fox was comfortable where he was, and did not hurry
himself to take his tail's advice.  And before very long he found
he was too late, for the bear had come round by another path, and
guessing where his enemy was began to scratch at the roots of the
tree.  The fox made himself as small as he could, but a scrap of
his tail peeped out, and the bear seized it and held it tight. 
Then the fox dug his claws into the ground, but he was not strong
enough to pull against the bear, and slowly he was dragged forth
and his body flung over the bear's neck.  In this manner they set
out down the road, the fox's tail being always in the bear's
mouth.

After they had gone some way, they passed a tree-stump, on which
a bright coloured woodpecker was tapping.

'Ah! those were better times when I used to paint all the birds
such gay colours,' sighed the fox.

'What are you saying, old fellow?' asked the bear.

'I?  Oh, I was saying nothing,' answered the fox drearily.  'Just
carry me to your cave and eat me up as quick as you can.'

The bear was silent, and thought of his supper; and the two
continued their journey till they reached another tree with a
woodpecker tapping on it.

'Ah! those were better times when I used to paint all the birds
such gay colours,' said the fox again to himself.

'Couldn't you paint me too?' asked the bear suddenly.

But the fox shook his head; for he was always acting, even if no
one was there to see him do it.

'You bear pain so badly,' he replied, in a thoughtful voice, 'and
you are impatient besides, and could never put up with all that
is necessary.  Why, you would first have to dig a pit, and then
twist ropes of willow, and drive in posts and fill the hole with
pitch, and, last of all, set it on fire.  Oh, no; you would never
be able to do all that.'

'It does not matter a straw how hard the work is,' answered the
bear eagerly, 'I will do it every bit.'  And as he spoke he began
tearing up the earth so fast that soon a deep pit was ready, deep
enough to hold him.

'That is all right,' said the fox at last, 'I see I was mistaken
in you.  Now sit here, and I will bind you.'  So the bear sat
down on the edge of the pit, and the fox sprang on his back,
which he crossed with the willow ropes, and then set fire to the
pitch.  It burnt up in an instant, and caught the bands of willow
and the bear's rough hair; but he did not stir, for he thought
that the fox was rubbing the bright colours into his skin, and
that he would soon be as beautiful as a whole meadow of flowers. 
But when the fire grew hotter still he moved uneasily from one
foot to the other, saying, imploringly: 'It is getting rather
warm, old man.'  But all the answer he got was: 'I thought you
would never be able to suffer pain like those little birds.'

The bear did not like being told that he was not as brave as a
bird, so he set his teeth and resolved to endure anything sooner
than speak again; but by this time the last willow band had
burned through, and with a push the fox sent his victim tumbling
into the grass, and ran off to hide himself in the forest.  After
a while he stole cautiously and found, as he expected, nothing
left but a few charred bones.  These he picked up and put in a
bag, which he slung over his back.

By-and-by he met a Lapp driving his team of reindeer along the
road, and as he drew near, the fox rattled the bones gaily.

'That sounds like silver or gold,' thought the man to himself. 
And he said politely to the fox:

'Good-day, friend! What have you got in your bag that makes such
a strange sound?'

'All the wealth my father left me,' answered the fox.  'Do you
feel inclined to bargain?'

'Well, I don't mind,' replied the Lapp, who was a prudent man,
and did not wish the fox to think him too eager; 'but show me
first what money you have got.'

'Ah, but I can't do that,' answered the fox, 'my bag is sealed
up.  But if you will give me those three reindeer, you shall take
it as it is, with all its contents.'

The Lapp did not quite like it, but the fox spoke with such an
air that his doubts melted away.  He nodded, and stretched out
his hand; the fox put the bag into it, and unharnassed the
reindeer he had chosen.

'Oh, I forgot!' he exclaimed, turning round, as he was about to
drive them in the opposite direction, 'you must be sure not to
open the bag until you have gone at least five miles, right on
the other side of those hills out there.  If you do, you will
find that all the gold and silver has changed into a parcel of
charred bones.'  Then he whipped up his reindeer, and was soon
out of sight.

For some time the Lapp was satisfied with hearing the bones
rattle, and thinking to himself what a good bargain he had made,
and of all the things he would buy with the money.  But, after a
bit, this amusement ceased to content him, and besides, what was
the use of planning when you did not know for certain how rich
you were?  Perhaps there might be a great deal of silver and only
a little gold in the bag; or a great deal of gold, and only a
little silver.  Who could tell?  He would not, of course, take
the money out to count it, for that might bring him bad luck. 
But there could be no harm in just one peep! So he slowly broke
the seal, and untied the strings, and, behold, a heap of burnt
bones lay before him! In a minute he knew he had been tricked,
and flinging the bag to the ground in a rage, he ran after the
fox as fast as his snow-shoes would carry him.

Now the fox had guessed exactly what would happen, and was on the
look out.  Directly he saw the little speck coming towards him,
he wished that the man's snow-shoes might break, and that very
instant the Lapp's shoes snapped in two.  The Lapp did now know
that this was the fox's work, but he had to stop and fetch one of
his other reindeer, which he mounted, and set off again in
pursuit of his enemy.  The fox soon heard him coming, and this
time he wished that the reindeer might fall and break its leg. 
And so it did; and the man felt it was a hopeless chase, and that
he was no match for the fox.

So the fox drove on in peace till he reached the cave where all
his stores were kept, and then he began to wonder whom he could
get to help him kill his reindeer, for though he could steal
reindeer he was too small to kill them.  'After all, it will be
quite easy,' thought he, and he bade a squirrel, who was watching
him on a tree close by, take a message to all the robber beasts
of the forest, and in less than half an hour a great crashing of
branches was heard, and bears, wolves, snakes, mice, frogs, and
other creatures came pressing up to the cave.

When they heard why they had been summoned, they declared
themselves ready each one to do his part.  The bear took his
crossbow from his neck and shot the reindeer in the chin; and,
from that day to this, every reindeer has a mark in that same
spot, which is always known as the bear's arrow.  The wolf shot
him in the thigh, and the sign of his arrow still remains; and so
with the mouse and the viper and all the rest, even the frog; and
at the last the reindeer all died.  And the fox did nothing, but
looked on.

'I really must go down to the brook and wash myself,' said he
(though he was perfectly clean), and he went under the bank and
hid himself behind a stone.  From there he set up the most
frightful shrieks, so that the animals fled away in all
directions.  Only the mouse and the ermine remained where they
were, for they thought that they were much too small to be
noticed.

The fox continued his shrieks till he felt sure that the animals
must have got to a safe distance; then he crawled out of his
hiding-place and went to the bodies of the reindeer, which he now
had all to himself.  He gathered a bundle of sticks for a fire,
and was just preparing to cook a steak, when his enemy, the Lapp,
came up, panting with haste and excitement.

'What are you doing there?' cried he; 'why did you palm off those
bones on me?  And why, when you had got the reindeer, did you
kill them?'

'Dear brother,' answered the fox with a sob, 'do not blame me for
this misfortune.  It is my comrades who have slain them in spite
of my prayers.'

The man made no reply, for the white fur of the ermine, who was
crouching with the mouse behind some stones, had just caught his
eye.  He hastily seized the iron hook which hung over the fire
and flung it at the little creature; but the ermine was too quick
for him, and the hook only touched the top of its tail, and that
has remained black to this day.  As for the mouse, the Lapp threw
a half-burnt stick after him, and though it was not enough to
hurt him, his beautiful white skin was smeared all over with it,
and all the washing in the world would not make him clean again. 
And the man would have been wiser if he had let the ermine and
the mouse alone, for when he turned round again he found he was
alone.

Directly the fox noticed that his enemy's attention had wandered
from himself he watched his chance, and stole softly away till he
had reached a clump of thick bushes, when he ran as fast as he
could, till he reached a river, where a man was mending his boat.

'Oh, I wish, I wish, I had a boat to mend too!' he cried, sitting
up on his hind-legs and looking into the man's face.

'Stop your silly chatter!' answered the man crossly, 'or I will
give you a bath in the river.'

'Oh, I wish, I do wish, I had a boat to mend,' cried the fox
again, as if he had not heard.  And the man grew angry and seized
him by the tail, and threw him far out in the stream close to the
edge of an island; which was just what the fox wanted.  He easily
scrambled up, and sitting on the top, he called: 'Hasten, hasten,
O fishes, and carry me to the other side!' And the fishes left
the stones where they had been sleeping, and the pools where they
had been feeding, and hurried to see who could get to the island
first.

'I have won,' shouted the pike.  'Jump on my back, dear fox, and
you will find yourself in a trice on the opposite shore.'

'No, thank you,' answered the fox, 'your back is much too weak
for me.  I should break it.'

'Try mine,' said the eel, who had wriggled to the front.

'No, thank you,' replied the fox again, 'I should slip over your
head and be drowned.'

'You won't slip on MY back,' said the perch, coming forward.

'No; but you are really TOO rough,' returned the fox.

'Well, you can have no fault to find with ME,' put in the trout.

'Good gracious! are YOU here?' exclaimed the fox.  'But I'm
afraid to trust myself to you either.'

At this moment a fine salmon swam slowly up.

'Ah, yes, you are the person I want,' said the fox; 'but come
near, so that I may get on your back, without wetting my feet.'

So the salmon swam close under the island, and when he was
touching it the fox seized him in his claws and drew him out of
the water, and put him on a spit, while he kindled a fire to cook
him by.  When everything was ready, and the water in the pot was
getting hot, he popped him in, and waited till he thought the
salmon was nearly boiled.  But as he stooped down the water gave
a sudden fizzle, and splashed into the fox's eyes, blinding him. 
He started backwards with a cry of pain, and sat still for some
minutes, rocking himself to and fro.  When he was a little better
he rose and walked down a road till he met a grouse, who stopped
and asked what was the matter.

'Have you a pair of eyes anywhere about you?' asked the fox
politely.

'No, I am afraid I haven't,' answered the grouse, and passed on.

A little while after the fox heard the buzzing of an early bee,
whom a gleam of sun had tempted out.

'Do you happen to have an extra pair of eyes anywhere?' asked the
fox.

'I am sorry to say I have only those I am using,' replied the
bee.  And the fox went on till he nearly fell over an asp who was
gliding across the road.

'I should be SO glad if you would tell me where I could get a
pair of eyes,' said the fox.  'I suppose you don't happen to have
any you could lend me?'

'Well, if you only want them for a short time, perhaps I could
manage,' answered the asp; 'but I can't do without them for
long.'

'Oh, it is only for a very short time that I need them,' said the
fox; 'I have a pair of my own just behind that hill, and when I
find them I will bring yours back to you.  Perhaps you will keep
these till them.'  So he took the eyes out of his own head and
popped them into the head of the asp, and put the asp's eyes in
their place.  As he was running off he cried over his shoulder:
'As long as the world lasts the asps' eyes will go down in the
heads of foxes from generation to generation.'

And so it has been; and if you look at the eyes of an asp you
will see that they are all burnt; and though thousands and
thousands of years have gone by since the fox was going about
playing tricks upon everybody he met, the asp still bears the
traces of the day when the sly creature cooked the salmon.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]




Kisa the Cat



Once upon a time there lived a queen who had a beautiful cat, the
colour of smoke, with china-blue eyes, which she was very fond
of.  The cat was constantly with her, and ran after her wherever
she went, and even sat up proudly by her side when she drove out
in her fine glass coach.

'Oh, pussy,' said the queen one day, 'you are happier than I am!
For you have a dear kitten just like yourself, and I have nobody
to play with but you.'

'Don't cry,' answered the cat, laying her paw on her mistress's
arm.  'Crying never does any good.  I will see what can be done.'

The cat was as good as her word.  As soon as she returned from
her drive she trotted off to the forest to consult a fairy who
dwelt there, and very soon after the queen had a little girl, who
seemed made out of snow and sunbeams.  The queen was delighted,
and soon the baby began to take notice of the kitten as she
jumped about the room, and would not go to sleep at all unless
the kitten lay curled up beside her.

Two or three months went by, and though the baby was still a
baby, the kitten was fast becoming a cat, and one evening when,
as usual, the nurse came to look for her, to put her in the
baby's cot, she was nowhere to be found.  What a hunt there was
for that kitten, to be sure! The servants, each anxious to find
her, as the queen was certain to reward the lucky man, searched
in the most impossible places.  Boxes were opened that would
hardly have held the kitten's paw; books were taken from
bookshelves, lest the kitten should have got behind them, drawers
were pulled out, for perhaps the kitten might have got shut in. 
But it was all no use.  The kitten had plainly run away, and
nobody could tell if it would ever choose to come back.

Years passed away, and one day, when the princess was playing
ball in the garden, she happened to throw her ball farther than
usual, and it fell into a clump of rose-bushes.  The princess of
course ran after it at once, and she was stooping down to feel if
it was hidden in the long grass, when she heard a voice calling
her: 'Ingibjorg! Ingibjorg!' it said, 'have you forgotten me?  I
am Kisa, your sister!'

'But I never HAD a sister,' answered Ingibjorg, very much
puzzled; for she knew nothing of what had taken place so long
ago.

'Don't you remember how I always slept in your cot beside you,
and how you cried till I came?  But girls have no memories at
all! Why, I could find my way straight up to that cot this
moment, if I was once inside the palace.'

'Why did you go away then?' asked the princess.  But before Kisa
could answer, Ingibjorg's attendants arrived breathless on the
scene, and were so horrified at the sight of a strange cat, that
Kisa plunged into the bushes and went back to the forest.

The princess was very much vexed with her ladies-in-waiting for
frightening away her old playfellow, and told the queen who came
to her room every evening to bid her good-night.

'Yes, it is quite true what Kisa said,' answered the queen; 'I
should have liked to see her again.  Perhaps, some day, she will
return, and then you must bring her to me.'

Next morning it was very hot, and the princess declared that she
must go and play in the forest, where it was always cool, under
the big shady trees.  As usual, her attendants let her do
anything she pleased, and sitting down on a mossy bank where a
little stream tinkled by, soon fell sound asleep.  The princess
saw with delight that they would pay no heed to her, and wandered
on and on, expecting every moment to see some fairies dancing
round a ring, or some little brown elves peeping at her from
behind a tree.  But, alas! she met none of these; instead, a
horrible giant came out of his cave and ordered her to follow
him.  The princess felt much afraid, as he was so big and ugly,
and began to be sorry that she had not stayed within reach of
help; but as there was no use in disobeying the giant, she walked
meekly behind.

They went a long way, and Ingibjorg grew very tired, and at
length began to cry.

'I don't like girls who make horrid noises,' said the giant,
turning round.  'But if you WANT to cry, I will give you
something to cry for.'  And drawing an axe from his belt, he cut
off both her feet, which he picked up and put in his pocket. 
Then he went away.

Poor Ingibjorg lay on the grass in terrible pain, and wondering
if she should stay there till she died, as no one would know
where to look for her.  How long it was since she had set out in
the morning she could not tell--it seemed years to her, of
course; but the sun was still high in the heavens when she heard
the sound of wheels, and then, with a great effort, for her
throat was parched with fright and pain, she gave a shout.

'I am coming!' was the answer; and in another moment a cart made
its way through the trees, driven by Kisa, who used her tail as a
whip to urge the horse to go faster.  Directly Kisa saw Ingibjorg
lying there, she jumped quickly down, and lifting the girl
carefully in her two front paws, laid her upon some soft hay, and
drove back to her own little hut.

In the corner of the room was a pile of cushions, and these Kisa
arranged as a bed.  Ingibjorg, who by this time was nearly
fainting from all she had gone through, drank greedily some milk,
and then sank back on the cushions while Kisa fetched some dried
herbs from a cupboard, soaked them in warm water and tied them on
the bleeding legs.  The pain vanished at once, and Ingibjorg
looked up and smiled at Kisa.

'You will go to sleep now,' said the cat, 'and you will not mind
if I leave you for a little while.  I will lock the door, and no
one can hurt you.'  But before she had finished the princess was
asleep.  Then Kisa got into the cart, which was standing at the
door, and catching up the reins, drove straight to the giant's
cave.

Leaving her cart behind some trees, Kisa crept gently up to the
open door, and, crouching down, listened to what the giant was
telling his wife, who was at supper with him.

'The first day that I can spare I shall just go back and kill
her,' he said; 'it would never do for people in the forest to
know that a mere girl can defy me!' And he and his wife were so
busy calling Ingibjorg all sorts of names for her bad behaviour,
that they never noticed Kisa stealing into a dark corner, and
upsetting a whole bag of salt into the great pot before the fire.

'Dear me, how thirsty I am!' cried the giant by-and-by.

'So am I,' answered the wife.  'I do wish I had not taken that
last spoonful of broth; I am sure something was wrong with it.'

'If I don't get some water I shall die,' went on the giant.  And
rushing out of the cave, followed by his wife, he ran down the
path which led to the river.

Then Kisa entered the hut, and lost no time in searching every
hole till she came upon some grass, under which Ingibjorg's feet
were hidden, and putting them in her cart, drove back again to
her own hut.

Ingibjorg was thankful to see her, for she had lain, too
frightened to sleep, trembling at every noise.

'Oh, is it you?' she cried joyfully, as Kisa turned the key.  And
the cat came in, holding up the two neat little feet in their
silver slippers.

'In two minutes they shall be as tight as they ever were!' said
Kisa.  And taking some strings of the magic grass which the giant
had carelessly heaped on them, she bound the feet on to the legs
above.

'Of course you won't be able to walk for some time; you must not
expect THAT,' she continued.  'But if you are very good, perhaps,
in about a week, I may carry you home again.'

And so she did; and when the cat drove the cart up to the palace
gate, lashing the horse furiously with her tail, and the king and
queen saw their lost daughter sitting beside her, they declared
that no reward could be too great for the person who had brought
her out of the giant's hands.

'We will talk about that by-and-by,' said the cat, as she made
her best bow, and turned her horse's head.

The princess was very unhappy when Kisa left her without even
bidding her farewell.  She would neither eat nor drink, nor take
any notice of all the beautiful dresses her parents bought for
her.

'She will die, unless we can make her laugh,' one whispered to
the other.  'Is there anything in the world that we have left
untried?'

'Nothing except marriage,' answered the king.  And he invited all
the handsomest young men he could think of to the palace, and
bade the princess choose a husband from among them.

It took her some time to decide which she admired the most, but
at last she fixed upon a young prince, whose eyes were like the
pools in the forest, and his hair of bright gold.  The king and
the queen were greatly pleased, as the young man was the son of a
neighbouring king, and they gave orders that a splendid feast
should be got ready.

When the marriage was over, Kisa suddenly stood before them, and
Ingibjorg rushed forward and clasped her in her arms.

'I have come to claim my reward,' said the cat.  'Let me sleep
for this night at the foot of your bed.'

'Is that ALL?' asked Ingibjorg, much disappointed.

'It is enough,' answered the cat.  And when the morning dawned,
it was no cat that lay upon the bed, but a beautiful princess.

'My mother and I were both enchanted by a spiteful fairy,' said
she, 'we could not free ourselves till we had done some kindly
deed that had never been wrought before.  My mother died without
ever finding a chance of doing anything new, but I took advantage
of the evil act of the giant to make you as whole as ever.'

Then they were all more delighted than before, and the princess
lived in the court until she, too, married, and went away to
govern one of her own.

[Adapted from Neuislandischen Volksmarchen.]




The Lion and the Cat



Far away on the other side of the world there lived, long ago, a
lion and his younger brother, the wild cat, who were so fond of
each other that they shared the same hut.  The lion was much the
bigger and stronger of the two--indeed, he was much bigger and
stronger than any of the beasts that dwelt in the forest; and,
besides, he could jump father and run faster than all the rest. 
If strength and swiftness could gain him a dinner he was sure
never to be without one, but when it came to cunning, both the
grizzly bear and the serpent could get the better of him, and he
was forced to call in the help of the wild cat.

Now the young wild cat had a lovely golden ball, so beautiful
that you could hardly look at it except through a piece of smoked
glass, and he kept it hidden in the thick fur muff that went
round his neck.  A very large old animal, since dead, had given
it to him when he was hardly more than a baby, and had told him
never to part with it, for as long as he kept it no harm could
ever come near him.

In general the wild cat did not need to use his ball, for the
lion was fond of hunting, and could kill all the food that they
needed; but now and then his life would have been in danger had
it not been for the golden ball.

 One day the two brothers started to hunt at daybreak, but as the
cat could not run nearly as fast as the lion, he had quite a long
start.  At least he THOUGHT it was a long one, but in a very few
bounds and springs the lion reached his side.

'There is a bear sitting on that tree,' he whispered softly.  'He
is only waiting for us to pass, to drop down on my back.'

'Ah, you are so big that he does not see I am behind you,'
answered the wild cat.  And, touching the ball, he just said:
'Bear, die!' And the bear tumbled dead out of the tree, and
rolled over just in front of them.

For some time they trotted on without any adventures, till just
as they were about to cross a strip of long grass on the edge of
the forest, the lion's quick ears detected a faint rustling
noise.

'That is a snake,' he cried, stopping short, for he was much more
afraid of snakes than of bears.

'Oh, it is all right,' answered the cat.  'Snake, die!' And the
snake died, and the two brothers skinned it.  They then folded
the skin up into a very small parcel, and the cat tucked it into
his mane, for snakes' skins can do all sorts of wonderful things,
if you are lucky enough to have one of them.

All this time they had had no dinner, for the snake's flesh was
not nice, and the lion did not like eating bear--perhaps because
he never felt sure that the bear was REALLY dead, and would not
jump up alive when his enemy went near him.  Most people are
afraid of SOME thing, and bears and serpents were the only
creatures that caused the lion's heart to tremble.  So the two
brothers set off again and soon reached the side of a hill where
some fine deer were grazing.

'Kill one of those deer for your own dinner,' said the boy-
brother, 'but catch me another alive.  I want him.'

The lion at once sprang towards them with a loud roar, but the
deer bounded away, and they were all three soon lost to sight. 
The cat waited for a long while, but finding that the lion did
not return, went back to the house where they lived.

It was quite dark when the lion came home, where his brother was
sitting curled up in one corner.

'Did you catch the deer for me?' asked the boy-brother, springing
up.

'Well, no,' replied the man-brother.  'The fact is, that I did
not get up to them till we had run half way across the world and
left the wind far behind us.  Think what a trouble it would have
been to drag it here! So--I just ate them both.'

The cat said nothing, but he did not feel that he loved his big
brother.  He had thought a great deal about that deer, and had
meant to get on his back to ride him as a horse, and go to see
all the wonderful places the lion talked to him about when he was
in a good temper.  The more he thought of it the more sulky he
grew, and in the morning, when the lion said that it was time for
them to start to hunt, the cat told him that he might kill the
bear and snake by himself, as HE had a headache, and would rather
stay at home.  The little fellow knew quite well that the lion
would not dare to go out without him and his ball for fear of
meeting a bear or a snake.

The quarrel went on, and for many days neither of the brothers
spoke to each other, and what made them still more cross was,
that they could get very little to eat, and we know that people
are often cross when they are hungry.  At last it occurred to the
lion that if he could only steal the magic ball he could kill
bears and snakes for himself, and then the cat might be as sulky
as he liked for anything that it would matter.  But how was the
stealing to be done?  The cat had the ball hung round his neck
day and night, and he was such a light sleeper that it was
useless to think of taking it while he slept.  No! the only thing
was to get him to lend it of his own accord, and after some days
the lion (who was not at all clever) hit upon a plan that he
thought would do.

'Dear me, how dull it is here!' said the lion one afternoon, when
the rain was pouring down in such torrents that, however sharp
your eyes or your nose might be, you could not spy a single bird
or beast among the bushes.  'Dear me, how dull, how dreadfully
dull I am.  Couldn't we have a game of catch with that golden
ball of yours?'

'I don't care about playing catch, it does not amuse me,'
answered the cat, who was as cross as ever; for no cat, even to
this day, ever forgets an injury done to him.

'Well, then, lend me the ball for a little, and I will play by
myself,' replied the lion, stretching out a paw as he spoke.

'You can't play in the rain, and if you did, you would only lose
it in the bushes,' said the cat.

'Oh, no, I won't; I will play in here.  Don't be so ill-natured.' 
And with a very bad grace the cat untied the string and threw the
golden ball into the lion's lap, and composed himself to sleep
again.

 For a long while the lion tossed it up and down gaily, feeling
that, however sound asleep the boy-brother might LOOK, he was
sure to have one eye open; but gradually he began to edge closer
to the opening, and at last gave such a toss that the ball went
up high into the air, and he could not see what became of it.

'Oh, how stupid of me!' he cried, as the cat sprang up angrily,
'let us go at once and search for it.  It can't really have
fallen very far.'  But though they searched that day and the
next, and the next after that, they never found it, because it
never came down.

After the loss of his ball the cat refused to live with the lion
any longer, but wandered away to the north, always hoping he
might meet with his ball again.  But months passed, and years
passed, and though he travelled over hundreds of miles, he never
saw any traces of it.

At length, when he was getting quite old, he came to a place
unlike any that he had ever seen before, where a big river rolled
right to the foot of some high mountains.  The ground all about
the river bank was damp and marshy, and as no cat likes to wet
its feet, this one climbed a tree that rose high above the water,
and thought sadly of his lost ball, which would have helped him
out of this horrible place.  Suddenly he saw a beautiful ball,
for all the world like his own, dangling from a branch of the
tree he was on.  He longed to get at it; but was the branch
strong enough to bear his weight?  It was no use, after all he
had done, getting drowned in the water.  However, it could do no
harm, if he was to go a little way; he could always manage to get
back somehow.

So he stretched himself at full length upon the branch, and
wriggled his body cautiously along.  To his delight it seemed
thick and stout.  Another movement, and, by stretching out his
paw, he would be able to draw the string towards him, when the
branch gave a loud crack, and the cat made haste to wriggle
himself back the way he had come.

But when cats make up their minds to do anything they generally
DO it; and this cat began to look about to see if there was
really no way of getting at his ball.  Yes! there was, and it was
much surer than the other, though rather more difficult.  Above
the bough where the ball was hung was another bough much thicker,
which he knew could not break with his weight; and by holding on
tight to this with all his four paws, he could just manage to
touch the ball with his tail.  He would thus be able to whisk the
ball to and fro till, by-and-by, the string would become quite
loose, and it would fall to the ground.  It might take some time,
but the lion's little brother was patient, like most cats.

Well, it all happened just as the cat intended it should, and
when the ball dropped on the ground the cat ran down the tree
like lightning, and, picking it up, tucked it away in the snake's
skin round his neck.  Then he began jumping along the shore of
the Big Water from one place to another, trying to find a boat,
or even a log of wood, that would take him across.  But there was
nothing; only, on the other side, he saw two girls cooking, and
though he shouted to them at the top of his voice, they were too
far off to hear what he said.  And, what was worse, the ball
suddenly fell out of its snake's skin bag right into the river.

Now, it is not at all an uncommon thing for balls to tumble into
rivers, but in that case they generally either fall to the bottom
and stay there, or else bob about on the top of the water close
to where they first touched it.  But this ball, instead of doing
either of these things, went straight across to the other side,
and there one of the girls saw it when she stooped to dip some
water into her pail.

'Oh! what a lovely ball!' cried she, and tried to catch it in her
pail; but the ball always kept bobbing just out of her reach.

'Come and help me!' she called to her sister, and after a long
while they had the ball safe inside the pail.  They were
delighted with their new toy, and one or the other held it in her
hand till bedtime came, and then it was a long time before they
could make up their minds where it would be safest for the night. 
At last they locked it in a cupboard in one corner of their room,
and as there was no hole anywhere the ball could not possibly get
out.  After that they went to sleep.

In the morning the first thing they both did was to run to the
cupboard and unlock it, but when the door opened they started
back, for, instead of the ball, there stood a handsome young man.

'Ladies,' he said, 'how can I thank you for what you have done
for me?  Long, long ago, I was enchanted by a wicked fairy, and
condemned to keep the shape of a ball till I should meet with two
maidens, who would take me to their own home.  But where was I to
meet them?  For hundreds of years I have lived in the depths of
the forest, where nothing but wild beasts ever came, and it was
only when the lion threw me into the sky that I was able to fall
to earth near this river.  Where there is a river, sooner or
later people will come; so, hanging myself on a tree, I watched
and waited.  For a moment I lost heart when I fell once more into
the hands of my old master the wild cat, but my hopes rose again
as I saw he was making for the river bank opposite where you were
standing.  That was my chance, and I took it.  And now, ladies, I
have only to say that, if ever I can do anything to help you, go
to the top of that high mountain and knock three times at the
iron door at the north side, and I will come to you.'

So, with a low bow, he vanished from before them, leaving the
maidens weeping at having lost in one moment both the ball and
the prince.

[Adapted from North American Indian Legends.]




Which was the Foolishest?



In a little village that stood on a wide plain, where you could
see the sun from the moment he rose to the moment he set, there
lived two couples side by side.  The men, who worked under the
same master, were quite good friends, but the wives were always
quarrelling, and the subject they quarrelled most about was--
which of the two had the stupidest husband.

Unlike most women--who think that anything that belongs to them
must be better than what belongs to anyone else--each thought her
husband the more foolish of the two.

'You should just see what he does!' one said to her neighbour. 
'He puts on the baby's frock upside down, and, one day, I found
him trying to feed her with boiling soup, and her mouth was
scalded for days after.  Then he picks up stones in the road and
sows them instead of potatoes, and one day he wanted to go into
the garden from the top window, because he declared it was a
shorter way than through the door.'

'That is bad enough, of course,' answered the other; 'but it is
really NOTHING to what I have to endure every day from MY
husband.  If, when I am busy, I ask him to go and feed the
poultry, he is certain to give them some poisonous stuff instead
of their proper food, and when I visit the yard next I find them
all dead.  Once he even took my best bonnet, when I had gone away
to my sick mother, and when I came back I found he had given it
to the hen to lay her eggs in.  And you know yourself that, only
last week, when I sent him to buy a cask of butter, he returned
driving a hundred and fifty ducks which someone had induced him
to take, and not one of them would lay.'

'Yes, I am afraid he IS trying,' replied the first; 'but let us
put them to the proof, and see which of them is the most
foolish.'

So, about the time that she expected her husband home from work,
she got out her spinning-wheel, and sat busily turning it, taking
care not even to look up from her work when the man came in.  For
some minutes he stood with his mouth open watching her, and as
she still remained silent, he said at last:

'Have you gone mad, wife, that you sit spinning without anything
on the wheel?'

'YOU may think that there is nothing on it,' answered she, 'but I
can assure you that there is a large skein of wool, so fine that
nobody can see it, which will be woven into a coat for you.'

'Dear me!' he replied, 'what a clever wife I have got! If you had
not told me I should never have known that there was any wool on
the wheel at all.  But now I really do seem to see something.'

The woman smiled and was silent, and after spinning busily for an
hour more, she got up from her stoop, and began to weave as fast
as she could.  At last she got up, and said to her husband: 'I am
too tired to finish it to-night, so I shall go to bed, and to-
morrow I shall only have the cutting and stitching to do.'

So the next morning she got up early, and after she had cleaned
her house, and fed her chickens, and put everything in its place
again, she bent over the kitchen table, and the sound of her big
scissors might be heard snip! snap! as far as the garden.  Her
husband could not see anything to snip at; but then he was so
stupid that was not surprising!

After the cutting came the sewing.  The woman patted and pinned
and fixed and joined, and then, turning to the man, she said:

'Now it is ready for you to try on.'  And she made him take off
his coat, and stand up in front of her, and once more she patted
an pinned and fixed and joined, and was very careful in smoothing
out every wrinkle.

'It does not feel very warm,' observed the man at last, when he
had borne all this patiently for a long time.

'That is because it is so fine,' answered she; 'you do not want
it to be as thick as the rough clothes you wear every day.'

He DID, but was ashamed to say so, and only answered: 'Well, I am
sure it must be beautiful since you say so, and I shall be
smarter than anyone in the whole village.  "What a splendid
coat!" they will exclaim when they see me.  But it is not
everybody who has a wife as clever as mine.'

Meanwhile the other wife was not idle.  As soon as her husband
entered she looked at him with such a look of terror that the
poor man was quite frightened.

'Why do you stare at me so?  Is there anything the matter?' asked
he.

'Oh! go to bed at once,' she cried; 'you must be very ill indeed
to look like that!'

The man was rather surprised at first, as he felt particularly
well that evening; but the moment his wife spoke he became quite
certain that he had something dreadful the matter with him, and
grew quite pale.

'I dare say it would be the best place for me,' he answered,
trembling; and he suffered his wife to take him upstairs, and to
help him off with his clothes.

'If you sleep well during the might there MAY be a chance for
you,' said she, shaking her head, as she tucked him up warmly;
'but if not--' And of course the poor man never closed an eye
till the sun rose.

'How do you feel this morning?' asked the woman, coming in on
tip-toe when her house-work was finished.

'Oh, bad; very bad indeed,' answered he; 'I have not slept for a
moment.  Can you think of nothing to make me better?'

'I will try everything that is possible,' said the wife, who did
not in the least wish her husband to die, but was determined to
show that he was more foolish that the other man.  'I will get
some dried herbs and make you a drink, but I am very much afraid
that it is too late.  Why did you not tell me before?'

'I thought perhaps the pain would go off in a day or two; and,
besides, I did not want to make you unhappy,' answered the man,
who was by this time quite sure he had been suffering tortures,
and had borne them like a hero.  'Of course, if I had had any
idea how ill I really was, I should have spoken at once.'

'Well, well, I will see what can be done,' said the wife, 'but
talking is not good for you.  Lie still, and keep yourself warm.'

All that day the man lay in bed, and whenever his wife entered
the room and asked him, with a shake of the head, how he felt, he
always replied that he was getting worse.  At last, in the
evening, she burst into tears, and when he inquired what was the
matter, she sobbed out:

'Oh, my poor, poor husband, are you really dead?  I must go to-
morrow and order your coffin.'

Now, when the man heard this, a cold shiver ran through his body,
and all at once he knew that he was as well as he had ever been
in his life.

'Oh, no, no!' he cried, 'I feel quite recovered! Indeed, I think
I shall go out to work.'

'You will do no such thing,' replied his wife.  'Just keep quite
quiet, for before the sun rises you will be a dead man.'

The man was very frightened at her words, and lay absolutely
still while the undertaker came and measured him for his coffin;
and his wife gave orders to the gravedigger about his grave. 
That evening the coffin was sent home, and in the morning at nine
o'clock the woman put him on a long flannel garment, and called
to the undertaker's men to fasten down the lid and carry him to
the grave, where all their friends were waiting them.  Just as
the body was being placed in the ground the other woman's husband
came running up, dressed, as far as anyone could see, in no
clothes at all.  Everybody burst into shouts of laughter at the
sight of him, and the men laid down the coffin and laughed too,
till their sides nearly split.  The dead man was so astonished at
this behaviour, that he peeped out of a little window in the side
of the coffin, and cried out:

'I should laugh as loudly as any of you, if I were not a dead
man.'

When they heard the voice coming from the coffin the other people
suddenly stopped laughing, and stood as if they had been turned
into stone.  Then they rushed with one accord to the c