offin, and
lifted the lid so that the man could step out amongst them.

'Were you really not dead after all?' asked they.  'And if not,
why did you let yourself be buried?'

At this the wives both confessed that they had each wished to
prove that her husband was stupider than the other.  But the
villagers declared that they could not decide which was the most
foolish-- the man who allowed himself to be persuaded that he was
wearing fine clothes when he was dressed in nothing, or the man
who let himself be buried when he was alive and well.

So the women quarrelled just as much as they did before, and no
one ever knew whose husband was the most foolish.

[Adapted from the Neuislandische Volksmarchen.]



Asmund and Signy



Long, long ago, in the days when fairies, witches, giants and
ogres still visited the earth, there lived a king who reigned
over a great and beautiful country.  He was married to a wife
whom he dearly loved, and had two most promising children--a son
called Asmund, and a daughter who was named Signy.

The king and queen were very anxious to bring their children up
well, and the young prince and princess were taught everything
likely to make them clever and accomplished.  They lived at home
in their father's palace, and he spared no pains to make their
lives happy.

Prince Asmund dearly loved all outdoor sports and an open-air
life, and from his earliest childhood he had longed to live
entirely in the forest close by.  After many arguments and
entreaties he succeeded in persuading the king to give him two
great oak trees for his very own.

'Now,' said he to his sister, 'I will have the trees hollowed
out, and then I will make rooms in them and furnish them so that
I shall be able to live out in the forest.'

'Oh, Asmund!' exclaimed Signy, 'what a delightful idea! Do let me
come too, and live in one of your trees.  I will bring all my
pretty things and ornaments, and the trees are so near home we
shall be quite safe in them.'

Asmund, who was extremely fond of his sister, readily consented,
and they had a very happy time together, carrying over all their
pet treasures, and Signy's jewels and other ornaments, and
arranging them in the pretty little rooms inside the trees.

Unfortunately sadder days were to come.  A war with another
country broke out, and the king had to lead his army against
their enemy.  During his absence the queen fell ill, and after
lingering for some time she died, to the great grief of her
children.  They made up their minds to live altogether for a time
in their trees, and for this purpose they had provisions enough
stored up inside to last them a year.

Now, I must tell you, in another country a long way off, there
reigned a king who had an only son named Ring.  Prince Ring had
heard so much about the beauty and goodness of Princess Signy
that he determined to marry her if possible.  So he begged his
father to let him have a ship for the voyage, set sail with a
favourable wind, and after a time landed in the country where
Signy lived.

The prince lost no time in setting out for the royal palace, and
on his way there he met such a wonderfully lovely woman that he
felt he had never seen such beauty in all his life.  He stopped
her and at once asked who she was.

'I am Signy, the king's daughter,' was the reply.

Then the prince inquired why she was wandering about all by
herself, and she told him that since her mother's death she was
so sad that whilst her father was away she preferred being alone.

Ring was quite deceived by her, and never guessed that she was
not Princess Signy at all, but a strong, gigantic, wicked witch
bent on deceiving him under a beautiful shape.  He confided to
her that he had travelled all the way from his own country for
her sake, having fallen in love with the accounts he had heard of
her beauty, and he then and there asked her to be his wife.

The witch listened to all he said and, much pleased, ended by
accepting his offer; but she begged him to return to his ship for
a little while as she wished to go some way further into the
forest, promising to join him later on.

Prince Ring did as she wished and went back to his ship to wait,
whilst she walked on into the forest till she reached the two oak
trees.

Here she resumed her own gigantic shape, tore up the trees by
their roots, threw one of them over her back and clasped the
other to her breast, carried them down to the shore and waded out
with them to the ship.

She took care not to be noticed as she reached the ship, and
directly she got on board she once more changed to her former
lovely appearance and told the prince that her luggage was now
all on board, and that they need wait for nothing more.

The prince gave orders to set sail at once, and after a fine
voyage landed in his own country, where his parents and his only
sister received him with the greatest joy and affection.

The false Signy was also very kindly welcomed.  A beautiful house
was got ready for her, and Prince Ring had the two oaks planted
in the garden just in front of her windows so that she might have
the pleasure of seeing them constantly.  He often went to visit
the witch, whom he believed to be Princess Signy, and one day he
asked: 'Don't you think we might be married before long?'

'Yes,' said she, quite pleased, 'I am quite ready to marry you
whenever you like.'

'Then,' replied Ring, 'let us decide on this day fortnight.  And
see, I have brought you some stuff to make your wedding-dress
of.'  So saying he gave her a large piece of the most beautiful
brocade, all woven over with gold threads, and embroidered with
pearls and other jewels.

The prince had hardly left her before the witch resumed her
proper shape and tore about the room, raging and storming and
flinging the beautiful silk on the floor.

'What was SHE to do with such things?' she roared.  'SHE did not
know how to sew or make clothes, and she was sure to die of
starvation into the bargain if her brother Ironhead did not come
soon and bring her some raw meat and bones, for she really could
eat nothing else.'

As she was raving and roaring in this frantic manner part of the
floor suddenly opened and a huge giant rose up carrying a great
chest in his arms.  The witch was enchanted at this sight, and
eagerly helped her brother to set down and open the chest, which
was full of the ghastly food she had been longing for.  The
horrid pair set to and greedily devoured it all, and when the
chest was quite empty the giant put it on his shoulder and
disappeared as he had come, without leaving any trace of his
visit.

But his sister did not keep quiet for long, and tore and pulled
at the rich brocade as if she wanted to destroy it, stamping
about and shouting angrily.

Now, all this time Prince Asmund and his sister sat in their
trees just outside the window and saw all that was going on.

'Dear Signy,' said Asmund, 'do try to get hold of that piece of
brocade and make the clothes yourself, for really we shall have
no rest day or night with such a noise.'

'I will try,' said Signy; 'it won't be an easy matter, but it's
worth while taking some trouble to have a little peace.'

So she watched for an opportunity and managed to carry off the
brocade the first time the witch left her room.  Then she set to
work, cutting out and sewing as best she could, and by the end of
six days she had turned it into an elegant robe with a long train
and a mantle.  When it was finished she climbed to the top of her
tree and contrived to throw the clothes on to a table through the
open window.

How delighted the witch was when she found the clothes all
finished! The next time Prince Ring came to see her she gave them
to him, and he paid her many compliments on her skilful work,
after which he took leave of her in the most friendly manner. 
But he had scarcely left the house when the witch began to rage
as furiously as ever, and never stopped till her brother Ironhead
appeared.

When Asmund saw all these wild doings from his tree he felt he
could no longer keep silence.  He went to Prince Ring and said:
'Do come with me and see the strange things that are happening in
the new princess's room.'

The prince was not a little surprised, but he consented to hide
himself with Asmund behind the panelling of the room, from where
they could see all that went on through a little slit.  The witch
was raving and roaring as usual, and said to her brother:

'Once I am married to the king's son I shall be better off than
now.  I shall take care to have all that pack of courtiers put to
death, and then I shall send for all my relations to come and
live here instead.  I fancy the giants will enjoy themselves very
much with me and my husband.'

When Prince Ring heard this he fell into such a rage that he
ordered the house to be set on fire, and it was burnt to the
ground, with the witch and her brother in it.

Asmund then told the prince about the two oak trees and took him
to see them.  The prince was quite astonished at them and at all
their contents, but still more so at the extreme beauty of Signy. 
He fell in love with her at once, and entreated her to marry him,
which, after a time, she consented to do.  Asmund, on his side,
asked for the hand of Prince Ring's sister, which was gladly
granted him, and the double wedding was celebrated with great
rejoicings.

After this Prince Asmund and his bride returned to his country to
live with the king his father.  The two couples often met, and
lived happily for many, many years.  And that is the end of the
story.

[From Islandische Mahrchen.]




Rubezahl



Over all the vast under-world the mountain Gnome Rubezahl was
lord; and busy enough the care of his dominions kept him.  There
were the endless treasure chambers to be gone through, and the
hosts of gnomes to be kept to their tasks.  Some built strong
barriers to hold back the fiery vapours to change dull stones to
precious metal, or were hard at work filling every cranny of the
rocks with diamonds and rubies; for Rubezahl loved all pretty
things.  Sometimes the fancy would take him to leave those gloomy
regions, and come out upon the green earth for a while, and bask
in the sunshine and hear the birds sing.  And as gnomes live many
hundreds of years he saw strange things.  For, the first time he
came up, the great hills were covered with thick forests, in
which wild animals roamed, and Rubezahl watched the fierce fights
between bear and bison, or chased the grey wolves, or amused
himself by rolling great rocks down into the desolate valleys, to
hear the thunder of their fall echoing among the hills.  But the
next time he ventured above ground, what was his surprise to find
everything changed! The dark woods were hewn down, and in their
place appeared blossoming orchards surrounding cosy-looking
thatched cottages; for every chimney the blue smoke curled
peacefully into the air, sheep and oxen fed in the flowery
meadows, while from the shade of the hedges came the music of the
shepherd's pipe.  The strangeness and pleasantness of the sight
so delighted the gnome that he never thought of resenting the
intrusion of these unexpected guests, who, without saying 'by
your leave' or 'with your leave,' had made themselves so very
much at home upon is hills; nor did he wish to interfere with
their doings, but left them in quiet possession of their homes,
as a good householder leaves in peace the swallows who have built
their nests under his eaves.  He was indeed greatly minded to
make friends with this being called 'man,' so, taking the form of
an old field labourer, he entered the service of a farmer.  Under
his care all the crops flourished exceedingly, but the master
proved to be wasteful and ungrateful, and Rubezahl soon left him,
and went to be shepherd to his next neighbour.  He tended the
flock so diligently, and knew so well where to lead the sheep to
the sweetest pastures, and where among the hills to look for any
who strayed away, that they too prospered under his care, and not
one was lost or torn by wolves; but this new master was a hard
man, and begrudged him his well-earned wages.  So he ran away and
went to serve the judge.  Here he upheld the law with might and
main, and was a terror to thieves and evildoers; but the judge
was a bad man, who took bribes, and despised the law.  Rubezahl
would not be the tool of an unjust man, and so he told his
master, who thereupon ordered him to be thrown in prison.  Of
course that did not trouble the gnome at all, he simply got out
through the keyhole, and went away down to his underground
palace, very much disappointed by his first experience of
mankind.  But, as time went on, he forgot the disagreeable things
that had happened to him, and thought he would take another look
at the upper world.

So he stole into the valley, keeping himself carefully hidden in
copse or hedgerow, and very soon met with an adventure; for,
peeping through a screen of leaves, he saw before him a green
lawn where stood a charming maiden, fresh as the spring, and
beautiful to look upon.  Around her upon the grass lay her young
companions, as if they had thrown themselves down to rest after
some merry game.  Beyond them flowed a little brook, into which a
waterfall leapt from a high rock, filling the air with its
pleasant sound, and making a coolness even in the sultry
noontide.  The sight of the maiden so pleased the gnome that, for
the first time, he wished himself a mortal; and, longing for a
better view of the gay company, he changed himself into a raven
and perched upon an oaktree which overhung the brook.  But he
soon found that this was not at all a good plan.  He could only
see with a raven's eyes, and feel as a raven feels; and a nest of
field-mice at the foot of the tree interested him far more than
the sport of the maidens.  When he understood this he flew down
again in a great hurry into the thicket, and took the form of a
handsome young man--that was the best way--and he fell in love
with the girl then and there.  The fair maiden was the daughter
of the king of the country, and she often wandered in the forest
with her play fellows gathering the wild flowers and fruits, till
the midday heat drove the merry band to the shady lawn by the
brook to rest, or to bathe in the cool waters.  On this
particular morning the fancy took them to wander off again into
the wood.  This was Master Rubezahl's opportunity.  Stepping out
of his hiding-place he stood in the midst of the little lawn,
weaving his magic spells, till slowly all about him changed, and
when the maidens returned at noon to their favourite resting-
place they stood lost in amazement, and almost fancied that they
must be dreaming.  The red rocks had become white marble and
alabaster; the stream that murmured and struggled before in its
rocky bed, flowed in silence now in its smooth channel, from
which a clear fountain leapt, to fall again in showers of diamond
drops, now on this side now on that, as the wandering breeze
scattered it.

Daisies and forget-me-nots fringed its brink, while tall hedges
of roses and jasmine ringed it round, making the sweetest and
daintiest bower imaginable.  To the right and left of the
waterfall opened out a wonderful grotto, its walls and arches
glittering with many-coloured rock-crystals, while in every niche
were spread out strange fruits and sweetmeats, the very sight of
which made the princess long to taste them.  She hesitated a
while, however, scarcely able to believe her eyes, and not
knowing if she should enter the enchanted spot or fly from it. 
But at length curiosity prevailed, and she and her companions
explored to their heart's content, and tasted and examined
everything, running hither and thither in high glee, and calling
merrily to each other.

At last, when they were quite weary, the princess cried out
suddenly that nothing would content her but to bathe in the
marble pool, which certainly did look very inviting; and they all
went gaily to this new amusement.  The princess was ready first,
but scarcely had she slipped over the rim of the pool when down--
down--down she sank, and vanished in its depths before her
frightened playmates could seize her by so much as a lock of her
floating golden hair!

Loudly did they weep and wail, running about the brink of the
pool, which looked so shallow and so clear, but which had
swallowed up their princess before their eyes.  They even sprang
into the water and tried to dive after her, but in vain; they
only floated like corks in the enchanted pool, and could not keep
under water for a second.

They saw at last that there was nothing for it but to carry to
the king the sad tidings of his beloved daughter's disappearance. 
And what great weeping and lamentation there was in the palace
when the dreadful news was told! The king tore his robes, dashed
his golden crown from his head, and hid his face in his purple
mantle for grief and anguish at the loss of the princess.  After
the first outburst of wailing, however, he took heart and hurried
off to see for himself the scene of this strange adventure,
thinking, as people will in sorrow, that there might be some
mistake after all.  But when he reached the spot, behold, all was
changed again! The glittering grotto described to him by the
maidens had completely vanished, and so had the marble bath, the
bower of jasmine; instead, all was a tangle of flowers, as it had
been of old.  The king was so much perplexed that he threatened
the princess's playfellows with all sorts of punishments if they
would not confess something about her disappearance; but as they
only repeated the same story he presently put down the whole
affair to the work of some sprite or goblin, and tried to console
himself for his loss by ordering a grand hunt; for kings cannot
bear to be troubled about anything long.

Meanwhile the princess was not at all unhappy in the palace of
her elfish lover.

When the water-nymphs, who were hiding in readiness, had caught
her and dragged her out of the sight of her terrified maidens,
she herself had not had time to be frightened.  They swam with
her quickly by strange underground ways to a palace so splendid
that her father's seemed but a poor cottage in comparison with
it, and when she recovered from her astonishment she found
herself seated upon a couch, wrapped in a wonderful robe of satin
fastened with a silken girdle, while beside her knelt a young man
who whispered the sweetest speeches imaginable in her ear.  The
gnome, for he it was, told her all about himself and his great
underground kingdom, and presently led her through the many rooms
and halls of the palace, and showed her the rare and wonderful
things displayed in them till she was fairly dazzled at the sight
of so much splendour.  On three sides of the castle lay a lovely
garden with masses of gay, sweet flowers, and velvet lawns all
cool and shady, which pleased the eye of the princess.  The fruit
trees were hung with golden and rosy apples, and nightingales
sang in every bush, as the gnome and the princess wandered in the
leafy alleys, sometimes gazing at the moon, sometimes pausing to
gather the rarest flowers for her adornment.  And all the time he
was thinking to himself that never, during the hundreds of years
he had lived, had he seen so charming a maiden.  But the princess
felt no such happiness; in spite of all the magic delights around
her she was sad, though she tried to seem content for fear of
displeasing the gnome.  However, he soon perceived her
melancholy, and in a thousand ways strove to dispel the cloud,
but in vain.  At last he said to himself: 'Men are sociable
creatures, like bees or ants.  Doubtless this lovely mortal is
pining for company.  Who is there I can find for her to talk to?'

Thereupon he hastened into the nearest filed and dug up a dozen
or so of different roots--carrots, turnips, and radishes--and
laying them carefully in an elegant basket brought them to the
princess, who sat pensive in the shade of the rose-bower.

'Loveliest daughter of earth,' said the gnome, 'banish all
sorrow; no more shall you be lonely in my dwelling.  In this
basket is all you need to make this spot delightful to you.  Take
this little many-coloured wand, and with a touch give to each
root the form you desire to see.'

With this he left her, and the princess, without an instant's
delay, opened the basket, and touching a turnip, cried eagerly:
'Brunhilda, my dear Brunhilda! come to me quickly!' And sure
enough there was Brunhilda, joyfully hugging and kissing her
beloved princess, and chattering as gaily as in the old days.

This sudden appearance was so delightful that the princess could
hardly believe her own eyes, and was quite beside herself with
the joy of having her dear playfellow with her once more.  Hand
in hand they wandered about the enchanted garden, and gathered
the golden apples from the trees, and when they were tired of
this amusement the princess led her friend through all the
wonderful rooms of the palace, until at last they came to the one
in which were kept all the marvellous dresses and ornaments the
gnome had given to his hoped-for bride.  There they found so much
to amuse them that the hours passed like minutes.  Veils,
girdles, and necklaces were tried on and admired, the imitation
Brunhilda knew so well how to behave herself, and showed so much
taste that nobody would ever have suspected that she was nothing
but a turnip after all.  The gnome, who had secretly been keeping
an eye upon them, was very pleased with himself for having so
well understood the heart of a woman; and the princess seemed to
him even more charming than before.  She did not forget to touch
the rest of the roots with her magic wand, and soon had all her
maidens about her, and even, as she had two tiny radishes to
spare, her favourite cat, and her little dog whose name was Beni.

And now all went cheerfully in the castle.  The princess gave to
each of the maidens her task, and never was mistress better
served.  For a whole week she enjoyed the delight of her pleasant
company undisturbed.  They all sang, they danced, they played
from morning to night; only the princess noticed that day by day
the fresh young faces of her maidens grew pale and wan, and the
mirror in the great marble hall showed her that she alone still
kept her rosy bloom, while Brunhilda and the rest faded visibly. 
They assured her that all was well with them; but, nevertheless,
they continued to waste away, and day by day it became harder to
them to take part in the games of the princess, till at last, one
fine morning, when the princess started from bed and hastened out
to join her gay playfellows, she shuddered and started back at
the sight of a group of shrivelled crones, with bent backs and
trembling limbs, who supported their tottering steps with staves
and crutches, and coughed dismally.  A little nearer to the
hearth lay the once frolicsome Beni, with all four feet stretched
stiffly out, while the sleek cat seemed too weak to raise his
head from his velvet cushion.

The horrified princess fled to the door to escape from the sight
of this mournful company, and called loudly for the gnome, who
appeared at once, humbly anxious to do her bidding.

'Malicious Sprite,' she cried, 'why do you begrudge me my
playmates --the greatest delight of my lonely hours?  Isn't this
solitary life in such a desert bad enough without your turning
the castle into a hospital for the aged?  Give my maidens back
their youth and health this very minute, or I will never love
you!'

'Sweetest and fairest of damsels,' cried the gnome, 'do not be
angry; everything that is in my power I will do--but do not ask
the impossible.  So long as the sap was fresh in the roots the
magic staff could keep them in the forms you desired, but as the
sap dried up they withered away.  But never trouble yourself
about that, dearest one, a basket of fresh turnips will soon set
matters right, and you can speedily call up again every form you
wish to see.  The great green patch in the garden will prove you
with a more lively company.'

So saying the gnome took himself off.  And the princess with her
magic wand touched the wrinkled old women, and left them the
withered roots they really were, to be thrown upon the rubbish
heap; and with light feet skipped off across to the meadow to
take possession of the freshly filled basket.  But to her
surprise she could not find it anywhere.  Up and down the garden
she searched, spying into every corner, but not a sign of it was
to be found.  By the trellis of grape vines she met the gnome,
who was so much embarrassed at the sight of her that she became
aware of his confusion while he was still quite a long way off.

'You are trying to tease me,' she cried, as soon as she saw him. 
'Where have you hidden the basket?  I have been looking for it at
least an hour.'

'Dear queen of my heart,' answered he, 'I pray you to forgive my
carelessness.  I promised more than I could perform.  I have
sought all over the land for the roots you desire; but they are
gathered in, and lie drying in musty cellars, and the fields are
bare and desolate, for below in the valley winter reigns, only
here in your presence spring is held fast, and wherever your foot
is set the gay flowers bloom.  Have patience for a little, and
then without fail you shall have your puppets to play with.'

Almost before the gnome had finished, the disappointed princess
turned away, and marched off to her own apartments, without
deigning to answer him.

The gnome, however, set off above ground as speedily as possible,
and disguising himself as a farmer, bought an ass in the nearest
market-town, and brought it back loaded with sacks of turnip,
carrot, and radish seed.  With this he sowed a great field, and
sent a vast army of his goblins to watch and tend it, and to
bring up the fiery rivers from the heart of the earth near enough
to warm and encourage the sprouting seeds.  Thus fostered they
grew and flourished marvellously, and promised a goodly crop.

The princess wandered about the field day by day, no other plants
or fruits in all her wonderful garden pleased her as much as
these roots; but still her eyes were full of discontent.  And,
best of all, she loved to while away the hours in a shady fir-
wood, seated upon the bank of a little stream, into which she
would cast the flowers she had gathered and watch them float
away.

The gnome tried hard by every means in his power to please the
princess and win her love, but little did he guess the real
reason of his lack of success.  He imagined that she was too
young and inexperienced to care for him; but that was a mistake,
for the truth was that another image already filled her heart. 
The young Prince Ratibor, whose lands joined her father's, had
won the heart of the princess; and the lovers had been looking
forward to the coming of their wedding-day when the bride's
mysterious disappearance took place.  The sad news drove Ratibor
distracted, and as the days went on, and nothing could be heard
of the princess, he forsook his castle and the society of men,
and spent his days in the wild forests, roaming about and crying
her name aloud to the trees and rocks.  Meanwhile, the maiden, in
her gorgeous prison, sighed in secret over her grief, not wishing
to arouse the gnome's suspicions.  In her own mind she was
wondering if by any means she might escape from her captivity,
and at last she hit upon a plan.

By this time spring once more reigned in the valley, and the
gnome sent the fires back to their places in the deeps of the
earth, for the roots which they had kept warm through all the
cruel winter hand now come to their full size.  Day by day the
princess pulled up some of them, and made experiments with them,
conjuring up now this longed-for person, and now that, just for
the pleasure of seeing them as they appeared; but she really had
another purpose in view.

One day she changed a tiny turnip into a bee, and sent him off to
bring her some news of her lover.

'Fly, dear little bee, towards the east,' said she, 'to my
beloved Ratibor, and softly hum into his ear that I love him
only, but that I am a captive in the gnome's palace under the
mountains.  Do not forget a single word of my greeting, and bring
me back a message from my beloved.'

So the bee spread his shining wings and flew away to do as he was
bidden; but before he was out of sight a greedy swallow made a
snatch at him, and to the great grief of the princess her
messenger was eaten up then and there.

After that, by the power of the wonderful wand she summoned a
cricket, and taught him this greeting:

'Hop, little cricket, to Ratibor, and chirp in his ear that I
love him only, but that I am held captive by the gnome in his
palace under the mountains.'

So the cricket hopped off gaily, determined to do his best to
deliver his message; but, alas! a long-legged stork who was
prancing along the same road caught him in her cruel beak, and
before he could say a word he had disappeared down her throat.

These two unlucky ventures did not prevent the princess from
trying once more.

This time she changed the turnip into a magpie.

'Flutter from tree to tree, chattering bird,' said she, 'till you
come to Ratibor, my love.  Tell him that I am a captive, and bid
him come with horses and men, the third day from this, to the
hill that rises from the Thorny Valley.'

The magpie listened, hopped awhile from branch to branch, and
then darted away, the princess watching him anxiously as far as
she could see.

Now Prince Ratibor was still spending his life in wandering about
the woods, and not even the beauty of the spring could soothe his
grief.

One day, as he sat in the shade of an oak tree, dreaming of his
lost princess, and sometimes crying her name aloud, he seemed to
hear another voice reply to his, and, starting up, he gazed
around him, but he could see no one, and he had just made up his
mind that he must be mistaken, when the same voice called again,
and, looking up sharply, he saw a magpie which hopped to and fro
among the twigs.  Then Ratibor heard with surprise that the bird
was indeed calling him by name.

'Poor chatterpie,' said he; 'who taught you to say that name,
which belongs to an unlucky mortal who wishes the earth would
open and swallow up him and his memory for ever?'

Thereupon he caught up a great stone, and would have hurled it at
the magpie, if it had not at that moment uttered the name of the
princess.

This was so unexpected that the prince's arm fell helplessly to
his side at the sound, and he stood motionless.

But the magpie in the tree, who, like all the rest of his family,
was not happy unless he could be for ever chattering, began to
repeat the message the princess had taught him; and as soon as he
understood it, Prince Ratibor's heart was filed with joy.  All
his gloom and misery vanished in a moment, and he anxiously
questioned the welcome messenger as to the fate of the princess.

But the magpie knew no more than the lesson he had learnt, so he
soon fluttered away; while the prince hurried back to his castle
to gather together a troop of horsemen, full of courage for
whatever might befall.

The princess meanwhile was craftily pursuing her plan of escape. 
She left off treating the gnome with coldness and indifference;
indeed, there was a look in her eyes which encouraged him to hope
that she might some day return his love, and the idea pleased him
mightily.  The next day, as soon as the sun rose, she made her
appearance decked as a bride, in the wonderful robes and jewels
which the fond gnome had prepared for her.  Her golden hair was
braided and crowned with myrtle blossoms, and her flowing veil
sparkled with gems.  In these magnificent garments she went to
meet the gnome upon the great terrace.

'Loveliest of maidens,' he stammered, bowing low before her, 'let
me gaze into your dear eyes, and read in them that you will no
longer refuse my love, but will make me the happiest being the
sun shines upon.'

So saying he would have drawn aside her veil; but the princess
only held it more closely about her.

'Your constancy has overcome me,' she said; 'I can no longer
oppose your wishes.  But believe my words, and suffer this veil
still to hide my blushes and tears.'

'Why tears, beloved one?' cried the gnome anxiously; 'every tear
of yours falls upon my heart like a drop of molten gold.  Greatly
as I desire your love, I do not ask a sacrifice.'

'Ah!' cried the false princess, 'why do you misunderstand my
tears?  My heart answers to your tenderness, and yet I am
fearful.  A wife cannot always charm, and though YOU will never
alter, the beauty of mortals is as a flower that fades.  How can
I be sure that you will always be as loving and charming as you
are now?'

'Ask some proof, sweetheart,' said he.  'Put my obedience and my
patience to some test by which you can judge of my unalterable
love.'

'Be it so,' answered the crafty maiden.  'Then give me just one
proof of your goodness.  Go! count the turnips in yonder meadow. 
My wedding feast must not lack guests.  They shall provide me
with bride-maidens too.  But beware lest you deceive me, and do
not miss a single one.  That shall be the test of your truth
towards me.'

Unwilling as the gnome was to lose sight of his beautiful bride
for a moment, he obeyed her commands without delay, and hurried
off to begin his task.  He skipped along among the turnips as
nimble as a grasshopper, and had soon counted them all; but, to
be quite certain that he had made no mistake, he thought he would
just run over them again.  This time, to his great annoyance, the
number was different; so he reckoned them for the third time, but
now the number was not the same as either of the previous ones!
And this was hardly to be wondered at, as his mind was full of
the princess's pretty looks and words.

As for the maiden, no sooner was her deluded lover fairly out of
sight than she began to prepare for flight.  She had a fine fresh
turnip hidden close at hand, which she changed into a spirited
horse, all saddled and bridled, and, springing upon its back, she
galloped away over hill and dale till she reached the Thorny
Valley, and flung herself into the arms of her beloved Prince
Ratibor.

Meanwhile the toiling gnome went through his task over and over
again till his back ached and his head swam, and he could no
longer put two and two together; but as he felt tolerably certain
of the exact number of turnips in the field, big and little
together, he hurried back eager to prove to his beloved one what
a delightful and submissive husband he would be.  He felt very
well satisfied with himself as he crossed the mossy lawn to the
place where he had left her; but, alas! she was no longer there.

He searched every thicket and path, he looked behind every tree,
and gazed into every pond, but without success; then he hastened
into the palace and rushed from room to room, peering into every
hole and corner and calling her by name; but only echo answered
in the marble halls--there was neither voice nor footstep.

Then he began to perceive that something was amiss, and, throwing
off the mortal form that encumbered him, he flew out of the
palace, and soared high into the air, and saw the fugitive
princess in the far distance just as the swift horse carried her
across the boundary of his dominions.

Furiously did the enraged gnome fling two great clouds together,
and hurl a thunderbolt after the flying maiden, splintering the
rocky barriers which had stood a thousand years.  But his fury
was vain, the thunderclouds melted away into a soft mist, and the
gnome, after flying about for a while in despair, bewailing to
the four winds his unhappy fate, went sorrowfully back to the
palace, and stole once more through every room, with many sighs
and lamentations.  He passed through the gardens which for him
had lost their charm, and the sight of the princess's footprints
on the golden sand of the pathway renewed his grief.  All was
lonely, empty, sorrowful; and the forsaken gnome resolved that he
would have no more dealings with such false creatures as he had
found men to be.

Thereupon he stamped three times upon the earth, and the magic
palace, with all its treasures, vanished away into the
nothingness out of which he had called it; and the gnome fled
once more to the depths of his underground kingdom.

 While all this was happening, Prince Ratibor was hurrying away
with his prize to a place of safety.  With great pomp and triumph
he restored the lovely princess to her father, and was then and
there married to her, and took her back with him to his own
castle.

But long after she was dead, and her children too, the villagers
would tell the tale of her imprisonment underground, as they sat
carving wood in the winter nights.

[Volksmahrchen der Deutschen.]



Story Of The King Who Would Be Stronger Than Fate



Once upon a time, far away in the east country, there lived a
king who loved hunting so much that, when once there was a deer
in sight, he was careless of his own safety.  Indeed, he often
became quite separated from his nobles and attendants, and in
fact was particularly fond of lonely adventures.  Another of his
favourite amusements was to give out that he was not well, and
could not be seen; and then, with the knowledge only of his
faithful Grand Wazeer, to disguise himself as a pedlar, load a
donkey with cheap wares, and travel about.  In this way he found
out what the common people said about him, and how his judges and
governors fulfilled their duties.

One day his queen presented him with a baby daughter as beautiful
as the dawn, and the king himself was so happy and delighted
that, for a whole week, he forgot to hunt, and spent the time in
public and private rejoicing.

Not long afterwards, however, he went out after some deer which
were to be found in a far corner of his forests.  In the course
of the beat his dogs disturbed a beautiful snow-white stag, and
directly he saw it the king determined that he would have it at
any cost.  So he put the spurs to his horse, and followed it as
hard as he could gallop.  Of course all his attendants followed
at the best speed that they could manage; but the king was so
splendidly mounted, and the stag was so swift, that, at the end
of an hour, the king found that only his favourite hound and
himself were in the chase; all the rest were far, far behind and
out of sight.

Nothing daunted, however, he went on and on, till he perceived
that he was entering a valley with great rocky mountains on all
sides, and that his horse was getting very tired and trembled at
every stride.  Worse than all evening was already drawing on, and
the sun would soon set.  In vain had he sent arrow after arrow at
the beautiful stag.  Every shot fell short, or went wide of the
mark; and at last, just as darkness was setting in, he lost sight
altogether of the beast.  By this time his horse could hardly
move from fatigue, his hound staggered panting along beside him,
he was far away amongst mountains where he had never been before,
and had quite missed his way, and not a human creature or
dwelling was in sight.

All this was very discouraging, but the king would not have
minded if he had not lost that beautiful stag.  That troubled him
a good deal, but he never worried over what he could not help, so
he got down from his horse, slipped his arm through the bridle,
and led the animal along the rough path in hopes of discovering
some shepherd's hut, or, at least, a cave or shelter under some
rock, where he might pass the night.

Presently he heard the sound of rushing water, and made towards
it.  He toiled over a steep rocky shoulder of a hill, and there,
just below him, was a stream dashing down a precipitous glen,
and, almost beneath his feet, twinkling and flickering from the
level of the torrent, was a dim light as of a lamp.  Towards this
light the king with his horse and hound made his way, sliding and
stumbling down a steep, stony path.  At the bottom the king found
a narrow grassy ledge by the brink of the stream, across which
the light from a rude lantern in the mount of a cave shed a broad
beam of uncertain light.  At the edge of the stream sat an old
hermit with a long white beard, who neither spoke nor moved as
the king approached, but sat throwing into the stream dry leaves
which lay scattered about the ground near him.

'Peace be upon you,' said the king, giving the usual country
salutation.

'And upon you peace,' answered the hermit; but still he never
looked up, nor stopped what he was doing.

For a minute or two the king stood watching him.  He noticed that
the hermit threw two leaves in at a time, and watched them
attentively.  Sometimes both were carried rapidly down by the
stream; sometimes only one leaf was carried off, and the other,
after whirling slowly round and round on the edge of the current,
would come circling back on an eddy to the hermit's feet.  At
other times both leaves were held in the backward eddy, and
failed to reach the main current of the noisy stream

'What are you doing?' asked the king at last, and the hermit
replied that he was reading the fates of men; every one's fate,
he said, was settled from the beginning, and, whatever it were,
there was no escape from it.  The king laughed.

'I care little,' he said, 'what my fate may be; but I should be
curious to know the fate of my little daughter.'

'I cannot say,' answered the hermit.

'Do you not know, then?' demanded the king.

'I might know,' returned the hermit, 'but it is not always wisdom
to know much.'

But the king was not content with this reply, and began to press
the old man to say what he knew, which for a long time he would
not do.  At last, however, the king urged him so greatly that he
said:

'The king's daughter will marry the son of a poor slave-girl
called Puruna, who belongs to the king of the land of the north. 
There is no escaping from Fate.'

The king was wild with anger at hearing these words, but he was
also very tired; so he only laughed, and answered that he hoped
there would be a way out of THAT fate anyhow.  Then he asked if
the hermit could shelter him and his beasts for the night, and
the hermit said 'Yes'; so, very soon the king had watered and
tethered his horse, and, after a supper of bread and parched
peas, lay down in the cave, with the hound at his feet, and tried
to go to sleep.  But instead of sleeping he only lay awake and
thought of the hermit's prophecy; and the more he thought of it
the angrier he felt, until he gnashed his teeth and declared that
it should never, never come true.

Morning came, and the king got up, pale and sulky, and, after
learning from the hermit which path to take, was soon mounted and
found his way home without much difficulty.  Directly he reached
his palace he wrote a letter to the king of the land of the
north, begging him, as a favour, to sell him his slave girl
Puruna and her son, and saying that, if he consented, he would
send a messenger to receive them at the river which divided the
kingdoms.

For five days he awaited the reply, and hardly slept or ate, but
was as cross as could be all the time.  On the fifth day his
messenger returned with a letter to say that the king of the land
of the north would not sell, but he would give, the king the
slave girl and her son.  The king was overjoyed.  He sent for his
Grand Wazeer and told him that he was going on one of his lonely
expeditions, and that the Wazeer must invent some excuse to
account for his absence.  Next he disguised himself as an
ordinary messenger, mounted a swift camel, and sped away to the
place where the slave girl was to be handed over to him.  When he
got there he gave the messengers who brought her a letter of
thanks and a handsome present for their master and rewards for
themselves; and then without delay he took the poor woman and her
tiny baby-boy up on to his camel and rode off to a wild desert.

After riding for a day and a night, almost without stopping, he
came to a great cave where he made the woman dismount, and,
taking her and the baby into the cave, he drew his sword and with
one blow chopped her head off.  But although his anger made him
cruel enough for anything so dreadful, the king felt that he
could not turn his great sword on the helpless baby, who he was
sure must soon die in this solitary place without its mother; so
he left it in the cave where it was, and, mounting his camel,
rode home as fast as he could.

Now, in a small village in his kingdom there lived an old widow
who had no children or relations of any kind.  She made her
living mostly by selling the milk of a flock of goats; but she
was very, very poor, and not very strong, and often used to
wonder how she would live if she got too weak or ill to attend to
her goats.  Every morning she drove the goats out into the desert
to graze on the shrubs and bushes which grew there, and every
evening they came home of themselves to be milked and to be shut
up safely for the night.

One evening the old woman was astonished to find that her very
best nanny-goat returned without a drop of milk.  She thought
that some naughty boy or girl was playing a trick upon her and
had caught the goat on its way home and stolen all the milk.  But
when evening after evening the goat remained almost dry she
determined to find out who the thief was.  So the next day she
followed the goats at a distance and watched them while they
grazed.  At length, in the afternoon, the old woman noticed this
particular nanny-goat stealing off by herself away from the herd
and she at once went after her.  On and on the goat walked for
some way, and then disappeared into a cave in the rocks.  The old
woman followed the goat into the cave and then, what should she
see but the animal giving her milk to a little boy-baby, whilst
on the ground near by lay the sad remains of the baby's dead
mother! Wondering and frightened, the old woman thought at last
that this little baby might be a son to her in her old age, and
that he would grow up and in time to come be her comfort and
support.  So she carried home the baby to her hut, and next day
she took a spade to the cave and dug a grave where she buried the
poor mother.

Years passed by, and the baby grew up into a find handsome lad,
as daring as he was beautiful, and as industrious as he was
brave.  One day, when the boy, whom the old woman had named Nur
Mahomed, was about seventeen years old, he was coming from his
day's work in the fields, when he saw a strange donkey eating the
cabbages in the garden which surround their little cottage. 
Seizing a big stick, he began to beat the intruder and to drive
him out of his garden.  A neighbour passing by called out to him-
-'Hi! I say! why are you beating the pedlar's donkey like that?'

'The pedlar should keep him from eating my cabbages,' said Nur
Mahomed; 'if he comes this evening here again I'll cut off his
tail for him!'

Whereupon he went off indoors, whistling cheerfully.  It happened
that this neighbour was one of those people who make mischief by
talking too much; so, meeting the pedlar in the 'serai,' or inn,
that evening, he told him what had occurred, and added: 'Yes; and
the young spitfire said that if beating the donkey would not do,
he would beat you also, and cut your nose off for a thief!'

A few days later, the pedlar having moved on, two men appeared in
the village inquiring who it was who had threatened to ill-treat
and to murder an innocent pedlar.  They declared that the pedlar,
in fear of his life, had complained to the king; and that they
had been sent to bring the lawless person who had said these
things before the king himself.  Of course they soon found out
about the donkey eating Nur Mahomed's cabbages, and about the
young man's hot words; but although the lad assured them that he
had never said anything about murdering anyone, they replied they
were ordered to arrest him, and bring him to take his trial
before the king.  So, in spite of his protests, and the wails of
his mother, he was carried off, and in due time brought before
the king.  Of course Nur Mahomed never guessed that the supposed
pedlar happened to have been the king himself, although nobody
knew it.

But as he was very angry at what he had been told, he declared
that he was going to make an example of this young man, and
intended to teach him that even poor travelling pedlars could get
justice in HIS country, and be protected from such lawlessness. 
However, just as he was going to pronounce some very heavy
sentence, there was a stir in the court, and up came Nur
Mahomed's old mother, weeping and lamenting, and begging to be
heard.  The king ordered her to speak, and she began to plead for
the boy, declaring how good he was, and how he was the support of
her old age, and if he were put in prison she would die.  The
king asked her who she was.  She replied that she was his mother.

'His mother?' said the king; 'you are too old, surely, to have so
young a son!'

Then the old woman, in her fright and distress, confessed the
whole story of how she found the baby, and how she rescued and
brought him up, and ended by beseeching the king for mercy.

It is easy to guess how, as the story came out, the king looked
blacker and blacker, and more and more grim, until at last he was
half fainting with rage and astonishment.  This, then, was the
baby he had left to die, after cruelly murdering his mother!
Surely fate might have spared him this! He wished he had
sufficient excuse to put the boy to death, for the old hermit's
prophecy came back to him as strongly as ever; and yet the young
man had done nothing bad enough to deserve such a punishment. 
Everyone would call him a tyrant if he were to give such an
order--in fact, he dared not try it!

At length he collected himself enough to say:--'If this young man
will enlist in my army I will let him off.  We have need of such
as him, and a little discipline will do him good.'  Still the old
woman pleaded that she could not live without her son, and was
nearly as terrified at the idea of his becoming a soldier as she
was at the thought of his being put in prison.  But at length the
king-- determined to get the youth into his clutches--pacified
her by promising her a pension large enough to keep her in
comfort; and Nur Mahomed, to his own great delight, was duly
enrolled in the king's army.

As a soldier Nur Mahomed seemed to be in luck.  He was rather
surprised, but much pleased, to find that he was always one of
those chosen when any difficult or dangerous enterprise was
afoot; and, although he had the narrowest escapes on some
occasions, still, the very desperateness of the situations in
which he found himself gave him special chances of displaying his
courage.  And as he was also modest and generous, he became a
favourite with his officers and his comrades.

Thus it was not very surprising that, before very long, he became
enrolled amongst the picked men of the king's bodyguard.  The
fact is, that the king had hoped to have got him killed in some
fight or another; but, seeing that, on the contrary, he throve on
hard knocks, he was now determined to try more direct and
desperate methods.

One day, soon after Nur Mahomed had entered the bodyguard, he was
selected to be one of the soldiers told off to escort the king
through the city.  The procession was marching on quite smoothly,
when a man, armed with a dagger, rushed out of an alley straight
towards the king.  Nur Mahomed, who was the nearest of the
guards, threw himself in the way, and received the stab that had
been apparently intended for the king.  Luckily the blow was a
hurried one, and the dagger glanced on is breastbone, so that,
although he received a severe wound, his youth and strength
quickly got the better of it.  The king was, of course, obliged
to take some notice of this brave deed, and as a reward made him
one of his own attendants.

After this the strange adventures the young man passed through
were endless.  Officers of the bodyguard were often sent on all
sorts of secret and difficult errands, and such errands had a
curious way of becoming necessary when Nur Mahomed was on duty. 
Once, while he was taking a journey, a foot-bridge gave way under
him; once he was attacked by armed robbers; a rock rolled down
u