pon him in a mountain pass; a heavy stone coping fell from a
roof at his feet in a narrow city alley.  Altogether, Nur Mahomed
began to think that, somewhere or other, he had made an enemy;
but he was light-hearted, and the thought did not much trouble
him.  He escaped somehow every time, and felt amused rather than
anxious about the next adventure.

It was the custom of that city that the officer for the day of
the palace guards should receive all his food direct from the
king's kitchen.  One day, when Nur Mahomed's turn came to be on
duty, he was just sitting down to a delicious stew that had been
sent in from the palace, when one of those gaunt, hungry dogs,
which, in eastern countries, run about the streets, poked his
nose in at the open guard-room door, and looked at Nur Mahomed
with mouth watering and nostrils working.  The kind-hearted young
man picked out a lump of meat, went to the door, and threw it
outside to him.  The dog pounced upon it, and gulped it down
greedily, and was just turning to go, when it staggered, fell,
rolled over, and died.  Nur Mahomed, who had been lazily watching
him, stood still for a moment, then he came back whistling
softly.  He gathered up the rest of his dinner and carefully
wrapped it up to carry away and bury somewhere; and then he sent
back the empty plates.

How furious the king was when, at the next morning's durbar, Nur
Mahomed appeared before him fresh, alert and smiling as usual. 
He was determined, however, to try once more, and bidding the
young man come into his presence that evening, gave orders that
he was to carry a secret despatch to the governor of a distant
province.  'Make your preparations at once,' added he, 'and be
ready to start in the morning.  I myself will deliver you the
papers at the last moment.'

Now this province was four or five days' journey from the palace,
and the governor of it was the most faithful servant the king
had.  He could be silent as the grave, and prided himself on his
obedience.  Whilst he was an old and tried servant of the king's,
his wife had been almost a mother to the young princess ever
since the queen had died some years before.  It happened that, a
little before this time, the princess had been sent away for her
health to another remote province; and whilst she was there her
old friend, the governor's wife, had begged her to come and stay
with them as soon as she could.

The princess accepted gladly, and was actually staying in the
governor's house at the very time when the king made up his mind
to send Nur Mahomed there with the mysterious despatch.

According to orders Nur Mahomed presented himself early the next
morning at the king's private apartments.  His best horse was
saddled, food placed in is saddle-bag, and with some money tied
up in his waist-band, he was ready to start.  The king handed
over to him a sealed packet, desiring him to give it himself only
into the hands of the governor, and to no one else.  Nur Mahomed
hid it carefully in his turban, swung himself into the saddle,
and five minutes later rode out of the city gates, and set out on
his long journey.

The weather was very hot; but Nur Mahomed thought that the sooner
his precious letter was delivered the better; so that, by dint of
riding most of each night and resting only in the hottest part of
the day, he found himself, by noon on the third day, approaching
the town which was his final destination.

Not a soul was to be seen anywhere; and Nur Mahomed, stiff, dry,
thirsty, and tired, looked longingly over the wall into the
gardens, and marked the fountains, the green grass, the shady
apricot orchards, and giant mulberry trees, and wished he were
there.

At length he reached the castle gates, and was at once admitted,
as he was in the uniform of the king's bodyguard.  The governor
was resting, the soldier said, and could not see him until the
evening.  So Nur Mahomed handed over his horse to an attendant,
and wandered down into the lovely gardens he had seen from the
road, and sat down in the shade to rest himself.  He flung
himself on his back and watched the birds twittering and
chattering in the trees above him.  Through the branches he could
see great patches of sky where the kites wheeled and circled
incessantly, with shrill whistling cried.  Bees buzzed over the
flowers with a soothing sound, and in a few minutes Nur Mahomed
was fast asleep.

Every day, through the heat of the afternoon, the governor, and
his wife also, used to lie down for two or three hours in their
own rooms, and so, for the matter of that, did most people in the
palace.  But the princess, like many other girls, was restless,
and preferred to wander about the garden, rather than rest on a
pile of soft cushions.  What a torment her stout old attendants
and servants sometime thought her when she insisted on staying
awake, and making them chatter or do something, when they could
hardly keep their eyes open! Sometimes, however, the princess
would pretend to go to sleep, and then, after all her women had
gladly followed her example, she would get up and go out by
herself, her veil hanging loosely about her.  If she was
discovered her old hostess scolded her severely; but the princess
only laughed, and did the same thing next time.

This very afternoon the princess had left all her women asleep,
and, after trying in vain to amuse herself indoors, she had
slipped out into the great garden, and rambled about in all her
favourite nooks and corners, feeling quite safe as there was not
a creature to be seen.  Suddenly, on turning a corner, she
stopped in surprise, for before her lay a man fast asleep! In her
hurry she had almost tripped over him.  But there he was, a young
man, tanned and dusty with travel, in the uniform of an officer
of the king's guard.  One of the few faults of this lovely
princess was a devouring curiosity, and she lived such an idle
life that she had plenty of time to be curious.  Out of one of
the folds of this young man's turban there peeped the corner of a
letter! She wondered what the letter was--whom it was for! She
drew her veil a little closer, and stole across on tip-toe and
caught hold of the corner of the letter.  Then she pulled it a
little, and just a little more! A great big seal came into view,
which she saw to be her father's, and at the sight of it she
paused for a minute half ashamed of what she was doing.  But the
pleasure of taking a letter which was not meant for her was more
than she could resist, and in another moment it was in her hand. 
All at once she remembered that it would be death to this poor
officer if he lost the letter, and that at all hazards she must
put it back again.  But this was not so easy; and, moreover, the
letter in her hand burnt her with longing to read it, and see
what was inside.  She examined the seal.  It was sticky with
being exposed to the hot sun, and with a very little effort it
parted from the paper.  The letter was open and she read it! And
this was what was written:

'Behead the messenger who brings this letter secretly and at
once.  Ask no questions.'

The girl grew pale.  What a shame! she thought.  SHE would not
let a handsome young fellow like that be beheaded; but how to
prevent it was not quite clear at the moment.  Some plan must be
invented, and she wished to lock herself in where no one could
interrupt her, as might easily happen in the garden.  So she
crept softly to her room, and took a piece of paper and wrote
upon it: 'Marry the messenger who brings this letter to the
princess openly at once.  Ask no questions.'  And even contrived
to work the seals off the original letter and to fix them to
this, so that no one could tell, unless they examined it closely,
that it had ever been opened.  Then she slipped back, shaking
with fear and excitement, to where the young officer still lay
asleep, thrust the letter into the fold so his turban, and
hurried back to her room.  It was done!

Late in the afternoon Nur Mahomed woke, and, making sure that the
precious despatch was still safe, went off to get ready for his
audience with the governor.  As soon as he was ushered into his
presence he took the letter from his turban and placed it in the
governor's hands according to orders.  When he had read it the
governor was certainly a little astonished; but he was told in
the letter to 'ask no questions,' and he knew how to obey orders. 
He sent for his wife and told her to get the princess ready to be
married at once.

'Nonsense!' said his wife, 'what in the world do you mean?'

'These are the king's commands,' he answered; 'go and do as I bid
you.  The letter says "at once," and "ask no questions." The
marriage, therefore, must take place this evening.'

In vain did his wife urge every objection; the more she argued,
the more determined was her husband.  'I know how to obey
orders,' he said, 'and these are as plain as the nose on my
face!' So the princess was summoned, and, somewhat to their
surprise, she seemed to take the news very calmly; next Nur
Mahomed was informed, and he was greatly startled, but of course
he could but be delighted at the great and unexpected honour
which he thought the king had done him.  Then all the castle was
turned upside down; and when the news spread in the town, THAT
was turned upside down too.  Everybody ran everywhere, and tried
to do everything at once; and, in the middle of it all, the old
governor went about with his hair standing on end, muttering
something about 'obeying orders.'

And so the marriage was celebrated, and there was a great feast
in the castle, and another in the soldiers' barracks, and
illuminations all over the town and in the beautiful gardens. 
And all the people declared that such a wonderful sight had never
been seen, and talked about it to the ends of their lives.

The next day the governor despatched the princess and her
bridegroom to the king, with a troop of horsemen, splendidly
dressed, and he sent a mounted messenger on before them, with a
letter giving the account of the marriage to the king.

When the king got the governor's letter, he grew so red in the
face that everyone thought he was going to have apoplexy.  They
were all very anxious to know what had happened, but he rushed
off and locked himself into a room, where he ramped and raved
until he was tired.  Then, after awhile, he began to think he had
better make the best of it, especially as the old governor had
been clever enough to send him back his letter, and the king was
pretty sure that this was in the princess's handwriting.  He was
fond of his daughter, and though she had behaved badly, he did
not wish to cut HER head off, and he did not want people to know
the truth because it would make him look foolish.  In fact, the
more he considered the matter, the more he felt that he would be
wise to put a good face on it, and to let people suppose that he
had really brought about the marriage of his own free will.

So, when the young couple arrived, the king received them with
all state, and gave his son-in-law a province to govern.  Nur
Mahomed soon proved himself as able and honourable a governor as
he was a brave soldier; and, when the old king died, he became
king in his place, and reigned long and happily.

Nur Mahomed's old mother lived for a long time in her 'son's'
palace, and died in peace.  The princess, his wife, although she
had got her husband by a trick, found that she could not trick
HIM, and so she never tried, but busied herself in teaching her
children and scolding her maids.  As for the old hermit, no trace
of him was ever discovered; but the cave is there, and the leaves
lie thick in front of it unto this day.

[Told the writer by an Indian.]




Story of Wali Dad the Simple-Hearted



Once upon a time there lived a poor old man whose name was Wali
Dad Gunjay, or Wali Dad the Bald.  He had no relations, but lived
all by himself in a little mud hut some distance from any town,
and made his living by cutting grass in the jungle, and selling
it as fodder for horses.  He only earned by this five halfpence a
day; but he was a simple old man, and needed so little out of it,
that he saved up one halfpenny daily, and spent the rest upon
such food and clothing as he required.

In this way he lived for many years until, one night, he thought
that he would count the money he had hidden away in the great
earthen pot under the floor of his hut.  So he set to work, and
with much trouble he pulled the bag out on to the floor, and sat
gazing in astonishment at the heap of coins which tumbled out of
it.  What should he do with them all?  he wondered.  But he never
thought of spending the money on himself, because he was content
to pass the rest of his days as he had been doing for ever so
long, and he really had no desire for any greater comfort or
luxury.

At last he threw all the money into an old sack, which he pushed
under his bead, and then, rolled in his ragged old blanket, he
went off to sleep.

Early next morning he staggered off with his sack of money to the
shop of a jeweller, whom he knew in the town, and bargained with
him for a beautiful little gold bracelet.  With this carefully
wrapped up in his cotton waistband he went to the house of a rich
friend, who was a travelling merchant, and used to wander about
with his camels and merchandise through many countries.  Wali Dad
was lucky enough to find him at home, so he sat down, and after a
little talk he asked the merchant who was the most virtuous and
beautiful lady he had ever met with.  The merchant replied that
the princess of Khaistan was renowned everywhere as well for the
beauty of her person as for the kindness and generosity of her
disposition.

'Then,' said Wali Dad, 'next time you go that way, give her this
little bracelet, with the respectful compliments of one who
admires virtue far more than he desires wealth.'

With that he pulled the bracelet from his waistband, and handed
it to his friend.  The merchant was naturally much astonished,
but said nothing, and made no objection to carrying out his
friend's plan.

Time passed by, and at length the merchant arrived in the course
of his travels at the capital of Khaistan.  As soon as he had
opportunity he presented himself at the palace, and sent in the
bracelet, neatly packed in a little perfumed box provided by
himself, giving at the same time the message entrusted to him by
Wali Dad.

The princess could not think who could have bestowed this present
on her, but she bade her servant to tell the merchant that if he
would return, after he had finished his business in the city, she
would give him her reply.  In a few days, therefore, the merchant
came back, and received from the princess a return present in the
shape of a camel-load or rich silks, besides a present of money
for himself.  With these he set out on his journey.

Some months later he got home again from his journeyings, and
proceeded to take Wali Dad the princess's present.  Great was the
perplexity of the good man to find a camel-load of silks tumbled
at his door! What was he to do with these costly things?  But,
presently, after much thought, he begged the merchant to consider
whether he did not know of some young prince to whom such
treasures might be useful.

'Of course,' cried the merchant, greatly amused; 'from Delhi to
Baghdad, and from Constantinople to Lucknow, I know them all; and
there lives none worthier than the gallant and wealthy young
prince of Nekabad.'

'Very well, then, take the silks to him, with the blessing of an
old man,' said Wali Dad, much relieved to be rid of them.

So, the next time that the merchant journeyed that way he carried
the silks with him, and in due course arrived at Nekabad, and
sought an audience of the prince.  When he was shown into his
presence he produced the beautiful gift of silks that Wali Dad
had sent, and begged the young man to accept them as a humble
tribute to his worth and greatness.  The prince was much touched
by the generosity of the giver, and ordered, as a return present,
twelve of the finest breed of horses for which his country was
famous to be delivered over to the merchant, to whom also, before
he took his leave, he gave a munificent reward for his services.

As before, the merchant at last arrived at home; and next day, he
set out for Wali Dad's house with the twelve horses.  When the
old man saw them coming in the distance he said to himself:
'Here's luck! a troop of horses coming! They are sure to want
quantities of grass, and I shall sell all I have without having
to drag it to market.'  Thereupon he rushed off and cut grass as
fast he could.  When he got back, with as much grass as he could
possibly carry, he was greatly discomfited to find that the
horses were all for himself.  At first he could not think what to
do with them, but, after a little, a brilliant idea struck him!
He gave two to the merchant, and begged him to take the rest to
the princess of Khaistan, who was clearly the fittest person to
possess such beautiful animals.

The merchant departed, laughing.  But, true to his old friend's
request, he took the horses with him on his next journey, and
eventually presented them safely to the princess.  This time the
princess sent for the merchant, and questioned him about the
giver.  Now, the merchant was usually a most honest man, but he
did not quite like to describe Wali Dad in his true light as an
old man whose income was five halfpence a day, and who had hardly
clothes to cover him.  So he told her that his friend had heard
stories of her beauty and goodness, and had longed to lay the
best he had at her feet.  The princess then took her father into
her confidence, and begged him to advise her what courtesy she
might return to one who persisted in making her such presents.

'Well,' said the king, 'you cannot refuse them; so the best thing
you can do is to send this unknown friend at once a present so
magnificent that he is not likely to be able to send you anything
better, and so will be ashamed to send anything at all!' Then he
ordered that, in place of each of the ten horses, two mules laden
with silver should be returned by her.

Thus, in a few hours, the merchant found himself in charge of a
splendid caravan; and he had to hire a number of armed men to
defend it on the road against the robbers, and he was glad indeed
to find himself back again in Wali Dad's hut.

'Well, now,' cried Wali Dad, as he viewed all the wealth laid at
his door, 'I can well repay that kind prince for his magnificent
present of horses; but to be sure you have been put to great
expenses! Still, if you will accept six mules and their loads,
and will take the rest straight to Nekabad, I shall thank you
heartily.'

The merchant felt handsomely repaid for his trouble, and wondered
greatly how the matter would turn out.  So he made no difficulty
about it; and as soon as he could get things ready, he set out
for Nekabad with this new and princely gift.

This time the prince, too, was embarrassed, and questioned the
merchant closely.  The merchant felt that his credit was at
stake, and whilst inwardly determining that he would not carry
the joke any further, could not help describing Wali Dad in such
glowing terms that the old man would never have known himself had
he heard them.  The prince, like the king of Khaistan, determined
that he would send in return a gift that would be truly royal,
and which would perhaps prevent the unknown giver sending him
anything more.  So he made up a caravan on twenty splendid horses
caparisoned in gold embroidered cloths, with fine morocco saddles
and silver bridles and stirrups, also twenty camels of the best
breed, which had the speed of race-horses, and could swing along
at a trot all day without getting tired; and, lastly, twenty
elephants, with magnificent silver howdahs and coverings of silk
embroidered with pearls.  To take care of these animals the
merchant hired a little army of men; and the troop made a great
show as they travelled along.

When Wali Dad from a distance saw the cloud of dust which the
caravan made, and the glitter of its appointments, he said to
himself: 'By Allah! here's a grand crowd coming! Elephants, too!
Grass will be selling well to-day!' And with that he hurried off
to the jungle and cut grass as fast as he could.  As soon as he
got back he found the caravan had stopped at his door, and the
merchant was waiting, a little anxiously, to tell him the news
and to congratulate him upon his riches.

'Riches!' cried Wali Dad, 'what has an old man like me with one
foot in the grave to do with riches?  That beautiful young
princess, now! She'd be the one to enjoy all these fine things!
Do you take for yourself two horses, two camels, and two
elephants, with all their trappings, and present the rest to
her.'

The merchant at first objected to these remarks, and pointed out
to Wali Dad that he was beginning to feel these embassies a
little awkward.  Of course he was himself richly repaid, so far
as expenses went; but still he did not like going so often, and
he was getting nervous.  At length, however he consented to go
once more, but he promised himself never to embark on another
such enterprise.

So, after a few days' rest, the caravan started off once more for
Khaistan.

The moment the king of Khaistan saw the gorgeous train of men and
beasts entering his palace courtyard, he was so amazed that he
hurried down in person to inquire about it, and became dumb when
he heard that these also were a present from the princely Wali
Dad, and were for the princess, his daughter.  He went hastily
off to her apartments, and said to her: 'I tell you what it is,
my dear, this man wants to marry you; that is the meaning of all
these presents! There is nothing for it but that we go and pay
him a visit in person.  He must be a man of immense wealth, and
as he is so devoted to you, perhaps you might do worse than marry
him!'

The princess agreed with all that her father said, and orders
were issued for vast numbers of elephants and camels, and
gorgeous tents and flags, and litters for the ladies, and horses
for the men, to be prepared without delay, as the king and
princess were going to pay a visit to the great and munificent
prince Wali Dad.  The merchant, the king declared, was to guide
the party.

The feelings of the poor merchant in this sore dilemma can hardly
be imagined.  Willingly would he have run away; but he was
treated with so much hospitality as Wali Dad's representative,
that he hardly got an instant's real peace, and never any
opportunity of slipping away.  In fact, after a few days, despair
possessed him to such a degree that he made up his mind that all
that happened was fate, and that escape was impossible; but he
hoped devoutly some turn of fortune would reveal to him a way out
of the difficulties which he had, with the best intentions, drawn
upon himself.

On the seventh day they all started, amidst thunderous salutes
from the ramparts of the city, and much dust, and cheering, and
blaring of trumpets.

Day after day they moved on, and every day the poor merchant felt
more ill and miserable.  He wondered what kind of death the king
would invent for him, and went through almost as much torture, as
he lay awake nearly the whole of every night thinking over the
situation, as he would have suffered if the king's executioners
were already setting to work upon his neck.

At last they were only one day's march from Wali Dad's little mud
home.  Here a great encampment was made, and the merchant was
sent on to tell Wali Dad that the King and Princess of Khaistan
had arrived and were seeking an interview.  When the merchant
arrived he found the poor old man eating his evening meal of
onions and dry bread, and when he told him of all that had
happened he had not the heart to proceed to load him with the
reproaches which rose to his tongue.  For Wali Dad was
overwhelmed with grief and shame for himself, for his friend, and
for the name and honour of the princess; and he wept and plucked
at his beard, and groaned most piteously.  With tears he begged
the merchant to detain them for one day by any kind of excuse he
could think of, and to come in the morning to discuss what they
should do.

As soon as the merchant was gone Wali Dad made up his mind that
there was only one honourable way out of the shame and distress
that he had created by his foolishness, and that was--to kill
himself.  So, without stopping to ask any one's advice, he went
off in the middle of the night to a place where the river wound
along at the base of steep rocky cliffs of great height, and
determined to throw himself down and put an end to his life. 
When he got to the place he drew back a few paces, took a little
run, and at the very edge of that dreadful black gulf he stopped
short! He COULD not do it!

From below, unseen in the blackness of the deep night shadows,
the water roared and boiled round the jagged rocks--he could
picture the place as he knew it, only ten times more pitiless and
forbidding in the visionless darkness; the wind soughed through
the gorge with fearsome sighs, and rustlings and whisperings, and
the bushes and grasses that grew in the ledges of the cliffs
seemed to him like living creatures that danced and beckoned,
shadowy and indistinct.  An owl laughed 'Hoo! hoo!' almost in his
face, as he peered over the edge of the gulf, and the old man
threw himself back in a perspiration of horror.  He was afraid!
He drew back shuddering, and covering his face in his hands he
wept aloud.

Presently he was aware of a gentle radiance that shed itself
before him.  Surely morning was not already coming to hasten and
reveal his disgrace! He took his hands from before his face, and
saw before him two lovely beings whom his instinct told him were
not mortal, but were Peris from Paradise.

'Why do you weep, old man?' said one, in a voice as clear and
musical as that of the bulbul.

'I weep for shame,' replied he.

'What do you here?' questioned the other.

'I came here to die,' said Wali Dad.  And as they questioned him,
he confessed all his story.

Then the first stepped forward and laid a hand upon his shoulder,
and Wali Dad began to feel that something strange--what, he did
not know--was happening to him.  His old cotton rags of clothes
were changed to beautiful linen and embroidered cloth; on his
hard, bare feet were warm, soft shoes, and on his head a great
jewelled turban.  Round his neck there lay a heavy golden chain,
and the little old bent sickle, which he cut grass with, and
which hung in his waistband, had turned into a gorgeous scimetar,
whose ivory hilt gleamed in the pale light like snow in
moonlight.  As he stood wondering, like a man in a dream, the
other peri waved her hand and bade him turn and see; and, lo!
before him a noble gateway stood open.  And up an avenue of giant
place trees the peris led him, dumb with amazement.  At the end
of the avenue, on the very spot where his hut had stood, a
gorgeous palace appeared, ablaze with myriads of lights.  Its
great porticoes and verandahs were occupied by hurrying servants,
and guards paced to and fro and saluted him respectfully as he
drew near, along mossy walks and through sweeping grassy lawns
where fountains were playing and flowers scented the air.  Wali
Dad stood stunned and helpless.

'Fear not,' said one of the peris; 'go to your house, and learn
that God rewards the simple-hearted.'

With these words they both disappeared and left him.  He walked
on, thinking still that he must be dreaming.  Very soon he
retired to rest in a splendid room, far grander than anything he
had ever dreamed of.

When morning dawned he woke, and found that the palace, and
himself, and his servants were all real, and that he was not
dreaming after all!

If he was dumbfounded, the merchant, who was ushered into his
presence soon after sunrise, was much more so.  He told Wali Dad
that he had not slept all night, and by the first streak of
daylight had started to seek out his friend.  And what a search
he had had! A great stretch of wild jungle country had, in the
night, been changed into parks and gardens; and if it had not
been for some of Wali Dad's new servants, who found him and
brought him to the palace, he would have fled away under the
impression that his trouble had sent him crazy, and that all he
saw was only imagination.

Then Wali Dad told the merchant all that had happened.  By his
advice he sent an invitation to the king and princess of Khaistan
to come and be his guests, together with all their retinue and
servants, down to the very humblest in the camp.

For three nights and days a great feast was held in honour of the
royal guests.  Every evening the king and his nobles were served
on golden plates and from golden cups; and the smaller people on
silver plates and from silver cups; and each evening each guest
was requested to keep the places and cups that they had used as a
remembrance of the occasion.  Never had anything so splendid been
seen.  Besides the great dinners, there were sports and hunting,
and dances, and amusements of all sorts.

On the fourth day the king of Khaistan took his host aside, and
asked him whether it was true, as he had suspected, that he
wished to marry his daughter.  But Wali Dad, after thanking him
very much for the compliment, said that he had never dreamed of
so great an honour, and that he was far too old and ugly for so
fair a lady; but he begged the king to stay with him until he
could send for the Prince of Nekabad, who was a most excellent,
brave, and honourable young man, and would surely be delighted to
try to win the hand of the beautiful princess.

To this the king agreed, and Wali Dad sent the merchant to
Nekabad, with a number of attendants, and with such handsome
presents that the prince came at once, fell head over ears in
love with the princess, and married her at Wali Dad's palace
amidst a fresh outburst of rejoicings.

And now the King of Khaistan and the Prince and Princess of
Nekabad, each went back to their own country; and Wali Dad lived
to a good old age, befriending all who were in trouble and
preserving, in his prosperity, the simple-hearted and generous
nature that he had when he was only Wali Dad Gunjay, the grass
cutter.

[Told the author by an Indian.]




Tale of a Tortoise and of a Mischievous Monkey



Once upon a time there was a country where the rivers were
larger, and the forests deeper, than anywhere else.  Hardly any
men came there, and the wild creatures had it all to themselves,
and used to play all sorts of strange games with each other.  The
great trees, chained one to the other by thick flowering plants
with bright scarlet or yellow blossoms, were famous hiding-places
for the monkeys, who could wait unseen, till a puma or an
elephant passed by, and then jump on their backs and go for a
ride, swinging themselves up by the creepers when they had had
enough.  Near the rivers huge tortoises were to be found, and
though to our eyes a tortoise seems a dull, slow thing, it is
wonderful to think how clever they were, and how often they
outwitted many of their livelier friends.

There was one tortoise in particular that always managed to get
the better of everybody, and many were the tales told in the
forest of his great deeds.  They began when he was quite young,
and tired of staying at home with his father and mother.  He left
them one day, and walked off in search of adventures.  In a wide
open space surrounded by trees he met with an elephant, who was
having his supper before taking his evening bath in the river
which ran close by.  'Let us see which of us two is strongest,'
said the young tortoise, marching up to the elephant.  'Very
well,' replied the elephant, much amused at the impertinence of
the little creature; 'when would you like the trial to be?'

'In an hour's time; I have some business to do first,' answered
the tortoise.  And he hastened away as fast as his short legs
would carry him.

In a pool of the river a whale was resting, blowing water into
the air and making a lovely fountain.  The tortoise, however, was
too young and too busy to admire such things, and he called to
the whale to stop, as he wanted to speak to him.  'Would you like
to try which of us is the stronger?' said he.  The whale looked
at him, sent up another fountain, and answered: 'Oh, yes;
certainly.  When do you wish to begin?  I am quite ready.'

'Then give me one of your longest bones, and I will fasten it to
my leg.  When I give the signal, you must pull, and we will see
which can pull the hardest.'

'Very good,' replied the whale; and he took out one of his bones
and passed it to the tortoise.

The tortoise picked up the end of the bone in his mouth and went
back to the elephant.  'I will fasten this to your leg,' said he,
'in the same way as it is fastened to mine, and we must both pull
as hard as we can.  We shall soon see which is the stronger.'  So
he wound it carefully round the elephant's leg, and tied it in a
firm knot.  'Now!' cried he, plunging into a thick bush behind
him.

The whale tugged at one end, and the elephant tugged at the
other, and neither had any idea that he had not the tortoise for
his foe.  When the whale pulled hardest the elephant was dragged
into the water; and when the elephant pulled the hardest the
whale was hauled on to the land.  They were very evenly matched,
and the battle was a hard one.

At last they were quite tired, and the tortoise, who was
watching, saw that they could play no more.  So he crept from his
hiding-place, and dipping himself in the river, he went to the
elephant and said: 'I see that you really are stronger than I
thought.  Suppose we give it up for to-day?' Then he dried
himself on some moss and went to the whale and said: 'I see that
you really are stronger than I thought.  Suppose we give it up
for to-day?'

The two adversaries were only too glad to be allowed to rest, and
believed to the end of their days that, after all, the tortoise
was stronger than either of them.

A day or two later the young tortoise was taking a stroll, when
he met a fox, and stopped to speak to him.  'Let us try,' said he
in a careless manner, 'which of us can lie buried in the ground
during seven years.'

'I shall be delighted,' answered the fox, 'only I would rather
that you began.'

'It is all the same to me,' replied the tortoise; 'if you come
round this way to-morrow you will see that I have fulfilled my
part of the bargain.'

So he looked about for a suitable place, and found a convenient
hole at the foot of an orange tree.  He crept into it, and the
next morning the fox heaped up the earth round him, and promised
to feed him every day with fresh fruit.  The fox so far kept his
word that each morning when the sun rose he appeared to ask how
the tortoise was getting on.  'Oh, very well; but I wish you
would give me some fruit,' replied he.

'Alas! the fruit is not ripe enough yet for you to eat,' answered
the fox, who hoped that the tortoise would die of hunger long
before the seven years were over.

'Oh dear, oh dear! I am so hungry!' cried the tortoise.

'I am sure you must be; but it will be all right to-morrow,' said
the fox, trotting off, not knowing that the oranges dropped down
the hollow trunk, straight into the tortoise's hole, and that he
had as many as he could possibly eat.

So the seven years went by; and when the tortoise came out of his
hole he was as fat as ever.

Now it was the fox's turn, and he chose his hole, and the
tortoise heaped the earth round, promising to return every day or
two with a nice young bird for his dinner.  'Well, how are you
getting on?' he would ask cheerfully when he paid his visits.

'Oh, all right; only I wish you had brought a bird with you,'
answered the fox.

'I have been so unlucky, I have never been able to catch one,'
replied the tortoise.  'However, I shall be more fortunate to-
morrow, I am sure.'

But not many to-morrows after, when the tortoise arrived with his
usual question: 'Well, how are you getting on?' he received no
answer, for the fox was lying in his hole quite still, dead of
hunger.

By this time the tortoise was grown up, and was looked up to
throughout the forest as a person to be feared for his strength
and wisdom.  But he was not considered a very swift runner, until
an adventure with a deer added to his fame.

One day, when he was basking in the sun, a stag passed by, and
stopped for a little conversation.  'Would you care to see which
of us can run fastest?' asked the tortoise, after some talk.  The
stag thought the question so silly that he only shrugged his
shoulders.  'Of course, the victor would have the right to kill
the other,' went on the tortoise.  'Oh, on that condition I
agree,' answered the deer; 'but I am afraid you are a dead man.'

'It is no use trying to frighten me,' replied the tortoise.  'But
I should like three days for training; then I shall be ready to
start when the sun strikes on the big tree at the edge of the
great clearing.'

The first thing the tortoise did was to call his brothers and his
cousins together, and he posted them carefully under ferns all
along the line of the great clearing, making a sort of ladder
which stretched for many miles.  This done to his satisfaction,
he went back to the starting place.

The stag was quite punctual, and as soon as the sun's rays struck
the trunk of the tree the stag started off, and was soon far out
of the sight of the tortoise.  Every now and then he would turn
his head as he ran, and call out: 'How are you getting on?' and
the tortoise who happened to be nearest at that moment would
answer: 'All right, I am close up to you.'

Full of astonishment, the stag would redouble his efforts, but it
was no use.  Each time he asked: 'Are you there?' the answer
would come: 'Yes, of course, where else should I be?' And the
stag ran, and ran, and ran, till he could run no more, and
dropped down dead on the grass.

And the tortoise, when he thinks about it, laughs still.

 But the tortoise was not the only creature of whose tricks
stories were told in the forest.  There was a famous monkey who
was just as clever and more mischievous, because he was so much
quicker on his feet and with his hands.  It was quite impossible
to catch him and give him the thrashing he so often deserved, for
he just swung himself up into a tree and laughed at the angry
victim who was sitting below.  Sometimes, however, the
inhabitants of the forest were so foolish as to provoke him, and
then they got the worst of it.  This was what happened to the
barber, whom the monkey visited one morning, saying that he
wished to be shaved.  The barber bowed politely to his customer,
and begging him to be seated, tied a large cloth round his neck,
and rubbed his chin with soap; but instead of cutting off his
beard, the barber made a snip at the end of his tail.  It was
only a very little bit and the monkey started up more in rage
than in pain.  'Give me back the end of my tail,' he roared, 'or
I will take one of your razors.'  The barber refused to give back
the missing piece, so the monkey caught up a razor from the table
and ran away with it, and no one in the forest could be shaved
for days, as there was not another to be got for miles and miles.

As he was making his way to his own particular palm-tree, where
the cocoanuts grew, which were so useful for pelting passers-by,
he met a woman who was scaling a fish with a bit of wood, for in
this side of the forest a few people lived in huts near the
river.

'That must be hard work,' said the monkey, stopping to look; 'try
my knife--you will get on quicker.'  And he handed her the razor
as he spoke.  A few days later he came back and rapped at the
door of the hut.  'I have called for my razor,' he said, when the
woman appeared.

'I have lost it,' answered she.

'If you don't give it to me at once I will take your sardine,'
replied the monkey, who did not believe her.  The woman protested
she had not got the knife, so he took the sardine and ran off.

A little further along he saw a baker who was standing at the
door, eating one of his loaves.  'That must be rather dry,' said
the monkey, 'try my fish'; and the man did not need twice
telling.  A few days later the monkey stopped again at the
baker's hut.  'I've called for that fish,' he said.

'That fish?  But I have eaten it!' exclaimed the baker in dismay.

'If you have eaten it I shall take this barrel of meal in
exchange,' replied the monkey; and he walked off with the barrel
under his arm.

As he went he saw a woman with a group of little girls round her,
teaching them how to dress hair.  'Here is something to make
cakes for the children,' he said, putting down his barrel, which
by this time he found rather heavy.  The children were delighted,
and ran directly to find some flat stones to bake their cakes on,
and when they had made and eaten them, they thought they had
never tasted anything so nice.  Indeed, when they saw the monkey
approaching not long after, they rushed to meet him, hoping that
he was bringing them some more presents.  But he took no notice
of their questions, he only said to their mother: 'I've called
for my barrel of meal.'

'Why, you gave it to me to make cakes of!' cried the mother.

'If I can't get my barrel of meal, I shall take one of your
children,' answered the monkey.  'I am in want of somebody who
can bake my bread when I am tired of fruit, and who knows how to
make cocoanut cakes.'

'Oh, leave me my child, and I will find you another barrel of
meal,' wept the mother.

'I don't WANT another barrel, I want THAT one,' answered the
monkey sternly.  And as the woman stood wringing her hands, he
caught up the little girl that he thought the prettiest and took
her to his home in the palm tree.

She never went back to the hut, but on the whole she was not much
to be pitied, for monkeys are nearly as good as children to play
with, and they taught her how to swing, and to climb, and to fly
from tree to tree, and everything else they knew, which was a
great deal.

Now the monkey's tiresome tricks had made him many enemies in the
forest, but no one hated him so much as the puma.  The cause of
their quarrel was known only to themselves, but everybody was
aware of the fact, and took care to be out of the way when there
was any chance of these two meeting.  Often and often the puma
had laid traps for the monkey, which he felt sure his foe could
not escape; and the monkey would pretend that he saw nothing, and
rejoice the hidden puma's heart by seeming to walk straight into
the snare, when, lo! a loud laugh would be heard, and the
monkey's grinning face would peer out of a mass of creepers and
disappear before his foe could reach him.

This state of things had gone on for quite a long while, when at
last there came a season such as the oldest parrot in the forest
could never remember.  Instead of two or three hundred inches of
rain falling, which they were all accustomed to, month after
month passed without a cloud, and the rivers and springs dried
up, till there was only one small pool left for everyone to drink
from.  There was not an animal for miles round that did not
grieve over this shocking condition of affairs, not one at least
except the puma.  His only thought for years had been how to get
the monkey into his power, and this time he imagined his chance
had really arrived.  He would hide himself in a thicket, and when
the monkey came down to drink--and come he must--the puma would
spring out and seize him.  Yes, on this occasion there could be
no escape!

And no more there would have been if the puma had had greater
patience; but in his excitement he moved a little too soon.  The
monkey, who was stooping to drink, heard a rustling, and turning
caught the gleam of two yellow, murderous eyes.  With a mighty
spring he grasped a creeper which was hanging above him, and
landed himself on the branch of a tree; feeling the breath of the
puma on his feet as the animal bounded from is cover.  Never had
the monkey been so near death, and it was some time before he
recovered enough courage to venture on the ground again.

Up there in the shelter of the trees, he began to turn over in
his head plans for escaping the snares of the puma.  And at
length chance helped him.  Peeping down to the earth, he saw a
man coming along the path carrying on his head a large gourd
filled with honey.

He waited till the man was just underneath the tree, then he hung
from a bough, and caught the gourd while the man looked up
wondering, for he was no tree-climber.  Then the monkey rubbed
the honey all over him, and a quantity of leaves from a creeper
that was hanging close by; he stuck them all close together into
the honey, so that he looked like a walking bush.  This finished,
he ran to the pool to see the result, and, quite pleased with
himself, set out in search of adventures.

Soon the report went through the forest that a new animal had
appeared from no one knew where, and that when somebody had asked
his name, the strange creature had answered that it was Jack-in-
the-Green.  Thanks to this, the monkey was allowed to drink at
the pool as often as he liked, for neither beast nor bird had the
faintest notion who he was.  And if they made any inquiries the
only answer they got was that the water of which he had drunk
deeply had turned his hair into leaves, so that they all knew
what would happen in case they became too greedy.

By-and-by the great rains began again.  The rivers and streams
filled up, and there was no need for him to go back to the pool,
near the home of his enemy, the puma, as there was a large number
of places for him to choose from.  So one night, when everything
was still and silent, and even the chattering parrots were asleep
on one leg, the monkey stole down softly from his perch, and
washed off the honey and the leaves, and came out from his bath
in his own proper skin.  On his way to breakfast he met a rabbit,
and stopped for a little talk.

'I am feeling rather dull,' he remarked; 'I think it would do me
good to hunt a while.  What do you say?'

'Oh, I am quite willing,' answered the rabbit, proud of being
spoken to by such a large creature.  'But the question is, what
shall we hunt?'

'There is no credit in going after an elephant or a tiger,'
replied the monkey stroking his chin, 'they are so big they could
not possibly get out of your way.  It shows much more skill to be
able to catch a small thing that can hide itself in a moment
behind a leaf.  I'll tell you what! Suppose I hunt butterflies,
and you, serpents.'

The rabbit, who was young and without experience, was delighted
with this idea, and they both set out on their various ways.

The monkey quietly climbed up the nearest tree, and ate fruit
most of the day, but the rabbit tired himself to death poking his
nose into every heap of dried leaves he saw, hoping to find a
serpent among them.  Luckily for himself the serpents were all
away for the afternoon, at a meeting of their own, for there is
nothing a serpent likes so well for dinner as a nice plump
rabbit.  But, as it was, the dried leaves were all empty, and the
rabbit at last fell asleep where he was.  Then the monkey, who
had been watching him, fell down and pulled his ears, to the rage
of the rabbit, who vowed vengeance.

It was not easy to catch the monkey off his guard, and the rabbit
waited long before an opportunity arrived.  But one day Jack-in-
the-Green was sitting on a stone, wondering what he should do
next, when the rabbit crept softly behind him, and gave his tail
a sharp pull.  The monkey gave a shriek of pain, and darted up
into a tree, but when he saw that it was only the rabbit who had
dared to insult him so, he chattered so fast in his anger, and
looked so fierce, that the rabbit fled into the nearest hole, and
stayed there for several days, trembling with fright.

Soon after this adventure the monkey went away into another part
of the country, right on the outskirts of the forest, where there
was a beautiful garden full of oranges hanging ripe from the
trees.  This garden was a favourite place for birds of all kinds,
each hoping to secure an orange for dinner, and in order to
frighten the birds away and keep a little fruit for himself, the
master had fastened a waxen figure on one of the boughs.

Now the monkey was as fond of oranges as any of the birds, and
when he saw a man standing in the tree where the largest and
sweetest oranges grew, he spoke to him at once.  'You man,' he
said rudely, 'throw me down that big orange up there, or I will
throw a stone at you.'  The wax figure took no notice of this
request, so the monkey, who was easily made angry, picked up a
stone, and flung it with all his force.  But instead of falling
to the ground again, the stone stuck to the soft wax.

At this moment a breeze shook the tree, and the orange on which
the monkey had set his heart dropped from the bough.  He picked
it up and ate it every bit, including the rind, and it was so
good he thought he should like another.  So he called again to
the wax figure to throw him an orange, and as the figure did not
move, he hurled another stone, which stuck to the wax as the
first had done.  Seeing that the man was quite indifferent to
stones, the monkey grew more angry still, and climbing the tree
hastily, gave the figure a violent kick.  But like the two stones
his leg remained stuck to the wax, and he was held fast.  'Let me
go at once, or I will give you another kick,' he cried, suiting
the action to the word, and this time also his foot remained in
the grasp of the man.  Not knowing what he did, the monkey hit
out, first with one hand and then with the other, and when he
found that he was literally bound hand and foot, he became so mad
with anger and terror that in his struggles he fell to the
ground, dragging the figure after him.  This freed his hands and
feet, but besides the shock of the fall, they had tumbled into a
bed of thorns, and he limped away broken and bruised, and
groaning loudly; for when monkeys ARE hurt, they take pains that
everybody shall know it.

It was a long time before Jack was well enough to go about again;
but when he did, he had an encounter with his old enemy the puma. 
And this was how it came about.

One day the puma invited his friend the stag to go with him and
see a comrade, who was famous for the good milk he got from his
cows.  The stag loved milk, and gladly accepted the invitation,
and when the sun began to get a little low the two started on
their walk.  On the way they arrived on the banks of a river, and
as there were no bridges in those days it was necessary to swim
across it.  The stag was not fond of swimming, and began to say
that he was tired, and thought that after all it was not worth
going so far to get milk, and that he would return home.  But the
puma easily saw through these excuses, and laughed at him.

'The river is not deep at all,' he said; 'why, you will never be
off your feet.  Come, pluck up your courage and follow me.'

The stag was afraid of the river; still, he was much more afraid
of being laughed at, and he plunged in after the puma; but in an
instant the current had swept him away, and if it had not borne
him by accident to a shallow place on the opposite side, where he
managed to scramble up the bank, he would certainly have been
drowned.  As it was, he scrambled out, shaking with terror, and
found the puma waiting for him.  'You had a narrow escape that
time,' said the puma.

After resting for a few minutes, to let the stag recover from his
fright, they went on their way till they came to a grove of
bananas.

'They look very good,' observed the puma with a longing glance,
'and I am sure you must be hungry, friend stag?  Suppose you were
to climb the tree and get some.  You shall eat the green ones,
they are the best and sweetest; and you can throw the yellow ones
down to me.  I dare say they will do quite well!' The stag did as
he was bid, though, not being used to climbing, it gave him a
deal of trouble and sore knees, and besides, his horns were
continually getting entangled in the creepers.  What was worse,
when once he had tasted the bananas, he found them not at all to
his liking, so he threw them all down, green and yellow alike,
and let the puma take his choice.  And what a dinner h