e made!
When he had QUITE done, they set forth once more.

The path lay through a field of maize, where several men were
working.  As they came up to them, the puma whispered: 'Go on in
front, friend stag, and just say "Bad luck to all workers!"' The
stag obeyed, but the men were hot and tired, and did not think
this a good joke.  So they set their dogs at him, and he was
obliged to run away as fast as he could.

'I hope your industry will be rewarded as it deserves,' said the
puma as he passed along; and the men were pleased, and offered
him some of their maize to eat.

By-and-by the puma saw a small snake with a beautiful shining
skin, lying coiled up at the foot of a tree.  'What a lovely
bracelet that would make for your daughter, friend stag! said he. 
The stag stooped and picked up the snake, which bit him, and he
turned angrily to the puma.  'Why did you not tell me it would
bite?' he asked.

'Is it my fault if you are an idiot?' replied the puma.

At last they reached their journey's end, but by this time it was
late, and the puma's comrade was ready for bed, so they slung
their hammocks in convenient places, and went to sleep.  But in
the middle of the night the puma rose softly and stole out of the
door to the sheep-fold, where he killed and ate the fattest sheep
he could find, and taking a bowl full of its blood, he sprinkled
the sleeping stag with it.  This done, he returned to bed.

In the morning the shepherd went as usual to let the sheep out of
the fold, and found one of them missing.  He thought directly of
the puma, and ran to accuse him of having eaten the sheep.  'I,
my good man?  What had put it into your head to think of such a
thing?  Have I got any blood about me?  If anyone has eaten a
sheep it must be my friend the stag.'  Then the shepherd went to
examine the sleeping stag, and of course he saw the blood.  'Ah!
I will teach you how to steal!' cried he, and he hit the stag
such a blow on his skull that he died in a moment.  The noise
awakened the comrade above, and he came downstairs.  The puma
greeted him with joy, and begged he might have some of the famous
milk as soon as possible, for he was very thirsty.  A large
bucket was set before the puma directly.  He drank it to the last
drop, and then took leave.

On his way home he met the monkey.  'Are you fond of milk?' asked
he.  'I know a place where you get it very nice.  I will show you
it if you like.'  The monkey knew that the puma was not so good-
natured for nothing, but he felt quite able to take care of
himself, so he said he should have much pleasure in accompanying
his friend.

They soon reached the same river, and, as before, the puma
remarked: 'Friend monkey, you will find it very shallow; there is
no cause for fear.  Jump in and I will follow.'

'Do you think you have the stag to deal with?' asked the monkey,
laughing.  'I should prefer to follow; if not I shall go no
further.  The puma understood that it was useless trying to make
the monkey do as he wished, so he chose a shallow place and began
to swim across.  The monkey waited till the puma had got to the
middle, then he gave a great spring and jumped on his back,
knowing quite well that the puma would be afraid to shake him
off, lest he should be swept away into deep water.  So in this
manner they reached the bank.

The banana grove was not far distant, and here the puma thought
he would pay the monkey out for forcing him to carry him over the
river.  'Friend monkey, look what fine bananas,' cried he.  'You
are fond of climbing; suppose you run up and throw me down a few. 
You can eat the green ones, which are the nicest, and I will be
content with the yellow.'

'Very well,' answered the monkey, swinging himself up; but he ate
all the yellow ones himself, and only threw down the green ones
that were left.  The puma was furious and cried out: 'I will
punch your head for that.'  But the monkey only answered: 'If you
are gong to talk such nonsense I won't walk with you.'  And the
puma was silent.

In a few minutes more they arrived at the field were the men were
reaping the maize, and the puma remarked as he had done before:
'Friend monkey, if you wish to please these men, just say as you
go by: "Bad luck to all workers."

'Very well,' replied the monkey; but, instead, he nodded and
smiled, and said: 'I hope your industry may be rewarded as it
deserves.'  The men thanked him heartily, let him pass on, and
the puma followed behind him.

Further along the path they saw the shining snake lying on the
moss.  'What a lovely necklace for your daughter,' exclaimed the
puma.  'Pick it up and take it with you.'

'You are very kind, but I will leave it for you,' answered the
monkey, and nothing more was said about the snake.

Not long after this they reached the comrade's house, and found
him just ready to go to bed.  So, without stopping to talk, the
guests slung their hammocks, the monkey taking care to place his
so high that no one could get at him.  Besides, he thought it
would be more prudent not to fall asleep, so he only lay still
and snored loudly.  When it was quite dark and no sound was to be
heard, the puma crept out to the sheep-fold, killed the sheep,
and carried back a bowl full of its blood with which to sprinkle
the monkey.  But the monkey, who had been watching out of the
corner of his eye, waited until the puma drew near, and with a
violent kick upset the bowl all over the puma himself.

When the puma saw what had happened, he turned in a great hurry
to leave the house, but before he could do so, he saw the
shepherd coming, and hastily lay down again.

'This is the second time I have lost a sheep,' the man said to
the monkey; 'it will be the worse for the thief when I catch him,
I can tell you.'  The monkey did not answer, but silently pointed
to the puma who was pretending to be asleep.  The shepherd
stooped and saw the blood, and cried out: 'Ah! so it is you, is
it?  then take that!' and with his stick he gave the puma such a
blow on the head that he died then and there.

Then the monkey got up and went to the dairy, and drank all the
milk he could find.  Afterwards he returned home and married, and
that is the last we heard of him.

[Adapted from Folk-lore Bresilien.]



The Knights of the Fish



Once upon a time there lived an old cobbler who worked hard at
his trade from morning till night, and scarcely gave himself a
moment to eat.  But, industrious as he was, he could hardly buy
bread and cheese for himself and his wife, and they grew thinner
and thinner daily.

For a long while whey pretended to each other that they had no
appetite, and that a few blackberries from the hedges were a
great deal nicer than a good strong bowl of soup.  But at length
there came a day when the cobbler could bear it no longer, and he
threw away his last, and borrowing a rod from a neighbour he went
out to fish.

Now the cobbler was as patient about fishing as he had been about
cobbling.  From dawn to dark he stood on the banks of the little
stream, without hooking anything better than an eel, or a few old
shoes, that even he, clever though he was, felt were not worth
mending.  At length his patience began to give way, and as he
undressed one night he said to himself: 'Well, I will give it one
more chance; and if I don't catch a fish to-morrow, I will go and
hang myself.'

He had not cast his line for ten minutes the next morning before
he drew from the river the most beautiful fish he had ever seen
in his life.  But he nearly fell into the water from surprise,
when the fish began to speak to him, in a small, squeaky voice:

'Take me back to your hut and cook me; then cut me up, and
sprinkle me over with pepper and salt.  Give two of the pieces to
your wife, and bury two more in the garden.'

The cobbler did not know what to make of these strange words; but
he was wiser than many people, and when he did not understand, he
thought it was well to obey.  His children wanted to eat all the
fish themselves, and begged their father to tell them what to do
with the pieces he had put aside; but the cobbler only laughed,
and told them it was no business of theirs.  And when they were
safe in bed he stole out and buried the two pieces in the garden.

By and by two babies, exactly alike, lay in a cradle, and in the
garden were two tall plants, with two brilliant shields on the
top.

Years passed away, and the babies were almost men.  They were
tired of living quietly at home, being mistaken for each other by
everybody they saw, and determined to set off in different
directions, to seek adventures.

So, one fine morning, the two brothers left the hut, and walked
together to the place where the great road divided.  There they
embraced and parted, promising that if anything remarkable had
happened to either, he would return to the cross roads and wait
till his brother came.

The youth who took the path that ran eastwards arrived presently
at a large city, where he found everybody standing at the doors,
wringing their hands and weeping bitterly.

'What is the matter?' asked he, pausing and looking round.  And a
man replied, in a faltering voice, that each year a beautiful
girl was chosen by lot to be offered up to a dreadful fiery
dragon, who had a mother even worse than himself, and this year
the lot had fallen on their peerless princess.

'But where IS the princess?' said the young man once more, and
again the man answered him: 'She is standing under a tree, a mile
away, waiting for the dragon.'

This time the Knight of the Fish did not stop to hear more, but
ran off as fast as he could, and found the princess bathed in
tears, and trembling from head to foot.

She turned as she heard the sound of his sword, and removed her
handkerchief from his eyes.

'Fly,' she cried; 'fly while you have yet time, before that
monster sees you.'

She said it, and she mean it; yet, when he had turned his back,
she felt more forsaken than before.  But in reality it was not
more than a few minutes before he came back, galloping furiously
on a horse he had borrowed, and carrying a huge mirror across its
neck.

'I am in time, then,' he cried, dismounting very carefully, and
placing the mirror against the trunk of a tree.

'Give me your veil,' he said hastily to the princess.  And when
she had unwound it from her head he covered the mirror with it.

'The moment the dragon comes near you, you must tear off the
veil,' cried he; 'and be sure you hide behind the mirror.  Have
no fear; I shall be at hand.'

He and his horse had scarcely found shelter amongst some rocks,
when the flap of the dragon's wings could be plainly heard.  He
tossed his head with delight at the sight of her, and approached
slowly to the place where she stood, a little in front of the
mirror.  Then, still looking the monster steadily in the face,
she passed one hand behind her back and snatched off the veil,
stepping swiftly behind the tree as she did so.

The princess had not known, when she obeyed the orders of the
Knight of the Fish, what she expected to happen.  Would the
dragon with snaky locks be turned to stone, she wondered, like
the dragon in an old story her nurse had told her; or would some
fiery spark dart from the heart of the mirror, and strike him
dead?  Neither of these things occurred, but, instead, the dragon
stopped short with surprise and rage when he saw a monster before
him as big and strong as himself.  He shook his mane with rage
and fury; the enemy in front did exactly the same.  He lashed his
tail, and rolled his red eyes, and the dragon opposite was no
whit behind him.  Opening his mouth to its very widest, he gave
an awful roar; but the other dragon only roared back.  This was
too much, and with another roar which made the princess shake in
her shoes, he flung himself upon his foe.  In an instant the
mirror lay at his feet broken into a thousand pieces, but as
every piece reflected part of himself, the dragon thought that he
too had been smashed into atoms.

It was the moment for which the Knight of the Fish had watched
and waited, and before the dragon could find out that he was not
hurt at all, the young man's lance was down his throat, and he
was rolling, dead, on the grass.

Oh! what shouts of joy rang through the great city, when the
youth came riding back with the princess sitting behind him, and
dragging the horrible monster by a cord.  Everybody cried out
that the king must give the victor the hand of the princess; and
so he did, and no one had ever seen such balls and feasts and
sports before.  And when they were all over the young couple went
to the palace prepared for them, which was so large that it was
three miles round.

The first wet day after their marriage the bridegroom begged the
bride to show him all the rooms in the palace, and it was so big
and took so long that the sun was shining brightly again before
they stepped on to the roof to see the view.

'What castle is that out there,' asked the knight; 'it seems to
be made of black marble?'

'It is called the castle of Albatroz,' answered the princess. 
'It is enchanted, and no one that has tried to enter it has ever
come back.'

Her husband said nothing, and began to talk of something else;
but the next morning he ordered his horse, took his spear, called
his bloodhound, and set off for the castle.

It needed a brave man to approach it, for it made your hair stand
on end merely to look at it; it was as dark as the night of a
storm, and as silent as the grave.  But the Knight of the Fish
knew no fear, and had never turned his back on an enemy; so he
drew out his horn, and blew a blast.

The sound awoke all the sleeping echoes in the castle, and was
repeated now loudly, now softly; now near, and now far.  But
nobody stirred for all that.

'Is there anyone inside?' cried the young man in his loudest
voice; 'anyone who will give a knight hospitality?  Neither
governor, nor squire, not even a page?'

'Not even a page!' answered the echoes.  But the young man did
not heed them, and only struck a furious blow at the gate.

Then a small grating opened, and there appeared the tip of a huge
nose, which belonged to the ugliest old woman that ever was seen.

'What do you want?' said she.

'To enter,' he answered shortly.  'Can I rest here this night? 
Yes or No?'

'No, No, No!' repeated the echoes.

Between the fierce sun and his anger at being kept waiting, the
Knight of the Fish had grown so hot that he lifted his visor, and
when the old woman saw how handsome he was, she began fumbling
with the lock of the gate.

'Come in, come in,' said she, 'so fine a gentleman will do us no
harm.'

'Harm!' repeated the echoes, but again the young man paid no
heed.

'Let us go in, ancient dame,' but she interrupted him.

'You must call me the Lady Berberisca,' she answered, sharply;
'and this is my castle, to which I bid you welcome.  You shall
live here with me and be my husband.'  But at these words the
knight let his spear fall, so surprised was he.

'I marry YOU? why you must be a hundred at least!' cried he. 
'You are mad! All I desire is to inspect the castle and then go.' 
As he spoke he heard the voices give a mocking laugh; but the old
woman took no notice, and only bade the knight follow her.

Old though she was, it seemed impossible to tire her.  There was
no room, however small, she did not lead him into, and each room
was full of curious things he had never seen before.

At length they came to a stone staircase, which was so dark that
you could not see your hand if you held it up before your face.

'I have kept my most precious treasure till the last,' said the
old woman; 'but let me go first, for the stairs are steep, and
you might easily break your leg.'  So on she went, now and then
calling back to the young man in the darkness.  But he did not
know that she had slipped aside into a recess, till suddenly he
put his foot on a trap door which gave way under him, and he fell
down, down, as many good knights had done before him, and his
voice joined the echoes of theirs.

'So you would not marry me!' chuckled the old witch.  'Ha! ha!
Ha! ha!'

Meanwhile his brother had wandered far and wide, and at last he
wandered back to the same great city where the other young knight
had met with so many adventures.  He noticed, with amazement,
that as he walked through the streets the guards drew themselves
up in line, and saluted him, and the drummers played the royal
march; but he was still more bewildered when several servants in
livery ran up to him and told him that the princess was sure
something terrible had befallen him, and had made herself ill
with weeping.  At last it occurred to him that once more he had
been taken for his brother.  'I had better say nothing,' thought
he; 'perhaps I shall be able to help him after all.'

So he suffered himself to be borne in triumph to the palace,
where the princess threw herself into his arms.

'And so you did go to the castle?' she asked.

'Yes, of course I did,' answered he.

'And what did you see there?'

'I am forbidden to tell you anything about it, until I have
returned there once more,' replied he.

'Must you really go back to that dreadful place?' she asked
wistfully.  'You are the only man who has ever come back from
it.'

'I must,' was all he answered.  And the princess, who was a wise
woman, only said: 'Well, go to bed now, for I am sure you must be
very tired.'

But the knight shook his head.  'I have sworn never to lie in a
bed as long as my work in the castle remains standing.'  And the
princess again sighed, and was silent.

Early next day the young man started for the castle, feeling sure
that some terrible thing must have happened to his brother.

At the blast of his horn the long nose of the old woman appeared
at the grating, but the moment she caught sight of his face, she
nearly fainted from fright, as she thought it was the ghost of
the youth whose bones were lying in the dungeon of the castle.

'Lady of all the ages,' cried the new comer, 'did you not give
hospitality to a young knight but a short time ago?'

'A short time ago!' wailed the voices.

'And how have you ill-treated him?' he went on.

'Ill-treated him!' answered the voices.  The woman did not stop
to hear more; she turned to fly; but the knight's sword entered
her body.

'Where is my brother, cruel hag?' asked he sternly.

'I will tell you,' said she; 'but as I feel that I am going to
die I shall keep that piece of news to myself, till you have
brought me to life again.'

The young man laughed scornfully.  'How do you propose that I
should work that miracle?'

'Oh, it is quite easy.  Go into the garden and gather the flowers
of the everlasting plant and some of dragon's blood.  Crush them
together and boil them in a large tub of water, and then put me
into it.'

The knight did as the old witch bade him, and, sure enough, she
came out quite whole, but uglier than ever.  She then told the
young man what had become of his brother, and he went down into
the dungeon, and brought up his body and the bodies of the other
victims who lay there, and when they were all washed in the magic
water their strength was restored to them.

And, besides these, he found in another cavern the bodies of the
girls who had been sacrificed to the dragon, and brought them
back to life also.

As to the old witch, in the end she died of rage at seeing her
prey escape her; and at the moment she drew her last breath the
castle of Albatroz fell into ruins with a great noise.

[From Cuentos, Oraciones, Adivinas recogidos por Fernan
Caballaro.]










This etext was produced by David A. Schwan (davidsch@earthlink.net).





How Members of Congress are Bribed.
An Open Letter.
A Protest and a Petition.
From a Citizen of California to the United States Congress

by Joseph H. Moore.




The Lobbyist.



If a persistent intermeddler without proper warrant in Government
affairs, an unscrupulous dealer in threats and promises amongst public
men, a constant menace to sworn servants of the people in their offices
of trust, a tempter of the corrupt and a terror to the timid who are
delegated to power a remorseless enemy to wholesome legislation, a
constant friend to conspirators against the common welfare for private
gain - if such a compound of dangerous and insolent qualities merged in
one personality, active, vigilant, unblushing, be a Lobbyist - then
Collis P. Huntington is a Lobbyist at the doors of Congress, in its
corridors and in its councils, at Washington.

He is the spirit incarnate of Monopoly in its most aggressive form.
Among the intrenched powers which have sapped the vitality and are a
menace to the existence of our form of republican government, he is
strong with their strength, dangerous with their power, perilous with
the insolence of their courtesies, the blandishment of their open or
covert threats.

For nearly thirty years he has engendered broadcast political corruption
in order to enrich himself and his associate railroad magnates at the
public cost.

The declared representative now of those who have been thus far
successful conspirators against the general Treasury and ruthless
oppressors of every vital interest of defenceless California, with
resonant voice and open hand he is clearly visible upon parade,
demanding attention from the elected servants of all the people, and
easily dwarfing the lessor lobby by the splendor of his equipment.

The English Parliament would relegate such an intruder to the street;
the French Deputies point to his credentials with infinite scorn;
Italian statesmen would shrink from a perusal of his record, and the
Spanish Cortes decline to listen to any plea that men who are at one and
the same time known robbers and declared beggars have blended and vested
rights as both such to millions of public money.

To the vision of thoughtful rulers and myriads of patriots throughout
the world, reading history now as it is being created from day to day,
the Anarchist naturally looms in the background of such a spectacle.



A Search-Light.



In order that a proper side-light be flashed upon him; that his choice
methods of dealing with men and accomplishing his purposes may pass in
review; that some Californians and many national legislators may be
informed of that which they never knew, or reminded of that which they
may have forgotten; that the record of his accidental and forced
confession in open Court of an appalling use of money in defending
stolen millions and grasping after more shall be revived; that his low
estimate of the honor and integrity of public men, and his essential
contempt for the masses, may be contrasted with his high appreciation of
the debauching power of money; that the enslavement by himself and his
associates of the naturally great State of California and her indignant
people may be once more proclaimed with bitter protest and earnest
appeal to all the citizens of our sister States throughout our vast
commonwealth; and to the end that no such palpable embodiment of
political infamy may continue to stalk without rebuke through all the
open ways and sacred recesses of popular power crystallized at
Washington - I propose to revive the recollection of - and to briefly
comment on - the whilom notorious Huntington-Colton Letters which became
public property as part of the records of the Superior Court of Sonoma
County in this State.



Huntington-Colton Letters.



Of an apparent nearly 600, only about 200 are in evidence. It is to be
regretted that more did not come to light. If the public could only be
privileged to read what he wrote to Leland Stanford, and to Charles
Crocker, and to Mark Hopkins - as well as to David D. Colton - there
there would be much to reflect upon. But the public never will see such
letters. The nature of them required their immediate destruction.

As Huntington explains:

"I am often asked by my associates in California about my views in
matters that I have written to the others of, and allow me to say that
all letters that I number consecutively, I have supposed would be read
by all, and then go into the basket together." (No. 561. N. Y., April
7th, 1875.)

That was the safest way. It is not wise to allow great numbers of
thinking people to read that they are victims of chicanery, corruption
in high places, bribery, hire and salary, and oppression through
conspiracy. There might be something more than a spice of danger in much
carelessness.



Tone of the Letters



The letters under consideration, written during the four years from
October, 1874, to October, 1878, tell a plain enough, tale of their own.
They abound with cool and easy allusions to various men and things: to
"convincing" public servants; to "fixing" committees in Congress; to
"persuading" the most exalted officials; purchasing National
legislators, as well as Territorial Governors; to deceiving local
communities, and the United States generally, with well considered
cunning; to working noisily with blatant instruments and quietly through
masked agents; to creating public opinion by means of false showings; to
electing or defeating candidates for office; to smiting enemies and
rewarding friends.

Viewed as a contribution to the literature of fatal political infection
the letters are unique. They embody an epitome of just such work as
their writer is prepared to now continue, if the temper of the American
people will permit him to do so.

The plane upon which his exertions will possibly be made may be justly
imagined from the intimate knowledge and implied approval of bribery on
a collossal scale which he mentions frankly and carelessly thus:

"I returned from Washington last night. The sub-committee of the R. R.
Committee of the House have agreed to report Scott T. and P. Bills
through to San Diego, and I am disposed to think the full committee will
report it to the House. It can be hoped, but I doubt if it would be
worth the cost, as I do not think it can pass the House. Scott, no
doubt, will promise all the - say $40,000,000 that the Act would give
him." (No, 428. N. Y., Feb. 23, 1878.)

And thus:

"The T. and P. folks are working hard on their bill. * * * They offered
one M. C. one thousand dollars cash down, five thousand when the Bill
passed and ten thousand of the bonds when they got them, if he would
vote for the Bill." (No. 455. N. Y., May 3 , 1878.)

The thought naturally occurs here: If such matter-of-course mention of
appalling debauch cry of political honor and morality reflects the
character of a conscience and foreshadows the scope of a purpose, - if
such were his estimate of Congress, and such his belief then - how much
are the Central Pacific magnates disposed to promise now to soon evade
and eventually escape payment of, say, $67,000,000 now nearly due to the
Government?



"The People Can Never Have an Open Highway."



In 1874, Thomas A. Scott, of Pennsylvania, proposed to build the Texas
and Pacific Railway, and to secure subsidies for that purpose from the
Southern States, as well as from Congress.

[With the question of subsidies in the abstract, this writing has
nothing to do.]

If he succeeded, the Southern Pacific  would lose its early clutch on
the throat of our commerce, an hundred thousand voters would escape from
political bondage - its paralyzing grip would be weakened, if not
broken. There was deadly issue at once.

Scott wrote to Huntington Dec. 9, 1874:

"We expect to build our road to San Diego, as already pledged to the
public to do so." (No. 416. N. Y., Dec. 10, 1874.)

Later, Huntington wrote to Colton:

"Scott is doing all he can to push his Texas Pacific Road, and his
strength all lies in one thing: The Southern Pacific of California is
controlled by the Central Pacific and Union Pacific, and will be used
only to help those great monopolies, and if we are beat by Scott, it
will be because our friends have persisted in helping him to convince
the public the above is true, and the people can never have an open
highway so long as the Central Pacific controls all the roads that reach
out to the Pacific." (No. 267. N. Y., April 3, 1877.)



Behind the Scenes.



These Colton letters emphasize Huntington's opinions, and expose his
methods during the struggle. Not completely, of course. One must read
between the lines occasionally. Something is left to surmise - to the
reflection, of Hamlet's Uncle, that

"In the corrupted currents of this world offense's gilded hand may shove
by Justice; and oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself buys out the law."

When he speaks of Mr. Justice Field not sitting in a certain suit (No.
475. N.Y., Sept. 30th, 1878), and, just how he "got the Secretary of War
out of all ugly idea in about twenty minutes," saw three other Cabinet
members shortly after, and caused a President to abandon being "cross"
and to "laugh heartily" (No. 361. N. Y., Oct. 10th, 1877), is not
precisely clear; nor are details given as to how the Railroad Committee
was sure to be "convinced" (No, 59. N. Y., Nov. 30, 1879) or exactly
what he did before writing: "I stayed in Washington two days to fix up
R. R. Committee in Senate. * * * * The Committee is just as we want it."
(No. 261. N. Y., March 7th, 1877.)

And it should be remembered, too, that the writer prided himself in
confessing to deliberate wariness in bribery and, caution in corrupting,
occupying in, "high ground" and preparing in advance to defy
investigators. As, witness:

"I returned from Washington this morning; shall go back next Monday
night. * * * Scott is working mostly among the commercial men. He
switched Senator Spencer of Alabama and Walker of Virginia this week,
but you know they can be switched back with the proper arrangements when
they are wanted; but Scott is asking for so much that he can promise
largely to pay when he wins, and you know I keep on high ground." (No.
110. N.Y., Jan. 29th, 1876.)

And again:

"When I see you I shall have much to tell you of Washington matters that
I have not time to write, but I keep on high ground so that we cannot be
hurt by any investigation." (No. 138. N.Y., March 23d, 1876.)

No just inference can be drawn from such confidential utterances that
the "high ground" of safety was fertile soil bearing the flowers and
fruits of political purity, rather than a chosen rock of refuge from
continuous danger; and the allusion to possible "investigation" involves
the confession that it was deserved and the dread that it might occur.



Use of Influence, and Power of Money.



But, there is no obscurity of meaning, nor is there much room for doubt,
that there is the expression of mature judgment based upon wide
experience and ample practice, in the following:

"I think this coming session of Congress will be composed of the
hungriest set of men that ever got together." (No. 389. N.Y., Nov. 30th,
1874.)

"I sent a man to Richmond, Va., on Saturday, and one to Albany to-day,
to get resolutions passed by the legislatures against subsidies. I think
it will control two members of the R. R. Committee." (No. 117. N. Y.,
Feb. 14th, 1876.)

"I left Washington on Friday, the 11th. I think our matters are safe
there for the Session." (No. 218. N. Y., Aug. 4th, 1876).

"I think our land matters in Washington have been fixed." (No. 366. N.
Y., Oct. 29th, 1877.)

"I think the R. R. Committee is right" (as made up for the 45th
Congress), "but the Com. on Territories I do not like. A different one
was promised me." (No. 373. N. Y., Oct. 30th, 1877.)

"I do not think we can get any legislation this session for extension of
land grants unless we pay more for it than it is worth." (No. 378. N.
Y., Nov. 9th, 1877.)

"If we are not hurt this session it will be because we pay much money to
prevent it." (No. 381. N. Y., Nov. 15th, 1877.)

"This Congress is nothing but an agrarian camp." (No. 449. N. Y., April
19th, 1878).

"I have done all I can to prevent certain bills from being reached, and
do not think any bills can be that will hurt us." (No. 468. N. Y., June
15th, 1878.)

"I have received several letters and telegrams from Washington to-day,
all calling me there, as Scott will certainly pass his Texas Pacific
bill if I do not come over; and I shall go over to-night. * * * It cost
money to fix things so that I would know his bill would not pass. I
believe that with $200,000 I can pass our bill." (No. 107. N. Y., Jan.
17, 1876.)



A Low Estimate of Congressional Brains and Public Interest.



The alarm evidently felt and certainly shown that the Central Pacific
and Southern Pacific were apt to be commonly considered and treated as
being one concern, and not as distinct and separate things - incestuous
and eager lovers instead of alien rivals and natural foes - conspirators
rather than competitors - would be simply amusing were it less offensive
and more in accordant vibration with the pulsations of common sense
amongst a people not wholly fools. That it was thought possible to
foster the idea and expand it into a belief, that Stanford, Huntington,
the Crockers and Hopkins - Janus faced - looking northerly along
monopoly lines, were the implacable enemies of the Crockers, Stanford,
Hopkins and Huntington gazing along monopoly lines southerly; and that
the interests of the government and the good of the people required the
tender coddling of that nursling until it became strong enough to sit up
and take nourishment in the shape of meaty millions of dollars, involves
a sarcastic comment upon measured law makers and estimated victims. Yet
the improbable becomes at times the possible and the actual.

Mark the plaintive wailing in the letters:

"On account of this legislation I think it important that the S. P.
should be disconnected from the Central as much as it well can be." (No.
416. N. Y., Dec. 10, 1874.)

"Governor S. said some good things to the Chronicle interviewer; but I
think it unfortunate that he should so closely connect the C. P. with
the S. P., as that is the only weapon our enemies have to fight us with
in Congress." (No. 590. N.Y., May 28, 1875.)

"If it was known that the C. P. does not control the S. P., I think we
could beat (Scott) all the time." (No. 157. N. Y., April 27, 1876.)

"Stanford, Tom Scott and many others have been trying for so long to
convince the country that the Central Pacific is building the S. P. that
I am not able now to convince Congress that it is not true." (No. 24. N.
Y., Dec. 25, 1876.)

"I have little or no fears of his (Scott) doing anything at the extra
session, but if he can convince Congress that the S. P. is controlled by
the C. P. * * * * I believe he can pass his bill to build on the direct
line between Ft. Yuma and San Diego, and I think I know enough of
Washington to know how he to can do it." (No. 268. N. Y., March 20,
1877.)

"His (Scott) strength all lies in one thing: The S. P. of Cal. is
controlled by the C. P. and U. P.; and will be used only to help those
great monopolies." (No. 276. N. Y., April 3, 1877.)

"What you say about our stopping at Ft. Yuma is well, and would be
almost conclusive if the S. P. was not owned and controlled by the C.
P.; but when we tell Congress we are willing to build this road, the
answer is always the same: Of course you are to protect the Central, but
what the country wants is a competing road." (No. 307. N. Y., May 17,
1877.)

"The fact is, he has nearly convinced the country that the C. P. is
building the S. P. to prevent competition; and I find it very hard to It
make them believe anything else." (No. 425. N. Y., Feb. 25, 1878.)



Wrongs of California.



So much for the United States. Let us now glance at California, as
mangled by the showing of the letters.

And it may as well be stated just here, that Leland Stanford and his
associates, having first in mind and at heart the design to eventually
defraud the United States Government of many millions of dollars, bent
all their energies next to the maintaining of their ownership of
California and her citizens, and all their property; and to keeping
under control their rights, privileges, hopes, fears, ambitions and acts
ever and ever.

A competing line - "an open highway" - across the continent would balk
their purposes. The Union Pacific was dangerous in that respect.
Therefore, it was to be given 10/22 of the Southern Pacific stock, and
become a partner instead of a rival. Jay Gould was to participate in the
spoils of our bondage. Concerning which the Letters say:

"I will say here that I think well of this, as it will have our interest
in the Central greater than in the Southern Pacific, which will satisfy
the Union Pacific, which, in my opinion, is very important. Of course
you will see the importance of the public not knowing anything of this
arrangement." (No. 24. N. Y., December 25th, 1876.)



Check to San Diego.



How neatly the San Diegans were induced to continue to tread out the old
measures of railroad corn for their masters, whose private intentions
were to lull them into silence with false hopes, fasten them in
commercial vassalage, and denounce, as well as keep comparatively
deserted, their splendid harbor, is quite clearly shown:

"I should infer from one of the newspaper clips that you sent that our
San Diego friends were displeased about something." (No. 14. N. Y.,
Sept. 23, 1875.)

That was intended to be facetious.

"In your interesting letter of the 5th you mention San Diego matters.
Now it is well to switch that people from the Texas Pacific road, but I
would suggest that you keep on asking them what they will do, but not
make them any definite proposition, for if you do, it will be sent East
at once, and I am working with the South and saying to them that our
interest lays with them; and that what San Francisco and Cal. wants is a
direct communication with New Orleans and other Gulf ports, and that our
interest lays that way; and we oppose the Texas Pacific because we think
if it is built it will prevent for many years our getting such a
connection." (No. 37. N. Y., October 18, 1875.)

That was not merrily written.

"I would much like a report of the harbor of San Diego, as I think it
is, but I would not care to pay much money for it. Hyde is a bright man,
and if he knows how worthless the harbor of San Diego is for an
extensive deep sea commerce, I would like a report from him." (No. 335.
N. Y., August 18, 1877.)



In California Politics.



The dominating influence of the railroad monopolists in California
politics has been California politicians. They are in the vein of the
letters.

The voters of California have for many years been the playthings of a
few political bandits. They have been driven in the harness of their
various parties to the polls by "bosses" shrewdly selected and liberally
paid. The results may be seen in glittering heaps of spoils,
concentrated in a few hands, in disheartening displays of vast wealth by
arrogant possessors who are not properly the owners of it, and who are
limited alike in number as in intelligent patriotism; may be felt in
unwarranted tax taxation - may be heard in the derision of insolent
laughter from lips merry with the delight of fancied security.

The creation of the "boss" rule simplified systematic bribery,
concerning which read:

"I received your telegram that Wm. B. Carr has had for his services
$60,000 S. P. bonds; then asking how much more I think his services are
worth for the future. * * * In view of the many things we have now
before Congress * " * it is very important that his friends in
Washington should be with us, and if that could be brought about by
paying Carr say $10,000 to $20,000 per year, I think we could afford to
do it, but, of course, not until he had controlled his friends. I would
like to have you get a written proposition from Carr, in which he would
agree to control his friends for a fixed sum, then send it to me." (No.
99. N. Y., Jan. 14, 1876.)

So much for California.



Cost of Arizona Legislature and Voters of New Mexico.



"If we had a franchise to build a road or two roads through Arizona (we
controlling, but having it in the name of another party) it could be
used against Scott. Cannot you have Stafford [Governor of Arizona] call
the Legislature together and grant such charters as we want at a cost of
say $25,000? If we could get such a charter as I spoke to you of it
would be worth much money to us." (No. 18. N. Y., Sept. 27, 1875.)

"I think Stafford had better be in Washington at the commencement of the
regular session to get Congress to confirm the Acts of Arizona." (No.
366, N. Y., Oct. 29, 1877.)

As to New Mexico:

I saw Axtell, Gov. of New Mexico, and be said he thought that if we
would send to him such a bill as we wanted to have passed into a law, he
could get it passed with very little or no money; when, if we sent a man
there, they would stick him for large amounts." (No. 366. N. Y., Oct.
29, 1877.)



Corruption and Bribery.



Such in part, is the story of the Letters. If it is not one of appalling
corruption and unhesitating bribery often repeated, what else is it? Why
should it cost a specific $200,000 to pass any proper bill through
Congress? $25,000 to convene a Territorial Legislature? $10,000 to
$20,000 a year to influence justly a few Californians? Influence thus
exercised is as, palpable as it is direct.



Nature and Value of Picnics.



But ends are sometimes attained by indirection. The Letters tell how.
For example:

"I have been working for the last two month" to get a party, of say, 25
Southern members of Congress to go out to California and over the line
of the Southern Pacific and see what we have done and our ability to do.
* * * I told Senator Gordon of Georgia if he could get up a party of the
best men of the South we would pay all their expenses, which. I suppose
would not be less than $10,000, and I think it would be money well
expended." (No. 208. N. Y., July 26th, 1876.)

But these Southern gentlemen seem to have been somewhat hesitating, as
attest:

"I have telegraphed to-day to you to get some of the prominent men of
San Francisco to telegraph to Gordon, Senator from Georgia, with other
Southern men to go. While Gordon and some others are not afraid to go,
G. tells me, that some of his friends do not like to go on an invitation
from the R. R. Co." (No. 213. N. Y., Aug. 7th, 1876.)

And the fear of a thoughtful constituency appears to have resulted in
"some doubts."

"You must have had a lively time in getting so many good names signed
and sent on in so short a time, inviting our Southern brethren to come
to Cal. I saw Gordon and several others just before Congress adjourned,
and they said they would go, but I have some doubts about it, as most of
the members of Congress are looking after their re-election." (No. 221.
N. Y., Aug. 25th, 1875.)

By the light of the above extracts may perhaps be interpreted the
meaning of the news that has just come by telegraph that the "Senate
Committee on Pacific Railroads will take a trip, soon after Congress
adjourns, to San Francisco by way of the Union, Central and Southern
Pacific systems - in Senator Brice's private car."



Protest and Petition.



It would be an interesting, and to me a congenial task, to further
analyze the Letters; to show what tools the monopolists secured, and how
they worked with them; to set forth how rivalry was met and defeated;
railroads - such as the Santa Monica - absorbed or paralyzed, and many
things were done and undone. But my intention at the outset was simply
to proclaim with irrefrageable proofs some shameful facts, and to
protest against any faltering in enforcing they laws as they exist,
compelling payment to the Government of great debts soon to mature. Of
principal and interest there will be due from these monopolists and
political corruptionists (the first payment, January 16, 1895; the last,
January 1, 1899), $77,049,630.66 - less some few millions now to their
credit. The money can be collected, and it ought to be. In the meantime,
the toleration of a lobby confessedly corrupt argues the existence of a
Congress at best incompetent.

Joseph H. Moore










This etext was produced by Sue Asscher  <asschers@dingoblue.net.au>





BRAMBLE-BEES AND OTHERS

by J. HENRI FABRE




TRANSLATED BY ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS, F.Z.S.

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

In this volume I have collected all the essays on Wild Bees scattered
through the "Souvenirs entomologiques," with the exception of those
on the Chalicodomae, or Mason-bees proper, which form the contents of
a separate volume entitled "The Mason-bees."

The first two essays on the Halicti (Chapters 12 and 13) have already
appeared in an abbreviated form in "The Life and Love of the Insect,"
translated by myself and published by Messrs. A. & C. Black (in
America by the Macmillan Co.) in 1911. With the greatest courtesy and
kindness, Messrs. Black have given me their permission to include
these two chapters in the present volume; they did so without fee or
consideration of any kind, merely on my representation that it would
be a great pity if this uniform edition of Fabre's Works should be
rendered incomplete because certain essays formed part of volumes of
extracts previously published in this country. Their generosity is
almost unparalleled in my experience; and I wish to thank them
publicly for it in the name of the author, of the French publishers
and of the English and American publishers, as well as in my own.

Of the remaining chapters, one or two have appeared in the "English
Review" or other magazines; but most of them now see the light in
English for the first time.

I have once more, as in the case of "The Mason-bees," to thank Miss
Frances Rodwell for the help which she has given me in the work of
translation and research; and I am also grateful for much kind
assistance received from the staff of the Natural History Museum and
from Mr. Geoffrey Meade-Waldo in particular.

ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS.

Chelsea, 1915.




CONTENTS.

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

CHAPTER 1. BRAMBLE-DWELLERS.

CHAPTER 2. THE OSMIAE.

CHAPTER 3. THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SEXES.

CHAPTER 4. THE MOTHER DECIDES THE SEX OF THE EGG.

CHAPTER 5. PERMUTATIONS OF SEX.

CHAPTER 6. INSTINCT AND DISCERNMENT.

CHAPTER 7. ECONOMY OF ENERGY.

CHAPTER 8. THE LEAF-CUTTERS.

CHAPTER 9. THE COTTON-BEES.

CHAPTER 10. THE RESIN-BEES.

CHAPTER 11. THE POISON OF THE BEE.

CHAPTER 12. THE HALICTI: A PARASITE.

CHAPTER 13. THE HALICTI: THE PORTRESS.

CHAPTER 14. THE HALICTI: PARTHENOGENESIS.

INDEX.




CHAPTER 1. BRAMBLE-DWELLERS.

The peasant, as he trims his hedge, whose riotous tangle threatens to
encroach upon the road, cuts the trailing stems of the bramble a foot
or two from the ground and leaves the root-stock, which soon dries
up. These bramble-stumps, sheltered and protected by the thorny
brushwood, are in great demand among a host of Hymenoptera who have
families to settle. The stump, when dry, offers to any one that knows
how to use it a hygienic dwelling, where there is no fear of damp
from the sap; its soft and abundant pith lends itself to easy work;
and the top offers a weak spot which makes it possible for the insect
to reach the vein of least resistance at once, without cutting away
through the hard ligneous wall. To many, therefore, of the Bee and
Wasp tribe, whether honey-gatherers or hunters, one of these dry
stalks is a valuable discovery when its diameter matches the size of
its would-be inhabitants; and it is also an interesting subject of
study to the entomologist who, in the winter, pruning-shears in hand,
can gather in the hedgerows a faggot rich in small industrial
wonders. Visiting the bramble-bushes has long been one of my
favourite pastimes during the enforced leisure of the wintertime; and
it is seldom but some new discovery, some unexpected fact, makes up
to me for my torn fingers.

My list, which is still far from being complete, already numbers
nearly thirty species of bramble-dwellers in the neighbourhood of my
house; other observers, more assiduous than I, exploring another
region and one covering a wider range, have counted as many as fifty.
I give at foot an inventory of the species which I have noted.

(Bramble-dwelling insects in the neighbourhood of Serignan
(Vaucluse):

1. MELLIFEROUS HYMENOPTERA.
Osmia tridentata, DUF. and PER.
Osmia detrita, PEREZ.
Anthidium scapulare, LATR.
Heriades rubicola, PEREZ.
Prosopis confusa, SCHENCK.
Ceratina chalcites, GERM.
Ceratina albilabris, FAB.
Ceratina callosa, FAB.
Ceratina coerulea, VILLERS.

2. HUNTING HYMENOPTERA.
Solenius vagus, FAB. (provisions, Diptera).
Solenius lapidarius, LEP. (provisions, Spiders?).
Cemonus unicolor, PANZ. (provisions, Plant-lice).
Psen atratus (provisions, Black Plant-lice).
Tripoxylon figulus, LIN. (provisions, Spiders).
A Pompilus, unknown (provisions, Spiders).
Odynerus delphinalis, GIRAUD.

3. PARASITICAL HYMENOPTERA.
A Leucopsis, unknown (parasite of Anthidium scapulare).
A small Scoliid, unknown (parasite of Solenius vagus).
Omalus auratus (parasite of various bramble-dwellers).
Cryptus bimaculatus, GRAV. (parasite of Osmia detrita).
Cryptus gyrator, DUF. (parasite of Tripoxylon figulus).
Ephialtes divinator, ROSSI (parasite of Cemonus unicolor).
Ephialtes mediator, GRAV. (parasite of Psen atratus).
Foenus pyrenaicus, GUERIN.
Euritoma rubicola, J. GIRAUD (parasite of Osmia detrita).

4. COLEOPTERA.
Zonitis mutica, FAB. (parasite of Osmia tridentata).

Most of these insects have been submitted to a learned expert,
Professor Jean Perez, of Bordeaux. I take this opportunity of
renewing my thanks for his kindness in identifying them for me.--
Author's Note.)

They include members of very diverse corporations. Some, more
industrious and equipped with better tools, remove the pith from the
dry stem and thus obtain a vertical cylindrical gallery, the length
of which may be nearly a cubit. This sheath is next divided, by
partitions, into more or less numerous storeys, each of which forms
the cell of a larva. Others, less well-endowed with strength and
implements, avail themselves of the old galleries of other insects,
galleries that have been abandoned after serving as a home for their
builder's family. Their only work is to make some slight repairs in
the ruined tenement, to clear the channel of its lumber, such as the
remains of cocoons and the litter of shattered ceilings, and lastly
to build new partitions, either with a plaster made of clay or with a
concrete formed of pith-scrapings cemented with a drop of saliva.

You can tell these borrowed dwellings by the unequal size of the
storeys. When the worker has herself bored the channel, she
economizes her space: she knows how costly it is. The cells, in that
case, are all alike, the proper size for the tenant, neither too
large nor too small. In this box, which has cost weeks of labour, the
insect has to house the largest possible number of larvae, while
allotting the necessary amount of room to each. Method in the
superposition of the floors and economy of space are here the
absolute rule.

But there is evidence of waste when the insect makes use of a bramble
hollowed by another. This is the case with Tripoxylon figulus. To
obtain the store-rooms wherein to deposit her scanty stock of
Spiders, she divides her borrowed cylinder into very unequal cells,
by means of slender clay partitions. Some are a centimetre (.39
inch.--Translator's Note.) deep, the proper size for the insect;
others are as much as two inches. These spacious rooms, out of all
proportion to the occupier, reveal the reckless extravagance of a
casual proprietress whose title-deeds have cost her nothing.

But, whether they be the original builders or labourers touching up
the work of others, they all alike have their parasites, who
constitute the third class of bramble-dwellers. These have neither
galleries to excavate nor victuals to provide; they lay their egg in
a strange cell; and their grub feeds either on the provisions of the
lawful owner's larva or on that larva itself.

At the head of this population, as regards both the finish and the
magnitude of the structure, stands the Three-pronged Osmia (Osmia
tridentata, DUF. and PER.), to whom this chapter shall be specially
devoted. Her gallery, which has the diameter of a lead pencil,
sometimes descends to a depth of twenty inches. It is at first almost
exactly cylindrical; but, in the course of the victualling, changes
occur which modify it slightly at geometrically