 determined distances.
The work of boring possesses no great interest. In the month of July,
we see the insect, perched on a bramble-stump, attack the pith and
dig itself a well. When this is deep enough, the Osmia goes down,
tears off a few particles of pith and comes up again to fling her
load outside. This monotonous labour continues until the Bee deems
the gallery long enough, or until, as often happens, she finds
herself stopped by an impassable knot.

Next comes the ration of honey, the laying of the egg and the
partitioning, the last a delicate operation to which the insect
proceeds by degrees from the base to the top. At the bottom of the
gallery, a pile of honey is placed and an egg laid upon the pile;
then a partition is built to separate this cell from the next, for
each larva must have its special chamber, about a centimetre and a
half (.58 inch.--Translator's Note.) long, having no communication
with the chambers adjoining. The materials employed for this
partition are bramble-sawdust, glued into a paste with the insects'
saliva. Whence are these materials obtained? Does the Osmia go
outside, to gather on the ground the rubbish which she flung out when
boring the cylinder? On the contrary, she is frugal of her time and
has better things to do than to pick up the scattered particles from
the soil. The channel, as I said, is at first uniform in size, almost
cylindrical; its sides still retain a thin coating of pith, forming
the reserves which the Osmia, as a provident builder, has economized
wherewith to construct the partitions. So she scrapes away with her
mandibles, keeping within a certain radius, a radius that corresponds
with the dimensions of the cell which she is going to build next;
moreover, she conducts her work in such a way as to hollow out more
in the middle and leave the two ends contracted. In this manner, the
cylindrical channel of the start is succeeded, in the worked portion,
by an ovoid cavity flattened at both ends, a space resembling a
little barrel. This space will form the second cell.

As for the rubbish, it is utilized on the spot for the lid or cover
that serves as a ceiling for one cell and a floor for the next. Our
own master-builders could not contrive more successfully to make the
best use of their labourers' time. On the floor thus obtained, a
second ration of honey is placed; and an egg is laid on the surface
of the paste. Lastly, at the upper end of the little barrel, a
partition is built with the scrapings obtained in the course of the
final work on the third cell, which itself is shaped like a flattened
ovoid. And so the work goes on, cell upon cell, each supplying the
materials for the partition separating it from the one below. On
reaching the end of the cylinder, the Osmia closes up the case with a
thick layer of the same mortar. Then that bramble-stump is done with;
the Bee will not return to it. If her ovaries are not yet exhausted,
other dry stems will be exploited in the same fashion.

The number of cells varies greatly, according to the qualities of the
stalk. If the bramble-stump be long, regular and smooth, we may count
as many as fifteen: that, at least, is the highest figure which my
observations have supplied. To obtain a good idea of the internal
distribution, we must split the stalk lengthwise, in the winter, when
the provisions have long been consumed and when the larvae are
wrapped in their cocoons. We then see that, at regular intervals, the
case becomes slightly narrower; and in each of the necks thus formed
a circular disk is fixed, a partition one or two millimetres thick.
(.039 to .079 inch.--Translator's Note.) The rooms separated by these
partitions form so many little barrels or kegs, each compactly filled
with a reddish, transparent cocoon, through which the larva shows,
bent into a fish-hook. The whole suggests a string of rough, oval
amber beads, touching at their amputated ends.

In this string of cocoons, which is the oldest, which the youngest?
The oldest is obviously the bottom one, the one whose cell was the
first built; the youngest is the one at the top of the row, the one
in the cell last built. The oldest of the larvae starts the pile,
down at the bottom of the gallery; the latest arrival ends it at the
top; and those in between follow upon one another, according to age,
from base to apex.

Let us next observe that there is no room in the shaft for two Osmiae
at a time on the same level, for each cocoon fills up the storey, the
keg that belongs to it, without leaving any vacant space; let us also
remark that, when they attain the stage of perfection, the Osmiae
must all emerge from the shaft by the only orifice which the bramble-
stem boasts, the orifice at the top. There is here but one obstacle,
easy to overcome: a plug of glued pith, of which the insect's
mandibles make short work. Down below, the stalk offers no ready
outlet; besides, it is prolonged underground indefinitely by the
roots. Everywhere else is the ligneous fence, generally too hard and
thick to break through. It is inevitable therefore that all the
Osmiae, when the time comes to quit their dwelling, should go out by
the top; and, as the narrowness of the shaft bars the passage of the
preceding insect as long as the next insect, the one above it,
remains in position, the removal must begin at the top, extend from
cell to cell and end at the bottom. Consequently, the order of exit
is the converse to the order of birth: the younger Osmiae leave the
nest first, their elders leave it last.

The oldest, that is to say, the bottom one, was the first to finish
her supply of honey and to spin her cocoon. Taking precedence of all
her sisters in the whole series of her actions, she was the first to
burst her silken bag and to destroy the ceiling that closes her room:
at least, that is what the logic of the situation takes for granted.
In her anxiety to get out, how will she set about her release? The
way is blocked by the nearest cocoons, as yet intact. To clear
herself a passage through the string of those cocoons would mean to
exterminate the remainder of the brood; the deliverance of one would
mean the destruction of all the rest. Insects are notoriously
obstinate in their actions and unscrupulous in their methods. If the
Bee at the bottom of the shaft wants to leave her lodging, will she
spare those who bar her road?

The difficulty is great, obviously; it seems insuperable. Thereupon
we become suspicious: we begin to wonder if the emergence from the
cocoon, that is to say, the hatching, really takes place in the order
of primogeniture. Might it not be--by a very singular exception, it
is true, but one which is necessary in such circumstances--that the
youngest of the Osmiae bursts her cocoon first and the oldest last;
in short, that the hatching proceeds from one chamber to the next in
the inverse direction to that which the age of the occupants would
lead us to presume? In that case, the whole difficulty would be
removed: each Osmia, as she rent her silken prison, would find a
clear road in front of her, the Osmiae nearer the outlet having gone
out before her. But is this really how things happen? Our theories
very often do not agree with the insect's practice; even where our
reasoning seems most logical, we should be more prudent to see what
happens before venturing on any positive statements. Leon Dufour was
not so prudent when he, the first in the field, took this little
problem in hand. He describes to us the habits of an Odynerus
(Odynerus rubicola, DUF.) who piles up clay cells in the shaft of a
dry bramble-stalk; and, full of enthusiasm for his industrious Wasp,
he goes on to say:

'Picture a string of eight cement shells, placed end to end and
closely wedged inside a wooden sheath. The lowest was undeniably made
first and consequently contains the first-laid egg, which, according
to rules, should give birth to the first winged insect. How do you
imagine that the larva in that first shell was bidden to waive its
right of primogeniture and only to complete its metamorphosis after
all its juniors? What are the conditions brought into play to produce
a result apparently so contrary to the laws of nature? Humble
yourself in the presence of the reality and confess your ignorance,
rather than attempt to hide your embarrassment under vain
explanations!

'If the first egg laid by the busy mother were destined to be the
first-born of the Odyneri, that one, in order to see the light
immediately after achieving wings, would have had the option either
of breaking through the double walls of his prison or of perforating,
from bottom to top, the seven shells ahead of him, in order to emerge
through the truncate end of the bramble-stem. Now nature, while
refusing any way of escape laterally, was also bound to veto any
direct invasion, the brutal gimlet-work which would inevitably have
sacrificed seven members of one family for the safety of an only son.
Nature is as ingenious in design as she is fertile in resource, and
she must have foreseen and forestalled every difficulty. She decided
that the last-built cradle should yield the first-born child; that
this one should clear the road for his next oldest brother, the
second for the third and so on. And this is the order in which the
birth of our Odyneri of the Brambles actually takes place.'

Yes, my revered master, I will admit without hesitation that the
bramble-dwellers leave their sheath in the converse order to that of
their ages: the youngest first, the oldest last; if not invariably,
at least very often. But does the hatching, by which I mean the
emergence from the cocoon, take place in the same order? Does the
evolution of the elder wait upon that of the younger, so that each
may give those who would bar his passage time to effect their
deliverance and to leave the road clear? I very much fear that logic
has carried your deductions beyond the bounds of reality. Rationally
speaking, my dear sir, nothing could be more accurate than your
inferences; and yet we must forgo the theory of the strange inversion
which you suggest. None of the Bramble-bees with whom I have
experimented behaves after that fashion. I know nothing personal
about Odynerus rubicola, who appears to be a stranger in my district;
but, as the method of leaving must be almost the same when the
habitation is exactly similar, it is enough, I think, to experiment
with some of the bramble-dwellers in order to learn the history of
the rest.

My studies will, by preference, bear upon the Three-pronged Osmia,
who lends herself more readily to laboratory experiments, both
because she is stronger and because the same stalk will contain a
goodly number of her cells. The first fact to be ascertained is the
order of hatching. I take a glass tube, closed at one end, open at
the other and of a diameter similar to that of the Osmia's tunnel. In
this I place, one above the other, exactly in their natural order,
the ten cocoons, or thereabouts, which I extract from a stump of
bramble. The operation is performed in winter. The larvae, at that
time, have long been enveloped in their silken case. To separate the
cocoons from one another, I employ artificial partitions consisting
of little round disks of sorghum, or Indian millet, about half a
centimetre thick. (About one-fifth of an inch.--Translator's Note.)
This is a white pith, divested of its fibrous wrapper and easy for
the Osmia's mandibles to attack. My diaphragms are much thicker than
the natural partitions; this is an advantage, as we shall see. In any
case, I could not well use thinner ones, for these disks must be able
to withstand the pressure of the rammer which places them in position
in the tube. On the other hand, the experiment showed me that the
Osmia makes short work of the material when it is a case of drilling
a hole through it.

To keep out the light, which would disturb my insects destined to
spend their larval life in complete darkness, I cover the tube with a
thick paper sheath, easy to remove and replace when the time comes
for observation. Lastly, the tubes thus prepared and containing
either Osmiae or other bramble-dwellers are hung vertically, with the
opening at the top, in a snug corner of my study. Each of these
appliances fulfils the natural conditions pretty satisfactorily: the
cocoons from the same bramble-stick are stacked in the same order
which they occupied in the native shaft, the oldest at the bottom of
the tube and the youngest close to the orifice; they are isolated by
means of partitions; they are placed vertically, head upwards;
moreover, my device has the advantage of substituting for the opaque
wall of the bramble a transparent wall which will enable me to follow
the hatching day by day, at any moment which I think opportune.

The male Osmia splits his cocoon at the end of June and the female at
the beginning of July. When this time comes, we must redouble our
watch and inspect the tubes several times a day if we would obtain
exact statistics of the births. Well, during the six years that I
have studied this question, I have seen and seen again, ad nauseam;
and I am in a position to declare that there is no order governing
the sequence of hatchings, absolutely none. The first cocoon to burst
may be the one at the bottom of the tube, the one at the top, the one
in the middle or in any other part, indifferently. The second to be
split may adjoin the first or it may be removed from it by a number
of spaces, either above or below. Sometimes several hatchings occur
on the same day, within the same hour, some farther back in the row
of cells, some farther forward; and this without any apparent reason
for the simultaneity. In short, the hatchings follow upon one
another, I will not say haphazard--for each of them has its appointed
place in time, determined by impenetrable causes--but at any rate
contrary to our calculations, based on this or the other
consideration.

Had we not been deceived by our too shallow logic, we might have
foreseen this result. The eggs are laid in their respective cells at
intervals of a few days, of a few hours. How can this slight
difference in age affect the total evolution, which lasts a year?
Mathematical accuracy has nothing to do with the case. Each germ,
each grub has its individual energy, determined we know not how and
varying in each germ or grub. This excess of vitality belongs to the
egg before it leaves the ovary. Might it not, at the moment of
hatching, be the cause why this or that larva takes precedence of its
elders or its juniors, chronology being altogether a secondary
consideration? When the hen sits upon her eggs, is the oldest always
the first to hatch? In the same way, the oldest larva, lodged in the
bottom storey, need not necessarily reach the perfect state first.

A second argument, had we reflected more deeply on the matter, would
have shaken our faith in any strict mathematical sequence. The same
brood forming the string of cocoons in a bramble-stem contains both
males and females; and the two sexes are divided in the series
indiscriminately. Now it is the rule among the Bees for the males to
issue from the cocoon a little earlier than the females. In the case
of the Three-pronged Osmia, the male has about a week's start.
Consequently, in a populous gallery, there is always a certain number
of males, who are hatched seven or eight days before the females and
who are distributed here and there over the series. This would be
enough to make any regular hatching-sequence impossible in either
direction.

These surmises accord with the facts: the chronological sequence of
the cells tells us nothing about the chronological sequence of the
hatchings, which take place without any definite order. There is,
therefore, no surrender of rights of primogeniture, as Leon Dufour
thought: each insect, regardless of the others, bursts its cocoon
when its time comes; and this time is determined by causes which
escape our notice and which, no doubt, depend upon the potentialities
of the egg itself. It is the case with the other bramble-dwellers
which I have subjected to the same test (Osmia detrita, Anthidium
scapulare, Solenius vagus, etc.); and it must also be the case with
Odynerus rubicola: so the most striking analogies inform us.
Therefore the singular exception which made such an impression on
Dufour's mind is a sheer logical illusion.

An error removed is tantamount to a truth gained; and yet, if it were
to end here, the result of my experiment would possess but slight
value. After destruction, let us turn to construction; and perhaps we
shall find the wherewithal to compensate us for an illusion lost. Let
us begin by watching the exit.

The first Osmia to leave her cocoon, no matter what place she
occupies in the series, forthwith attacks the ceiling separating her
from the floor above. She cuts a fairly clean hole in it, shaped like
a truncate cone, having its larger base on the side where the Bee is
and its smaller base opposite. This conformation of the exit-door is
a characteristic of the work. When the insect tries to attack the
diaphragm, it first digs more or less at random; then, as the boring
progresses, the action is concentrated upon an area which narrows
until it presents no more than just the necessary passage. Nor is the
cone-shaped aperture special to the Osmia: I have seen it made by the
other bramble-dwellers through my thick disks of sorghum-pith. Under
natural conditions, the partitions, which, for that matter, are very
thin, are destroyed absolutely, for the contraction of the cell at
the top leaves barely the width which the insect needs. The truncate,
cone-shaped breach has often been of great use to me. Its wide base
made it possible for me, without being present at the work, to judge
which of the two neighbouring Osmiae had pierced the partition; it
told me the direction of a nocturnal migration which I had been
unable to witness.

The first-hatched Osmia, wherever she may be, has made a hole in her
ceiling. She is now in the presence of the next cocoon, with her head
at the opening of the hole. In front of her sister's cradle, she
usually stops, consumed with shyness; she draws back into her cell,
flounders among the shreds of the cocoon and the wreckage of the
ruined ceiling; she waits a day, two days, three days, more if
necessary. Should impatience gain the upper hand, she tries to slip
between the wall of the tunnel and the cocoon that blocks the way.
She even undertakes the laborious work of gnawing at the wall, so as
to widen the interval, if possible. We find these attempts, in the
shaft of a bramble, at places where the pith is removed down to the
very wood, where the wood itself is gnawed to some depth. I need
hardly say that, although these lateral inroads are perceptible after
the event, they escape the eye at the moment when they are being
made.

If we would witness them, we must slightly modify the glass
apparatus. I line the inside of the tube with a thick piece of whity-
brown packing-paper, but only over one half of the circumference; the
other half is left bare, so that I may watch the Osmia's attempts.
Well, the captive insect fiercely attacks this lining, which to its
eyes represents the pithy layer of its usual abode; it tears it away
by tiny particles and strives to cut itself a road between the cocoon
and the glass wall. The males, who are a little smaller, have a
better chance of success than the females. Flattening themselves,
making themselves thin, slightly spoiling the shape of the cocoon,
which, however, thanks to its elasticity, soon recovers its first
condition, they slip through the narrow passage and reach the next
cell. The females, when in a hurry to get out, do as much, if they
find the tube at all amenable to the process. But no sooner is the
first partition passed than a second presents itself. This is pierced
in its turn. In the same way will the third be pierced and others
after that, if the insect can manage them, as long as its strength
holds out. Too weak for these repeated borings, the males do not go
far through my thick plugs. If they contrive to cut through the
first, it is as much as they can do; and, even so, they are far from
always succeeding. But, in the conditions presented by the native
stalk, they have only feeble tissues to overcome; and then, slipping,
as I have said, between the cocoon and the wall, which is slightly
worn owing to the circumstances described, they are able to pass
through the remaining occupied chambers and to reach the outside
first, whatever their original place in the stack of cells. It is
just possible that their early eclosion forces this method of exit
upon them, a method which, though often attempted, does not always
succeed. The females, furnished with stronger tools, make greater
progress in my tubes. I see some who pierce three or four partitions,
one after the other, and are so many stages ahead before those whom
they have left behind are even hatched. While they are engaged in
this long and toilsome operation, others, nearer to the orifice, have
cleared a passage whereof those from a distance will avail
themselves. In this way, it may happen that, when the width of the
tube permits, an Osmia in a back row will nevertheless be one of the
first to emerge.

In the bramble-stem, which is of exactly the same diameter as the
cocoon, this escape by the side of the column appears hardly
practicable, except to a few males; and even these have to find a
wall which has so much pith that by removing it they can effect a
passage. Let us then imagine a tube so narrow as to prevent any exit
save in the natural sequence of the cells. What will happen? A very
simple thing. The newly-hatched Osmia, after perforating his
partition, finds himself faced with an unbroken cocoon that obstructs
the road. He makes a few attempts upon the sides and, realizing his
impotence, retires into his cell, where he waits for days and days,
until his neighbour bursts her cocoon in her turn. His patience is
inexhaustible. However, it is not put to an over long test, for
within a week, more or less, the whole string of females is hatched.

When two neighbouring Osmiae are released at the same time, mutual
visits are paid through the aperture between the two rooms: the one
above goes down to the floor below; the one below goes up to the
floor above; sometimes both of them are in the same cell together.
Might not this intercourse tend to cheer them and encourage them to
patience? Meanwhile, slowly, doors are opening here and there through
the separating walls; the road is cleared by sections; and a moment
arrives when the leader of the file walks out. The others follow, if
ready; but there are always laggards who keep the rear-ranks waiting
until they are gone.

To sum up, first, the hatching of the larvae takes place without any
order; secondly, the exodus proceeds regularly from summit to base,
but only in consequence of the insect's inability to move forward so
long as the upper cells are not vacated. We have here not an
exceptional evolution, in the inverse ratio to age, but the simple
impossibility of emerging otherwise. Should a chance occur of going
out before its turn, the insect does not fail to seize it, as we can
see by the lateral movements which send the impatient ones a few
ranks ahead and even release the more favoured altogether. The only
remarkable thing that I perceive is the scrupulous respect shown to
the as yet unopened neighbouring cocoon. However eager to come out,
the Osmia is most careful not to touch it with his mandibles: it is
taboo. He will demolish the partition, he will gnaw the side-wall
fiercely, even though there be nothing left but wood, he will reduce
everything around him to dust; but touch a cocoon that obstructs his
way? Never! He will not make himself an outlet by breaking up his
sisters' cradles.

It may happen that the Osmia's patience is in vain and that the
barricade that blocks the way never disappears at all. Sometimes, the
egg in a cell does not mature; and the unconsumed provisions dry up
and become a compact, sticky, mildewed plug, through which the
occupants of the floors below could never clear themselves a passage.
Sometimes, again, a grub dies in its cocoon; and the cradle of the
deceased, now turned into a coffin, forms an everlasting obstacle.
How shall the insect cope with such grave circumstances?

Among the many bramble-stumps which I have collected, some few have
presented a remarkable peculiarity. In addition to the orifice at the
top, they had at the side one and sometimes two round apertures that
looked as though they had been punched out with an instrument. On
opening these stalks, which were old, deserted nests, I discovered
the cause of these very exceptional windows. Above each of them was a
cell full of mouldy honey. The egg had perished and the provisions
remained untouched: hence the impossibility of getting out by the
ordinary road. Walled in by the unsurmountable obstacle, the Osmia on
the floor below had contrived an outlet through the side of the
shaft; and those in the lower storeys had benefited by this ingenious
innovation. The usual door being inaccessible, a side-window had been
opened by means of the insect's jaws. The cocoons, torn, but still in
position in the lower rooms, left no doubt as to this eccentric mode
of exit. The same fact, moreover, was repeated, in several bramble-
stumps, in the case of Osmia tridentata; it was likewise repeated in
the case of Anthidium scapulare. The observation was worth confirming
by experiment.

I select a bramble-stem with the thinnest rind possible, so as to
facilitate the Osmiae's work. I split it in half, thus obtaining a
smooth-sided trough which will enable me to judge better of future
exits. The cocoons are next laid out in one of the troughs. I
separate them with disks of sorghum, covering both surfaces of the
disk with a generous layer of sealing-wax, a material which the
Osmia's mandibles are not able to attack. The two troughs are then
placed together and fastened. A little putty does away with the joint
and prevents the least ray of light from penetrating. Lastly, the
apparatus is hung up perpendicularly, with the cocoons' heads up. We
have now only to wait. None of the Osmiae can get out in the usual
manner, because each of them is confined between two partitions
coated with sealing-wax. There is but one resource left to them if
they would emerge into the light of day, that is, for each of them to
open a side-window, provided always that they possess the instinct
and the power to do so.

In July, the result is as follows: of twenty Osmiae thus immured, six
succeed in boring a round hole through the wall and making their way
out; the others perish in their cells, without managing to release
themselves. But, when I open the cylinder, when I separate the two
wooden troughs, I realize that all have attempted to escape through
the side, for the wall of each cell bears traces of gnawing
concentrated upon one spot. All, therefore, have acted in the same
way as their more fortunate sisters; they did not succeed, because
their strength failed them. Lastly, in my glass tubes, part-lined
with a thick piece of packing-paper, I often see attempts at making a
window in the side of the cell: the paper is pierced right through
with a round hole.

This then is yet another result which I am glad to record in the
history of the bramble-dwellers. When the Osmia, the Anthidium and
probably others are unable to emerge through the customary outlet,
they take an heroic decision and perforate the side of the shaft. It
is the last resource, resolved upon after other methods have been
tried in vain. The brave, the strong succeed; the weak perish in the
attempt.

Supposing that all the Osmiae possessed the necessary strength of jaw
as well as the instinct for this sideward boring, it is clear that
egress from each cell through a special window would be much more
advantageous than egress through the common door. The Bee could
attend to his release as soon as he was hatched, instead of
postponing it until after the emancipation of those who come before
him; he would thus escape long waits, which too often prove fatal. In
point of fact, it is no uncommon thing to find bramble-stalks in
which several Osmiae have died in their cells, because the upper
storeys were not vacated in time. Yes, there would be a precious
advantage in that lateral opening, which would not leave each
occupant at the mercy of his environment: many die that would not
die. All the Osmiae, when compelled by circumstances, resort to this
supreme method; all have the instinct for lateral boring; but very
few are able to carry the work through. Only the favourites of fate
succeed, those more generously endowed with strength and
perseverance.

If the famous law of natural selection, which is said to govern and
transform the world, had any sure foundation; if really the fittest
removed the less fit from the scene; if the future were to the
strongest, to the most industrious, surely the race of Osmiae, which
has been perforating bramble-stumps for ages, should by this time
have allowed its weaker members, who go on obstinately using the
common outlet, to die out and should have replaced them, down to the
very last one, by the stalwart drillers of side-openings. There is an
opportunity here for immense progress; the insect is on the verge of
it and is unable to cross the narrow intervening line. Selection has
had ample time to make its choice; and yet, though there be a few
successes, the failures exceed them in very large measure. The race
of the strong has not abolished the race of the weak: it remains
inferior in numbers, as doubtless it has been since all time. The law
of natural selection impresses me with the vastness of its scope;
but, whenever I try to apply it to actual facts, it leaves me
whirling in space, with nothing to help me to interpret realities. It
is magnificent in theory, but it is a mere gas-bubble in the face of
existing conditions. It is majestic, but sterile. Then where is the
answer to the riddle of the world? Who knows? Who will ever know?

Let us waste no more time in this darkness, which idle theorizing
will not dispel; let us return to facts, humble facts, the only
ground that does not give way under our feet. The Osmia respects her
neighbour's cocoon; and her scruples are so great that, after vainly
trying to slip between that cocoon and the wall, or else to open a
lateral outlet, she lets herself die in her cell rather than effect
an egress by forcing her way through the occupied cells. When the
cocoon that blocks the way contains a dead instead of a live grub,
will the result be the same?

In my glass tubes, I let Osmia-cocoons containing a live grub
alternate with Osmia-cocoons in which the grub has been asphyxiated
by the fumes of sulphocarbonic acid. As usual, the storeys are
separated by disks of sorghum. The anchorites, when hatched, do not
hesitate long. Once the partition is pierced, they attack the dead
cocoons, go right through them, reducing the dead grub, now dry and
shrivelled, to dust, and at last emerge, after wrecking everything in
their path. The dead cocoons, therefore, are not spared; they are
treated as would be any other obstacle capable of attack by the
mandibles. The Osmia looks upon them as a mere barricade to be
ruthlessly overturned. How is she apprised that the cocoon, which has
undergone no outward change, contains a dead and not a live grub? It
is certainly not by sight. Can it be by sense of smell? I am always a
little suspicious of that sense of smell of which we do not know the
seat and which we introduce on the slightest provocation as a
convenient explanation of that which may transcend our explanatory
powers.

My next test is made with a string of live cocoons. Of course, I
cannot take all these from the same species, for then the experiment
would not differ from the one which we have already witnessed; I take
them from two different species which leave their bramble-stem at
separate periods. Moreover, these cocoons must have nearly the same
diameter to allow of their being stacked in a tube without leaving an
empty space between them and the wall. The two species adopted are
Solenius vagus, which quits the bramble at the end of June, and Osmia
detrita, which comes a little earlier, in the first fortnight of the
same month. I therefore alternate Osmia-cocoons and Solenius-cocoons,
with the latter at the top of the series, either in glass tubes or
between two bramble-troughs joined into a cylinder.

The result of this promiscuity is striking. The Osmiae, which mature
earlier, emerge; and the Solenius-cocoons, as well as their
inhabitants, which by this time have reached the perfect stage, are
reduced to shreds, to dust, wherein it is impossible for me to
recognize a vestige, save perhaps here and there a head, of the
exterminated unfortunates. The Osmia, therefore, has not respected
the live cocoons of a foreign species: she has passed out over the
bodies of the intervening Solenii. Did I say passed over their
bodies? She has passed through them, crunched the laggards between
her jaws, treated them as cavalierly as she treats my disks. And yet
those barricades were alive. No matter: when her hour came, the Osmia
went ahead, destroying everything upon her road. Here, at any rate,
is a law on which we can rely: the supreme indifference of the animal
to all that does not form part of itself and its race.

And what of the sense of smell, distinguishing the dead from the
living? Here, all are alive; and the Bee pierces her way as through a
row of corpses. If I am told that the smell of the Solenii may differ
from that of the Osmiae, I shall reply that such extreme subtlety in
the insect's olfactory apparatus seems to me a rather far-fetched
supposition. Then what is my explanation of the two facts? The
explanation? I have none to give! I am quite content to know that I
do not know, which at least spares me many vain lucubrations. And so
I do not know how the Osmia, in the dense darkness of her tunnel,
distinguishes between a live cocoon and a dead cocoon of the same
species; and I know just as little how she succeeds in recognizing a
strange cocoon. Ah, how clearly this confession of ignorance proves
that I am behind the times! I am deliberately missing a glorious
opportunity of stringing big words together and arriving at nothing.

The bramble-stump is perpendicular, or nearly so; its opening is at
the top. This is the rule under natural conditions. My artifices are
able to alter that state of things; I can place the tube vertically
or horizontally; I can turn its one orifice either up or down;
lastly, I can leave the channel open at both ends, which will give
two outlets. What will happen under these several conditions? That is
what we shall examine with the Three-pronged Osmia.

The tube is hung perpendicularly, but closed at the top and open at
the bottom; in fact, it represents a bramble-stump turned upside
down. To vary and complicate the experiment, the strings of cocoons
are arranged differently in different tubes. In some of them, the
heads of the cocoons are turned downwards, towards the opening; in
others, they are turned upwards, towards the closed end; in others
again, the cocoons alternate in direction, that is to say, they are
placed head to head and rear to rear, turn and turn about. I need not
say that the separating floors are of sorghum.

The result is identical in all these tubes. If the Osmiae have their
heads pointing upwards, they attack the partition above them, as
happens under normal conditions; if their heads point downwards, they
turn round in their cells and set to work as usual. In short, the
general outward trend is towards the top, in whatever position the
cocoon be placed.

We here see manifestly at work the influence of gravity, which warns
the insect of its reversed position and makes it turn round, even as
it would warn us if we ourselves happened to be hanging head
downwards. In natural conditions, the insect has but to follow the
counsels of gravity, which tells it to dig upwards, and it will
infallibly reach the exit-door situated at the upper end. But, in my
apparatus, these same counsels betray it: it goes towards the top,
where there is no outlet. Thus misled by my artifices, the Osmiae
perish, heaped up on the higher floors and buried in the ruins.

It nevertheless happens that attempts are made to clear a road
downwards. But it is rare for the work to lead to anything in this
direction, especially in the case of the middle or upper cells. The
insect is little inclined for this progress, the opposite to that to
which it is accustomed; besides, a serious difficulty arises in the
course of this reversed boring. As the Bee flings the excavated
materials behind her, these fall back of their own weight under her
mandibles; the clearance has to be begun anew. Exhausted by her
Sisyphean task, distrustful of this new and unfamiliar method, the
Osmia resigns herself and expires in her cell. I am bound to add,
however, that the Osmiae in the lower storeys, those nearest the
exit--sometimes one, sometimes two or three--do succeed in escaping.
In that case, they unhesitatingly attack the partitions below them,
while their companions, who form the great majority, persist and
perish in the upper cells.

It was easy to repeat the experiment without changing anything in the
natural conditions, except the direction of the cocoons: all that I
had to do was to hang up some bramble-stumps as I found them,
vertically, but with the opening downwards. Out of two stalks thus
arranged and peopled with Osmiae, not one of the insects succeeded in
emerging. All the Bees died in the shaft, some turned upwards, others
downwards. On the other hand, three stems occupied by Anthidia
discharged their population safe and sound. The outgoing was effected
at the bottom, from first to last, without the least impediment. Must
we take it that the two sorts of Bees are not equally sensitive to
the influences of gravity? Can the Anthidium, built to pass through
the difficult obstacle of her cotton wallets, be better-adapted than
the Osmia to make her way through the wreckage that keeps falling
under the worker's feet; or, rather, may not this very cotton-waste
put a stop to these cataracts of rubbish which must naturally drive
the insect back? This is all quite possible; but I can say nothing
for certain.

Let us now experiment with vertical tubes open at both ends. The
arrangements, save for the upper orifice, are the same as before. The
cocoons, in some of the tubes, have their heads turned down; others,
up; in others again, their positions alternate. The result is similar
to what we have seen above. A few Osmiae, those nearest the bottom
orifice, take the lower road, whatever the direction first occupied
by the cocoon; the others, composing by far the larger number, take
the higher road, even when the cocoon is placed upside down. As both
doors are free, the outgoing is effected at either end with success.

What are we to conclude from all these experiments? First, that
gravity guides the insect towards the top, where the natural door is,
and makes it turn in its cell when the cocoon has been reversed.
Secondly, I seem to suspect an atmospheric influence and, in any
case, some second cause that sends the insect to the outlet. Let us
admit that this cause is the proximity of the outer air acting upon
the anchorite through the partitions.

The animal then is subject, on the one hand, to the promptings of
gravity, and this to an equal degree for all, whatever the storey
inhabited. Gravity is the common guide of the whole series from base
to top. But those in the lower boxes have a second guide, when the
bottom end is open. This is the stimulus of the adjacent air, a more
powerful stimulus than that of gravity. The access of the air from
without is very slight, because of the partitions; while it can be
felt in the nethermost cells, it must decrease rapidly as the storeys
ascend. Wherefore the bottom insects, very few in number, obeying the
preponderant influence, that of the atmosphere, make for the lower
outlet and reverse, if necessary, their original position; those
above, on the contrary, who form the great majority, being guided
only by gravity when the upper end is closed, make for that upper
end. It goes without saying that, if the upper end be open at the
same time as the other, the occupants of the top storeys will have a
double incentive to take the ascending path, though this will not
prevent the dwellers on the lower floors from obeying, by preference,
the call of the adjacent air and adopting the downward road.

I have one means left whereby to judge of the value of my
explanation, namely, to experiment with tubes open at both ends and
lying horizontally. The horizontal position has a twofold advantage.
In the first place, it removes the insect from the influence of
gravity, inasmuch as it leaves it indifferent to the direction to be
taken, the right or the left. In the second place, it does away with
the descent of the rubbish which, falling under the worker's feet
when the boring is done from below, sooner or later discourages her
and makes her abandon her enterprise.

There are a few precautions to be observed for the successful conduct
of the experiment; I recommend them to any one who might care to make
the attempt. It is even advisable to remember them in the case of the
tests which I have already described. The males, those puny
creatures, not built for work, are sorry labourers when confronted
with my stout disks. Most of them perish miserably in their glass
cells, without succeeding in piercing their partitions right through.
Moreover, instinct has been less generous to them than to the
females. Their corpses, interspersed here and there in the series of
the cells, are disturbing causes, which it is wise to eliminate. I
therefore choose the larger, more powerful-looking cocoons. These,
except for an occasional unavoidable error, belong to females. I pack
them in tubes, sometimes varying their position in every way,
sometimes giving them all a like arrangement. It does not matter
whether the whole series comes from one and the same bramble-stump or
from several: we are free to choose where we please; the result will
not be altered.

The first time that I prepared one of these horizontal tubes open at
both ends, I was greatly struck by what happened. The series
consisted of ten cocoons. It was divided into two equal batches. The
five on the left went out on the left, the five on the right went out
on the right, reversing, when necessary, their original direction in
the cell. It was very remarkable from the point of view of symmetry;
moreover, it was a very unlikely arrangement among the total number
of possible arrangements, as mathematics will show us.

Let us take n to represent the number of Osmiae. Each of them, once
gravity ceases to interfere and leaves the insect indifferent to
either end of the tube, is capable of two positions, according as she
chooses the exit on the right or on the left. With each of the two
positions of this first Osmia can be combined each of the two
positions of the second, giving us, in all, 2 x 2 = (2 squared)
arrangements. Each of these (2 squared) arrangements can be combined,
in its turn, with each of the two positions of the third Osmia. We
thus obtain 2 x 2 x 2 = (2 cubed) arrangements with three Osmiae; and
so on, each additional insect multiplying the previous result by the
factor 2. With n Osmiae, therefore, the total number of arrangements
is (2 to the power n.)

But note that these arrangements are symmetrical, two by two: a given
arrangement towards the right corresponds with a similar arrangement
towards the left; and this symmetry implies equality, for, in the
problem in hand, it is a matter of indifference whether a fixed
arrangement correspond with the right or left of the tube. The
previous number, therefore, must be divided by 2. Thus, n Osmiae,
according as each of them turns her head to the right or left in my
horizontal tube, are able to adopt (2 to the power n - 1)
arrangements. If n = 10, as in my first experiment, the number of
arrangements becomes (2 to the power 9) = 512.

Consequently, out of 512 ways which my ten insects can adopt for
their outgoing position, there resulted one of those in which the
symmetry was most striking. And observe that this was not an effect
obtained by repeated attempts, by haphazard experiments. Each Osmia
in the left half had bored to the left, without touching the
partition on the right; each Osmia in the right half had bored to the
right, without touching the partition on the left. The shape of the
orifices and the surface condition of the partition showed this, if
proof were necessary. There had been a spontaneous decision, one half
in favour of the left, one half in favour of the right.

The arrangement presents another merit, one superior to that of
symmetry: it has the merit of corresponding with the minimum
expenditure of force. To admit of the exit of the whole series, if
the string consists of n cells, there are originally n partitions to
be perforated. There might even be one more, owing to a complication
which I disregard. There are, I say, at least n partitions to be
perforated. Whether each Osmia pierces her own, or whether the same
Osmia pierces several, thus relieving her neighbours, does not matter
to us: the sum-total of the force expended by the string of Bees will
be in proportion to the number of those partitions, in whatever
manner the exit be effected.

But there is another task which we must take seriously into
consideration, because it is often more troublesome than the boring
of the partition: I mean the work of clearing a road through the
wreckage. Let us suppose the partitions pierced and the several
chambers blocked by the resulting rubbish and by that rubbish only,
since the horizontal position precludes any mixing of the contents of
different chambers. To open a passage for itself through these
rubbish-heaps, each insect will have the smallest effort to make if
it passes through the smallest possible number of cells, in short, if
it makes for the opening nearest to it. These smallest individual
efforts amount, in the aggregate, to the smallest total effort.
Therefore, by proceeding as they did in my experiment, the Osmiae
effect their exit with the least expenditure of energy. It is curious
to see an insect apply the 'principle of least action,' so often
postulated in mechanics.

An arrangement which satisfies this principle, which conforms to the
law of symmetry and which possesses but one chance in 512, is
certainly no fortuitous result. It is determined by a cause; and, as
this cause acts invariably, the same arrangement must be reproduced
if I renew the experiment. I renewed it, therefore, in the years that
followed, with as many appliances as I could find bramble-stumps;
and, at each new test, I saw once more what I had seen with such
interest on the first occasion. If the number be even--and my column
at that time consisted usually of ten--one half goes out on the
right, the other on the left. If the number be odd--eleven, for
instance--the Osmia in the middle goes out indiscriminately by the
right or left exit. As the number of cells to be traversed is the
same on both sides, her expenditure of energy does not vary with the
direction of the exit; and the principle of least action is still
observed.

It was important to discover if the Three-pronged Osmia shared her
capacity, in the first place, with the other bramble-dwellers and, in
the second, with Bees differently housed, but also destined
laboriously to cut a new road for themselves when the hour comes to
quit the nest. Well, apart from a few irregularities, due either to
cocoons whose larva perished in my tubes before developing, or to
those inexperienced workers, the males, the result was the same in
the case of Anthidium scapulare. The insects divided themselves into
two equal batches, one going to the right, the other to the left.
Tripoxylon figulus left me undecided. This feeble insect is not
capable of perforating my partitions; it nibbles at them a little;
and I had to judge the direction from the marks of its mandibles.
These marks, which are not always very plain, do not yet allow me to
pronounce an opinion. Solenius vagus, who is a skilful borer, behaved
differently from the Osmia. In a column of ten, the whole exodus was
made in one direction.

On the other hand, I tested the Mason-bee of the Sheds, who, when
emerging under natural conditions, has only to pierce her cement
ceiling and is not confronted with a series of cells. Though a
stranger to the environment which I created for her, she gave me a
most positive answer. Of a column of ten laid in a horizontal tube
open at both ends, five made their way to the right and five to the
left. Dioxys cincta, a parasite in the buildings of both species of
Mason-bees, the Chalicodoma of the Sheds and the Chalicodoma of the
Walls (Cf. "The Mason-bees" by J. Henri Fabre, translated by
Alexander Teixeira de Mattos: passim.--Translator's Note.), provided
me with no precise result. The Leaf-cutting Bee (Megachile apicalis,
SPIN. (Cf. Chapter 8 of the present volume.--Translator's Note.)),
who builds her leafy cups in the old cells of the Chalicodoma of the
Walls, acts like the Solenius and directs her whole column towards
the same outlet.

Incomplete as it is, this symmetry shows us how unwise it were to
generalize from the conclusions to which the Three-pronged Osmia
leads us. Whereas some Bees, such as the Anthidium and the
Chalicodoma, share the Osmia's talent for using the twofold exit,
others, such as the Solenius and the Leaf-cutter, behave like a flock
of sheep and follow the first that goes out. The entomological world
is not all of a piece; its gifts are very various: what one is
capable of doing another cannot do; and penetrating indeed would be
the eyes that saw the causes of these differences. Be this as it may,
increased research will certainly show us a larger number of species
qualified to use the double outlet. For the moment, we know three;
and that is enough for our purpose.

I will add that, when the horizontal tube has one of its ends closed,
the whole string of Osmiae makes for the open end, turning round to
do so, if need be.

Now that the facts are set forth, let us, if possible, trace the
cause. In a horizontal tube, gravity no longer acts to determine the
direction which the insect will take. Is it to attack the partition
on the right or that on the left? How shall it decide? The more I
look into the matter, the more do my suspicions fall upon the
atmospheric influence which is felt through the two open ends. Of
what does this influence consist? Is it an effect of pressure, of
hygrometry, of electrical conditions, of properties that escape our
coarser physical attunement? He were a bold man who should undertake
to decide. Are not we ourselves, when the weather is about to alter,
subject to subtle impressions, to sensations which we are unable to
explain? And yet this vague sensitiveness to atmospheric changes
would not be of much help to us in circumstances similar to those of
my anchorites. Imagine ourselves in the darkness and the silence of a
prison-cell, preceded and followed by other similar cells. We possess
implements wherewith to pierce the walls; but where are we to strike
to reach the final outlet and to reach it with the least delay?
Atmospheric influence would certainly never guide us.

And yet it guides the insect. Feeble though it be, through the
multiplicity of partitions, it is exercised on one side more than on
the other, because the obstacles are fewer; and the insect, sensible
to the difference between those two uncertainties, unhesitatingly
attacks the partition which is nearer to the open air. Thus is
decided the division of the column into two converse sections, which
accomplish the total liberation with the least aggregate of work. In
short, the Osmia and her rivals 'feel' the free space. This is yet
one more sensory faculty which evolution might well ha