ve left us, for
our greater advantage. As it has not done so, are we then really, as
many contend, the highest expression of the progress accomplished,
throughout the ages, by the first atom of glair expanded into a cell?


CHAPTER 2. THE OSMIAE.

February has its sunny days, heralding spring, to which rude winter
will reluctantly yield place. In snug corners, among the rocks, the
great spurge of our district, the characias of the Greeks, the jusclo
of the Provencals, begins to lift its drooping inflorescence and
discreetly opens a few sombre flowers. Here the first Midges of the
year will come to slake their thirst. By the time that the tip of the
stalks reaches the perpendicular, the worst of the cold weather will
be over.

Another eager one, the almond-tree, risking the loss of its fruit,
hastens to echo these preludes to the festival of the sun, preludes
which are too often treacherous. A few days of soft skies and it
becomes a glorious dome of white flowers, each twinkling with a
roseate eye. The country, which still lacks green, seems dotted
everywhere with white-satin pavilions. 'Twould be a callous heart
indeed that could resist the magic of this awakening.

The insect nation is represented at these rites by a few of its more
zealous members. There is first of all the Honey-bee, the sworn enemy
of strikes, who profits by the least lull of winter to find out if
some rosemary is not beginning to open somewhere near the hive. The
droning of the busy swarm fills the flowery vault, while a snow of
petals falls softly to the foot of the tree.

Together with the population of harvesters there mingles another,
less numerous, of mere drinkers, whose nesting-time has not yet
begun. This is the colony of the Osmiae, with their copper-coloured
skin and bright-red fleece. Two species have come hurrying up to take
part in the joys of the almond-tree: first, the Horned Osmia, clad in
black velvet on the head and breast and in red velvet on the abdomen;
and, a little later, the Three-horned Osmia, whose livery must be red
and red only. These are the first delegates despatched by the pollen-
gleaners to ascertain the state of the season and attend the festival
of the early blooms. 'Tis but a moment since they burst their cocoon,
the winter abode: they have left their retreats in the crevices of
the old walls; should the north wind blow and set the almond-tree
shivering, they will hasten to return to them. Hail to you, O my dear
Osmiae, who yearly, from the far end of the harmas (The piece of
waste ground in which the author studied his insects in their natural
state. Cf. "The Life of the Fly" by J. Henri Fabre, translated by
Alexander Teixeira de Mattos: chapter 1.--Translator's Note.),
opposite snow-capped Ventoux (A mountain in the Provencal Alps, near
Carpentras and Serignan, 6,271 feet.--Translator's Note.), bring me
the first tidings of the awakening of the insect world! I am one of
your friends; let us talk about you a little.

Most of the Osmiae of my region have none of the industry of their
kinswomen of the brambles, that is to say, they do not themselves
prepare the dwelling destined for the laying. They want ready-made
lodgings, such as the old cells and old galleries of Anthophorae and
Chalicodomae. If these favourite haunts are lacking, then a hiding-
place in the wall, a round hole in some bit of wood, the tube of a
reed, the spiral of a dead Snail under a heap of stones are adopted,
according to the tastes of the several species. The retreat selected
is divided into chambers by partition-walls, after which the entrance
to the dwelling receives a massive seal. That is the sum-total of the
building done.

For this plasterer's rather than mason's work, the Horned and the
Three-horned Osmia employ soft earth. This material is different from
the Mason-bee's cement, which will withstand wind and weather for
many years on an exposed pebble; it is a sort of dried mud, which
turns to pap on the addition of a drop of water. The Mason-bee
gathers her cementing-dust in the most frequented and driest portions
of the road; she wets it with a saliva which, in drying, gives it the
consistency of stone. The two Osmiae who are the almond-tree's early
visitors are no chemists: they know nothing of the making and mixing
of hydraulic mortar; they limit themselves to gathering natural
soaked earth, mud in short, which they allow to dry without any
special preparation on their part; and so they need deep and well-
sheltered retreats, into which the rain cannot penetrate, or the work
would fall to pieces.

While exploiting, in friendly rivalry with the Three-horned Osmia,
the galleries which the Mason-bee of the Sheds good-naturedly
surrenders to both, Latreille's Osmia uses different materials for
her partitions and her doors. She chews the leaves of some
mucilaginous plant, some mallow perhaps, and then prepares a sort of
green putty with which she builds her partitions and finally closes
the entrance to the dwelling. When she settles in the spacious cells
of the Masked Anthophora (Anthophora personata, ILLIG.), the entrance
to the gallery, which is wide enough to admit one's finger, is closed
with a voluminous plug of this vegetable paste. On the earthy banks,
hardened by the sun, the home is then betrayed by the gaudy colour of
the lid. It is as though the authorities had closed the door and
affixed to it their great seals of green wax.

So far then as their building-materials are concerned, the Osmiae
whom I have been able to observe are divided into two classes: one
building compartments with mud, the other with a green-tinted
vegetable putty. The first section includes the Horned Osmia and the
Three-horned Osmia, both so remarkable for the horny tubercles on
their faces.

The great reed of the south, the Arundo donax, is often used, in the
country, for rough garden-shelters against the mistral or just for
fences. These reeds, the ends of which are chopped off to make them
all the same length, are planted perpendicularly in the earth. I have
often explored them in the hope of finding Osmia-nests. My search has
very seldom succeeded. The failure is easily explained. The
partitions and the closing-plug of the Horned and of the Three-horned
Osmia are made, as we have seen, of a sort of mud which water
instantly reduces to pap. With the upright position of the reeds, the
stopper of the opening would receive the rain and would become
diluted; the ceilings of the storeys would fall in and the family
would perish by drowning. Therefore the Osmia, who knew of these
drawbacks before I did, refuses the reeds when they are placed
perpendicularly.

The same reed is used for a second purpose. We make canisses of it,
that is to say, hurdles, which, in spring, serve for the rearing of
silk-worms and, in autumn, for the drying of figs. At the end of
April and during May, which is the time when the Osmiae work, the
canisses are indoors, in the silk-worm nurseries, where the Bee
cannot take possession of them; in autumn, they are outside, exposing
their layers of figs and peeled peaches to the sun; but by that time
the Osmiae have long disappeared. If, however, during the spring, an
old, disused hurdle is left out of doors, in a horizontal position,
the Three-horned Osmia often takes possession of it and makes use of
the two ends, where the reeds lie truncated and open.

There are other quarters that suit the Three-horned Osmia, who is not
particular, it seems to me, and will make shift with any hiding-
place, so long as it has the requisite conditions of diameter,
solidity, sanitation and kindly darkness. The most original dwellings
that I know her to occupy are disused Snail-shells, especially the
house of the Common Snail (Helix aspersa). Let us go to the slope of
the hills thick with olive-trees and inspect the little supporting-
walls which are built of dry stones and face the south. In the
crevices of this insecure masonry, we shall reap a harvest of old
Snail-shells, plugged with earth right up to the orifice. The family
of the Three-horned Osmia is settled in the spiral of those shells,
which is subdivided into chambers by mud partitions.

Let us inspect the stone-heaps, especially those which come from the
quarry-works. Here we often find the Field-mouse sitting on a grass
mattress, nibbling acorns, almonds, olive-stones and apricot-stones.
The Rodent varies his diet: to oily and farinaceous foods he adds the
Snail. When he is gone, he has left behind him, under the overhanging
stones, mixed up with the remains of other victuals, an assortment of
empty shells, sometimes plentiful enough to remind me of the heap of
Snails which, cooked with spinach and eaten country-fashion on
Christmas Eve, are flung away next day by the housewife. This gives
the Three-horned Osmia a handsome collection of tenements; and she
does not fail to profit by them. Then again, even if the Field-
mouse's conchological museum be lacking, the same broken stones serve
as a refuge for Garden-snails who come to live there and end by dying
there. When we see Three-horned Osmiae enter the crevices of old
walls and of stone-heaps, there is no doubt about their occupation:
they are getting free lodgings out of the old Snail-shells of those
labyrinths.

The Horned Osmia, who is less common, might easily also be less
ingenious, that is to say, less rich in varieties of houses. She
seems to scorn empty shells. The only homes that I know her to
inhabit are the reeds of the hurdles and the deserted cells of the
Masked Anthophora.

All the other Osmiae whose method of nest-building I know work with
green putty, a paste made of some crushed leaf or other; and none of
them, except Latreille's Osmia, is provided with the horned or
tubercled armour of the mud-kneaders. I should like to know what
plants are used in making the putty; probably each species has its
own preferences and its little professional secrets; but hitherto
observation has taught me nothing concerning these details. Whatever
worker prepare it, the putty is very much the same in appearance.
When fresh, it is always a clear dark green. Later, especially in the
parts exposed to the air, it changes, no doubt through fermentation,
to the colour of dead leaves, to brown, to dull-yellow; and the leafy
character of its origin is no longer apparent. But uniformity in the
materials employed must not lead us to believe in uniformity in the
lodging; on the contrary, this lodging varies greatly with the
different species, though there is a marked predilection in favour of
empty shells. Thus Latreille's Osmia, together with the Three-horned
Osmia, uses the spacious structures of the Mason-bee of the Sheds;
she likes the magnificent cells of the Masked Anthophora; and she is
always ready to establish herself in the cylinder of any reed lying
flat on the ground.

I have already spoken of an Osmia (O. cyanoxantha, PEREZ) who elects
to make her home in the old nests of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles.
(Cf. "The Mason-bees": chapter 10.--Translator's Note.) Her closing-
plug is made of a stout concrete, consisting of fair-sized bits of
gravel sunk in the green paste; but for the inner partitions she
employs only unalloyed putty. As the outer door, situated on the
curve of an unprotected dome, is exposed to the inclemencies of the
weather, the mother has to think of fortifying it. Danger, no doubt,
is the originator of that gritty concrete.

The Golden Osmia (O. aurulenta, LATR.) absolutely insists on an empty
Snail-shell as her residence. The Brown or Girdled Snail, the Garden
Snail and especially the Common Snail, who has a more spacious
spiral, all scattered at random in the grass, at the foot of the
walls and of the sun-swept rocks, furnish her with her usual
dwelling-house. Her dried putty is a kind of felt full of short white
hairs. It must come from some hairy-leaved plant, one of the
Boragineae perhaps, rich both in mucilage and the necessary bristles.

The Red Osmia (O. rufo-hirta, LATR.) has a weakness for the Brown
Snail and the Garden Snail, in whose shells I find her taking refuge
in April when the north-wind blows. I am not yet much acquainted with
her work, which should resemble that of the Golden Osmia.

The Green Osmia (O. viridana, MORAWITZ) takes up her quarters, tiny
creature that she is, in the spiral staircase of Bulimulus radiatus.
It is a very elegant, but very small lodging, to say nothing of the
fact that a considerable portion is taken up with the green-putty
plug. There is just room for two.

The Andrenoid Osmia (O. andrenoides, LATR.), who looks so curious,
with her naked red abdomen, appears to build her nest in the shell of
the Common Snail, where I discover her refuged.

The Variegated Osmia (O. versicolor, LATR.) settles in the Garden
Snail's shell, almost right at the bottom of the spiral.

The Blue Osmia (O. cyanea, KIRB.) seems to me to accept many
different quarters. I have extracted her from old nests of the Mason-
bee of the Pebbles, from the galleries dug in a roadside bank by the
Colletes (A short-tongued Burrowing-bee known also as the Melitta.--
Translator's Note.) and lastly from the cavities made by some digger
or other in the decayed trunk of a willow-tree.

Morawitz' Osmia (O. Morawitzi, PEREZ) is not uncommon in the old
nests of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles, but I suspect her of favouring
other lodgings besides.

The Three-pronged Osmia (O. tridentata, DUF. and PER.) creates a home
of her own, digging herself a channel with her mandibles in dry
bramble and sometimes in danewort. It mixes a few scrapings of
perforated pith with the green paste. Its habits are shared by the
Ragged Osmia (O. detrita, PEREZ) and by the Tiny Osmia (O. parvula,
DUF.)

The Chalicodoma works in broad daylight, on a tile, on a pebble, on a
branch in the hedge; none of her trade-practises is kept a secret
from the observer's curiosity. The Osmia loves mystery. She wants a
dark retreat, hidden from the eye. I would like, nevertheless, to
watch her in the privacy of her home and to witness her work with the
same facility as if she were nest-building in the open air. Perhaps
there are some interesting characteristics to be picked up in the
depths of her retreats. It remains to be seen whether my wish can be
realized.

When studying the insect's mental capacity, especially its very
retentive memory for places, I was led to ask myself whether it would
not be possible to make a suitably-chosen Bee build in any place that
I wished, even in my study. And I wanted, for an experiment of this
sort, not an individual but a numerous colony. My preference leant
towards the Three-horned Osmia, who is very plentiful in my
neighbourhood, where, together with Latreille's Osmia, she frequents
in particular the monstrous nests of the Chalicodoma of the Sheds. I
therefore thought out a scheme for making the Three-horned Osmia
accept my study as her settlement and build her nests in glass tubes,
through which I could easily watch the progress. To these crystal
galleries, which might well inspire a certain distrust, were to be
added more natural retreats: reeds of every length and thickness and
disused Chalicodoma-cells taken from among the biggest and the
smallest. A scheme like this sounds mad. I admit it, while mentioning
that perhaps none ever succeeded so well with me. We shall see as
much presently.

My method is extremely simple. All I ask is that the birth of my
insects, that is to say, their first seeing the light, their emerging
from the cocoon, should take place on the spot where I propose to
make them settle. Here there must be retreats of no matter what
nature, but of a shape similar to that in which the Osmia delights.
The first impressions of sight, which are the most long-lived of any,
shall bring back my insects to the place of their birth. And not only
will the Osmiae return, through the always open windows, but they
will always nidify on the natal spot if they find something like the
necessary conditions.

And so, all through the winter, I collect Osmia-cocoons, picked up in
the nests of the Mason-bee of the Sheds; I go to Carpentras to glean
a more plentiful supply in the nests of the Hairy-footed Anthophora,
that old acquaintance whose wonderful cities I used to undermine when
I was studying the history of the Oil-beetles. (This study is not yet
translated into English; but cf. "The Life of the Fly": chapters 2
and 4.--Translator's Note.) Later, at my request, a pupil and
intimate friend of mine, M. Henri Devillario, president of the civil
court at Carpentras, sends me a case of fragments broken off the
banks frequented by the Hairy-footed Anthophora and the Anthophora of
the Walls, useful clods which furnish a handsome adjunct to my
collection. Indeed, at the end, I find myself with handfuls of
cocoons of the Three-horned Osmia. To count them would weary my
patience without serving any particular purpose.

I spread out my stock in a large open box on a table which receives a
bright diffused light but not the direct rays of the sun. The table
stands between two windows facing south and overlooking the garden.
When the moment of hatching comes, those two windows will always
remain open to give the swarm entire liberty to go in and out as it
pleases. The glass tubes and the reed-stumps are laid here and there,
in fine disorder, close to the heap of cocoons and all in a
horizontal position, for the Osmia will have nothing to do with
upright reeds. The hatching of some of the Osmiae will therefore take
place under cover of the galleries destined to be the building-yard
later; and the site will be all the more deeply impressed on their
memory. When I have made these comprehensive arrangements, there is
nothing more to be done; and I wait patiently for the building-season
to open.

My Osmiae leave their cocoons in the second half of April. Under the
immediate rays of the sun, in well-sheltered nooks, the hatching
would occur a month earlier, as we can see from the mixed population
of the snowy almond-tree. The constant shade in my study has delayed
the awakening, without, however, making any change in the nesting-
period, which synchronizes with the flowering of the thyme. We now
have, around my working-table, my books, my jars and my various
appliances, a buzzing crowd that goes in and out of the windows at
every moment. I enjoin the household henceforth not to touch a thing
in the insects' laboratory, to do no more sweeping, no more dusting.
They might disturb the swarm and make it think that my hospitality
was not to be trusted. I suspect that the maid, wounded in her self-
esteem at seeing so much dust accumulating in the master's study, did
not always respect my prohibitions and came in stealthily, now and
again, to give a little sweep of the broom. At any rate, I came
across a number of Osmiae who seemed to have been crushed under foot
while taking a sunbath on the floor in front of the window. Perhaps
it was I myself who committed the misdeed in a heedless moment. There
is no great harm done, for the population is a numerous one; and,
notwithstanding those crushed by inadvertence, notwithstanding the
parasites wherewith many of the cocoons are infested, notwithstanding
those who may have come to grief outside or been unable to find their
way back, notwithstanding the deduction of one-half which we must
make for the males: notwithstanding all this, during four or five
weeks I witness the work of a number of Osmiae which is much too
large to allow of my watching their individual operations. I content
myself with a few, whom I mark with different-coloured spots to
distinguish them; and I take no notice of the others, whose finished
work will have my attention later.

The first to appear are the males. If the sun is bright, they flutter
around the heap of tubes as if to take careful note of the locality;
blows are exchanged and the rival swains indulge in mild skirmishing
on the floor, then shake the dust off their wings and fly away. I
find them, opposite my window, in the refreshment-bar of the lilac-
bush, whose branches bend with the weight of their scented panicles.
Here the Bees get drunk with sunshine and draughts of honey. Those
who have had their fill come home and fly assiduously from tube to
tube, placing their heads in the orifices to see if some female will
at last make up her mind to emerge.

One does, in point of fact. She is covered with dust and has the
disordered toilet that is inseparable from the hard work of the
deliverance. A lover has seen her, so has a second, likewise a third.
All crowd round her. The lady responds to their advances by clashing
her mandibles, which open and shut rapidly, several times in
succession. The suitors forthwith fall back; and they also, no doubt
to keep up their dignity, execute savage mandibular grimaces. Then
the beauty retires into the arbour and her wooers resume their places
on the threshold. A fresh appearance of the female, who repeats the
play with her jaws; a fresh retreat of the males, who do the best
they can to flourish their own pincers. The Osmiae have a strange way
of declaring their passion: with that fearsome gnashing of their
mandibles, the lovers look as though they meant to devour each other.
It suggests the thumps affected by our yokels in their moments of
gallantry.

The ingenious idyll is soon over. By turns greeting and greeted with
a clash of jaws, the female leaves her gallery and begins impassively
to polish her wings. The rivals rush forward, hoist themselves on top
of one another and form a pyramid of which each struggles to occupy
the base by toppling over the favoured lover. He, however, is careful
not to let go; he waits for the strife overhead to calm down; and,
when the supernumeraries realize that they are wasting their time and
throw up the game, the couple fly away far from the turbulent rivals.
This is all that I have been able to gather about the Osmia's
nuptials.

The females, who grow more numerous from day to day, inspect the
premises; they buzz outside the glass galleries and the reed
dwellings; they go in, stay for a while, come out, go in again and
then fly away briskly into the garden. They return, first one, then
another. They halt outside, in the sun, on the shutters fastened back
against the wall; they hover in the window-recess, come inside, go to
the reeds and give a glance at them, only to set off again and to
return soon after. Thus do they learn to know their home, thus do
they fix their birthplace in their memory. The village of our
childhood is always a cherished spot, never to be effaced from our
recollection. The Osmia's life endures for a month; and she acquires
a lasting remembrance of her hamlet in a couple of days. 'Twas there
that she was born; 'twas there that she loved; 'tis there that she
will return. Dulces reminiscitur Argos.
('Now falling by another's wound, his eyes
He casts to heaven, on Argos thinks and dies.'
--"Aeneid," Book 10 Dryden's translation.)

At last each has made her choice. The work of construction begins;
and my expectations are fulfilled far beyond my wishes. The Osmiae
build nests in all the retreats which I have placed at their
disposal. The glass tubes, which I cover with a sheet of paper to
produce the shade and mystery favourable to concentrated toil, do
wonderfully well. All, from first to last, are occupied. The Osmiae
quarrel for the possession of these crystal palaces, hitherto unknown
to their race. The reeds and the paper tubes likewise do wonderfully.
The number provided is too small; and I hasten to increase it. Snail-
shells are recognized as excellent abodes, though deprived of the
shelter of the stone-heap; old Chalicodoma-nests, down to those of
the Chalicodoma of the Shrubs (Cf. "The Mason-bees": chapters 4 and
10.--Translator's Note.), whose cells are so small, are eagerly
occupied. The late-comers, finding nothing else free, go and settle
in the locks of my table-drawers. There are daring ones who make
their way into half-open boxes containing ends of glass tubes in
which I have stored my most recent acquisitions: grubs, pupae and
cocoons of all kinds, whose evolution I wished to study. Whenever
these receptacles have an atom of free space, they claim the right to
build there, whereas I formally oppose the claim. I hardly reckoned
on such a success, which obliges me to put some order into the
invasion with which I am threatened. I seal up the locks, I shut my
boxes, I close my various receptacles for old nests, in short I
remove from the building-yard any retreat of which I do not approve.
And now, O my Osmiae, I leave you a free field!

The work begins with a thorough spring-cleaning of the home. Remnants
of cocoons, dirt consisting of spoilt honey, bits of plaster from
broken partitions, remains of dried Mollusc at the bottom of a shell:
these and much other insanitary refuse must first of all disappear.
Violently the Osmia tugs at the offending object and tears it out;
and then off she goes, in a desperate hurry, to dispose of it far
away from the study. They are all alike, these ardent sweepers: in
their excessive zeal, they fear lest they should block up the place
with a speck of dust which they might drop in front of the new house.
The glass tubes, which I myself have rinsed under the tap, are not
exempt from a scrupulous cleaning. The Osmia dusts them, brushes them
thoroughly with her tarsi and then sweeps them out backwards. What
does she pick up? Not a thing. It makes no difference: as a
conscientious housewife, she gives the place a touch of the broom
nevertheless.

Now for the provisions and the partition-walls. Here the order of the
work changes according to the diameter of the cylinder. My glass
tubes vary greatly in dimensions. The largest have an inner width of
a dozen millimetres (Nearly half an inch.--Translator's Note.); the
narrowest measure six or seven. (About a quarter of an inch.--
Translator's Note.) In the latter, if the bottom suit her, the Osmia
sets to work bringing pollen and honey. If the bottom do not suit
her, if the sorghum-pith plug with which I have closed the rear-end
of the tube be too irregular and badly-joined, the Bee coats it with
a little mortar. When this small repair is made, the harvesting
begins.

In the wider tubes, the work proceeds quite differently. At the
moment when the Osmia disgorges her honey and especially at the
moment when, with her hind-tarsi, she rubs the pollen-dust from her
ventral brush, she needs a narrow aperture, just big enough to allow
of her passage. I imagine that, in a straitened gallery, the rubbing
of her whole body against the sides gives the harvester a support for
her brushing-work. In a spacious cylinder, this support fails her;
and the Osmia starts with creating one for herself, which she does by
narrowing the channel. Whether it be to facilitate the storing of the
victuals or for any other reason, the fact remains that the Osmia
housed in a wide tube begins with the partitioning.

Her division is made by a dab of clay placed at right angles to the
axis of the cylinder, at a distance from the bottom determined by the
ordinary length of a cell. This wad is not a complete round; it is
more crescent-shaped, leaving a circular space between it and one
side of the tube. Fresh layers are swiftly added to the dab of clay;
and soon the tube is divided by a partition which has a circular
opening at the side of it, a sort of dog-hole through which the Osmia
will proceed to knead the Bee-bread. When the victualling is finished
and the egg laid upon the heap, the hole is closed and the filled-up
partition becomes the bottom of the next cell. Then the same method
is repeated, that is to say, in front of the just completed ceiling a
second partition is built, again with a side-passage, which is
stouter, owing to its distance from the centre, and better able to
withstand the numerous comings and goings of the housewife than a
central orifice, deprived of the direct support of the wall, could
hope to be. When this partition is ready, the provisioning of the
second cell is effected; and so on until the wide cylinder is
completely stocked.

The building of this preliminary party-wall, with a narrow, round
dog-hole, for a chamber to which the victuals will not be brought
until later is not restricted to the Three-horned Osmia; it is also
frequently found in the case of the Horned Osmia and of Latreille's
Osmia. Nothing could be prettier than the work of the last-named, who
goes to the plants for her material and fashions a delicate sheet in
which she cuts a graceful arch. The Chinaman partitions his house
with paper screens; Latreille's Osmia divides hers with disks of thin
green cardboard perforated with a serving-hatch which remains until
the room is completely furnished. When we have no glass houses at our
disposal, we can see these little architectural refinements in the
reeds of the hurdles, if we open them at the right season.

By splitting the bramble-stumps in the course of July, we perceive
also that the Three-pronged Osmia, notwithstanding her narrow
gallery, follows the same practice as Latreille's Osmia, with a
difference. She does not build a party-wall, which the diameter of
the cylinder would not permit; she confines herself to putting up a
frail circular pad of green putty, as though to limit, before any
attempt at harvesting, the space to be occupied by the Bee-bread,
whose depth could not be calculated afterwards if the insect did not
first mark out its confines. Can there really be an act of measuring?
That would be superlatively clever. Let us consult the Three-horned
Osmia in her glass tubes.

The Osmia is working at her big partition, with her body outside the
cell which she is preparing. From time to time, with a pellet of
mortar in her mandibles, she goes in and touches the previous ceiling
with her forehead, while the tip of her abdomen quivers and feels the
pad in course of construction. One might well say that she is using
the length of her body as a measure, in order to fix the next ceiling
at the proper distance. Then she resumes her work. Perhaps the
measure was not correctly taken; perhaps her memory, a few seconds
old, has already become muddled. The Bee once more ceases laying her
plaster and again goes and touches the front wall with her forehead
and the back wall with the tip of her abdomen. Looking at that body
trembling with eagerness, extended to its full length to touch the
two ends of the room, how can we fail to grasp the architect's grave
problem? The Osmia is measuring; and her measure is her body. Has she
quite done, this time? Oh dear no! Ten times, twenty times, at every
moment, for the least particle of mortar which she lays, she repeats
her mensuration, never being quite certain that her trowel is going
just where it should.

Meanwhile, amid these frequent interruptions, the work progresses and
the partition gains in width. The worker is bent into a hook, with
her mandibles on the inner surface of the wall and the tip of her
abdomen on the outer surface. The soft masonry stands between the two
points of purchase. The insect thus forms a sort of rolling-press, in
which the mud wall is flattened and shaped. The mandibles tap and
furnish mortar; the end of the abdomen also pats and gives brisk
trowel-touches. This anal extremity is a builder's tool; I see it
facing the mandibles on the other side of the partition, kneading and
smoothing it all over, flattening the little lump of clay. It is a
singular implement, which I should never have expected to see used
for this purpose. It takes an insect to conceive such an original
idea, to do mason's work with its behind! During this curious
performance, the only function of the legs is to keep the worker
steady by spreading out and clinging to the walls of the tunnel.

The partition with the hole in it is finished. Let us go back to the
measuring of which the Osmia was so lavish. What a magnificent
argument in favour of the reasoning-power of animals! To find
geometry, the surveyor's art, in an Osmia's tiny brain! An insect
that begins by taking the measurements of the room to be constructed,
just as any master-builder might do! Why, it's splendid, it's enough
to cover with confusion those horrible sceptics who persist in
refusing to admit the animal's 'continuous little flashes of atoms of
reason!'

O common-sense, veil your face! It is with this gibberish about
continuous flashes of atoms of reason that men pretend to build up
science to-day! Very well, my masters; the magnificent argument with
which I am supplying you lacks but one little detail, the merest
trifle: truth! Not that I have not seen and plainly seen all that I
am relating; but measuring has nothing to do with the case. And I can
prove it by facts.

If, in order to see the Osmia's nest as a whole, we split a reed
lengthwise, taking care not to disturb its contents; or, better
still, if we select for examination the string of cells built in a
glass tube, we are forthwith struck by one detail, namely, the uneven
distances between the partitions, which are placed almost at right
angles to the axis of the cylinder. It is these distances which fix
the size of the chambers, which, with a similar base, have different
heights and consequently unequal holding-capacities. The bottom
partitions, the oldest, are farther apart; those of the front part,
near the orifice, are closer together. Moreover, the provisions are
plentiful in the loftier cells, whereas they are niggardly and
reduced to one-half or even one-third in the cells of lesser height.

Here are a few examples of these inequalities. A glass tube with a
diameter of 12 millimetres (.468 inch.--Translator's Note.), inside
measurement, contains ten cells. The five lower ones, beginning with
the bottom-most, have as the respective distances between their
partitions, in millimetres:

11, 12, 16, 13, 11. (.429, .468, .624, .507, .429 inch.--Translator's
Note.)

The five upper ones measure between their partitions:

7, 7, 5, 6, 7. (.273, .273, .195, .234, .273 inch.--Translator's
Note.)

A reed-stump 11 millimetres (.429 inch.--Translator's Note.) across
the inside contains fifteen cells; and the respective distances
between the partitions of those cells, starting from the bottom, are:

13, 12, 12, 9, 9, 11, 8, 8, 7, 7, 7, 6, 6, 6, 7. (.507, .468, .468,
.351, .351, .429, .312, .312, .273, .273, .273, .234, .234, .234,
.273 inch.--Translator's Note.)

When the diameter of the tunnel is less, the partitions can be still
further apart, though they retain the general characteristic of being
closer to one another the nearer they are to the orifice. A reed of
five millimetres (.195 inch.--Translator's Note.) in diameter, gives
me the following distances, always starting from the bottom:

22, 22, 20, 20, 12, 14. (.858, .858, .78, .78, .468, .546 inch.--
Translator's Note.)

Another, of 9 millimetres (.351 inch.--Translator's Note.), gives me:

15, 14, 11, 10, 10, 9, 10. (.585, .546, .429, .39, .39, .351, .39
inch.--Translator's Note.)

A glass tube of 8 millimetres (.312 inch.--Translator's Note.)
yields:

15, 14, 20, 10, 10, 10. (.585, .546, .78, .39, .39, .39 inch.--
Translator's Note.).

I could fill pages and pages with such figures, if I cared to print
all my notes. Do they prove that the Osmia is a geometrician,
employing a strict measure based on the length of her body? Certainly
not, because many of those figures exceed the length of the insect;
because sometimes a higher number follows suddenly upon a lower;
because the same string contains a figure of one value and another
figure of but half that value. They prove only one thing: the marked
tendency of the insect to shorten the distance between the party-
walls as the work proceeds. We shall see later that the large cells
are destined for the females and the small ones for the males.

Is there not at least a measuring adapted to each sex? Again, not so;
for in the first series, where the females are housed, instead of the
interval of 11 millimetres, which occurs at the beginning and the
end, we find, in the middle of the series, an interval of 16
millimetres, while in the second series, reserved for the males,
instead of the interval of 7 millimetres at the beginning and the
end, we have an interval of 5 millimetres in the middle. It is the
same with the other series, each of which shows a striking
discrepancy in its figures. If the Osmia really studied the
dimensions of her chambers and measured them with the compasses of
her body, how could she, with her delicate mechanism, fail to notice
mistakes of 5 millimetres, almost half her own length?

Besides, all idea of geometry vanishes if we consider the work in a
tube of moderate width. Here, the Osmia does not fix the front
partition in advance; she does not even lay its foundation. Without
any boundary-pad, with no guiding mark for the capacity of the cell,
she busies herself straightway with the provisioning. When the heap
of Bee-bread is judged sufficient, that is, I imagine, when her tired
body tells her that she has done enough harvesting, she closes up the
chamber. In this case, there is no measuring; and yet the capacity of
the cell and the quantity of the victuals fulfil the regular
requirements of one or the other sex.

Then what does the Osmia do when she repeatedly stops to touch the
front partition with her forehead and the back partition, the one in
the course of building, with the tip of her abdomen? I have no idea
what she does or what she has in view. I leave the interpretation of
this performance to others, more venturesome than I. Plenty of
theories are based on equally shaky foundations. Blow on them and
they sink into the quagmire of oblivion.

The laying is finished, or perhaps the cylinder is full. A final
partition closes the last cell. A rampart is now built, at the
orifice of the tube itself, to forbid the ill-disposed all access to
the home. This is a thick plug, a massy work of fortification,
whereon the Osmia spends enough mortar to partition off any number of
cells. A whole day is not too long for making this barricade,
especially in view of the minute finishing-touches, when the Osmia
fills up with putty every chink through which the least atom could
slip. The mason completing a wall smooths his plaster and brings it
to a fine surface while it is still wet; the Osmia does the same, or
almost. With little taps of the mandibles and a continual shaking of
her head, a sign of her zest for the work, she smooths and polishes
the surface of the lid for hours at a time. After such pains, what
foe could visit the dwelling?

And yet there is one, an Anthrax, A. sinuata (Cf. "The Life of the
Fly": chapters 2 and 4.--Translator's Note.), who will come later on,
in the height of summer, and succeed, invisible bit of thread that
she is, in making her way to the grub through the thickness of the
door and the web of the cocoon. In many cells, mischief of another
kind has already been done. During the progress of the works, an
impudent Midge, one of the Tachina-flies, who feeds her family on the
victuals amassed by the Bee, hovers in front of the galleries. Does
she penetrate to the cells and lay her eggs there in the mother's
absence? I could never catch the sneak in the act. Does she, like
that other Tachina who ravages cells stocked with game (The cells of
the Hunting Wasps.--Translator's Note.), nimbly deposit her eggs on
the Osmia's harvest at the moment when the Bee is going indoors? It
is possible, though I cannot say for certain. The fact remains that
we soon see the Midge's grub-worms swarming around the larva, the
daughter of the house. There are ten, fifteen, twenty or more of them
gnawing with their pointed mouths at the common dish and turning the
food into a heap of fine, orange-coloured vermicelli. The Bee's grub
dies of starvation. It is life, life in all its ferocity even in
these tiny creatures. What an expenditure of ardent labour, of
delicate cares, of wise precautions, to arrive at...what? Her
offspring sucked and drained dry by the hateful Anthrax; her family
sweated and starved by the infernal Tachina.

The victuals consist mostly of yellow flour. In the centre of the
heap, a little honey is disgorged, which turns the pollen-dust into a
firm, reddish paste. On this paste the egg is laid, not flat, but
upright, with the fore-end free and the hind-end lightly held and
fixed in the plastic mass. When hatched, the young grub, kept in its
place by its rear-end, need only bend its neck a little to find the
honey-soaked paste under its mouth. When it grows stronger, it will
release itself from its support and eat up the surrounding flour.

All this is touching, in its maternal logic. For the new-born, dainty
bread-and-honey; for the adolescent, dry bread. In cases where the
provisions are all of a kind, these delicate precautions are
superfluous. The victuals of the Anthophorae and the Chalicodomae
consist of flowing honey, the same throughout. The egg is then laid
at full length on the surface, without any particular arrangement,
thus compelling the new-born grub to take its first mouthfuls at
random. This has no drawback, as the food is of the same quality
throughout. But, with the Osmia's provisions--dry powder on the
edges, jam in the centre--the grub would be in danger if its first
meal were not regulated in advance. To begin with pollen not seasoned
with honey would be fatal to its stomach. Having no choice of its
mouthfuls because of its immobility and being obliged to feed on the
spot where it was hatched, the young grub must needs be born on the
central mass, where it has only to bend its head a little way in
order to find what its delicate stomach calls for. The place of the
egg, therefore, fixed upright by its base in the middle of the red
jam, is most judiciously chosen. What a contrast between this
exquisite maternal forethought and the horrible destruction by the
Anthrax and the Midge!

The egg is rather large for the size of the Osmia. It is cylindrical,
slightly curved, rounded at both ends and transparent. It soon
becomes cloudy, while remaining diaphanous at each extremity. Fine
lines, hardly perceptible to the most penetrating lens, show
themselves in transverse circles. These are the first signs of
segmentation. A contraction appears in the front hyaline part,
marking the head. An extremely thin opaque thread runs down either
side. This is the cord of tracheae communicating between one
breathing-hole and another. At last, the segments show distinctly,
with their lateral pads. The grub is born.

At first, one would think that there was no hatching in the proper
sense of the word--that is to say, no bursting and casting of a
wrapper. The most minute attention is necessary to show that
appearances are deceptive and that actually a fine membrane is thrown
off from front to back. This infinitesimal shred is the shell of the
egg.

The grub is born. Fixed by its base, it curves into an arc and bends
its head, until now held erect, down to the red mass. The meal
begins. Soon a yellow cord occupying the front two-thirds of the body
proclaims that the digestive apparatus is swelling out with food. For
a fortnight, consume your provender in peace, my child; then spin
your cocoon: you are now safe from the Tachina! Shall you be safe
from the Anthrax' sucker later on? Alack!


CHAPTER 3. THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SEXES.

Does the insect know beforehand the sex of the egg which it is about
to lay? When examining the stock of food in the cells just now, we
began to suspect that it does, for each little heap of provisions is
carefully proportioned to the needs at one time of a male and at
another of a female. What we have to do is to turn this suspicion
into a certainty demonstrated by experiment. And first let us find
out how the sexes are arranged.

It is not possible to ascertain the chronological order of a laying,
except by going to suitably-chosen species. Digging up the burrows of
Cerceris-, Bembex- or Philanthus-wasps will never tell us that this
grub has taken precedence of that in point of time nor enable us to
decide whether one cocoon in a colony belongs to the same family as
another. To compile a register of births is absolutely impossible
here. Fortunately there are a few species in which we do not find
this difficulty: these are the Bees who keep to one gallery and build
their cells in storeys. Among the number are the different
inhabitants of the bramble-stumps, notably the Three-pronged Osmiae,
who form an excellent subject for observation, partly because they
are of imposing-size--bigger than any other bramble-dwellers in my
neighbourhood--partly because they are so plentiful.

Let us briefly recall the Osmia's habits. Amid the tangle of a hedge,
a bramble-stalk is selected, still standing, but a mere withered
stump. In this the insect digs a more or less deep tunnel, an easy
piece of work owing to the abundance of soft pith. Provisions are
heaped up right at the bottom of the tunnel and an egg is laid on the
surface of the food: that is the first-born of the family. At a
height of some twelve millimetres (About half an inch.--Translator's
Note.), a partition is fixed, formed of bramble saw-dust and of a
green paste obtained by masticating particles of the leaves of some
plant that has not yet been identified. This gives a second storey,
which in its turn receives provisions and an egg, the second in order
of primogeniture. And so it goes on, storey by storey, until the
cylinder is full. Then a thick plug of the same green material of
which the partitions are formed closes the home and keeps out
marauders.

In this common cradle, the chronological order of births is perfectly
clear. The first-born of the family is at the bottom of the series;
the last-born is at the top, near the closed door. The others follow
from bottom to top in the same order in which they followed in point
of time. The laying is numbered automatically; each cocoon tells us
its respective age by the place which it occupies.

To know the sexes, we must wait for the month of June. But it would
be unwise to postpone our investigations until that period. Osmia-
nests are not so common that we can hope to pick one up each time
that we go out with that object; besides, if we wait for the
hatching-period before examining the brambles, it may happen that the
order has been disturbed through some insects' having tried to make
their escape as soon as possible after bursting their cocoons; it may
happen that the male Osmiae, who are more forward than the females,
are already gone. I therefore set to work a long time beforehand and
devote my leisure in winter to these investigations.

The bramble-sticks are split and the cocoons taken out one by one and
methodically transferred to glass tubes, of approximately the same
diameter as the native cylinder. These cocoons are arranged one on
top of the other in exactly the same order that they occupied in the
bramble; they are separated from one another by a cotton plug, an
insuperable obstacle to the future insect. There is thus no fear that
the contents of the cells may become mixed or transposed; and I am
saved the trouble of keeping a laborious watch. Each insect can hatch
at its own time, in my presence or not: I am sure of always finding
it in its place, in its proper order, held fast fore and aft by the
cotton barrier. A cork or sorghum-pith partition would not fulfil the
same purpose: the insect would perforate it and the register of
births would be muddled by changes of position. Any reader wishing to
undertake similar investigations will excuse these practical details,
which may facilitate his work.

We do not often come upon complete series, comprising the whole
laying, from the first-born to the youngest. As a rule, we find part
of a laying, in which the number of cocoons varies greatly, sometimes
falling as low as two, or even one. The mother has not deemed it
advisable to confide her whole family to a single bramble-stump; in
order to make the exit less toilsome, or else for reasons which
escape me, she has left the first home and elected to make a second
home, perhaps a third or more.

We also find series with breaks in them. Sometimes, in cells
distributed at random, the egg has not developed and the provisions
have remained untouched, but mildewed; sometimes, the larva has died
before spinning its cocoon, or after spinning it. Lastly, there are
parasites, such as the Unarmed Zonitis (Zonitis mutica, one of the
Oil-beetles.--Translator's Note.) and the Spotted Sapyga (A Digger-
wasp.--Translator's Note.), who interrupt the series by substituting
themselves for the original occupant. All these disturbing factors
make it necessary to examine a large number of nests of the Three-
pronged Osmia, if we would obtain a definite result.

I have been studying the bramble-dwellers for seven or eight years
and I could not say how many strings of cocoons have passed through
my hands. During a recent winter, in view particularly of the
distribution of the sexes, I collected some forty of this Osmia's
nests, transferred their contents into glass tubes and made a careful
summary of the sexes. I give some of my results. The figures start in
their order from the bottom of the tunnel dug in the bramble and
proceed upwards to the orifice. The figure 1 therefore denotes the
first-born of the series, the oldest in date; the highest figure
denotes the last-born. The letter M, placed under the corresponding
figure, represents the male and the letter F the female sex.

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15
F  F  M  F  M  F  M  M  F  F  F  F  M  F  M

This is the longest series that I have ever been able to procure. It
is also complete, inasmuch as it comprises the entire laying of the
Osmia. My statement requires explaining, otherwise it would seem
impossible to know whether a mother whose acts one has not watched,
nay more, whom one has never seen, has or has not finished laying her
eggs. The bramble-stump under consideration leaves a free space of
nearly four inches above the continuous string of cocoons. Beyond it,
at the actual orifice, is the terminal stopper, the thick plug which
closes the entrance to the gallery. In this empty portion of the
tunnel there is ample accommodation for numerous cocoons. The fact
that the mother has not made use of it proves that her ovaries were
exhausted; for it is exceedingly unlikely that she has abandoned
first-rate lodgings to go laboriously digging a new gallery elsewhere
and there continue her laying.

You may say that, if the unoccupied space marks the end of the
laying, nothing tells us that the beginning is actually at the bottom
of the cul-de-sac, at the other end of the tunnel. You may also say
that the laying is done in shifts, separated by intervals of rest.
The space left empty in the channel would mean that one of these
shifts was finished and not that there were no more eggs ripe for
hatching. In answer to these very plausible explanations, I will say
that, the sum of my observations--and they have been extremely
numerous--is that the total number of eggs laid not only by the
Osmiae but by a host of other Bees fluctuates round about fifteen.

Besides, when we consider that the active life of these insects lasts
hardly a month; when we remember that this period of activity is
disturbed by dark, rainy or very windy days, during which all work is
suspended; when lastly we ascertain, as I have done ad nauseam in the
case of the Three-horned Osmia, the time required for building and
victualling a cell, it becomes obvious that the total laying must be
kept within narrow bounds and that the mother has no time to lose if
she wishes to get fifteen cells satisfactorily built in three or four
weeks interrupted by compulsory rests. I shall give some facts later
which will dispel your doubts, if any remain.

I assume, therefore, that a number of eggs bordering on fifteen
represents the entire family of an Osmia, as it does of many other
Bees.

Let us consult some other complete series. Here are two:

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13
F  F  M  F  M  F  M  F  F  F  F  M  F
F  M  F  F  F  M  F  F  M  F  M

In both cases, the laying is taken as complete, for the same reasons
as above.

We will end with some 