series that appear to me incomplete, in view of
the small number of cells and the absence of any free space above the
pile of cocoons:

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8
M  M  F  M  M  M  M  M
M  M  F  M  F  M  M  M
F  M  F  F  M  M
M  M  M  F  M
F  F  F  F
M  M     M
F  M

These examples are more than sufficient. It is quite evident that the
distribution of the sexes is not governed by any rule. All that I can
say on consulting the whole of my notes, which contain a good many
instances of complete layings--most of them, unfortunately, spoilt
through gaps caused by parasites, the death of the larva, the failure
of the egg to hatch and other accidents--all that I can say in
general is that the complete series begins with females and nearly
always ends with males. The incomplete series can teach us nothing in
this respect, for they are only fragments starting we know not
whence; and it is impossible to tell whether they should be ascribed
to the beginning, to the end, or to an intermediate period of the
laying. To sum up: in the laying of the Three-pronged Osmia, no order
governs the succession of the sexes; only, the series has a marked
tendency to begin with females and to finish with males.

The brambles, in my district, harbour two other Osmiae, both of much
smaller size: O. detrita, PEREZ, and O. parvula, DUF. The first is
very common, the second very rare; and until now I have found only
one of her nests, placed above a nest of O. detrita, in the same
bramble. Here, instead of the lack of order in the distribution of
the sexes which we find with O. tridentata, we have an order
remarkable for consistency and simplicity. I have before me the list
of the series of O. detrita collected last winter. Here are some of
them:

1. A series of twelve: seven females, beginning with the bottom of
the tunnel, and then five males.

2. A series of nine: three females first, then six males.

3. A series of eight: five females followed by three males.

4. A series of eight: seven females followed by one male.

5. A series of eight: one female followed by seven males.

6. A series of seven: six females followed by one male.

The first series might very well be complete. The second and fifth
appear to be the end of layings, of which the beginning has taken
place elsewhere, in another bramble-stump. The males predominate and
finish off the series. Nos. 3, 4 and 6, on the other hand, look like
the beginnings of layings: the females predominate and are at the
head of the series. Even if these interpretations should be open to
doubt, one result at least is certain: with O. detrita, the laying is
divided into two groups, with no intermingling of the sexes; the
first group laid yields nothing but females, the second, or more
recent, yields nothing but males.

What was only a sort of attempt with the Three-pronged Osmia--who, it
is true, begins with females and ends with males, but muddles up the
order and mixes the two sexes anyhow between the extreme points--
becomes a regular law with her kinswoman. The mother occupies herself
at the start with the stronger sex, the more necessary, the better-
gifted, the female sex, to which she devotes the first flush of her
laying and the fullness of her vigour; later, when she is perhaps
already at the end of her strength, she bestows what remains of her
maternal solicitude upon the weaker sex, the less-gifted, almost
negligible male sex.

O. parvula, of whom I unfortunately possess but one series, repeats
what the previous witness has just shown us. This series, one of nine
cocoons, comprises five females followed by four males, without any
mixing of the sexes.

Next to these disgorgers of honey and gleaners of pollen-dust, it
would be well to consult other Hymenoptera, Wasps who devote
themselves to the chase and pile their cells one after the other, in
a row, showing the relative age of the cocoons. The brambles house
several of these: Solenius vagus, who stores up Flies; Psen atratus,
who provides her grubs with a heap of Plant-lice; Trypoxylon figulus,
who feeds them with Spiders.

Solenius vagus digs her gallery in a bramble-stick that is lopped
short, but still fresh and green. The house of this Fly-huntress,
therefore, suffers from damp, as the sap enters, especially on the
lower floors. This seems to me rather insanitary. To avoid the
humidity, or for other reasons which escape me, the Solenius does not
dig very far into her bramble-stump and consequently can stack but a
small number of cells in it. A series of five cocoons gives me first
four females and then one male; another series, also of five,
contains first three females, with two males following. These are the
most complete that I have for the moment.

I reckoned on the Black Psen, or Psen atratus, whose series are
pretty long; it is a pity that they are nearly always greatly
interfered with by a parasite called Ephialtes mediator. (Cf. "The
Life of the Fly": chapter 2.--Translator's Note.) I obtained only
three series free from gaps: one of eight cocoons, comprising only
females; one of six, likewise consisting wholly of females; lastly,
one of eight, formed exclusively of males. These instances seem to
show that the Psen arranges her laying in a succession of females and
a succession of males; but they tell us nothing of the relative order
of the two series.

>From the Spider-huntress, Trypoxylon figulus, I learnt nothing
decisive. She appeared to me to rove about from one bramble to the
next, utilizing galleries which she has not dug herself. Not
troubling to be economical with a lodging which it has cost her
nothing to acquire, she carelessly builds a few partitions at very
unequal heights, stuffs three or four compartments with Spiders and
passes on to another bramble-stump, with no reason, so far as I know,
for abandoning the first. Her cells, therefore, occur in series that
are too short to give us any useful information.

This is all that the bramble-dwellers have to tell us; I have
enumerated the list of the principal ones in my district. We will now
look into some other Bees who arrange their cocoons in single files:
the Megachiles (Cf. Chapter 8 of the present volume.--Translator's
Note.), who cut disks out of leaves and fashion the disks into
thimble-shaped receptacles; the Anthidia (Cf. Chapters 9 and 10 of
the present volume.--Translator's Note.), who weave their honey-
wallets out of cotton-wool and arrange their cells one after the
other in some cylindrical gallery. In most cases, the home is the
produce of neither the one nor the other. A tunnel in the upright,
earthy banks, the old work of some Anthophora, is the usual dwelling.
There is no great depth to these retreats; and all my searches,
zealously prosecuted during a number of winters, procured me only
series containing a small number of cocoons, four or five at most,
often one alone. And, what is quite as serious, nearly all these
series are spoilt by parasites and allow me to draw no well-founded
deductions.

I remembered finding, at rare intervals, nests of both the Anthidium
and the Megachile in the hollows of cut reeds. I thereupon installed
some hives of a new kind on the sunniest walls of my enclosure. They
consisted of stumps of the great reed of the south, open at one end,
closed at the other by the natural knot and gathered into a sort of
enormous pan-pipe, such as Polyphemus might have employed. The
invitation was accepted: Osmiae, Anthidia and Megachiles came in
fairly large numbers, especially the first, to benefit by the queer
installation.

In this way I obtained some magnificent series of Anthidia and
Megachiles, running up to a dozen. There was a melancholy side to
this success. All my series, with not one exception, were ravaged by
parasites. Those of the Megachile (M. sericans, FONSCOL), who
fashions her goblets with robinia-, holm-, and terebinth-leaves, were
inhabited by Coelioxys octodentata (A Parasitic Bee.--Translator's
Note.); those of the Anthidium (A. florentinum, LATR.) were occupied
by a Leucopsis. Both kinds were swarming with a colony of pigmy
parasites whose name I have not yet been able to discover. In short,
my pan-pipe hives, though very useful to me from other points of
view, taught me nothing about the order of the sexes among the Leaf-
cutters and the cotton-weavers.

I was more fortunate with three Osmiae (O. tricornis, LATR., O.
cornuta, LATR., and O. Latreillii, SPIN.), all of whom gave me
splendid results, with reed-stumps arranged either against the walls
of my garden, as I have just said, or near their customary abode, the
huge nests of the Mason-bee of the Sheds. One of them, the Three-
horned Osmia, did better still: as I have described, she built her
nests in my study, as plentifully as I could wish, using reeds, glass
tubes and other retreats of my selecting for her galleries.

We will consult this last, who has furnished me with documents beyond
my fondest hopes, and begin by asking her of how many eggs her
average laying consists. Of the whole heap of colonized tubes in my
study, or else out of doors, in the hurdle-reeds and the pan-pipe
appliances, the best-filled contains fifteen cells, with a free space
above the series, a space showing that the laying is ended, for, if
the mother had any more eggs available, she would have lodged them in
the room which she leaves unoccupied. This string of fifteen appears
to be rare; it was the only one that I found. My attempts at indoor
rearing, pursued during two years with glass tubes or reeds, taught
me that the Three-horned Osmia is not much addicted to long series.
As though to decrease the difficulties of the coming deliverance, she
prefers short galleries, in which only a part of the laying is
stacked. We must then follow the same mother in her migration from
one dwelling to the next if we would obtain a complete census of her
family. A spot of colour, dropped on the Bee's thorax with a paint-
brush while she is absorbed in closing up the mouth of the tunnel,
enables us to recognize the Osmia in her various homes.

In this way, the swarm that resided in my study furnished me, in the
first year, with an average of twelve cells. Next year, the summer
appeared to be more favourable and the average became rather higher,
reaching fifteen. The most numerous laying performed under my eyes,
not in a tube, but in a succession of Snail-shells, reached the
figure of twenty-six. On the other hand, layings of between eight and
ten are not uncommon. Lastly, taking all my records together, the
result is that the family of the Osmia fluctuates round about fifteen
in number.

I have already spoken of the great differences in size apparent in
the cells of one and the same series. The partitions, at first widely
spaced, draw gradually nearer to one another as they come closer to
the aperture, which implies roomy cells at the back and narrow cells
in front. The contents of these compartments are no less uneven
between one portion and another of the string. Without any exception
known to me, the large cells, those with which the series starts,
have more abundant provisions than the straitened cells with which
the series ends. The heap of honey and pollen in the first is twice
or even thrice as large as that in the second. In the last cells, the
most recent in date, the victuals are but a pinch of pollen, so
niggardly in amount that we wonder what will become of the larva with
that meagre ration.

One would think that the Osmia, when nearing the end of the laying,
attaches no importance to her last-born, to whom she doles out space
and food so sparingly. The first-born receive the benefit of her
early enthusiasm: theirs is the well-spread table, theirs the
spacious apartments. The work has begun to pall by the time that the
last eggs are laid; and the last-comers have to put up with a scurvy
portion of food and a tiny corner.

The difference shows itself in another way after the cocoons are
spun. The large cells, those at the back, receive the bulky cocoons;
the small ones, those in front, have cocoons only a half or a third
as big. Before opening them and ascertaining the sex of the Osmia
inside, let us wait for the transformation into the perfect insect,
which will take place towards the end of summer. If impatience gets
the better of us, we can open them at the end of July or in August.
The insect is then in the nymphal stage; and it is easy, under this
form, to distinguish the two sexes by the length of the antennae,
which are larger in the males, and by the glassy protuberances on the
forehead, the sign of the future armour of the females. Well, the
small cocoons, those in the narrow front cells, with their scanty
store of provisions, all belong to males; the big cocoons, those in
the spacious and well-stocked cells at the back, all belong to
females.

The conclusion is definite: the laying of the Three-horned Osmia
consists of two distinct groups, first a group of females and then a
group of males.

With my pan-pipe apparatus displayed on the walls of my enclosure and
with old hurdle-reeds left lying flat out of doors, I obtained the
Horned Osmia in fair quantities. I persuaded Latreille's Osmia to
build her nest in reeds, which she did with a zeal which I was far
from expecting. All that I had to do was to lay some reed-stumps
horizontally within her reach, in the immediate neighbourhood of her
usual haunts, namely, the nests of the Mason-bee of the Sheds.
Lastly, I succeeded without difficulty in making her build her nests
in the privacy of my study, with glass tubes for a house. The result
surpassed my hopes.

With both these Osmiae, the division of the gallery is the same as
with the Three-horned Osmia. At the back are large cells with
plentiful provisions and widely-spaced partitions; in front, small
cells, with scanty provisions and partitions close together. Also,
the larger cells supplied me with big cocoons and females; the
smaller cells gave me little cocoons and males. The conclusion
therefore is exactly the same in the case of all three Osmiae.

Before dismissing the Osmiae, let us devote a moment to their
cocoons, a comparison of which, in the matter of bulk, will furnish
us with fairly accurate evidence as to the relative size of the two
sexes, for the thing contained, the perfect insect, is evidently
proportionate to the silken wrapper in which it is enclosed. These
cocoons are oval-shaped and may be regarded as ellipsoids formed by a
revolution around the major axis. The volume of one of these solids
is expressed in the following formula:

4 / 3 x pi x a x (b squared),

in which 2a is the major axis and 2b the minor axis.

Now, the average dimensions of the cocoons of the Three-horned Osmia
are as follows:

2a = 13 mm. (.507 inch.--Translator's Note.), 2b = 7 mm. (.273 inch.-
-Translator's Note.) in the females;

2a = 9 mm. (.351 inch.--Translator's Note.), 2b = 5 mm. (.195 inch.--
Translator's Note.) in the males.

The ratio therefore between 13 x 7 x 7 = 637 and 9 x 5 x 5 = 225 will
be more or less the ratio between the sizes of the two sexes. This
ratio is somewhere between 2 to 1 and 3 to 1. The females therefore
are two or three times larger than the males, a proportion already
suggested by a comparison of the mass of provisions, estimated simply
by the eye.

The Horned Osmia gives us the following average dimensions:

2a = 15 mm. (.585 inch.--Translator's Note.), 2b = 9 mm. (.351 inch.-
-Translator's Note.) in the females;

2a = 12 mm. (.468 inch.--Translator's Note.), 2b = 7 mm. (.273 inch.-
-Translator's Note.) in the males.

Once again, the ratio between 15 x 9 x 9 = 1215 and 12 x 7 x 7 = 588
lies between 2 to 1 and 3 to 1.

Besides the Bees who arrange their laying in a row, I have consulted
others whose cells are grouped in a way that makes it possible to
ascertain the relative order of the two sexes, though not quite so
precisely. One of these is the Mason-bee of the Walls. I need not
describe again her dome-shaped nest, built on a pebble, which is now
so well-known to us. (Cf. "The Mason-bees": chapter 1.--Translator's
Note.)

Each mother chooses her stone and works on it in solitude. She is an
ungracious landowner and guards her site jealously, driving away any
Mason who even looks as though she might alight on it. The
inhabitants of the same nest are therefore always brothers and
sisters; they are the family of one mother.

Moreover, if the stone presents a large enough surface--a condition
easily fulfilled--the Mason-bee has no reason to leave the support on
which she began her laying and go in search of another whereon to
deposit the rest of her eggs. She is too thrifty of her time and of
her mortar to involve herself in such expenditure except for grave
reasons. Consequently, each nest, at least when it is new, when the
Bee herself has laid the first foundations, contains the entire
laying. It is a different thing when an old nest is restored and made
into a place for depositing the eggs. I shall come back later to such
houses.

A newly-built nest then, with rare exceptions, contains the entire
laying of one female. Count the cells and we shall have the total
list of the family. Their maximum number fluctuates round about
fifteen. The most luxuriant series will occasionally reach as many as
eighteen, though these are very scarce.

When the surface of the stone is regular all around the site of the
first cell, when the mason can add to her building with the same
facility in every direction, it is obvious that the groups of cells,
when finished, will have the oldest in the central portion and the
more recent in the surrounding portion. Because of this juxtaposition
of the cells, which serve partly as a wall to those which come next,
it is possible to form some estimate of the chronological order of
the cells in the Chalicodoma's nest and thus to discover the sequence
of the two sexes.

In winter, by which time the Bee has long been in the perfect state,
I collect Chalicodoma-nests, removing them bodily from their support
with a few smart sideward taps of the hammer on the pebbles. At the
base of the mortar dome the cells are wide agape and display their
contents. I take the cocoon from its box, open it and take note of
the sex of the insect enclosed.

I should probably be accused of exaggeration if I mentioned the total
number of the nests which I have gathered and the cells which I have
inspected by this method during the last six or seven years. I will
content myself with saying that the harvest of a single morning
sometimes consisted of as many as sixty nests of the Mason-bee. I had
to have help in carrying home my spoils, even though the nests were
removed from their stones on the spot.

>From the enormous number of nests which I have examined, I am able to
state that, when the cluster is regular, the female cells occupy the
centre and the male cells the edges. Where the irregularity of the
pebble has prevented an even distribution around the initial point,
the same rule has been observed. A male cell is never surrounded on
every side by female cells: either it occupies the edges of the nest,
or else it adjoins, at least on some sides, other male cells, of
which the last form part of the exterior of the cluster. As the
surrounding cells are obviously of a later date than the inner cells,
it follows that the Mason-bee acts like the Osmiae: she begins her
laying with females and ends it with males, each of the sexes forming
a series of its own, independent of the other.

Some further circumstances add their testimony to that of the
surrounded and surrounding cells. When the pebble projects sharply
and forms a sort of dihedral angle, one of whose faces is more or
less vertical and the other horizontal, this angle is a favourite
site with the Mason, who thus finds greater stability for her edifice
in the support given her by the double plane. These sites appear to
me to be in great request with the Chalicodoma, considering the
number of nests which I find thus doubly supported. In nests of this
kind, all the cells, as usual, have their foundations fixed to the
horizontal surface; but the first row, the row of cells first built,
stands with its back against the vertical surface.

Well, these older cells, which occupy the actual edge of the dihedral
angle, are always female, with the exception of those at either end
of the row, which, as they belong to the outside, may be male cells.
In front of this first row come others. The female cells occupy the
middle portion and the male the ends. Finally, the last row, closing
in the remainder, contains only male cells. The progress of the work
is very visible here: the Mason has begun by attending to the central
group of female cells, the first row of which occupies the dihedral
angle, and has finished her task by distributing the male cells round
the outside.

If the perpendicular face of the dihedral angle be high enough, it
sometimes happens that a second row of cells is placed above the
first row backing on to that plane; a third row occurs less often.
The nest is then one of several storeys. The lower storeys, the
older, contain only females; the upper, the more recent storey,
contains none but males. It goes without saying that the surface
layer, even of the lower storeys, can contain males without
invalidating the rule, for this layer may always be looked upon as
the Chalicodoma's last work.

Everything therefore contributes to show that, in the Mason-bee, the
females take the lead in the order of primogeniture. Theirs is the
central and best-protected part of the clay fortress; the outer part,
that most exposed to the inclemencies of the weather and to
accidents, is for the males.

The males' cells do not differ from the females' only by being placed
at the outside of the cluster; they differ also in their capacity,
which is much smaller. To estimate the respective capacities of the
two sorts of cells, I go to work as follows: I fill the empty cell
with very fine sand and pour this sand back into a glass tube
measuring 5 millimetres (.195 inch.--Translator's Note.) in diameter.
>From the height of the column of sand we can estimate the comparative
capacity of the two kinds of cells. I will take one at random among
my numerous examples of cells thus gauged.

It comprises thirteen cells and occupies a dihedral angle. The female
cells give me the following figures, in millimetres, as the height of
the columns of sand:

40, 44, 43, 48, 48, 46, 47
(1.56, 1.71, 1.67, 1.87, 1.87, 1.79, 1.83 inches.--Translator's
Note.),

averaging 45. (1.75 inches.--Translator's Note.)

The male cells give me:

32, 35, 28, 30, 30, 31
(1.24, 1.36, 1.09, 1.17, 1.17, 1.21 inches.--Translator's Note.),

averaging 31. (1.21 inches.--Translator's Note.)

The ratio of the capacity of the cells for the two sexes is therefore
roughly a ratio of 4 to 3. The actual contents of the cell being
proportionate to its capacity, the above ratio must also be more or
less the ratio of provisions and sizes between females and males.
These figures will assist us presently to tell whether an old cell,
occupied for a second or third time, belonged originally to a female
or a male.

The Chalicodoma of the Sheds cannot give us any information on this
matter. She builds under the same eaves, in excessively populous
colonies; and it is impossible to follow the labours of any single
Mason, whose cells, distributed here and there, are soon covered up
with the work of her neighbours. All is muddle and confusion in the
individual output of the swarming throng.

I have not watched the work of the Chalicodoma of the Shrubs with
close enough attention to be able to state definitely that this Bee
is a solitary builder. Her nest is a ball of clay hanging from a
bough. Sometimes, this nest is the size of a large walnut and then
appears to be the work of one alone; sometimes, it is the size of a
man's fist, in which case I have no doubt that it is the work of
several. Those bulky nests, comprising more than fifty cells, can
tell us nothing exact, as a number of workers must certainly have
collaborated to produce them.

The walnut-sized nests are more trustworthy, for everything seems to
indicate that they were built by a single Bee. Here females are found
in the centre of the group and males at the circumference, in
somewhat smaller cells, thus repeating what the Mason-bee of the
Pebbles has told us.

One clear and simple rule stands out from this collection of facts.
Apart from the strange exception of the Three-pronged Osmia, who
mixes the sexes without any order, the Bees whom I studied and
probably a crowd of others produce first a continuous series of
females and then a continuous series of males, the latter with less
provisions and smaller cells. This distribution of the sexes agrees
with what we have long known of the Hive-bee, who begins her laying
with a long sequence of workers, or sterile females, and ends it with
a long sequence of males. The analogy continues down to the capacity
of the cells and the quantities of provisions. The real females, the
Queen-bees, have wax cells incomparably more spacious than the cells
of the males and receive a much larger amount of food. Everything
therefore demonstrates that we are here in the presence of a general
rule.

But does this rule express the whole truth? Is there nothing beyond a
laying in two series? Are the Osmiae, the Chalicodomae and the rest
of them fatally bound by this distribution of the sexes into two
distinct groups, the male group following upon the female group,
without any mixing of the two? Is the mother absolutely powerless to
make a change in this arrangement, should circumstances require it?

The Three-pronged Osmia already shows us that the problem is far from
being solved. In the same bramble-stump, the two sexes occur very
irregularly, as though at random. Why this mixture in the series of
cocoons of a Bee closely related to the Horned Osmia and the Three-
horned Osmia, who stack theirs methodically by separate sexes in the
hollow of a reed? What the Bee of the brambles does cannot her
kinswomen of the reeds do too? Nothing, so far as I know, can explain
this difference in a physiological act of primary importance. The
three Bees belong to the same genus; they resemble one another in
general outline, internal structure and habits; and, with this close
similarity, we suddenly find a strange dissimilarity.

There is just one thing that might possibly arouse a suspicion of the
cause of this irregularity in the Three-pronged Osmia's laying. If I
open a bramble-stump in the winter to examine the Osmia's nest, I
find it impossible, in the vast majority of cases, to distinguish
positively between a female and a male cocoon: the difference in size
is so small. The cells, moreover, have the same capacity: the
diameter of the cylinder is the same throughout and the partitions
are almost always the same distance apart. If I open it in July, the
victualling-period, it is impossible for me to distinguish between
the provisions destined for the males and those destined for the
females. The measurement of the column of honey gives practically the
same depth in all the cells. We find an equal quantity of space and
food for both sexes.

This result makes us foresee what a direct examination of the two
sexes in the adult form tells us. The male does not differ materially
from the female in respect of size. If he is a trifle smaller, it is
scarcely noticeable, whereas, in the Horned Osmia and the Three-
horned Osmia, the male is only half or a third the size of the
female, as we have seen from the respective bulk of their cocoons. In
the Mason-bee of the Walls there is also a difference in size, though
less pronounced.

The Three-pronged Osmia has not therefore to trouble about adjusting
the dimensions of the dwelling and the quantity of the food to the
sex of the egg which she is about to lay; the measure is the same
from one end of the series to the other. It does not matter if the
sexes alternate without order: one and all will find what they need,
whatever their position in the row. The two other Osmiae, with their
great disparity in size between the two sexes, have to be careful
about the twofold consideration of board and lodging. And that, I
think, is why they begin with spacious cells and generous rations for
the homes of the females and end with narrow, scantily-provisioned
cells, the homes of the males. With this sequence, sharply defined
for the two sexes, there is less fear of mistakes which might give to
one what belongs to another. If this is not the explanation of the
facts, I see no other.

The more I thought about this curious question, the more probable it
appeared to me that the irregular series of the Three-pronged Osmia
and the regular series of the other Osmiae, of the Chalicodomae and
of the Bees in general were all traceable to a common law. It seemed
to me that the arrangement in a succession first of females and then
of males did not account for everything. There must be something
more. And I was right: that arrangement in series is only a tiny
fraction of the reality, which is remarkable in a very different way.
This is what I am going to prove by experiment.


CHAPTER 4. THE MOTHER DECIDES THE SEX OF THE EGG.

I will begin with the Mason-bee of the Pebbles. (This is the same
insect as the Mason-bee of the Walls. Cf. "The Mason-bees": passim.--
Translator's Note.) The old nests are often used, when they are in
good enough repair. Early in the season the mothers quarrel fiercely
over them; and, when one of the Bees has taken possession of the
coveted dome, she drives any stranger away from it. The old house is
far from being a ruin, only it is perforated with as many holes as it
once had occupants. The work of restoration is no great matter. The
heap of earth due to the destruction of the lid by the outgoing
tenant is taken out of the cell and flung away at a distance, atom by
atom. The remnants of the cocoon are also thrown away, but not
always, for the delicate silken wrapper sometimes adheres closely to
the masonry.

The victualling of the renovated cell is now begun. Next comes the
laying; and lastly the orifice is sealed with a mortar plug. A second
cell is utilized in the same way, followed by a third and so on, one
after the other, as long as any remain unoccupied and the mother's
ovaries are not exhausted. Finally, the dome receives, mainly over
the apertures already plugged, a coat of plaster which makes the nest
look like new. If she has not finished her laying, the mother goes in
search of other old nests to complete it. Perhaps she does not decide
to found a new establishment except when she can find no second-hand
dwellings, which mean a great economy of time and labour. In short,
among the countless number of nests which I have collected, I find
many more ancient than recent ones.

How shall we distinguish one from the other? The outward aspect tells
you nothing, owing to the great care taken by the Mason to restore
the surface of the old dwelling equal to new. To resist the rigours
of the winter, this surface must be impregnable. The mother knows
that and therefore repairs the dome. Inside, it is another matter:
the old nest stands revealed at once. There are cells whose
provisions, at least a year old, are intact, but dried up or musty,
because the egg has never developed. There are others containing a
dead larva, reduced by time to a blackened, curled-up cylinder. There
are some whence the perfect insect was never able to issue: the
Chalicodoma wore herself out in trying to pierce the ceiling of her
chamber; her strength failed her and she perished in the attempt.
Others again and very many are occupied by ravagers, Leucopses (Cf.
"The Mason-bees": chapter 11.--Translator's Note.) and Anthrax-flies,
who will come out a good deal later, in July. Altogether, the house
is far from having every room vacant; there are nearly always a
considerable number occupied either by parasites that were still in
the egg-stage at the time when the Mason-bee was at work or by
damaged provisions, dried grubs or Chalicodomae in the perfect state
who have died without being able to effect their deliverance.

Should all the rooms be available, a rare occurrence, there still
remains a method of distinguishing between an ancient nest and a
recent one. The cocoon, as I have said, adheres pretty closely to the
walls; and the mother does not always take away this remnant, either
because she is unable to do so, or because she considers the removal
unnecessary. Thus the base of the new cocoon is set in the bottom of
the old cocoon. This double wrapper points very clearly to two
generations, two separate years. I have even found as many as three
cocoons fitting one into another at their bases. Consequently, the
nests of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles are able to do duty for three
years, if not more. Eventually they become utter ruins, abandoned to
the Spiders and to various smaller Bees or Wasps, who take up their
quarters in the crumbling rooms.

As we see, an old nest is hardly ever capable of containing the
Mason-bee's entire laying, which calls for some fifteen apartments.
The number of rooms at her disposal is most unequal, but always very
small. It is saying much when there are enough to receive about half
the laying. Four or five cells, sometimes two or even one: that is
what the Mason usually finds in a nest that is not her own work. This
large reduction is explained when we remember the numerous parasites
that live upon the unfortunate Bee.

Now, how are the sexes distributed in those layings which are
necessarily broken up between one old nest and another? They are
distributed in such a way as utterly to upset the idea of an
invariable succession first of females and then of males, the idea
which occurs to us on examining the new nests. If this rule were a
constant one, we should be bound to find in the old domes at one time
only females, at another only males, according as the laying was at
its first or at its second stage. The simultaneous presence of the
two sexes would then correspond with the transition period between
one stage and the next and should be very unusual. On the contrary,
it is very common; and, however few cells there may be, we always
find both females and males in the old nests, on the sole condition
that the compartments have the regulation holding-capacity, a large
capacity for the females, a lesser for the males, as we have seen.

The old male cells can be recognized by their position on the outer
edges and by their capacity, measuring on an average the same as a
column of sand 31 millimetres high in a glass tube 5 millimetres
wide. (1.21 x .195 inches.--Translator's Note.) These cells contain
males of the second or third generation and none but males. In the
old female cells, those in the middle, whose capacity is measured by
a similar column of sand 45 millimetres high (1.75 inches.--
Translator's Note.), are females and none but females.

This presence of both sexes at a time, even when there are but two
cells free, one spacious and the other small, proves in the plainest
fashion that the regular distribution observed in the complete nests
of recent production is here replaced by an irregular distribution,
harmonizing with the number and holding-capacity of the chambers to
be stocked. The Mason-bee has before her, let me suppose, only five
vacant cells: two larger and three smaller. The total space at her
disposal would do for about a third of the laying. Well, in the two
large cells, she puts females; in the three small cells, she puts
males.

As we find the same sort of thing in all the old nests, we must needs
admit that the mother knows the sex of the egg which she is going to
lay, because that egg is placed in a cell of the proper capacity. We
can go further and admit that the mother alters the order of
succession of the sexes at her pleasure, because her layings, between
one old nest and another, are broken up into small groups of males
and females according to the exigencies of space in the actual nest
which she happens to be occupying.

Just now, in the new nest, we saw the Mason-bee arranging her total
laying into series first of females and next of males; and here she
is, mistress of an old nest of which she has not the power to alter
the arrangement, breaking up her laying into sections comprising both
sexes just as required by the conditions imposed upon her. She
therefore decides the sex of the egg at will, for, without this
prerogative, she could not, in the chambers of the nest which she
owes to chance, deposit unerringly the sex for which those chambers
were originally built; and this happens however small the number of
chambers to be filled.

When the nest is new, I think I see a reason why the Mason-bee should
seriate her laying into females and then males. Her nest is a half-
sphere. That of the Mason-bee of the Shrubs is very nearly a sphere.
Of all shapes, the spherical shape is the strongest. Now these two
nests require an exceptional power of resistance. Without protection
of any kind, they have to brave the weather, one on its pebble, the
other on its bough. Their spherical configuration is therefore very
practical.

The nest of the Mason-bee of the Walls consists of a cluster of
upright cells backing against one another. For the whole to take a
spherical form, the height of the chambers must diminish from the
centre of the dome to the circumference. Their elevation is the sine
of the meridian arc starting from the plane of the pebble. Therefore,
if they are to have any solidity, there must be large cells in the
middle and small cells at the edges. And, as the work begins with the
central chambers and ends with those on the circumference, the laying
of the females, destined for the large cells, must precede that of
the males, destined for the small cells. So the females come first
and the males at the finish.

This is all very well when the mother herself founds the dwelling,
when she lays the first rows of bricks. But, when she is in the
presence of an old nest, of which she is quite unable to alter the
general arrangement, how is she to make use of the few vacant rooms,
the large and the small alike, if the sex of the egg be already
irrevocably fixed? She can only do so by abandoning the arrangement
in two consecutive rows and accommodating her laying to the varied
exigencies of the home. Either she finds it impossible to make an
economical use of the old nest, a theory refuted by the evidence, or
else she determines at will the sex of the egg which she is about to
lay.

The Osmiae themselves will furnish the most conclusive evidence on
the latter point. We have seen that these Bees are not generally
miners, who themselves dig out the foundation of their cells. They
make use of the old structures of others, or else of natural
retreats, such as hollow stems, the spirals of empty shells and
various hiding-places in walls, clay or wood. Their work is confined
to repairs to the house, such as partitions and covers. There are
plenty of these retreats; and the insect would always find first-
class ones if it thought of going any distance to look for them. But
the Osmia is a stay-at-home: she returns to her birth-place and
clings to it with a patience extremely difficult to exhaust. It is
here, in this little familiar corner, that she prefers to settle her
progeny. But then the apartments are few in number and of all shapes
and sizes. There are long and short ones, spacious ones and narrow.
Short of expatriating herself, a Spartan course, she has to use them
all, from first to last, for she has no choice. Guided by these
considerations, I embarked on the experiments which I will now
describe.

I have said how my study, on two separate occasions, became a
populous hive, in which the Three-horned Osmia built her nests in the
various appliances which I had prepared for her. Among these
appliances, tubes, either of glass or reed, predominated. There were
tubes of all lengths and widths. In the long tubes, entire or almost
entire layings, with a series of females followed by a series of
males, were deposited. As I have already referred to this result, I
will not discuss it again. The short tubes were sufficiently varied
in length to lodge one or other portion of the total laying. Basing
my calculations on the respective lengths of the cocoons of the two
sexes, on the thickness of the partitions and the final lid, I
shortened some of these to the exact dimensions required for two
cocoons only, of different sexes.

Well, these short tubes, whether of glass or reed, were seized upon
as eagerly as the long tubes. Moreover, they yielded this splendid
result: their contents, only a part of the total laying, always began
with female and ended with male cocoons. This order was invariable;
what varied was the number of cells in the long tubes and the
proportion between the two sorts of cocoons, sometimes males
predominating and sometimes females.

The experiment is of paramount importance; and it will perhaps make
the result clearer if I quote one instance from among a multitude of
similar cases. I give the preference to this particular instance
because of the rather exceptional fertility of the laying. An Osmia
marked on the thorax is watched, day by day, from the commencement to
the end of her work. From the 1st to the 10th of May, she occupies a
glass tube in which she lodges seven females followed by a male,
which ends the series. From the 10th to the 17th of May, she
colonizes a second tube, in which she lodges first three females and
then three males. From the 17th to the 25th of May, a third tube,
with three females and then two males. On the 26th of May, a fourth
tube, which she abandons, probably because of its excessive width,
after laying one female in it. Lastly, from the 26th to the 30th of
May, a fifth tube, which she colonizes with two females and three
males. Total: twenty-five Osmiae, including seventeen females and
eight males. And it will not be superfluous to observe that these
unfinished series do not in any way correspond with periods separated
by intervals of rest. The laying is continuous, in so far as the
variable condition of the atmosphere allows. As soon as one tube is
full and closed, another is occupied by the Osmia without delay.

The tubes reduced to the exact length of two cells fulfilled my
expectation in the great majority of cases: the lower cell was
occupied by a female and the upper by a male. There were a few
exceptions. More discerning than I in her estimate of what was
strictly necessary, better-versed in the economy of space, the Osmia
had found a way of lodging two females where I had only seen room for
one female and a male.

This experiment speaks volumes. When confronted with tubes too small
to receive all her family, she is in the same plight as the Mason-bee
in the presence of an old nest. She thereupon acts exactly as the
Chalicodoma does. She breaks up her laying, divides it into series as
short as the room at her disposal demands; and each series begins
with females and ends with males. This breaking up, on the one hand,
into sections in all of which both sexes are represented and the
division, on the other hand, of the entire laying into just two
groups, one female, the other male, when the length of the tube
permits, surely provide us with ample evidence of the insect's power
to regulate the sex of the egg according to the exigencies of space.

And besides the exigencies of space one might perhaps venture to add
those connected with the earlier development of the males. These
burst their cocoons a couple of weeks or more before the females;
they are the first who hasten to the sweets of the almond-tree. In
order to release themselves and emerge into the glad sunlight without
disturbing the string of cocoons wherein their sisters are still
sleeping, they must occupy the upper end of the row; and this, no
doubt, is the reason that makes the Osmia end each of her broken
layings with males. Being next to the door, these impatient ones will
leave the home without upsetting the shells that are slower in
hatching.

I experimented on Latreille's Osmia, using short and even very short
stumps of reed. All that I had to do was to lay them just beside the
nests of the Mason-bee of the Sheds, nests beloved by this particular
Osmia. Old, disused hurdles supplied me with reeds inhabited from end
to end by the Horned Osmia. In both cases I obtained the same results
and the same conclusions as with the Three-horned Osmia.

I return to the latter, nidifying under my eyes in some old nests of
the Mason-bee of the Walls, which I had placed within her reach,
mixed up with the tubes. Outside my study, I had never yet seen the
Three-horned Osmia adopt that domicile. This may be due to the fact
that these nests are isolated one by one in the fields; and the
Osmia, who loves to feel herself surrounded by her kin and to work in
plenty of company, refuses them because of this isolation. But on my
table, finding them close to the tubes in which the others are
working, she adopts them without hesitation.

The chambers presented by those old nests are more or less spacious
according to the thickness of the coat of mortar which the
Chalicodoma has laid over the assembled chambers. To leave her cell,
the Mason-bee has to perforate not only the plug, the lid built at
the mouth of the cell, but also the thick plaster wherewith the dome
is strengthened at the end of the work. The perforation results in a
vestibule which gives access to the chamber itself. It is this
vestibule which is sometimes longer and sometimes shorter, whereas
the corresponding chamber is of almost constant dimensions, in the
case of the same sex, of course.

We will first consider the short vestibule, at the most large enough
to receive the plug with which the Osmia will close up the lodging.
There is then nothing at her disposal except the cell proper, a
spacious apartment in which one of the Osmia's females will find
ample accommodation, for she is much smaller than the original
occupant of the chamber, no matter the sex; but there is not room for
two cocoons at a time, especially in view of the space taken up by
the intervening partition. Well, in those large, well-built chambers,
formerly the homes of Chalicodomae, the Osmia settles females and
none but females.

Let us now consider the long vestibule. Here, a partition is
constructed, encroaching slightly on the cell proper, and the
residence is divided into two unequal storeys, a large room below,
housing a female, and a narrow cabin above, containing a male.

When the length of the vestibule permits, allowing for the space
required by the outer stopper, a third storey is built, smaller than
the second; and another male is lodged in this cramped corner. In
this way the old nest of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles is colonized,
cell after cell, by a single mother.

The Osmia, as we see, is very frugal of the lodging that has fallen
to her share; she makes the best possible use of it, giving to the
females the spacious chambers of the Mason-bee and to the males the
narrow vestibules, subdivided into storeys when this is feasible.
Economy of space is the chief consideration, since her stay-at-home
tastes do not allow her to indulge in distant quests. She has to
employ the site which chance places at her disposal just as it is,
now for a male and now for a female. Here we see displayed, more
clearly than ever, her power of deciding the sex of the egg, in order
to adapt it judiciously to the conditions of the house-room
available.

I had offered at the same time to the Osmiae in my study some old
nests of the Mason-bee of the Shrubs, which are clay spheroids with
cylindrical cavities in them. These cavities are formed, as in the
old nests of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles, of the cell properly so-
called and of the exit-way which the perfect insect cut through the
outer coating at the time of its deliverance. Their diameter is about
seven millimetres (.273 inch.--Translator's Note.); their depth at
the centre of the heap is 23 millimetres (.897 inch.--Translator's
Note.); and at the edge averages 14 millimetres (.546 inch.--
Translator's Note.)

The deep central cells receive only the females of the Osmia;
sometimes even the two sexes together, with a partition in the
middle, the female occupying the lower and the male the upper storey.
True, in such cases economy of space is strained to the utmost, the
apartments provided by the Mason-bee of the Shrubs being very small
as it is, despite their entrance-halls. Lastly, the deeper cavities
on the circumference are allotted to females and the shallower to
males.

I will add that a single mother peoples each nest and also that she
proceeds from cell to cell without troubling to ascertain the depth.
She goes from the centre to the edges, from the edges to the centre,
from a deep cavity to a shallow cavity and vice versa, which she
would not do if the sexes were to follow upon each other in a settled
order. For greater certainty, I numbered the cells of one nest as
each of them was closed. On opening them later, I was able to see
that the sexes were not subjected to a chronological arrangement.
Females were succeeded by males and these by females without its
being possible for me to make out any regular sequence. Only--and
this is the essential point--the deep cavities were allotted to the
females and the shallow ones to the males.

We know that the Three-horned Osmia prefers to haunt the habitations
of the Bees who nidify in populous colonies, such as the Mason-bee of
the Sheds and the Hairy-footed Anthophora. Exercising the very
greatest care, I broke up some great lumps of earth removed from the
banks inhabited by the Anthophora and sent to me from Carpentras by
my dear friend and pupil M. Devillario. I examined them
conscientiously in the quiet of my study. I found the Osmia's cocoons
arranged in short series, in very irregular passages, the original
work of which is due to the Anthophora. Touched up afterwards, made
larger or smaller, lengthened or shortened, intersected with a
network of crossings by the numerous generations that had succeeded
one another in the same city, they formed an inextricable labyrinth.

Sometimes these corridors did not communicate with any adjoining
apartment; sometimes they gave access to the spacious chamber of the
Anthophora, which could be recognized, in spite of its age, by its
oval shape and its coating of glazed stucco. In the latter case, the
bottom cell, which once constituted, by itself, the chamber of the
Anthophora, was always occupied by a female Osmia. Beyond it, in the
narrow corridor, a male was lodged, not seldom two, or even three. Of
course, clay partitions, the work of the Osmia, separated the
different inhabitants, each of whom had his own storey, his own
closed cell.

When the accommodation consisted of no more than a simple cylinder,
with no state-bedroom at the end of it--a bedroom always reserved for
a female--the contents varied with the diameter of the cylinder. The
series, of which the longest were series of four, included, with a
wider diameter, first one or two females, then one or two males. It
also happened, though rarely, that the series was reversed, that is
to say, it began with males and ended with females. Lastly, there
were a good many isolated cocoons, of one sex or the other. When the
cocoon was alone and occupied the Anthophora's cell, it invariably
belonged to a female.

I have observed the same thing in the nests of the Mason-bee of the
Sheds, but not so easily. The series are shorter here, because the
Mason-bee does not bore galleries but builds cell upon cell. The work
of the whole swarm thus forms a stratum of cells that grows thicker
from year to year. The corridors occupied by the Osmia are the holes
which the Mason-bee dug in order to reach daylight from the deep
layers. In these short series, both sexes are usually present; and,
if the Mason-bee's chamber is at the end of the passage, it is
inhabited by a female Osmia.

We come back to what the short tubes and the old nests of the Mason-
bee of the Pebbles have already taught us. The Osmia who, in tubes of
sufficient length, divides her whole l