nswer is possible. It is no use talking of
the distant period of the laying: eggs of the same period laid by
other mothers, eggs of the same date and likewise the final ones of a
laying, are perfectly fertile. Once more, they do not hatch because
they were not fertilized.

And why were they not fertilized? Because the seminal receptacle, so
tiny, so difficult to see that it sometimes escaped me despite all my
scrutiny, had exhausted its contents. The mothers in whom this
receptacle retained a remnant of sperm to the end had their last eggs
as fertile as the first; the others, whose seminal reservoir was
exhausted too soon, had their last-born stricken with death. All this
seems to me as clear as daylight.

If the unfertilized eggs perish without hatching, those which hatch
and produce males are therefore fertilized; and the German theory
falls to the ground.

Then what explanation shall I give of the wonderful facts which I
have set forth? Why, none, absolutely none. I do not explain facts, I
relate them. Growing daily more sceptical of the interpretations
suggested to me and more hesitating as to those which I may have to
suggest myself, the more I observe and experiment, the more clearly I
see rising out of the black mists of possibility an enormous note of
interrogation.

Dear insects, my study of you has sustained me and continues to
sustain me in my heaviest trials. I must take leave of you for
to-day. The ranks are thinning around me and the long hopes have
fled. Shall I be able to speak to you again? (This is the closing
paragraph of Volume 3 of the "Souvenirs entomologiques," of which the
author has lived to publish seven more volumes, containing over 2,500
pages and nearly 850,000 words.--Translator's Note.)


CHAPTER 6. INSTINCT AND DISCERNMENT.

The Pelopaeus (A Mason-wasp forming the subject of essays which have
not yet been published in English.--Translator's Note.) gives us a
very poor idea of her intellect when she plasters up the spot in the
wall where the nest which I have removed used to stand, when she
persists in cramming her cell with Spiders for the benefit of an egg
no longer there and when she dutifully closes a cell which my forceps
has left empty, extracting alike germ and provisions. The Mason-bees
(Cf. "The Mason-bees": chapter 7.--Translator's Note.), the
caterpillar of the Great Peacock Moth (Cf. "Social Life in the Insect
World" by J.H. Fabre, translated by Bernard Miall: chapter 14.--
Translator's Note.) and many others, when subjected to similar tests,
are guilty of the same illogical behaviour: they continue, in the
normal order, their series of industrious actions, though an accident
has now rendered them all useless. Just like millstones unable to
cease revolving though there be no corn left to grind, let them once
be given the compelling power and they will continue to perform their
task despite its futility. Are they then machines? Far be it from me
to think anything so foolish.

It is impossible to make definite progress on the shifting sands of
contradictory facts: each step in our interpretation may find us
embogged. And yet these facts speak so loudly that I do not hesitate
to translate their evidence as I understand it. In insect mentality,
we have to distinguish two very different domains. One of these is
INSTINCT properly so called, the unconscious impulse that presides
over the most wonderful part of what the creature achieves. Where
experience and imitation are of absolutely no avail, instinct lays
down its inflexible law. It is instinct and instinct alone that makes
the mother build for a family which she will never see; that counsels
the storing of provisions for the unknown offspring; that directs the
sting towards the nerve-centres of the prey and skilfully paralyses
it, so that the game may keep good; that instigates, in fine, a host
of actions wherein shrewd reason and consummate science would have
their part, were the creature acting through discernment.

This faculty is perfect of its kind from the outset, otherwise the
insect would have no posterity. Time adds nothing to it and takes
nothing from it. Such as it was for a definite species, such it is
to-day and such it will remain, perhaps the most settled zoological
characteristic of them all. It is not free nor conscious in its
practice, any more than is the faculty of the stomach for digestion
or that of the heart for pulsation. The phases of its operations are
predetermined, necessarily entailed one by another; they suggest a
system of clock-work wherein one wheel set in motion brings about the
movement of the next. This is the mechanical side of the insect, the
fatum, the only thing which is able to explain the monstrous
illogicality of a Pelopaeus when misled by my artifices. Is the Lamb
when it first grips the teat a free and conscious agent, capable of
improvement in its difficult art of taking nourishment? The insect is
no more capable of improvement in its art, more difficult still, of
giving nourishment.

But, with its hide-bound science ignorant of itself, pure insect, if
it stood alone, would leave the insect unarmed in the perpetual
conflict of circumstances. No two moments in time are identical;
though the background remain the same, the details change; the
unexpected rises on every side. In this bewildering confusion, a
guide is needed to seek, accept, refuse and select; to show
preference for this and indifference to that; to turn to account, in
short, anything useful that occasion may offer. This guide the insect
undoubtedly possesses, to a very manifest degree. It is the second
province of its mentality. Here it is conscious and capable of
improvement by experience. I dare not speak of this rudimentary
faculty as intelligence, which is too exalted a title: I will call it
DISCERNMENT. The insect, in exercising its highest gifts, discerns,
differentiates between one thing and another, within the sphere of
its business, of course; and that is about all.

As long as we confound acts of pure instinct and acts of discernment
under the same head, we shall fall back into those endless
discussions which embitter controversy without bringing us one step
nearer to the solution of the problem. Is the insect conscious of
what it does? Yes and no. No, if its action is in the province of
instinct; yes, if the action is in that of discernment. Are the
habits of an insect capable of modification? No, decidedly not, if
the habit in question belongs to the province of instinct; yes, if it
belongs to that of discernment. Let us state this fundamental
distinction more precisely by the aid of a few examples.

The Pelopaeus builds her cells with earth already softened, with mud.
Here we have instinct, the unalterable characteristic of the worker.
She has always built in this way and always will. The passing ages
will never teach her, neither the struggle for life nor the law of
selection will ever induce her to imitate the Mason-bee and collect
dry dust for her mortar. This mud nest needs a shelter against the
rain. The hiding-place under a stone suffices at first. But should
she find something better, the potter takes possession of that
something better and instals herself in the home of man. (The
Pelopaeus builds in the fire-places of houses.--Translator's Note.)
There we have discernment, the source of some sort of capacity for
improvement.

The Pelopaeus supplies her larvae with provisions in the form of
Spiders. There you have instinct. The climate, the longitude or
latitude, the changing seasons, the abundance or scarcity of game
introduce no modification into this diet, though the larva shows
itself satisfied with other fare provided by myself. Its forebears
were brought up on Spiders; their descendants consumed similar food;
and their posterity again will know no other. Not a single
circumstance, however favourable, will ever persuade the Pelopaeus
that young Crickets, for instance, are as good as Spiders and that
her family would accept them gladly. Instinct binds her down to the
national diet.

But, should the Epeira (The Weaving or Garden Spider. Cf. "The Life
of the Spider" by J. Henri Fabre translated by Alexander Teixeira de
Mattos; chapters 9 to 14 and appendix.--Translator's Note.), the
favourite prey, be lacking, must the Pelopaeus therefore give up
foraging? She will stock her warehouses all the same, because any
Spider suits her. There you have discernment, whose elasticity makes
up, in certain circumstances, for the too-great rigidity of instinct.
Amid the innumerable variety of game, the huntress is able to discern
between what is Spider and what is not; and, in this way, she is
always prepared to supply her family, without quitting the domain of
her instinct.

The Hairy Ammophila gives her larva a single caterpillar, a large
one, paralysed by as many pricks of her sting as it has nervous
centres in its thorax and abdomen. Her surgical skill in subduing the
monster is instinct displayed in a form which makes short work of any
inclination to see in it an acquired habit. In an art that can leave
no one to practise it in the future unless that one be perfect at the
outset, of what avail are happy chances, atavistic tendencies, the
mellowing hand of time? But the grey caterpillar, sacrificed one day,
may be succeeded on another day by a green, yellow or striped
caterpillar. There you have discernment, which is quite capable of
recognizing the regulation prey under very diverse garbs.

The Megachiles build their honey-jars with disks cut out of leaves;
certain Anthidia make felted cotton wallets; others fashion pots out
of resin. There you have instinct. Will any rash mind ever conceive
the singular idea that the Leaf-cutter might very well have started
working in cotton, that the cotton-wool-worker once thought or will
one day think of cutting disks out of the leaves of the lilac- and
the rose-tree, that the resin-kneader began with clay? Who would dare
to indulge in any such theories? Each Bee has her art, her medium, to
which she strictly confines herself. The first has her leaves; the
second her wadding; the third her resin. None of these guilds has
ever changed trades with another; and none ever will. There you have
instinct, keeping the workers to their specialities. There are no
innovations in their workshops, no recipes resulting from experiment,
no ingenious devices, no progress from indifferent to good, from good
to excellent. To-day's method is the facsimile of yesterday's; and
to-morrow will know no other.

But, though the manufacturing-process is invariable, the raw material
is subject to change. The plant that supplies the cotton differs in
species according to the locality; the bush out of whose leaves the
pieces will be cut is not the same in the various fields of
operation; the tree that provides the resinous putty may be a pine, a
cypress, a juniper, a cedar or a spruce, all very different in
appearance. What will guide the insect in its gleaning? Discernment.

These, I think, are sufficient details of the fundamental distinction
to be drawn in the insect's mentality; the distinction, that is,
between instinct and discernment. If people confuse these two
provinces, as they nearly always do, any understanding becomes
impossible; the last glimmer of light disappears behind the clouds of
interminable discussions. From an industrial point of view, let us
look upon the insect as a worker thoroughly versed from birth in a
craft whose essential principles never vary; let us grant that
unconscious worker a gleam of intelligence which will permit it to
extricate itself from the inevitable conflict of attendant
circumstances; and I think that we shall have come as near to the
truth as the state of our knowledge will allow for the moment.

Having thus assigned a due share both to instinct and the aberrations
of instinct when the course of its different phases is disturbed, let
us see what discernment is able to do in the selection of a site for
the nest and materials for building it; and, leaving the Pelopaeus,
upon whom it is useless to dwell any longer, let us consider other
examples, picked from among those richest in variations.

The Mason-bee of the Sheds (Chalicodoma rufitarsis, PEREZ) well
deserves the name which I have felt justified in giving her from her
habits: she settles in numerous colonies in our sheds, on the lower
surface of the tiles, where she builds huge nests which endanger the
solidity of the roof. Nowhere does the insect display a greater zeal
for work than in one of these colossal cities, an estate which is
constantly increasing as it passes down from one generation to
another; nowhere does it find a better workshop for the exercise of
its industry. Here it has plenty of room: a quiet resting-place,
sheltered from damp and from excess of heat or cold.

But the spacious domain under the tiles is not within the reach of
all: sheds with free access and the proper sunny aspect are pretty
rare. These sites fall only to the favoured of fortune. Where will
the others take up their quarters? More or less everywhere. Without
leaving the house in which I live, I can enumerate stone, wood,
glass, metal, paint and mortar as forming the foundation of the
nests. The green-house with its furnace heat in the summer and its
bright light, equalling that outside, is fairly well-frequented. The
Mason-bee hardly ever fails to build there each year, in squads of a
few dozen apiece, now on the glass panes, now on the iron bars of the
framework. Other little swarms settle in the window embrasures, under
the projecting ledge of the front door or in the cranny between the
wall and an open shutter. Others again, being perhaps of a morose
disposition, flee society and prefer to work in solitude, one in the
inside of a lock or of a pipe intended to carry the rain-water from
the leads; another in the mouldings of the doors and windows or in
the crude ornamentation of the stone-work. In short, the house is
made use of all round, provided that the shelter be an out-of-door
one; for observe that the enterprising invader, unlike the Pelopaeus,
never penetrates inside our dwellings. The case of the conservatory
is an exception more apparent than real: the glass building, standing
wide open throughout the summer, is to the Mason-bee but a shed a
little lighter than the others. There is nothing here to arouse the
distrust with which anything indoors or shut up inspires her. To
build on the threshold of an outer door, or to usurp its lock, a
hiding-place to her fancy, is all that she allows herself; to go any
farther is an adventure repugnant to her taste.

Lastly, in the case of all these dwellings, the Mason-bee is man's
free tenant; her industry makes use of the products of our own
industry. Can she have no other establishments? She has, beyond a
doubt; she possesses some constructed on the ancient plan. On a stone
the size of a man's fist, protected by the shelter of a hedge,
sometimes even on a pebble in the open air, I see her building now
groups of cells as large as a walnut, now domes emulating in size,
shape and solidity those of her rival, the Mason-bee of the Walls.

The stone support is the most frequent, though not the only one. I
have found nests, but sparsely inhabited it is true, on the trunks of
trees, in the seams of the rough bark of oaks. Among those whose
support was a living plant, I will mention two that stand out above
all the others. The first was built in the lobe of a torch-thistle as
thick as my leg; the second rested on a stalk of the opuntia, the
Indian fig. Had the fierce armour of these two stout cactuses
attracted the attention of the insect, which looked upon their tufts
of spikes as furnishing a system of defence for its nest? Perhaps so.
In any case, the attempt was not imitated; I never saw another
installation of the kind. There is one definite conclusion to be
drawn from my two discoveries. Despite the oddity of their structure,
which is unparalleled among the local flora, the two American
importations did not compel the insect to go through an
apprenticeship of groping and hesitation. The one which found itself
in the presence of those novel growths, and which was perhaps the
first of its race to do so, took possession of their lobes and stalks
just as it would have done of a familiar site. From the start, the
fleshy plants from the New World suited it as well as the trunk of a
native tree.

The Mason-bee of the Pebbles (Chalicodoma parietina) has none of this
elasticity in the choice of a site. In her case, the smooth stone of
the parched uplands is the almost invariable foundation of her
structures. Elsewhere, under a less clement sky, she prefers the
support of a wall, which protects the nest against the prolonged
snows. Lastly, the Mason-bee of the Shrubs (Chalicodoma rufescens,
PEREZ) fixes her ball of clay to a twig of any ligneous plant, from
the thyme, the rock-rose and the heath to the oak, the elm and the
pine. The list of the sites that suit her would almost form a
complete catalogue of the ligneous flora.

The variety of places wherein the insect instals itself, so eloquent
of the part played by discernment in their selection, becomes still
more remarkable when it is accompanied by a corresponding variety in
the architecture of the cells. This is more particularly the case
with the Three-horned Osmia, who, as she uses clayey materials very
easily affected by the rain, requires, like the Pelopaeus, a dry
shelter for her cells, a shelter which she finds ready-made and uses
just as it is, after a few touches by way of sweeping and cleansing.
The homes which I see her adopt are especially the shells of Snails
that have died under the stone-heaps and in the low, unmortared walls
which support the cultivated earth of the hills in shelves or
terraces. The use of Snail-shells is accompanied by the no less
active use of the old cells of both the Mason-bee of the Sheds and of
certain Anthophorae (A. pilipes, A. parietina and A. personata).

We must not forget the reed, which is highly appreciated when--a rare
find--it appears under the requisite conditions. In its natural
state, the plant with the mighty hollow cylinders is of no possible
use to the Osmia, who knows nothing of the art of perforating a woody
wall. The gallery of an internode has to be wide open before the
insect can take possession of it. Also, the clean-cut stump must be
horizontal, otherwise the rain would soften the fragile edifice of
clay and soon lay it low; also, the stump must not be lying on the
ground and must be kept at some distance from the dampness of the
soil. We see therefore that, without the intervention of man,
involuntary in the vast majority of cases and deliberate only on the
experimenter's part, the Osmia would hardly ever find a reed-stump
suited to the installation of her family. It is to her a casual
acquisition, a home unknown to her race before men took it into their
heads to cut reeds and make them into hurdles for drying figs in the
sun.

How did the work of man's pruning-knife bring about the abandonment
of the natural lodging? How was the spiral staircase of the Snail-
shell replaced by the cylindrical gallery of the reed? Was the change
from one kind of house to another effected by gradual transitions, by
attempts made, abandoned, resumed, becoming more and more definite in
their results as generation succeeded generation? Or did the Osmia,
finding the cut reed that answered her requirements, instal herself
there straightway, scorning her ancient dwelling, the Snail-shell?
These questions called for a reply; and they have received one. Let
us describe how things happened.

Near Serignan are some great quarries of coarse limestone,
characteristic of the miocene formation of the Rhone valley. These
have been worked for many generations. The ancient public buildings
of Orange, notably the colossal frontage of the theatre whither all
the intellectual world once flocked to hear Sophocles' "Oedipus
Tyrannus," derive most of their material from these quarries. Other
evidence confirms what the similarity of the hewn stone tells us.
Among the rubbish that fills up the spaces between the tiers of
seats, they occasionally discover the Marseilles obol, a bit of
silver stamped with the four-spoked wheel, or a few bronze coins
bearing the effigy of Augustus or Tiberius. Scattered also here and
there among the monuments of antiquity are heaps of refuse,
accumulations of broken stones in which various Hymenoptera,
including the Three-horned Osmia in particular, take possession of
the dead Snail-shell.

The quarries form part of an extensive plateau which is so arid as to
be nearly deserted. In these conditions, the Osmia, at all times
faithful to her birth-place, has little or no need to emigrate from
her heap of stones and leave the shell for another dwelling which she
would have to go and seek at a distance. Since there are heaps of
stone there, she probably has no other dwelling than the Snail-shell.
Nothing tells us that the present-day generations are not descended
in the direct line from the generations contemporary with the
quarryman who lost his as or his obol at this spot. All the
circumstances seem to point to it: the Osmia of the quarries is an
inveterate user of Snail-shells; so far as heredity is concerned, she
knows nothing whatever of reeds. Well, we must place her in the
presence of these new lodgings.

I collect during the winter about two dozen well-stocked Snail-shells
and instal them in a quiet corner of my study, as I did at the time
of my enquiries into the distribution of the sexes. The little hive
with its front pierced with forty holes has bits of reed fitted to
it. At the foot of the five rows of cylinders I place the inhabited
shells and with these I mix a few small stones, the better to imitate
the natural conditions. I add an assortment of empty Snail-shells,
after carefully cleaning the interior so as to make the Osmia's stay
more pleasant. When the time comes for nest-building, the stay-at-
home insect will have, close beside the house of its birth, a choice
of two habitations: the cylinder, a novelty unknown to its race; and
the spiral staircase, the ancient ancestral home.

The nests were finished at the end of May and the Osmiae began to
answer my list of questions. Some, the great majority, settled
exclusively in the reeds; the others remained faithful to the Snail-
shell or else entrusted their eggs partly to the spirals and partly
to the cylinders. With the first, who were the pioneers of
cylindrical architecture, there was no hesitation that I could
perceive: after exploring the stump of reed for a time and
recognizing it as serviceable, the insect instals itself there and,
an expert from the first touch, without apprenticeship, without
groping, without any tendencies bequeathed by the long practice of
its predecessors, builds its straight row of cells on a very
different plan from that demanded by the spiral cavity of the shell
which increases in size as it goes on.

The slow school of the ages, the gradual acquisitions of the past,
the legacies of heredity count for nothing therefore in the Osmia's
education. Without any novitiate on its own part or that of its
forebears, the insect is versed straight away in the calling which it
has to pursue; it possesses, inseparable from its nature, the
qualities demanded by its craft: some which are invariable and belong
to the domain of instinct; others, flexible, belonging to the
province of discernment. To divide a free lodging into chambers by
means of mud partitions; to fill those chambers with a heap of
pollen-flour, with a few sups of honey in the central part where the
egg is to lie; in short, to prepare board and lodging for the
unknown, for a family which the mothers have never seen in the past
and will never see in the future: this, in its essential features, is
the function of the Osmia's instinct. Here, everything is
harmoniously, inflexibly, permanently preordained; the insect has but
to follow its blind impulse to attain the goal. But the free lodging
offered by chance varies exceedingly in hygienic conditions, in shape
and in capacity. Instinct, which does not choose, which does not
contrive, would, if it were alone, leave the insect's existence in
peril. To help her out of her predicament, in these complex
circumstances, the Osmia possesses her little stock of discernment,
which distinguishes between the dry and the wet, the solid and the
fragile, the sheltered and the exposed; which recognizes the worth or
the worthlessness of a site and knows how to sprinkle it with cells
according to the size and shape of the space at disposal. Here,
slight industrial variations are necessary and inevitable; and the
insect excels in them without any apprenticeship, as the experiment
with the native Osmia of the quarries has just proved.

Animal resources have a certain elasticity, within narrow limits.
What we learn from the animals' industry at a given moment is not
always the full measure of their skill. They possess latent powers
held in reserve for certain emergencies. Long generations can succeed
one another without employing them; but, should some circumstance
require it, suddenly those powers burst forth, free of any previous
attempts, even as the spark potentially contained in the flint
flashes forth independently of all preceding gleams. Could one who
knew nothing of the Sparrow but her nest under the eaves suspect the
ball-shaped nest at the top of a tree? Would one who knew nothing of
the Osmia save her home in the Snail-shell expect to see her accept
as her dwelling a stump of reed, a paper funnel, a glass tube? My
neighbour the Sparrow, impulsively taking it into her head to leave
the roof for the plane-tree, the Osmia of the quarries, rejecting her
natal cabin, the spiral of the shell, for my cylinder, alike show us
how sudden and spontaneous are the industrial variations of animals.


CHAPTER 7. ECONOMY OF ENERGY.

What stimulus does the insect obey when it employs the reserve powers
that slumber in its race? Of what use are its industrial variations?
The Osmia will yield us her secret with no great difficulty. Let us
examine her work in a cylindrical habitation. I have described in
full detail, in the foregoing pages, the structure of her nests when
the dwelling adopted is a reed-stump or any other cylinder; and I
will content myself here with recapitulating the essential features
of that nest-building.

We must first distinguish three classes of reeds according to their
diameter: the small, the medium-sized and the large. I call small
those whose narrow width just allows the Osmia to go about her
household duties without discomfort. She must be able to turn where
she stands in order to brush her abdomen and rub off its load of
pollen, after disgorging the honey in the centre of the heap of flour
already collected. If the width of the tube does not admit of this
operation, if the insect is obliged to go out and then come in again
backwards in order to place itself in a favourable posture for the
discharge of the pollen, then the reed is too narrow and the Osmia is
rather reluctant to accept it. The middle-sized reeds and a fortiori
the large ones leave the victualler entire liberty of action; but the
former do not exceed the width of a cell, a width agreeing with the
bulk of the future cocoon, whereas the latter, with their excessive
diameter, require more than one chamber on the same floor.

When free to choose, the Osmia settles by preference in the small
reeds. Here, the work of building is reduced to its simplest
expression and consists in dividing the tube by means of earthen
partitions into a straight row of cells. Against the partition
forming the back wall of the preceding cell the mother places first a
heap of honey and pollen; next, when the portion is seen to be
enough, she lays an egg in the centre of it. Then and then only she
resumes her plasterer's work and marks out the length of the new cell
with a mud partition. This partition in its turn serves as the rear-
wall of another chamber, which is first victualled and then closed;
and so on until the cylinder is sufficiently colonized and receives a
thick terminal stopper at its orifice. In a word, the chief
characteristic of this method of nest-building, the roughest of all,
is that the partition in front is not undertaken so long as the
victualling is still incomplete, or, in other words, that the
provisions and the egg are deposited before the Bee sets to work on
the partition.

At first sight, this latter detail hardly deserves attention: is it
not right to fill the pot before we put a lid on? The Osmia who owns
a medium-sized reed is not at all of this opinion; and other
plasterers share her views, as we shall see when we watch the
Odynerus building her nest. (A genus of Mason-wasps, the essays on
which have not yet been translated into English.--Translator's Note.)
Here we have an excellent illustration of one of those latent powers
held in reserve for exceptional occasions and suddenly brought into
play, although often very far removed from the insect's regular
methods. If the reed, without being of inordinate width from the
point of view of the cocoon, is nevertheless too spacious to afford
the Bee a suitable purchase against the wall at the moment when she
is disgorging honey and brushing off her load of pollen; the Osmia
altogether changes the order of her work; she sets up the partition
first and then does the victualling.

All round the inside of the tube she places a ring of mud, which, as
the result of her constant visits to the mortar, ends by becoming a
complete diaphragm minus an orifice at the side, a sort of round dog-
hole, just large enough for the insect to pass through. When the cell
is thus marked out and almost wholly closed, the Osmia attends to the
storing of her provisions and the laying of her eggs. Steadying
herself against the margin of the hole at one time with her fore-legs
and at another with her hind-legs, she is able to empty her crop and
to brush her abdomen; by pressing against it, she obtains a foothold
for her little efforts in these various operations. When the tube was
narrow, the outer wall supplied this foothold and the earthen
partition was postponed until the heap of provisions was completed
and surmounted by the egg; but in the present case the passage is too
wide and would leave the insect floundering helplessly in space, so
the partition with its serving-hatch takes precedence of the
victuals. This method is a little more expensive than the other,
first in materials, because of the diameter of the reed, and secondly
in time, if only because of the dog-hole, a delicate piece of mortar-
work which is too soft at first and cannot be used until it has dried
and become harder. Therefore the Osmia, who is sparing of her time
and strength, accepts medium-sized reeds only when there are no small
ones available.

The large tubes she will use only in grave emergencies and I am
unable to state exactly what these exceptional circumstances are.
Perhaps she decides to make use of those roomy dwellings when the
eggs have to be laid at once and there is no other shelter in the
neighbourhood. While my cylinder-hives gave me plenty of well-filled
reeds of the first and second class, they provided me with but half-
a-dozen at most of the third, notwithstanding my precaution to
furnish the apparatus with a varied assortment.

The Osmia's repugnance to big cylinders is quite justified. The work
in fact is longer and more costly when the tubes are wide. An
inspection of a nest constructed under these conditions is enough to
convince us. It now consists not of a string of chambers obtained by
simple transverse partitions, but of a confused heap of clumsy, many-
sided compartments, standing back to back, with a tendency to group
themselves in storeys without succeeding in doing so, because any
regular arrangement would mean that the ceilings possessed a span
which it is not in the builder's power to achieve. The edifice is not
a geometrical masterpiece and it is even less satisfactory from the
point of view of economy. In the previous constructions, the sides of
the reed supplied the greater part of the walls and the work was
limited to one partition for each cell. Here, except at the actual
periphery, where the tube itself supplies a foundation, everything
has to be obtained by sheer building: the floor, the ceiling, the
walls of the many-sided compartment are one and all made of mortar.
The structure is almost as costly in materials as that of the
Chalicodoma or the Pelopaeus.

It must be pretty difficult, too, when one thinks of its
irregularity. Fitting as best she can the projecting angles of the
new cell into the recessed corners of the cell already built, the
Osmia runs up walls more or less curved, upright or slanting, which
intersect one another at various points, so that each compartment
requires a new and complicated plan of construction, which is very
different from the circular-partition style of architecture, with its
row of parallel dividing-disks. Moreover, in this composite
arrangement, the size of the recesses left available by the earlier
work to some extent decides the assessment of the sexes, for,
according to the dimensions of those recesses, the walls erected take
in now a larger space, the home of a female, and now a smaller space,
the home of a male. Roomy quarters therefore have a double drawback
for the Osmia: they greatly increase the outlay in materials; and
also they establish in the lower layers, among the females, males
who, because of their earlier hatching, would be much better placed
near the mouth of the nest. I am convinced of it: if the Osmia
refuses big reeds and accepts them only in the last resort, when
there are no others, it is because she objects to additional labour
and to the mixture of the sexes.

The Snail-shell, then, is but an indifferent home for her, which she
is quite ready to abandon should a better offer. Its expanding cavity
represents an average between the favourite small cylinder and the
unpopular large cylinder, which is accepted only when there is no
other obtainable. The first whorls of the spiral are too narrow to be
of use to the Osmia, but the middle ones have the right diameter for
cocoons arranged in single file. Here things happen as in a first-
class reed, for the helical curve in no way affects the method of
structure employed for a rectilinear series of cells. Circular
partitions are erected at the required distances, with or without a
serving-hatch, according to the diameter. These mark out the first
cells, one after the other, which are reserved solely for the
females. Then comes the last whorl, which is much too wide for a
single row of cells; and here we once more find, exactly as in a wide
reed, a costly profusion of masonry, an irregular arrangement of the
cells and a mixture of the sexes.

Having said so much, let us go back to the Osmia of the quarries.
Why, when I offer them simultaneously Snail-shells and reeds of a
suitable size, do the old frequenters of the shells prefer the reeds,
which in all probability have never before been utilized by their
race? Most of them scorn the ancestral dwelling and enthusiastically
accept my reeds. Some, it is true, take up their quarters in the
Snail-shell; but even among these a goodly number refuse my new
shells and return to their birth-place, the old Snail-shell, in order
to utilize the family property, without much labour, at the cost of a
few repairs. Whence, I ask, comes this general preference for the
cylinder, never used hitherto? The answer can be only this: of two
lodgings at her disposal the Osmia selects the one that provides a
comfortable home at a minimum outlay. She economizes her strength
when restoring an old nest; she economizes it when replacing the
Snail-shell by the reed.

Can animal industry, like our own, obey the law of economy, the
sovran law that governs our industrial machine even as it governs, at
least to all appearances, the sublime machine of the universe? Let us
go deeper into the question and bring other workers into evidence,
those especially who, better equipped perhaps and at any rate better
fitted for hard work, attack the difficulties of their trade boldly
and look down upon alien establishments with scorn. Of this number
are the Chalicodomae, the Mason-bees proper.

The Mason-bee of the Pebbles does not make up her mind to build a
brand-new dome unless there be a dearth of old and not quite
dilapidated nests. The mothers, sisters apparently and heirs-at-law
to the domain, dispute fiercely for the ancestral abode. The first
who, by sheer brute force, takes possession of the dome, perches upon
it and, for long hours, watches events while polishing her wings. If
some claimant puts in an appearance, forthwith the other turns her
out with a volley of blows. In this way the old nests are employed so
long as they have not become uninhabitable hovels.

Without being equally jealous of the maternal inheritance, the Mason-
bee of the Sheds eagerly uses the cells whence her generation issued.
The work in the huge city under the eaves begins thus: the old cells,
of which, by the way, the good-natured owner yields a portion to
Latreille's Osmia and to the Three-horned Osmia alike, are first made
clean and wholesome and cleared of broken plaster and then
provisioned and shut. When all the accessible chambers are occupied,
the actual building begins with a new stratum of cells upon the
former edifice, which becomes more and more massive from year to
year.

The Mason-bee of the Shrubs, with her spherical nests hardly larger
than walnuts, puzzled me at first. Does she use the old buildings or
does she abandon them for good? To-day perplexity makes way for
certainty: she uses them very readily. I have several times surprised
her lodging her family in the empty rooms of a nest where she was
doubtless born herself. Like her kinswoman of the Pebbles, she
returns to the native dwelling and fights for its possession. Also,
like the dome-builder, she is an anchorite and prefers to cultivate
the lean inheritance alone. Sometimes, however, the nest is of
exceptional size and harbours a crowd of occupants, who live in
peace, each attending to her business, as in the colossal hives in
the sheds. Should the colony be at all numerous and the estate
descend to two or three generations in succession, with a fresh layer
of masonry each year, the normal walnut-sized nest becomes a ball as
large as a man's two fists. I have gathered on a pine-tree a nest of
the Mason-bee of the Shrubs that weighed a kilogram (2.205 pounds
avoirdupois.--Translator's Note.) and was the size of a child's head.
A twig hardly thicker than a straw served as its support. The casual
sight of that lump swinging over the spot on which I had sat down
made me think of the mishap that befell Garo. (The hero of La
Fontaine's fable, "Le Gland et la Citrouille," who wondered why
acorns grew on such tall trees and pumpkins on such low vines, until
he fell asleep under one of the latter and a pumpkin dropped upon his
nose.--Translator's Note.) If such nests were plentiful in the trees,
any one seeking the shade would run a serious risk of having his head
smashed.

After the Masons, the Carpenters. Among the guild of wood-workers,
the most powerful is the Carpenter-bee (Xylocopa violacea (Cf. "The
Life of the Spider": chapter 1.--Translator's Note.)), a very large
Bee of formidable appearance, clad in black velvet with violet-
coloured wings. The mother gives her larvae as a dwelling a
cylindrical gallery which she digs in rotten wood. Useless timber
lying exposed to the air, vine-poles, large logs of fire-wood
seasoning out of doors, heaped up in front of the farmhouse porch,
stumps of trees, vine-stocks and big branches of all kinds are her
favourite building-yards. A solitary and industrious worker, she
bores, bit by bit, circular passages the width of one's thumb, as
clear-cut as though they were made with an auger. A heap of saw-dust
accumulates on the ground and bears witness to the severity of the
task. Usually, the same aperture is the entrance to two or three
parallel corridors. With several galleries there is accommodation for
the entire laying, though each gallery is quite short; and the Bee
thus avoids those long series which always create difficulties when
the moment of hatching arrives. The laggards and the insects eager to
emerge are less likely to get in each other's way.

After obtaining the dwelling, the Carpenter-bee behaves like the
Osmia who is in possession of a reed. Provisions are collected, the
egg is laid and the chamber is walled in front with a saw-dust
partition. The work is pursued in this way until the two or three
passages composing the house are completely stocked. Heaping up
provisions and erecting partitions are an invariable feature of the
Xylocopa's programme; no circumstance can release the mother from the
duty of providing for the future of her family, in the matter both of
ready-prepared food and of separate compartments for the rearing of
each larva. It is only in the boring of the galleries, the most
laborious part of the work, that economy can occasionally be
exercised by a piece of luck. Well, is the powerful Carpenter, all
unheeding of fatigue, able to take advantage of such fortunate
occasions? Does she know how to make use of houses which she has not
tunnelled herself? Why, yes: a free lodging suits her just as much as
it does the various Mason-bees. She knows as well as they the
economic advantages of an old nest that is still in good condition:
she settles down, as far as possible, in her predecessors' galleries,
after freshening up the sides with a superficial scraping. And she
does better still. She readily accepts lodgings which have never
known a drill, no matter whose. The stout reeds used in the trellis-
work that supports the vines are valuable discoveries, providing as
they do sumptuous galleries free of cost. No preliminary work or next
to none is required with these. Indeed, the insect does not even
trouble to make a side-opening, which would enable it to occupy the
cavity contained within two nodes; it prefers the opening at the end
cut by man's pruning-knife. If the next partition be too near to give
a chamber of sufficient length, the Xylocopa destroys it, which is
easy work, not to be compared with the labour of cutting an entrance
through the side. In this way, a spacious gallery, following on the
short vestibule made by the pruning-knife, is obtained with the least
possible expenditure of energy.

Guided by what was happening on the trellises, I offered the black
Bee the hospitality of my reed-hives. From the very beginning, the
insect gladly welcomed my advances; each spring, I see it inspect my
rows of cylinders, pick out the best ones and instal itself there.
Its work, reduced to a minimum by my intervention, is limited to the
partitions, the materials for which are obtained by scraping the
inner sides of the reed.

As first-rate joiners, next to the Carpenter-bees come the Lithurgi,
of whom my district possesses two species: L. cornutus, FAB., and L.
chrysurus, BOY. By what aberration of nomenclature was the name of
Lithurgus, a worker in stone, given to insects which work solely in
wood? I have caught the first, the stronger of the two, digging
galleries in a large block of oak that served as an arch for a
stable-door; I have always found the second, who is more widely
distributed, settling in dead wood--mulberry, cherry, almond, poplar-
-that was still standing. Her work is exactly the same as the
Xylocopa's, on a smaller scale. A single entrance-hole gives access
to three or four parallel galleries, assembled in a serried group;
and these galleries are subdivided into cells by means of saw-dust
partitions. Following the example of the big Carpenter-bee, Lithurgus
chrysurus knows how to avoid the laborious work of boring, when
occasion offers: I find her cocoons lodged almost as often in old
dormitories as in new ones. She too has the tendency to economize her
strength by turning the work of her predecessors to account. I do not
despair of seeing her adopt the reed if, one day, when I possess a
large enough colony, I decide to try this experiment on her. I will
say nothing about L. cornutus, whom I only once surprised at her
carpentering.

The Anthophorae, those children of the precipitous earthy banks, show
the same thrifty spirit as the other members of the mining
corporation. Three species, A. parietina, A. personata and A.
pilipes, dig long corridors leading to the cells, which are scattered
here and there and one by one. These passages remain open at all
seasons of the year. When spring comes, the new colony uses them just
as they are, provided that they are well preserved in the clayey mass
baked by the sun; it increases their length if necessary, runs out a
few more branches, but does not decide to start boring in new ground
until the old city, which, with its many labyrinths, resembles some
monstrous sponge, is too much undermined for safety. The oval niches,
the cells that open on those corridors, are also profitably employed.
The Anthophora restores their entrance, which has been destroyed by
the insect's recent emergence; she smooths their walls with a fresh
coat of whitewash, after which the lodging is fit to receive the heap
of honey and the egg. When the old cells, insufficient in number and
moreover partly inhabited by diverse intruders, are all occupied, the
boring of new cells begins, in the extended sections of the
galleries, and the rest of the eggs are housed. In this way, the
swarm is settled at a minimum of expense.

To conclude this brief account, let us change the zoological setting
and, as we have already spoken of the Sparrow, see what he can do as
a builder. The simplest form of his nest is the great round ball of
straw, dead leaves and feathers, in the fork of a few branches. It is
costly in material, but can be set up anywhere, when the hole in the
wall or the shelter of a tile are lacking. What reasons induced him
to give up the spherical edifice? To all seeming, the same reasons
that led the Osmia to abandon the Snail-shell's spiral, which
requires a fatiguing expenditure of clay, in favour of the economical
cylinder of the reed. By making his home in a hole in the wall, the
Sparrow escapes the greater part of his work. Here, the dome that
serves as a protection from the rain and the thick walls that offer
resistance to the wind both become superfluous. A mere mattress is
sufficient; the cavity in the wall provides the rest. The saving is
great; and the Sparrow appreciates it quite as much as the Osmia.

This does not mean that the primitive art has disappeared, lost
through neglect; it remains an ineffaceable characteristic of the
species, ever ready to declare itself should circumstances demand it.
The generations of to-day are as much endowed with it as the
generations of yore; without apprenticeship, without the example of
others, they have within themselves, in the potential state, the
industrial aptitude of their ancestors. If aroused by the stimulus of
necessity, this aptitude will pass suddenly from inaction to action.
When, therefore, the Sparrow still from time to time indulges in
spherical building, this is not progress on his part, as is sometimes
contended; it is, on the contrary, a retrogression, a return to the
ancient customs, so prodigal of labour. He is behaving like the Osmia
who, in default of a reed, makes shift with a Snail-shell, which is
more difficult to utilize but easier to find. The cylinder and the
hole in the wall stand for progress; the spiral of the Snail-shell
and the ball-shaped nest represent the starting-point.

I have, I think, sufficiently illustrated the inference which is
borne out by the whole mass of analogous facts. Animal industry
manifests a tendency to achieve the essential with a minimum of
expenditure; after its own fashion, the insect bears witness to the
economy of energy. On the one hand, instinct imposes upon it a craft
that is unchangeable in its fundamental features; on the other hand,
it is left a certain latitude in the details, so as to take advantage
of favourable circumstances and attain the object aimed at with the
least possible expenditure of time, materials and work, the three
elements of mechanical labour. The problem in higher geometry solved
by the Hive-bee is only a particular case--true, a magnificent case,-
-of this general law of economy which seems to govern the whole
animal world. The wax cells, with their maximum capacity as against a
minimum wall-space, are the equivalent, with the superaddition of a
marvellous scientific skill, of the Osmia's compartments in which the
stonework is reduced to a minimum through the selection of a reed.
The artificer in mud and the artificer in wax obey the same tendency:
they economize. Do they know what they are doing? Who would venture
to suggest it in the case of the Bee grappling with her
transcendental problem? The others, pursuing their rustic art, are no
wiser. With all of them, there is no calculation, no premeditation,
but simply blind obedience to the law of general harmony.


CHAPTER 8. THE LEAF-CUTTERS.

It is not enough that animal industry should be able, to a certain
extent, to adapt itself to casual exigencies when choosing the site
of a nest; if the race is to thrive, something else is required,
something which hide-bound instinct is unable to provide. The
Chaffinch, for instance, introduces a great quantity of lichen into
the outer layer of his nest. This is his method of strengthening the
edifice and making a stout framework in which to place first the
bottom mattress of moss, fine straw and rootlets and then the soft
bed of feathers, wool and down. But, should the time-honoured lichen
be lacking, will the bird refrain from building its nest? Will it
forgo the delight of hatching its brood because it has not the
wherewithal to settle its family in the orthodox fashion?

No, the chaffinch is not perplexed by so small a matter; he is an
expert in materials, he understands botanical equivalents. In the
absence of the branches of the evernias, he picks the long beards of
the usneas, the wartlike rosettes of the parmelias, the membranes of
the stictises torn away in shreds; if he can find nothing better, he
makes shift with the bushy tufts of the cladonias. As a practical
lichenologist, when one species is rare or lacking in the
neighbourhood, he is able to fall back on others, varying greatly in
shape, colour and texture. And, if the impossible happened and lichen
failed entirely, I credit the Chaffinch with sufficient talent to be
able to dispense with it and to build the foundations of his nest
with some coarse moss or other.

What the worker in lichens tells us the other weavers of textile
materials confirm. Each has his favourite flora, which hardly ever
varies when the plant is easily accessible and which can be
supplemented by plenty of others when it is not. The bird's botany
would be worth examining; it would be interesting to draw up the
industrial herbal of each species. In this connection, I will quote
just one instance, so as not to stray too far from the subject in
hand.

The Red-backed Shrike (Lanius collurio), the commonest variety in my
district, is noteworthy because of his savage mania for forked
gibbets, the thorns in the hedgerows whereon he impales the
voluminous contents of his game-bag--little half-fledged birds, small
Lizards, Grasshoppers, caterpillars, Beetles--and leaves them to get
high. To this passion for the gallows, which has passed unnoticed by
the country-folk, at least in my part, he adds another, an innocent
botanical passion, which is so much in evidence that everybody, down
to the youngest bird's-nester, knows all about it. His nest, a
massive structure, is made of hardly any other materials than a
greyish and very fluffy plant, which is found everywhere among the
corn. This is the Filago spathulata of the botanists; and the bird
also makes use, though less frequently, of the Filago germanica, or
common cotton-rose. Both are known in Provencal by th