them eathen bleck niggers calls
theirseolves Christians! It's a crool shime, sow it is.

RANKIN. If a man has the heart to pull the trigger, it matters
little what color his hand is, Mr. Drinkwotter. Have ye anything
else to say to me this afternoon?

DRINKWATER (rising). Nathink, gavner, cept to wishyer the bust o
yolth, and a many cornverts. Awtenoon, gavner.

RANKIN. Good afternoon to ye, Mr. Drinkwotter.

As Drinkwater turns to go, a Moorish porter comes from the house
with two Krooboys.

THE PORTER (at the door, addressing Rankin). Bikouros (Moroccan
for Epicurus, a general Moorish name for the missionaries, who
are supposed by the Moors to have chosen their calling through a
love of luxurious idleness): I have brought to your house a
Christian dog and his woman.

DRINKWATER. There's eathen menners fer yer! Calls Sr Ahrd Ellam
an Lidy Winefleet a Christian dorg and is woman! If ee ed you in
the dorck et the Centl Crimnal, you'd fawnd aht oo was the dorg
and oo was is marster, pretty quick, you would.

RANKIN. Have you broat their boxes?

THE PORTER. By Allah, two camel loads!

RANKIN. Have you been paid?

THE PORTER. Only one miserable dollar, Bikouros. I have brought
them to your house. They will pay you. Give me something for
bringing gold to your door.

DRINKWATER. Yah! You oughter bin bawn a Christian, you ought. You
knaow too mach.

RANKIN. You have broat onnly trouble and expense to my door,
Hassan; and you know it. Have I ever charged your wife and
children for my medicines?

HASSAN (philosophically). It is always permitted by the Prophet
to ask, Bikouros. (He goes cheerfully into the house with the
Krooboys.)

DRINKWATER. Jist thort eed trah it orn, a did. Hooman nitre is
the sime everywheres. Them eathens is jast lawk you an' me,
gavner.

A lady and gentleman, both English, come into the garden.
The gentleman, more than elderly, is facing old age on
compulsion, not resignedly. He is clean shaven, and has a brainy
rectangular forehead, a resolute nose with strongly governed
nostrils, and a tightly fastened down mouth which has evidently
shut in much temper and anger in its time. He has a habit of
deliberately assumed authority and dignity, but is trying to
take life more genially and easily in his character of tourist,
which is further borne out by his white hat and summery
racecourse attire.

The lady is between thirty and forty, tall, very goodlooking,
sympathetic, intelligent, tender and humorous, dressed with
cunning simplicity not as a businesslike, tailor made, gaitered
tourist, but as if she lived at the next cottage and had dropped
in for tea in blouse and flowered straw hat. A woman of great
vitality and humanity, who begins a casual acquaintance at the
point usually attained by English people after thirty years
acquaintance when they are capable of reaching it at all. She
pounces genially on Drinkwater, who is smirking at her, hat in
hand, with an air of hearty welcome. The gentleman, on the other
hand, comes down the side of the garden next the house,
instinctively maintaining a distance between himself and the
others.

THE LADY (to Drinkwater). How dye do? Are you the missionary?

DRINKWATER (modestly). Naow, lidy, aw will not deceive you, thow
the mistike his but netral. Awm wanne of the missionary's good
works, lidy--is first cornvert, a umble British seaman--
countrymen o yours, lidy, and of is lawdship's. This eah is Mr.
Renkin, the bust worker in the wust cowst vawnyawd. (Introducing
the judge) Mr. Renkin: is lawdship Sr Ahrd Ellam. (He withdraws
discreetly into the house.)

SIR HOWARD (to Rankin). I am sorry to intrude on you, Mr. Rankin;
but in the absence of a hotel there seems to be no alternative.

LADY CICELY (beaming on him). Besides, we would so much RATHER
stay with you, if you will have us, Mr. Rankin.

SIR HOWARD (introducing her). My sister-in-law, Lady Cicely
Waynflete, Mr. Rankin.

RANKIN. I am glad to be of service to your leddyship. You will be
wishing to have some tea after your journey, I'm thinking.

LADY CICELY. Thoughtful man that you are, Mr. Rankin! But we've
had some already on board the yacht. And I've arranged everything
with your servants; so you must go on gardening just as if we
were not here.

SIR HOWARD. I am sorry to have to warn you, Mr. Rankin, that Lady
Cicely, from travelling in Africa, has acquired a habit of
walking into people's houses and behaving as if she were in her
own.

LADY CICELY. But, my dear Howard, I assure you the natives like
it.

RANKIN (gallantly). So do I.

LADY CICELY (delighted). Oh, that is so nice of you, Mr. Rankin.
This is a delicious country! And the people seem so good! They
have such nice faces! We had such a handsome Moor to carry our
luggage up! And two perfect pets of Krooboys! Did you notice
their faces, Howard?

SIR HOWARD. I did; and I can confidently say, after a long
experience of faces of the worst type looking at me from the
dock, that I have never seen so entirely villainous a trio as
that Moor and the two Krooboys, to whom you gave five dollars
when they would have been perfectly satisfied with one.

RANKIN (throwing up his hands). Five dollars! 'Tis easy to see
you are not Scotch, my leddy.

LADY CICELY. Oh, poor things, they must want it more than we do;
and you know, Howard, that Mahometans never spend money in drink.

RANKIN. Excuse me a moment, my leddy. I have a word in season to
say to that same Moor. (He goes into the house.)

LADY CICELY (walking about the garden, looking at the view and at
the flowers). I think this is a perfectly heavenly place.

Drinkwater returns from the house with a chair.

DRINKWATER (placing the chair for Sir Howard). Awskink yr pawdn
for the libbety, Sr Ahrd.

SIR HOWARD (looking a him). I have seen you before somewhere.

DRINKWATER. You ev, Sr Ahrd. But aw do assure yer it were hall a
mistike.

SIR HOWARD. As usual. (He sits down.) Wrongfully convicted, of
course.

DRINKWATER (with sly delight). Naow, gavner. (Half whispering,
with an ineffable grin) Wrorngfully hacquittid!

SIR HOWARD. Indeed! That's the first case of the kind I have ever
met.

DRINKWATER. Lawd, Sr Ahrd, wot jagginses them jurymen was! You an
me knaowed it too, didn't we?

SIR HOWARD. I daresay we did. I am sorry to say I forget the
exact nature of the difficulty you were in. Can you refresh my
memory?

DRINKWATER. Owny the aw sperrits o youth, y' lawdship. Worterleoo
Rowd kice. Wot they calls Ooliganism.

SIR HOWARD. Oh! You were a Hooligan, were you?

LADY CICELY (puzzled). A Hooligan!

DRINKWATER (deprecatingly). Nime giv huz pore thortless leds baw
a gent on the Dily Chrornicle, lidy. (Rankin returns. Drinkwater
immediately withdraws, stopping the missionary for a moment near
the threshold to say, touching his forelock) Awll eng abaht
within ile, gavner, hin kice aw should be wornted. (He goes into
the house with soft steps.)

Lady Cicely sits down on the bench under the tamarisk. Rankin
takes his stool from the flowerbed and sits down on her left, Sir
Howard being on her right.

LADY CICELY. What a pleasant face your sailor friend has, Mr.
Rankin! He has been so frank and truthful with us. You know I
don't think anybody can pay me a greater compliment than to be
quite sincere with me at first sight. It's the perfection of
natural good manners.

SIR HOWARD. You must not suppose, Mr. Rankin, that my
sister-in-law talks nonsense on purpose. She will continue to
believe in your friend until he steals her watch; and even then
she will find excuses for him.

RANKIN (drily changing the subject). And how have ye been, Sir
Howrrd, since our last meeting that morning nigh forty year ago
down at the docks in London?

SIR HOWARD (greatly surprised, pulling himself together) Our last
meeting! Mr. Rankin: have I been unfortunate enough to forget an
old acquaintance?

RANKIN. Well, perhaps hardly an acquaintance, Sir Howrrd. But I
was a close friend of your brother Miles: and when he sailed for
Brazil I was one of the little party that saw him off. You were
one of the party also, if I'm not mistaken. I took particular
notice of you because you were Miles's brother and I had never
seen ye before. But ye had no call to take notice of me.

SIR HOWARD (reflecting). Yes: there was a young friend of my
brother's who might well be you. But the name, as I recollect it,
was Leslie.

RANKIN. That was me, sir. My name is Leslie Rankin; and your
brother and I were always Miles and Leslie to one another.

SIR HOWARD (pluming himself a little). Ah! that explains it. I
can trust my memory still, Mr. Rankin; though some people do
complain that I am growing old.

RANKIN. And where may Miles be now, Sir Howard?

SIR HOWARD (abruptly). Don't you know that he is dead?

RANKIN (much shocked). Never haird of it. Dear, dear: I shall
never see him again; and I can scarcely bring his face to mind
after all these years. (With moistening eyes, which at once touch
Lady Cicely's sympathy) I'm right sorry--right sorry.

SIR HOWARD (decorously subduing his voice). Yes: he did not live
long: indeed, he never came back to England. It must be nearly
thirty years ago now that he died in the West Indies on his
property there.

RANKIN (surprised). His proaperty! Miles with a proaperty!

SIR HOWARD. Yes: he became a planter, and did well out there, Mr.
Rankin. The history of that property is a very curious and
interesting one--at least it is so to a lawyer like myself.

RANKIN. I should be glad to hear it for Miles's sake, though I am
no lawyer, Sir Howrrd.

LADY CICELY. I never knew you had a brother, Howard.

SIR HOWARD (not pleased by this remark). Perhaps because you
never asked me. (Turning more blandly to Rankin) I will tell you
the story, Mr. Rankin. When Miles died, he  left an estate in one
of the West Indian islands. It was in charge of an agent who was
a sharpish fellow, with all his wits about him. Now, sir, that
man did a thing which probably could hardly be done with impunity
even here in Morocco, under the most barbarous of surviving
civilizations. He quite simply took the estate for himself and
kept it.

RANKIN. But how about the law?

SIR HOWARD. The law, sir, in that island, consisted practically
of the Attorney General and the Solicitor General; and these
gentlemen were both retained by the agent. Consequently there was
no solicitor in the island to take up the case against him.

RANKIN. Is such a thing possible to-day in the British Empire?

SIR HOWARD (calmly). Oh, quite. Quite.

LADY CICELY. But could not a firstrate solicitor have been sent
out from London?

SIR HOWARD. No doubt, by paying him enough to compensate him for
giving up his London practice: that is, rather more than there
was any reasonable likelihood of the estate proving worth.

RANKIN. Then the estate was lost?

SIR HOWARD. Not permanently. It is in my hands at present.

RANKIN. Then how did ye get it back?

SIR HOWARD (with crafty enjoyment of his own cunning). By
hoisting the rogue with his own petard. I had to leave matters as
they were for many years; for I had my own position in the world
to make. But at last I made it. In the course of a holiday trip
to the West Indies, I found that this dishonest agent had left
the island, and placed the estate in the hands of an agent of his
own, whom he was foolish enough to pay very badly. I put the case
before that agent; and he decided to treat the estate as my
property. The robber now found himself in exactly the same
position he had formerly forced me into. Nobody in the island
would act against me, least of all the Attorney and Solicitor
General, who appreciated my influence at the Colonial Office. And
so I got the estate back. "The mills of the gods grind slowly,"
Mr. Rankin; "but they grind exceeding small."

LADY CICELY. Now I suppose if I'd done such a clever thing in
England, you'd have sent me to prison.

SIR HOWARD. Probably, unless you had taken care to keep outside
the law against conspiracy. Whenever you wish to do anything
against the law, Cicely, always consult a good solicitor first.

LADY CICELY. So I do. But suppose your agent takes it into his
head to give the estate back to his wicked old employer!

SIR HOWARD. I heartily wish he would.

RANKIN (openeyed). You wish he WOULD!!

SIR HOWARD. Yes. A few years ago the collapse of the West Indian
sugar industry converted the income of the estate into an annual
loss of about 150 pounds a year. If I can't sell it soon, I shall
simply abandon it--unless you, Mr. Rankin, would like to take it
as a present.

RANKIN (laughing). I thank your lordship: we have estates enough
of that sort in Scotland. You're setting with your back to the
sun, Leddy Ceecily, and losing something worth looking at. See
there. (He rises and points seaward, where the rapid twilight of
the latitude has begun.)

LADY CICELY (getting up to look and uttering a cry of
admiration). Oh, how lovely!

SIR HOWARD (also rising). What are those hills over there to the
southeast?

RANKIN. They are the outposts, so to speak, of the Atlas
Mountains.

LADY CICELY. The Atlas Mountains! Where Shelley's witch lived!
We'll make an excursion to them to-morrow, Howard.

RANKIN. That's impoassible, my leddy. The natives are verra
dangerous.

LADY CICELY. Why? Has any explorer been shooting them?

RANKIN. No. But every man of them believes he will go to heaven
if he kills an unbeliever.

LADY CICELY. Bless you, dear Mr. Rankin, the people in England
believe that they will go to heaven if they give all their
property to the poor. But they don't do it. I'm not a bit afraid
of that.

RANKIN. But they are not accustomed to see women going about
unveiled.

LADY CICELY. I always get on best with people when they can see
my face.

SIR HOWARD. Cicely: you are talking great nonsense and you know
it. These people have no laws to restrain them, which means, in
plain English, that they are habitual thieves and murderers.

RANKIN. Nay, nay: not exactly that,

LADY CICELY (indignantly). Of course not. You always think,
Howard, that nothing prevents people killing each other but the
fear of your hanging them for it. But what nonsense that is! And
how wicked! If these people weren't here for some good purpose,
they wouldn't have been made, would they, Mr. Rankin?

RANKIN. That is a point, certainly, Leddy Ceecily.

SIR HOWARD. Oh, if you are going to talk theology--

LADY CICELY. Well, why not? theology is as respectable as law, I
should think. Besides, I'm only talking commonsense. Why do
people get killed by savages? Because instead of being polite to
them, and saying Howdyedo? like me, people aim pistols at them.
I've been among savages--cannibals and all sorts. Everybody said
they'd kill me. But when I met them, I said Howdyedo? and they
were quite nice. The kings always wanted to marry me.

SIR HOWARD. That does not seem to me to make you any safer here,
Cicely. You shall certainly not stir a step beyond the protection
of the consul, if I can help it, without a strong escort.

LADY CICELY. I don't want an escort.

SIR HOWARD. I do. And I suppose you will expect me to accompany
you.

RANKIN. 'Tis not safe, Leddy Ceecily. Really and truly, 'tis not
safe. The tribes are verra fierce; and there are cities here that
no Christian has ever set foot in. If you go without being well
protected, the first chief you meet well seize you and send you
back again to prevent his followers murdering you.

LADY CICELY. Oh, how nice of him, Mr. Rankin!

RANKIN. He would not do it for your sake, Leddy Ceecily, but for
his own. The Sultan would get into trouble with England if you
were killed; and the Sultan would kill the chief to pacify the
English government.

LADY CICELY. But I always go everywhere. I KNOW the people here
won't touch me. They have such nice faces and such pretty
scenery.

SIR HOWARD (to Rankin, sitting down again resignedly). You can
imagine how much use there is in talking to a woman who admires
the faces of the ruffians who infest these ports, Mr. Rankin. Can
anything be done in the way of an escort?

RANKIN. There is a certain Captain Brassbound here who trades
along the coast, and occasionally escorts parties of merchants on
journeys into the interior. I understand that he served under
Gordon in the Soudan.

SIR HOWARD. That sounds promising. But I should like to know a
little more about him before I trust myself in his hands.

RANKIN. I quite agree with you, Sir Howrrd. I'll send Felix
Drinkwotter for him. (He claps his hands. An Arab boy appears at
the house door.) Muley: is sailor man here? (Muley nods.) Tell
sailor man bring captain. (Muley nods and goes.)

SIR HOWARD. Who is Drinkwater?

RANKIN. His agent, or mate: I don't rightly know which.

LADY CICELY. Oh, if he has a mate named Felix Drinkwater, it must
be quite a respectable crew. It is such a nice name.

RANKIN. You saw him here just now. He is a convert of mine.

LADY CICELY (delighted). That nice truthful sailor!

SIR HOWARD (horrified). What! The Hooligan!

RANKIN (puzzled). Hooligan? No, my lord: he is an Englishman.

SIR HOWARD. My dear Mr. Rankin, this man was tried before me on a
charge of street ruffianism.

RANKIN. So he told me. He was badly broat up, I am afraid. But he
is now a converted man.

LADY CICELY. Of course he is. His telling you so frankly proves
it. You know, really, Howard, all those poor people whom you try
are more sinned against than sinning. If you would only talk to
them in a friendly way instead of passing cruel sentences on
them, you would find them quite nice to you. (Indignantly) I
won't have this poor man trampled on merely because his mother
brought him up as a Hooligan. I am sure nobody could be nicer
than he was when he spoke to us.

SIR HOWARD. In short, we are to have an escort of Hooligans
commanded by a filibuster. Very well, very well. You will most
likely admire all their faces; and I have no doubt at all that
they will admire yours.

Drinkwater comes from the house with an Italian dressed in a much
worn suit of blue serge, a dilapidated Alpine hat, and boots
laced with scraps of twine. He remains near the door, whilst
Drinkwater comes forward between Sir Howard and Lady Cicely.

DRINKWATER. Yr honor's servant. (To the Italian) Mawtzow: is
lawdship Sr Ahrd Ellam. (Marzo touches his hat.) Er Lidyship Lidy
Winefleet. (Marzo touches his hat.) Hawtellian shipmite, lidy.
Hahr chef.

LADY CICELY (nodding affably to Marzo). Howdyedo? I love Italy.
What part of it were you born in?

DRINKWATER. Worn't bawn in Hitly at all, lidy. Bawn in Ettn Gawdn
(Hatton Garden). Hawce barrer an street pianner Hawtellian, lidy:
thet's wot e is. Kepn Brarsbahnd's respects to yr honors; an e
awites yr commawnds.

RANKIN. Shall we go indoors to see him?

SIR HOWARD. I think we had better have a look at him by daylight.

RANKIN. Then we must lose no time: the dark is soon down in this
latitude. (To Drinkwater) Will ye ask him to step out here to us,
Mr. Drinkwotter?

DRINKWATER. Rawt you aw, gavner. (He goes officiously into the
house.)

Lady Cicely and Rankin sit down as before to receive the Captain.
The light is by this time waning rapidly, the darkness creeping
west into the orange crimson.

LADY CICELY (whispering). Don't you feel rather creepy, Mr.
Rankin? I wonder what he'll be like.

RANKIN. I misdoubt me he will not answer, your leddyship.

There is a scuffling noise in the house; and Drinkwater shoots
out through the doorway across the garden with every appearance
of having been violently kicked. Marzo immediately hurries down
the garden on Sir Howard's right out of the neighborhood of the
doorway.

DRINKWATER (trying to put a cheerful air on much mortification and
bodily anguish). Narsty step to thet ere door tripped me hap, it
did. (Raising his voice and narrowly escaping a squeak of pain)
Kepn Brarsbahnd. (He gets as far from the house as possible, on
Rankin's left. Rankin rises to receive his guest.)

An olive complexioned man with dark southern eyes and hair comes
from the house. Age about 36. Handsome features, but joyless;
dark eyebrows drawn towards one another; mouth set grimly;
nostrils large and strained: a face set to one tragic purpose. A
man of few words, fewer gestures, and much significance. On the
whole, interesting, and even attractive, but not friendly. He
stands for a moment, saturnine in the ruddy light, to see who is
present, looking in a singular and rather deadly way at Sir
Howard; then with some surprise and uneasiness at Lady Cicely.
Finally he comes down into the middle of the garden, and
confronts Rankin, who has been glaring at him in consternation
from the moment of his entrance, and continues to do so in so
marked a way that the glow in Brassbound's eyes deepens as he
begins to take offence.

BRASSBOUND. Well, sir, have you stared your fill at me?

RANKIN (recovering himself with a start). I ask your pardon for
my bad manners, Captain Brassbound. Ye are extraordinair lek an
auld college friend of mine, whose face I said not ten minutes
gone that I could no longer bring to mind. It was as if he had
come from the grave to remind me of it.

BRASSBOUND. Why have you sent for me?

RANKIN. We have a matter of business with ye, Captain.

BRASSBOUND. Who are "we"?

RANKIN. This is Sir Howrrd Hallam, who will be well known to ye
as one of Her Majesty's judges.

BRASSBOUND (turning the singular look again on Sir Howard). The
friend of the widow! the protector of the fatherless!

SIR HOWARD (startled). I did not know I was so favorably spoken
of in these parts, Captain Brassbound. We want an escort for a
trip into the mountains.

BRASSBOUND (ignoring this announcement). Who is the lady?

RANKIN. Lady Ceecily Waynflete, his lordship's sister-in-law.

LADY CICELY. Howdyedo, Captain Brassbound? (He bows gravely.)

SIR HOWARD (a little impatient of these questions, which strike
him as somewhat impertinent). Let us come to business, if you
please. We are thinking of making a short excursion to see the
country about here. Can you provide us with an escort of
respectable, trustworthy men?

BRASSBOUND. No.

DRINKWATER (in strong remonstrance). Nah, nah, nah! Nah look eah,
Kepn, y'knaow--

BRASSBOUND (between his teeth). Hold your tongue.

DRINKWATER (abjectly). Yuss, Kepn.

RANKIN. I understood it was your business to provide escorts,
Captain Brassbound.

BRASSBOUND. You were rightly informed. That IS my business.

LADY CICELY. Then why won't you do it for us?

BRASSBOUND. You are not content with an escort. You want
respectable, trustworthy men. You should have brought a
division of London policemen with you. My men are neither
respectable nor trustworthy.

DRINKWATER (unable to contain himself). Nah, nah, look eah, Kepn.
If you want to be moddist, be moddist on your aown accahnt, nort
on mawn.

BRASSBOUND. You see what my men are like. That rascal (indicating
Marzo) would cut a throat for a dollar if he had courage enough.

MARZO. I not understand. I no spik Englis.

BRASSBOUND. This thing (pointing to Drinkwater) is the greatest
liar, thief, drunkard, and rapscallion on the west coast.

DRINKWATER (affecting an ironic indifference). Gow orn, Gow orn.
Sr Ahrd ez erd witnesses to maw kerrickter afoah. E knaows ah
mech to believe of em.

LADY CICELY. Captain Brassbound: I have heard all that before
about the blacks; and I found them very nice people when they
were properly treated.

DRINKWATER (chuckling: the Italian is also grinning). Nah, Kepn,
nah! Owp yr prahd o y'seolf nah.

BRASSBOUND. I quite understand the proper treatment for him,
madam. If he opens his mouth again without my leave, I will break
every bone in his skin.

LADY CICELY (in her most sunnily matter-of-fact way). Does
Captain Brassbound always treat you like this, Mr. Drinkwater?

Drinkwater hesitates, and looks apprehensively at the Captain.

BRASSBOUND. Answer, you dog, when the lady orders you. (To Lady
Cicely) Do not address him as Mr. Drinkwater, madam: he is
accustomed to be called Brandyfaced Jack.

DRINKWATER (indignantly). Eah, aw sy! nah look eah, Kepn: maw
nime is Drinkworter. You awsk em et Sin Jorn's in the Worterleoo
Rowd. Orn maw grenfawther's tombstown, it is.

BRASSBOUND. It will be on your own tombstone, presently, if you
cannot hold your tongue. (Turning to the others) Let us
understand one another, if you please. An escort here, or
anywhere where there are no regular disciplined forces, is what
its captain makes it. If I undertake this business, I shall be
your escort. I may require a dozen men, just as I may require a
dozen horses. Some of the horses will be vicious; so will all the
men. If either horse or man tries any of his viciousness on me,
so much the worse for him; but it will make no difference to you.
I will order my men to behave themselves before the lady; and
they shall obey their orders. But the lady will please understand
that I take my own way with them and suffer no interference.

LADY CICELY. Captain Brassbound: I don't want an escort at all.
It will simply get us all into danger; and I shall have the
trouble of getting it out again. That's what escorts always do.
But since Sir Howard prefers an escort, I think you had better
stay at home and let me take charge of it. I know your men will
get on perfectly well if they're properly treated.

DRINKWATER (with enthusiasm). Feed aht o yr and, lidy, we would.

BRASSBOUND (with sardonic assent). Good. I agree. (To Drinkwater)
You shall go without me.

DRINKWATER. (terrified). Eah! Wot are you a syin orn? We cawn't
gow withaht yer. (To Lady Cicely) Naow, lidy: it wouldn't be for
yr hown good. Yer cawn't hexpect a lot o poor honeddikited men
lawk huz to ran ahrseolvs into dineger withaht naow Kepn to teoll
us wot to do. Naow, lidy: hoonawted we stend: deevawdid we fall.

LADY CICELY. Oh, if you prefer your captain, have him by all
means. Do you LIKE to be treated as he treats you?

DAINKWATER (with a smile of vanity). Weoll, lidy: y cawn't deenaw
that e's a Paffick Genlmn. Bit hawbitrairy, preps; but hin a
genlmn you looks for sich. It tikes a hawbitrairy wanne to knock
aht them eathen Shikes, aw teoll yer.

BRASSBOUND. That's enough. Go.

DRINKWATER. Weoll, aw was hownly a teolln the lidy thet-- (A
threatening movement from Brassbound cuts him short. He flies for
his life into the house, followed by the Italian.)

BRASSBOUND. Your ladyship sees. These men serve me by their own
free choice. If they are dissatisfied, they go. If I am
dissatisfied, they go. They take care that I am not dissatisfied.

SIR HOWARD (who has listened with approval and growing
confidence). Captain Brassbound: you are the man I want. If your
terms are at all reasonable, I will accept your services if we
decide to make an excursion. You do not object, Cicely, I hope.

LADY CICELY. Oh no. After all, those men must really like you,
Captain Brassbound. I feel sure you have a kind heart. You have
such nice eyes.

SIR HOWARD (scandalized). My DEAR Cicely: you really must
restrain your expressions of confidence in people's eyes and
faces. (To Brassbound) Now, about terms, Captain?

BRASSBOUND. Where do you propose to go?

SIR HOWARD. I hardly know. Where CAN we go, Mr. Rankin?

RANKIN. Take my advice, Sir Howrrd. Don't go far.

BRASSBOUND. I can take you to Meskala, from which you can see the
Atlas Mountains. From Meskala I can take you to an ancient castle
in the hills, where you can put up as long as you please. The
customary charge is half a dollar a man per day and his food. I
charge double.

SIR HOWARD. I suppose you answer for your men being sturdy
fellows, who will stand to their guns if necessary.

BRASSBOUND. I can answer for their being more afraid of me than
of the Moors.

LADY CICELY. That doesn't matter in the least, Howard. The
important thing, Captain Brassbound, is: first, that we should
have as few men as possible, because men give such a lot of
trouble travelling. And then, they must have good lungs and not
be always catching cold. Above all, their clothes must be of good
wearing material. Otherwise I shall be nursing and stitching and
mending all the way; and it will be trouble enough, I assure you,
to keep them washed and fed without that.

BRASSBOUND (haughtily). My men, madam, are not children in the
nursery.

LADY CICELY (with unanswerable conviction). Captain Brassbound:
all men are children in the nursery. I see that you don't notice
things. That poor Italian had only one proper bootlace: the other
was a bit of string. And I am sure from Mr. Drinkwater's
complexion that he ought to have some medicine.

BRASSBOUND (outwardly determined not to be trifled with: inwardly
puzzled and rather daunted). Madam: if you want an escort, I can
provide you with an escort. If you want a Sunday School treat, I
can NOT provide it.

LADY CICELY (with sweet melancholy). Ah, don't you wish you
could, Captain? Oh, if I could only show you my children from
Waynflete Sunday School! The darlings would love this place, with
all the camels and black men. I'm sure you would enjoy having
them here, Captain Brassbound; and it would be such an education
for your men! (Brassbound stares at her with drying lips.)

SIR HOWARD. Cicely: when you have quite done talking nonsense to
Captain Brassbound, we can proceed to make some definite
arrangement with him.

LADY CICELY. But it's arranged already. We'll start at eight
o'clock to-morrow morning, if you please, Captain. Never mind
about the Italian: I have a big box of clothes with me for my
brother in Rome; and there are some bootlaces in it. Now go home
to bed and don't fuss yourself. All you have to do is to bring
your men round; and I'll see to the rest. Men are always so
nervous about moving. Goodnight. (She offers him her hand.
Surprised, he pulls off his cap for the first time. Some scruple
prevents him from taking her hand at once. He hesitates; then
turns to Sir Howard and addresses him with warning earnestness.)

BRASSBOUND. Sir Howard Hallam: I advise you not to attempt this
expedition.

SIR HOWARD. Indeed! Why?

BRASSBOUND. You are safe here. I warn you, in those hills there
is a justice that is not the justice of your courts in England.
If you have wronged a man, you may meet that man there. If you
have wronged a woman, you may meet her son there. The justice of
those hills is the justice of vengeance.

SIR HOWARD (faintly amused). You are superstitious, Captain. Most
sailors are, I notice. However, I have complete confidence in
your escort.

BRASSBOUND (almost threateningly). Take care. The avenger may be
one of the escort.

SIR HOWARD. I have already met the only member of your escort who
might have borne a grudge against me, Captain; and he was
acquitted.

BRASSBOUND. You are fated to come, then?

SIR HOWARD (smiling). It seems so.

BRASSBOUND. On your head be it! (To Lady Cicely, accepting her
hand at last) Goodnight.

He goes. It is by this time starry night.



ACT II

Midday. A roam in a Moorish castle. A divan seat runs round the
dilapidated adobe walls, which are partly painted, partly faced
with white tiles patterned in green and yellow. The ceiling is
made up of little squares, painted in bright colors, with gilded
edges, and ornamented with gilt knobs. On the cement floor
are mattings, sheepskins, and leathern cushions with geometrical
patterns on them. There is a tiny Moorish table in the middle;
and at it a huge saddle, with saddle cloths of various colors,
showing that the room is used by foreigners accustomed to chairs.
Anyone sitting at the table in this seat would have the chief
entrance, a large horseshoe arch, on his left, and another saddle
seat between him and the arch; whilst, if susceptible to
draughts, he would probably catch cold from a little Moorish door
in the wall behind him to his right.

Two or three of Brassbound's men, overcome by the midday heat,
sprawl supine on the floor, with their reefer coats under their
heads, their knees uplifted, and their calves laid comfortably on
the divan. Those who wear shirts have them open at the throat for
greater coolness. Some have jerseys. All wear boots and belts,
and have guns ready to their hands. One of them, lying with his
head against the second saddle seat, wears what was once a
fashionable white English yachting suit. He is evidently a
pleasantly worthless young English gentleman gone to the
bad, but retaining sufficient self-respect to shave carefully and
brush his hair, which is wearing thin, and does not seem to have
been luxuriant even in its best days.

The silence is broken only by the snores of the young gentleman,
whose mouth has fallen open, until a few distant shots half waken
him. He shuts his mouth convulsively, and opens his eyes
sleepily. A door is violently kicked outside; and the voice of
Drinkwater is heard raising urgent alarm.

DRINKWATER. Wot ow! Wike ap there, will yr. Wike ap. (He rushes
in through the horseshoe arch, hot and excited, and runs round,
kicking the sleepers) Nah then. Git ap.  Git ap, will yr, Kiddy
Redbrook. (He gives the young qentleman a rude shove.)

REDBOOK (sitting up). Stow that, will you. What's amiss?

DRINKWATER (disgusted). Wot's amiss! Didn't eah naow fawrin, I
spowse.

REDBROOK. No.

DRINKWATER (sneering). Naow. Thort it sifer nort, didn't yr?

REDBROOK (with crisp intelligence). What! You're running away,
are you? (He springs up, crying) Look alive, Johnnies: there's
danger. Brandyfaced Jack's on the run. (They spring up hastily,
grasping their guns.)

DRINKWATER. Dineger! Yuss: should think there wors dineger. It's
howver, thow, as it mowstly his baw the tawm YOU'RE awike. (They
relapse into lassitude.) Waw wasn't you on the look-aht to give
us a end? Bin hattecked baw the Benny Seeras (Beni Siras), we ev,
an ed to rawd for it pretty strite, too, aw teoll yr. Mawtzow is
it: the bullet glawnst all rahnd is bloomin brisket. Brarsbahnd e
dropt the Shike's oss at six unnern fifty yawds. (Bustling them
about) Nah then: git the plice ready for the British
herristoracy, Lawd Ellam and Lidy Wineflete.

REDBOOK. Lady faint, eh?

DRINKWATER. Fynt! Not lawkly. Wornted to gow an talk, to the
Benny Seeras: blaow me if she didn't! huz  wot we was frahtnd of.
Tyin up Mawtzow's wound, she is, like a bloomin orspittle nass.
(Sir Howard, with a copious pagri on his white hat, enters
through the horseshoe arch, followed by a couple of men
supporting the wounded Marzo, who, weeping and terrorstricken by
the prospect of death and of subsequent torments for which he is
conscious of having eminently qualified himself, has his coat off
and a bandage round his chest. One of his supporters is a
blackbearded, thickset, slow, middle-aged man with an air of
damaged respectability, named--as it afterwards appears--Johnson.
Lady Cicely walks beside Marzo. Redbrook, a little shamefaced,
crosses the room to the opposite wall as far away as possible
from the visitors. Drinkwater turns and receives them with
jocular ceremony.) Weolcome to Brarsbahnd Cawstl, Sr Ahrd an
lidy. This eah is the corfee and commercial room.

Sir Howard goes to the table and sits on the saddle, rather
exhausted. Lady Cicely comes to Drinkwater.

LADY CICELY. Where is Marzo's bed?

DRINKWATER. Is bed, lidy? Weoll: e ynt petickler, lidy. E ez is
chawce of henny flegstown agin thet wall.

They deposit Marzo on the flags against the wall close to the
little door. He groans. Johnson phlegmatically leaves him and
joins Redbrook.

LADY CICELY. But you can't leave him there in that state.

DRINKWATER. Ow: e's hall rawt. (Strolling up callously to Marzo)
You're hall rawt, ynt yer, Mawtzow? (Marzo whimpers.) Corse y'aw.

LADY CICELY (to Sir Howard). Did you ever see such a helpless lot
of poor creatures? (She makes for the little door.)

DRINKWATER. Eah! (He runs to the door and places himself before
it.) Where mawt yr lidyship be gowin?

LADY CICELY. I'm going through every room in this castle to find
a proper place to put that man. And now I'll tell you where
YOU'RE going. You're going to get some water for Marzo, who is
very thirsty. And then, when I've chosen a room for him, you're
going to make a bed for him there.

DRINKWATER (sarcastically). Ow! Henny ather little suvvice? Mike
yrseolf at owm, y' knaow, lidy.

LADY CICELY (considerately). Don't go if you'd rather not, Mr.
Drinkwater. Perhaps you're too tired. (Turning to the archway)
I'll ask Captain Brassbound: he won't mind.

DRINKWATER (terrified, running after her and getting between her
and the arch). Naow, naow! Naow, lidy: doesn't you goes disturbin
the Kepn. Awll see to it.

LADY CICELY (gravely). I was sure you would, Mr. Drinkwater. You
have such a kind face. (She turns back and goes out through the
small door.)

DRINKWATER (looking after her). Garn!

SIR HOWARD (to Drinkwater). Will you ask one of your friends to
show me to my room whilst you are getting the water?

DRINKWATER (insolently). Yr room! Ow: this ynt good enaf fr yr,
ynt it? (Ferociously) Oo a you orderin abaht, ih?

SIR HOWARD (rising quietly, and taking refuge between Redbrook
and Johnson, whom he addresses). Can you find me a more private
room than this?

JOHNSON (shaking his head). I've no orders. You must wait til the
capn comes, sir.

DRINKWATER (following Sir Howard). Yuss; an whawl you're witin,
yll tike your horders from me: see?

JOHNSON (with slow severity, to Drinkwater). Look here: do you
see three genlmen talkin to one another here, civil and private,
eh?

DRINKWATER (chapfallen). No offence, Miste Jornsn--

JOHNSON (ominously). Ay; but there is offence. Where's your
manners, you guttersnipe? (Turning to Sir Howard) That's the
curse o this kind o life, sir: you got to associate with all
sorts. My father, sir, was Capn Johnson o Hull--owned his own
schooner, sir. We're mostly gentlemen here, sir, as you'll find,
except the poor ignorant foreigner and that there scum of the
submerged tenth. (Contemptuously looking at Drinkwater) HE ain't
nobody's son: he's only a offspring o coster folk or such.

DRINKWATER (bursting into tears). Clawss feelin! thet's wot it
is: clawss feelin! Wot are yer, arter all, bat a bloomin gang o
west cowst cazhls (casual ward paupers)? (Johnson is scandalized;
and there is a general thrill of indignation.) Better ev naow
fembly, an rawse aht of it, lawk me, than ev a specble one and
disgrice it, lawk you.

JOHNSON. Brandyfaced Jack: I name you for conduct and language
unbecoming to a gentleman. Those who agree will signify the same
in the usual manner.

ALL (vehemently). Aye.

DRINKWATER (wildly). Naow.

JOHNSON. Felix Drinkwater: are you goin out, or are you goin to
wait til you're chucked out? You can cry in the passage. If you
give any trouble, you'll have something to cry for.

They make a threatenng movement towards Drinkwater.

DRINKWATER (whimpering). You lee me alown: awm gowin. There's
n'maw true demmecrettick feelin eah than there is in the owl
bloomin M division of Noontn Corzwy coppers (Newington Causeway
policemen).

As he slinks away in tears towards the arch, Brassbound enters.
Drinkwater promptly shelters himself on the captain's left hand,
the others retreating to the opposite side as Brassbound advances
to the middle of the room. Sir Howard retires behind them and
seats himself on the divan, much fatigued.

BRASSBOUND (to Drinkwater). What are you snivelling at?

DRINKWATER. You awsk the wust cowst herristorcracy. They fawnds
maw cornduck hanbecammin to a genlmn.

Brassbound is about to ask Johnson for an explanation, when Lady
Cicely returns through the little door, and comes between
Brassbound and Drinkwater.

LADY CICELY (to Drinkwater). Have you fetched the water?

DRINKWATER. Yuss: nah YOU begin orn me. (He weeps afresh.)

LADY CICELY (surprised). Oh! This won't do, Mr. Drinkwater. If
you cry, I can't let you nurse your friend.

DRINKWATER (frantic). Thet'll brike maw awt, wown't it nah? (With
a lamentable sob, he throws himself down on the divan, raging
like an angry child.)

LADY CICELY (after contemplating him in astonishment for a
moment). Captain Brassbound: are there any charwomen in the Atlas
Mountains?

BRASSB0UND. There are people here who will work if you pay them,
as there are elsewhere.

LADY CICELY. This castle is very romantic, Captain; but it hasn't
had a spring cleaning since the Prophet lived in it. There's only
one room I can put that wounded man into. It's the only one that
has a bed in it: the second room on the right out of that
passage.

BRASSBOUND (haughtily). That is my room, madam.

LADY CICELY (relieved). Oh, that's all right. It would have been
so awkward if I had had to ask one of your men to turn out. You
won't mind, I know. (All the men stare at her. Even Drinkwater
forgets his sorrows in his stupefaction.)

BRASSBOUND. Pray, madam, have you made any arrangements for my
accommodation?

LADY CICELY (reassuringly). Yes: you can have my room instead
wherever it may be: I'm sure you chose me a nice one. I must be
near my patient; and I don't mind roughing it. Now I must have
Marzo moved very carefully. Where is that truly gentlemanly Mr.
Johnson?--oh, there you are, Mr. Johnson. (She runs to Johnson,
past Brassbound, who has to step back hastily out of her way with
every expression frozen out of his face except one of extreme and
indignant dumbfoundedness). Will you ask your strong friend to
help you with Marzo: strong people are always so gentle.

JOHNSON. Let me introdooce Mr. Redbrook. Your ladyship may know
his father, the very Rev. Dean Redbrook. (He goes to Marzo.)

REDBROOK. Happy to oblige you, Lady Cicely.

LADY CICELY (shaking hands). Howdyedo? Of course I knew your
father--Dunham, wasn't it? Were you ever called--

REDBROOK. The kid? Yes.

LADY CICELY. But why--

REDBROOK (anticipating the rest of the question). Cards and
drink, Lady Sis. (He follows Johnson to the patient. Lady Cicely
goes too.) Now, Count Marzo. (Marzo groans as Johnson and
Redbrook raise him.)

LADY CICELY. Now they're NOT hurting you, Marzo. They couldn't be
more gentle.

MARZO. Drink.

LADY CICELY. I'll get you some water myself. Your friend Mr.
Drinkwater was too overcome--take care of the corner--that's it--
the second door on the right. (She goes out with Marzo and his
bearers through the little door.)

BRASSBOUND (still staring). Well, I AM damned!--

DRINKWATER (getting up). Weoll, blimey!

BRASSBOUND (turning irritably on him). What did you say?

DRINKWATER. Weoll, wot did yer sy yrseolf, kepn? Fust tawm aw
yever see y' afride of ennybody. (The others laugh.)

BRASSBOUND. Afraid!

DRINKWATER (maliciously). She's took y' bed from hander yr for a
bloomin penny hawcemen. If y' ynt afride, let's eah yer speak ap
to er wen she cams bawck agin.

BRASSBOUND (to Sir Howard). I wish you to understand, Sir Howard,
that in this castle, it is I who give orders, and no one else.
Will you be good enough to let Lady Cicely Waynflete know that.

SIR HOWARD (sitting up on the divan and pulling himself
together). You will have ample opportunity for speaking to Lady
Cicely yourself when she returns. (Drinkwater chuckles: and the
rest grin.)

BRASSBOUND. My manners are rough, Sir Howard. I have no wish to
frighten the lady.

SIR HOWARD. Captain Brassbound: if you can frighten Lady Cicely,
you will confer a great obligation on her family. If she had any
sense of danger, perhaps she would keep out of it.

BRASSBOUND. Well, sir, if she were ten Lady Cicelys, she must
consult me while she is here.

DRINKWATER. Thet's rawt, kepn. Let's eah you steblish yr
hawthority. (Brassbound turns impatiently on him: He retreats
remonstrating) Nah, nah, nah!

SIR HOWARD. If you feel at all nervous, Captain Brassbound, I
will mention the matter with pleasure.

BRASSBOUND. Nervous, sir! no. Nervousness is not in my line. You
will find me perfectly capable of saying what I want to say--with
considerable emphasis, if necessary. (Sir Howard assents with a
polite but incredulous nod.)

DRINKWATER. Eah, eah!

Lady Cicely returns with Johnson and Redbrook. She carries a jar.

LADY CICELY (stopping between the door and the arch). Now for the
water. Where is it?

REDBROOK. There's a well in the courtyard. I'll come and work the
bucket.

LADY CICELY. So good of you, Mr. Redbrook. (She makes for the
horseshoe arch, followed by Redbrook.)

DRINKWATER. Nah, Kepn Brassbound: you got sathink to sy to the
lidy, ynt yr?

LADY CICELY (stopping). I'll come back to hear it presently,
Captain. And oh, while I remember it (coming forward between
Brassbound and Drinkwater), do please tell me Captain, if I
interfere with your arrangements in any way. It I disturb you the
least bit in the world, stop me at once. You have all the
responsibility; and your comfort and your authority must be the
first thing. You'll tell me, won't you?

BRASSBOUND (awkwardly, quite beaten). Pray do as you please,
madam.

LADY CICELY. Thank you. That's so like you, Captain. Thank you.
Now, Mr. Redbrook! Show me the way to the well. (She follows
Redbrook out through the arch.)

DRINKWATER. Yah! Yah! Shime! Beat baw a woman!

JOHNSON (coming forward on Brassbound's right). What's wrong now?

DRINKWATER (with an air of disappointment and disillusion).
Down't awsk me, Miste Jornsn. The kepn's naow clawss arter all.

BRASSBOUND (a little shamefacedly). What has she been fixing up
in there, Johnson?

JOHNSON. Well: Marzo's in your bed. Lady wants to make a kitchen
of the Sheikh's audience chamber, and to put me and the Kid handy
in his bedroom in case Marzo gets erysipelas and breaks out
violent. From what I can make out, she means to make herself
matron of this institution. I spose it's all right, isn't it?

DRINKWATER. Yuss, an horder huz abaht as if we was keb tahts! An
the kepn afride to talk bawck at er!

Lady Cicely returns with Redbrook. She carries the jar full of
water.

LADY CICELY (putting down the jar, and coming between Brassbound
and Drinkwater as before). And now, Captain, before I go to poor
Marzo, what have you to say to me?

BRASSBOUND. I! Nothing.

DRINKWATER. Down't fank it, gavner. Be a men!

LADY CICELY (looking at Drinkwater, puzzled). Mr. Drinkwater said
you had.

BRASSBOUND (recovering himself). It was only this. That fellow
there (pointing to Drinkwater) is subject to fits of insolence.
If he is impertinent to your ladyship, or disobedient, you have
my authority to order him as many kicks as you think good for
him; and I will see that he gets them.

DRINKWATER (lifting up his voice in protest). Nah, nah--

LADY CICELY. Oh, I couldn't think of such a thing, Captain
Brassbound. I am sure it would hurt Mr. Drinkwater.

DRINKWATER (lachrymosely). Lidy's hinkyp'ble o sich bawbrous
usage.

LADY CICELY. But there's one thing I SHOULD like, if Mr.
Drinkwater won't mind my mentioning it. It's so important if he's
to attend on Marzo.

BRASSBOUND. What is that?

LADY CICELY. Well--you WON'T mind, Mr. Drinkwater, will you?

DRINKWATER (suspiciously). Wot is it?

LADY CICELY. There would be so much less danger of erysipelas if
you would be so good as to take a bath.

DRINKWATER (aghast). A bawth!

BRASSBOUND (in tones of command). Stand by, all hands. (They
stand by.) Take that man and wash him. (With a roar of laughter
they seize him.)

DRINKWATER (in an agony of protest). Naow, naow. Look eah--

BRASSBOUND (ruthlessly). In COLD water.

DRINKWATER (shrieking). Na-a-a-a-ow. Aw eawn't, aw toel yer.
Naow. Aw sy, look eah. Naow, naow, naow, naow, naow, NAOW!!!

He is dragged away through the arch in a whirlwind of laughter,
protests and tears.

LADY CICELY. I'm afraid he isn't used to it, poor fellow; but
REALLY it will do him good, Captain Brassbound. Now I must be off
to my patient. (She takes up her jar and goes out by the little
door, leaving Brassbound and Sir Howard alone together.)

SIR HOWARD (rising). And now, Captain Brass--

BRASSBOUND (cutting him short with a fierce contempt that
astonishes him). I will attend to you presently. (Calling)
Johnson. Send me Johnson there. And Osman. (He pulls off his coat
and throws it on the table, standing at his ease in his blue
jersey.)

SIR HOWARD (after a momentary flush of anger, with a controlled
force that compels Brassbound's attention in spite of himself).
You seem to be in a strong position with reference to these men
of yours.

BRASSBOUND. I am in a strong position with reference to everyone
in this castle.

SIR HOWARD (politely but threateningly). I have just been
noticing that you think so. I do not agree with you. Her
Majesty's Government, Captain Brassbound, has a strong arm and a
long arm. If anything disagreeable happens to me or to my
sister-in-law, that arm will be stretched out. If that happens
you will not be in a strong position. Excuse my reminding you of
it.

BRASSBOUND (grimly). Much good may it do you! (Johnson comes in
through the arch.) Where is Osman, the Sheikh's messenger? I want
him too.

JOHNSON. Coming, Captain. He had a prayer to finish.

Osman, a tall, skinny, whiteclad, elderly Moor, appears in the
archway.

BRASSBOUND. Osman Ali (Osman comes forward between Brassbound and
Johnson): you have seen this unbeliever (indicating Sir Howard)
come in with us?

OSMAN. Yea, and the shameless one with the naked face, who
flattered my countenance and offered me her hand.

JOHNSON. Yes; and you took it too, Johnny, didn't you?

BRASSBOUND. Take horse, then; and ride fast to your master the
Sheikh Sidi el Assif

OSMAN (proudly). Kinsman to the Prophet.

BRASSBOUND. Tell him what you have seen here. That is all.
Johnson: give him a dollar; and note the hour of his going, that
his master may know how fast he rides.

OSMAN. The believer's word shall prevail with Allah and his
servant Sidi el Assif.

BRASSBOUND. Off with you.

OSMAN. Make good thy master's word ere I go out from his
presence, O Johnson el Hull.

JOHNSON. He wants the dollar.

Brassbound gives Osman a coin.

OSMAN (bowing). Allah will make hell easy for the friend of Sidi
el Assif and his servant. (He goes out through the arch.)

BRASSBOUND (to Johnson). Keep the men out of this until the
Sheikh comes. I have business to talk over. When he does come, we
must keep together all: Sidi el Assif's natural instinct will be
to cut every Christian throat here.

JOHNSON. We look to you, Captain, to square him, since you
invited him over.

BRASSBOUND. You can depend on me; and you know it, I think.

JOHNSON (phlegmatically). Yes: we know it. (He is going out when
Sir Howard speaks.)

SIR HOWARD. You know also, Mr. Johnson, I hope, that you can
depend on ME.

JOHNSON (turning). On YOU, sir?

SIR HOWARD. Yes: on me. If my throat is cut, the Sultan of
Morocco may send Sidi's head with a hundred thousand dollars
blood-money to the Colonial Office; but it will not be enough to
save his kingdom--any more than it would saw your life, if your
Captain here did the same thing.

JOHNSON (struck). Is that so, Captain?

BRASSBOUND. I know the gentleman's value--better perhaps than he
knows it himself. I shall not lose sight of it.

Johnson nods gravely, and is going out when Lady Cicely returns
softly by the little door and calls to him in a whisper. She has
taken off her travelling things and put on an apron. At her
chatelaine is a case of sewing materials.

LADY CICELY. Mr. Johnson. (He turns.) I've got Marzo to sleep.
Would you mind asking the gentlemen not to make a noise under his
window in the courtyard.

JOHNSON. Right, maam. (He goes out.)

Lady Cicely sits down at the tiny table, and begins stitching at
a sling bandage for Marzo's arm. Brassbound walks up and down on
her right, muttering to himself so ominously that Sir Howard
quietly gets out of his way by crossing to the other side and
sitting down on the second saddle seat.

SIR HOWARD. Are you yet able to attend to me for a moment,
Captain Brassbound?

BRASSBOUND (still walking about). What do you want?

SIR HOWARD. Well, I am afraid I want a little privacy, and, if
you will allow me to say so, a little civility. I am greatly
obliged to you for bringing us safely off to-day when we were
attacked. So far, you have carried out your contract. But since
we have been your guests here, your tone and that of the worst of
your men has changed--intentionally changed, I think.

BRASSBOUND (stopping abruptly and flinging the announcement at
him). You are not my guest: you are my prisoner.

SIR HOWARD. Prisoner!

Lady Cicely, after a single glance up, continues stitching,
apparently quite unconcerned.

BRASSBOUND. I warned you. You should have taken my warning.

SIR HOWARD (immediately taking the tone of co