hem." Quoth I, "By Allah,
I marvel at thee, for that assuredly thou wast the cause of my
preservation!" Quoth he, "The world is full of this sort; and we
beseech the Almighty to send us safety, for that these wretches
practice upon men with every kind of malpractice." Then I said to
him, "Tell me the rarest adventure of all that befel thee in this
villainy thou wast wont to work." And he answered, "O my brother,
I was not present when they did such deeds, for that my part with
them was to concern myself with selling and buying and feeding
them; but it hath reached me that the rarest thing which befel
them was on this wise."




The Thief's Tale.



The woman who acted decoy for them and trapped their game and
used to inveigle damsels from marriage-banquets, once caught them
a woman from a bride-feast, under pretence that she had a wedding
in her own house, and fixed for her a day when she should come to
her. As soon as the appointed time arrived, the woman presented
herself and the other carried her into the house by a door,
declaring that it was a private wicket. When she entered the
saloon, she saw men and braves[FN#91] and knew that she had
fallen into a snare; so she looked at them and said, "Harkye, my
fine fellows![FN#92] I am a woman and in my slaughter there is no
glory, nor have ye against me any feud of blood-wite wherefor ye
should pursue me; and that which is upon me of raiment and
ornaments ye are free to take as lawful loot." Quoth they, "We
fear thy denunciation;" but quoth she, "I will abide with you,
neither coming in nor going out." So they said, "We grant thee
thy life." Then the Captain looked on her and she pleased him; so
he took her for himself, and she abode with him a whole year
doing her very best in their service, till they became familiar
with her and felt assured of her faith. One night of the nights
she plied them with drink and they drank till they became
drunken; whereupon she arose and took her clothes and five
hundred dinars from the Captain; after which she fetched a razor
and shaved off all their beards. Then she took soot from the
cooking-pots and blackening their faces[FN#93] opened the doors
and fared forth; and when the thieves recovered from their drink,
they abode confounded and knew that the woman had practiced upon
them. All present marvelled at this his story and the ninth
constable came forward and said, "I will tell you a right
pleasant tale I heard at a wedding."




The Ninth Constable's History.



A certain singing-girl was fair of favour and bruited of repute,
and it happened one day that she fared forth to a garden
a-pleasuring. As she sat in the summer-house, behold, a man
lopped of the hand stopped to beg of her, and suddenly entered in
at the door. Then he touched her with his stump, saying, "An
alms, for the love of Allah!"[FN#94] but she answered, "Allah
open!" and insulted him. Many days after this, there came to her
a messenger and gave her the hire of her going forth.[FN#95] So
she took with her a hand-maid and an accompanyist;[FN#96] and
when she came to the place appointed, the messenger brought her
into a long passage, at the end whereof was a saloon. "So" (quoth
she) "we entered therein and found nobody, but we saw the room
made ready for an entertainment with candles, dried fruits and
wine, and in another place we saw food and in a third beds.
Thereupon we sat down and I looked at him who had opened the door
to us, and behold he was lopped of the hand. I misliked this, and
when I sat a little longer, there entered a man, who filled the
candelabra in the saloon and lit the waxen candles; and behold,
he also was handlopped. Then flocked the folk and there entered
none except he were lopped of the hand, and indeed the house was
full of these companions.[FN#97] When the session was complete,
the host came in and the company rose to him and seated him in
the place of honour. Now he was none other than the man who had
fetched me, and he was clad in sumptuous clothes, but his hands
were in his sleeves, so that I knew not how it was with them.
They brought him food and he ate, he and the company; after which
they washed hands and the host began casting at me furtive
glances. Then they drank till they were drunken, and when they
had taken leave of their wits, the host turned to me and said,
'Thou dealtest not in friendly fashion with him who sought an
alms of thee, and thou saidst to him, "How loathsome art thou!"'´
I considered him and behold, he was the lophand who had accosted
me in my pleasance.[FN#98] So I asked, 'O my lord, what is this
thou sayest?' and he answered, 'Wait; thou shalt remember it.' So
saying, he shook his head and stroked his beard, whilst I sat
down for fear. Then he put out his hand to my mantilla and
walking-boots and laying them by his side, cried to me, 'Sing, O
accursed!' Accordingly, I sang till I was tired out, what while
they occupied themselves with their case and drank themselves
drunk and the heat of their drink redoubled. Presently, the
doorkeeper came to me and said, 'O my lady, fear not; but when
thou hast a mind to go, let me know.' Quoth I, 'Thinkest thou to
delude me?' and quoth he, 'Nay, by Allah! But I have ruth on thee
for that our Captain and Chief purposeth thee no good and
methinketh he will kill thee this night.' Said I to him, 'An thou
be minded to do me a favour, now is its time;' and said he, 'When
our Chief riseth to his need and goeth to the Chapel of Ease, I
will precede him with the light and leave the door open; and do
thou wend whithersoever thou wiliest.' Then I sang and the
Captain cried, ''Tis good.' Replied I, 'Nay, but thou'rt
loathsome.' He looked at me and rejoined, 'By Allah, thou shalt
never more scent the odour of the world!' But his comrades said
to him, 'Do it not,' and gentled him, till he added, 'An it must
be so, and there be no help for it, she shall tarry here a whole
year and not fare forth.' My answer was, 'I am content to submit
to whatso pleaseth thee: if I have failed in respect to thee,
thou art of the clement.' He shook his head and drank, then arose
and went out to do his need, whilst his comrades were occupied
with what they were about of merry-making and drunkenness and
sport. So I winked to my friends and we all slipped out into the
corridor. We found the door open and fled forth, unveiled[FN#99]
and unknowing whither we went; nor did we halt till we had fared
afar from the house and happened on a Cook cooking, of whom I
asked, 'Hast thou a mind to quicken the dead?' He said, 'Come
up;' so we went up into the shop, and he whispered, 'Lie down.'
Accordingly, we lay down and he covered us with the Halfah
grass,[FN#100] wherewith he was used to kindle the fire under the
food. Hardly had we settled ourselves in the place when we heard
a noise of kicking at the door and people running right and left
and questioning the Cook and asking, 'Hath any one passed by
thee?' Answered he, 'None hath passed by me.' But they ceased not
to go round about the shop till the day broke, when they turned
back, disappointed. Then the Cook removed the reeds and said to
us, 'Rise, for ye are delivered from death.' So we arose, and we
were uncovered, sans veil or mantilla; but the Cook carried us up
into his house and we sent to our homes and fetched us veils; and
we repented to Allah Almighty and renounced singing, for indeed
this was a mighty narrow escape after stress."[FN#101] Those
present marvelled at this, and the tenth constable came forward
and said, "As for me, there befel me that which was yet rarer
than all ye have yet heard." Quoth Al-Malik al-Zahir, "What was
that?" And quoth he, "Deign give ear to me."




The Tenth Constable's History.



A robbery of stuffs had been committed in the city and as it was
a great matter I was cited,[FN#102] I and my fellows:
they[FN#103] pressed hard upon us: but we obtained of them some
days' grace and dispersed in search of the stolen goods. As for
me, I sallied forth with five men and went round about the city
that day; and on the morrow we fared forth into the suburbs. When
we found ourselves a parasang or two parasangs away from the
city, we waxed athirst; and presently we came to a garden. There
I went in alone and going up to the waterwheel,[FN#104] entered
it and drank and made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed. Presently, up
came the keeper of the garden and said to me, "Woe to thee! Who
brought thee to this waterwheel?" and he smote me and squeezed my
ribs[FN#105] till I was like to die. Then he bound me with one of
his bulls and made me work the waterwheel, flogging me as I
walked round with a cattle-whip[FN#106] he had with him, till my
heart was a-fire; after which he loosed me and I went out,
knowing not the way. Now when I came forth, I fainted: so I sat
down till my trouble subsided; then I made for my comrades and
said to them, "'I have found money and malefactor, and I
affrighted him not neither troubled him, lest he should flee; but
now, come, let us go to him, so we may contrive to lay hold upon
him." Then I took them and we repaired to the keeper of the
garden, who had tortured me with tunding, with the intent to make
him taste the like of that which he had done with me and lie
against him and cause him eat many a stick. So we rushed to the
waterwheel and seized the keeper. Now there was with him a youth
and, as we were pinioning the gardener, he said, "By Allah, I was
not with him and indeed 'tis six months since I entered this
city, nor did I set eyes on the stuffs until they were brought
hither." Quoth we, "Show us the stuffs;" upon which he carried us
to a place wherein was a pit, beside the waterwheel, and digging
there, brought out the stolen goods with not a thread or a stitch
of them missing. So we took them and carried the keeper to the
Prefecture of Police where we stripped him and beat him with
palm-rods till he confessed to thefts manifold. Now I did this by
way of mockery against my comrades, and it succeeded. The company
marvelled at this story with the utmost marvelling, and the
eleventh constable rose and said, "I know a story yet stranger
than this: but it happened not to myself."




The Eleventh Constable's History.



There was once in times of yore a Chief Officer of Police and
there passed by him one day of the days a Jew, hending in hand a
basket wherein were five thousand dinars; whereupon quoth that
officer to one of his slaves, "Art able to take that money from
yonder Jew's basket?" "Yes," quoth he, nor did he tarry beyond
the next day ere he came to his lord, bringing the basket. "So"
(said the officer) "I bade him 'Go, bury it in such a place;'
whereupon he went and buried it and returned and told me. Hardly
had he reported this when there arose a clamour like that of
Doomsday and up came the Jew, with one of the King's officers,
declaring that the gold pieces belonged to the Sultan and that he
looked to none but us for it. We demanded of him three days'
delay, according to custom and I said to him who had taken the
money, 'Go and set in the Jew's house somewhat that shall occupy
him with himself.' Accordingly he went and played a mighty fine
trick, which was, he laid in a basket a dead woman's hand,
painted with henna and having a gold seal-ring on one of the
fingers, and buried that basket under a slab in the Jew's home.
Then we came and searched and found the basket, whereupon without
a moment of delay we clapped the Jew in irons for the murder of a
woman. As soon as it was the appointed time, there entered to us
the man of the Sultan's guards, who had accompanied the Jew, when
he came to complain of the loss of the money,[FN#107] and said,
'The Sultan sayeth to you, Nail up[FN#108] the Jew and bring the
money, for there is no way by which five thousand gold pieces can
be lost.' Wherefore we knew that our device did not suffice. So I
went forth and finding a young man, a Haurani,[FN#109] passing
along the road, laid hands on him forthright and stripped him,
and whipped him with palm-rods. Then I threw him in jail, ironed,
and carrying him to the Prefecture, beat him again, saying to
them, 'This be the robber who stole the coin.' And we strove to
make him confess; but he would not. Accordingly, we beat him a
third and a fourth time, till we were aweary and exhausted and he
became unable to return a reply; but, when we had made an end of
beating and tormenting him, he said, 'I will fetch the money this
very moment.' Presently we went with him till he came to the
place where my slave had buried the gold and he dug there and
brought it out; whereat I marvelled with the utmost marvel and we
carried it to the Prefect's house. When the Wali saw the money
and made sure of it with his own eyes, he rejoiced with joy
exceeding and bestowed on me a robe of honour. Then he restored
the coin straightway to the Sultan and we left the youth in
durance vile; whilst I said to my slave who had taken the money,
'Say me, did yonder young man see thee, what time thou buriedst
the money?' and he replied, 'No, by Allah the Great!' So I went
in to the young man, the prisoner, and plied him with
wine[FN#110] till he recovered, when I said to him, 'Tell me how
thou stolest the money?' Answered he, 'By Allah, I stole it not,
nor did I ever set eyes on it till I brought it forth of the
earth!' Quoth I, 'How so?' and quoth he, 'Know that the  cause of
my falling into your hands was my parent's imprecation against
me; because I entreated her evilly yesternight and beat her and
she said to me, 'By Allah, O my son, the Lord shall assuredly gar
the oppressor prevail over thee!' Now she is a pious woman. So I
went out forthright and thou sawest me on my way and didst that
which thou didst; and when beating was prolonged on me, my senses
failed me and I heard a voice saying to me, 'Fetch it.' So I said
to you what I said and the Speaker[FN#111] guided me till I came
to the place and there befel what befel of the bringing out of
the money.' I admired this with the utmost admiration and knew
that he was of the sons of the pious. So I bestirred myself for
his release and cured him and besought him of acquittance and
absolution of responsibility." All those who were present
marvelled at this story with the utmost marvel, and the twelfth
constable came forward and said, "I will tell you a pleasant
trait that I heard from a certain person, concerning an adventure
which befel him with one of the thieves.




The Twelfth Constable's History.



I was passing one day in the market, when I found that a robber
had broken into the shop of a shroff, a changer of monies, and
thence taken a casket, wherewith he had made off to the
burialground. Accordingly I followed him thither and came up to
him, as he opened the casket and fell a-looking into it;
whereupon I accosted him, saying, "Peace be on you!"[FN#112] And
he was startled at me; so I left him and went away from him. Some
months after this, I met him again under arrest, in the midst of
the guards and "men of violence,"[FN#113] and he said to them,
"Seize this man." So they laid hands on me and carried me to the
Chief of Police, who said, "What hast thou to do with this
wight?" The robber turned to me and looking a long while in my
face, asked, "Who took this man?" and the officer answered, "Thou
badest us take him; so we took him." And he cried, "I ask refuge
of Allah! I know not this man, nor knoweth he me; and I said not
that to you but of a person other than this." So they released
me, and a while after the thief met me in the street and saluted
me with the salam, saying, "O my lord, fright for fright! Hadst
thou taken aught from me, thou hadst a part in the
calamity."[FN#114] I replied to him, "Allah be the judge between
thee and me!"[FN#115] And this is what I have to recount. Then
came forward the thirteenth constable and said, "'I will tell you
a tale which a man of my friends told me."





The Thirteenth Constable's History.



I went out one night of the nights to the house of a friend and
when it was the middle of the night, I sallied forth alone to hie
me home. When I came into the road, I espied a sort of thieves
and they espied me, whereupon my spittle dried up; but I feigned
myself drunken and staggered from side to side, crying out and
saying, "I am drunken." And I went up to the walls right and left
and made as if I saw not the thieves, who followed me afoot till
I reached my home and knocked at the door, when they went away.
Some few days after this, as I stood at the door of my house,
behold, there came up to me a young man, with a chain about his
neck and with him a trooper, and he said to me, "O my lord, an
alms for the love of Allah!" I replied, "Allah open!" and he
looked at me a long while and cried, "That which thou shouldst
give me would not come to the worth of thy turband or thy
waistcloth or what not else of thy habit, to say nothing of the
gold and the silver which were about thy person." I asked, "And
how so?" and he answered, "On such a night, when thou fellest
into peril and the thieves would have stripped thee, I was with
them and said to them, Yonder man is my lord and my master who
reared me. So was I and only I the cause of thy deliverance and
thus I saved thee from them." When I heard this, I said to him,
"Stop ;" and entering my house, brought him that which Allah
Almighty made easy to me.[FN#116] So he went his way; and this is
all I have to say. Then came forward the fourteenth constable and
said, "Know that the tale I have to tell is rarer and pleasanter
than this; and 'tis as follows."




The Fourteenth Constable's History.



I had a draper's shop before I entered this corporation,[FN#117]
and there used to come to me a person whom I know not, save by
his face, and I would give him whatso he sought and have patience
with him, till he could pay me. One night, I foregathered with
certain of my friends and we sat down to liquor: so we drank and
were merry and played at Tab;[FN#118] and we made one of us Wazir
and another Sultan and a third Torchbearer or Headsman.[FN#119]
Presently, there came in upon us a spunger, without bidding, and
we went on playing, whilst he played with us. Then quoth the
Sultan to the Wazir, "Bring the Parasite who cometh in to the
folk, without leave or license, that we may enquire into his
case; after which I will cut off his head;" so the headsmen arose
and dragged the spunger before the Sultan who bade cut off his
head. Now there was with them a sword, that would not cut clotted
curd;[FN#120] so the headsmen smote him therewith and his head
flew from his body. When we saw this, the wine fled from our
brains and we became in the foulest of plights. Then my friends
lifted up the corpse and went out with it, that they might hide
it,whilst I took the head and made for the river. Now I was
drunken and my clothes were drenched with the blood; and as I
passed along the road, I met a robber. When he saw me, he knew me
and cried to me, "Such-an-one!" "Well?" said I, and he rejoined,
"What is that thou hast with thee?" So I acquainted him with the
case and he took the head from me. Then we fared on till we came
to the river, where he washed the head and considering it
straitly, exclaimed, "By Allah, verily this be my brother, the
son of my sire, and he used to spunge upon the folk;" after which
he threw that head into the river. As for me, I was like a dead
man for dread; but he said to me, "Fear not, neither do thou
grieve, for I acquit thee of my brother's blood." Presently, he
took my clothes and washed them and dried them and put them on
me; after which he said to me, "Get thee gone to thy house." So I
returned to my house and he accompanied me, till I came thither,
when he said to me, "Allah never desolate thee! I am thy friend
Such-an-one, who used to take of thee goods on credit, and I owe
thee a kindness; but henceforward thou wilt never see me more."
Then he went his ways. The company marvelled at the manliness of
this man and his clemency[FN#121] and courtesy, and the Sultan
said, "Tell us another of thy stories, O Shahrazad."[FN#122] She
replied, " 'Tis well! They set forth[FN#123]




A Merry Jest of a Clever Thief.



A thief of the thieves of the Arabs went one night to a certain
man's house, to steal from a heap of wheat there, and the people
of the house surprised him. Now on the heap was a great copper
tasse, and the thief buried himself in the corn and covered his
head with the tasse, so that the folk found him not and went
their ways; but as they were going, behold, there came a mighty
great fart[FN#124] forth of the corn. So they went up to the
tasse and raising it, discovered the thief and laid hands on him.
Quoth he, "I have saved you the trouble of seeking me: for I
purposed, in breaking wind, to direct you to my hiding place;
wherefore do you be easy with me and have ruth on me, so may
Allah have ruth on you!" Accordingly they let him go and harmed
him not. "And for another story of the same kind" (she
continued), "hearken to




The Tale of the Old Sharper.



There was once an old man renowned for clever roguery, and he
went, he and his mates, to one of the markets and stole thence a
quantity of stuffs: then they separated and returned each to his
quarter. Awhile after this, the old man assembled a company of
his fellows and, as they sat at drink, one of them pulled out a
costly piece of cloth and said, "Is there any one of you will
dare sell this in its own market whence it was stolen, that we
may confess his superior subtlety?" Quoth the old man, "I will;"
and they said, "Go, and Allah Almighty open to thee the door!" So
early on the morrow, he took the stuff and carrying it to the
market whence it had been stolen, sat down at the very shop out
of which it had been purloined and gave it to the broker, who
hent it in hand and cried it for sale. Its owner knew it and
bidding for it, bought it and sent after the Chief of Police, who
seized the Sharper and seeing him an old man of grave presence
and handsomely clad said to him, "Whence hadst thou this piece of
stuff?" Quoth he, "I had it from this market and from yonder shop
where I was sitting." Quoth the Wali, "Did its owner sell it to
thee?" and quoth the robber, "Not so; I stole it, this and other
than it." Then said the Chief, "How camest thou to bring it for
sale to the place whence thou stolest it?" "I will not tell my
tale save to the Sultan, for that I have a profitable counsel
wherewith I would fief bespeak him." "Name it!" "Art thou the
Sultan?" "No!" "I'll not tell it save to himself." Accordingly
the Wali carried him up to the Sultan and he said I have a
counsel for thee, O my lord." Asked the Sultan, "What is thy
counsel?" And the thief said, "I repent and will deliver into thy
hand all who are evildoers, and whomsoever I bring not, I will
stand in his stead." Cried the Sultan, "Give hum a robe of honour
and accept his profession of penitence." So he went down from the
presence and returning to his comrades, related to them that
which had passed, when they confessed his subtlety and gave him
that which they had promised him. Then he took the rest of the
booty and went up therewith to the Sultan, who, seeing him,
recognised him and he was magnified in the royal eyes and the
king commanded that naught should be taken from him. After this,
when he went down, the Sultan's attention was diverted from him,
little by little, till the case was forgotten, and so he saved
the booty for himself. Those present marvelled at this and the
fifteenth constable came forward and said, "Know that among those
who make a trade of trickery are those whom Allah Almighty taketh
on their own testimony against themselves." It was asked him,
"How so?" and he began to relate




The Fifteenth Constable's History.[FN#125]



It is told of a thieving person, one of the braves, that he used
to rob and cut the way by himself upon caravans, and whenever the
Chief of Police and the Governors sought him, he would flee from
them and fortify himself in the mountains. Now it came to pass
that a certain man journeyed along the road wherein was that
robber, and this man was single-handed and knew not the sore
perils besetting his way. So the highwayman came out upon him and
said to him, "Bring out that which is with thee, for I mean to
kill thee and no mistake. ' Quoth the traveller, "Kill me not,
but annex these saddle-bags and divide that which is in them and
take to thee the fourth part." And the thief answered, "I will
not take aught but the whole."[FN#126] Rejoined the traveller,
"Take half, and let me go;" but the robber replied, "I will have
naught but the whole, and eke I will kill thee." So the wayfarer
said, "Take it." Accordingly the highwayman took the saddle-bags
and offered to slay the traveller, who said, "What is this? Thou
hast against me no blood-feud that should make my slaughter
incumbent." Quoth the other, "Needs must I kill thee;" whereupon
the traveller dismounted from his horse and grovelled before him,
beseeching the thief and bespeaking him fair. The man hearkened
not to his prayers, but cast him to the ground; whereupon the
traveller raised his eyes and seeing a francolin dying over him,
said, in his agony, "O Francolin,[FN#127] bear testimony that
this man slayeth me unjustly and wickedly; for indeed I have
given him all that was with me and entreated him to let me go,
for my children's sake; yet would he not consent. But be thou
witness against him, for Allah is not unmindful of deeds which
the oppressors do." The highwayman paid no heed to what he heard,
but smote him and cut off his head. After this, the rulers
compounded with the highwayman for his submission, and when he
came before them, they enriched him and he became in such favour
with the lieutenant of the Sultan that he used to eat and drink
with him and there befel between them familiar converse which
lasted a long while till in fine there chanced a curious chance.
The lieutenant of the Sultan one day of the days made a banquet,
and therein was a roasted francolin, which when the robber saw,
he laughed a loud laugh. The lieutenant was angered against him
and said to him, "What is the meaning of thy laughter? Seest thou
any fault or dost thou mock at us, of thy lack of good manners?"
Answered the highwayman, "Not so, by Allah, O my lord; but I saw
yonder francolin, which brought to my mind an extraordinary
thing; and 'twas on this wise. In the days of my youth, I used to
cut the way, and one day I waylaid a man, who had with him a pair
of saddle-bags and money therein. So I said to him, 'Leave these
saddle-bags, for I mean to slay thee.' Quoth he, 'Take the fourth
part of that which is in them and leave me the rest;' and quoth
I, 'Needs must I take the whole and kill thee without mistake.'
Then said he, 'Take the saddle bags and let me wend my way;' but
I answered, 'There is no help but that I slay thee.' As we were
in this contention, behold, he saw a francolin and turning to it,
said, 'Bear testimony against him, O Francolin, that he slayeth
me unjustly and letteth me not go to my children, for all he hath
taken my money.' However, I had no pity on him neither hearkened
to that which he said, but smote him and slew him and concerned
not myself with the evidence of the francolin." His story
troubled the lieutenant of the Sultan and he was enraged against
him with sore rage; so he drew his sword and smiting him, cut off
his head while he sat at table; whereupon a voice recited these
couplets--

"An wouldst not be injured, injure not; * But do good and from
     Allah win goodly lot,
For what happeth by Allah is doomed to be * Yet shine acts are
     the root I would love thee wot."[FN#128]

Now this voice was the francolin which bore witness against him.
The company present marvelled at this tale and all cried, "Woe to
the oppressor!" Then came forward the sixteenth constable and
said, "And I for another will tell you a marvellous story which
is on this wise."




The Sixteenth Constable's History.



I went forth one day of the days, intending to travel, and
suddenly fell upon a man whose wont it was to cut the way. When
he came up with me he offered to slay me and I said to him, "I
have naught with me whereby thou mayst profit." Quoth he, "My
profit shall be the taking of thy life." I asked, "What is the
cause of this? Hath there been enmity between us aforetime?" and
he answered, "Nay; but needs must I slay thee." Thereupon I ran
away from him to the river side; but he caught me up and casting
me to the ground, sat down on my breast. So I sought help of the
Shaykh of the Pilgrims[FN#129] and cried to him, "Protect me from
this oppressor!" And indeed he had drawn a knife to cut my throat
when, lo and behold! there came a mighty great crocodile forth of
the river and snatching him up from off my breast plunged into
the water, with him still hending knife in hand, even within the
jaws of the beast: whilst I abode extolling Almighty Allah, and
rendering thanks for my preservation to him who had delivered me
from the hand of that wrong-doer.[FN#130]




            TALE OF HARUN AL-RASHID AND ABDULLAH BIN
                         NAFI'.[FN#131]



Know thou, O King of the Age, that there was in days of yore and
in ages and times long gone before, in the city of Baghdad the
Abode of Peace, a Caliph Harun al-Rashid highs, and he had cup-
companions and tale-tellers to entertain him by night. Among his
equerries was a man named Abdullah bin Nafi', who stood high in
favour with him and dear to him, so that he did not forget him a
single hour. Now it came to pass, by the decree of Destiny, that
it became manifest to Abdullah how he was grown of small account
with the Caliph, who paid no heed unto him nor, if he absented
himself, did he ask after him, as had been his habit. This was
grievous to Abdullah and he said within himself, "Verily, the
soul of the Commander of the Faithful and his Wazir are changed
towards me and nevermore shall I see in him that cordiality and
affection wherewith he was wont to treat me." And this was
chagrin-full to him and concern grew upon him, so that he recited
these couplets:--

"Whoso's contemned in his home and land * Should, to better his
     case, in self-exile hie:
So fly the house where contempt awaits, * Nor on fires of grief
     for the parting fry;
Crude Ambergris[FN#132] is but offal where * 'Tis born; but
     abroad on our necks shall stye;
And Kohl at home is a kind of stone, * Cast on face of earth and
     on roads to lie;
But when borne abroad it wins highest worth * And thrones between
     eyelid and ball of eye."

(Quoth the sayer), Then he could brook this matter no longer; so
he went forth from the dominions of the Prince of True Believers,
under presence of visiting certain of his kith and kin, and took
with him nor servant nor comrade, neither acquainted any with his
intent, but betook himself to the road and fared deep into the
wold and the sandwastes, unknowing whither he went. After awhile,
he unexpectedly fell in with travellers who were making the land
of Hind and journeyed with them. When he came thither, he lighted
down in a city of that country and housed him in one of the
lodging-houses; and there he abode a while of days, relishing not
food neither solacing himself with sleep; nor was this for lack
of dirhams or diners, but for that his mind was occupied with
musing upon the shifts of Destiny and bemoaning himself for that
the revolving sphere had turned against him in enmity, and the
days had decreed unto him the disfavour of our lord the
Imam.[FN#133] After such fashion he abode a space of days, and
presently he homed him in the land and took to himself friends
and got him many familiars, with whom he addressed himself to
diversion and good cheer. He used also to go a-pleasuring with
his companions and their hearts were solaced by his company and
he entertained them every evening with stories and displays of
his manifold accomplishments[FN#134] and diverted them with
delectable verses and told them abundance of stories and
histories. Presently, the report of him reached King Jamhur, lord
of Kashgar of Hind, who sent in quest of him, and great was his
desire to see him. So Abdullah repaired to his court and going in
to him, kissed ground before him; and Jamhur welcomed him and
treated him with kindness and bade lodge him in the guest-house,
where he abode three days, at the end of which the king sent to
him a chamberlain of his chamberlains and bade bring him to the
presence. When he came before him, he greeted him, and the
truchman accosted him, saying, "Verily, King Jamhur hath heard of
thy report, that thou art a pleasant cup-companion and an
eloquent teller of night tales, and he would have thee company
with him o'nights and entertain him with that which thou knowest
of histories and pleasant stories and verses." And he made
answer, ' To hear is to obey!" (Quoth Abdullah bin Nafi',) So I
became his boon-companion and entertained him by night with tales
and talk; and this pleased him with the utmost pleasure and he
took me into favour and bestowed on me robes of honour and set
apart for me a lodging; indeed he was bountiful exceedingly to me
and could not brook to be parted from me a single hour. So I
sojourned with him a while of time and every night I caroused and
conversed with him till the most part of the dark hours was past;
and when drowsiness overcame him, he would rise and betake
himself to his sleeping-place, saying to me, Forsake not my
service and forego not my presence.' And I made answer with
'Hearing and obeying.' Now the king had a son, a nice child,
called the Emir Mohammed, who was winsome of youth and sweet of
speech: he had read books and had perused histories and he loved
above all things in the world the telling and hearing of verses
and tales and anecdotes. He was dear to his father King Jamhur,
for that he owned no other son than he on life, and indeed he had
reared him in the lap of love and he was gifted with exceeding
beauty and loveliness, brilliancy and perfect grace: he had also
learnt to play upon the lute and upon all manner instruments and
he was used to converse and company with friends and brethren.
Now it was his wont when the king arose seeking his
sleeping-chamber, to sit in his place and require me to entertain
him with tales and verses and pleasant anecdotes; and on this
wise I abode with them both a great while in all joyance and
delight, and the Prince still loved me with mighty great love and
treated me with the utmost tenderness. It fortuned one day that
the king's son came to me, after his sire had withdrawn, and
cried, 'O Ibn Nafi'!' 'At thy service, O my lord;' 'I would have
thee tell me a wondrous story and a marvellous matter, which thou
hast never related either to me or to my father Jamhur.' 'O my
lord, what story is this that thou desires" of me and what kind
shall it be of the kinds?' 'It mattereth little, so it be a
goodly story, whether it befel of olden tide or in these times.'
'O my lord, I know by rote many stories of various kinds; so
which of the kinds preferrest thou, and wilt thou have a story of
mankind or of Jinn kind?' ' 'Tis well! An thou have espied aught
with shine eyes and heard it with thine ears, tell it me.' Then
he bethought himself and said to me, 'I conjure thee by my life,
tell me a tale of the tales of the Jinn and that which thou hast
heard of them and seen of them!' I replied, 'O my son, indeed
thou conjures" me by a mighty conjuration; so lend an ear to the
goodliest of stories, ay, and the strangest of them and the
pleasantest and rarest.' Quoth the Prince, 'Say on, for I am
attentive to thy speech;' and quoth I, 'Hear then, O my son,




The Tale of the Damsel Tohfat al-Kulub and the Caliph Harun al-
Rashid.



The Viceregent of the Lord of the three Worlds, Harun al-Rashid,
had a boon companion of the number of his boon-companions, by
name Ishak bin Ibrahim al-Nadim al-Mausili,[FN#135] who was the
most accomplished of the folk of his time in smiting upon the
lute; and of the Commander of the Faithful's love for him, he set
apart for him a palace of the choicest of his palaces, wherein he
was wont to instruct hand-maidens in the arts of singing and of
lute playing. If any slave-girl became, by his instruction,
clever in the craft, he carried her before the Caliph, who bade
her perform upon the lute; and if she pleased him, he would order
her to the Harim; else would he restore her to Ishak's palace.
One day, the Commander of the Faithful's breast was straitened;
so he sent after his Wazir Ja'afar the Barmecide and Ishak the
cup-companion and Masrur the eunuch, the Sworder of his
vengeance; and when they came, he changed his habit and disguised
himself, whilst Ja'afar and Ishak and Masrur and al-Fazl[FN#136]
and Yunus[FN#137] (who were also present) did the like. Then he
went out, he and they, by the postern, to the Tigris and taking
boat fared on till they came to near Al Taf,[FN#138] when they
landed and walked till they came to the gate of the high street.
Here there met them an old man, handsome in his hoariness and of
a venerable bearing and a dignified, agreeable of aspect and
apparel. He kissed the earth before Ishak al-Mausili (for that he
knew only him of the company, the Caliph being disguised, and
deemed the others certain of his friends), and said to him, "O my
lord, there is presently with me a hand-maid, a lutanist, never
saw eyes the like of her nor the like of her grace, and indeed I
was on my way to pay my respects to thee and give thee to know of
her, but Allah, of His favour, hath spared me the trouble. So now
I desire to show her to thee, and if she take thy fancy, well and
good; otherwise I will sell her." Quoth Ishak, "Go before me to
thy quarters,[FN#139] till I come to thee and see her." The old
man kissed his hand and went away; whereupon quoth Al-Rashid to
him, "O Ishak, who is yonder man and what is his want?" The other
replied, "O my lord, this is a man Sa'id the Slave-dealer hight,
and 'tis he that buyeth us maidens and Mamelukes. He declareth
that with him is a fair slave, a lutanist, whom he hath withheld
from sale, for that he could not fairly sell her till he had
passed her before me in review." Quoth the Caliph, "Let us go to
him so we may see her, by way of solace, and sight what is in the
slave-dealer's quarters of slave-girls;" and quoth Ishak,
"Command belongeth to Allah and to the Commander of the Faithful"
Then he forewent them and they followed in his track till they
came to the slave-dealer's quarters and found a building tall of
wall and large of lodgment, with sleeping cells and chambers
therein, after the number of the slave-girls, and folk sitting
upon the wooden benches. So Ishak entered, he and his company and
seating themselves in the place of honour, amused themselves by
looking at the hand-maids and Mamelukes and watching how they
were bought and sold, till the vending came to an end, when some
of the folk went away and some remained seated. Then cried the
slave-dealer, "Let none sit with us except whoso purchaseth by
the thousand diners and upwards." Accordingly those present
withdrew and there remained none but Al-Rashid and his suite;
whereupon the slave-dealer called the damsel, after he had caused
set her a chair of Fawwak,[FN#140] lined with Grecian brocade,
and she was like the sun shining high in the shimmering sky. When
she entered, she saluted and sitting down, took the lute and
smote upon it, after she had touched its strings and tuned it, so
that all present were amazed. Then she sang thereto these
couplets:

"Breeze o' Morn, an thou breathe o'er the loved one's land, *
     Deliver my greeting to all the dear band!
And declare to them still I am pledged to their love * And my
     long~ng excels all that lover unmanned:
O ye who have blighted my heart, ears and eyes, * My passion and
     ecstasy grow out of hand;
And torn is my sprite every night with desire, * And nothing of
     sleep can my eyelids command."

Ishak exclaimed, "Brave, O damsel! By Allah, this is a fair
hour!" Whereupon she sprang up and kissed his hand, saying, 'O my
lord, in very sooth the hands stand still before thy presence and
the tongues at thy sight, and the eloquent when confronting thee
wax dumb; but thou art the looser of the veil."[FN#141] Then she
clung to him and cried, "Stand;" so he stood and said to her,
"Who art thou and what is thy need?" She raised a corner of the
veil, and behold she was a damsel as she were the full moon
rising or the levee glancing, with two side-locks of hair which
fell down to her anklets. She kissed his hand and said to him, "O
my lord, know that I have been in these quarters some five
months, during which I have withheld myself from sale till thou
shouldst be present and see me; and yonder slave-dealer also made
thy coming a pretext for not vending me, and forbade me for all I
sought of him night and day that he should cause thee come hither
and vouchsafe me thy company and gar me and thee forgather."
Quoth Ishak, "Tell me what thou wouldst have;" and quoth she, "I
beseech thee, by Allah Almighty, that thou buy me, so I may be
with thee by way of service." He asked, "Is that thy desire?" and
she answered, "Yes." So Ishak returned to the slave-dealer and
said to him, "Ho thou, Shaykh Sa'id!" Said the old man, "At thy
service, O my lord," and Ishak continued, "In the corridor is a
chamber and therein wones a damsel pale and wan. What is her
price in dirhams and how much cost thou ask for her?" Quoth the
slave-dealer, "She whom thou mentionest, O my lord, is called
Tohfat al-Humaka?"[FN#142] Ishak asked, "What is the meaning of
Al-Humaka?" and the old man answered, "Her price hath been
weighed and paid an hundred times and she still saith, Show me
him who would buy me; and when I show her to him she saith, This
one I mislike; he hath in him such and such a default. And in
every one who would fain buy her she noteth some defect or other,
so that none careth now to purchase her and none seeketh her, for
fear lest she find some fault in him." Quoth Ishak, "She seeketh
at this present to sell herself; so go thou to her and inquire of
her and see her price and send her to the palace." Quoth Sa'id!"
"O my lord, her price is an hundred diners, though, were she free
of this paleness that is upon her face, she would be worth a
thousand gold pieces; but wanton folly and wanness have
diminished her value; and behold I will go to her and consult her
of this." So he betook himself to her and enquired of her, "Wilt
thou be sold to Ishak bin Ibrahim al-Mausili?" She replied,
"Yes," and he said, "Leave folly, for to whom cloth it happen to
be in the house of Ishak the cup-companion?"[FN#143] Thereupon
Ishak went forth the slave-dealer's quarters and overtook Al-
Rashid who had preceded him; and they ceased not walking till
they came to their landing-place, where they embarked in the boat
and fared on to Thaghr al-Khanakah.[FN#144] As for the slave-
dealer, he sent the damsel to the house of Ishak al-Nadim, whose
slave-girls took her and carried her to the Hammam. Then each
damsel gave her somewhat of her gear and they decked her with
earrings and bracelets, so that she redoubled in beauty and
became as she were the moon on the night of its full. When Ishak
returned home from the Caliph's palace, Tohfah rose to him and
kissed his hand; and he saw that which the hand-maids had done
with her and thanked them for so doing and said to them, "Let her
home in the house of instruction and bring her instruments of
music, and if she be apt at song teach her; and may Allah
Almighty vouchsafe her health and weal!" So there passed over her
three months, while she homed with him in the house of
instruction, and they brought her the instruments of music.
Furthermore, as time went on she was vouchsafed health and
soundness and her beauty waxed many times brighter than before
and her pallor was changed to white and red, so that she became a
seduction to all who saw her. One day, Ishak bade summon all who
were with him of slave-girls from the house of instruction and
carried them up to Al-Rashid's palace, leaving none in his house
save Tohfah and a cookmaid; for that he thought not of Tohfah,
nor did she come to his memory, and none of the damsels reminded
him of her. When she saw that the house was empty of the slave-
girls, she took the lute (now she was singular in her time for
smiting upon the lute, nor had she her like in the world, no, not
Ishak himself, nor any other) and sang thereto these couplets:--

"When soul desireth one that is its mate * It never winneth dear
     desire of Fate:
My life for him whose tortures tare my frame, * And dealt me pine
     he can alone abate!
He saith (that only he to heal mine ill, * Whose sight is
     medicine to my doleful state),
'O scoffer-wight, how long wilt mock my woe * As though did Allah
     nothing else create?' "

Now Ishak had returned to his house on an occasion that called
for him; and when he entered the vestibule, he heard a sound of
singing, the like whereof he had never heard in the world, for
that it was soft as the breeze and more strengthening than
oil[FN#145] of almonds. So the pleasure of it get hold of him and
delight so seized him, that he fell down fainting in the
vestibule. Tohfah heard the noise of footfalls and laying the
lute from her hand, went out to see what was the matter. She
found her lord Ishak lying aswoon in the entrance; so she took
him up and strained him to her bosom, saying, "I conjure thee in
Allah's name, O my lord, tell me, hath aught of ill befallen
thee?" When he heard her voice, he recovered from his fainting
and asked her, "Who art thou?" She answered, "I am thy slave-
girl, Tohfah;" and he said to her, "Art thou indeed Tohfah?"
"Yes," replied she; and he, "By Allah, I had indeed forgotten
thee and remembered thee not till this moment!" Then he looked at
her and said, "Verily, thy case is altered to other case and thy
wanness is changed to rosiness and thou hast redoubled in beauty
and loveliness. But was it thou who was singing just now?" She
was troubled and affrighted and answered, "Even I, O my lord;"
whereupon Ishak seized upon her hand and carrying her into the
house, said to her, "Take the lute and sing; for never saw I nor
heard thy like in smiting upon the lute; no, not even myself!"
Quoth she, "O my lord, thou mockest me. Who am I that thou
shouldst say all this to me? Indeed, this is but of thy
kindness." Quoth he, "Nay, by Allah, I said but the truth to thee
and I am not of those on whom presence imposeth For these three
months nature hath not moved thee to take the lute and sing
thereto, and this is naught save a rare thing and a strange. But
all this cometh of strength in the art and thy self-restraint."
Then he bade her sing; and she said, "Hearkening and obedience."
So she took the lute and tightening its strings to the sticking-
point, smote thereon a number of airs, so that she confounded
Ishak's wit and for delight he was like to fly. Then she returned
to the first mode and sang thereto these couplets:--

"By your ruined stead aye I stand and stay, * Nor shall change or
     dwelling depart us tway!
No distance of homestead shall gar me forget * Your love, O
     friends, but yearn alway:
Ne'er flies your phantom the babes of these eyne * You are moons
     in Nighttide's murkest array:
And with growing passion mine unrest grows * And each morn I find
     union dissolved in woes."

When she had made an end of her song and laid down the lute,
Ishak looked fixedly on her, then took her hand and offered to
kiss it; but she snatched it from him and said to him, "Allah, O
my lord, do not that!"[FN#146] Cried he, "Be silent. By Allah, I
had said that there was not in the world the like of me; but now
I have found my dinar in the art but a danik,[FN#147] for thou
art more excellent of skill than I, beyond comparison or
approximation or calculation! This very day will I carry[FN#148]
thee up to the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, and
when his glance lighteth on thee, thou wilt become a Princess of
womankind. So Allah, Allah upon thee, O my lady, whenas thou
becomes" of the household of the Prince of True Believers, do not
thou forget me!" She replied, "Allah, O my lord, thou art the
root of my fortunes and in thee is my heart fortified." Thereat
he took her hand and made a covenant with her of this and she
swore to him that she would not forget him Then said he to her,
"By Allah, thou art the desire of the Commander of the Faithful!
Now take the lute and sing a song which thou shalt sing to the
Caliph, when thou goest in to him" So she took the lute and
tuning it, improvised these couplets:--

"His lover hath ruth on his woeful mood * And o'erwept him as
     still by his couch he[FN#149] stood:
And garred him drink of his lip-dews and wine[FN#150] * Ere he
     died and this food was his latest good."

Ishak stared at her and seizing her hand, said to her, "Know that
I am bound by an oath that, when the singing of a damsel pleaseth
me, she shall not end her song but before the Prince of True
Believers. But now tell me, how came it that thou tarriedst with
the slave-dealer five months and wast not sold to any one, and
thou of this skill, especially when the price set on thee was no
great matter?" Hereat she laughed and answered, "O my lord, my
story is a wondrous and my case a marvellous Know that I belonged
aforetime to a Maghribi merchant,who bought me when I was three
years old, and there were in his house many slave-girls and
eunuchs; but I was the dearest to him of them all So he kept me
with him and used not to address me otherwise than, 'O
daughterling,' and indeed to this moment I am a clean maid. Now
there was with him a damsel, a lutanist, and she reared me and
taught me the art, even as thou seest. Then was my master removed
to the mercy of Allah Almighty[FN#151] and his sons divided his
monies. I fell to the lot of one of them; but 'twas only a little
while ere he had wasted all his wealth and there was left him
naught of coin. So I gave up the lute, fearing lest I should fall
into the hand of a man who knew not my worth, for well I wot that
needs must my master sell me; and indeed but a few days passed
ere he carried me forth to the quarters of the slave merchant who
buyeth damsels and displayeth them to the Commander of the
Faithful. Now I desired to learn the art and mystery; so I
refused to be sold to other than thou, until Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) vouchsafed me my desire of thy presence;
whereupon I came out to thee, as soon as I heard of thy coming,
and besought thee to buy me. Thou heartenedst my heart and
broughtest me; and since I entered thy house, O my lord, I have
not taken up the lute till now; but to-day, when I was left
private by the slave-girls, I took it; and my purpose in this was
that I might see if my hand were changed[FN#152] or not. As I was
singing, I heard a footfall in the vestibule; so springing up, I
laid the lute from my hand and going forth to see what was to do,
found thee, O my lord, after this fashion." Quoth Ishak, "Indeed,
this was of thy fair fortune. By Allah, I know not that which
thou knowest in this art!" Then he arose and opening a chest,
brought out therefrom striped clothes,[FN#153] netted with jewels
and great pearls and other costly gems and said to her, "In the
name of Allah, don these, O my lady Tohfah." So she arose and
donned that dress and veiled herself and went up with Ishak to
the palace of the Caliphate, where he made her stand without,
whilst he himself went in to the Prince of True Believers (with
whom was Ja'afar the Barmaki) and kissing the ground before him,
said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful, I have brought thee a
damsel, never saw eyes of seer her like for excellence in singing
and touching the lute; and her name is Tohfah." Al-Rashid asked,
"And where be this Tohfah[FN#154] who hath not her like in the
world?" Answered Ishak, "Yonder she standeth, O Commander of the
Faithful ;" and he acquainted the Caliph with her case from first
to last. Then said Al-Rashid, " 'Tis a marvel to hear thee praise
a slave-girl after this fashion. Admit her that we may look upon
her, for verily the morning may not be hidden." Accor