dingly,
Ishak bade admit her; so she entered, and when her eyes fell upon
the Prince of True Believers, she kissed ground before him and
said, "The Peace be upon thee, O Commander of the faithful Fold
and Asylum of all who the true Creed hold and Quickener of
justice in the Worlds threefold! Allah make thy feet tread on
safest wise and give thee joy of what He gave thee in generous
guise and make thy harbourage Paradise and Hell-fire that of
thine enemies!" Quoth Al-Rashid, "And on thee be the Peace, O
damsel! Sit." So she sat down and he bade her sing; whereupon she
took the lute and tightening its strings, played thereon in many
modes, so that the Prince of True Believers and Ja'afar were
confounded in sprite and like to fly for delight. Then she
returned to the first mode and improvised these couplets:--

"O mine eyes! I swear by him I adore, * Whom pilgrims seek
     thronging Arafat;
An thou call my name on the grave of me, * I'll reply to thy call
     tho' my bones go rot:
I crave none for friend of my heart save thee; * So believe me,
     for true are the well-begot."

Al-Rashid considered her comeliness and the goodliness of her
singing and her eloquence and what other qualities she comprised
and rejoiced with joy exceeding; and for the stress of that which
overcame him of delight, he descended from the couch and sitting
down with her upon the floor, said to her, "Thou hast done well,
O Tohfah. By Allah, thou art indeed a choice gift!"[FN#155] Then
he turned to Ishak and said to him, "Thou dealtest not justly, O
Ishak, in the description of this damsel, nor didst thou fairly
set forth all that she comprised of charms and art; for that, by
Allah, she is inconceivably more skilful than thou; and I know of
this craft that which none knowest save I!" Exclaimed the Wazir
Ja'afar, "By Allah, thou sayst sooth, O my lord, O Commander of
the Faithful. Indeed, she hath done away my wit, hath this
damsel." Quoth Ishak, "By Allah, O Prince of True Believers, I
had said that there was not on the face of the earth one who knew
the art of the lute like myself; but when I heard her, my skill
became nothing worth in mine eyes." Then said the Caliph to her,
"Repeat thy playing, O Tohfah." So she repeated it and he cried
to her, "Well done!" Moreover, he said to Ishak, "Thou hast
indeed brought me a marvellous thing, one which is worth in mine
eyes the empire of the world." Then he turned to Masrur the
eunuch and said to him, "Carry Tohfah to the chamber of honour."
Accordingly, she went away with the Castrato and the Caliph
looked at her raiment and ornaments and seeing her clad in
clothing of choice, asked Ishak, "O Ishak, whence hath she these
robes?" Answered he, "O my lord, these are somewhat of thy
bounties and thy largesse, and they are a gift to her from me. By
Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, the world, all of it, were
little in comparison with her!" Then the Caliph turned to the
Wazir Ja'afar and said to him, "Give Ishak fifty thousand dirhams
and a robe of honour of the choicest apparel." "Hearing and
obeying," replied Ja'afar and gifted him with that which the
Caliph ordered him. As for Al-Rashid, he was private with Tohfah
that night and found her a pure virgin and rejoiced in her; and
she took high rank in his heart, so that he could not suffer her
absence a single hour and committed to her the keys of the
affairs of the realm, for that which he saw in her of good
breeding and fine wit and leal will. He also gave her fifty
slave-girls and two hundred thousand diners and a quantity of
raiment and ornaments, gems and jewels worth the kingdom of
Egypt; and of the excess of his love for her, he would not
entrust her to any of the hand-maids or eunuchs; but, whenever he
went out from her, he locked the door upon her and took the key
with him, against he should return to her, forbidding the damsels
to go in to her, of his fear lest they should slay her or poison
her or practice on her with the knife; and in this way he abode
awhile. One day, as she sang before the Commander of the
Faithful, he was delighted with exceeding delight, so that he
offered to kiss her hand;[FN#156] but she drew it away from him
and smote upon her lute and broke it and wept. Al-Rashid wiped
away her tears and said, "O desire of the heart, what is it
maketh thee weep? May Allah not cause an eye of shine to shed
tears!" Said she, "O my lord, what am I that thou shouldst kiss
my hand? Wilt thou have Allah punish me for this and my term come
to an end and my felicity pass away? For this is what none ever
attained unto." He rejoined, "Well said, O Tohfah. Know that thy
rank in my esteem is high and for that which delighted me of what
I saw in thee, I offered to do this, but I will not return unto
the like thereof; so be of good cheer, with eyes cool and clear,
for I have no desire to other than thyself and will not die but
in the love of thee, and thou to me art queen this day, to the
exclusion of al! humankind." Therewith she fell to kissing his
feet; and this her fashion pleased him, so that his love for her
redoubled and he became unable to brook severance from her a
single hour. Now Al-Rashid one day went forth to the chase and
left Tohfah in her pavilion. As she sat perusing a book, with a
candle-branch of gold before her, wherein was a perfumed candle,
behold, a musk-apple fell down before her from the top of the
saloon.[FN#157] So she looked up and beheld the Lady Zubaydah
bint al-Kasim,[FN#158] who saluted her with a salam and
acquainted her with herself, whereupon Tohfah sprang to her feet
and said, "O my lady, were I not of the number of the
new,[FN#159] I had daily sought thy service; so do not thou
bereave me of those noble steps."[FN#160] The Lady Zubaydah
called down blessings upon her and replied, "I knew this of thee;
and, by the life of the Commander of the Faithful, but that it is
not of my wont to go forth of my place, I had come out to do my
service to thee." Then quoth she to her, "Know, O Tohfah, that
the Commander of the Faithful hath deserted all his concubines
and favourites on shine account, even myself hath he abandoned on
this wise, and I am not content to be as one of the mistresses;
yet hath he made me of them and forsaken me, and I have sought
thee, so thou mayst beseech him to come to me, though it be but
once a month, in order that I may not be the like of the hand-
maids and concubines nor take rank with the slave-girls; and this
is my need of thee." Answered Tohfah, "Hearkening and obedience!
By Allah, O my lady, I would that he might be with thee a whole
month and with me but one night, so thy heart might be heartened,
for that I am one of thy hand-maids and thou in every case art my
lady." The Princess Zubaydah thanked her for this and taking
leave of her, returned to her palace. When the Caliph came back
from the chase and course, he betook himself to Tohfah's pavilion
and bringing out the key, opened the lock and went in to her. She
rose to receive him and kissed his hand, and he gathered her to
his breast and seated her on his knee.[FN#161] Then food was
brought to them and they ate and washed their hands; after which
she took the lute and sang, till Al-Rashid was moved to sleep.
When aware of this, she ceased singing and told him her adventure
with the Lady Zubaydah, saying, "O Prince of True Believers, I
would have thee favour me with a favour and hearten my heart and
accept my intercession and reject not my supplication, but fare
thee forthright to the Lady Zubaydah." Now this talk befel after
he had stripped himself naked and she also had doffed her dress;
and he said, "Thou shouldst have named this ere we stripped
ourselves naked, I and thou!" But she answered, say ing, "O
Commander of the Faithful, I did this not except in accordance
with the saying of the poet in these couplets,

"Of all intercessions can none succeed, * Save whatso Tohfah bint
     Marjan sue'd:
No intercessor who comes enveiled;[FN#162] * She sues the best
     who sues mother-nude."

When Al-Rashid heard this, her speech pleased him and he strained
her to his bosom. Then he went forth from her and locked the door
upon her, as before; whereupon she took the book and sat perusing
it awhile. Presently, she set it aside and taking the lute,
tightened its strings; and smote thereon, after a wondrous
fashion, such as would have moved inanimate things to dance, and
fell to singing marvellous melodies and chanting these couplets:-
-

"Cease for change to wail,* The world blames who rail
Bear patient its shafts  * That for aye prevail.
How often a joy          * Grief garbed thou shalt hail
How oft gladding bliss   * Shall appear amid bale!"

Then she turned and saw within the chamber an old man, handsome
in his hoariness and stately of semblance, who was dancing in
goodly and winning wise, a dance whose like none might dance. So
she sought refuge with Allah Almighty from Satan the Stoned and
said, "I will not give over what I am about, for whatso the Lord
willeth, He fulfilleth." Accordingly, she went on singing till
the Shaykh came up to her and kissed ground before her, saying,
"Well done, O Highmost of the East and the West! May the world be
not bereaved of thee! By Allah, indeed thou art perfect of
manners and morals, O Tohfat al-Sudur![FN#163] Dost thou know
me?" Cried she, "Nay, by Allah, but methinks thou art of the
Jann." Quoth he, "Thou sayst sooth; I am Abu al-Tawaif[FN#164]
Iblis, and I come to thee every night, and with me thy sister
Kamariyah, for that she loveth thee and sweareth not but by thy
life; and her pastime is not pleasant to her, except she come to
thee and see thee whilst thou seest her not. As for me, I
approach thee upon an affair, whereby thou shalt gain and rise to
high rank with the kings of the Jann and rule them, even as thou
rulest mankind; and to that end I would have thee come with me
and be present at the festival of my daughter's wedding and the
circumcision of my son;[FN#165] for that the Jann are agreed upon
the manifestation of thy command. And she answered, "Bismillah;
in the name of the Lord."[FN#166] So she gave him the lute and he
forewent her, till he came to the Chapel of Ease,[FN#167] and
behold, therein was a door and a stairway. When Tohfah saw this,
her reason fled; but Iblis cheered her with chat. Then he
descended the steps and she followed him to the bottom of the
stair, where she found a passage and they fared on therein, till
they came to a horse standing, ready saddled and bridled and
accoutred. Quoth Iblis, "Bismillah, O my lady Tohfah;" and he
held the stirrup for her. So she mounted and the horse heaved
like a wave under her and putting forth wings soared upwards with
her, while the Shaykh flew by her side; whereat she was
affrighted and clung to the pommel of the saddle;[FN#168] nor was
it but an hour ere they came to a fair green meadow, fresh-
flowered as if the soil thereof were a fine robe, purfled with
all manner bright hues. Amiddlemost that mead was a palace
towering high in air, with crenelles of red gold, set with pearls
and gems, and a two-leaved door; and about the gateway were much
people of the chiefs of the Jann, clad in costliest clothing.
When they saw the Shaykh, they all cried out, saying, "The Lady
Tohfah is come!" And as soon as she reached the palace-gate they
pressed forward in a body, and dismounting her from the horse's
back, carried her into the palace and fell to kissing her hands.
When she entered, she beheld a palace whereof seers ne'er saw the
like; for therein were four halls, one facing other, and its
walls were of gold and its ceilings of silver. It was high-
builded of base, wide of space, and those who descried it would
be posed to describe it. At the upper end of the hall stood a
throne of red gold set with pearls and jewels, up to which led
five steps of silver, and on its right and on its left were many
chairs of gold and silver. Quoth Tohfah, "The Shaykh led me to
the estrade and seated me on a chair of gold beside the throne,
and over the dais was a curtain let down, gold and silver wrought
and broidered with pearls and jewels." And she was amazed at that
which she beheld in that place and magnified her Lord (extolled
and exalted be He!) and hallowed Him. Then the kings of the Jann
came up to that throne and seated themselves thereon; and they
were in the semblance of Adam's sons, excepting two of them, who
appeared in the form and aspect of the Jann, each with one eye
slit endlong and jutting horns and projecting tusks.[FN#169]
After this there came up a young lady, fair of favour and seemly
of stature, the light of whose face outshone that of the waxen
fiambeaux; and about her were other three women, than whom none
fairer abode on face of earth. They saluted Tohfah with the salam
and she rose to them and kissed ground before them whereupon they
embraced her after returning her greeting[FN#170] and sat down on
the chairs aforesaid. Now the four women who thus accosted Tohfah
were the Princess Kamariyah, daughter of King Al-Shisban, and her
sisters; and Kamariyah loved Tohfah with exceeding love. So, when
she came up to her, she fell to kissing and embracing her, and
Shaykh Iblis cried, "Fair befal the accolade! Take me between
you." At this Tohfah laughed and Kamariyah said, "O my sister, I
love thee, and doubtless hearts have their witnesses,[FN#171]
for, since I saw thee, I have loved thee." Replied Tohfah, By
Allah, hearts have sea-like deeps, and thou, by Allah, art dear
to me and I am thy hand-maid." Kamariyah thanked her for this and
kissing her once more said, "These be the wives of the kings of
the Jann: greet them with the salam! This is Queen
Jamrah,[FN#172] that is Queen Wakhimah and this other is Queen
Shararah, and they come not but for thee." So Tohfah rose to her
feet and bussed their hands, and the three queens kissed her and
welcomed her and honoured her with the utmost honour. Then they
brought trays and tables and amongst the rest a platter of red
gold, inlaid with pearls and gems; its raised rims were of or and
emerald, and thereon were graven[FN#173] these couplets:--

To bear provaunt assigned,    * By hands noble designed,
For the gen'rous I'm made     * Not for niggardly hind!
So eat safe all I hold        * And praise God of mankind.

After reading the verses they ate and Tohfah looked at the two
kings who had not changed shape and said to Kamariyah, "O my
lady, what be this feral and that other like unto him? By Allah,
mine eye may not suffer the sight of them." Kamariyah laughed and
answered, "O my sister, that is my sire Al-Shisban and the other
is highs Maymun the Sworder; and of the arrogance of their souls
and their insolence, they consented not to change their created
shapes. Indeed, all whom thou seest here are nature-fashioned
like them; but on shine account they have changed favour, for
fear lest thou be disquieted and for the comforting of thy mind,
so thou mightest become familiar with them and be at thine ease."
Quoth Tohfah, "O my lady, verily I cannot look at them. How
frightful is this Maymun, with his monocular face! Mine eye
cannot brook the sight of him, and indeed I am in affright of
him." Kamariyah laughed at her speech, and Tohfah continued, "By
Allah, O my lady, I cannot fill my eye with the twain!"[FN#174]
Then cried her father Al-Shisban to her, What be this laughing?"
So she bespoke him in a tongue none understood but they two and
acquainted him with that which Tohfah had said; whereat he
laughed a prodigious loud laugh, as it were the roaring thunder.
Presently they ate and the tables were removed and they washed
their hands; after which Iblis the Accursed came up to Tohfah and
said to her, "O my lady, thou gladdenest the place and
enlightenest and embellishes" it with thy presence; but now fain
would these kings hear somewhat of thy singing, for Night hath
dispread her pinions for departure and there abideth of it but a
little." Quoth she, "Hearing and obeying." So she took the lute
and touching its strings with rare touch, played thereon after
wondrous wise, so that it seemed to those who were present as if
the palace surged like a wave with them for the music. Then she
began singing and chanting these couplets,

"Folk of my faith and oath, Peace with you be! * Quoth ye not I
     shall meet you you meet me?
I'll chide you softerwise than breeze o' morn, * Sweeter than
     spring of coolest clarity.
I' faith mine eyelids are with tears chafed sore: * My vitals
     plain to you some cure to see.
My friends! Our union to disunion changed * Was aye my fear for
     'twas my certainty.
I'll plain to Allah of all ills I bore; * For pine and yearning
     misery still I dree."

The kings of the Jann were moved to delight by that sweet singing
and seemly speech and thanked Tohfah therefore; and Queen
Kamariyah rose to her and threw her arms round her neck and
kissed her between the eyes, saying, "By Allah, 'tis good, O my
sister and coolth of mine eyes and core of my heart!" Then said
she, "I conjure thee by Allah, give us more of this lovely
singing;' and Tohfah answered with "To hear is to obey." So she
took the lute and playing thereon in a mode different from the
former fashion, sang these couplets:--

"I, oft as ever grows the pine of me, * Console my soul with hope
     thy sight to see.
Haply shall Allah join our parted lives, * E'en as my fortunes
     far from thee cast He!
Then oh! who thrallest me by force of love--* Seized by fond
     affection's mastery
All hardships easy wax when thou art nigh; * And all the far
     draws near when near thou be.
Ah! be the Ruthful light to lover fond, * Love-lore, frame
     wasted, ready Death to dree!
Were hope of seeing thee cut off, my loved; * After shine absence
     sleep mine eyes would flee!
I mourn no worldly joyance, my delight * Is but to sight thee
     while thou seest my sight."

At this the accursed Iblis was hugely pleased and thrust his
finger up his fundament,[FN#175] whilst Maymun danced and said,
"O Tohfat al-Sudur, soften the sound;[FN#176] for, as pleasure
entereth into my heart, it arresteth my breath and blood." So she
took the lute and altering the tune, played a third air; then she
returned to the first and sang these couplets:--

"The waves of your[FN#177] love o'er my life have rolled; * I
     sink while I see you all aid withhold:
You have drowned my vitals in deeps of your love, * Nor can heart
     and sprite for your loss be consoled:
Deem not I forget my troth after you: * How forget what Allah
     decreed of old?[FN#178]
Love clings to the lover who nights in grief, * And 'plains of
     unrest and of woes ensouled.

The kings and all those who were present rejoiced in this with
joy exceeding and the accursed Iblis came up to Tohfah and
kissing her hand, said to her, "Verily there abideth but little
of the night; so tarry with us till the morrow, when we will
apply ourselves to the wedding[FN#179] and the
circumcision."[FN#180] Then all the Jann went away, whereupon
Tohfah rose to her feet and Iblis said, "Go ye up with Tohfah to
the garden for the rest of the night." So Kamariyah took her and
went with her into the garden, which contained all manner birds,
nightingale and mocking-bird and ringdove and curlew[FN#181] and
other than these of all the kinds. Therein were all manner of
fruits: its channels[FN#182] were of gold and silver and the
water thereof, as it broke forth of its conduits, was like the
bellies of fleeing serpents, and indeed it was as it were the
Garden of Eden.[FN#183] When Tohfah beheld this, she called to
mind her lord and wept sore and said, "I beseech Allah the Most
High to vouchsafe me speedy deliverance and return to my palace
and to my high estate and queendom and glory, and reunion with my
lord and master Al-Rashid." Then she walked about that garden and
saw in its midst a dome of white marble, raised on columns of
black teak whereto hung curtains purfled with pearls and gems.
Amiddlemost this pavilion was a founfain, inlaid with all kinds
of jacinths, and thereon a golden statue of a man and beside it a
little door. She opened the door and found herself in a long
corridor: so she followed it and entered a Hammam-bath walled
with all kinds of costly marbles and floored with a mosaic of
pearls and jewels. Therein were four cisterns of alabaster, one
facing other, and the ceiling of the bath was of glass coloured
with all varieties of colours, such as confounded the
understanding of those who have insight and amazed the wit of
every wight. Tohfah entered the bath, after she had doffed her
dress, and behold the Hammam basin was overlaid with gold set
with pearls and red balasses and green emeralds and other jewels:
so she extolled Allah Almighty and hallowed Him for the
magnificence of that which she saw of the appointments of that
bath. Then she made her Wuzu-ablution in that basin and
pronouncing the Prohibition,[FN#184] prayed the dawn-prayer and
what else had escaped her of orisons;[FN#185] after which she
went out and walked in that garden among jessamine and lavender
and roses and chamomile and gillyflowers and thyme and violets
and basil royal, till she came to the door of the pavilion
aforesaid. There she sat down, pondering that which would betide
Al-Rashid after her, when he should come to her apartment and
find her not; and she plunged into the sea of her solicitude,
till slumber overtook her and soon she slept. Presently she felt
a breath upon her face; whereupon she awoke and found Queen
Kamariyah kissing her, and with her her three sisters, Queen
Jamrah, Queen Wakhimah and Queen Shararah. So she arose and
kissed their hands and rejoiced in them with the utmost joy and
they ceased not, she and they, to talk and converse, what while
she related to them her history, from the time of her purchase by
the Maghrabi to that of her coming to the quarters of the slave-
dealer, where she besought Ishak al-Nadim to buy her,[FN#186] and
how she won union with Al-Rashid, till the moment when Iblis came
to her and brought her to them. They gave not over talking till
the sun declined and yellowed and the hour of its setting drew
near and the day departed, whereupon Tohfah was urgent in
supplication[FN#187] to Allah Almighty, on the occasion of the
sundown prayer, that he would reunite her with her lord
Al-Rashid. After this, she abode with the four queens, till they
arose and entered the palace, where she found the waxen tapers
lit and ranged in candlesticks of gold and silver, and censing
vessels of silver and gold filled with lign-aloes and ambergris,
and there were the kings of the Jann sitting. So she saluted them
with the salam, kissing the earth before them and doing them
service; and they rejoiced in her and in her sight. Then she
ascended the estrade and sat down upon her chair, whilst King Al-
Shisban and King Al Muzfir[FN#188] and Queen Luluah and other
kings of the Jann sat on chairs, and they brought choice tables,
spread with all manner meats befitting royalties. They ate their
fill; after which the tables were removed and they washed their
hands and wiped them with napkins. Then they brought the wine-
service and set on sasses and cups and flagons and beakers of
gold and silver and bowls of crystal and gold, and they poured
out the wines and they filled the flagons. Then Iblis took the
bowl and signed to Tohfah to sing: and she said, "To hear is to
obey!" So she hent the lute in hand and tuning it, sang these
couplets,

"Drink wine, O ye lovers, I rede you alway, * And praise his
     worth who loves night and day;
'Mid the myrtle, narcissus and lavender, * And the scented herbs
     that bedeck the tray."

So Iblis the Damned drank and said, "Brave, O desire of hearts!
But thou owest me still another aria." Then he filled the cup and
signed to her to sing. Quoth she, "Hearkening and obedience, and
chanted these couplets,

"Ye wot, I am whelmed in despair and despight, * Ye dight me
     blight that delights your sight:
Your wone is between my unrest and my eyes; * Nor tears to melt
     you, nor sighs have might.
How oft shall I sue you for justice, and you * With a pining
     death my dear love requite?
But your harshness is duty, your farness near; * Your hate is
     Union, your wrath is delight:
Take your fill of reproach as you will: you claim * All my heart,
     and I reck not of safety or blame."


All present were delighted and the sitting-chamber was moved like
a wave with mirth, and Iblis said, "Brave, O Tohfat al-Sudur!"
Then they left not liquor-bibbing and rejoicing and making merry
and tambourining and piping till the night waned and the dawn
waxed near; and indeed exceeding delight entered into them. The
most of them in mirth was the Shaykh Iblis, and for the stress of
that which befel him of joyance, he doffed all that was on him of
coloured clothes and cast them over Tohfah, and among the rest a
robe broidered with jewels and jacinths, worth ten thousand
diners. Then he kissed the earth and danced and he thrust his
finger up his fundament and hending his beard in hand, said to
her, "Sing about this beard and endeavour after mirth and
pleasance, and no blame shall betide thee for this." So she
improvised and sang these couplets:--

"Barbe of the olden, the one eyed goat! * What words shall thy
     foulness o' deed denote?
Be not of our praises so pompous-proud: * Thy worth for a dock-
     tail dog's I wot.
By Allah, to-morrow shall see me drub * Thy nape with a
     cow-hide[FN#189] and dust thy coat!"

All those present laughed at her mockery of Iblis and wondered at
the wittiness of her visnomy[FN#190] and her readiness in
versifying, whilst the Shaykh himself rejoiced and said to her,
"O Tohfat al-Sudur, verily, the night be gone; so arise and rest
thyself ere the day; and to-orrow there shall be naught save
weal." Then all the kings of the Jinn departed, together with
those who were present of guards; and Tohfah abode alone,
pondering the case of Al-Rashid and bethinking her of how it went
with him after her going, and of what had betided him for her
loss, till the dawn lightened, when she arose and walked about
the palace. Suddenly she saw a handsome door; so she opened it
and found herself in a flower-garden finer than the first--ne'er
saw eyes of seer a fairer than it. When she beheld this garth,
she was moved to delight and she called to mind her lord Al-
Rashid and wept with sore weeping and cried, "I crave of the
bounty of Allah Almighty that my return to him and to my palace
and to my home may be nearhand!" Then she walked about the
parterres till she came to a pavilion, high builded of base and
wide of space, never espied mortal nor heard of a grander than
it. So she entered and found herself in a long corridor, which
led to a Hammam goodlier than that aforetime described, and its
cisterns were full of rose water mingled with musk. Quoth Tohfah,
"Extolled be Allah! Indeed, this[FN#191] is none other than a
mighty great king." Then she pulled off her clothes and washed
her body and made her Ghusl ablution of the whole person[FN#192]
and prayed that which was due from her of prayer from the evening
of the previous day.[FN#193] When the sun rose upon the gate of
the garden and she saw the wonders thereof, with that which was
therein of all manner blooms and streams, and heard the voices of
its birds, she marvelled at what she beheld of the rareness of
its ordinance and the beauty of its disposition and sat musing
over the case of Al-Rashid and pondering what was come of him
after her. Her tears coursed down her cheeks and the Zephyr blew
on her; so she slept and knew no more till she suddenly felt a
breath on her side-face, whereat she awoke in affright and found
Queen Kamariyah kissing her, and she was accompanied by her
sisters, who said, "Rise, for the sun hath set." So Tohfah arose
and making the Wuzu-ablution, prayed her due of prayers[FN#194]
and accompanied the four queens to the palace, where she saw the
wax candles lighted and the kings sitting. She saluted them with
the salam and seated herself upon her couch; and behold, King Al-
Shisban had shifted his semblance, for all the pride of his soul.
Then came up Iblis (whom Allah damn!) and Tohfah rose to him and
kissed his hands. He also kissed her hand and blessed her and
asked, "How deemest thou? Is not this place pleasant, for all its
desertedness and desolation?" Answered she, "None may be desolate
in this place;" and he cried, "Know that this is a site whose
soil no mortal dare tread;" but she rejoined, "I have dared and
trodden it, and this is one of thy many favours." Then they
brought tables and dishes and viands and fruits and sweetmeats
and other matters, whose description passeth powers of mortal
man, and they ate their sufficiency; after which the tables were
removed and the dessert-trays and platters set on, and they
ranged the bottles and flagons and vessels and phials, together
with all manner fruits and sweet-scented flowers. The first to
raise the bowl was Iblis the Accursed, who said, "O Tohfat al-
Sudur, sing over my cup." So she took the lute and touching it,
carolled these couplets,

"Wake ye, Ho sleepers all! and take your joy * Of Time, and boons
     he deigned to bestow;
Then hail the Wine-bride, drain the wine-ptisane * Which, poured
     from flagon, flows with flaming glow:
O Cup-boy, serve the wine, bring round the red[FN#195] * Whose
     draught gives all we hope for here below:
What's worldly pleasure save my lady's face, * Draughts of pure
     wine and song of musico?"

So Iblis drained his bowl and, when he had made an end of his
draught, waved his hand to Tohfah; then, throwing off that which
was upon him of clothes, delivered them to her. The suit would
have brought ten thousand diners and with it was a tray full of
jewels worth a mint of money. Presently he filled again and gave
the cup to his son Al-Shisban, who took it from his hand and
kissing it, stood up and sat down again. Now there was before him
a tray of roses; so he said to her, "O Tohfah, sing thou somewhat
upon these roses." She replied, "Hearkening and obedience," and
chanted these two couplets,

"It proves my price o' er all the flowers that I * Seek you each
     year, yet stay but little stound:
And high my vaunt I m dyed by my lord * Whom Allah made the best
     e'er trod on ground.[FN#196]"

So Al-Shisban drank off the cup in his turn and said, "Brave, O
desire of hearts!" and he bestowed on her that was upon him, to
wit, a dress of cloth-of-pearl, fringed with great unions and
rubies and purfled with precious gems, and a tray wherein were
fifty thousand diners. Then Maymun the Sworder took the cup and
began gazing intently upon Tohfah. Now there was in his hand a
pomegranate-flower and he said to her, "Sing thou somewhat, O
queen of mankind and Jinn kind upon this pomegranate-flower; for
indeed thou hast dominion over all hearts." Quoth she, "To hear
is to obey;" and she improvised and sang these couplets,

"Breathes sweet the zephyr on fair parterre; * Robing lute in the
     flamings that fell from air:
And moaned from the boughs with its cooing rhyme * Voice of
     ring-doves plaining their love and care:
The branch dresses in suit of fine sendal green* And in wine-hues
     borrowed from bloom Gulnare."[FN#197]

Maymun the Sworder drained his bowl and said to her, "Brave, O
perfection of qualities!" Then he signed to her and was absent
awhile, after which he returned and with him a tray of jewels
worth an hundred thousand ducats, which he gave to Tohfah.
Thereupon Kamariyah arose and bade her slave-girl open the closet
behind the Songstress, wherein she laid all that wealth; and
committed the key to her, saying, "Whatso of riches cometh to
thee, lay thou in this closet that is by thy side, and after the
festivities, it shall be borne to thy palace on the heads of the
Jinn." Tohfah kissed her hand and another king, by name
Munir,[FN#198] took the bowl and filling it, said to her, "O
ferry Fair, sing to me over my bowl somewhat upon-the jasmine."
She replied with, "Hearkening and obedience," and improvised
these couplets,

"'Twere as though the Jasmine (when self she enrobes * On her
     boughs) cloth display to my wondering eyne;
In sky of green beryl, which Beauty enclothes, * Star-groups like
     studs of the silvern mine."

Munir drank off his cup and ordered her eight hundred thousand
diners, whereat Kamariyah rejoiced and rising to her feet, kissed
Tohfah on her face and said to her, "Be the world never bereaved
of thee, O thou who lordest it over the hearts of Jinn-kind and
mankind!" Then she returned to her place and the Shaykh Iblis
arose and danced, till all present were confounded; after which
the Songstress said, "Verily, thou embellishes" my festivities, O
thou who commandest men and Jinn and rejoices" their hearts with
thy loveliness and the beauty[FN#199] of thy faithfulness to thy
lord. All that thy hands possess shall be borne to thee in thy
palace and placed at thy service; but now the dawn is nearhand;
so do thou rise and rest thee according to thy custom." Tohfah
turned and found with her none of the Jinn; so she laid her head
on the floor and slept till she had gotten her repose; after
which she arose and betaking herself to the lakelet, made the
Wuzu-ablution and prayed. Then she sat beside the water awhile
and meditated the matter of her lord Al-Rashid and that which had
betided him after her loss and wept with sore weeping. Presently,
she heard a blowing behind her;[FN#200] so she turned and behold,
a Head without a body and with eyes slit endlong: it was of the
bigness of an elephant's skull and bigger and ha] a mouth as it
were an oven and projecting canines as they were grapnels, and
hair which trailed upon the ground. So Tohfah cried, "I take
refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned!" and recited the Two
Preventives;[FN#201] what while the Head drew near her and said,
"Peace be with thee, O Princess of Jinn and men and union-pearl
of her age and her time! Allah continue thee on life, for all the
lapsing of the days, and reunite thee with thy lord the
Imam!"[FN#202] She replied, "And upon thee be Peace; O thou whose
like I have not seen among the Jann!" Quoth the Head, "We are a
folk who may not change their favours and we are highs Ghuls:
mortals summon us to their presence, but we cannot present
ourselves before them without leave. As for me, I have gotten
leave of the Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif to appear before thee and I
desire of thy favour that thou sing me a song, so I may go to thy
palace and question its Haunters[FN#203] concerning the plight of
thy lord after thee and return to thee; and know, O Tohfat al-
Sudur, that between thee and thy lord be a distance of fifty
years' journey for the bona fide traveller." She rejoined,
"Indeed, thou grieves" me anent him between whom and me is fifty
years' journey;" but the Head[FN#204] cried to her, "Be of good
cheer and of eyes cool and clear, for the sovrans of the Jann
will restore thee to him in less than the twinkling of an eye."
Quoth she, "I will sing thee an hundred songs, so thou wilt bring
me news of my lord and that which betided him after me." And
quoth the Head, "Do thou favour me and sing me a song, so I may
go to thy lord and fetch thee tidings of him, for that I desire,
before I go, to hear thy voice, so haply my thirst[FN#205] may be
quenched." So she took the lute and tuning it, sang these
couplets:--

"They have marched, yet no empty stead left they: * They are
     gone, nor heart grieves me that fled be they:
My heart forebode the bereaval of friends; * Allah ne'er bereave
     steads wherefrom sped be they!
Though they hid the stations where led were they, * I'll follow
     till stars fall in disarray!
Ye slumber, but wake shall ne'er fly these lids; * 'Tis I bear
     what ye never bore--well-away!
It had irked them not to farewell who fares * With the parting-
     fires that my heart waylay.
My friends,[FN#206] your meeting to me is much * But more is the
     parting befel us tway:
You're my heart's delight, or you present be * Or absent, with
     you is my soul for aye!"

Thereupon the Head wept exceeding sore and cried, "O my lady,
indeed thou hast solaced my heart, and I have naught but my life;
so take it." She replied, "Nay, an I but knew that thou wouldst
bring me news of my lord Al-Rashid, 'twere fainer to me than the
reign of the world;" and the Head answered her, "It shall be done
as thou desirest." Then it disappeared and returning to her at
the last of the night, said, "O my lady, know that I have been to
thy palace and have questioned one of its Haunters of the case of
the Commander of the Faithful and that which befel him after
thee; and he said, 'When the Prince of True Believers came to
Tohfah's apartment and found her not and saw no sign of her, he
buffeted his face and head and rent his raiment.' Now there was
in thy chamber the Castrato, the chief of thy household, and the
Caliph cried out at him, saying, 'Bring me Ja'afar the Barmaki
and his father and brother at this very moment!' The Eunuch went
out, bewildered in his wit for fear of the King, and when he
stood in the presence of Ja'afar, he said to him, 'Come to the
Commander of the Faithful, thou and thy father and thy brother.'
So they arose in haste and betaking themselves to the presence,
said, 'O Prince of True Believers what may be the matter?' Quoth
he, 'There is a matter which passeth description. Know that I
locked the door and taking the key with me, betook myself to my
uncle's daughter, with whom I lay the night; but, when I arose in
the morning and came and opened the door, I found no sign of
Tohfah.' Quoth Ja'afar, 'O Commander of the Faithful have
patience, for that the damsel hath been snatched away, and needs
must she return, seeing that she took the lute with her, and 'tis
her own lute. The Jinns have assuredly carried her off, and we
trust in Allah Almighty that she will return.' Cried the Caliph,
'This[FN#207] is a thing which may nowise be!' And he abode in
her apartment, nor eating nor drinking, while the Barmecides
besought him to fare forth to the folk; and he weepeth and
tarrieth on such fashion till she shall return. This, then, is
that which hath betided him after thee." When Tohfah heard his
words, they were grievous to her and she wept with sore weeping;
whereupon quoth the Head to her, "The relief of Allah the Most
High is nearhand; but now let me hear somewhat of thy speech." So
she took the lute and sang three songs, weeping the while. The
Head exclaimed, "By Allah, thou hast been bountiful to me, the
Lord be with thee!" Then it disappeared and the season of sundown
came: so she rose and betook herself to her place in the hall;
whereupon behold, the candles sprang up from under the earth and
kindled themselves. Then the kings of the Jann appeared and
saluted her and kissed her hands and she greeted them with the
salam. Presently appeared Kamariyah and her three sisters and
saluted Tohfah and sat down; whereupon the tables were brought
and they ate; and when the tables were removed there came the
wine-tray and the drinking-service. So Tohfah took the lute and
one of the three queens filled the cup and signed to the
Songstress. Now she had in her hand a violet, so Tohfah
improvised these couplets:--

"I'm clad in a leaf-cloak of green; * In an honour-robe
     ultramarine:
I'm a wee thing of loveliest mien * But all flowers as my vassals
     are seen:
An Rose title her 'Morn-pride,' I ween * Nor before me nor after
     she's Queen."

The queen drank off her cup and bestowed on Tohfah a dress of
cloth-of-pearl, fringed with red rubies, worth twenty thousand
ducats, and a tray whereon were ten thousand sequins. All this
while Maymun's eye was upon her and presently he said to her,
"Harkye, Tohfah! Sing to me." But Queen Zalzalah cried out at
him, and said "Desist,[FN#208] O Maymun. Thou sufferest not
Tohfah to pay heed to us." Quoth he, "I will have her sing to
me:" and many words passed between them and Queen Zalzalah cried
aloud at him. Then she shook and became like unto the Jinns and
taking in her hand a mace of stone, said to him, "Fie upon thee!
What art thou that thou shouldst bespeak us thus? By Allah, but
for the respect due to kings and my fear of troubling the session
and the festival and the mind of the Shaykh Iblis, I would
assuredly beat the folly out of thy head!" When Maymun heard
these her words, he rose, with the fire shooting from his eyes,
and said, "O daughter of Imlak, what art thou that thou shouldst
outrage me with the like of this talk?" Replied she, "Woe to
thee, O dog of the Jinn, knowest thou not thy place?" So saying,
she ran at him, and offered to strike him with the mace, but the
Shaykh Iblis arose and casting his turband on the ground cried,
"Out on thee, O Maymun! Thou dost always with us on this wise.
Wheresoever thou art present, thou troublest our pleasure! Canst
thou not hold thy peace until thou go forth of the festival and
this bride-feast be accomplished? When the circumcision is at an
end and ye all return to your dwellings, then do as thou willest.
Fie upon thee, O Maymun! Wottest thou not that Imlak is of the
chiefs of the Jinn? But for my goodname, thou shouldst have seen
what would have betided thee of humiliation and chastisement; yet
on account of the festival none may speak. Indeed thou exceedest;
dost thou not ken that her sister Wakhimah is doughtier[FN#209]
than any of the Jann? Learn to know thyself: hast thou no regard
for thy life?" So Maymun was silent and Iblis turned to Tohfah
and said to her, "Sing to the kings of the Jinns this day and to-
night until the morrow, when the boy will be circumcised and each
shall return to his own place." Accordingly she took the lute and
Kamariyah said to her (now she had a citron in hand), "O my
sister, sing to me somewhat on this citron." Tohfah replied, "To
hear is to obey," and improvising, sang these couplets,

"I'm a dome of fine gold and right cunningly dight; * And my
     sweetness of youth gladdeth every sight:
My wine is ever the drink of kings * And I'm fittest gift to the
     friendliest sprite.

At this Queen Kamariyah rejoiced with joy exceeding and drained
her cup, crying, "Brava! O thou choice Gift of hearts!"
Furthermore, she took off a sleeved robe of blue brocade, fringed
with red rubies, and a necklace of white jewels worth an hundred
thousand ducats, and gave them to Tohfah. Then she passed the cup
to her sister Zalzalah, who hent in her hand herb basil, and she
said to Tohfah, "Sing to me somewhat on this basil." She replied,
"Hearing and obeying," and improvised and sang these couplets,

"I'm the Queen of herbs in the seance of wine * And in Heaven
     Na'im are my name and sign:
And the best are promised, in garth of Khuld, * Repose, sweet
     scents and the peace divine:[FN#210]
What prizes then with my price shall vie? * What rank even mine,
     in all mortals' eyne?"

Thereat Queen Zalzalah rejoiced with joy exceeding and bidding
her treasuress bring a basket, wherein were fifty pairs of
bracelets and the same number of earrings, all of gold, crusted
with jewels of price, whose like nor mankind nor Jinn-kind
possessed, and an hundred robes of vari-coloured brocades and an
hundred thousand ducats, gave the whole to Tohfah. Then she
passed the cup to her sister Shararah, who had in her hand a
stalk of narcissus; so she took it from her and turning to the
Songstress, said to her, "O Tohfah, sing to me somewhat on this."
She replied, "Hearkening and obedience," and improvised these
couplets,

"With the smaragd wand doth my form compare; * 'Mid the finest
     flowers my worth's rarest rare:
My eyes are likened to Beauty's eyne, * And my gaze is still on
     the bright parterre."

When she had made an end of her song, Shararah was moved to
delight exceeding, and drinking off her cup, said to her, "Brava,
O thou choice Gift of hearts!" Then she ordered her an hundred
dresses of brocade and an hundred thousand ducats and passed the
cup to Queen Wakhimah. Now she had in her hand somewhat of
Nu'uman's bloom, the anemone; so she took the cup from her sister
and turning to the Songstress, said to her, "O Tohfah, sing to me
on this." Quoth she, "I hear and I obey," and improvised these
couplets,

"I'm a dye was dyed by the Ruthful's might; * And all confess me
     the goodliest sight:
I began in the dust and the clay, but now * On the cheeks of fair
     women I rank by right."

Therewith Wakhimah rejoiced with joy exceeding and drinking off
the cup, ordered her twenty dresses of Roumi brocade and a tray,
wherein were thirty thousand ducats. Then she gave the cup to
Queen Shu'a'ah,[FN#211] Regent of the Fourth Sea, who took it and
said, "O my lady Tohfah, sing to me on the gillyflower." She
replied, "Hearing and obeying," and improvised these couplets,

"The time of my presence ne'er draws to a close, * Amid all whose
     joyance with mirth o'erflows;
When topers gather to sit at wine * Or in nightly shade or when
     morning shows,
I filch from the flagon to fill the bowls * And the crystal cup
     where the wine-beam glows."

Queen Shu'a'ah rejoiced with joy exceeding and emptying her cup,
gave Tohfah an hundred thousand ducats. Then up sprang Iblis
(whom Allah curse!) and cried, "Verily, the dawn lighteneth;"
whereupon the folk arose and disappeared, all of them, and there
abode not one of them save the Songstress, who went forth to the
garden and entering the Hamman made her Wuzu-ablutions and prayed
whatso lacked her of prayers. Then she sat down and when the sun
rose, behold, there came up to her near an hundred thousand green
birds, which filled the branches of the trees with their
multitudes and they warbled in various voices, whilst Tohfah
marvelled at their fashion. Suddenly, appeared eunuchs, bearing a
throne of gold, studded with pearls and gems and jacinths, both
white and red, and having four steps of gold, together with many
carpets of sendal and brocade and Coptic cloth of silk sprigged
with gold; and all these they spread in the centre of the garden
and setting up the throne thereon, perfumed the place with virgin
musk, Nadd[FN#212] and ambergris. After that, there came a queen;
never saw eyes a fairer than she nor than her qualities; she was
robed in rich raiment, broidered with pearls and gems, and on her
head was a crown set with various kinds of unions and jewels.
About her were five hundred slave-girls high-bosomed maids, as
they were moons, screening her, right and left, and she among
them like the moon on the night of its full, for that she was the
most worthy of them in majesty and dignity. She ceased not
walking till she came to Tohfah, whom she found gazing on her in
amazement; and when the Songstress saw her turn to her, she rose
to her, standing on her feet, and saluted her and kissed ground
between her hands. The queen rejoiced in her and putting out her
hand to her, drew her to herself and seated her by her side on
the couch; whereupon the Songstress kissed her hands and the
queen said to her, "Know, O Tohfah, that all which thou treadest
of these carpets belongeth not to any of the Jinn, who may never
tread them without thy leave,[FN#213] for that I am the queen of
them all and the Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif Iblis sought my permission
to hold festival[FN#214] and prayed me urgently to be present at
the circumcision of his son. So I despatched to him, in my stead,
a slave-girl of my slave-girls, namely, Shu'a'ah Queen of the
Fourth Sea, who is vice-reine of my reign. When she was present
at the wedding and saw thee and heard thy singing, she sent to
me, informing me of thee and setting forth to me thy grace and
amiability and the beauty of thy breeding and thy
courtesy.[FN#215] So I am come to thee, for that which I have
heard of thy charms, and hereby I do thee a mighty great favour
in the eyes of all the Jann."[FN#216] Thereupon Tohfah arose and
kissed the earth and the queen thanked her for this and bade her
sit. So she sat down and the queen called for foods when they
brought a table of gold, inlaid with pearls and jacinth; and
jewels and bearing kinds manifold of birds and viands of various
hues, and the queen said, "O Tohfah, in the name of Allah! Let us
eat bread and salt together, I and thou." Accordingly the
Songstress came forward and ate of those meats and found therein
somewhat the like whereof she had never eaten; no, nor aught more
delicious than it, while the slave-girls stood around the table,
as the white compasseth the black of the eye, and she sat
conversing and laughing with the queen. Then said the lady, "O my
sister, a slave-girl told me of thee that thou saidst, 'How
loathly is what yonder Jinni Maymun eateth!"[FN#217] Tohfah
replied, "By Allah, O my lady, I have not any eye that can look
at him,[FN#218] and indeed I am fearful of him." When the queen
heard this, she laughed till she fell backwards and said "O my
sister, by the might of the graving upon the seal-ring of
Solomon, prophet of Allah, I am queen over all the Jann, and none
dare so much as cast on thee a glance of the eye;" whereat Tohfah
kissed her hand. Then the tables were removed and the twain sat
talking. Presently up came the kings of the Jinn from every side
and kissed ground before the queen and stood in her service; and
she thanked them for this, but moved not for one of them.[FN#219]
Then appeared the Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif Iblis (Allah curse him!)
and kissed the earth before her, saying, "O my lady, may I not be
bereft of these steps!"[FN#220] She replied, "O Shaykh Abu
al-Tawaif, it behoveth thee to thank the bounty of the Lady
Tohfah, who was the cause of my coming." Rejoined he, "Thou
sayest sooth," and kissed ground. Then the queen fared on towards
the palace and there arose and alighted upon the trees an hundred
thousand birds of manifold hues. The Songstress asked, "How many
are these birds?" and Queen Wakhimah answered her, "Know, O my
sister, that this queen is hight Queen al-Shahba[FN#221] and that
she is queen over all the Jann from East to West. These birds
thou seest are of her host, and unless they appeared in this
shape, earth would not be wide enough for them. Indeed, they came
forth with her and are present with her presence at this
circumcision. She will give thee after the measure of that which
hath been given to thee from the first of the festival to the
last thereof;[FN#222] and indeed she honoureth us all with her
presence." Then the queen entered the palace and sat down on the
couch of the circumcision[FN#223] at the upper end of the hall,
where-upon Tohfah took the lute and pressing it to her breast,
touched its strings suchwise that the wits of all present were
bewildered and Shaykh Iblis cried to her, "O my lady Tohfah, I
conjure thee, by the life of this noble queen, sing for me and
praise thyself, and cross me not." Quoth she, "To hear is to
obey; still, but for thine adjuration, I had not done this. Say
me, doth any praise himself? What manner thing is this?" Then she
improvised these couplets:

"In all fetes I'm Choice Gift[FN#224] to the minstrel-race;
Folk attest my worth, rank and my pride of place,
While Fame, merit and praises with honour engrace."

Her verses pleased the kings of the Jann and they cried, "By
Allah, thou sayst sooth!" Then she rose to her feet, hending lute
in hand, and played and sang, whilst the Jinns and the Shaykh Abu
al-Tawaif danced. Presently the Father of the Tribes came up to
her bussing her bosom, and gave her a Brahmani[FN#225] carbuncle
he had taken from the hidden hoard of Yafis bin Nuh[FN#226] (on
whom be the Peace), and which was worth the reign of the world;
its light was as the sheen of the sun and he said to her, "Take
this and be equitable therewith to the people of the world."
[FN#227] She kissed his hand and rejoiced in the jewel and said,
"By Allah, this befitteth none save the Commander of the
Faithful." Now Queen Al-Shahba laughed with delight at the
dancing of Iblis and she said to him, "By Allah, this is a goodly
pavane!" He thanked her for this and said to the Songstress, "O
Tohfah, there is not on earth's face a skilfuller than Ishak
al-Nadim;[FN#228] but thou art more skilful than he. Indeed, I
have been present with him many a time and have shown him
pos