itions[FN#229] on the lute, and there has betided me with him
that which betided. Indeed, the story of my dealings with him is
a long one but this is no time to repeat it; for now I would show
thee a shift on the lute, whereby thou shalt be exalted over all
folk." Quoth she, "Do what seemeth good to thee." So he took the
lute and played thereon a wondrous playing, with rare divisions
and marvellous modulations, and showed her a passage she knew
not; and this was goodlier to her than all that she had gotten.
Then she took the lute from him and playing thereon, sang and
presently returned to the passage which he had shown her; and he
said, "By Allah, thou singest better than I!" As for Tohfah, it
became manifest to her that her former practice was all of it
wrong and that what she had learnt from the Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif
Iblis was the root and foundation of all perfection in the art
and its modes. So she rejoiced in that which she had won of skill
in touching the lute far more than in all that had fallen to her
lot of wealth and honour-robes and kissed the Master's hand. Then
said Queen Al-Shahba, "By Allah, O Shaykh, my sister Tohfah is
indeed singular among the folk of her time, and I hear that she
singeth upon all sweetsmelling blooms." Iblis replied, "Yes, O my
lady, and I am in extremest wonderment thereat. But there
remaineth somewhat of sweet-scented flowers, which she hath not
besung, such as myrtle and tuberose and jessamine and the
moss-rose and the like." Then the Shaykh signed to her to sing
somewhat upon the rest of the flowers, that Queen Al-Shahba might
hear, and she said, "Hearing and obeying." So she took the lute
and played thereon in many modes, then returned to the first and
sang these couplets,

"I'm one of the lover-retinue * Whom long pine and patience have
     doomed rue:
And sufferance of parting from kin and friends * Hath clothed me,
     O folk, in this yellow hue:
Then, after the joyance had passed away, * Heart-break, abasement
     and cark I knew,
Through the long, long day when the lift is light, * Nor, when
     night is murk, my pangs cease pursue:
So, 'twixt fairest hope and unfailing fear, * My bitter tears
     ever flow anew."

Thereat Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced with joy exceeding and cried,
"Brava, O queen of delight! No one is able to describe thee. Sing
to us on the Apple." Quoth Tohfah, "Hearkening and obedience."
Then she recited these couplets,

"I surpass all forms in my coquetry* For mine inner worth and
     mine outer blee;
Tend me noble hands in the sight of all * And slake with pure
     waters the thirst of me;
My robe is of sendal, and eke my veil * Is of sunlight the
     Ruthful hath bidden be:
When my fair companions are marched afar, * In sorrow fro' home
     they are forced to flee:
But noble hands deign hearten my heart * With beds where I sit in
     my high degree; [FN#230]
And where, like full moon at its rise, my light * 'mid the
     garden-fruits thou shalt ever see."

Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced in this with exceeding joy and cried
"Brava! By Allah, there is none excelleth thee." Tohfah kissed
the ground, then returned to her place and versified on the
Tuberose, saying,

"I'm a marvel-bloom to be worn on head! * Though a stranger among
     you fro' home I fled:
Make use of wine in my company * And flout at Time who in
     languish sped.
E'en so cloth camphor my hue attest, * O my lords, as I stand in
     my present stead.
So gar me your gladness when dawneth day, * And to highmost seat
     in your homes be I led:
And quaff your cups in all jollity, * And cheer and ease shall
     ne'er cease to be."

At this Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced with exceeding joy and cried,
"Brava, O queen of delight! By Allah, I know not how I shall do
to give thee thy due! May the Most High grant us the grace of thy
long continuance!" Then she strained her to her breast and bussed
her on the cheek; whereupon quoth Iblis (on whom be a curse!),
"This is a mighty great honour!" Quoth the queen, "Know that this
lady Tohfah is my sister and that her biddance is my biddance and
her forbiddance my forbiddance. So all of you hearken to her word
and render her worshipful obedience." Therewith the kings rose in
a body and kissed ground before Tohfah, who rejoiced in this.
Moreover, Queen Al-Shahba doffed dress and habited her in a suit
adorned with pearls, jewels and jacinths, worth an hundred
thousand ducats, and wrote for her on a slip of paper[FN#231] a
patent appointing her to be her deputy. So the Songstress rose
and kissed ground before the Queen, who said to her, "Of thy
favour, sing to us somewhat concerning the rest of the
sweet-scented flowers and herbs, so I may hear thy chant and
solace myself with witnessing thy skill." She replied, "To hear
is to obey, O lady mine," and, taking the lute, improvised these
couplets,

"My hue excelleth all hues in light, * And I would all eyes
     should enjoy my sight:
My site is the site of fillets and pearls * Where the fairest
     brows are with jasmine dight:
My light's uprist (and what light it shows!) * Is a silvern zone
     on the waist of Night."

Then she changed the measure and improvised these couplets,

"I'm the gem of herbs, and in seasons twain * My tryst I keep
     with my lovers-train:
I stint not union for length of time * Nor visits, though some be
     of severance fain;
The true one am I and my troth I keep, * And, easy of plucking,
     no hand disdain."

Then, changing measure and the mode, she played so that she
bewildered the wits of those who were present, and Queen
Al-Shahba, moved to mirth and merriment, cried, "Brava, O queen
of delight!" Presently she returned to the first mode and
improved these couplets on Nenuphar,

"I fear me lest freke espy me, * In air when I fain deny me;
So I root me beneath the wave, * And my stalks to bow down apply
me."

Hereat Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced with exceeding joy, and cried,
"Brava, O Tohfah! Let me hear more of thy chant." Accordingly,
she smote the lute and changing the mode, recited on the Moss-
rose these couplets,

"Look on Nasrin[FN#232] those branchy shoots surround; * With
     greenest leafery 'tis deckt and crowned:
Its graceful bending stem draws every gaze * While beauteous
     bearing makes their love abound."

Then she changed measure and mode and sang these couplets on the
Water-lily,

"O thou who askest Susan[FN#233] of her scent, * Hear thou my
     words and beauty of my lay.
'Emir am I whom all mankind desire' * (Quoth she) 'or present or
     whenta'en away.'"

When Tohfah had made an end of her song, Queen Al-Shahba rose and
said, "I never heard from any the like of this;" and she drew the
Songstress to her and fell to kissing her. Then she took leave of
her and flew away; and on like wise all the birds took flight
with her, so that they walled the horizon; whilst the rest of the
kings tarried behind. Now as soon as it was the fourth night,
there came the boy who was to be circumcised, adorned with jewels
such as never saw eye nor heard ear of, and amongst the rest a
crown of gold crusted with pearls and gems, the worth whereof was
an hundred thousand sequins. He sat down upon the couch and
Tohfah sang to him, till the chirurgeon[FN#234] came and they
snipped his foreskin in the presence of all the kings, who
showered on him a mighty great store of jewels and jacinths and
gold. Queen Kamariyah bade her Eunuchs gather up all this and lay
it in Tohfah's closet and it was as much in value as all that had
fallen to her, from the first of the festivities to the last
thereof. Moreover, the Shaykh Iblis (whom Allah curse!) bestowed
upon the Songstress the crown worn by the boy and gave the
circumcisee another, whereat Tohfah's reason took flight. Then
the Jinn departed, in order of rank, whilst Iblis farewelled
them, band after band. Seeing the Shaykh thus occupied with
taking leave of the kings, Maymun seized his opportunity, the
place being empty, and taking up Tohfah on his shoulders, soared
aloft with her to the confines of the lift, and flew away with
her. Presently, Iblis came to look for the Songstress and see
what she purposed, but found her not and sighted the slave-girls
slapping their faces: so he said to them, "Fie on you! What may
be the matter?" They replied, "O our lord, Maymun hath snatched
up Tohfah and flown away with her." When Iblis heard this, he
gave a cry whereto earth trembled and said, "What is to be done?"
Then he buffetted his face and head, exclaiming, "Woe to you!
This be none other than exceeding insolence. Shall he carry off
Tohfah from my very palace and attaint mine honour? Doubtless,
this Maymun hath lost his wits." Then he cried out a second time,
so that the earth quaked, and rose on his wings high in air. The
news came to the rest of the kings; so they flew after him and
overtaking him, found him full of anxiety and affright, with fire
issuing from his nostrils, and said to him, "O Shaykh
al-Tawaif,[FN#235] what is to do?" He replied, "Know ye that
Maymun hath carried oh from my palace and attainted mine honour."
When they heard this, they cried, "There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah the Glorious, the Great. By God he hath
ventured upon a grave matter and verily he destroyeth self and
folk!" Then Shaykh Iblis ceased not flying till he fell in with
the tribes of the Jann, and they gathered together a world of
people, none may tell the tale of them save the Lord of
All-might. So they came to the Fortress of Copper and the Citadel
of Lead,[FN#236] and the people of the sconces saw the tribes of
the Jann issuing from every deep mountain-pass[FN#237] and said,
"What be the news?" Then Iblis went in to King Al-Shisban and
acquainted him with that which had befallen; whereupon quoth he,
"Verily, Allah hath destroyed Maymun and his many! He pretendeth
to possess Tohfah, and she is become queen of the Jann! But have
patience till we devise that which befitteth in the matter of
Tohfah." Iblis asked, "And what befitteth it to do?" And
Al-Shisban answered, "We will fall upon him and kill him and his
host with cut of brand." Then quoth Shaykh Iblis, "'Twere better
to acquaint Queen Kamariyah and Queen Zal-zalah and Queen
Shararah and Queen Wakhimah; and when they are assembled, Allah
shall ordain whatso He deemeth good in the matter of her
release." Quoth Al-Shisban, "Right is thy rede" and thy
despatched to Queen Kamariyah an Ifrit hight Salhab who came to
her palace and found her sleeping, so he roused her and she said,
"What is to do, O Salhab?" Cried he, "O my lady, come to the
succour of thy sister the Songstress, for Maymun hath carried her
off and attainted thine honour and that of Shaykh Iblis." Quoth
she, "What sayst thou?" and she sat up straight and cried out
with a great cry. And indeed she feared for Tohfah and said, "By
Allah, in very sooth she used to say that he gazed at her and
prolonged the gaze; but ill is that whereto his soul hath
prompted him." Then she rose in haste and mounting a Sataness of
her Satans, said to her, "Fly." So she flew off with her and
alighted in the palace of her sister Shararah, whereupon she sent
for her sisters Zalzalah and Wakhimah and acquainted them with
the tidings, saying, "Know that Maymun hath snatched up Tohfah
and flown off with her swiftlier than the blinding leven." Then
they all flew off in haste and lighting down in the place where
were their father Al-Shisban and their grandfather the Shaykh Abu
al-Tawaif, found the folk on the sorriest of situations. When
their grandfather Iblis saw them, he rose to them and wept, and
they all wept for the Songstress. Then said Iblis to them,
"Yonder hound hath attainted mine honour and taken Tohfah, and I
think not other wise[FN#238] but that she is like to die of
distress for herself and her lord Al-Rashid and saying, 'The
whole that they said and did was false.'"[FN#239] Quoth
Kamariyah, "O grandfather mine, nothing is left for it but
stratagem and device for her deliverance, for that she is dearer
to me than everything; and know that yonder accursed when he
waxeth ware of your coming upon him, will ken that he hath no
power to cope with you, he who is the least and meanest of the
Jann; but we dread that he, when assured of defeat, will slay
Tohfah; wherefore nothing will serve but that we contrive a
sleight for saving her; else will she perish." He asked, "And
what hast thou in mind of device?" and she answered, "Let us take
him with fair means, and if he obey, all will be well;[FN#240]
else will we practice stratagem against him; and expect not her
deliverance from other than myself." Quoth Iblis, "The affair is
thine; contrive what thou wilt, for that Tohfah is thy sister and
thy solicitude for her is more effectual than that of any other."
So Kamariyah cried out to an Ifrit of the Ifrits and a calamity
of the calamities,[FN#241] by name Al-Asad al-Tayyar, the Flying
Lion and said to him, "Hie with my message to the Crescent
Mountain,[FN#242] the wone of Maymun the Sworder, and enter and
say to him, My lady saluteth thee with the salam and asketh thee,
'How canst thou be assured for thyself of safety, after what thou
hast done, O Maymun? Couldst thou find none to maltreat in thy
drunken humour save Tohfah, she too being a queen? But thou art
excused, because thou didst not this deed, but 'twas thy drink,
and the Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif pardoneth thee, because thou wast
drunken. Indeed, thou hast attainted his honour; but now restore
her to her palace, for that she hath done well and favoured us
and rendered us service, and thou wottest that she is this day
our queen. Belike she may bespeak Queen Al-Shahba, whereupon the
matter will become grievous and that wherein there is no good
shall betide thee; and thou wilt get no title of gain. Verily, I
give thee good counsel, and so the Peace!'" Al-Asad answered
"Hearing and obeying," and flew till he came to the Crescent
Mountain, when he sought audience of Maymun, who bade admit him.
So he entered and kissing ground before him, gave him Queen
Kamariyah's message, which when he heard, he cried to the Ifrit,
"Return whence thou comest and say to thy mistress, 'Be silent
and thou wilt show thy good sense.' Else will I come and seize
upon her and make her serve Tohfah; and if the kings of the Jinn
assemble together against me and I be overcome by them, I will
not leave her to scent the wind of this world and she shall be
neither mine nor theirs, for that she is presently my sprite
[FN#243] from between my ribs; and how shall any part with his
sprite?" When the Ifrit heard Maymun's words, he said to him, "By
Allah, O Maymun, art thou a changeling in thy wits, that thou
speakest these words of my lady, and thou one of her page-boys?"
Whereupon Maymun cried out and said to him, "Woe to thee, O dog
of the Jinns! Wilt thou bespeak the like of me with these words?"
Then he bade those who were about him bastinado Al-Asad, but he
took flight and soaring high in air, betook himself to his
mistress and told her the tidings: when she said, "Thou hast done
well, O good knight!" Then she turned to her sire and said to
him, "Hear that which I shall say to thee." Quoth he, "Say on;"
and quoth she, "I rede thee take thy troops and go to him, for
when he heareth this, he will in turn levy his many and come
forth to thee; whereupon do thou offer him battle and prolong the
fight with him and make a show to him of weakness and giving way.
Meantime, I will devise me a device for getting at Tohfah and
delivering her, what while he is busied with you in battle; and
when my messenger cometh to thee and informeth thee that I have
gotten possession of Tohfah and that she is with me, return thou
upon Maymun forthwith and overthrow him and his hosts, and take
him prisoner. But, an my device succeed not with him and we fail
to deliver Tohfah, he will assuredly practice to slay her,
without recourse, and regret for her will remain in our hearts."
Quoth Iblis, "This is the right rede" and bade call a march among
the troops, whereupon an hundred thousand knights, doughty wights
of war, joined themselves to him and set out for the country of
Maymun. As for Queen Kamariyah, she flew off to the palace of her
sister Wakhimah, and told her what deed Maymun had done and how
he declared that, whenas he saw defeat nearhand, he would slay
Tohfah; adding, "And indeed, he is resolved upon this; otherwise
had he not dared to work such sleight. So do thou contrive the
affair as thou see fit, for in rede thou hast no superior." Then
they sent for Queen Zalzalah and Queen Shararah and sat down to
take counsel, one with other, concerning what they had best do in
the matter. Presently said Wakhimah, " 'Twere advisable we fit
out a ship in this our island home and embark therein, disguised
as Adam's sons, and fare on till we come to anchor under a little
island that lieth over against Maymun's palace. There will we sit
drinking and smiting the lute and singing; for Tohfah will
assuredly be seated there overlooking the sea, and needs must she
see us and come down to us, whereupon we will take her by force
and she will be under our hands, so that none shall be able to
molest her any more. Or, an Maymun be gone forth to do battle
with the Jinns, we will storm his stronghold and take Tohfah and
raze his palace and slay all therein. When he hears of this, his
heart will be broken and we will send to let our father know,
whereat he will return upon him with his troops and he will be
destroyed and we shall have rest of him." They answered her,
saying, "This is a good counsel." Then they bade fit out a ship
from behind the mountain,[FN#244] and it was fitted out in less
than the twinkling of an eye; so they launched it on the sea and
embarking therein, together with four thousand Ifrits, set out,
intending for Maymun's palace. They also bade other five thousand
Ifrits betake themselves to the island under the Crescent
Mountain and there lie in wait for them ambushed well. Thus fared
it with the kings of the Jann; but as regards Shaykh Abu
al-Tawaif Iblis and his son Al-Shisban the twain set out, as we
have said, with their troops, who were of the doughtiest of the
Jinn and the prowest of them in wing-flying and horse-manship,
and fared on till they drew near the Crescent Mountain. When the
news of their approach reached Maymun, he cried out with a mighty
great cry to the troops, who were twenty thousand riders, and
bade them make ready for departure. Then he went in to Tohfah and
kissing her, said, "Know that thou art this day my life of the
world, and indeed the Jinns are gathered together to wage war on
me for thy sake. An I win the day from them and am preserved
alive, I will set all the kings of the Jann under thy feet and
thou shalt become queen of the world." But she shook her head and
shed tears; and he said, "Weep not, for I swear by the virtue of
the mighty inscription borne on the seal-ring of Solomon, thou
shalt never again see the land of men; no, never! Say me, can any
one part with his life? Give ear, then, to my words; else will I
slay thee." So she was silent. And forthright he sent for his
daughter, whose name was Jamrah,[FN#245] and when she came, he
said to her, "Harkye, Jamrah! Know that I am going to fight the
clans of Al-Shisban and Queen Kamariyah and the Kings of the
Jann. An I be vouch-safed the victory over them, to Allah be the
laud and thou shalt have of me largesse;[FN#246] but, an thou see
or hear that I am worsted and any come to thee with ill news of
me, hasten to kill Tohfah, so she may fall neither to me nor to
them." Then he farewelled her and mounted, saying, "When this
cometh about, pass over to the Crescent Mountain and take up
thine abode there, and await what shall befal me and what I shall
say to thee." And Jamrah answered "Hearkening and obedience." Now
when the Songstress heard these words, she fell to weeping and
wailing and said, "By Allah, naught irketh me but severance from
my lord Al-Rashid; however, when I am dead, let the world be
ruined after me!"[FN#247] And she was certified in herself that
she was assuredly lost. Then Maymun set forth with his army and
departed in quest of the hosts of the Jinn, leaving none in the
palace save his daughter Jamrah and Tohfah and an Ifrit which was
dear to him. They fared on till they met with the army of
Al-Shisban; and when the two hosts came face to face, they fell
each upon other and fought a fight, a passing sore than which
naught could be more. After a while, Al-Shisban's troops began to
give way, and when Maymun saw them do thus, he despised them and
made sure of victory over them. On this wise it befel them; but
as regards Queen Kamariyah and her company they sailed on without
ceasing, till they came under the palace wherein was Tohfah, to
wit, that of Maymun the Sworder; and by the decree of the Lord of
destiny, the Songstress herself was at that very time sitting on
the belvedere of the palace, pondering the affair of Harun
al-Rashid and her own and that which had befallen her and weeping
for that she was doomed to death. She saw the vessel and what was
therein of those we have named, and they in mortal guise, and
said, "Alas, my sorrow for this ship and for the men that be
therein!" As for Kamariyah and her many, when they drew near the
palace, they strained their eyes and seeing the Songstress
sitting, cried, "Yonder sitteth Tohfah. May Allah not bereave us
of her!" Then they moored their craft and, making for the island
which lay over against the palace, spread carpets and sat eating
and drinking; whereupon quoth Tohfah, "Well come and welcome to
yonder faces! These be my kinswomen and I conjure thee by Allah,
O Jamrah, that thou let me down to them, so I may sit with them
awhile and enjoy kindly converse with them and return." Quoth
Jamrah, "I may on no wise do that;" and Tohfah wept. Then the
folk brought out wine and drank, while Kamariyah took the lute
and sang these couplets,

"By Allah, had I never hoped to greet you * Your guide had failed
     on camel to seat you!
Far bore you parting from friend would greet you * Till meseems
     mine eyes for your wone entreat you."

When Tohfah heard this, she cried out so great a cry, that the
folk heard her and Kamariyah said, "Relief is nearhand." Then the
Songstress looked out to them and called to them, saying, "O
daughters of mine uncle, I am a lonely maid, an exile from kin
and country: so for the love of Allah Almighty, repeat that
song!" Accordingly Kamariyah repeated it and Tohfah swooned away.
When she came to herself, she said to Jamrah, "By the rights of
the Apostle of Allah (whom may He save and assain!) unless thou
suffer me go down to them and look on them and sit with them for
a full hour, I will hurl myself headlong from this palace, for
that I am aweary of my life and know that I am slain to all
certainty; wherefore will I kill myself, ere you pass sentence
upon me." And she was instant with her in asking. When Jamrah
heard her words, she knew that, an she let her not down, she
would assuredly destroy herself. So she said to her, "O Tohfah,
between thee and them are a thousand cubits, but I will bring the
women up to thee." The Songstress replied, "Nay, there is no help
but that I go down to them and solace me in the island and look
upon the sea anear; then will we return, I and thou; for that, an
thou bring them up to us, they will be affrighted and there will
betide them neither joy nor gladness. As for me, I wish but to be
with them, that they may cheer me with their company neither give
over their merrymaking, so peradventure I may broaden my breast
with them, and indeed I swear that needs must I go down to them;
else I will cast myself upon them." And she cajoled Jamrah and
kissed her hands, till she said, "Arise and I will set thee down
beside them." Then she took Tohfah under her armpit and flying up
swiftlier than the blinding leven, set her down with Kamariyah
and her company; whereupon she went up to them and accosted them,
saying, "Fear ye not: no harm shall befal you; for I am a mortal,
like unto you, and I would fain look on you and talk with you and
hear your singing." So they welcomed her and kept their places
whilst Jamrah sat down beside them and fell a-snuffing their
odours and saying, "I smell the scent of the Jinn![FN#248] Would
I wot whence it cometh!" Then said Wakhimah to her sister
Kamariyah, "Yonder foul slut smelleth us and presently she will
take to flight; so what be this inaction concerning her?"[FN#249]
Thereupon Kamariyah put out an arm long as a camel's neck, and
dealt Jamrah a buffet on the head, that made it fly from her body
and cast it into the sea. Then cried she, "Allah is
All-great!"[FN#250] And they uncovered their faces, whereupon
Tohfah knew them and said to them, "Protection!" Queen Kamariyah
embraced her, as also did Queen Zalzalah and Queen Wakhimah and
Queen Shararah, and the first-named said to her, "Receive the
good tidings of assured safety, for there abideth no harm for
thee; but this is no time for talk." Then they cried out,
whereupon up came the Ifrits ambushed in that island, hending
swords and maces in hand, and taking up Tohfah, flew her to the
palace and made themselves masters of it, whilst the Ifrit
aforesaid, who was dear to Maymun and whose name was
Dukhan,[FN#251] fled like an arrow and stinted not flying till he
came to Maymun and found him fighting a sore fight with the Jinn.
When his lord saw him, he cried out at him, saying, "Fie upon
thee! Whom hast thou left in the palace?" Dukhan answered,
saying, "And who abideth in the palace? Thy beloved Tohfah they
have captured and Jamrah is slain and they have taken the palace,
all of it." At these ill tidings Maymun buffeted his face and
head and said, "Oh! Out on it for a calamity!" Then he cried
aloud. Now Kamariyah had sent to her sire and reported to him the
news, whereat the raven of the wold[FN#252] croaked for the foe.
So, when Maymun saw that which had betided him (and indeed the
Jinn smote upon him and the wings of eternal severance overspread
his host), he planted the heel of his lance in the earth and
turning its head to his heart, urged his charger thereat and
pressed upon it with his breast, till the point came forth
gleaming from his back. Meanwhile the messenger had made the
friendly host with the news of Tohfah's deliverance, whereat the
Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif rejoiced and bestowed on the bringer of lief
tidings a sumptuous robe of honour and made him commander over a
company of the Jann. Then they charged home upon Maymun's host
and wiped them out to the last man; and when they came to Maymun,
they found that he had slain himself and was even as we have
said. Presently Kamariyah and her sister Wakhimah came up to
their grandfather and told him what they had done; whereupon he
came to Tohfah and saluted her with the salam and congratulated
her on deliverance. Then he made over Maymun's palace to Salhab;
and, taking all the rebel's wealth gave it to the Songstress,
while the troops encamped upon the Crescent Mountain.
Furthermore, the Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif said to Tohfah, "Blame me
not," and she kissed his hands, when behold, there appeared to
them the tribes of the Jinn, as they were clouds, and Queen
Al-Shahba flying in their van, drawn sword in grip. As she came
in sight of the folk, they kissed ground between her hands and
she said to them, "Tell me what hath betided Queen Tohfah from
yonder dog Maymun and why did ye not send to me and report to
me?" Quoth they, "And who was this dog that we should send to
thee on his account? Indeed he was the least and lowest of the
Jinn." Then they told her what Kamariyah and her sisters had done
and how they had practiced upon Maymun and delivered the
Songstress from his hand, fearing lest he should slay her when he
found himself defeated; and she said, "By Allah, the accursed was
wont to lengthen his looking upon her!" And Tohfah fell to
kissing Al-Shahba's hand, whilst the queen strained her to her
bosom and kissed her, saying, "Trouble is past; so rejoice in
assurance of deliverance." Then they rose and went up to the
palace whereupon the trays of food were brought and they ate and
drank; after which quoth Queen Al-Shahba, "O Tohfah, sing to us,
by way of sweetmeat[FN#253] for thine escape, and favour us with
that which shall solace our minds, for that indeed my thoughts
have been occupied with thee." And quoth Tohfah, "Hearkening and
obedience, O my lady." So she improvised and sang these couplets,

"Breeze of East[FN#254] an thou breathe o'er the dear ones' land
     * Speed, I pray thee, my special salute and salam:
And say them I'm pledged to love them and * In pine that passeth
     all pine I am."

Thereat Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced and with her all who were
present; and they admired her speech and fell to kissing her; and
when she had made an end of her song, Queen Kamariyah said to
her, "O my sister, ere thou go to thy palace, I would fain bring
thee to look upon Al-'Anka,[FN#255] daughter of Bahram Jur, whom
Al-'Anka, daughter of the wind, carried off, and her beauty; for
that there is not her fellow on earth's face." And Queen
Al-Shahba said, "O Kamariyah, I also think it were well an I
beheld her." Quoth Kamirayah, "I saw her three years ago; but my
sister Wakhimah seeth her at all times, for she is near to her
people, and she saith that there is not in the world fairer than
she. Indeed, this Queen Al-Anka is become a byword for beauty and
comeliness." And Wakhimah said, "By the mighty inscription on the
seal-ring of Solomon, there is not her like for loveliness here
below." Then said Queen Al-Shahba, "An it needs must be and the
affair is as ye say, I will take Tohfah and go with her to
Al-Anka, so she may look upon her!" So they all arose and
repaired to Al-Anka, who abode in the Mountain Kaf. When she saw
them, she drew near to them and saluted them, saying, "O my
ladies, may I not be bereaved of you!" Quoth Wakhimah to her,
"Who is like unto thee, O Anka? Behold, Queen Al-Shahba is come
to thee." So Al-Anka kissed the Queen's feet and lodged them in
her palace; whereupon Tohfah came up to her and fell to kissing
her and saying, "Never saw I seemlier than this semblance." Then
she set before them somewhat of food and they ate and washed
their hands; after which the Songstress took the lute and smote
it well; and Al-Anka also played, and they fell to improvising
verses in turns, whilst Tohfah embraced Al-Anka every moment.
Al-Shahba cried, "O my sister, each kiss is worth a thousand
dinars;" and Tohfah replied, "And a thousand dinars were little
therefor;" whereat Al-Anka laughed and after nighting in her
pavilion on the morrow they took leave of her and went away to
Maymun's palace. Here Queen Al-Shahba farewelled them and taking
her troops, returned to her capital, whilst the kings also went
away to their abodes and the Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif applied himself
to diverting Tohfah till nightfall, when he mounted her on the
back of one of the Ifrits and bade other thirty gather together
all that she had gotten of treasure and raiment, jewels and robes
of honour. Then they flew off, whilst Iblis went with her, and in
less than the twinkling of an eye he set her down in her sleeping
room, where he and those who were with him bade adieu to her and
went away. When Tohfah found herself in her own chamber[FN#256]
and on her couch, her reason fled for joy and it seemed to her as
if she had never stirred thence: then she took the lute and tuned
it and touched it in wondrous fashion and improvised verses and
sang. The Eunuch heard the smiting of the lute within the chamber
and cried, "By Allah, that is the touch of my lady Tohfah!" So he
arose and went, as he were a madman, falling down and rising up,
till he came to the Castrato on guard at the gate of the
Commander of the Faithful and found him sitting. When his fellow
neutral saw him, and he like a madman, slipping down and
stumbling up, he asked him, "What aileth thee and what bringeth
thee hither at this hour?" The other answered, "Wilt thou not
make haste and awaken the Prince of True Believers?" And he fell
to crying out at him; whereupon the Caliph awoke and heard them
bandying words together and Tohfah's slave crying to the other,
"Woe to thee! Awaken the Commander of the Faithful in haste." So
quoth he, "O Sawab, what hast thou to say?" and quoth the Chief
Eunuch, "O our lord, the Eunuch of Tohfah's lodging hath lost his
wits and crieth, 'Awaken the Commander of the Faithful in haste!'
" Then said Al-Rashid to one of his slave-girls, "See what may be
the matter." Accordingly she hastened to admit the Castrato, who
entered at her order; and when he saw the Commander of the
Faithful, he salamed not neither kissed ground, but cried in his
hurry, "Quick: up with thee! My lady Tohfah sitteth in her
chamber, singing a goodly ditty. Come to her in haste and see all
that I say to thee! Hasten! She sitteth awaiting thee." The
Caliph was amazed at his speech and asked him, "What sayst thou?"
He answered, "Didst thou not hear the first of the speech? Tohfah
sitteth in the sleeping-chamber, singing and lute-playing. Come
thy quickest! Hasten!" Accordingly Al-Rashid sprang up and donned
his dress; but he believed not the Eunuch's words and said to
him, "Fie upon thee! What is this thou sayst? Hast thou not seen
this in a dream?" Quoth the Eunuch, "By Allah, I wot not what
thou sayest, and I was not asleep;" and quoth Al-Rashid, "An thy
speech be soothfast, it shall be for thy good luck, for I will
free thee and give thee a thousand gold pieces; but, an it be
untrue and thou have seen this in dream-land, I will crucify
thee." The Eunuch said within himself, "O Protector, let me not
have seen this in vision!" then he left the Caliph and running to
the chamber-door, heard the sound of singing and lute-playing;
whereupon he returned to Al-Rashid and said to him, "Go and
hearken and see who is asleep." When the Prince of True Believers
drew near the door of the sleeping-chamber, he heard the sound of
the lute and Tohfah's voice singing; whereat he could not
restrain his reason and was like to faint for excess of delight.
Then he pulled out the key but his hand refused to draw the bolt:
however, after a while, he took heart and applying himself,
opened the door and entered, saying, "Methinks this is none other
than a vision or an imbroglio of dreams." When Tohfah saw him,
she rose and coming to meet him, pressed him to her breast; and
he cried out a cry wherein his sprite was like to depart and fell
down in a fit. She again strained him to her bosom and sprinkled
on him rose-water mingled with musk, and washed his face, till he
came to himself, as he were a drunken man, and shed tears for the
stress of his joy in Tohfah's return to him, after he had
despaired of her returning. Then she took the lute and smote
thereon, after the fashion she had learnt from Shaykh Iblis, so
that Al-Rashid's wit was bewildered for excess of joy and his
understanding was confounded for exultation; after which she
improvised and sang these couplets,

"That I left thee my heart to believe is unlief; * For the life
     that's in it ne'er leaveth; brief,
An thou say 'I went,' saith my heart 'What a fib!' * And I bide
     'twixt believing and unbelief."

When she had made an end of her verses, Al-Rashid said to her, "O
Tohfah, shine absence was wondrous, yet is thy presence still
more marvellous." She replied, "By Allah, O my lord, thou sayst
sooth;" then, taking his hand, she said to him, "O Commander of
the Faithful, see what I have brought with me." So he looked and
spied treasures such as neither words could describe nor
registers could document, pearls and jewels and jacinths and
precious stones and unions and gorgeous robes of honour, adorned
with margarites and jewels and purfled with red gold. There he
beheld what he never had beheld all his life long, not even in
idea; and she showed him that which Queen Al-Shahba had bestowed
on her of those carpets, which she had brought with her, and that
throne, the like whereof neither Kisra possessed nor Caesar, and
those tables inlaid with pearls and jewels and those vessels
which amazed all who looked on them, and that crown which was on
the head of the circumcised boy, and those robes of honour, which
Queen Al-Shahba and Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif had doffed and donned
upon her, and the trays wherein were those treasures; brief, she
showed him wealth whose like he had never in his life espied and
which the tongue availeth not to describe and whereat all who
looked thereon were bewildered, Al-Rashid was like to lose his
wits for amazement at this spectacle and was confounded at that
he sighted and witnessed. Then said he to Tohfah, "Come, tell me
thy tale from beginning to end, and let me know all that hath
betided thee, as if I had been present." She answered,
"Hearkening and obedience," and acquainting him with all that had
betided her first and last, from the time when she first saw the
Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif, how he took her and descended with her
through the side of the Chapel of Ease; and she told him of the
horse she had ridden, till she came to the meadow aforesaid and
described it to him, together with the palace and that was
therein of furniture, and related to him how the Jinn rejoiced in
her, and whatso she had seen of their kings, masculine and
feminine, and of Queen Kamariyah and her sisters and Queen
Shu'a'ah, Regent of the Fourth Sea, and Queen Al-Shahba, Queen of
Queens, and King Al-Shisban, and that which each one of them had
bestowed upon her. Moreover, she recited to him the story of
Maymun the Sworder and described to him his fulsome favour, which
he had not deigned to change, and related to him that which befel
her from the kings of the Jinn, male and female, and the coming
of the Queen of Queens, Al-Shahba, and how she had loved her and
appointed her her vice-reine and how she was thus become ruler
over all the kings of the Jann; and she showed him the writ of
investiture which Queen Al-Shahba had written her and told him
what had betided her with the Ghulish Head, when it appeared to
her in the garden, and how she had despatched it to her palace,
beseeching it to bring her news of the Commander of the Faithful
and of what had betided him after her. Then she described to him
the flower-gardens, wherein she had taken her pleasure, and the
Hammam-baths inlaid with pearls and jewels and told him that
which had befallen Maymun the Sworder, when he bore her off, and
how he had slain himself; in fine, she related to him everything
she had seen of wonders and marvels and that which she had beheld
of all kinds and colours among the Jinn. Then she told him the
story of Al-Anka, daughter of Bahram Jur, with Al-Anka, daughter
of the wind, and described to him her dwelling-place and her
island, whereupon quoth Al-Rashid, "O Tohfat al-Sadr,[FN#257]
tell me of Al-Anka, daughter of Bahram Jur; is she of the
Jinn-kind or of mankind or of the bird-kind? For this long time
have I desired to find one who should tell me of her." Tohfah
replied, "'Tis well, O Commander of the Faithful. I asked the
queen of this and she acquainted me with her case and told me who
built her the palace." Quoth Al-Rashid, "Allah upon thee, tell it
me;" and quoth Tohfah, "I will well," and proceeded to tell him.
And he was amazed at that which he heard from her and what she
reported to him and at that which she had brought back of jewels
and jacinths of various hues and precious stones of many sorts,
such as amazed the beholder and confounded thought and mind. As
for this, Tohfah was the means of the enrichment of the
Barmecides and the Abbasides, and they had endurance in their
delight. Then the Caliph went forth and bade decorate the city:
so they decorated it and the drums of glad tidings were beaten;
and they made banquets to the people for whom the tables were
spread seven days. And Tohfah and the Commander of the Faithful
ceased not to enjoy the most delightsome of life and the most
prosperous till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and
the Severer of societies; and this is all that hath come down to
us of their story.




                     WOMEN'S WILES[FN#258]



On the following night Dunyazad said to her sister Shahrazad, "O
sister mine, an thou incline not unto sleep, prithee tell us a
tale which shall beguile our watching through the dark hours."
She replied:--With love and gladness.[FN#259] It hath reached me,
O magnificent King, that whilome there was in the city of
Baghdad, a comely youth and a well bred, fair of favour, tall of
stature, and slender of shape. His name was Ala al-Din and he was
of the chiefs of the sons of the merchants and had a shop wherein
he sold and bought. One day, as he sat in his shop, there passed
by him a merry girl[FN#260] who raised her head and casting a
glance at the young merchant, saw written in a flowing hand on
the forehead[FN#261] of his shop door these words, "THERE BE NO
CRAFT SAVE MEN'S CRAFT, FORASMUCH AS IT OVERCOMETH WOMEN'S
CRAFT." When she beheld this, she was wroth and took counsel with
herself, saying, As my head liveth, there is no help but I show
him a marvel trick of the wiles of women and put to naught this
his inscription!" Thereupon she hied her home; and on the morrow
she made her ready and donning the finest of dress, adorned
herself with the costliest of ornaments and the highest of price
and stained her hands with henna. Then she let down her tresses
upon her shoulders and went forth, walking with coquettish gait
and amorous grace, followed by her slave-girl carrying a parcel,
till she came to the young merchant's shop and sitting down under
pretext of seeking stuffs, saluted him with the salam and
demanded of him somewhat of cloths. So he brought out to her
various kinds and she took them and turned them over, talking
with him the while. Then said she to him, "Look at the
shapeliness of my shape and my semblance! Seest thou in me aught
of default?" He replied, "No, O my lady;" and she continued, "Is
it lawful in any one that he should slander me and say that I am
humpbacked?" Then she discovered to him a part of her bosom, and
when he saw her breasts his reason took flight from his head and
his heart crave to her and he cried, "Cover it up,[FN#262] so may
Allah veil thee!" Quoth she, "Is it fair of any one to decry my
charms?" and quoth he, "How shall any decry thy charms, and thou
the sun of loveliness?" Then said she, "Hath any the right to say
of me that I am lophanded?" and tucking up her sleeves, she
showed him forearms as they were crystal; after which she
unveiled to him a face, as it were a full moon breaking forth on
its fourteenth night, and said to him, "Is it lawful for any to
decry me and declare that my face is pitted with smallpox or that
I am one eyed or crop eared?" and said he, "O my lady, what is it
moveth thee to discover unto me that lovely face and those fair
limbs, wont to be so jealously veiled and guarded? Tell me the
truth of the matter, may I be thy ransom!" And he began to
improvise,[FN#263]

"White Fair now drawn from sheath of parted hair, * Then in the
     blackest tresses hid from sight,
Flasheth like day irradiating Earth * While round her glooms the
     murk of nightliest night."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. Whereupon cried Dunyazad her sister, "O sister
mine, how delectable is this tale and how desirable!" She
replied, saying, "And where is this compared with that which I
will recount to thee next night, Inshallah?"

             The Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night.

Now when came the night, quoth Dunyazad to her sister Shahrazad,
"O sister mine, an thou incline not unto sleep, prithee finish
thy tale which shall beguile our watching through the dark
hours." She replied:--With love and gladness! It hath reached me,
O auspicious King, that the girl said to the young merchant,
"Know, O my lord, that I am a maid oppressed of my sire, who
speaketh at me and saith to me, Thou art loathly of looks and
semblance and it besitteth not that thou wear rich raiment; for
thou and the slave-girls are like in rank, there is no
distinguishing thee from them. Now he is a richard, having a
mighty great store of money and saith not thus save because he is
a pinchpenny, and grudgeth the spending of a farthing; wherefore
he is loath to marry me, lest he be put to somewhat of expense in
my marriage, albeit Almighty Allah hath been bounteous to him and
he is a man puissant in his time and lacking naught of worldly
weal." The youth asked, "Who is thy father and what is his
condition?" and she answered, "He is the Chief Kazi of the well-
known Supreme Court, under whose hands are all the Kazis who
administer justice in this city." The merchant believed her and
she farewelled him and fared away, leaving in his heart a
thousand regrets, for that the love of her had prevailed over him
and he knew not how he should win to her; wherefore he woned
enamoured, love-distracted, unknowing if he were alive or dead.
As soon as she was gone, he shut up shop and walked straightway
to the Court, where he went in to the Chief Kazi and saluted him.
The magistrate returned his salam and treated him with
distinction and seated him by his side. Then said Ala al-Din to
him, "I come to thee seeking thine alliance and desiring the hand
of thy noble daughter." Quoth the Kazi, "O my lord merchant,
welcome to thee and fair welcome; but indeed my daughter
befitteth not the like of thee, neither beseemeth she the
goodliness of thy youth and the pleasantness of thy compostition
and the sweetness of thy speech;" but Ala al-Din replied, "This
talk becometh thee not, neither is it seemly in thee; if I be
content with her, how should this vex thee?" So the Kazi was
satisfied and they came to an accord and concluded the marriage
contract at a dower precedent of five purses[FN#264] ready money
and a dower contingent of fifteen purses, so it might be hard for
him to put her away, her father having given him fair warning,
but he would not be warned. Then they wrote out the contract
document and the merchant said, "I desire to go in to her this
night." Accordingly they carried her to him in procession that
very evening, and he prayed the night prayer and entered the
private chamber prepared for him; but, when he lifted the head
gear from the bride's head and the veil from her face and looked,
he saw a foul face and a favour right fulsome; indeed he beheld
somewhat whereof may Allah never show thee the like! loathly,
dispensing from description, inasmuch as there were reckoned in
her all legal defects.[FN#265] So he repented, when repentance
availed him naught, and knew that the girl had cheated him.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. Whereupon cried Dunyazad, her sister, "O sister
mine, how delectable is thy story and how sweet!" She replied,
saying, "And where is this compared with that which I will
recount to thee next night an I be spared and suffered to live by
the King, whom Almighty Allah preserve?"

              The Hundred and Ninety-eight Night.

Now whenas came the night, quoth Dunyazad to her sister
Shahrazad, "O sister mine, an thou incline not unto sleep,
prithee finish thy story which shall beguile our watching through
the dark hours, for indeed 'tis a fine tale and a wondrous." She
replied:--With love and gladness! It hath reached me, O generous
King, that the unhappy merchant carnally knew the loathly bride,
sore against the grain, and abode that night troubled in mind, as
he were in the prison of Al-Daylam.[FN#266] Hardly had the day
dawned when he arose from her side and betaking himself to one of
the Hammams, dozed there awhile, after which he made the
Ghusl-ablution of ceremonial impurity[FN#267] and donned his
every day dress. Then he went out to the coffee house and drank a
cup of coffee; after which he returned to his shop and opening
the door, sat down, with concern and chagrin manifest on his
countenance. After an hour or so, his friends and intimates among
the merchants and people of the market began to come up to him,
by ones and twos; to give him joy, and said to him, laughing, "A
blessing! a blessing! Where be the sweetmeats? Where be the
coffee?[FN#268] 'Twould seem thou hast forgotten us; and nothing
made thee oblivious save that the charms of the bride have
disordered thy wit and taken thy reason, Allah help thee! We give
thee joy, we give thee joy." And they mocked at him whilst he
kept silence before them, being like to rend his raiment and shed
tears for rage. Then they went away from him, and when it was the
hour of noon, up came his mistress, the crafty girl, trailing her
skirts and swaying to and fro in her gait, as she were a branch
of Ban in a garden of bloom. She was yet more richly dressed and
adorned and more striking and cutting[FN#269] in her symmetry and
grace than on the previous day, so that she made the passers stop
and stand in espalier to gaze upon her. When she came to Ala
al-Din's shop, she sat down thereon and said to him, "Blessed be
the day to thee, O my lord Ala al-Din! Allah prosper thee and be
good to thee and perfect thy gladness and make it a wedding of
weal and welfare!" He knitted his brows and frowned in answer to
her; then asked her, "Wherein have I failed of thy due, or what
have I done to harm thee, that thou shouldst requite me after
this fashion?" She answered, "Thou hast been no wise in default;
but 'tis yonder inscription written on the door of thy shop that
irketh me and vexeth my heart. An thou have the courage to change
it and write up the contrary thereof, I will deliver thee from
thine evil plight." And he answered, "Thy requirement is right
easy: on my head and eyes!" So saying, he brought out a
sequin[FN#270] and summoning one of his Mamelukes said to him,
"Get thee to Such-an-one the Scribe and bid him write us an
epigraph, adorned with gold and lapis lazuli, in these words,
"THERE BE NO CRAFT SAVE WOMEN'S CRAFT, FOR INDEED THEIR CRAFT IS
A MIGHTY CRAFT[FN#271] AND OVERCOMETH AND HUMBLETH THE FALSES OF
MEN." And she said to the white slave "Fare thee forthright." So
he repaired to the Scribe, who wrote him the scroll, and he
brought it to his master, who set it on the door and asked the
damsel, "Is thy heart satisfied?" She answered, "Yes! Arise
forthwith and get thee to the place before the citadel, where do
thou foregather with all the mountebanks and ape-dancers and
bear-leaders and drummers and pipers and bid them come to thee
to-morrow early, with their kettle drums and flageolets, whilst
thou art drinking coffee with thy father in law the Kazi, and
congratulate thee and wish thee joy, saying, 'A blessing, O son
of our uncle! Indeed, thou art the vein[FN#272] of our eye! We
rejoice for thee, and if thou be ashamed of us, verily we pride
ourselves upon thee; so, although thou banish us from thee, know
that we will not forsake thee, albeit thou forsake us.' And do
thou fall to throwing diners and dirhams amongst them; whereupon
the Kazi will question thee, and do thou answer him, saying, My
father was an ape-dancer and this is our original condition; but
our Lord opened on us the gate of fortune and we have gotten us a
name amongst the merchants and with their provost.' Upon this he
will say to thee, 'Then thou art an ape-leader of the tribe of
the mountebanks?' and do thou rejoin, 'I may in nowise deny my
origin, for the sake of thy daughter and in her honour.' The Kazi
will say, 'It may not be that thou shalt be given the daughter of
a Shaykh who sitteth upon the carpet of the Law and whose descent
is traceable by genealogy to the loins of the Apostle of
Allah,[FN#273] nor is it meet that his daughter be in the power
of a man who is an ape-dancer, a minstrel.' Then do thou reply,
'Nay, O Efendi, she is my lawful wife, and every hair of her is
worth a thousand lives, and I will not put her away though I be
given the kingship of the world.' At last be thou persuaded to
speak the word of divorce and so shall the marriage be voided and
ye be saved each from other." Quoth Ala al-Din, "Right is thy
rede," and locking up his shop, betook himself to the place --And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. Whe