r which she drank a second and a
third. Then she crowned the cup a fourth time and handed it to
the Shaykh, but he would not accept it from her. However, she
conjured him, by her own head and that of the Prince of True
Believers, that he take the cup from her, till he received it
from her hand and kissed it and would have set it down; but she
sware him by her life to smell it. Accordingly he smelt it and
she said to him, "How deemest thou?" Said he, "I find its smell
is sweet;" and she conjured him by the Caliph's life to taste
thereof. So he put it to his mouth and she rose to him and made
him drink; whereupon quoth be, "O Princess of the Fair,[FN#326]
this is none other than good." Quoth she, "So deem I: hath not
our Lord promised us wine in Paradise?" He answered, "Yes! The
Most High saith, 'And rivers of wine, delicious to the
drinkers.'[FN#327] And we will drink it in this world and in the
next world." She laughed and emptying the cup, gave him to drink,
and he said, "O Princess of the Fair, indeed thou art excusable
in thy love for this." Then he bent in hand from her another and
another, till he became drunken and his talk waxed great and his
prattle. The folk of the quarter heard him and assembled under
the window; and when the Shaykh was ware of them, he opened the
window and said to them, "Are ye not ashamed, O pimps? Every one
in his own house doth whatso he willeth and none hindereth him;
but we drink one single day and ye assemble and come, panders
that ye are! To-day, wine, and to-morrow business;[FN#328] and
from hour to hour cometh relief." So they laughed together and
dispersed. Then the girl drank till she was drunken, when she
called to mind her lord and wept, and the Shaykh said to her,
"What maketh thee weep, O my lady?" Said she, "O elder, I am a
lover and a separated." He cried, "O my lady, what is this love?"
Cried she, "And thou, hast thou never been in love?" He replied,
"By Allah, O my lady, never in all my life heard I of this thing,
nor have I ever known it! Is it of the sons of Adam or of the
Jinn?" She laughed and said, "Verily, thou art even as those of
whom the poet speaketh, in these couplets,

"How oft shall they admonish and ye shun this nourishment; * When
     e'en the shepherd's bidding is obeyed by his flocks?
I see you like in shape and form to creatures whom we term *
     Mankind, but in your acts and deeds you are a sort of
     ox"[FN#329]

The Shaykh laughed at her speech and her verses pleased him. Then
cried she to him, "I desire of thee a lute." So he arose and
brought her a bit of fuel.[FN#330] Quoth she, "What is that?" and
quoth he "Didst thou not say: Bring me fuel?" Said she, "I do not
want this," and said he, "What then is it that is hight fuel,
other than this?" She laughed and replied, "The lute is an
instrument of music, whereunto I sing." Asked he, "Where is this
thing found and of whom shall I get it for thee?" and answered
she, "Of him who gave thee the wine." So he arose and betaking
himself to his neighbour the Jew, said to him, "Thou favouredst
us before with the wine; so now complete thy favours and look me
out a thing hight lute, which be an instrument for singing; for
she seeketh this of me and I know it not." Replied the Jew,
"Hearkening and obedience," and going into his house, brought him
a lute. The old man carried it to Sitt al-Milah, whilst the Jew
took his drink and sat by a window adjoining the Shaykh's house,
so he might hear the singing. The damsel rejoiced, when the old
man returned to her with the lute, and taking it from him, tuned
its strings and sang these couplets,

"Remains not, after you are gone, or trace of you or sign, * But
     hope to see this parting end and break its lengthy line:
You went and by your wending made the whole world desolate; * And
     none may stand this day in stead to fill the yearning eyne.
Indeed, you've burdened weakling me, by strength and force of you
     * With load no hill hath power t'upheave nor yet the plain
     low li'en:
And I, whenever fain I scent the breeze your land o'erbreathes, *
     Lose all my wits as though they were bemused with heady
     wine.
O folk no light affair is Love for lover woe to dree * Nor easy
     'tis to satisfy its sorrow and repine.
I've wandered East and West to hap upon your trace, and when *
     Spring-camps I find the dwellers cry, 'They've marched,
     those friends o' thine!'
Never accustomed me to part these intimates I love; * Nay, when I
     left them all were wont new meetings to design."

Now when she had ended her song, she wept with sore weeping, till
presently sleep overcame her and she slept. On the morrow, she
said to the Shaykh, "Get thee to the Shroff and fetch me the
ordinary;" so he repaired to the money-changer and delivered him
the message, whereupon he made ready meat and drink, according to
his custom, with which the old man returned to the damsel and
they ate their sufficiency. When she had eaten, she sought of him
wine and he went to the Jew and fetched it. Then the twain sat
down and drank; and when she waxed drunken, she took the lute and
smiting it, fell a-singing and chanted these couplets,

"How long ask I the heart, the heart drowned, and eke * Refrain
     my complaint while I my tear-floods speak?
They forbid e'en the phantom to visit me, * (O marvel!) her
     phantom my couch to seek."[FN#331]

And when she had made an end of her song, she wept with sore
weeping. All this time, the young Damascene was listening, and
now he likened her voice to the voice of his slave-girl and then
he put away from him this thought, and the damsel had no
knowledge whatever of his presence. Then she broke out again into
song and chanted these couplets,

"Quoth they, 'Forget him! What is he?' To them I cried, * 'Allah
     forget me when forget I mine adored!'
Now in this world shall I forget the love o' you? * Heaven grant
     the thrall may ne'er forget to love his lord!
I pray that Allah pardon all except thy love * Which, when I meet
     Him may my bestest plea afford."

After ending this song she drank three cups and filling the old
man other three, improvised these couplets,

"His love he hid which tell-tale tears betrayed; * For burn of
     coal that 'neath his ribs was laid:
Giv'n that he seek his joy in spring and flowers * Some day, his
     spring's the face of dear-loved maid.
O ye who blame me for who baulks my love! * What sweeter thing
     than boon to man denayed?
A sun, yet scorcheth he my very heart! * A moon, but riseth he
     from breasts a-shade!"

When she had made an end of her song, she threw the lute from her
hand and wept, whilst the Shaykh wept for her weeping. Then she
fell down in a fainting fit and presently recovering, crowned the
cup and drinking it off, gave the elder to drink, after which she
took the lute and breaking out into song, chanted these couplets,

"Thy parting is bestest of woes to my heart, * And changed my
     case till all sleep it eschewed:
The world to my being is desolate; * Then Oh grief! and O
     lingering solitude!
Maybe The Ruthful incline thee to me * And join us despite what
     our foes have sued!"

Then she wept till her voice rose high and her wailing was
discovered to those without; after which she again began to drink
and plying the Shaykh with wine, sang these couplets,

"An they hid thy person from eyen-sight, * They hid not thy name
     fro' my mindful sprite:
Or meet me; thy ransom for meeting I'll be[FN#332] * Or fly me;
     and ransom I'll be for thy flight!
Mine outer speaks for mine inner case, * And mine inner speaks
     for mine outer plight."

When she had made an end of her verses, she threw the lute from
her hand and wept and wailed. Then she slept awhile and presently
awaking, said, "O Shaykh, say me, hast thou what we may eat?" He
replied, "O my lady, I have the rest of the food;" but she cried,
"I will not eat of the orts I have left. Go down to the bazar and
fetch us what we may eat." He rejoined, "Excuse me, O my lady, I
cannot rise to my feet, because I am bemused with wine; but with
me is the servant of the mosque, who is a sharp youth and an
intelligent. I will call him, so he may buy thee whatso thou
wantest." Asked she, "Whence hast thou this servant?" and he
answered, "He is of the people of Damascus." When she heard him
say "of the people of Damascus," she sobbed such a sob that she
swooned away; and when she came to herself, she said, "Woe is me
for the people of Damascus and for those who are therein! Call
him, O Shaykh, that he may do our need." Accordingly, the old man
put his head forth of the window and called the youth, who came
to him from the mosque and sought leave to enter. The Muezzin
bade him come in, and when he appeared before the damsel, he knew
her and she knew him; whereupon he turned back in bewilderment
and would have fled at hap-hazard; but she sprang up to him and
held him fast, and they embraced and wept together, till they
fell to the floor in a fainting fit. When the Shaykh saw them in
this condition, he feared for himself and fared forth in fright,
seeing not the way for drunkenness. His neighbour the Jew met him
and asked him, "How is it that I behold thee astounded?" Answered
the old man, "How should I not be astounded, seeing that the
damsel who is with me is fallen in love with the mosque servant
and they have embraced and slipped down in a swoon? Indeed, I
fear lest the Caliph come to know of this and be wroth with me;
so tell me thou what is thy device for that wherewith I am
afflicted in the matter of this damsel." Quoth the Jew, "For the
present, take this casting-bottle of rose-water and go forthright
and sprinkle them therewith: an they be aswoon for this their
union and embrace, they will recover, and if otherwise, then take
to flight." The Shaykh snatched the casting-bottle from the Jew
and going up to the twain, sprinkled their faces, whereupon they
came to themselves and fell to relating each to other that which
they had suffered, since both had been parted, for the pangs of
severance. Nur al-Din also acquainted Sitt al-Milah with that
which he had endured from the folk who would have killed[FN#333]
him and utterly annihilated him; and she said to him, "O my lord,
let us for the nonce leave this talk and praise Allah for reunion
of loves, and all this shall cease from us." Then she gave him
the cup and he said, "By Allah, I will on no wise drink it,
whilst I am in this case!" So she drank it off before him and
taking the lute, swept the strings and sang these couplets,

"O absent fro' me and yet present in place, * Thou art far from
     mine eyes and yet ever nigh!
Thy farness bequeathed me all sorrow and care * And my troublous
     life can no joy espy:
Lone, forlorn, weeping-eyelidded, miserablest, * I abide for thy
     sake as though banisht I:
Then (ah grief o' me!) far thou hast fared from sight * Yet canst
     no more depart me than apple of eye!"

When she had made an end of her verse, she wept and the young man
of Damascus, Nur al-Din, wept also. Then she took the lute and
improvised these couplets,

"Well Allah wots I never named you * But tears o'erbrimming eyes
     in floods outburst;
And passion raged and pine would do me die, * Yet my heart rested
     wi' the thought it nurst;
O eye-light mine, O wish and O my hope! * Your face can never
     quench mine eyes' hot thirst."

When Nur al-Din heard these his slave-girl's verses, he fell
a-weeping, while she strained him to her bosom and wiped away his
tears with her sleeve and questioned him and comforted his mind.
Then she took the lute and sweeping its strings, played thereon
with such performing as would move the staidest to delight and
sang these couplets,

"Indeed, what day brings not your sight to me, * That day I
     rem'mber not as dight to me!
And, when I vainly long on you to look, * My life is lost, Oh
     life and light o' me!"

After this fashion they fared till the morning, tasting not the
nourishment of sleep;[FN#334] and when the day lightened, behold
the eunuch came with the she-mule and said to Sitt al-Milah, "The
Commander of the Faithful calleth for thee." So she arose and
taking by the hand her lord, committed him to the Shaykh, saying,
"This is the deposit of Allah, then thy deposit,[FN#335] till
this eunuch cometh to thee; and indeed, O elder, my due to thee
is the white hand of favour such as filleth the interval betwixt
heaven and earth." Then she mounted the mule and repairing to the
palace of the Commander of the Faithful, went in to him and
kissed ground before him. Quoth he to her, as who should make
mock of her, "I doubt not but thou hast found thy lord;" and
quoth she, "By thy felicity and the length of thy continuance on
life, I have indeed found him!" Now Al-Rashid was leaning back;
but, when he heard this, he sat upright and said to her "By my
life, true?" She replied, "Ay, by thy life!" He said, "Bring him
into my presence, so I may see him;" but she said, "O my lord,
there have happened to him many hardships and his charms are
changed and his favour faded; and indeed the Prince of True
Believers vouchsafed me a month; wherefore I will tend him the
rest of the month and then bring him to do his service to the
Commander of the Faithful." Quoth Al-Rashid, "Sooth thou sayest:
the condition certainly was for a month; but tell me what hath
betided him." Quoth she, "O my lord (Allah prolong thy
continuance and make Paradise thy place of returning and thine
asylum and the fire the abiding-place of thy foes!), when he
presenteth himself to serve thee, he will assuredly expound to
thee his case and will name to thee his wrongdoers; and indeed
this is an arrear that is due to the Prince of True Believers, by
whom may Allah fortify the Faith and vouchsafe him the victory
over rebel and froward wretch!" Thereupon he ordered her a fine
house and bade furnish it with carpets and vessels of choice and
commanded them to give all she needed. This was done during the
rest of the day, and when the night came, she sent the eunuch
with a suit of clothes and the mule, to fetch Nur al-Din from the
Muezzin's lodging. So the young man donned the dress and
mounting, rode to the house, where he abode in comfort and luxury
a full-told month, while she solaced him with four things, the
eating of fowls and the drinking of wine and the sleeping upon
brocade and the entering the bath after horizontal
refreshment.[FN#336] Furthermore, she brought him six suits of
linen stuffs and took to changing his clothes day by day; nor was
the appointed time of delay accomplished ere his beauty and
loveliness returned to him; nay, his favour waxed tenfold fairer
and he became a seduction to all who looked upon him. One day of
the days Al-Rashid bade bring him to the presence; so his
slave-girl changed his clothes and robing him in sumptuous
raiment, mounted him on the she-mule. Then he rode to the palace
and presenting himself before the Caliph, saluted him with the
goodliest of salutations and bespake him with Truchman's[FN#337]
speech eloquent and deep-thoughted. When Al-Rashid saw him, he
marvelled at the seemliness of his semblance and his loquence and
eloquence and asking of him, was told that he was Sitt al-Milah's
lord; whereupon quoth he, "Indeed, she is excusable in her love
for him, and if we had put her to death wrongfully, as we were
minded to do, her blood would have been upon our heads." Then he
accosted the young man and entering into discourse with him,
found him well-bred, intelligent, clever, quick-witted, generous,
pleasant, elegant, excellent. So he loved him with exceeding love
and questioned him of his native city and of his sire and of the
cause of his journey to Baghdad. Nur al-Din acquainted him with
that which he would know in the goodliest words and concisest
phrases; and the Caliph asked him, "And where hast thou been
absent all this while? Verily, we sent after thee to Damascus and
Mosul and all other cities, but happened on no tidings of thee."
Answered the young man, "O my lord, there betided thy slave in
thy capital that which never yet betided any." Then he acquainted
him with his case, first and last, and told him that which had
befallen him of evil from Al-Muradi and the Chief of Police. Now
when Al-Rashid heard this, he was chagrined with sore chagrin and
waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and cried, "Shall this thing
happen in a city wherein I am?" And the Hashimi vein [FN#338]
started out between his eyes. Then he bade fetch Ja'afar, and
when he came between his hands, he acquainted him with the
adventure and said to him, "Shall this thing come to pass in my
city and I have no news of it?" Thereupon he bade Ja'afar fetch
all whom the young Damascene had named,and when they came, he
bade smite their necks: he also summoned him whom they called
Ahmad and who had been the means of the young man's deliverance a
first time and a second, and thanked him and showed him favour
and bestowed on him a costly robe of honour and made him Chief of
Police in his city.[FN#339] Then he sent for the Shaykh, the
Muezzin, and when the messenger came to him and told him that the
Commander of the Faithfull summoned him, he feared the
denunciation of the damsel and walked with him to the palace,
farting for fear as he went, whilst all who passed him by laughed
at him. When he came into the presence of the Commander of the
Faithful, he fell a-trembling and his tongue was tied,[FN#340] so
that he could not speak. The Caliph smiled at him and said, "O
Shaykh, thou hast done no offence; so why fearest thou?" Answered
the old man (and indeed he was in the sorest of that which may be
of fear), "O my lord, by the virtue of thy pure forefathers,
indeed I have done naught, and do thou enquire of my manners and
morals." The Caliph laughed at him and ordering him a thousand
dinars, bestowed on him a costly robe of honour and made him
headman of the Muezzins in his mosque. Then he called Sitt
al-Milah and said to her, "The house wherein thou lodgest with
all it containeth is a largesse to thy lord: so do thou take him
and depart with him in the safeguard of Allah Almighty; but
absent not yourselves from our presence." Accordingly she went
forth with the young Damascene and when she came to the house,
she found that the Prince of True Believers had sent them gifts
galore and good things in store. As for Nur al-Din, he sent for
his father and mother and appointed for himself agents in the
city of Damascus, to receive the rent of the houses and gardens
and Wakalahs and Hammams; and they occupied themseves with
collecting that which accrued to him and sending it to him every
year. Meanwhile, his father and mother came to him, with that
which they had of monies and merchandise of price and,
foregathering with their son, found that he was become of the
chief officers and familiars of the Commander of the Faithful and
of the number of his sitting-companions and nightly entertainers,
wherefore they rejoiced in reunion with him and he also rejoiced
in them. The Caliph assigned them solde and allowances; and as
for Nur al-Din, his father brought him those riches and his
wealth waxed and his estate was stablished, till he became the
richest of the folk of his time in Baghdad and left not the
presence of the Commander of the Faithful or by night or by day.
He was vouchsafed issue by Sitt al-Milah, and he ceased not to
live the goodliest of lives, he and she and his father and his
mother, a while of time, till Abu al-Hasan sickened of a sore
sickness and departed to the mercy of Allah Almighty. Presently,
his mother also died and he carried them forth and shrouded them
and buried and made them expiations and funeral
ceremonies.[FN#341] In due course his children grew up and became
like moons, and he reared them in splendour and affection, while
his wealth waxed and his case never waned. He ceased not to pay
frequent visits to the Commander of the Faithful, he and his
children and his slave-girl Sitt al-Milah, and they abode in all
solace of life and prosperity till there came to them the
Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of societies; and laud to
the Abiding, the Eternal! This is all that hath come down to us
of their story.




           TALE OF KING INS BIN KAYS AND HIS DAUGHTER
            WITH THE SON OF KING AL-'ABBAS.[FN#342]



There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone
before, in the city of Baghdad, the House of Peace, a king mighty
of estate, lord of understanding and beneficence and generosity
and munificence, and he was strong of sultanate and endowed with
might and majesty and magnificence. His name was Ins bin Kays bin
Rabi' al-Shaybani,[FN#343] and when he took horse, there rode
about him riders from the farthest parts of the two
Iraks.[FN#344] Almighty Allah decreed that he should take to wife
a woman hight 'Afifah, daughter of Asad al-Sundusi, who was
endowed with beauty and loveliness and brightness and perfect
grace and symmetry of shape and stature; her face was like the
crescent moon and she had eyes as they were gazelle's eyes and an
aquiline nose like Luna's cymb. She had learned cavalarice and
the use of arms and had mastered the sciences of the Arabs; eke
she had gotten by heart all the dragomanish[FN#345] tongues and
indeed she was a ravishment to mankind. She abode with Ins bin
Kays twelve years, during which time he was not blessed with
children by her; so his breast was straitened by reason of the
failure of lineage, and he besought his Lord to vouchsafe him a
son. Accordingly the queen conceived, by permission of Allah
Almighty; and when the days of her pregnancy were accomplished,
she gave birth to a maid-child, than whom never saw eyes fairer,
for that her face was as it were a pearl pure-bright or a lamp
raying light or a candle gilt with gold or a full moon breaking
cloudy fold, extolled be He who her from vile water dight and
made her to the beholders a delight! When her father saw her in
this fashion of loveliness, his reason fled for joy, and when she
grew up, he taught her writing and belles-lettres and philosophy
and all manner of tongues. So she excelled the folk of her time
and surpassed her peers; and the sons of the kings heard of her
and all of them longed to look upon her. The first who sought her
to wife was King Nabhan[FN#346] of Mosul, who came to her with a
great company, bringing an hundred she-camels, laden with musk
and lign-aloes and ambergris and five score loaded with camphor
and jewels and other hundred laden with silver monies and yet
other hundred loaded with raiment of silken stuffs, sendal and
brocade, besides an hundred slave-girls and a century of choice
steeds of swift and generous breeds, completely housed and
accoutred, as they were brides; and all this he had laid before
her father, demanding her of him in wedlock. Now King Ins bin
Kays had bound himself by an oath that he would not marry his
daughter save to him whom she should choose; so, when King Nabhan
sought her in marriage, her father went in to her and consulted
her concerning his affair. She consented not and he repeated to
Nabhan that which she said, whereupon he departed from him. After
this came King Bahram, lord of the White Island, with treasures
richer than the first; but she accepted not of him and he
returned disappointed; nor did the kings cease coming to her
sire, on her account, one after other, from the farthest of the
lands and the climes, each glorying in bringing more than those
who forewent him; but she heeded not any one of them. Presently,
Al-'Abbas, son of King Al-'Aziz, lord of the land of Al-Yaman and
Zabidun[FN#347] and Meccah (which Allah increase in honour and
brightness and beauty!) heard of her; and he was of the great
ones of Meccah and Al-Hijaz,[FN#348] and was a youth without hair
on his side-face. So he presented himself one day in his sire's
assembly, whereupon the folk made way for him and the king seated
him on a chair of red gold, crusted with pearls and gems. The
Prince sat, with his head bowed groundwards, and spake not to
any: whereby his father knew that his breast was straitened and
bade the cup-companions and men of wit relate marvellous
histories, such as beseem the sessions of kings; nor was there
one of them but spoke forth the goodliest of that which was with
him; but Al-'Abbas still abode with his head bowed down. Then the
king bade his sitting-companions withdraw, and when the chamber
was private, he looked at his son and said to him, "By Allah,
thou cheerest me with thy coming in to me and chagrinest me for
that thou payest no heed to any of the familiars nor of the
cup-companions. What is the cause of this?" Answered the Prince,
"O my papa, I have heard tell that in the land of Al-Irak is a
woman of the daughters of the kings, and her father is called
King Ins bin Kays, lord of Baghdad; she is famed for beauty and
loveliness and brightness and perfect grace, and indeed many of
the kings have sought her in marriage; but her soul consented not
unto any one of them. Wherefore my thought prompteth me to travel
herwards, for that my heart cleaveth to her, and I beseech thee
suffer me to go to her." His sire replied, "O my son, thou
knowest that I have none other than thyself of children and thou
art the coolth of mine eyes and the fruit of my vitals; nay, I
cannot brook to be parted from thee a single hour and I purpose
to seat thee on the throne of the kingship and espouse thee to
one of the daughters of the kings, who shall be fairer than she."
Al-Abbas gave ear to his father's word and dared not gainsay him;
wherefore he abode with him awhile, whilst the love-fire raged in
his vitals. Then the king took rede with himself to build his son
a Hammam and adorn it with various paintings, so he might display
it to him and divert him with the sight thereof, to the intent
that his body might be solaced thereby and that the accident of
travel might cease from him and he be turned from his purpose of
removal from his parents. Presently he addressed himself to the
building of the bath and assembling architects and artisans from
all his cities and citadels and islands, assigned them a
foundation-site and marked out its boundaries. Then the workmen
occupied themselves with the building of the Hammam and the
ordinance and adornment of its cabinets and roofs. They used
paints and precious minerals of all kinds, according to the
contrast of their colours, red and green and blue and yellow and
what not else of all manner tincts; and each artisan wrought at
his craft and each painter at his art, whilst the rest of the
folk busied themselves with transporting thither vari-coloured
stones. One day, as the Master-painter wrought at his work, there
came in to him a poor man, who looked long upon him and observed
his mystery; whereupon quoth the artist to him, "Knowest thou
aught of painting?" Quoth the stranger, "Yes;" so he gave him
tools and paints and said to him, "Limn for us a rare semblance."
Accordingly the pauper stranger entered one of the bath-chambers
and drew on its walls a double border, which he adorned on both
sides, after a fashion than which eyes never saw a fairer.
Moreover, amiddlemost the chamber he limned a picture to which
there lacked but the breath,[FN#349] and it was the portraiture
of Mariyah, daughter to the king of Baghdad. Then, when he had
finished the portrait, he went his way and told none of what he
had done, nor knew any wight the chambers and doors of the bath
and the adornment and ordinance thereof. Presently the chief
artisan came to the palace and sought audience of the king who
bade admit him. So he entered and kissing the earth, saluted him
with a salam beseeming Sultans and said, "O king of the time and
lord of the age and the tide, may prosperity endure to thee and
acceptance and eke thy degree over all the kings both morning and
evening[FN#350] exalted be! The work of the bath is accomplished,
by the king's fair fortune and the purity of his purpose, and
indeed, we have done all that behoved us and there remaineth but
that which behoveth the king." Al-Aziz ordered him a costly robe
of honour and expended monies galore, giving unto each who had
wroughten after the measure of his work. Then he assembled in the
Hammam all the Lords of his realm, Emirs and Wazirs and
Chamberlains and Nabobs, and the chief officers of his kingdom
and household, and sending for his son Al-Abbas, said to him, "O
my son, I have builded thee a bath, wherein thou mayst take thy
pleasance; so enter that thou mayst see it and divert thyself by
gazing upon it and viewing the beauty of its ordinance and
decoration." "With love and gladness," replied the Prince and
entered the bath, he and the king and the folk about them, so
they might divert themselves with viewing that which the
workmen's hands had worked. Al-Abbas went in and passed from
place to place and chamber to chamber, till he came to the room
aforesaid and espied the portrait of Mariyah, whereupon he fell
down in a fainting-fit and the workmen went to his father and
said to him, "Thy son Al-Abbas hath swooned away." So the king
came and finding his son cast down, seated himself at his head
and bathed his face with rose-water. After awhile he revived and
the king said to him, "I seek refuge with Allah for thee, O my
son! What accident hath befallen thee?" The Prince replied, "O my
father, I did but look on yonder picture and it bequeathed me a
thousand qualms and there befel me that which thou beholdest."
Therewith the king bade fetch the Master-painter, and when he
stood before him, he said to him, "Tell me of yonder portrait and
what girl is this of the daughters of the kings; else I will take
thy head." Said the painter, "By Allah, O king, I limned it not,
neither know I who she is; but there came to me a poor man and
looked hard at me. So I asked him, Knowest thou the art of
painting? and he answered, Yes. Whereupon I gave him the gear and
said to him, Limn for us a rare semblance. Accordingly he painted
yonder portrait and went away and I wot him not neither have I
ever set eyes on him save that day." Hearing this, the king
ordered all his officers to go round about in the thoroughfares
and colleges and to bring before him all strangers they found
there. So they went forth and brought him much people, amongst
whom was the pauper who had painted the portrait. When they came
into the presence, the Sultan bade the crier make public
proclamation that whoso wrought the portrait should discover
himself and have whatso he wished. Thereupon the poor man came
forward and kissing the ground before the king, said to him, "O
king of the age, I am he who limned yonder likeness." Quoth
Al-Aziz, "And knowest thou who she is?" and quoth the other,
"Yes, this is the portrait of Mariyah, daughter of the king of
Baorhdad." The king ordered him a robe of honour and a slave-girl
and he went his way. Then said Al-Abbas, "O my papa, give me
leave to seek her, so I may look upon her: else shall I farewell
the world, withouten fail." The king his father wept and
answered, "O my son, I builded thee a Hammam, that it might turn
thee from leaving me, and behold, it hath been the cause of thy
going forth; but the behest of Allah is a determinate
decree."[FN#351] Then he wept again and Al-Abbas said to him,
"Fear not for me, for thou knowest my prowess and puissance in
returning answers in the assemblies of the land and my good
breeding and accomplishments together with my skill in rhetoric;
and indeed for him whose father thou art and whom thou hast
reared and bred and in whom thou hast united praiseworthy
qualities, the repute whereof hath traversed the East and the
West, thou needest not fear aught, more especially as I purpose
but to seek pleasuring and return to thee, an it be the will of
Allah Almighty." Quoth the king, "Whom wilt thou take with thee
of attendants and what of monies?" Replied Al-Abbas, "O my papa,
I have no need of horses or camels or weapons, for I purpose not
warfare, and I will have none go forth with me save my page 'Amir
and no more." Now as he and his father were thus engaged in talk,
in came his mother and caught hold of him; and he said to her,
"Allah upon thee, let me gang my gait and strive not to divert me
from what purpose I have purposed, for needs must I go." She
replied, "O my son, if it must be so and there be no help for it,
swear to me that thou wilt not be absent from me more than a
year." And he sware to her. Then he entered his father's
treasuries and took therefrom what he would of jewels and
jacinths and everything weighty of worth and light of load: he
also bade his servant Amir saddle him two steeds and the like for
himself, and whenas the night beset his back,[FN#352] he rose
from his couch and mounting his horse, set out for Baghdad, he
and Amir, whilst the page knew not whither he intended.[FN#353]
He gave not over going and the journey was joyous to him, till
they came to a goodly land, abounding in birds and wild beasts,
whereupon Al-Abbas started a gazelle and shot it with a shaft.
Then he dismounted and cutting its throat, said to his servant,
"Alight thou and skin it and carry it to the water." Amir
answered him with "Hearkening and obedience" and going down to
the water, built a fire and broiled the gazelle's flesh. Then
they ate their fill and drank of the water, after which they
mounted again and fared on with diligent faring, and Amir still
unknowing whither Al-Abbas was minded to wend. So he said to him,
"O my lord, I conjure thee by Allah of All-might, wilt thou not
tell me whither thou intendest?" Al-Abbas looked at him and in
reply improvised these couplets,

"In my vitals are fires of desire and repine; * And naught I
     reply when they flare on high:
Baghdad-wards I hie me on life-and-death work, * Loving one who
     distorts my right judgment awry:
A swift camel under me shortcuts the wold * And deem it a cloud
     all who nearhand espy:
O 'Amir make haste after model of her * Who would heal mine ill
     and Love's cup drain dry:
For the leven of love burns the vitals of me; * So with me seek
     my tribe and stint all reply."

When Amir heard his lord's verses, he knew that he was a slave of
love and that she whom he loved abode in Baghdad. Then they fared
on night and day, traversing plain and stony way, till they
sighted Baghdad and lighted down in its environs[FN#354] and
there lay their night. When they arose in the morning, they
removed to the bank of the Tigris where they encamped and
sojourned a second day and a third. As they abode thus on the
fourth day, behold, a company of folk giving their beasts the
rein and crying aloud and saying, "Quick! Quick! Haste to our
rescue, Ho thou the King!" Therewith the King's chamberlains and
officers accosted them and said, "What is behind you and what
hath betided you?" Quoth they, "Bring us before the King." So
they carried them to Ins bin Kays; and when they saw him, they
said to him, "O king, unless thou succour us, we are dead men;
for that we are a folk of the Banu Shayban,[FN#355] who have
taken up our abode in the parts of Bassorah, and Hodhayfah the
wild Arab hath come down on us with his steeds and his men and
hath slain our horse-men and carried off our women and children;
nor was one saved of the tribe but he who fled; wherefore we
crave help first by Allah Almighty, then by thy life." When the
king heard their speech, he bade the crier proclaim in the
highways of the city that the troops should busk them to march
and that the horsemen should mount and the footmen fare forth;
nor was it but the twinkling of the eye ere the kettle-drums beat
and the trumpets blared; and scarce was the forenoon of the day
passed when the city was blocked with horse and foot. Presently,
the king reviewed them and behold, they were four-and-twenty
thousand in number, cavalry and infantry. He bade them go forth
to the enemy and gave the command of them to Sa'ad ibn al-Wakidi,
a doughty cavalier and a dauntless champion; so the horsemen set
out and fared on along the Tigris-bank. Al-Abbas, son of King
Al-Aziz, looked at them and saw the flags flaunting and the
standards stirring and heard the kettle-drums beating; so he bade
his page saddle him a blood-steed and look to the surcingles and
bring him his harness of war, for indeed horsemanship[FN#356] was
rooted in his heart. Quoth Amir, "And indeed I saw Al-Abbas, his
eyes waxed red and the hair of his hands on end." So he mounted
his charger, whilst Amir also bestrode a destrier, and they went
forth with the commando and fared on two days. On the third day,
after the hour of the midafternoon prayer, they came in sight of
the foe and the two armies met and the two ranks joined in fight.
The strife raged amain and sore was the strain, whilst the dust
rose in clouds and hung in vaulted shrouds, so that all eyes were
blinded; and they ceased not from the battle till the night
overtook them,[FN#357] when the two hosts drew off from the
mellay and passed the night, perplexed concerning themselves.
When Allah caused the morning to morrow, the two hosts were
aligned in line and their thousands fixed their eyne and the
troops stood looking one at other. Then sallied forth Al-Haris
ibn Sa'ad between the two lines and played with his lance and
cried out and improvised these couplets,

"You are in every way this day our prey; * And ever we prayed
     your sight to see:
The Ruthful drave you Hodhayfah-wards * To the Brave, the Lion
     who sways the free:
Say, amid you's a man who would heal his ills, * With whose lust
     of battle shrewd blows agree?
Then by Allah meet me who come to you * And whoso is wronged
     shall the wronger be."[FN#358]

Thereupon there sallied forth to him Zuhayr bin Habib, and they
wheeled about and wiled a while, then they exchanged strokes.
Al-Haris forewent his foe in smiting and stretched him weltering
in his gore; whereupon Hodhayfah cried out to him, "Gifted of
Allah[FN#359] art thou, O Haris! Call out another of them." So he
cried aloud, "I say, who be a champion?" But they of Baghdad held
back from him; and when it appeared to Al-Haris that
consternation was amongst them, he charged down upon them and
overrolled the first of them upon the last of them and slew of
them twelve men. Then the evening caught him and the Baghdadis
began addressing themselves to flight. No sooner had the morning
morrowed than they found themselves reduced to a fourth part of
their number and there was not one of them had dismounted from
his horse. Wherefore they made sure of destruction and Hodhayfah
rushed out between the two lines (now he was reckoned good for a
thousand knights) and cried out, "Harkye, my masters of Baghdad!
Let none come forth to me but your Emir, so I may talk with him
and he with me; and he shall meet me in combat singular and I
will meet him, and may he who is clear of offence come off safe."
Then he repeated his words and said, "How is it I see your Emir
refuse me a reply?" But Sa'ad, the Emir of the army of Baghdad,
answered him not, and indeed his teeth chattered in his mouth,
when he heard him summon him to the duello. Now when Al-Abbas
heard Hodhayfah's challenge and saw Sa'ad in this case, he came
up to the Emir and asked him, "Wilt thou suffer me to answer him
and I will be thy substitute in replying him and in monomachy
with him and will make my life thy sacrifice?" Sa'ad looked at
him and seeing knighthood shining from between his eyes, said to
him, "O youth, by the virtue of Mustafa the Chosen Prophet (whom
Allah save and assain), tell me who thou art and whence thou
comest to bring us victory."[FN#360] Quoth the Prince, "This is
no place for questioning;" and quoth Sa'ad to him, "O Knight, up
and at Hodhayfah! Yet, if his Satan prove too strong for thee,
afflict not thyself on thy youth."[FN#361] Al-Abbas cried, "Allah
is He of whom help is to be sought;"[FN#362] and, taking his
arms, fortified his purpose and went down into the field, as he
were a fort of the forts or a mountain's contrefort. Thereupon
Hodhayfah cried out to him, saying, "Haste thee not, O youth! Who
art thou of the folk?" He replied, "I am Sa'ad ibn al-Wakidi,
commander of the host of King Ins, and but for thy pride in
challenging me, I had not come forth to thee; for thou art no
peer for me to front nor as mine equal dost thou count nor canst
thou bear my brunt. Wherefore get thee ready for the last
march[FN#363] seeing that there abideth but a little of thy
life." When Hodhayfah heard this speech, he threw himself
backwards,[FN#364] as if in mockery of him, whereat Al-Abbas was
wroth and called out to him, saying, "O Hodhayfah, guard thyself
against me." Then he rushed upon him, as he were a swooper of the
Jinn,[FN#365] and Hodhayfah met him and they wheeled about a long
while. Presently, Al-Abbas cried out at Hodhayfah a cry which
astounded him and struck him a stroke, saying, "Take this from
the hand of a brave who feareth not the like of thee." Hodhayfah
met the sabre-sway with his shield, thinking to ward it off from
him; but the blade shore the target in sunder and descending upon
his shoulder, came forth gleaming from the tendons of his throat
and severed his arm at the armpit; whereupon he fell down,
wallowing in his blood, and Al-Abbas turned upon his host; not
had the sun departed the dome of the welkin ere Hodhayfah's army
was in full flight before Al-Abbas and the saddles were empty of
men. Quoth Sa'ad, "By the virtue of Mustafa the Chosen Prophet,
whom Allah save and assain, I saw Al-Abbas with the blood upon
his saddle-pads, in clots like camels' livers, smiting with the
sword right and left, till he scattered them abroad in every
gorge and wold; and when he hied him back to the camp, the men of
Baghdad were fearful of him." But as soon as they saw this
victory which had betided them over their foes, they turned back
and gathering together the weapons and treasures and horses of
those they had slain, returned to Baghdad, victorious, and all by
the knightly valour of Al-Abbas. As for Sa'ad, he foregathered
with his lord, and they fared on in company till they came to the
place where Al-Abbas had taken horse, whereupon the Prince
dismounted from his charger and Sa'ad said to him, "O youth,
wherefore alightest thou in other than thy place? Indeed, thy
rights be incumbent upon us and upon our Sultan; so go thou with
us to the dwellings, that we may ransom thee with our souls."
Replied Al-Abbas, "O Emir Sa'ad, from this place I took horse
with thee and herein is my lodging. So, Allah upon thee, mention
not me to the king, but make as if thou hadst never seen me
because I am a stranger in the land." So saying he turned away
from him and Sa'ad fared on to his palace, where he found all the
courtiers in attendance on the king and recounting to him that
which had betided them with Al-Abbas. Quoth the king, "Where is
he?" and quoth they, "He is with the Emir Sa'ad." So, when the
Emir entered, the king looked, but found none with him; and
Sa'ad, seeing at a glance that he longed to look upon the youth,
cried out to him, saying, "Allah prolong the king's days! Indeed,
he refuseth to present himself before thee, without order or
leave." Asked the king, "O Sa'ad, whence cometh this man?" and
the Emir answered, "O my lord, I know not; but he is a youth fair
of favour, amiable of aspect, accomplished in address, ready of
repartee, and valour shineth from between his eyes." Quoth the
king, "O Sa'ad, fetch him to me, for indeed thou describest to me
at full length a mighty matter."[FN#366] And he answered, saying,
"By Allah, O my lord, hadst thou but seen our case with
Hodhayfah, when he challenged me to the field of fight and the
stead of cut-and-thrust and I held back from doing battle with
him! Then, as I thought to go forth to him, behold, a knight gave
loose to his bridle-rein and called out to me, saying, 'O Sa'ad,
wilt thou suffer me to be thy substitute in waging war with him
and I will ransom thee with myself?' and quoth I, 'By Allah, O
youth, whence comest thou?' and quoth he, 'This be no time for
thy questions, while Hodhayfah standeth awaiting thee.'"
Thereupon he repeated to the king all that had passed between
himself and Al-Abbas from first to last; whereat cried Ins bin
Kays, "Bring him to me in haste, so we may learn his tidings and
question him of his case." "'Tis well," replied Sa'ad, and going
forth of the king's presence, repaired to his own house, where he
doffed his war-harness and took rest for himself. On this wise
fared it with the Emir Sa'ad, but as regards Al-Abbas, when he
dismounted from his destrier, he doffed his war-gear and repose
himself awhile; after which he brought out a body-dress of
Venetian[FN#367] silk and a gown of green damask and donning
them, bound about his head a turband of Damietta stuff and zoned
his waist with a kerchief. Then he went out a-walking in the
highways of Baghdad and fared on till he came to the bazar of the
traders. There he found a merchant, with chess before him; so the
Prince stood watching him, and presently the other looked up at
him and asked him, "O youth, what wilt thou bet upon the game?"
He answered, "Be it thine to decide." Said the merchant, "Then be
it an hundred dinars," and Al-Abbas consented to him; whereupon
quoth he, "Produce the money, O youth, so the game may be fairly
stablished." Accordingly Al-Abbas brought out a satin purse,
wherein were a thousand dinars, and laid down an hundred dinars
therefrom on the edge of the carpet, whilst the merchant produced
the like, and indeed his reason fled for joy when he saw the gold
in possession of Al-Abbas. The folk flocked about them, to divert
themselves with watching the play, and they called the bystanders
to witness the wager and after the stakes were duly staked, the
twain fell a-playing. Al-Abbas forebore the merchant, so he might
lead him on, and dallied with him a full hour; and the merchant
won and took of him the hundred dinars. Then said the Prince,
"Wilt thou play another partie?" and the other said, "O youth, I
will not play again, save for a thousand dinars." Quoth the
youth, 'Whatsoever thou stakest, I will match thy stake with its
like." So the merchant brought out a thousand dinars and the
Prince covered them with other thousand. Then the game began, but
Al-Abbas was not long with him ere he beat him in the house of
the elephant[FN#368] nor did he cease to do thus till he had
beaten him four times and won of him four thousand dinars. This
was all the merchant had of money; so he said, "O youth, I will
play thee another game for the shop." Now the value of the shop
was four thousand dinars; so they played and Al-Ahbas beat him
and won his shop, with whatso was therein; upon which the other
arose, shaking his clothes,[FN#369] and said to him, "Up, O
youth, and take thy shop." Accordingly Al-Abbas arose and
repairing to the shop, took possession thereof, after which he
returned to the place where he had left his servant 'Amir, and
found there the Emir Sa'ad, who was come to bid him to the
presence of the king. The Prince consented to this and
accompanied him till they came before King Ins bin Kays,
whereupon he kissed the ground and saluted him and
exaggerated[FN#370] the salutation. So the king asked him,
"Whence comest thou, O youth, and whither goest thou?" and he
answered, "I come from Al-Yaman." Then said the king, "Hast thou
a need we may fulfil to thee; for indeed thou hast strong claims
to our favour after that which thou didst in the matter of
Hodhayfah and his folk." And he commanded to cast over him a
mantle of Egyptian satin, worth an hundred dinars. He also bade
his treasurer give him a thousand dinars and said to him, "O
youth, take this in part of that which thou deservest of us; and
if thou prolong thy sojourn with us, we will give thee slaves and
servants." Al-Abbas kissed ground and said, "O king, Allah grant
thee abiding weal, I deserve not all this." Then he put his hand
to his pouch and pulling out two caskets of gold, in each of
which were rubies whose value none could estimate, gave them to
the king, saying, "O king, Allah cause thy welfare to endure, I
conjure thee by that which the Almighty hath vouchsafed thee,
heal my heart by accepting these two caskets, even as I have
accepted thy present." So the king accepted the two caskets and
Al-Abbas took his leave and went away to the bazar. Now when the
merchants saw him, they accosted him and said, "O youth, wilt
thou not open thy shop?" As they were addressing him, up came a
woman, having with her a boy bare of head, and stood looking at
Al-Abbas, till he turned to her, when she said to him, "O youth,
I conjure thee by Allah, look at this boy and have ruth on him,
for that his father hath forgotten his skull-cap in the shop he
lost to thee; so, an thou see fit to give it him, thy reward be
with Allah! For indeed the child maketh our hearts ache with his
excessive weeping, and the Lord be witness for us that, had they
left us aught wherewith to buy him a cap in its stead, we had not
sought it of thee." Replied Al-Abbas, "O adornment of
womankind,[FN#371] indeed, thou bespeakest me with thy fair
speech and supplicatest me with thy goodly words! But bring me
thy husband." So she went and fetched the merchant, whilst a
crowd collected to see what Al-Abbas would do. When the man came,
he returned him the gold he had won of him, art and part, and
delivered him the keys of the shop, saying, "Requite us with thy
pious prayers." Therewith the woman came up to him and kissed his
feet, and in like fashion did the merchant her husband: and all
who were present blessed him, and there was no talk but of
Al-Abbas. Thus fared it with him; but as for the merchant, he
bought him a head of sheep[FN#372] and slaughtering it, roasted
it and dressed birds and other meats of various kinds and colours
and purchased dessert and sweetmeats and fresh fruits; then he
repaired to Al-Abbas and conjured him to accept of his
hospitality and visit his home and eat of his provaunt. The
Prince consented to his wishes and went with him till they came
to his house, when the merchant bade him enter: so Al-Abbas went
in and saw a goodly house, wherein was a handsome saloon, with a
vaulted ceiling. When he entered the saloon, he found that the
merchant had made ready food and dessert and perfumes, such as
may not be described; and indeed he had adorned the table with
sweet-scented flowers and sprinkled musk and rose-water upon the
food; and he had smeared the saloon walls with ambergris and had
burned aloes-wood therein and Nadd. Presently, Al-Abbas looked
out of the window of the saloon and saw by its side a house of
goodly ordinance, tall of base and wide of space, with rooms
manifold and two upper stories crowning the whole; but therein
was no sign of inhabitants. So he said to the merchant, "Verily,
thou exaggeratest in doing us honour; but, by Allah, I will not
eat of thy meat until thou tell me what hath caused the voidance
of yonder house." Said he, "O my lord, that was Al-Ghitrif's
house and he passed away to the mercy of the Almighty and left no
heir save myself; whereupon the mansion became mine, and by
Allah, an thou have a mind to sojourn in Baghdad, take up thine
abode in this house, whereby thou mayst be in my neighbourhood;
for that verily my heart inclineth unto thee with affection and I
would have thee never absent from mine eyes, so I may still have
my fill of thee and hearken to thy speech." Al-Abbas thanked him
and said to him, "By Allah, thou art indeed friendly in thy
converse and thou exaggeratest in thy discourse, and needs must I
sojourn in Baghdad. As for the house, if it please thee to lodge
me, I will abide therein; so accept of me its price." Therewith
he put hand to his pouch and bringing out from it three hundred
dinars, gave them to the merchant, who said in himself, "Unless I
take his dirhams, he will not darken my doors." So he pocketed
the monies and sold him the mansion, taking witnesses against
himself of the sale. Then he arose and set food before Al-Abbas
and they sat down to his good things; after which he brought him
dessert and sweetmeats whereof they ate their sufficiency, and
when the tables were removed they washed their hands with musked
rose-water and will