ow-water. Then the merchant brought Al-Abbas a
napkin scented with the smoke of aloes-wood, on which he wiped
his right hand, and said to him, "O my lord, the house is become
thy house; so bid thy page transport thither the horses and arms
and stuffs." The Prince did this and the merchant rejoiced in his
neighbourhood and left him not night nor day,[FN#373] so that
Al-Abbas said to him, "By the Lord, we distract thee from thy
livelihood." He replied, "Allah upon thee, O my lord, name not to
me aught of this, or thou wilt break my heart, for the best of
traffic art thou and the best of livelihood." So there befel
straight friendship between them and all ceremony was laid aside.
Meanwhile[FN#374] the king said to his Wazir, "How shall we do in
the matter of yonder youth, the Yamani, on whom we thought to
confer gifts, but he hath gifted us with tenfold our largesse and
more, and we know not an he be a sojourner with us or not?" Then
he went into the Harim and gave the rubies to his wife Afifah,
who asked him, "What is the worth of these with thee and with
other of the kings?" Quoth he, "They are not to be found save
with the greatest of sovrans nor can any price them with monies."
Quoth she, "Whence gottest thou them?" So he recounted to her the
story of Al-Abbas from beginning to end, and she said, "By Allah,
the claims of honour are imperative on us and the King hath
fallen short of his devoir; for that we have not seen him bid the
youth to his assembly, nor hath he seated him on his left hand."
When the king heard his wife's words, it was as if he had been
asleep and awoke; so he went forth the Harim and bade kill
poultry and dress meats of every kind and colour. Moreover, he
assembled all his courtiers and let bring sweetmeats and dessert
and all that beseemeth the tables of kings. Then he adorned his
palace and despatched after Al-Abbas a man of the chief officers
of his household, who found him coming forth of the Hammam, clad
in a jerkin[FN#375] of fine goats' hair and over it a Baghdadi
scarf; his waist was girt with a Rustaki[FN#376] kerchief and on
his head he wore a light turband of Damietta[FN#377] stuff. The
messenger wished him joy of the bath and exaggerated in doing him
honour: then he said to him, "The king biddeth thee in
weal."[FN#378] "To hear is to obey," quoth Al-Abbas and
accompanied the officer to the king's palace. Now Afifah and her
daughter Mariyah were behind the curtain, both looking at him;
and when he came before the sovran he saluted him and greeted him
with the greeting of kings, whilst all present gazed at him and
at his beauty and loveliness and perfect grace. The king seated
him at the head of the table; and when Afifah saw him and
considered him straitly, she said, "By the virtue of Mohammed,
prince of the Apostles, this youth is of the sons of the kings
and cometh not to these parts save for some noble purpose!" Then
she looked at Mariyah and saw that her favour was changed, and
indeed her eye-balls were as dead in her face and she turned not
her gaze from Al-Abbas a twinkling of the eyes, for that the love
of him had sunk deep into her heart. When the queen saw what had
befallen her daughter, she feared for her from reproach
concerning Al-Abbas; so she shut the casement-wicket that the
Princess might not look upon him any more. Now there was a
pavilion set apart for Mariyah, and therein were boudoirs and
bowers, balconies and lattices, and she had with her a nurse, who
served her as is the fashion with the daughters of the Kings.
When the banquet was ended and the folk had dispersed, the King
said to Al-Abbas, "I would fain have thee abide with me and I
will buy thee a mansion, so haply we may requite thee for thy
high services; and indeed imperative upon us is thy due and
magnified in our eyes is thy work; and soothly we have fallen
short of thy deserts in the matter of distance."[FN#379] When the
youth heard the king's speech, he rose and sat down[FN#380] and
kissing ground, returned thanks for his bounty and said, "I am
the King's thrall, wheresoever I may be, and under his eye." Then
he told him the tale of the merchant and the manner of the buying
of the house, and the king said, "In very truth I would fain have
had thee in my neighbourhood and by side of me." Presently
Al-Abbas took leave of the king and went away to his own house.
Now it chanced that he passed under the palace of Mariyah, the
king's daughter, and she was sitting at a casement. He happened
to look round and his eyes met those of the Princess, whereupon
his wit departed and he was ready to swoon away, whilst his
colour changed, and he said, "Verily, we are Allah's and unto Him
are we returning!" But he feared for himself lest severance
betide him; so he concealed his secret and discovered not his
case to any of the creatures of Allah Almighty. When he reached
his quarters, his page Amir said to him, "I seek refuge for thee
with Allah, O my lord, from change of colour! Hath there betided
thee a pain from the Lord of All-might or aught of vexation? In
good sooth, sickness hath an end and patience doeth away
trouble." But the Prince returned him no answer. Then he brought
out ink-case[FN#381] and paper and wrote these couplets:

I cry (and mine's a frame that pines alway), * A mind which fires
     of passion e'er waylay;
And eyeballs never tasting sweets of sleep; * Yet Fortune spare
     its cause I ever pray!
While from world-perfidy and parting I * Like Bishram with
     Hind,[FN#382] that well-loved may;--
Yea, grown a bye-word 'mid the folk but aye * Spend life
     unwinning wish or night or day.
"Ah say, wots she my love when her I spied * At the high lattice
     shedding sunlike ray?"
Her glances, keener than the brand when bared * Cleave soul of
     man nor ever 'scapes her prey:
I looked on her in lattice pierced aloft * When bare her cheat of
     veil that slipped away;
And shot me thence a shaft my liver pierced * When thrall to care
     and dire despair I lay
Knowst thou, O Fawn o' the palace, how for thee * I fared from
     farness o'er the lands astray?
Then read my writ, dear friends, and show some ruth * To wight
     who wones black-faced, distraught, sans stay!

And when he ended inditing, he folded up the letter. Now the
merchant's wife aforesaid, who was the nurse of the king's
daughter, was watching him from a window, unknown of him, and
when she saw him writing and reciting, she knew that some rare
tale attached to him; so she went in to him and said, "Peace be
with thee, O afflicted wight, who acquaintest not leach with thy
plight! Verily, thou exposest thy life to grievous blight. I
conjure thee by the virtue of Him who hath afflicted thee and
with the constraint of love-liking hath stricken thee, that thou
acquaint me with thine affair and disclose to me the truth of thy
secret; for that indeed I have heard from thee verses which
trouble the mind and melt the body." Accordingly he acquainted
her with his case and enjoined her to secrecy, whereof she
consented, saying, "What shall be the recompense of whoso goeth
with thy letter and bringeth thee its reply?" He bowed his head
for shame before her and was silent; and she said to him, "Raise
thy head and give me thy writ": so he gave her the letter and she
hent it and carrying it to the Princess, said to her, "Take this
epistle and give me its answer." Now the dearest of all things to
Mariyah was the recitation of poesy and verses and linked rhymes
and the twanging of lute-strings, and she was versed in all
tongues; wherefore she took the writ and opening it, read that
which was therein and understood its purport. Then she threw it
to the ground and cried, "O nurse, I have no answer to make to
this letter." Quoth the nurse, "Indeed, this is weakness in thee
and a reproach to thee, for that the people of the world have
heard of thee and commend thee for keenness of wit and
understanding; so do thou return him an answer, such as shall
trick his heart and tire his soul." Quoth she, "O nurse, who may
be the man who presumeth upon me with this correspondence? Haply
'tis the stranger youth who gave my father the rubies." The woman
said, "It is himself," and Mariyah said, "I will answer his
letter in such fashion that thou shalt not bring me other than
it." Cried the nurse, "So be it."[FN#383] Thereupon the Princess
called for ink-case and paper and wrote these couplets:--

Thou art bold in the copy thou sentest! May be * 'Twill increase
     the dule foreign wight must dree!
Thou hast spied me with glance that bequeaths thee woe * Ah! far
     is thy hope, a mere foreigner's plea!
Who art thou, poor freke, that wouldst win my love * Wi' thy
     verse? What seeks thine insanity?
An thou hope for my favours and greed therefor; * Where find thee
     a leach for such foolish gree?
Then rhyme-linking leave and fool-like be not * Hanged to Cross
     at the doorway of ignomy!
Deem not that to thee I incline, O youth! * 'Mid the Sons of the
     Path[FN#384] is no place for me.
Thou art homeless waif in the wide wide world; * So return thee
     home where they keen for thee:[FN#385]
Leave verse-spouting, O thou who a-wold dost wone, * Or minstrel
     shall name thee in lay and glee:
How many a friend who would meet his love * Is baulked when the
     goal is right clear to see!
So begone and ne'er grieve for what canst not win * Albe time be
     near, yet thy grasp 'twill flee.
Now such is my say and the tale I'd tell; * So master my meaning
     and--fare thee well!


When Mariyah had made an end of her verses, she folded the letter
and delivered it to the nurse, who hent it and went with it to
Al-Abbas. When she gave it to him, he took it and breaking it
open, read it and comprehended its contents; and when he reached
the end of it, he swooned away. After awhile, he came to himself
and cried, "Praise be to Allah who hath caused her return a reply
to my writ! Canst thou carry her another missive, and with Allah
Almighty be thy requital?" Said she, "And what shall letters
profit thee, seeing that such is her reply;" but he said,
"Peradventure, she may yet be softened." Then he took ink-case
and paper and wrote these couplets:--

Reached me the writ and what therein didst write, * Whence grew
     my pain and bane and blight:
I read the marvel-lines made wax my love * And wore my body out
     till slightest slight.[FN#386]
Would Heaven ye wot the whole I bear for love * Of you, with
     vitals clean for you undight!
And all I do t' outdrive you from my thought * 'Vails naught and
     'gainst th' obsession loses might:
Couldst for thy lover feel 'twould ease his soul; * E'en thy dear
     Phantom would his sprite delight!
Then on my weakness lay not coyness-load * Nor in such breach of
     troth be traitor-wight:
And, weet ye well, for this your land I fared * Hoping to 'joy
     the union-boon forthright:
How many a stony wold for this I spanned; * How oft I waked when
     men kept watch o'night!
To fare fro' another land for sight of you * Love bade, while
     length of way forbade my sprite:
So by His name[FN#387] who molt my frame, have ruth, * And quench
     the flames thy love in me did light:
Thou fillest, arrayed with glory's robes and rays, * Heaven's
     stars with joy and Luna with despight.
Then who dare chide or blame me for my love * Of one that can all
     Beauty's boons unite?

When Al-Abbas had made an end of his verses, he folded the letter
and delivering it to the nurse, charged her keep the secret. So
she took it and carrying it to Mariyah, gave it to her. The
Princess broke it open and read it and apprehended its purport;
then cried she, "By Allah, O nurse, my heart is chagrined with
exceeding chagrin, never knew I a sorer, because of this
correspondence and of these verses." And the nurse made answer to
her "O my lady, thou art in thy dwelling and thy palace and thy
heart is void of care; so return to him a reply and reck not."
Accordingly, the Princess called for ink-case and paper and wrote
these couplets:--

Ho thou who wouldst vaunt thee of cark and care; * How many
     love-molten, tryst-craving be there?
An hast wandered the wold in the murks of night * Bound afar and
     anear on the tracks to fare,
And to eyne hast forbidden the sweets of sleep, * Borne by Devils
     and Marids to dangerous lair;
And beggest my boons, O in tribe-land[FN#388] homed * And to urge
     thy wish and desire wouldst dare;
Now, woo Patience fair, an thou bear in mind * What The Ruthful
     promised to patient prayer![FN#389]
How many a king for my sake hath vied, * Craving love and in
     marriage with me to pair.
Al-Nabhan sent, when a-wooing me, * Camels baled with musk and
     Nadd scenting air.
They brought camphor in boxes and like thereof * Of pearls and
     rubies that countless were;
Brought pregnant lasses and negro-lads, * Blood steeds and arms
     and gear rich and rare;
Brought us raiment of silk and of sendal sheen, * And came
     courting us but no bride he bare:
Nor could win his wish, for I 'bode content * To part with far
     parting and love forswear;
So for me greed not, O thou stranger wight * Lest thou come to
     ruin and dire despair!

When she had made an end of her verses, she folded the letter and
delivered it to the nurse, who took it and carried it to
Al-Abbas. He broke it open and read it and comprehended its
contents; then took ink-case and paper and wrote these improvised
couplets:--

Thou hast told me the tale of the Kings, and of them * Each was
     rending lion, a furious foe:
And thou stolest the wits of me, all of them * And shotst me with
     shaft of thy magic bow:
Thou hast boasted of slaves and of steeds and wealth; * And of
     beauteous lasses ne'er man did know;
How presents in mighty store didst spurn, * And disdainedst
     lovers both high and low:
Then I followed their tracks in desire for thee, * With naught
     save my scymitar keen of blow;
Nor slaves nor camels that run have I; * Nor slave-girls the
     litters enveil, ah, no!
But grant me union and soon shalt sight * My trenchant blade with
     the foeman's woe;
Shalt see the horsemen engird Baghdad * Like clouds that wall the
     whole world below,
Obeying behests which to them I deal * And hearing the words to
     the foes I throw.
An of negro chattels ten thousand head * Wouldst have, or Kings
     who be proud and prow
Or chargers led for thee day by day * And virgin girls high of
     bosom, lo!
Al-Yaman land my command doth bear * And my biting blade to my
     foes I show.
I have left this all for the sake of thee, * Left Aziz and my
     kinsmen for ever-mo'e;
And made Al-Irak making way to thee * Under nightly murks over
     rocks arow;
When the couriers brought me account of thee * Thy beauty,
     perfection, and sunny glow,
Then I sent thee verses whose very sound * Burns the heart of
     shame with a fiery throe;
Yet the world with falsehood hath falsed me, * Though Fortune was
     never so false as thou,
Who dubbest me stranger and homeless one * A witless fool and a
     slave-girl's son!

Then he folded the letter and committed it to the nurse and gave
her five hundred dinars, saying, "Accept this from me, for by
Allah thou hast indeed wearied thyself between us." She replied,
"By Allah, O my lord, my aim is to bring about forgathering
between you, though I lose that which my right hand possesseth."
And he said, "May the Lord of All-might requite thee with good!"
Then she carried the letter to Mariyah and said to her, "Take
this letter; haply it may be the end of the correspondence." So
she took it and breaking it open, read it, and when she had made
an end of it, she turned to the nurse and said to her, "This one
foisteth lies upon me and asserteth unto me that he hath cities
and horsemen and footmen at his command and submitting to his
allegiance; and he wisheth of me that which he shall not win; for
thou knowest, O nurse, that kings' sons have sought me in
marriage, with presents and rarities; but I have paid no heed
unto aught of this; how, then, shall I accept of this fellow, who
is the ignoramus of his time and possesseth naught save two
caskets of rubies, which he gave to my sire, and indeed he hath
taken up his abode in the house of Al-Ghitrif and abideth without
silver or gold? Wherefore, Allah upon thee, O nurse, return to
him and cut off his hope of me." Accordingly the nurse rejoined
Al-Abbas, without letter or answer; and when she came in to him,
he looked at her and saw that she was troubled, and he noted the
marks of anger on her face; so he said to her, "What is this
plight?" Quoth she, "I cannot set forth to thee that which
Mariyah said; for indeed she charged me return to thee without
writ or reply." Quoth he, "O nurse of kings, I would have thee
carry her this letter and return not to her without it." Then he
took ink-case and paper and wrote these couplets:--

My secret now to men is known though hidden well and true * By
     me: enough is that I have of love and love of you:
I left familiars, friends, and kin to weep the loss of me * With
     floods of tears which like the tide aye flowed and flowed
     anew:
Then, left my home myself I bore to Baghdad-town one day, * When
     parting drave me there his pride and cruelty to rue:
I have indeed drained all the bowl whose draught
     repression[FN#390] was * Handed by friend who bitter
     gourd[FN#391] therein for drinking threw.
And, oft as strove I to enjoin the ways of troth and faith, * So
     often on refusal's path he left my soul to sue.
Indeed my body molten is with care I'm doomed dree; * And yet I
     hoped relenting and to win some grace, my due.
But wrong and rigour waxed on me and changed to worse my case; *
     And love hath left me weeping-eyed for woes that aye pursue.
How long must I keep watch for you throughout the nightly gloom?
     * How many a path of pining pace and garb of grief endue?
And you, what while you joy your sleep, your restful pleasant
     sleep, * Reck naught of sorrow and of shame that to your
     friend accrue:
For wakefulness I watched the stars before the peep o' day, *
     Praying that union with my dear in bliss my soul imbrue;
Indeed the throes of long desire laid waste my frame and I * Rise
     every morn in weaker plight with hopes e'er fewer few:
"Be not" (I say) "so hard of heart!" for did you only deign * In
     phantom guise to visit me 'twere joy enough to view.
But when ye saw my writ ye grudged to me the smallest boon * And
     cast adown the flag of faith though well my troth ye knew;
Nor aught of answer you vouchsafe, albe you wot full well * The
     words therein address the heart and pierce the spirit
     through.
You deemed yourself all too secure for changes of the days * And
     of the far and near alike you ever careless grew.
Hadst thou (dear maid) been doomed like me to woes, forsure hadst
     felt * The lowe of love and Laza-hell which paring doth
     enmew;
Yet soon shalt suffer torments such as those from thee I bear *
     And storm of palpitation-pangs in vitals thine shall brew:
Yea, thou shalt taste the bitter smack of charges false and foul,
     * And public make the privacy best hid from meddling crew;
And he thou lovest shall approve him hard of heart and soul * And
     heedless of the shifts of Time thy very life undo.
Then hear the fond Salam I send and wish thee every day * While
     swayeth spray and sparkleth star all good thy life ensue!

When Al-Abbas had made an end of his verses, he folded the scroll
and gave it to the nurse, who took it and carried it to Mariyah.
When she came into the Princess's presence, she saluted her; but
Mariyah returned not her salutation and she said, "O my lady, how
hard is thy heart that thou grudgest to return the salam! Accept
this letter, because 'tis the last that shall come to thee from
him." Quoth Mariyah, "Take my warning and never again enter my
palace, or 'twill be the cause of thy destruction; for I am
certified that thou purposest my disgrace. So get thee gone from
me." And she bade beat the nurse who went forth fleeing from her
presence, changed of colour and 'wildered of wits, and gave not
over going till she came to the house of Al-Abbas. When the
Prince saw her in this plight, he became like a sleeper awakened
and cried to her, "What hath befallen thee? Acquaint me with thy
case." She replied, "Allah upon thee, nevermore send me to
Mariyah, and do thou protect me, so the Lord protect thee from
the fires of Gehenna!" Then she related to him that which had
betided her with Mariyah which when Al-Abbas heard, there took
him the pride and high spirit of the generous and this was
grievous to him. The love of Mariyah fled forth of his heart and
he said to the nurse, "How much hadst thou of Mariyah every
month?" Quoth she, "Ten dinars" and quoth he, "Be not concerned."
Then he put hand to pouch and bringing out two hundred ducats,
gave them to her and said,"Take this wage for a whole year and
turn not again to serve anyone of the folk. When the twelvemonth
shall have passed away, I will give thee a two years' wage, for
that thou hast wearied thyself with us and on account of the
cutting off the tie which bound thee to Mariyah." Also he gifted
her with a complete suit of clothes and raising his head to her,
said, "When thou toldest me that which Mariyah had done with
thee, Allah uprooted the love of her from out my heart, and never
again will she occur to my thought; so extolled be He who turneth
hearts and eyes! 'Twas she who was the cause of my coming out
from Al-Yaman, and now the time is past for which I engaged with
my folk and I fear lest my father levy his forces and ride forth
in quest of me, for that he hath no child other than myself nor
can he brook to be parted from me; and in like way 'tis with my
mother." When the nurse heard his words, she asked him, "O my
lord, and which of the kings is thy sire?" He answered, saying,
"My father is Al-Aziz, lord of Al-Yaman, and Nubia and the
Islands[FN#392] of the Banu Kahtan, and the Two
Sanctuaries[FN#393] (Allah of All-might have them in His
keeping!), and whenever he taketh horse, there ride with him an
hundred and twenty and four thousand horsemen, each and every
smiters with the sword, besides attendants and servants and
followers, all of whom give ear to my word and obey my bidding."
Asked the nurse, "Why, then, O my lord, didst thou conceal the
secret of thy rank and lineage and passedst thyself off for a
foreigner and a wayfarer? Alas for our disgrace before thee by
reason of our shortcoming in rendering thee thy due! What shall
be our excuse with thee, and thou of the sons of the kings?" But
he rejoined, "By Allah, thou hast not fallen short! Indeed, 'tis
incumbent on me to requite thee, what while I live, though from
thee I be far distant." Then he called his man Amir and said to
him, "Saddle the steeds." When the nurse heard his words and
indeed she saw that Amir brought him the horses and they were
resolved upon departure, the tears ran down upon her cheeks and
she said to him, "By Allah, thy separation is saddening to me, O
coolth of the eye!" Then quoth she, "Where is the goal of thine
intent, so we may know thy news and solace ourselves with thy
report?" Quoth he, "I go hence to visit 'Akil, the son of my
paternal uncle, for that he hath his sojourn in the camp of
Kundah bin Hisham, and these twenty years have I not seen him nor
hath he seen me; so I purpose to repair to him and discover his
news and return. Then will I go hence to Al-Yaman, Inshallah!" So
saying, he took leave of the nurse and her husband and set out,
intending for 'Akil, the son of his father's brother. Now there
was between Baghdad and 'Akil's abiding-place forty days'
journey; so Al-Abbas settled himself on the back of his steed and
his servant Amir mounted also and they fared forth on their way.
Presently, Al-Abbas turned right and left and recited these
couplets,

"I'm the singular knight and my peers I slay! * I lay low the foe
     and his whole array:
I fare me to visit my friend Al-Akil, * And in safety and
     Allah-lauds,[FN#394] shorten the way;
And roll up the width of the wold while still * Hears 'Amir my
     word or in earnest or play.[FN#395]
I spring with the spring of a lynx or a pard * Upon whoso dareth
     our course to stay;
O'erthrow him in ruin and abject shame, * Make him drain the
     death-cup in fatal fray.
My lance is long with its steely blade; * A brand keen-grided,
     thin-edged I sway:
With a stroke an it fell on a towering hill * Of the hardest
     stone, this would cleave in tway:
I lead no troops, nor seek aid save God's, * The creating Lord
     (to whom laud alway!)
On Whom I rely in adventures all * And Who pardoneth laches of
     freeman and thrall."

Then they fell a-faring night and day, and as they went, behold,
they sighted a camp of the camps of the Arabs. So Al-Abbas
enquired thereof and was told that it was the camp of the Banu
Zohrah. Now there were around them herds and flocks, such as
filled the earth, and they were enemies to Al-Akil, the cousin of
Al-Abbas, upon whom they made daily raids and took his cattle,
wherefore he used to pay them tribute every year because he
lacked power to cope wth them. When Al-Abbas came to the skirts
of the camp, he dismounted from his destrier and his servant Amir
also dismounted; and they set down the provaunt and ate their
sufficiency and rested an hour of the day. Then said the Prince
to his page, "Fetch water from the well and give the horses to
drink and draw up a supply for us in thy bag,[FN#396] by way of
provision for the road." So Amir took the water-skin and made for
the well; but, when he came there, behold, two young men slaves
were leading gazelles, and when they saw him, they said to him,
"Whither wendest thou, O youth, and of which of the Arabs art
thou?" Quoth he, "Harkye, lads, fill me my water-skin, for that I
am a stranger astray and a farer of the way, and I have a comrade
who awaiteth me." Quoth the thralls, "Thou art no wayfarer, but a
spy from Al-Akil's camp." Then they took him and carried him to
their king Zuhayr bin Shabib; and when he came before him, he
said to him, "Of which of the Arabs art thou?" Quoth Amir, "I am
a wayfarer." So Zuhayr said, "Whence comest thou and whither
wendest thou?" and Amir replied, "I am on my way to Al-Akil."
When he named Al-Akil, those who were present were excited; but
Zuhayr signed to them with his eyes and asked him, "What is thine
errand with Al-Akil?" and he answered, "We would fain see him, my
friend and I." As soon as Zuhayr heard his words, he bade smite
his neck;' but his Wazir said to him, "Slay him not, till his
friend be present." So he commanded the two slaves to fetch his
friend; whereupon they repaired to Al-Abbas and called to him,
saying, "O youth, answer the summons of King Zuhayr." He
enquired, "What would the king with me?" and they replied, "We
know not." Quoth he, "Who gave the king news of me?" and quoth
they, "We went to draw water, and found a man by the well. So we
questioned him of his case, but he would not acquaint us
therewith, wherefore we carried him willy-nilly to King Zuhayr,
who asked him of his adventure and he told him that he was going
to Al-Akil. Now Al-Akil is the king's enemy and he intendeth to
betake himself to his camp and make prize of his offspring, and
cut off his traces." Said Al-Abbas, "And what hath Al-Akil done
with King Zuhayr?" They replied. "He engaged for himself that he
would bring the King every year a thousand dinars and a thousand
she-camels, besides a thousand head of thoroughbred steeds and
two hundred black slaves and fifty hand-maids; but it hath
reached the king that Al-Akil purposeth to give naught of this;
wherefore he is minded to go to him. So hasten thou with us, ere
the King be wroth with thee and with us." Then said Al-Abbas to
them, "O youths, sit by my weapons and my stallion till I
return." But they said, "By Allah, thou prolongest discourse with
that which beseemeth not of words! Make haste, or we will go with
thy head, for indeed the King purposeth to slay thee and to slay
thy comrade and take that which is with you." When the Prince
heard this, his skin bristled with rage and he cried out at them
with a cry which made them tremble. Then he sprang upon his horse
and settling himself in the saddle, galloped till he came to the
King's assembly, when he shouted at the top of his voice, saying,
"To horse, O horsemen!" and couched his spear at the pavilion
wherein was Zuhayr. Now there were about the King a thousand
smiters with the sword; but Al-Abbas charged home upon them and
dispersed them from around him; and there abode none in the tent
save Zuhayr and his Wazir. Then Al-Abbas came up to the door of
the tent wherein were four-and-twenty golden doves; so he took
them, after he had tumbled them down with the end of his lance.
Then he called out saying, "Ho, Zuhayr! Doth it not suffice thee
that thou hast abated Al-Akil's repute, but thou art minded to
abate that of those who sojourn round about him? Knowest thou not
that he is of the lieutenants of Kundah bin Hisham of the Banu
Shayban, a man renowned for prowess? Indeed, greed of his gain
hath entered into thee and envy of him hath gotten the mastery of
thee. Doth it not suffice thee that thou hast orphaned his
children[FN#397] and slain his men? By the virtue of Mustafa, the
Chosen Prophet, I will make thee drain the cup of death!" So
saying. he bared his brand and smiting Zuhayr on his
shoulder-blade caused the steel issue gleaming from his throat
tendons; then he smote the Wazir and clove his crown asunder. As
he was thus, behold, Amir called out to him and said, "O my lord,
come help me, or I be a dead man!" So Al-Abbas went up to him
guided by his voice, and found him cast down on his back and
chained with four chains to four pickets of iron.[FN#398] He
loosed his bonds and said to him, "Go in front of me, O Amir." So
he fared on before him a little, and presently they looked, and,
behold, horsemen were making to Zuhayr's succour, and they
numbered twelve thousand riders led by Sahl bin Ka'ab bestriding
a coal-black steed. He charged upon Amir, who fled from him, then
upon Al-Abbas, who said, "O Amir, hold fast to my horse and guard
my back." The page did as he bade him, whereupon Al-Abbas cried
out at the folk and falling upon them, overthrew their braves and
slew of them some two thousand riders, whilst not one of them
knew what was to do nor with whom he fought. Then said one of
them to other, "Verily, the King is slain; so with whom do we
wage war? Indeed ye flee from him; but 'twere better ye enter
under his banners, or not one of you will be saved." Thereupon
all dismounted and doffing that which was upon them of war-gear,
came before Al-Abbas and proffered him allegiance and sued for
his protection. So he withheld his brand from them and bade them
gather together the spoils. Then he took the riches and the
slaves and the camels, and they all became his lieges and his
retainers, to the number (according to that which is reported) of
fifty thousand horses. Furthermore, the folk heard of him and
flocked to him from all sides; whereupon he divided the loot
amongst them and gave largesse and dwelt thus three days, and
there came gifts to him. After this he bade march for Al-Akil's
abiding place; so they fared on six days and on the seventh they
sighted the camp. Al-Abbas bade his man Amir precede him and give
Al-Akil the good news of his cousin's coming; so he rode on to
the camp and, going in to Al-Akil, acquainted him with the glad
tidings of Zuhayr's slaughter and the conquest of his
clan.[FN#399] Al-Akil rejoiced in the coming of Al-Abbas and the
slaughter of his enemy and all in his camp rejoiced also and cast
robes of honour upon Amir; while Al-Akil bade go forth to meet
Al-Abbas, and commanded that none, great or small, freeman or
slave, should tarry behind. So they did his bidding and going
forth all, met Al-Abbas at three parasangs[FN#400] distance from
the camp; and when they met him, they dismounted from their
horses and Al-Akil and he embraced and clapped palm to
palm.[FN#401] Then rejoicing in the coming of Al-Abbas and the
killing of their foeman, they returned to the camp, where tents
were pitched for the new-comers and skin-rugs spread and game
slain and beasts slaughtered and royal guest-meals spread; and
after this fashion they abode twenty days in the enjoyment of all
delight of life. On this wise fared it with Al-Abbas and his
cousin Al-Akil; but as regards King Al-Aziz, when his son left
him, he was desolated for him with exceeding desolation, both he
and his mother; and when tidings of him tarried long and the
tryst-time passed without his returning, the king caused public
proclamation to be made, commanding all his troops to get ready
to mount and ride forth in quest of his son Al-Abbas, at the end
of three days, after which no cause of hindrance or excuse would
be admitted to any. So on the fourth day, the king bade muster
the troops who numbered four-and-twenty thousand horse, besides
servants and followers. Accordingly, they reared the standards
and the kettle-drums beat the general and the king set out with
his power intending for Baghdad; nor did he cease to press
forward with all diligence, till he came within half a day's
journey of the city, when he bade his army encamp on the Green
Meadow. There they pitched the tents, till the lowland was
straitened with them, and set up for the king a pavilion of green
brocade, purfled with pearls and precious stones. When Al-Aziz
had sat awhile, he summoned the Mamelukes of his son Al-Abbas,
and they were five-and-twenty in number besides ten slave-girls,
as they were moons, five of whom the king had brought with him
and other five he had left with the prince's mother. When the
Mamelukes came before him, he cast over each and every of them a
mantle of green brocade and bade them mount similar horses of one
and the same fashion and enter Baghdad and ask after their lord
Al-Abbas. So they rode into the city and passed through the
market-streets and there remained in Baghdad nor old man nor boy
but came forth to gaze on them and divert himself with the sight
of their beauty and loveliness and the seemliness of their
semblance and the goodliness of their garments and horses, for
all were even as moons. They gave not over going till they came
to the palace,[FN#402] where they halted, and the king looked at
them and seeing their beauty and the brilliancy of their apparel
and the brightness of their faces, said, "Would Heaven I knew of
which of the tribes these are!" And he bade the Eunuch bring him
news of them. The castrato went out to them and questioned them
of their case, whereto they replied, "Return to thy lord and
enquire of him concerning Prince Al-Abbas, an he have come unto
him, for that he left his sire King Al-Aziz a full-told year ago,
and indeed longing for him troubleth the King and he hath levied
a division of his army and his guards and is come forth in quest
of his son, so haply he may light upon tidings of him." Quoth the
Eunuch, "Is there amongst you a brother of his or a son?" and
quoth they, "Nay, by Allah, but we are all his Mamelukes and the
purchased of his money, and his sire Al-Aziz hath sent us to make
enquiry of him. Do thou go to thy lord and question him of the
Prince and return to us with that which he shall answer thee."
Asked the Eunuch, "And where is King Al-Aziz?" and they answered,
"He is encamped in the Green Meadow."[FN#403] The Eunuch returned
and told the king, who said, "Indeed we have been unduly
negligent with regard to Al-Abbas. What shall be our excuse with
the King? By Allah, my soul suggested to me that the youth was of
the sons of the kings!" His wife, the Lady Afifah, saw him
lamenting for his neglect of Al-Abbas, and said to him, "O King,
what is it thou regrettest with this mighty regret?" Quoth he,
"Thou knowest the stranger youth, who gifted us with the rubies?"
Quoth she, "Assuredly;" and he, "Yonder youths, who have halted
in the palace court, are his Mamelukes, and his father, King
Al-Aziz, lord of Al-Yaman, hath pitched his camp on the Green
Meadow; for he is come with his army to seek him, and the number
of his troops is four-and-twenty thousand horsemen." Then he went
out from her, and when she heard his words, she wept sore for him
and had compassion on his case and sent after him, counselling
him to summon the Mamelukes and lodge them in the palace and
entertain them. The king hearkened to her rede and despatching
the Eunuch for the Mamelukes, assigned unto them a lodging and
said to them, "Have patience, till the King give you tidings of
your lord Al-Abbas." When they heard his words, their eyes ran
over with a rush of tears, of their mighty longing for the sight
of their lord. Then the King bade the Oueen enter the private
chamber opening upon the throne-room and let down the curtain
before the door, so she might see and not be seen. She did this
and he summoned them to his presence; and, when they stood before
him, they kissed ground to do him honour, and showed forth their
courtly breeding and magnified his dignity. He ordered them to
sit, but they refused, till he conjured them by their lord
Al-Abbas: accordingly they sat down and he bade set before them
food of various kinds and fruits and sweetmeats. Now within the
Lady Afifah's palace was a souterrain communicating with the
pavilion of the Princess Mariyah: so the Queen sent after her and
she came to her, whereupon she made her stand behind the curtain
and gave her to know that Al-Abbas was son to the King of
Al-Yaman and that these were his Mamelukes: she also told her
that the Prince's father had levied his troops and was come with
his army in quest of him and that he had pitched his camp on the
Green Meadow and had despatched these Mamelukes to make enquiry
of their lord. Then Mariyah abode looking upon them and upon
their beauty and loveliness and the goodliness of their raiment,
till they had eaten their fill of food and the tables were
removed; whereupon the King recounted to them the story of
Al-Abbas and they took leave of him and went their ways. So
fortuned it with the Mamelukes; but as for the Princess Mariyah,
when she returned to her palace, she bethought herself concerning
the affair of Al-Abbas repenting her of what she had done; and
the love of him took root in her heart. And, when the night
darkened upon her, she dismissed all her women and bringing out
the letters, to wit, those which Al-Abbas had written her, fell
to reading them and weeping. She left not weeping her night long,
and when she arose in the morning. she called a damsel of her
slave-girls, Shafikah by name, and said to her, "O damsel, I
purpose to discover to thee mine affair and I charge thee keep my
secret, which is that thou betake thyself to the house of the
nurse, who used to serve me, and fetch her to me, for that I have
grave need of her." Accordingly, Shafikah went out and repairing
to the nurse's house, entered and found her clad in clothing
other and richer than what she had whilome been wont to wear. So
she saluted her and asked her, "Whence hadst thou this dress,
than which there is no goodlier?" Answered the nurse, "O
Shafikah, thou deemest that I have seen no good save of thy
mistress; but, by Allah, had I endeavoured for her destruction, I
had acted righteously, seeing that she did with me what she did
and bade the Eunuch beat me, without offence by me offered: so
tell her that he, on whose behalf I bestirred myself with her,
hath made me independent of her and her humours, for he hath
habited me in this habit and given me two hundred and fifty
dinars and promised me the like every year and charged me to
serve none of the folk." Quoth Shafikah, "My mistress hath a need
for thee; so come thou with me and I will engage to restore thee
to thy dwelling in safety and satisfaction." But quoth the nurse,
"Indeed her palace is become unlawful and forbidden to me[FN#404]
and never again will I enter therein, for that Allah (extolled
and exalted be He!) of His favour and bounty hath rendered me
independent of her." Presently Shafikah returned to her mistress
and acquainted her with the nurse's words and that wherein she
was of prosperity; whereupon Mariyah confessed her unmannerly
dealing with her and repented when repentance profited her not;
and she abode in that her case days and nights, whilst the fire
of longing flamed in her heart. On this wise happened it to her;
but as regards Al-Abbas, he tarried with his cousin Al-Akil
twenty days, after which he made ready for the journey to Baghdad
and bidding bring the booty he had taken from King Zuhayr,
divided it between himself and his cousin. Then he sent out
a-marching Baghdad-wards and when he came within two days'
journey of the city, he summoned his servant Amir and said to
him, "Mount thy charger and forego me with the caravan and the
cattle." So Amir took horse and fared on till he came to Baghdad,
and the season of his entering was the first of the day; nor was
there in the city little child or old greybeard but came forth to
divert himself with gazing on those flocks and herds and upon the
beauty of those slave-girls; and their wits were wildered at what
they saw. Soon afterwards the news reached the king that the
young man Al-Abbas, who had gone forth from him, was come back
with booty and rarities and black slaves and a conquering host
and had taken up his sojourn without the city, whilst his servant
Amir was presently come to Baghdad, so he might get ready for his
lord dwelling-places wherein he should take up his abode. When
the King heard these tidings of Amir, he sent for him and caused
bring him before him; and when he entered his presence, he kissed
the ground and saluted with the salam and showed his fine
breeding and greeted him with the goodliest of greetings. The
King bade him raise his head and, this done, questioned him of
his lord Al-Abbas; whereupon he acquainted him with his
adventures and told him that which had betided him with King
Zuhayr and of the army that was become at his command and of the
spoil he had secured. He also gave him to know that Al-Abbas was
to arrive on the morrow, and with him more than fifty thousand
cavatiers, obedient to his orders. When the king heard his words,
he bade decorate Baghdad and commanded the citizens to equip
themselves with the richest of their apparel, in honour of the
coming of Al-Abbas. Furthermore, he sent to give King Al-Aziz the
glad tidings of his son's return and informed him of all which he
had heard from the Prince's servant. When the news reached King
Al-Aziz, he joyed with exceeding joy in the approach of his son
and straightway took horse, he and all his host, while the
trumpets blared and the musicians played, so that the earth
quaked and Baghdad also trembled, and it was a notable day. When
Mariyah beheld all this, she repented in all possible penitence
of that which she had done against Al-Abbas and the fires of
desire raged in her vitals. Meanwhile, the troops[FN#405] sallied
forth of Baghdad and went out to meet those of Al-Abbas, who had
halted in a garth called the Green Island. When he espied the
approaching host, he strained his sight and, seeing horsemen
coming and troops and footmen he knew not, said to those about
him, "Among yonder troops are flags and banners of various kinds;
but, as for the great green standard that ye see, 'tis the
standard of my sire, the which is reserved to him and never
displayed save over his head, and thus I know that he himself is
come out in quest of me." And he was certified of this, he and
his troops. So he fared on towards them and when he drew near
them, he knew them and they knew him; whereupon they lighted down
from their horses and saluting him, gave him joy of his safety
and the folk flocked to him. When he came to his father, they
embraced and each greeted other a long time, whilst neither of
them could utter a word, for the greatness of that which betided
them of joy in reunion. Then Al-Abbas bade the folk take horse;
so they mounted and his Mamelukes surrounded him and they entered
Baghdad on the most splendid wise and in the highest honour and
glory. Now the wife of the shopkeeper, that is, the nurse, came
out, with the rest of those who flocked forth, to divert herself
with gazing upon the show, and when she saw Al-Abbas and beheld
his beauty and the beauty of his host and that which he had
brought back with him of herds and slave-girls, Mamelukes and
negroes, she improvised and recited these couplets,

"Al-Abbas from the side of Akil is come; * Caravans and steeds he
     hath plundered:
Yea; horses he brought of pure blood, whose necks * Ring with
     collars like anklets wher'er they are led.
With domed hoofs they pour torrent-like, * As they prance through
     dust on the level stead:
And bestriding their saddles come men of war, * Whose fingers
     play on the kettle drum's head:
And couched are their lances that bear the points * Keen grided,
     which fill every soul with dread:
Who wi' them would fence draweth down his death * For one deadly
     lunge soon shall do him dead:
Charge, comrades, charge ye and give me joy, * Saying, 'Welcome
     to thee, O our dear comrade!'
And who joys at his meeting shall 'joy delight * Of large gifts
     when he from his steed shall 'light."

When the troops entered Baghdad, each of them alighted in his
tent, whilst Al-Abbas encamped apart on a place near the Tigris
and issued orders to slaughter for the soldiers, each day, that
which should suffice them of oxen and sheep and to bake them
bread and spread the tables: so the folk ceased not to come to
him and eat of his banquet. Furthermore, all the country-people
flocked to him with presents and rarities and he requited them
many times the like of their gifts, so that the lands were filled
with his renown and the fame of him was bruited abroad among the
habitants of wold and town. Then, as soon as he rode to the house
he had bought, the shopkeeper and his wife came to him and gave
him joy of his safety; whereupon he ordered them three head of
swift steeds and thoroughbred and ten dromedaries and an hundred
head of sheep and clad them both in costly robes of honour.
Presently he chose out ten slave-girls and ten negro slaves and
fifty mares and the like number of she-camels and three hundred
of sheep, together with twenty ounces of musk and as many of
camphor, and sent all this to the King of Baghdad. When the
present came to Ins bin Kays, his wit fled for joy and he was
perplexed wherewith to requite him. Al-Abbas also gave gifts and
largesse and bestowed robes of honour upon noble and simple, each
after the measure of his degree, save only Mariyah; for to her
indeed he sent nothing. This was grievous to the Princess and it
irked her sore that he should not remember her; so she called her
slave-girl Shafikah and said to her, "Hie thee to Al-Abbas and
salute him and say to him, 'What hindereth thee from sending my
lady Mariyah her part of thy booty?'" So Shafikah betook herself
to him and when she came to his door, the chamberlains refused
her admission, until they should have got for her leave and
permission. When she entered, Al-Abbas knew her and knew that she
had somewhat of speech with him; so he dismissed his Mamelukes
and asked her, "What is thine errand, O hand-maid of good?"
Answered she, "O my lord, I am a slave-girl of the Princess
Mariyah, who kisseth thy hands and offereth her salutation to
thee. Indeed, she rejoiceth in thy safety and blameth thee for
that thou breakest her heart, alone of all the folk, because thy
largesse embraceth great and small, yet hast thou not remembered
her with anything of thy plunder, as if thou hadst hardened thy
heart against her." Quoth he, "Extolled be He who turneth hearts!
By Allah, my vitals were consumed with the love of her; and, of
my longing after her I came forth to her from my mother-land and
left my people and my home and my wealth, and it was with her
that began the hard-heartedness and the cruelty. Natheless, for
all this, I bear her no malice and there is no help but that I
send her somewhat whereby she may remember me; for that I sojourn
in her country but a few days, after which I set out for the land
of Al-Yaman." Then he called for a chest and thence bringing out
a necklace of Greek workmanship, worth a thousand dinars, wrapped
it in a mantle of Greek silk, set with pearls and gems and
purfled with red gold, and joined thereto a couple of caskets
containing musk and amber-gris. He also put off upon the girl a
mantle of Greek silk, striped with gold, wherein were divers
figures and portraitures depictured, never saw eyes its like.
Therewithal the girl's wit fled for joy and she went forth from
his presence and returned to her mistress. When she came in to
her, she acquainted her with that which she had seen of Al-Abbas
and that which was with him of servants and attendants and set
out to her the loftiness of his station and gave her that which
was with her. Mariyah opened the mantle, and when she saw that
necklace (and indeed the place was illumined with the lustre
thereof), she looked at her slave-girl and said to her, "By
Allah, O Shafikah, one look at him were dearer to me than all
that my hand possesseth! Oh, would Heaven I knew what I shall do,
when Baghdad is empty of him and I hear of him no news!" Then she
wept and calling for ink-case and paper and pen of brass, wrote
these couplets:

Longsome my sorrows are; my liver's fired with ecstasy; * And
     severance-shaft hath shot me through whence sorest pangs I
     dree:
And howso could my soul forget the love I bear to you? *
     You-wards my will perforce returns nor passion sets me free:
I 'prison all desires I feel for fear of spies thereon * Yet
     tears that streak my cheek betray for every eye to see.
No place of rest or joy I find to bring me life-delight; * No
     wine tastes well, nor viands please however savoury:
Ah me! to whom shall I complain of case and seek its cure * Save
     unto thee whose Phantom deigns to show me sight of thee?
Then name me not or chide for aught I did in passion-stress, *
     With vitals gone and frame consumed by yearning-malady!
Secret I keep the fire of love which aye for severance burns; *
     Sworn slave[FN#406] to Love who robs my rest and wakes me
     cruelly:
And ceaseth not my thought to gaze upon your ghost by night, *
     Which falsing comes and he I love still, still unloveth me.
Would Heaven ye wist the blight that I for you are doomed to bear
     * For love of you, which tortures me with parting agony!
Then read between the lines I wrote, and mark and learn their
     sense * For such my tale, and Destiny made me an outcast be:
Learn eke the circumstance of Love and lover's woe nor deign *
     Divulge its mysteries to men nor grudge its secrecy.

Then she folded the scroll and givng it to her slave-girl, bade
her bear it to Al-Abbas and bring back his reply. So Shafikah
took the letter and carried it to the Prince, after the
doorkeeper had sought leave of him to admit her. When she came in
to him, she found with him five damsels, as they were moons, clad
in rich raiment and ornaments; and when he saw her, he said to
her, "What is thy need, O hand-maid of good?" Presently she put
out her hand to him with the writ, after she had kissed it, and
he bade one of his slave-girls receive it from her.[FN#407] Then
he took it from the girl and breaking the seal, read it and
comprehended its contents; whereupon he cried, "Verily, we be
Allah's and unto Him we shall return!" and calling for ink-case
and paper, wrote these improvised couplets:--

I wonder seeing how thy love to me * Inclined, while I in heart
     from love declined:
Eke wast thou wont to say in verseful writ, * "Son of the
     Road[FN#408] no road to me shall find!
How oft kings flocked to me with mighty men * And bales on back
     of Bukhti[FN#409] beast they bind:
And noble steeds of purest blood and all * They bore of choicest
     boons to me consigned;
Yet won no favour!" Then came I to woo * And the long tale o'
     love I had designed,
I fain set forth in writ of mine, w