 of their case.  The king said,
"Wait here, and I will put you all in turn to the proof;' so they
agreed and remained there.  And at the time that the king took
his meal, he had them conducted to a seat of honour, and given
delicious food fit for a king, possessing all the six flavours.
And while all were feasting around him, the Brahman who was
fastidious about eating along of the company did not eat, but sat
there with his face puckered up with disgust.  The king himself
asked the Brahman why he did not eat his food, though it was
sweet and fragrant, and he slowly answered him, "I perceive in
this food an evil smell of the reek from corpses, so I cannot
bring myself to eat it, however delicious it may be."  When he
said this before the assembled multitude, they all smelled it by
the king's orders, and said, "This food is prepared from white
rice and is good and fragrant."  But the Brahman who was so
fastidious about eating would not touch it, but stopped his nose.
Then the king reflected, and proceeded to inquire into the
matter, and found out from his officers that the food had been
made from rice which had been grown in a field near the burning
ghat of a certain village.  Then the king was much astonished,
and, being pleased, he said to him, "In truth you are very
particular as to what you eat; so eat of some other dish."

And after they had finished their dinner, the king dismissed the
Brahmans to their apartments and sent for the loveliest lady of
his court.  And in the evening he sent that fair one, all whose
limbs were of faultless beauty, splendidly adorned, to the second
Brahman, who was so squeamish about the fair sex.  And that
matchless kindler of Cupid's flame, with a face like the full
moon of midnight, went, escorted by the king's servants, to the
chamber of the Brahman.  But when she entered, lighting up the
chamber with her brightness, that gentleman who was so fastidious
about the fair sex felt quite faint, and stopping his nose with
his left hand, said to the king's servants, "Take her away; if
you do not, I am a dead man: a smell comes from her like that of
a goat."  When the king's servants heard this, they took the
bewildered fair one to their sovereign, and told him what had
taken place.  And the eking immediately had the squeamish
gentleman sent for, and said to him, "How can this lovely woman,
who has perfumed herself with sandal-wood, camphor, black aloes,
and other splendid scents, so that she diffuses exquisite
fragrance through the world, smell like a goat?"  But though the
king used this argument to the squeamish gentleman he stuck to
his point; and then the king began to have his doubts on the
subject, and at last, by artfully framed questions, he elicited
from the lady herself that, having been separated in her
childhood from her mother and nurse, she had been brought up on
goat's milk.

Then the king was much astonished, and praised highly the
discernment of the man who was fastidious about the fair sex, and
immediately had given to the third Brahman, who was fastidious
about beds, in accordance with his taste, a bed composed of seven
mattresses placed upon a bedstead.  White smooth sheets and
coverlets were laid upon the bed, and the fastidious man slept
upon it in a splendid room.  But, before half a watch of the
night had passed, he rose up from that bed, with his hand pressed
to his side, screaming in an agony of pain.  And the king's
officers, who were there, saw a red crooked mark on his side, as
if a hair had been pressed deep into it. And they went and told
the king, and the king said to them, "Look and see if there is
not something under the mattress."  So they went and examined the
bottom of the mattresses one by one, and they found a hair in the
middle of the bedstead underneath them all.  And they took it and
showed it to the king, and they also brought the man who was
fastidious about beds, and when the king saw the state of his
body, he was astonished.  And he spent the whole night in
wondering how a hair could make so deep an impression on his skin
through seven mattresses.[FN#499]

And the next morning the king gave three hundred thousand gold
pieces to those fastidious men, because they were persons of
wonderful discernment and refinement.  And they remained in great
comfort in the king's court, forgetting all about the turtle, and
little did they reck of the fact that they had incurred sin by
obstructing their father's sacrifice.[FN#500]

The story of the brothers who were so very "knowing" is common to
most countries, with occasional local modifications.  It is not
often we find the knowledge of the "quintessence of things"
concentrated in a single individual, as in the case of the ex-
king of our tale, but we have his exact counterpart--and the
circumstance is significant--in No. 2 of the "Cento Novelle
Antiche," the first Italian collection of short stories, made in
the 13th century, where a prisoner informs the king of Greece
that a certain horse has been suckled by a she-ass, that a jewel
contains a flaw, and that the king himself is a baker.  Mr.
Tawney, in a note on the Vetala story, as above, refers also to
the decisions of Hamlet in Saxo Grammaticus, 1839, p. 138, in
Simrock's "Quellen des Shakespeare," I, 81-85; 5, 170; he lays
down that some bread tastes of blood (the corn was grown on a
battlefield); that some liquor tastes of iron (the malt was mixed
with water taken from a well in which some rusty swords had
lain); that some bacon tastes of corpses (the pig had eaten a
corpse); lastly, that the king is a servant and his wife a
serving-maid.  But in most versions of the story three brothers
are the gifted heroes.

In "Melusine"[FN#501] for 5 Nov. 1885, M. Rene Basset cites an
interesting variant (in which, as is often the case, the "Lost
Camel" plays a part, but are not concerned about it at present)
from Radloff's "Proben der Volksliteratur der turkischen Stamme
des Sud-Siberiens," as follows:


                        SIBERIAN VERSION

Meat and bread were set before the three brothers, and the prince
went out.  The eldest said, "The prince is a slave;" the second,
"This is dog's flesh;" the youngest, "This bread has grown over
the legs of a dead body."  The prince heard them.  He took a
knife and ran to find his mother.  "Tell me the truth," cried he-
-"were you unfaithful to my father during his absence?  A man who
is here has called me a slave."  "My son," replied she, "If I
don't tell the truth, I shall die; if I tell it, I shall die.
When thy father was absent, I gave myself up to a slave."  The
prince left his mother and ran to the house of the shepherd:
"The meat which you have cooked to-day--what is it?  Tell the
truth, otherwise I'll cut your head off."  "Master, if I tell it,
I shall die; if I don't I shall die.  I will be truthful.  It was
a lamb whose mother had no milk; on the day of its birth, it was
suckled by a bitch: that is to-day's ewe."  The prince left the
shepherd and ran to the house of the husbandman: "Tell the truth,
or else I'll cut off your head.  Three young men have come to my
house, I have placed bread before them, and they say that the
grain has grown over the limbs of a dead man."  "I will be frank
with you.  I ploughed with my plough in a place where were
(buried) the limbs of a man; without knowing it, I sowed some
wheat, which grew up."  the prince quitted his slave and returned
to his house, where were seated the strangers.  He said to the
first, "Young man, how do you know that I am a slave?"  "Because
you went out as soon as the repast was brought in."  He asked the
second, "How do you know that the meat which was served was that
of a dog?" "Because it has a disagreeable taste like the flesh of
a dog."  Then to the third: "How come you to know that this bread
was grown over the limbs of a dead person?"  "What shall I say?
It smells of the limbs of a dead body; that is why I recognised
it.  If you do not believe me, ask your slave; he will tell you
that what I say is true."

In the same paper (col. 516) M. Rene Basset cites a somewhat
elaborate variant, from Stier's "Ungarische Sagen und Marchen,"
in which, once more, the knowledge of the "quintessence of
things" is concentrated in a single individual.


                       HUNGARIAN VERSION

A clever Magyar is introduced with his companions in disguise
into the camp of the king of the Tatars, who is menacing his
country.  The prince, suspicious, causes him to be carefully
watched by his mother, a skilful sorceress.  They brought in the
evening's repast.  "What good wine the prince has!" said she.
"Yes," replied one, "but it contains human blood."  The sorceress
took not of the bed from whence these words proceeded, and when
all were asleep she deftly cut a lock of hair from him who had
spoken, crept stealthily out of the room, and brought this mark
to her son.  the strangers started up, and when our hero
discovered what had been done to him, he cut a lock from all, to
render his decision impossible.  When they came to dinner, the
king knew not from whom the lock had been taken.  The following
night the mother of the prince again slipped into the room, and
said, "What good bread has the prince of the Tatars!"  "Very
good," replied one, "it is made with the milk of a woman."  When
all were asleep, she cut a little off the moustache of him who
was lying in the bed from which the voice proceeded.  This time
the Magyars were still more on the alert, and when they were
apprised of the matter, they all cut a little from their
moustaches, so that next morning the prince found himself again
foiled.  The third night the old lady hid herself, and said in a
loud voice, "What a handsome man is the prince of the Tatars!"
"Yes," said one, "but he is a bastard."  When all were asleep,
the old lady made a mark on the visor of the helmet of the one
from whence had come the words, and then acquainted her son of
what she had done.  In the morning the prince perceived that all
the helmets were similarly marked.[FN#502] At length he
refrained, and said, "I see that there is among you a master
greater than myself; that is why I desire very earnestly to know
him.  He may make himself known; I should like to see and know
this extraordinary man, who is more clever and powerful than
myself."  The young man started up from his seat and said, "I
have not wished to be stronger or wiser than yourself.  I have
only wished to find out what you had preconcerted for us.  I am
the person who has been marked three nights."  "It is well, young
man.  But prove now your words:  How is there human blood in the
wine?"  "Call your butler and he will tell you."  The butler came
in trembling all over, and confessed that when he corked the wine
he had cut his finger with the knife, and a drop of blood had
fallen into the cask.  "But how is there woman's milk in the
bread?" asked the king.  "Call the bakeress," he replied, "and
she will tell it you."  When they questioned her, she confessed
that she was kneading the bread and at the same time suckling her
baby, and that on pressing it to her breast some milk flowed and
was mixed with the bread.  The sorceress, the mother of the king,
when they came to the third revelation of the young man,
confessed in her turn that the king was illegitimate.

Mr. Tawney refers to the Chevalier de Mailly's version of the
Three Princes of Serendip (Ceylon):  The three are sitting at
table, and eating a leg of lamb, sent with some splendid wine
from the table of the emperor Bahram.  The eldest maintains that
the wine was made of grapes that grew in a cemetery; the second,
that the lamb was brought up on dog's milk; while the third
asserts that the emperor had put to death the son of the wazir.
And that the latter is bent on vengeance.  All these statements
turn out to be well-grounded.  Mr. Tawney also refers to parallel
stories in the Breslau edition of The Nights; namely, in Night
458, it is similarly conjectured that the bread was baked by a
sick woman; that the kid was suckled by a bitch, and that the
sultan is illegitimate; and in Night 459, a gem-cutter guesses
that a jewel has an internal flaw, a man skilled in the pedigrees
of horses divines that a horse is the offspring of a female
buffalo, and a man skilled in human pedigrees that the mother of
the favourite queen was a rope-dancer.  Similar incidents occur
in "The Sultan of Yemen and his Three Sons," one of the
Additional Tales translated by Scott, from the Wortley-Montague
MS., now in the Bodleian Library, and comprised in vol. vi. of
his edition of "The Arabian Nights Entertainments," published at
London in 1811.

An analogous tale occurs in Mr. E. J. W. Gibb's recently-
published translation of the "History of the Forty Vezirs (the
Lady's Fourth Story, p. 69 ff.), the motif of which is that "all
things return to their origin:"


                        TURKISH ANALOGUE

There was in the palace of the world a king who was very desirous
of seeing Khizr[FN#503] (peace on him!), and he would even say,
"If there be any one who will show me Khizr, I will give him
whatsoever he may wish."  Now there was at that time a man poor
of estate, and from the stress of his poverty he said to himself,
"Let me go and speak to the king, that if he provide for me
during three years, either I will be dead, or the king will be
dead, or he will forgive me my fault, or I shall on somewise win
to escape, and in this way shall I make merry for a time."  so he
went to the king and spake these words to him.[FN#504]  the king
said, "An thou show him not, then I will kill thee," and that
poor man consented.  Then the king let give him much wealth and
money, and the poor man took that wealth and money and went to
his house.  Three years he spent in merriment and delight, and he
rested at ease till the term was accomplished.  At the end of
that time he fled and hid himself in a trackless place and he
began to quake for fear.  Of a sudden he saw a personage with
white raiment and shining face, who saluted him.  The poor man
returned the salutation, and the radiant being asked, "Why art
thou thus sad?"  but he gave no answer.  Again the radiant being
asked him and sware to him, saying, "Do indeed tell to me thy
plight, that I may find thee some remedy."  So that hapless one
narrated his story from its beginning to its end, and the radiant
being said, "Come, I will go with thee to the king, and I will
answer for thee."  So they arose.

Now the king wanted that hapless one, and while they were going
some of the king's officers who were seeking met them, and they
straightway seized the poor man and brought him to the king.
Quoth the king, "Lo, the three years are accomplished; come now,
and show me Khizr."  The poor man said, "My king, grace and
bounty are the work of kings--forgive my sin."  Quoth the king,
"I made a pact; till I have killed thee, I shall not have
fulfilled it."  And he looked to his chief vezir and said, "How
should this be done?"  quoth the vezir, "This man should be hewn
in many pieces and then hung up on butchers' hooks, that others
may see and lie not before the king."  Said that radiant being,
"True spake the vezir;--all things return to their origin."  Then
the king looked to the second vezir and said, "What sayest thou?"
he replied, "This man should be boiled in a cauldron."  Said that
radiant being, "True spake the vezir;--all things return to their
origin."  The king looked to the third vezir and said, "What
sayest though?"  the vezir replied, "This man should be hewn in
small pieces and baked in an oven."  Again said that elder, "True
spake the vezir;--all things return to their origin."  Then quoth
the king to the fourth vezir, "Let us see what sayest thou?"  The
vezir replied, "O king, the wealth thou gavest this poor creature
was for the love of Khizr (peace on him!).  he, thinking to find
him, accepted it; now that he has not found him he seeks pardon.
This were befitting, that thou set free this poor creature for
love of Khizr."  Said that elder, "True spake the vezir;--all
things return to their origin."  Then the king said to the elder,
"O elder, my vezirs have said different things contrary the one
to the other, and thou hast said concerning each of them, 'True
spake the vezir; - all things return to their origin.'  What is
the reason thereof?"  that elder replied, "O king, thy first
vezir is a butcher's son; therefore did he draw to his origin.
Thy second vezir is a cook's son, and he likewise proposed a
punishment as became his origin.  Thy third vezir is a baker's
son; he likewise proposed a punishment as became his origin.
But thy fourth vezir is of gentle birth; compassion therefore
becomes his origin, so he had compassion on that hapless one, and
sought to do good and counselled liberation.  O king, all things
return to their origin."[FN#505]  And he gave the king much
counsel, and at last said, "Lo, I am Khizr," and
vanished.[FN#506]

The discovery of the king's illegitimate birth, which occurs in
so many versions, has its parallels in the story of the Nephew of
Hippocrates in the "Seven Wise Masters," and the Lady's 2nd Story
in Mr. Gibb's translation of the "Forty Vezirs."  The
extraordinary sensitiveness of the third young Brahman, in the
Vetala story, whose side was scratched by a hair that was under
the seventh of the mattresses on which he lay, Rohde (says
Tawney), in his "Greichische Novellistik," p. 62, compares with a
story told by Aelian of the Sybarite Smindyrides, who slept on a
bed of rose-leaves and got up in the morning covered with
blisters.  He also quotes from the Chronicle of Tabari a story of
a princess who was made to bleed by a rose-leaf lying in her
bed.[FN#507]

The eleventh recital of the Vetala is about a king's three
sensitive wives:  As one of the queens was playfully pulling the
hair of the king, a blue lotus leaped from her ear and fell on
her lap; immediately a would was produced on the front of her
thigh by the blow, and the delicate princess exclaimed, "Oh! oh!"
and fainted. At night, the second retired with the king to an
apartment on the roof of the palace exposed to the rays of the
moon, which fell on the body of the queen, who was sleeping by
the king's side, where it was exposed by her garment blowing
aside; immediately she woke up, exclaiming, "Alas! I am burnt,"
and rose up from the bed rubbing her limbs.  The king woke up in
a state of alarm, crying out, "What is the meaning of this?"
then he got up and saw that blisters had been produced on the
queen's body.  In the meanwhile the king's third wife heard of it
and left her palace to come to him.  And when she got into the
open air, she heard distinctly, as the night was still, the sound
of a pestle pounding in a distant house.  The moment the gazelle-
eyed one heard it, she said, "Alas! I am killed," and she sat
down on the path, shaking her hands in an agony of pain.  Then
the girl turned back, and was conducted by her attendants to her
own chamber, where she fell on her bed and groaned.  And when her
weeping attendants examined her, they saw that her hands were
covered with bruises, and looked like lotuses upon which black
beetles had settled.

To this piteous tale of the three very sensitive queens Tawney
appends the following note:  Rohde, in his "Greichische
Novellistik," p. 62, compares with this a story told by Timaeus,
of a Sybarite who saw a husbandman hoeing a field, and contracted
rupture from it.  Another Sybarite, to whom he told the tale of
his sad mishap, got ear-ache from hearing it.  Oesterley, in his
German translation of the Baital Pachisi, points out that Grimm,
in his "Kindermarchen," iii. p. 238, quotes a similar incident
from the travels of the Three sons of Giaffar:  out of four
princesses, one faints because a rose-twig is thrown into her
face among some roses; a second shuts her eyes in order not to
see the statue of a man; a third says, "Go away; the hairs in
your fur cloak run into me;" and the fourth covers her face,
fearing that some of the fish in a tank may belong to the male
sex.  He also quotes a striking parallel from the "Elites des
contes du Sieur d'Onville:" Four ladies dispute as to which of
them is the most delicate.  One has been lame for three months
owing to a rose-leaf having fallen on her foot; another has had
three ribs broken by a sheet in her bed having been crumpled; a
third has held her head on one side for six weeks owing to one
half of her head having three more hairs on it than the other; a
fourth has broken a blood-vessel by a slight movement, and the
rupture cannot be healed without breaking the whole limb.[Poor
things!]




THE PRINCE WHO FELL IN LOVE WITH THE PICTURE.--Vol. XI. p. 153.



In the Persian tales of "The Thousand and One Days," a young
prince entered his father's treasury one day, and saw there a
little cedar chest "set with pearls, diamonds, emeralds, and
topazes;" on opening it (for the key was in the lock) he beheld
the picture of an exceedingly beautiful woman, with whom he
immediately fell in love.  Ascertaining the name of the lady from
an inscription on the back of the portrait, he set off with a
companion to discover her, and having been told by an old man at
Baghdad that her father at one reigned in Ceylon, he continued
his journey thither, encountering many unheard-of adventures by
the way.  Ultimately he is informed that the lady with whose
portrait he had become enamoured was one of the favourites of
King Solomon.  One should suppose that his would have effectually
cured the love-sick prince; but no:  he "could never banish her
sweet image from his heart."[FN#508]

Two instances of falling in love with the picture of a pretty
woman occur in the "Katha Sarit Sagara."  In Book ix., chap. 51,
a painter shows King Prithvirupa the "counterfeit presentment" of
the beauteous Princess Rapalata, and "as the king gazed on it his
eye was drowned in that sea of beauty her person, so that he
could not draw it out again.  For the king, whose longing was
excessive, could not be satisfied with devouring her form, which
poured forth a stream of the nectar of beauty, as the partridge
cannot be satisfied with devouring the moonlight."  In Book xii.,
chap. 100, a female ascetic shows a wandering prince the portrait
of the Princess Mandaravati, "and Sundarasena when he beheld that
maiden, who, though she was present there only in a picture,
seemed to be of romantic beauty and like a flowing forth of joy,
immediately felt as if he had been pierced with the arrows of the
god of the flowery bow [i.e. Kama]."  In chapter 35 of Scott's
translation of the "Bahar-i-Danish," Prince Ferokh-Faul opens a
volume, "which he had scarcely done when the fatal portrait of
the fair princess who, the astrologers had foretold, was to
occasion him so many perils, presented itself to his view.  He
instantly fainted, when the slave, alarmed, conveyed intelligence
of his condition to the sultan, and related the unhappy cause of
the disorder."  In Gomberville's romances of Polexandre, the
African prince, Abd-el-Malik, falls in love with the portrait of
Alcidiana, and similar incidents occur in the romance of
Agesilaus of Colchos and in the Story of the Seven Wazirs (vol.
vi.); but why multiply instances?  Nothing is more common in
Asiatic fictions.




    THE FULLER, HIS WIFE, AND THE TROOPER.--Vol. XI. p. 157.



In addition to the versions of this amusing story referred to on
p. 157--all of which will be found in the second volume of my
work on "Popular Tales and Fictions," pp. 212-228--there is yet
another in a Persian story-book, of unknown date, entitled,
"Shamsa u Kuhkuha," written by Mirza Berkhorder Turkman, of which
an account, together with specimens, is given in a recently-
published little book (Quaritch), "Persian Portraits, a sketch of
Persian History, Literature, and Politics," by Mr. F. F.
Arbuthnot, author of "Early Ideas: a Group of Hindoo Stories."

This version occurs in a tale of three artful wives--or, to
employ the story-teller's own graphic terms, "three whales of the
sea of fraud and deceit: three dragons of the nature of thunder
and the quickness of lightning; three defamers of honour and
reputation; namely, three men-deceiving, lascivious women, each
of whom had from the chicanery of her cunning issued the diploma
of turmoil to a hundred cities and countries, and in the arts of
fraud they accounted Satan as an admiring spectator in the
theatre of their stratagems.[FN#509]  One of them was sitting in
the court of justice of the kazi's embrace; the second was the
precious gem of the bazaar-master's diadem of compliance; and the
third was the beazle and ornament of the signet-ring of the life
and soul of the superintendent of police.  They were constantly
entrapping the fawns of the prairie of deceit within the grasp of
cunning, and plundered the wares of the caravans of tranquillity
of hearts of strangers and acquaintances, by means of the edge of
the scimitar of fraud.  One day this trefoil of roguery met at
the public bath, and, according to their homogeneous nature they
intermingled as intimately as the comb with the hair; they tucked
up their garment of amity to the waist of union, entered the tank
of agreement, seated themselves in the hot-house of love, and
poured from the dish of folly, by means of the key of hypocrisy,
the water of profusion upon the head of intercourse; they rubbed
with the brush of familiarity and the soap of affection the
stains of jealousies from each other's limbs.  After a while,
when they had brought the pot of concord to boil by the fire of
mutual laudation, they warmed the bath of association with the
breeze of kindness, and came out.  In the dressing-room all three
of them happened simultaneously to find a ring, the gem of which
surpassed the imagination of the jeweler of destiny, and the like
of which he had never beheld in the storehouse of possibility.
In short, these worthy ladies contended with each other for
possession of the ring, until at length the mother of the bathman
came forward and proposed that they should entrust the ring to
her in the meanwhile, and it should be the prize of the one who
most cleverly deceived and befooled her husband, to which they
all agreed, and then departed for their respective
domiciles.[FN#510]

Mr. Arbuthnot's limits pertained only of abstracts of the tricks
played upon their husbands by the three ladies--which the story-
teller gives at great length--and that of the kazi's wife is as
follows:

The kazi's wife knows that a certain carpenter, who lived close
to her, was very much in love with her.  She sends her maid to
him with a message to say that the flame of his love had taken
effect upon her heart, and that he must make an underground
passage between his house and her dwelling, so that they might
communicate with each other freely by means of the mine.  The
carpenter digs the passage, and the lady pays him a visit, and
says to him, "To-morrow I shall come here, and you must bring the
kazi to marry me to you."  The next day the kazi goes to his
office; the lady goes to the carpenter's house, and send him to
bring her husband, the kazi, to marry them.  The carpenter
fetches him, and, as the kazi hopes for a good present, he comes
willingly enough, but is much surprised at the extreme likeness
between the bride and his own wife.  The more he looks at her,
the more he is in doubt; and at last, offering an excuse to fetch
something, he rushes off to his own house, but is forestalled by
his souse, who had gone thither by the passage, and on his
arrival is lying on her bed.  The kazi makes some excuses for his
sudden entry into her room, and, after some words, goes back to
the carpenter's house; but his wife had preceded him, and is
sitting in her place.  Again he begins the ceremony, but is
attracted by a black mole on the corner of the bride's lip, which
he could have sworn was the same as that possessed by his wife.
Making more excuses, and in spite of the remonstrances of the
carpenter, he hurries back to his house once more; but his wife
had again got there before him, and he finds her reading a book,
and much astonished at his second visit.  She suggests that he is
mad, and he admits that his conduct is curious, and returns to
the carpenter's house to complete the ceremony.  This is again
frequently interrupted, but finally he marries his own wife to
the carpenter, and, having behaved in such an extraordinary
manner throughout, is sent off to a lunatic asylum.

For the tricks of the two other ladies, and for many other
equally diverting tales, I refer the reader to Mr. Arbuthnot's
pleasing and instructive little book, which is indeed an
admirable epitome of the history and literature of Persia, and
one which was greatly wanted in these days, when most men, "like
the dogs in Egypt for fear of the crocodiles, must drink of the
waters of information as they run, in dread of the old enemy
Time."

I have discussed the question of the genealogy of this tale
elsewhere, but, after a somewhat more minute comparative analysis
of the several versions, am disposed to modify the opinion which
I then entertained.  I think we must consider as the direct or
indirect source of the versions and variants the "Miles
Gloriosus" of Plautus, the plot of which, it is stated in the
prologue to the second act, was taken from a Greek play.  It is,
however, not very clear whether Berni adapted his story from
Plautus or the "Seven Wise Masters"; probably from the former,
since in both the lady is represented, to the captain and the
cuckold, as a twin sister, while in the S. W. M. the crafty
knight pretends that she is his leman, come from Hungary with
tidings that he may now with safety return home.  On the other
hand, in the S. W. M., as in Plautus, the lovers make their
escape by sea, an incident which Berni has altered to a journey
by land--no doubt, in order to introduce further adventures for
the development of his main plot.  But then we find a point of
resemblance between Berni and the S. W. M., in the incident of
the cuckold accompanying the lovers part of their way--in the
latter to the sea-shore; while in Plautus the deceived captain
remains at home to prosecute an amour and get a thrashing for his
reward (in Plautus, instead of a wife, it is the captain's slave-
girl).  It is curious that amidst all the masquerade of the
Arabian story the cuckold's wife also personates her
supposititious twin-sister, as in Plautus and Berni.  In Plautus
the houses of the lover and the captain adjoin, as is also the
case in the modern Italian and Sicilian versions; while in Berni,
the S. W. M., the Arabian, and the Persian story cited in this
note they are at some distance.  With these resemblances and
variations it is not easy to say which version was derived from
another.  Evidently the Arabian story has been deliberately
modified by the compiler, and he has, I think, considerably
improved upon the original: the ludicrous perplexity of the poor
fuller when he awakes, to find himself apparently transformed
into a Turkish trooper, recalls the nursery rhyme of the little
woman "who went to market her eggs for to sell," and falling
asleep on the king's highway a pedlar cut off her petticoats up
to the knees, and when she awoke and saw her condition she
exclaimed, "Lawk-a-mercy me, this is none of I!" and so on.  And
not less diverting is the pelting the blockhead receives from his
brother fullers--altogether, a capital story.




        TALE OF THE SIMPLETON HUSBAND.--Vol. XI. p. 162.



The "curious" reader will find European and Asiatic versions of
this amusing story in "Originals and Analogues of some of
Chaucer's Canterbury Tales." Published for the Chaucer Society,
pp. 177-188 and (in a paper contrived by me: "The Enchanted
Tree") p. 341-364.




    TALE OF THE THREE MEN AND OUR LORD ISA.--Vol XI. p. 170.



Under the title of "The Robbers and the Treasure-Trove" I have
brought together many European and Asiatic versions of this wide-
spread tale in "Chaucer Analogues," pp. 415-436.




     THE MELANCHOLIST AND THE SHARPER. -- Vol. XI. p. 180.



A similar but much shorter story is found in Gladwin's "Persian
Moonshee," and storybooks in several of the Indian vernaculars
which have been rendered into English:

A miser said to a friend, "I have now a thousand rupees, which I
will bury out of the city, and I will not tell the secret to any
one besides yourself."  They went out of the city together, and
buried the money under a tree.  Some days after the miser went
alone to the tree and found no signs of his money.  He said to
himself, "Excepting that friend, no other has taken it away, but
if I question him he will never confess."  He therefore went to
his (the friend's) house and said, "A great deal of money is come
into my hands, which I want to put in the same place; if you will
come to-morrow, we will go together."  The friend, by coveting
this large sum, replaced the former money, and the miser next day
went there alone and found it.  He was delighted with his own
contrivance, and never again placed any confidence in friends.

One should suppose a miser the last person to confide the secret
of his wealth to any one; but the Italian versions bear a closer
resemblance to the Arabian story.  From No. 74 of the "Cento
Novelle Antiche" Sacchetti, who was born in 1335 and is ranked by
Crescimbini as next to Boccaccio, adapted his 198th novella,
which is a most pleasing version of the Asiatic story:


                        ITALIAN VERSION.

A blind man of Orvieto, of the name of Cola, hit upon a device to
recover a hundred florins he had been cheated of, which showed he
was possessed of all the eyes of Argus, though he had unluckily
lost his own.  And this he did without wasting a farthing either
upon law or arbitration, by sheer dexterity, for he had formerly
been a barber, and accustomed to shave very close, having then
all his eyes about him, which had been now closed for about
thirty years.  Alms seemed then the only resource to which he
could betake himself, and such was the surprising progress he in
a short time made in his new trade that he counted a hundred
florins in his purse, which he secretly carried about him until
he could find a safer place.  His gains far surpassed anything he
had realised with his razor and scissors; indeed, they increased
so fast that he no longer knew where to bestow them, until one
morning happening to remain the last, as he believed, in the
church, he thought of depositing his purse of a hundred florins
under a loose tile in the floor behind the door, knowing the
situation of the place perfectly well.  After listening some time
without hearing a foot stirring, he very cautiously laid it in
the spot; but unluckily there remained a certain Juccio
Pezzichernolo, offering his adoration before an image of San
Giovanni Boccadoro, who happened to see Cola busily engaged
behind the door.  He continued his adorations until he saw the
blind man depart, when, not in the least suspecting the truth, he
approached and searched the place.  He soon found the identical
tile, and on removing it with the help of his knife, he found the
purse, which he very quietly put into his pocket, replacing the
tiles just as they were, and, resolving to say nothing about it,
he went home.

At the end of three days the blind mendicant, desirous of
inspecting his treasure, took a quiet time for visiting the
place, and removing the tile searched a long while in great
perturbation, but all vain, to find his beloved purse.  At last,
replacing things just as they were, he was compelled to return in
no very enviable state of mind to his dwelling, and there
meditating on his loss, the harvest of the toil of so many days,
by dint of intense thinking a bright thought struck him (as
frequently happens by cogitating in the dark), how he had yet a
kind of chance of redeeming his lost spoils.  Accordingly in the
morning he called his young guide, a lad about nine years old,
saying, "My son, lead me to church," and before setting out he
tutored him how he was to behave, seating himself at his side
before the entrance, and particularly remarking every person who
should enter into the church.  "Now, if you happen to see any one
who takes particular notice of me, and who either laughs or makes
any sign, be sure you observe it and tell me."  The boy promised
he would; and they proceeded accordingly and took their station
before the church

When the dinner-hour arrived, the father and son prepared to
leave the place, the former inquiring by the way whether his son
had observed any one looking hard at him as he passed along.
"That I did," answered the lad, "but only one, and he laughed as
he went past us.  I do not know his name, but he is strongly
marked with the small-pox and lives somewhere near the Frati
Minori."  "Do you think, my dear lad," said his father, "that you
could take me to his shop, and tell me when you see him there?"
"To be sure I could," said the lad.  "Then come, let us lose no
time," replied the father, "and when we are there tell me, and
while I speak to him you can step on one side and wait for me."
So the sharp little fellow led him along the way until he reached
a cheesemonger's stall, when he acquainted his father, and
brought him close to it.  No sooner did the blind man hear him
speaking with his customers than he recognised him for the same
Juccio with whom he had formerly been acquainted during his days
of light.  When the coast was a little clear, our blind hero
entreated some moments' conversation, and Juccio, half suspecting
the occasion took him on one side into a little room, saying,
"Cola, friend, what good news?"  "Why," said Cola, "I am come to
consult you, in great hopes you will be of use to me.  You know
it is a long time since I lost my sight, and being in a destitute
condition, I was compelled to earn my subsistence by begging
alms.  Now, by the grace of God, and with the help of you and of
other good people of Orvieto, I have saved a sum of two hundred
florins, one hundred of which I have deposited in a safe place,
and the other is in the hands of my relations, which I expect to
receive with interest in the course of a week.  Now if you would
consent to receive, and to employ for me to the best advantage,
the whole sum of two hundred florins it would be doing me a great
kindness, for there is no one besides in all Orvieto in whom I
dare to confide; nor do I like to be at the expense of paying a
notary for doing business which we can as well transact
ourselves.  Only I wish you would say nothing about it, but
receive the two hundred florins from me to employ as you think
best.  Say not a word about it, for there would be an end of my
calling were it known I had received so large a sum in alms."
Here the blind mendicant stopped; and the sly Juccio, imagining
he might thus become master of the entire sum, said he should be
very happy to serve him in every way he could and would return an
answer the next morning as to the best way of laying out the
money.  Cola then took his leave, while Juccio, going directly
for the purse, deposited it in its old place being in full
expectation of soon receiving it again with the addition of the
other hundred, as it was clear that Cola had not yet missed the
money.  The cunning old mendicant on his part expected that he
would do no less, and trusting that his plot might have
succeeded, he set out the very same day to the church, and had
the delight, on removing the tile, to find his purse really
there.  Seizing upon it with the utmost eagerness, he concealed
it under his clothes, and placing the tiles exactly in the same
position, he hastened home whistling, troubling himself very
little about his appointment of the next day.

The sly thief Juccio set out accordingly the next morning to see
his friend Cola, and actually met him on the road.  "Whither are
you going?" inquired Juccio.  "I was going," said Cola, "to your
house."  The former, then taking the blind man aside, said, "I am
resolved to do what you ask; and since you are pleased to confide
in me, I will tell you of a plan that I have in hand for laying
out your money to advantage.  If you will put the two hundred
florins into my possession, I will make a purchase in cheese and
salt meat, a speculation which cannot fail to turn to good
account."  "Thank you," quoth Cola, "I am going to-day for the
other hundred, which I mean to bring, and when you have got them
both, you can do with them what you think proper."  Juccio said,
"Then let me have them soon, for I think I can secure this
bargain; and as the soldiers are come into the town, who are fond
of these articles, I think it cannot fail to answer; so go, and
Heaven speed you."  And Cola went, but with very different
intentions from those imagined by his friend--Cola being now
clear-sighted, and Juccio truly blind.  The next day Cola called
on his friend with very downcast and melancholy looks, and when
Juccio bade him good day, he said, "I wish from my soul it were a
good, or even a middling, day for me."  "Why, what is the
matter?"  "The matter?" echoed Cola; "why, it is all over with
me: some rascal has stolen a hundred florins from the place where
they were hidden, and I cannot recover a penny from my relations,
so that I may eat my fingers off or anything I have to expect."
Juccio replied, "This is like all the rest of my speculations.  I
have invariably lost where I expected to make a good hit.  What I
shall do I know not, for if the person should choose to keep me
to the agreement I made for you, I shall be in a pretty dilemma
indeed."  "Yet," said Cola, "I think my condition is still worse
than yours.  I shall be sadly distressed and shall have to amass
afresh capital, which will take me ever so long. And when I have
got it, I will take care not to conceal it in a hole in the
floor, or trust it, Juccio, into any friend's hands."  "But,"
said Juccio, "if we could contrive to recover what is owing by
your relations, we might still make some pretty profit of it, I
doubt not."  For he thought, if he could only get hold of the
hundred he had returned it would still be something in his way.
"Why," said Cola, "to tell the truth, if I were to proceed
against my relations I believe I might get it; but such a thing
would ruin my business, my dear Juccio, for ever:  the world
would know I was worth money, and I should get no more money from
the world; so I fear I shall hardly be able to profit by your
kindness, though I shall always consider myself as much obliged
as if I had actually cleared a large sum.  Moreover, I am going
to teach another blind man my profession, and if we have luck you
shall see me again, and we can venture a speculation together."
So far the wily mendicant, to whom Juccio said, "Well, go and try
to get money soon, and bring it; you know where to find me, but
look sharp about you and the Lord speed you; farewell."
"Farewell," said Cola; "and I am well rid of thee," he whispered
to himself, and going upon his way, in a short time he doubled
his capital; but he no longer went near his friend Juccio to know
how he should invest it.  He had great diversion in telling the
story to his companions during their feasts, always concluding,
"By St. Lucia! Juccio is the blinder man of the two:  he thought
it was a bold stroke to risk his hundred to double the amount."

For my own part, I think the blind must possess a more acute
intellect than other people, inasmuch as the light, exhibiting
such a variety of objects to view, is apt to distract the
attention, of which many examples might be adduced.  For
instance, two gentlemen may be conversing together on some matter
of business, and in the middle of a sentence a fine woman happens
to pass by, and they will suddenly stop, gazing after her; or a
fine equipage or any other object is enough to turn the current
of their thoughts.  And then we are obliged to recollect
ourselves, saying, "Where was I?" "What was it that I was
observing?"--a thing which never occurs to a blind man. The
philosopher Democritus very properly on this account knocked his
eyes out in order to catch objects in a juster light with his
mind's eye.

It is impossible to describe Juccio's vexation on going to church
and finding the florins were gone.  His regret was far greater
than if he had actually lost a hundred of his own; as is known to
be the case with all inveterate rogues, half of whose pleasure
consists in depriving others of their lawful property.

There are many analogous stories, one of which is the well-known
tale of the merchant who, before going on a journey, deposited
with a dervish 1,000 sequins, which he thought it prudent to
reserve in case of accidents. When he returned and requested his
deposit, the dervish flatly denied that he ever had any of his
money.  Upon this the merchant went and laid his case before the
kazi, who advised him to return to the dervish and speak
pleasantly to him, which he does, but receives nothing but abuse.
He informed the kazi of this, and was told not to go near the
dervish for the present, but to be at ease for he should have his
money next day.  The kazi then sent for the dervish, and after
entertaining him sumptuously, told him that, for certain reasons,
he was desirous of removing a considerable sum of money from his
house; that he knew of no person in whom he could confide so much
as himself; and that if he would come the following evening at a
late hour, he should have the precious deposit.  On hearing this,
the dervish expressed his gratification that so much confidence
should be placed in his integrity, and agreed to take charge of
the treasure.  Next day the merchant returned to the kazi, who
bade him go back to the dervish and demand his money once more,
and should he refuse, threaten to complain to the kazi.  The
result may be readily guessed: no sooner did the merchant mention
the kazi than the rascally dervish said, "My good friend, what
need is there to complain to the kazi?  Here is your money; it
was only a little joke on my part."  But in the evening, when he
went to receive the kazi's pretended deposit, he experienced the
truth of the saw, that "covetousness sews up the eyes of
cunning."

A variant of this found in the continental "Gesta Romanorum" (ch.
cxviii. of Swan's translation), in which a knight deposits ten
talents with a respectable old man, who when called upon to
refund the money denies all knowledge of it.  By the advice of an
old woman the knight has ten chests made, and employs a person to
take them to the old man and represent them as containing
treasure; and while one of them is being carried into his house
the knight enters and in the stranger's presence demands his
money, which is at once delivered to him.

In Mr. Edward Rehatsek's translated selections from the Persian
story-book "Shamsa u Kuhkuha" (see ante, p. 237), printed at
Bombay in 1871, under the title of "Amusing Stories," there is a
tale (No. xviii.) which also bears some resemblance to that of
the Melancholist and the Sharper; and as Mr. Rehatsek's little
work is exceedingly scarce, I give it in extenso as follows:

There was in Damascus a man of the name of Zayn el-Arab, with the
honey of whose life the poison of hardships was always mixed.
Day and night he hastened like the breeze from north to south in
the world of exertion, and he was burning brightly like straw,
from his endeavours in the oven of acquisition in order to gain a
loaf of bread and feed his family.  In course of time, however,
he succeeded in accumulating a considerable sum of money, but as
he had tasted the bitter poison of destitution, and had for a
very long time earned the heavy load of poverty upon his back,
and fearing to lose his property by the chameleon-like changes of
fortune, he took up his money on a certain night, carried it out
of the city, and buried it under a tree.  After some time had
passed be began sorely to miss the presence of his treasure, and
betook himself to the tree to refresh his eyes with the sight of
it.  But when he dug up the ground at the foot of the tree he
discovered that his soul-exhilarating deposit was refreshing the
palate of some one else.  The morning of his prosperity was
suddenly changed into the evening of bitterness and
disappointment.  He was perplexed to what friend to confide his
secret, and to what remedy to fly for the recovery of his
treasure.  The lancet of grief had pierced the liver of his
peace, and the huntsman of distress had tied up the wings and
feet of the bird of his serenity.  One day he went on some
business to a learned and wise man of the city with whom he was
on a footing of intimacy.  This man said to him, "It is some time
since I perceived the glade of your circumstances to have been
destroyed by the burning coals of restlessness, and a sad change
to have taken place in your health.  I do not know the reason,
nor what thorn of misfortune has pierced the foot of your heart,
nor what hardship has dawned from the east of your mind."  Zayn
el-Arab wept tears of sadness and said, "O thou standard coin
from the mint of love! the treachery of misfortune has brought a
strange accident upon me, and the bow of destiny has let fly an
unpropitious arrow upon my feeble target.  I have a heavy heart
and great sorrow, and were I to reveal it to you perhaps it would
be of no use and would plunge you also into grief."  The learned
man said, "Since the hearts of intimate friends are like looking-
glasses and are receiving the figures of mutual secrets, it is at
all times necessary that they should communicate to each other
any difficulties which they have fallen into, that they may
remove them by taking in common those steps which prudence and
foresight should recommend."  Zayn el-Arab replied, "Dear friend,
I had some gold, and fearing lest it should be stolen, I carried
it to such and such a place and buried it under a tree, and when
I again visited the place, I perceived the garment of my beloved
Joseph to be sprinkled with the blood of the wolf of deception."
The learned man said, "This is a grave accident, and it will be
difficult to get on the track of your gold.  Perhaps some one saw
you bury it:  he who has taken it will have to give an account of
it in the next world, for God is omniscient.  Give me ten days'
delay, that I may study the book of expedients and stratagems,
when mayhap somewhat will occur to me."

That knowing man sat down for ten days in the school of
meditation, and how much so ever he turned over the leaves of the
volume of his mind from the preface to the epilogue, he could hit
upon no plan.  On the tenth day they again met in the street, and
he said to Zayn el-Arab, "Although the diver of my mind has
plunged deeply and searched diligently in this deep sea, he has
been unable to seize the precious pearl of a wise plan of
operation:  may God recompense you from the stores of His hidden
treasury!"  They were conversing in this way when a lunatic met
them and said, "Well, my boys, what secret- mongering have you
got between you?"  The learned man said to Zayn el-Arab, "Come,
let us relate our case to this crazy fellow, to see the flower of
the plant that may bloom from his mind."  Zayn el-Arab replied,
"Dear friend, you, with all your knowledge, cannot devise
anything during ten days:  what information are we likely to gain
from a poor lunatic who does not know whether it is now day or
night?"  The learned man said, "There is no telling what he may
say to us. But you know that the most foolish as well as the most
wise have ideas, and a sentence uttered at random has sometimes
furnished a clue by which the desired object may be attained."
Meanwhile a little boy also came up, and perceiving the lunatic
stopped to see his tricks.  The two friends explained their case
to the lunatic, who then seemed immersed in thought for some
time, after which he said, "He who took the root of that tree for
a medicine also took the gold," and having thus spoken, he turned
his back upon them and went his way.  They consulted with each
other what indication this remark might furnish, when the little
boy who had overheard the conversation, asked what kind of tree
it was.  Zayn el-Arab replied that it was a jujube tree.  The boy
said, "This