 crocodile forth of
the river and snatching him up from off my breast plunged into
the water, with him still hending knife in hand, even within the
jaws of the beast: whilst I abode extolling Almighty Allah, and
rendering thanks for my preservation to him who had delivered me
from the hand of that wrong-doer.[FN#130]




            TALE OF HARUN AL-RASHID AND ABDULLAH BIN
                         NAFI'.[FN#131]



Know thou, O King of the Age, that there was in days of yore and
in ages and times long gone before, in the city of Baghdad the
Abode of Peace, a Caliph Harun al-Rashid highs, and he had cup-
companions and tale-tellers to entertain him by night. Among his
equerries was a man named Abdullah bin Náfi', who stood high in
favour with him and dear to him, so that he did not forget him a
single hour. Now it came to pass, by the decree of Destiny, that
it became manifest to Abdullah how he was grown of small account
with the Caliph, who paid no heed unto him nor, if he absented
himself, did he ask after him, as had been his habit. This was
grievous to Abdullah and he said within himself, "Verily, the
soul of the Commander of the Faithful and his Wazir are changed
towards me and nevermore shall I see in him that cordiality and
affection wherewith he was wont to treat me." And this was
chagrin-full to him and concern grew upon him, so that he recited
these couplets:--

"Whoso's contemned in his home and land * Should, to better his
     case, in self-exile hie:
So fly the house where contempt awaits, * Nor on fires of grief
     for the parting fry;
Crude Ambergris[FN#132] is but offal where * 'Tis born; but
     abroad on our necks shall stye;
And Kohl at home is a kind of stone, * Cast on face of earth and
     on roads to lie;
But when borne abroad it wins highest worth * And thrones between
     eyelid and ball of eye."

(Quoth the sayer), Then he could brook this matter no longer; so
he went forth from the dominions of the Prince of True Believers,
under presence of visiting certain of his kith and kin, and took
with him nor servant nor comrade, neither acquainted any with his
intent, but betook himself to the road and fared deep into the
wold and the sandwastes, unknowing whither he went. After awhile,
he unexpectedly fell in with travellers who were making the land
of Hind and journeyed with them. When he came thither, he lighted
down in a city of that country and housed him in one of the
lodging-houses; and there he abode a while of days, relishing not
food neither solacing himself with sleep; nor was this for lack
of dirhams or diners, but for that his mind was occupied with
musing upon the shifts of Destiny and bemoaning himself for that
the revolving sphere had turned against him in enmity, and the
days had decreed unto him the disfavour of our lord the
Imam.[FN#133] After such fashion he abode a space of days, and
presently he homed him in the land and took to himself friends
and got him many familiars, with whom he addressed himself to
diversion and good cheer. He used also to go a-pleasuring with
his companions and their hearts were solaced by his company and
he entertained them every evening with stories and displays of
his manifold accomplishments[FN#134] and diverted them with
delectable verses and told them abundance of stories and
histories. Presently, the report of him reached King Jamhúr, lord
of Kashgar of Hind, who sent in quest of him, and great was his
desire to see him. So Abdullah repaired to his court and going in
to him, kissed ground before him; and Jamhur welcomed him and
treated him with kindness and bade lodge him in the guest-house,
where he abode three days, at the end of which the king sent to
him a chamberlain of his chamberlains and bade bring him to the
presence. When he came before him, he greeted him, and the
truchman accosted him, saying, "Verily, King Jamhur hath heard of
thy report, that thou art a pleasant cup-companion and an
eloquent teller of night tales, and he would have thee company
with him o'nights and entertain him with that which thou knowest
of histories and pleasant stories and verses." And he made
answer, ' To hear is to obey!" (Quoth Abdullah bin Nafi',) So I
became his boon-companion and entertained him by night with tales
and talk; and this pleased him with the utmost pleasure and he
took me into favour and bestowed on me robes of honour and set
apart for me a lodging; indeed he was bountiful exceedingly to me
and could not brook to be parted from me a single hour. So I
sojourned with him a while of time and every night I caroused and
conversed with him till the most part of the dark hours was past;
and when drowsiness overcame him, he would rise and betake
himself to his sleeping-place, saying to me, Forsake not my
service and forego not my presence.' And I made answer with
'Hearing and obeying.' Now the king had a son, a nice child,
called the Emir Mohammed, who was winsome of youth and sweet of
speech: he had read books and had perused histories and he loved
above all things in the world the telling and hearing of verses
and tales and anecdotes. He was dear to his father King Jamhur,
for that he owned no other son than he on life, and indeed he had
reared him in the lap of love and he was gifted with exceeding
beauty and loveliness, brilliancy and perfect grace: he had also
learnt to play upon the lute and upon all manner instruments and
he was used to converse and company with friends and brethren.
Now it was his wont when the king arose seeking his
sleeping-chamber, to sit in his place and require me to entertain
him with tales and verses and pleasant anecdotes; and on this
wise I abode with them both a great while in all joyance and
delight, and the Prince still loved me with mighty great love and
treated me with the utmost tenderness. It fortuned one day that
the king's son came to me, after his sire had withdrawn, and
cried, 'O Ibn Nafi'!' 'At thy service, O my lord;' 'I would have
thee tell me a wondrous story and a marvellous matter, which thou
hast never related either to me or to my father Jamhur.' 'O my
lord, what story is this that thou desires" of me and what kind
shall it be of the kinds?' 'It mattereth little, so it be a
goodly story, whether it befel of olden tide or in these times.'
'O my lord, I know by rote many stories of various kinds; so
which of the kinds preferrest thou, and wilt thou have a story of
mankind or of Jinn kind?' ' 'Tis well! An thou have espied aught
with shine eyes and heard it with thine ears, tell it me.' Then
he bethought himself and said to me, 'I conjure thee by my life,
tell me a tale of the tales of the Jinn and that which thou hast
heard of them and seen of them!' I replied, 'O my son, indeed
thou conjures" me by a mighty conjuration; so lend an ear to the
goodliest of stories, ay, and the strangest of them and the
pleasantest and rarest.' Quoth the Prince, 'Say on, for I am
attentive to thy speech;' and quoth I, 'Hear then, O my son,




The Tale of the Damsel Tohfat al-Kulub and the Caliph Harun al-
Rashid.



The Viceregent of the Lord of the three Worlds, Harun al-Rashid,
had a boon companion of the number of his boon-companions, by
name Ishak bin Ibrahim al-Nadim al-Mausili,[FN#135] who was the
most accomplished of the folk of his time in smiting upon the
lute; and of the Commander of the Faithful's love for him, he set
apart for him a palace of the choicest of his palaces, wherein he
was wont to instruct hand-maidens in the arts of singing and of
lute playing. If any slave-girl became, by his instruction,
clever in the craft, he carried her before the Caliph, who bade
her perform upon the lute; and if she pleased him, he would order
her to the Harim; else would he restore her to Ishak's palace.
One day, the Commander of the Faithful's breast was straitened;
so he sent after his Wazir Ja'afar the Barmecide and Ishak the
cup-companion and Masrur the eunuch, the Sworder of his
vengeance; and when they came, he changed his habit and disguised
himself, whilst Ja'afar and Ishak and Masrur and al-Fazl[FN#136]
and Yúnus[FN#137] (who were also present) did the like. Then he
went out, he and they, by the postern, to the Tigris and taking
boat fared on till they came to near Al Táf,[FN#138] when they
landed and walked till they came to the gate of the high street.
Here there met them an old man, handsome in his hoariness and of
a venerable bearing and a dignified, agreeable of aspect and
apparel. He kissed the earth before Ishak al-Mausili (for that he
knew only him of the company, the Caliph being disguised, and
deemed the others certain of his friends), and said to him, "O my
lord, there is presently with me a hand-maid, a lutanist, never
saw eyes the like of her nor the like of her grace, and indeed I
was on my way to pay my respects to thee and give thee to know of
her, but Allah, of His favour, hath spared me the trouble. So now
I desire to show her to thee, and if she take thy fancy, well and
good; otherwise I will sell her." Quoth Ishak, "Go before me to
thy quarters,[FN#139] till I come to thee and see her." The old
man kissed his hand and went away; whereupon quoth Al-Rashid to
him, "O Ishak, who is yonder man and what is his want?" The other
replied, "O my lord, this is a man Sa'íd the Slave-dealer hight,
and 'tis he that buyeth us maidens and Mamelukes. He declareth
that with him is a fair slave, a lutanist, whom he hath withheld
from sale, for that he could not fairly sell her till he had
passed her before me in review." Quoth the Caliph, "Let us go to
him so we may see her, by way of solace, and sight what is in the
slave-dealer's quarters of slave-girls;" and quoth Ishak,
"Command belongeth to Allah and to the Commander of the Faithful"
Then he forewent them and they followed in his track till they
came to the slave-dealer's quarters and found a building tall of
wall and large of lodgment, with sleeping cells and chambers
therein, after the number of the slave-girls, and folk sitting
upon the wooden benches. So Ishak entered, he and his company and
seating themselves in the place of honour, amused themselves by
looking at the hand-maids and Mamelukes and watching how they
were bought and sold, till the vending came to an end, when some
of the folk went away and some remained seated. Then cried the
slave-dealer, "Let none sit with us except whoso purchaseth by
the thousand diners and upwards." Accordingly those present
withdrew and there remained none but Al-Rashid and his suite;
whereupon the slave-dealer called the damsel, after he had caused
set her a chair of Fawwák,[FN#140] lined with Grecian brocade,
and she was like the sun shining high in the shimmering sky. When
she entered, she saluted and sitting down, took the lute and
smote upon it, after she had touched its strings and tuned it, so
that all present were amazed. Then she sang thereto these
couplets:

"Breeze o' Morn, an thou breathe o'er the loved one's land, *
     Deliver my greeting to all the dear band!
And declare to them still I am pledged to their love * And my
     long~ng excels all that lover unmanned:
O ye who have blighted my heart, ears and eyes, * My passion and
     ecstasy grow out of hand;
And torn is my sprite every night with desire, * And nothing of
     sleep can my eyelids command."

Ishak exclaimed, "Brave, O damsel! By Allah, this is a fair
hour!" Whereupon she sprang up and kissed his hand, saying, 'O my
lord, in very sooth the hands stand still before thy presence and
the tongues at thy sight, and the eloquent when confronting thee
wax dumb; but thou art the looser of the veil."[FN#141] Then she
clung to him and cried, "Stand;" so he stood and said to her,
"Who art thou and what is thy need?" She raised a corner of the
veil, and behold she was a damsel as she were the full moon
rising or the levee glancing, with two side-locks of hair which
fell down to her anklets. She kissed his hand and said to him, "O
my lord, know that I have been in these quarters some five
months, during which I have withheld myself from sale till thou
shouldst be present and see me; and yonder slave-dealer also made
thy coming a pretext for not vending me, and forbade me for all I
sought of him night and day that he should cause thee come hither
and vouchsafe me thy company and gar me and thee forgather."
Quoth Ishak, "Tell me what thou wouldst have;" and quoth she, "I
beseech thee, by Allah Almighty, that thou buy me, so I may be
with thee by way of service." He asked, "Is that thy desire?" and
she answered, "Yes." So Ishak returned to the slave-dealer and
said to him, "Ho thou, Shaykh Sa'íd!" Said the old man, "At thy
service, O my lord," and Ishak continued, "In the corridor is a
chamber and therein wones a damsel pale and wan. What is her
price in dirhams and how much cost thou ask for her?" Quoth the
slave-dealer, "She whom thou mentionest, O my lord, is called
Tohfat al-Humaká?"[FN#142] Ishak asked, "What is the meaning of
Al-Humaka?" and the old man answered, "Her price hath been
weighed and paid an hundred times and she still saith, Show me
him who would buy me; and when I show her to him she saith, This
one I mislike; he hath in him such and such a default. And in
every one who would fain buy her she noteth some defect or other,
so that none careth now to purchase her and none seeketh her, for
fear lest she find some fault in him." Quoth Ishak, "She seeketh
at this present to sell herself; so go thou to her and inquire of
her and see her price and send her to the palace." Quoth Sa'id!"
"O my lord, her price is an hundred diners, though, were she free
of this paleness that is upon her face, she would be worth a
thousand gold pieces; but wanton folly and wanness have
diminished her value; and behold I will go to her and consult her
of this." So he betook himself to her and enquired of her, "Wilt
thou be sold to Ishak bin Ibrahim al-Mausili?" She replied,
"Yes," and he said, "Leave folly, for to whom cloth it happen to
be in the house of Ishak the cup-companion?"[FN#143] Thereupon
Ishak went forth the slave-dealer's quarters and overtook Al-
Rashid who had preceded him; and they ceased not walking till
they came to their landing-place, where they embarked in the boat
and fared on to Thaghr al-Khánakah.[FN#144] As for the slave-
dealer, he sent the damsel to the house of Ishak al-Nadim, whose
slave-girls took her and carried her to the Hammam. Then each
damsel gave her somewhat of her gear and they decked her with
earrings and bracelets, so that she redoubled in beauty and
became as she were the moon on the night of its full. When Ishak
returned home from the Caliph's palace, Tohfah rose to him and
kissed his hand; and he saw that which the hand-maids had done
with her and thanked them for so doing and said to them, "Let her
home in the house of instruction and bring her instruments of
music, and if she be apt at song teach her; and may Allah
Almighty vouchsafe her health and weal!" So there passed over her
three months, while she homed with him in the house of
instruction, and they brought her the instruments of music.
Furthermore, as time went on she was vouchsafed health and
soundness and her beauty waxed many times brighter than before
and her pallor was changed to white and red, so that she became a
seduction to all who saw her. One day, Ishak bade summon all who
were with him of slave-girls from the house of instruction and
carried them up to Al-Rashid's palace, leaving none in his house
save Tohfah and a cookmaid; for that he thought not of Tohfah,
nor did she come to his memory, and none of the damsels reminded
him of her. When she saw that the house was empty of the slave-
girls, she took the lute (now she was singular in her time for
smiting upon the lute, nor had she her like in the world, no, not
Ishak himself, nor any other) and sang thereto these couplets:--

"When soul desireth one that is its mate * It never winneth dear
     desire of Fate:
My life for him whose tortures tare my frame, * And dealt me pine
     he can alone abate!
He saith (that only he to heal mine ill, * Whose sight is
     medicine to my doleful state),
'O scoffer-wight, how long wilt mock my woe * As though did Allah
     nothing else create?' "

Now Ishak had returned to his house on an occasion that called
for him; and when he entered the vestibule, he heard a sound of
singing, the like whereof he had never heard in the world, for
that it was soft as the breeze and more strengthening than
oil[FN#145] of almonds. So the pleasure of it get hold of him and
delight so seized him, that he fell down fainting in the
vestibule. Tohfah heard the noise of footfalls and laying the
lute from her hand, went out to see what was the matter. She
found her lord Ishak lying aswoon in the entrance; so she took
him up and strained him to her bosom, saying, "I conjure thee in
Allah's name, O my lord, tell me, hath aught of ill befallen
thee?" When he heard her voice, he recovered from his fainting
and asked her, "Who art thou?" She answered, "I am thy slave-
girl, Tohfah;" and he said to her, "Art thou indeed Tohfah?"
"Yes," replied she; and he, "By Allah, I had indeed forgotten
thee and remembered thee not till this moment!" Then he looked at
her and said, "Verily, thy case is altered to other case and thy
wanness is changed to rosiness and thou hast redoubled in beauty
and loveliness. But was it thou who was singing just now?" She
was troubled and affrighted and answered, "Even I, O my lord;"
whereupon Ishak seized upon her hand and carrying her into the
house, said to her, "Take the lute and sing; for never saw I nor
heard thy like in smiting upon the lute; no, not even myself!"
Quoth she, "O my lord, thou mockest me. Who am I that thou
shouldst say all this to me? Indeed, this is but of thy
kindness." Quoth he, "Nay, by Allah, I said but the truth to thee
and I am not of those on whom presence imposeth For these three
months nature hath not moved thee to take the lute and sing
thereto, and this is naught save a rare thing and a strange. But
all this cometh of strength in the art and thy self-restraint."
Then he bade her sing; and she said, "Hearkening and obedience."
So she took the lute and tightening its strings to the sticking-
point, smote thereon a number of airs, so that she confounded
Ishak's wit and for delight he was like to fly. Then she returned
to the first mode and sang thereto these couplets:--

"By your ruined stead aye I stand and stay, * Nor shall change or
     dwelling depart us tway!
No distance of homestead shall gar me forget * Your love, O
     friends, but yearn alway:
Ne'er flies your phantom the babes of these eyne * You are moons
     in Nighttide's murkest array:
And with growing passion mine unrest grows * And each morn I find
     union dissolved in woes."

When she had made an end of her song and laid down the lute,
Ishak looked fixedly on her, then took her hand and offered to
kiss it; but she snatched it from him and said to him, "Allah, O
my lord, do not that!"[FN#146] Cried he, "Be silent. By Allah, I
had said that there was not in the world the like of me; but now
I have found my dinár in the art but a dánik,[FN#147] for thou
art more excellent of skill than I, beyond comparison or
approximation or calculation! This very day will I carry[FN#148]
thee up to the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, and
when his glance lighteth on thee, thou wilt become a Princess of
womankind. So Allah, Allah upon thee, O my lady, whenas thou
becomes" of the household of the Prince of True Believers, do not
thou forget me!" She replied, "Allah, O my lord, thou art the
root of my fortunes and in thee is my heart fortified." Thereat
he took her hand and made a covenant with her of this and she
swore to him that she would not forget him Then said he to her,
"By Allah, thou art the desire of the Commander of the Faithful!
Now take the lute and sing a song which thou shalt sing to the
Caliph, when thou goest in to him" So she took the lute and
tuning it, improvised these couplets:--

"His lover hath ruth on his woeful mood * And o'erwept him as
     still by his couch he[FN#149] stood:
And garred him drink of his lip-dews and wine[FN#150] * Ere he
     died and this food was his latest good."

Ishak stared at her and seizing her hand, said to her, "Know that
I am bound by an oath that, when the singing of a damsel pleaseth
me, she shall not end her song but before the Prince of True
Believers. But now tell me, how came it that thou tarriedst with
the slave-dealer five months and wast not sold to any one, and
thou of this skill, especially when the price set on thee was no
great matter?" Hereat she laughed and answered, "O my lord, my
story is a wondrous and my case a marvellous Know that I belonged
aforetime to a Maghribi merchant,who bought me when I was three
years old, and there were in his house many slave-girls and
eunuchs; but I was the dearest to him of them all So he kept me
with him and used not to address me otherwise than, 'O
daughterling,' and indeed to this moment I am a clean maid. Now
there was with him a damsel, a lutanist, and she reared me and
taught me the art, even as thou seest. Then was my master removed
to the mercy of Allah Almighty[FN#151] and his sons divided his
monies. I fell to the lot of one of them; but 'twas only a little
while ere he had wasted all his wealth and there was left him
naught of coin. So I gave up the lute, fearing lest I should fall
into the hand of a man who knew not my worth, for well I wot that
needs must my master sell me; and indeed but a few days passed
ere he carried me forth to the quarters of the slave merchant who
buyeth damsels and displayeth them to the Commander of the
Faithful. Now I desired to learn the art and mystery; so I
refused to be sold to other than thou, until Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) vouchsafed me my desire of thy presence;
whereupon I came out to thee, as soon as I heard of thy coming,
and besought thee to buy me. Thou heartenedst my heart and
broughtest me; and since I entered thy house, O my lord, I have
not taken up the lute till now; but to-day, when I was left
private by the slave-girls, I took it; and my purpose in this was
that I might see if my hand were changed[FN#152] or not. As I was
singing, I heard a footfall in the vestibule; so springing up, I
laid the lute from my hand and going forth to see what was to do,
found thee, O my lord, after this fashion." Quoth Ishak, "Indeed,
this was of thy fair fortune. By Allah, I know not that which
thou knowest in this art!" Then he arose and opening a chest,
brought out therefrom striped clothes,[FN#153] netted with jewels
and great pearls and other costly gems and said to her, "In the
name of Allah, don these, O my lady Tohfah." So she arose and
donned that dress and veiled herself and went up with Ishak to
the palace of the Caliphate, where he made her stand without,
whilst he himself went in to the Prince of True Believers (with
whom was Ja'afar the Barmaki) and kissing the ground before him,
said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful, I have brought thee a
damsel, never saw eyes of seer her like for excellence in singing
and touching the lute; and her name is Tohfah." Al-Rashid asked,
"And where be this Tohfah[FN#154] who hath not her like in the
world?" Answered Ishak, "Yonder she standeth, O Commander of the
Faithful ;" and he acquainted the Caliph with her case from first
to last. Then said Al-Rashid, " 'Tis a marvel to hear thee praise
a slave-girl after this fashion. Admit her that we may look upon
her, for verily the morning may not be hidden." Accordingly,
Ishak bade admit her; so she entered, and when her eyes fell upon
the Prince of True Believers, she kissed ground before him and
said, "The Peace be upon thee, O Commander of the faithful Fold
and Asylum of all who the true Creed hold and Quickener of
justice in the Worlds threefold! Allah make thy feet tread on
safest wise and give thee joy of what He gave thee in generous
guise and make thy harbourage Paradise and Hell-fire that of
thine enemies!" Quoth Al-Rashid, "And on thee be the Peace, O
damsel! Sit." So she sat down and he bade her sing; whereupon she
took the lute and tightening its strings, played thereon in many
modes, so that the Prince of True Believers and Ja'afar were
confounded in sprite and like to fly for delight. Then she
returned to the first mode and improvised these couplets:--

"O mine eyes! I swear by him I adore, * Whom pilgrims seek
     thronging Arafát;
An thou call my name on the grave of me, * I'll reply to thy call
     tho' my bones go rot:
I crave none for friend of my heart save thee; * So believe me,
     for true are the well-begot."

Al-Rashid considered her comeliness and the goodliness of her
singing and her eloquence and what other qualities she comprised
and rejoiced with joy exceeding; and for the stress of that which
overcame him of delight, he descended from the couch and sitting
down with her upon the floor, said to her, "Thou hast done well,
O Tohfah. By Allah, thou art indeed a choice gift!"[FN#155] Then
he turned to Ishak and said to him, "Thou dealtest not justly, O
Ishak, in the description of this damsel, nor didst thou fairly
set forth all that she comprised of charms and art; for that, by
Allah, she is inconceivably more skilful than thou; and I know of
this craft that which none knowest save I!" Exclaimed the Wazir
Ja'afar, "By Allah, thou sayst sooth, O my lord, O Commander of
the Faithful. Indeed, she hath done away my wit, hath this
damsel." Quoth Ishak, "By Allah, O Prince of True Believers, I
had said that there was not on the face of the earth one who knew
the art of the lute like myself; but when I heard her, my skill
became nothing worth in mine eyes." Then said the Caliph to her,
"Repeat thy playing, O Tohfah." So she repeated it and he cried
to her, "Well done!" Moreover, he said to Ishak, "Thou hast
indeed brought me a marvellous thing, one which is worth in mine
eyes the empire of the world." Then he turned to Masrur the
eunuch and said to him, "Carry Tohfah to the chamber of honour."
Accordingly, she went away with the Castrato and the Caliph
looked at her raiment and ornaments and seeing her clad in
clothing of choice, asked Ishak, "O Ishak, whence hath she these
robes?" Answered he, "O my lord, these are somewhat of thy
bounties and thy largesse, and they are a gift to her from me. By
Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, the world, all of it, were
little in comparison with her!" Then the Caliph turned to the
Wazir Ja'afar and said to him, "Give Ishak fifty thousand dirhams
and a robe of honour of the choicest apparel." "Hearing and
obeying," replied Ja'afar and gifted him with that which the
Caliph ordered him. As for Al-Rashid, he was private with Tohfah
that night and found her a pure virgin and rejoiced in her; and
she took high rank in his heart, so that he could not suffer her
absence a single hour and committed to her the keys of the
affairs of the realm, for that which he saw in her of good
breeding and fine wit and leal will. He also gave her fifty
slave-girls and two hundred thousand diners and a quantity of
raiment and ornaments, gems and jewels worth the kingdom of
Egypt; and of the excess of his love for her, he would not
entrust her to any of the hand-maids or eunuchs; but, whenever he
went out from her, he locked the door upon her and took the key
with him, against he should return to her, forbidding the damsels
to go in to her, of his fear lest they should slay her or poison
her or practice on her with the knife; and in this way he abode
awhile. One day, as she sang before the Commander of the
Faithful, he was delighted with exceeding delight, so that he
offered to kiss her hand;[FN#156] but she drew it away from him
and smote upon her lute and broke it and wept. Al-Rashid wiped
away her tears and said, "O desire of the heart, what is it
maketh thee weep? May Allah not cause an eye of shine to shed
tears!" Said she, "O my lord, what am I that thou shouldst kiss
my hand? Wilt thou have Allah punish me for this and my term come
to an end and my felicity pass away? For this is what none ever
attained unto." He rejoined, "Well said, O Tohfah. Know that thy
rank in my esteem is high and for that which delighted me of what
I saw in thee, I offered to do this, but I will not return unto
the like thereof; so be of good cheer, with eyes cool and clear,
for I have no desire to other than thyself and will not die but
in the love of thee, and thou to me art queen this day, to the
exclusion of al! humankind." Therewith she fell to kissing his
feet; and this her fashion pleased him, so that his love for her
redoubled and he became unable to brook severance from her a
single hour. Now Al-Rashid one day went forth to the chase and
left Tohfah in her pavilion. As she sat perusing a book, with a
candle-branch of gold before her, wherein was a perfumed candle,
behold, a musk-apple fell down before her from the top of the
saloon.[FN#157] So she looked up and beheld the Lady Zubaydah
bint al-Kasim,[FN#158] who saluted her with a salam and
acquainted her with herself, whereupon Tohfah sprang to her feet
and said, "O my lady, were I not of the number of the
new,[FN#159] I had daily sought thy service; so do not thou
bereave me of those noble steps."[FN#160] The Lady Zubaydah
called down blessings upon her and replied, "I knew this of thee;
and, by the life of the Commander of the Faithful, but that it is
not of my wont to go forth of my place, I had come out to do my
service to thee." Then quoth she to her, "Know, O Tohfah, that
the Commander of the Faithful hath deserted all his concubines
and favourites on shine account, even myself hath he abandoned on
this wise, and I am not content to be as one of the mistresses;
yet hath he made me of them and forsaken me, and I have sought
thee, so thou mayst beseech him to come to me, though it be but
once a month, in order that I may not be the like of the hand-
maids and concubines nor take rank with the slave-girls; and this
is my need of thee." Answered Tohfah, "Hearkening and obedience!
By Allah, O my lady, I would that he might be with thee a whole
month and with me but one night, so thy heart might be heartened,
for that I am one of thy hand-maids and thou in every case art my
lady." The Princess Zubaydah thanked her for this and taking
leave of her, returned to her palace. When the Caliph came back
from the chase and course, he betook himself to Tohfah's pavilion
and bringing out the key, opened the lock and went in to her. She
rose to receive him and kissed his hand, and he gathered her to
his breast and seated her on his knee.[FN#161] Then food was
brought to them and they ate and washed their hands; after which
she took the lute and sang, till Al-Rashid was moved to sleep.
When aware of this, she ceased singing and told him her adventure
with the Lady Zubaydah, saying, "O Prince of True Believers, I
would have thee favour me with a favour and hearten my heart and
accept my intercession and reject not my supplication, but fare
thee forthright to the Lady Zubaydah." Now this talk befel after
he had stripped himself naked and she also had doffed her dress;
and he said, "Thou shouldst have named this ere we stripped
ourselves naked, I and thou!" But she answered, say ing, "O
Commander of the Faithful, I did this not except in accordance
with the saying of the poet in these couplets,

"Of all intercessions can none succeed, * Save whatso Tohfah bint
     Marjan sue'd:
No intercessor who comes enveiled;[FN#162] * She sues the best
     who sues mother-nude."

When Al-Rashid heard this, her speech pleased him and he strained
her to his bosom. Then he went forth from her and locked the door
upon her, as before; whereupon she took the book and sat perusing
it awhile. Presently, she set it aside and taking the lute,
tightened its strings; and smote thereon, after a wondrous
fashion, such as would have moved inanimate things to dance, and
fell to singing marvellous melodies and chanting these couplets:-
-

"Cease for change to wail,* The world blames who rail
Bear patient its shafts  * That for aye prevail.
How often a joy          * Grief garbed thou shalt hail
How oft gladding bliss   * Shall appear amid bale!"

Then she turned and saw within the chamber an old man, handsome
in his hoariness and stately of semblance, who was dancing in
goodly and winning wise, a dance whose like none might dance. So
she sought refuge with Allah Almighty from Satan the Stoned and
said, "I will not give over what I am about, for whatso the Lord
willeth, He fulfilleth." Accordingly, she went on singing till
the Shaykh came up to her and kissed ground before her, saying,
"Well done, O Highmost of the East and the West! May the world be
not bereaved of thee! By Allah, indeed thou art perfect of
manners and morals, O Tohfat al-Sudúr![FN#163] Dost thou know
me?" Cried she, "Nay, by Allah, but methinks thou art of the
Jann." Quoth he, "Thou sayst sooth; I am Abú al-Tawáif[FN#164]
Iblis, and I come to thee every night, and with me thy sister
Kamariyah, for that she loveth thee and sweareth not but by thy
life; and her pastime is not pleasant to her, except she come to
thee and see thee whilst thou seest her not. As for me, I
approach thee upon an affair, whereby thou shalt gain and rise to
high rank with the kings of the Jann and rule them, even as thou
rulest mankind; and to that end I would have thee come with me
and be present at the festival of my daughter's wedding and the
circumcision of my son;[FN#165] for that the Jann are agreed upon
the manifestation of thy command. And she answered, "Bismillah;
in the name of the Lord."[FN#166] So she gave him the lute and he
forewent her, till he came to the Chapel of Ease,[FN#167] and
behold, therein was a door and a stairway. When Tohfah saw this,
her reason fled; but Iblis cheered her with chat. Then he
descended the steps and she followed him to the bottom of the
stair, where she found a passage and they fared on therein, till
they came to a horse standing, ready saddled and bridled and
accoutred. Quoth Iblis, "Bismillah, O my lady Tohfah;" and he
held the stirrup for her. So she mounted and the horse heaved
like a wave under her and putting forth wings soared upwards with
her, while the Shaykh flew by her side; whereat she was
affrighted and clung to the pommel of the saddle;[FN#168] nor was
it but an hour ere they came to a fair green meadow, fresh-
flowered as if the soil thereof were a fine robe, purfled with
all manner bright hues. Amiddlemost that mead was a palace
towering high in air, with crenelles of red gold, set with pearls
and gems, and a two-leaved door; and about the gateway were much
people of the chiefs of the Jann, clad in costliest clothing.
When they saw the Shaykh, they all cried out, saying, "The Lady
Tohfah is come!" And as soon as she reached the palace-gate they
pressed forward in a body, and dismounting her from the horse's
back, carried her into the palace and fell to kissing her hands.
When she entered, she beheld a palace whereof seers ne'er saw the
like; for therein were four halls, one facing other, and its
walls were of gold and its ceilings of silver. It was high-
builded of base, wide of space, and those who descried it would
be posed to describe it. At the upper end of the hall stood a
throne of red gold set with pearls and jewels, up to which led
five steps of silver, and on its right and on its left were many
chairs of gold and silver. Quoth Tohfah, "The Shaykh led me to
the estrade and seated me on a chair of gold beside the throne,
and over the dais was a curtain let down, gold and silver wrought
and broidered with pearls and jewels." And she was amazed at that
which she beheld in that place and magnified her Lord (extolled
and exalted be He!) and hallowed Him. Then the kings of the Jann
came up to that throne and seated themselves thereon; and they
were in the semblance of Adam's sons, excepting two of them, who
appeared in the form and aspect of the Jann, each with one eye
slit endlong and jutting horns and projecting tusks.[FN#169]
After this there came up a young lady, fair of favour and seemly
of stature, the light of whose face outshone that of the waxen
fiambeaux; and about her were other three women, than whom none
fairer abode on face of earth. They saluted Tohfah with the salam
and she rose to them and kissed ground before them whereupon they
embraced her after returning her greeting[FN#170] and sat down on
the chairs aforesaid. Now the four women who thus accosted Tohfah
were the Princess Kamariyah, daughter of King Al-Shísbán, and her
sisters; and Kamariyah loved Tohfah with exceeding love. So, when
she came up to her, she fell to kissing and embracing her, and
Shaykh Iblis cried, "Fair befal the accolade! Take me between
you." At this Tohfah laughed and Kamariyah said, "O my sister, I
love thee, and doubtless hearts have their witnesses,[FN#171]
for, since I saw thee, I have loved thee." Replied Tohfah, By
Allah, hearts have sea-like deeps, and thou, by Allah, art dear
to me and I am thy hand-maid." Kamariyah thanked her for this and
kissing her once more said, "These be the wives of the kings of
the Jann: greet them with the salam! This is Queen
Jamrah,[FN#172] that is Queen Wakhímah and this other is Queen
Sharárah, and they come not but for thee." So Tohfah rose to her
feet and bussed their hands, and the three queens kissed her and
welcomed her and honoured her with the utmost honour. Then they
brought trays and tables and amongst the rest a platter of red
gold, inlaid with pearls and gems; its raised rims were of or and
emerald, and thereon were graven[FN#173] these couplets:--

To bear provaunt assigned,    * By hands noble designed,
For the gen'rous I'm made     * Not for niggardly hind!
So eat safe all I hold        * And praise God of mankind.

After reading the verses they ate and Tohfah looked at the two
kings who had not changed shape and said to Kamariyah, "O my
lady, what be this feral and that other like unto him? By Allah,
mine eye may not suffer the sight of them." Kamariyah laughed and
answered, "O my sister, that is my sire Al-Shisban and the other
is highs Maymun the Sworder; and of the arrogance of their souls
and their insolence, they consented not to change their created
shapes. Indeed, all whom thou seest here are nature-fashioned
like them; but on shine account they have changed favour, for
fear lest thou be disquieted and for the comforting of thy mind,
so thou mightest become familiar with them and be at thine ease."
Quoth Tohfah, "O my lady, verily I cannot look at them. How
frightful is this Maymun, with his monocular face! Mine eye
cannot brook the sight of him, and indeed I am in affright of
him." Kamariyah laughed at her speech, and Tohfah continued, "By
Allah, O my lady, I cannot fill my eye with the twain!"[FN#174]
Then cried her father Al-Shisban to her, What be this laughing?"
So she bespoke him in a tongue none understood but they two and
acquainted him with that which Tohfah had said; whereat he
laughed a prodigious loud laugh, as it were the roaring thunder.
Presently they ate and the tables were removed and they washed
their hands; after which Iblis the Accursed came up to Tohfah and
said to her, "O my lady, thou gladdenest the place and
enlightenest and embellishes" it with thy presence; but now fain
would these kings hear somewhat of thy singing, for Night hath
dispread her pinions for departure and there abideth of it but a
little." Quoth she, "Hearing and obeying." So she took the lute
and touching its strings with rare touch, played thereon after
wondrous wise, so that it seemed to those who were present as if
the palace surged like a wave with them for the music. Then she
began singing and chanting these couplets,

"Folk of my faith and oath, Peace with you be! * Quoth ye not I
     shall meet you you meet me?
I'll chide you softerwise than breeze o' morn, * Sweeter than
     spring of coolest clarity.
I' faith mine eyelids are with tears chafed sore: * My vitals
     plain to you some cure to see.
My friends! Our union to disunion changed * Was aye my fear for
     'twas my certainty.
I'll plain to Allah of all ills I bore; * For pine and yearning
     misery still I dree."

The kings of the Jann were moved to delight by that sweet singing
and seemly speech and thanked Tohfah therefore; and Queen
Kamariyah rose to her and threw her arms round her neck and
kissed her between the eyes, saying, "By Allah, 'tis good, O my
sister and coolth of mine eyes and core of my heart!" Then said
she, "I conjure thee by Allah, give us more of this lovely
singing;' and Tohfah answered with "To hear is to obey." So she
took the lute and playing thereon in a mode different from the
former fashion, sang these couplets:--

"I, oft as ever grows the pine of me, * Console my soul with hope
     thy sight to see.
Haply shall Allah join our parted lives, * E'en as my fortunes
     far from thee cast He!
Then oh! who thrallest me by force of love--* Seized by fond
     affection's mastery
All hardships easy wax when thou art nigh; * And all the far
     draws near when near thou be.
Ah! be the Ruthful light to lover fond, * Love-lore, frame
     wasted, ready Death to dree!
Were hope of seeing thee cut off, my loved; * After shine absence
     sleep mine eyes would flee!
I mourn no worldly joyance, my delight * Is but to sight thee
     while thou seest my sight."

At this the accursed Iblis was hugely pleased and thrust his
finger up his fundament,[FN#175] whilst Maymun danced and said,
"O Tohfat al-Sudur, soften the sound;[FN#176] for, as pleasure
entereth into my heart, it arresteth my breath and blood." So she
took the lute and altering the tune, played a third air; then she
returned to the first and sang these couplets:--

"The waves of your[FN#177] love o'er my life have rolled; * I
     sink while I see you all aid withhold:
You have drowned my vitals in deeps of your love, * Nor can heart
     and sprite for your loss be consoled:
Deem not I forget my troth after you: * How forget what Allah
     decreed of old?[FN#178]
Love clings to the lover who nights in grief, * And 'plains of
     unrest and of woes ensouled.

The kings and all those who were present rejoiced in this with
joy exceeding and the accursed Iblis came up to Tohfah and
kissing her hand, said to her, "Verily there abideth but little
of the night; so tarry with us till the morrow, when we will
apply ourselves to the wedding[FN#179] and the
circumcision."[FN#180] Then all the Jann went away, whereupon
Tohfah rose to her feet and Iblis said, "Go ye up with Tohfah to
the garden for the rest of the night." So Kamariyah took her and
went with her into the garden, which contained all manner birds,
nightingale and mocking-bird and ringdove and curlew[FN#181] and
other than these of all the kinds. Therein were all manner of
fruits: its channels[FN#182] were of gold and silver and the
water thereof, as it broke forth of its conduits, was like the
bellies of fleeing serpents, and indeed it was as it were the
Garden of Eden.[FN#183] When Tohfah beheld this, she called to
mind her lord and wept sore and said, "I beseech Allah the Most
High to vouchsafe me speedy deliverance and return to my palace
and to my high estate and queendom and glory, and reunion with my
lord and master Al-Rashid." Then she walked about that garden and
saw in its midst a dome of white marble, raised on columns of
black teak whereto hung curtains purfled with pearls and gems.
Amiddlemost this pavilion was a founfain, inlaid with all kinds
of jacinths, and thereon a golden statue of a man and beside it a
little door. She opened the door and found herself in a long
corridor: so she followed it and entered a Hammam-bath walled
with all kinds of costly marbles and floored with a mosaic of
pearls and jewels. Therein were four cisterns of alabaster, one
facing other, and the ceiling of the bath was of glass coloured
with all varieties of colours, such as confounded the
understanding of those who have insight and amazed the wit of
every wight. Tohfah entered the bath, after she had doffed her
dress, and behold the Hammam basin was overlaid with gold set
with pearls and red balasses and green emeralds and other jewels:
so she extolled Allah Almighty and hallowed Him for the
magnificence of that which she saw of the appointments of that
bath. Then she made her Wuzu-ablution in that basin and
pronouncing the Prohibition,[FN#184] prayed the dawn-prayer and
what else had escaped her of orisons;[FN#185] after which she
went out and walked in that garden among jessamine and lavender
and roses and chamomile and gillyflowers and thyme and violets
and basil royal, till she came to the door of the pavilion
aforesaid. There she sat down, pondering that which would betide
Al-Rashid after her, when he should come to her apartment and
find her not; and she plunged into the sea of her solicitude,
till slumber overtook her and soon she slept. Presently she felt
a breath upon her face; whereupon she awoke and found Queen
Kamariyah kissing her, and with her her three sisters, Queen
Jamrah, Queen Wakhimah and Queen Sharárah. So she arose and
kissed their hands and rejoiced in them with the utmost joy and
they ceased not, she and they, to talk and converse, what while
she related to them her history, from the time of her purchase by
the Maghrabi to that of her coming to the quarters of the slave-
dealer, where she besought Ishak al-Nadim to buy her,[FN#186] and
how she won union with Al-Rashid, till the moment when Iblis came
to her and brought her to them. They gave not over talking till
the sun declined and yellowed and the hour of its setting drew
near and the day departed, whereupon Tohfah was urgent in
supplication[FN#187] to Allah Almighty, on the occasion of the
sundown prayer, that he would reunite her with her lord
Al-Rashid. After this, she abode with the four queens, till they
arose and entered the palace, where she found the waxen tapers
lit and ranged in candlesticks of gold and silver, and censing
vessels of silver and gold filled with lign-aloes and ambergris,
and there were the kings of the Jann sitting. So she saluted them
with the salam, kissing the earth before them and doing them
service; and they rejoiced in her and in her sight. Then she
ascended the estrade and sat down upon her chair, whilst King Al-
Shisban and King Al Muzfir[FN#188] and Queen Lúlúah and other
kings of the Jann sat on chairs, and they brought choice tables,
spread with all manner meats befitting royalties. They ate their
fill; after which the tables were removed and they washed their
hands and wiped them with napkins. Then they brought the wine-
service and set on sasses and cups and flagons and beakers of
gold and silver and bowls of crystal and gold, and they poured
out the wines and they filled the flagons. Then Iblis took the
bowl and signed to Tohfah to sing: and she said, "To hear is to
obey!" So she hent the lute in hand and tuning it, sang these
couplets,

"Drink wine, O ye lovers, I rede you alway, * And praise his
     worth who loves night and day;
'Mid the myrtle, narcissus and lavender, * And the scented herbs
     that bedeck the tray."

So Iblis the Damned drank and said, "Brave, O desire of hearts!
But thou owest me still another aria." Then he filled the cup and
signed to her to sing. Quoth she, "Hearkening and obedience, and
chanted these couplets,

"Ye wot, I am whelmed in despair and despight, * Ye dight me
     blight that delights your sight:
Your wone is between my unrest and my eyes; * Nor tears to melt
     you, nor sighs have might.
How oft shall I sue you for justice, and you * With a pining
     death my dear love requite?
But your harshness is duty, your farness near; * Your hate is
     Union, your wrath is delight:
Take your fill of reproach as you will: you claim * All my heart,
     and I reck not of safety or blame."


All present were delighted and the sitting-chamber was moved like
a wave with mirth, and Iblis said, "Brave, O Tohfat al-Sudur!"
Then they left not liquor-bibbing and rejoicing and making merry
and tambourining and piping till the night waned and the dawn
waxed near; and indeed exceeding delight entered into them. The
most of them in mirth was the Shaykh Iblis, and for the stress of
that which befel him of joyance, he doffed all that was on him of
coloured clothes and cast them over Tohfah, and among the rest a
robe broidered with jewels and jacinths, worth ten thousand
diners. Then he kissed the earth and danced and he thrust his
finger up his fundament and hending his beard in hand, said to
her, "Sing about this beard and endeavour after mirth and
pleasance, and no blame shall betide thee for this." So she
improvised and sang these couplets:--

"Barbe of the olden, the one eyed goat! * What words shall thy
     foulness o' deed denote?
Be not of our praises so pompous-proud: * Thy worth for a dock-
     tail dog's I wot.
By Allah, to-morrow shall see me drub * Thy nape with a
     cow-hide[FN#189] and dust thy coat!"

All those present laughed at her mockery of Iblis and wondered at
the wittiness of her visnomy[FN#190] and her readiness in
versifying, whilst the Shaykh himself rejoiced and said to her,
"O Tohfat al-Sudur, verily, the night be gone; so arise and rest
thyself ere the day; and to-orrow there shall be naught save
weal." Then all the kings of the Jinn departed, together with
those who were present of guards; and Tohfah abode alone,
pondering the case of Al-Rashid and bethinking her of how it went
with him after her going, and of what had betided him for her
loss, till the dawn lightened, when she arose and walked about
the palace. Suddenly she saw a handsome door; so she opened it
and found herself in a flower-garden finer than the first--ne'er
saw eyes of seer a fairer than it. When she beheld this garth,
she was moved to delight and she called to mind her lord Al-
Rashid and wept with sore weeping and cried, "I crave of the
bounty of Allah Almighty that my return to him and to my palace
and to my home may be nearhand!" Then she walked about the
parterres till she came to a pavilion, high builded of base and
wide of space, never espied mortal nor heard of a grander than
it. So she entered and found herself in a long corridor, which
led to a Hammam goodlier than that aforetime described, and its
cisterns were full of rose water mingled with musk. Quoth Tohfah,
"Extolled be Allah! Indeed, this[FN#191] is none other than a
mighty great king." Then she pulled off her clothes and washed
her body and made her Ghusl ablution of the whole person[FN#192]
and prayed that which was due from her of prayer from the evening
of the previous day.[FN#193] When the sun rose upon the gate of
the garden and she saw the wonders thereof, with that which was
therein of all manner blooms and streams, and heard the voices of
its birds, she marvelled at what she beheld of the rareness of
its ordinance and the beauty of its disposition and sat musing
over the case of Al-Rashid and pondering what was come of him
after her. Her tears coursed down her cheeks and the Zephyr blew
on her; so she slept and knew no more till she suddenly felt a
breath on her side-face, whereat she awoke in affright and found
Queen Kamariyah kissing her, and she was accompanied by her
sisters, who said, "Rise, for the sun hath set." So Tohfah arose
and making the Wuzu-ablution, prayed her due of prayers[FN#194]
and accompanied the four queens to the palace, where she saw the
wax candles lighted and the kings sitting. She saluted them with
the salam and seated herself upon her couch; and behold, King Al-
Shisban had shifted his semblance, for all the pride of his soul.
Then came up Iblis (whom Allah damn!) and Tohfah rose to him and
kissed his hands. He also kissed her hand and blessed her and
asked, "How deemest thou? Is not this place pleasant, for all its
desertedness and desolation?" Answered she, "None may be desolate
in this place;" and he cried, "Know that this is a site whose
soil no mortal dare tread;" but she rejoined, "I have dared and
trodden it, and this is one of thy many favours." Then they
brought tables and dishes and viands and fruits and sweetmeats
and other matters, whose description passeth powers of mortal
