man, and they ate their sufficiency; after which the tables were
removed and the dessert-trays and platters set on, and they
ranged the bottles and flagons and vessels and phials, together
with all manner fruits and sweet-scented flowers. The first to
raise the bowl was Iblis the Accursed, who said, "O Tohfat al-
Sudur, sing over my cup." So she took the lute and touching it,
carolled these couplets,

"Wake ye, Ho sleepers all! and take your joy * Of Time, and boons
     he deigned to bestow;
Then hail the Wine-bride, drain the wine-ptisane * Which, poured
     from flagon, flows with flaming glow:
O Cup-boy, serve the wine, bring round the red[FN#195] * Whose
     draught gives all we hope for here below:
What's worldly pleasure save my lady's face, * Draughts of pure
     wine and song of musico?"

So Iblis drained his bowl and, when he had made an end of his
draught, waved his hand to Tohfah; then, throwing off that which
was upon him of clothes, delivered them to her. The suit would
have brought ten thousand diners and with it was a tray full of
jewels worth a mint of money. Presently he filled again and gave
the cup to his son Al-Shisban, who took it from his hand and
kissing it, stood up and sat down again. Now there was before him
a tray of roses; so he said to her, "O Tohfah, sing thou somewhat
upon these roses." She replied, "Hearkening and obedience," and
chanted these two couplets,

¨It proves my price o' er all the flowers that I * Seek you each
     year, yet stay but little stound:
And high my vaunt I m dyed by my lord * Whom Allah made the best
     e'er trod on ground.[FN#196]"

So Al-Shisban drank off the cup in his turn and said, "Brave, O
desire of hearts!" and he bestowed on her that was upon him, to
wit, a dress of cloth-of-pearl, fringed with great unions and
rubies and purfled with precious gems, and a tray wherein were
fifty thousand diners. Then Maymun the Sworder took the cup and
began gazing intently upon Tohfah. Now there was in his hand a
pomegranate-flower and he said to her, "Sing thou somewhat, O
queen of mankind and Jinn kind upon this pomegranate-flower; for
indeed thou hast dominion over all hearts." Quoth she, "To hear
is to obey;" and she improvised and sang these couplets,

"Breathes sweet the zephyr on fair partèrre; * Robing lute in the
     flamings that fell from air:
And moaned from the boughs with its cooing rhyme * Voice of
     ring-doves plaining their love and care:
The branch dresses in suit of fine sendal green* And in wine-hues
     borrowed from bloom Gulnare."[FN#197]

Maymun the Sworder drained his bowl and said to her, "Brave, O
perfection of qualities!" Then he signed to her and was absent
awhile, after which he returned and with him a tray of jewels
worth an hundred thousand ducats, which he gave to Tohfah.
Thereupon Kamariyah arose and bade her slave-girl open the closet
behind the Songstress, wherein she laid all that wealth; and
committed the key to her, saying, "Whatso of riches cometh to
thee, lay thou in this closet that is by thy side, and after the
festivities, it shall be borne to thy palace on the heads of the
Jinn." Tohfah kissed her hand and another king, by name
Munír,[FN#198] took the bowl and filling it, said to her, "O
ferry Fair, sing to me over my bowl somewhat upon-the jasmine."
She replied with, "Hearkening and obedience," and improvised
these couplets,

"'Twere as though the Jasmine (when self she enrobes * On her
     boughs) cloth display to my wondering eyne;
In sky of green beryl, which Beauty enclothes, * Star-groups like
     studs of the silvern mine."

Munir drank off his cup and ordered her eight hundred thousand
diners, whereat Kamariyah rejoiced and rising to her feet, kissed
Tohfah on her face and said to her, "Be the world never bereaved
of thee, O thou who lordest it over the hearts of Jinn-kind and
mankind!" Then she returned to her place and the Shaykh Iblis
arose and danced, till all present were confounded; after which
the Songstress said, "Verily, thou embellishes" my festivities, O
thou who commandest men and Jinn and rejoices" their hearts with
thy loveliness and the beauty[FN#199] of thy faithfulness to thy
lord. All that thy hands possess shall be borne to thee in thy
palace and placed at thy service; but now the dawn is nearhand;
so do thou rise and rest thee according to thy custom." Tohfah
turned and found with her none of the Jinn; so she laid her head
on the floor and slept till she had gotten her repose; after
which she arose and betaking herself to the lakelet, made the
Wuzu-ablution and prayed. Then she sat beside the water awhile
and meditated the matter of her lord Al-Rashid and that which had
betided him after her loss and wept with sore weeping. Presently,
she heard a blowing behind her;[FN#200] so she turned and behold,
a Head without a body and with eyes slit endlong: it was of the
bigness of an elephant's skull and bigger and ha] a mouth as it
were an oven and projecting canines as they were grapnels, and
hair which trailed upon the ground. So Tohfah cried, "I take
refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned!" and recited the Two
Preventives;[FN#201] what while the Head drew near her and said,
"Peace be with thee, O Princess of Jinn and men and union-pearl
of her age and her time! Allah continue thee on life, for all the
lapsing of the days, and reunite thee with thy lord the
Imam!"[FN#202] She replied, "And upon thee be Peace; O thou whose
like I have not seen among the Jann!" Quoth the Head, "We are a
folk who may not change their favours and we are highs Ghuls:
mortals summon us to their presence, but we cannot present
ourselves before them without leave. As for me, I have gotten
leave of the Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif to appear before thee and I
desire of thy favour that thou sing me a song, so I may go to thy
palace and question its Haunters[FN#203] concerning the plight of
thy lord after thee and return to thee; and know, O Tohfat al-
Sudur, that between thee and thy lord be a distance of fifty
years' journey for the bonâ fide traveller." She rejoined,
"Indeed, thou grieves" me anent him between whom and me is fifty
years' journey;" but the Head[FN#204] cried to her, "Be of good
cheer and of eyes cool and clear, for the sovrans of the Jann
will restore thee to him in less than the twinkling of an eye."
Quoth she, "I will sing thee an hundred songs, so thou wilt bring
me news of my lord and that which betided him after me." And
quoth the Head, "Do thou favour me and sing me a song, so I may
go to thy lord and fetch thee tidings of him, for that I desire,
before I go, to hear thy voice, so haply my thirst[FN#205] may be
quenched." So she took the lute and tuning it, sang these
couplets:--

"They have marched, yet no empty stead left they: * They are
     gone, nor heart grieves me that fled be they:
My heart forebode the bereaval of friends; * Allah ne'er bereave
     steads wherefrom sped be they!
Though they hid the stations where led were they, * I'll follow
     till stars fall in disarray!
Ye slumber, but wake shall ne'er fly these lids; * 'Tis I bear
     what ye never bore--well-away!
It had irked them not to farewell who fares * With the parting-
     fires that my heart waylay.
My friends,[FN#206] your meeting to me is much * But more is the
     parting befel us tway:
You're my heart's delight, or you present be * Or absent, with
     you is my soul for aye!"

Thereupon the Head wept exceeding sore and cried, "O my lady,
indeed thou hast solaced my heart, and I have naught but my life;
so take it." She replied, "Nay, an I but knew that thou wouldst
bring me news of my lord Al-Rashid, 'twere fainer to me than the
reign of the world;" and the Head answered her, "It shall be done
as thou desirest." Then it disappeared and returning to her at
the last of the night, said, "O my lady, know that I have been to
thy palace and have questioned one of its Haunters of the case of
the Commander of the Faithful and that which befel him after
thee; and he said, 'When the Prince of True Believers came to
Tohfah's apartment and found her not and saw no sign of her, he
buffeted his face and head and rent his raiment.' Now there was
in thy chamber the Castrato, the chief of thy household, and the
Caliph cried out at him, saying, 'Bring me Ja'afar the Barmaki
and his father and brother at this very moment!' The Eunuch went
out, bewildered in his wit for fear of the King, and when he
stood in the presence of Ja'afar, he said to him, 'Come to the
Commander of the Faithful, thou and thy father and thy brother.'
So they arose in haste and betaking themselves to the presence,
said, 'O Prince of True Believers what may be the matter?' Quoth
he, 'There is a matter which passeth description. Know that I
locked the door and taking the key with me, betook myself to my
uncle's daughter, with whom I lay the night; but, when I arose in
the morning and came and opened the door, I found no sign of
Tohfah.' Quoth Ja'afar, 'O Commander of the Faithful have
patience, for that the damsel hath been snatched away, and needs
must she return, seeing that she took the lute with her, and 'tis
her own lute. The Jinns have assuredly carried her off, and we
trust in Allah Almighty that she will return.' Cried the Caliph,
'This[FN#207] is a thing which may nowise be!' And he abode in
her apartment, nor eating nor drinking, while the Barmecides
besought him to fare forth to the folk; and he weepeth and
tarrieth on such fashion till she shall return. This, then, is
that which hath betided him after thee." When Tohfah heard his
words, they were grievous to her and she wept with sore weeping;
whereupon quoth the Head to her, "The relief of Allah the Most
High is nearhand; but now let me hear somewhat of thy speech." So
she took the lute and sang three songs, weeping the while. The
Head exclaimed, "By Allah, thou hast been bountiful to me, the
Lord be with thee!" Then it disappeared and the season of sundown
came: so she rose and betook herself to her place in the hall;
whereupon behold, the candles sprang up from under the earth and
kindled themselves. Then the kings of the Jann appeared and
saluted her and kissed her hands and she greeted them with the
salam. Presently appeared Kamariyah and her three sisters and
saluted Tohfah and sat down; whereupon the tables were brought
and they ate; and when the tables were removed there came the
wine-tray and the drinking-service. So Tohfah took the lute and
one of the three queens filled the cup and signed to the
Songstress. Now she had in her hand a violet, so Tohfah
improvised these couplets:--

"I'm clad in a leaf-cloak of green; * In an honour-robe
     ultramarine:
I'm a wee thing of loveliest mien * But all flowers as my vassals
     are seen:
An Rose title her 'Morn-pride,' I ween * Nor before me nor after
     she's Queen."

The queen drank off her cup and bestowed on Tohfah a dress of
cloth-of-pearl, fringed with red rubies, worth twenty thousand
ducats, and a tray whereon were ten thousand sequins. All this
while Maymun's eye was upon her and presently he said to her,
"Harkye, Tohfah! Sing to me." But Queen Zalzalah cried out at
him, and said "Desist,[FN#208] O Maymun. Thou sufferest not
Tohfah to pay heed to us." Quoth he, "I will have her sing to
me:" and many words passed between them and Queen Zalzalah cried
aloud at him. Then she shook and became like unto the Jinns and
taking in her hand a mace of stone, said to him, "Fie upon thee!
What art thou that thou shouldst bespeak us thus? By Allah, but
for the respect due to kings and my fear of troubling the session
and the festival and the mind of the Shaykh Iblis, I would
assuredly beat the folly out of thy head!" When Maymun heard
these her words, he rose, with the fire shooting from his eyes,
and said, "O daughter of Imlák, what art thou that thou shouldst
outrage me with the like of this talk?" Replied she, "Woe to
thee, O dog of the Jinn, knowest thou not thy place?" So saying,
she ran at him, and offered to strike him with the mace, but the
Shaykh Iblis arose and casting his turband on the ground cried,
"Out on thee, O Maymun! Thou dost always with us on this wise.
Wheresoever thou art present, thou troublest our pleasure! Canst
thou not hold thy peace until thou go forth of the festival and
this bride-feast be accomplished? When the circumcision is at an
end and ye all return to your dwellings, then do as thou willest.
Fie upon thee, O Maymun! Wottest thou not that Imlak is of the
chiefs of the Jinn? But for my goodname, thou shouldst have seen
what would have betided thee of humiliation and chastisement; yet
on account of the festival none may speak. Indeed thou exceedest;
dost thou not ken that her sister Wakhimah is doughtier[FN#209]
than any of the Jann? Learn to know thyself: hast thou no regard
for thy life?" So Maymun was silent and Iblis turned to Tohfah
and said to her, "Sing to the kings of the Jinns this day and to-
night until the morrow, when the boy will be circumcised and each
shall return to his own place." Accordingly she took the lute and
Kamariyah said to her (now she had a citron in hand), "O my
sister, sing to me somewhat on this citron." Tohfah replied, "To
hear is to obey," and improvising, sang these couplets,

"I'm a dome of fine gold and right cunningly dight; * And my
     sweetness of youth gladdeth every sight:
My wine is ever the drink of kings * And I'm fittest gift to the
     friendliest sprite.

At this Queen Kamariyah rejoiced with joy exceeding and drained
her cup, crying, "Brava! O thou choice Gift of hearts!"
Furthermore, she took off a sleeved robe of blue brocade, fringed
with red rubies, and a necklace of white jewels worth an hundred
thousand ducats, and gave them to Tohfah. Then she passed the cup
to her sister Zalzalah, who hent in her hand herb basil, and she
said to Tohfah, "Sing to me somewhat on this basil." She replied,
"Hearing and obeying," and improvised and sang these couplets,

"I'm the Queen of herbs in the séance of wine * And in Heaven
     Na'ím are my name and sign:
And the best are promised, in garth of Khuld, * Repose, sweet
     scents and the peace divine:[FN#210]
What prizes then with my price shall vie? * What rank even mine,
     in all mortals' eyne?"

Thereat Queen Zalzalah rejoiced with joy exceeding and bidding
her treasuress bring a basket, wherein were fifty pairs of
bracelets and the same number of earrings, all of gold, crusted
with jewels of price, whose like nor mankind nor Jinn-kind
possessed, and an hundred robes of vari-coloured brocades and an
hundred thousand ducats, gave the whole to Tohfah. Then she
passed the cup to her sister Shararah, who had in her hand a
stalk of narcissus; so she took it from her and turning to the
Songstress, said to her, "O Tohfah, sing to me somewhat on this."
She replied, "Hearkening and obedience," and improvised these
couplets,

"With the smaragd wand doth my form compare; * 'Mid the finest
     flowers my worth's rarest rare:
My eyes are likened to Beauty's eyne, * And my gaze is still on
     the bright partèrre."

When she had made an end of her song, Shararah was moved to
delight exceeding, and drinking off her cup, said to her, "Brava,
O thou choice Gift of hearts!" Then she ordered her an hundred
dresses of brocade and an hundred thousand ducats and passed the
cup to Queen Wakhimah. Now she had in her hand somewhat of
Nu'uman's bloom, the anemone; so she took the cup from her sister
and turning to the Songstress, said to her, "O Tohfah, sing to me
on this." Quoth she, "I hear and I obey," and improvised these
couplets,

"I'm a dye was dyed by the Ruthful's might; * And all confess me
     the goodliest sight:
I began in the dust and the clay, but now * On the cheeks of fair
     women I rank by right."

Therewith Wakhimah rejoiced with joy exceeding and drinking off
the cup, ordered her twenty dresses of Roumí brocade and a tray,
wherein were thirty thousand ducats. Then she gave the cup to
Queen Shu'á'ah,[FN#211] Regent of the Fourth Sea, who took it and
said, "O my lady Tohfah, sing to me on the gillyflower." She
replied, "Hearing and obeying," and improvised these couplets,

"The time of my presence ne'er draws to a close, * Amid all whose
     joyance with mirth o'erflows;
When topers gather to sit at wine * Or in nightly shade or when
     morning shows,
I filch from the flagon to fill the bowls * And the crystal cup
     where the wine-beam glows."

Queen Shu'a'ah rejoiced with joy exceeding and emptying her cup,
gave Tohfah an hundred thousand ducats. Then up sprang Iblis
(whom Allah curse!) and cried, "Verily, the dawn lighteneth;"
whereupon the folk arose and disappeared, all of them, and there
abode not one of them save the Songstress, who went forth to the
garden and entering the Hamman made her Wuzu-ablutions and prayed
whatso lacked her of prayers. Then she sat down and when the sun
rose, behold, there came up to her near an hundred thousand green
birds, which filled the branches of the trees with their
multitudes and they warbled in various voices, whilst Tohfah
marvelled at their fashion. Suddenly, appeared eunuchs, bearing a
throne of gold, studded with pearls and gems and jacinths, both
white and red, and having four steps of gold, together with many
carpets of sendal and brocade and Coptic cloth of silk sprigged
with gold; and all these they spread in the centre of the garden
and setting up the throne thereon, perfumed the place with virgin
musk, Nadd[FN#212] and ambergris. After that, there came a queen;
never saw eyes a fairer than she nor than her qualities; she was
robed in rich raiment, broidered with pearls and gems, and on her
head was a crown set with various kinds of unions and jewels.
About her were five hundred slave-girls high-bosomed maids, as
they were moons, screening her, right and left, and she among
them like the moon on the night of its full, for that she was the
most worthy of them in majesty and dignity. She ceased not
walking till she came to Tohfah, whom she found gazing on her in
amazement; and when the Songstress saw her turn to her, she rose
to her, standing on her feet, and saluted her and kissed ground
between her hands. The queen rejoiced in her and putting out her
hand to her, drew her to herself and seated her by her side on
the couch; whereupon the Songstress kissed her hands and the
queen said to her, "Know, O Tohfah, that all which thou treadest
of these carpets belongeth not to any of the Jinn, who may never
tread them without thy leave,[FN#213] for that I am the queen of
them all and the Shaykh Abu al-Tawaif Iblis sought my permission
to hold festival[FN#214] and prayed me urgently to be present at
the circumcision of his son. So I despatched to him, in my stead,
a slave-girl of my slave-girls, namely, Shu'á'ah Queen of the
Fourth Sea, who is vice-reine of my reign. When she was present
at the wedding and saw thee and heard thy singing, she sent to
me, informing me of thee and setting forth to me thy grace and
amiability and the beauty of thy breeding and thy
courtesy.[FN#215] So I am come to thee, for that which I have
heard of thy charms, and hereby I do thee a mighty great favour
in the eyes of all the Jann."[FN#216] Thereupon Tohfah arose and
kissed the earth and the queen thanked her for this and bade her
sit. So she sat down and the queen called for foods when they
brought a table of gold, inlaid with pearls and jacinth; and
jewels and bearing kinds manifold of birds and viands of various
hues, and the queen said, "O Tohfah, in the name of Allah! Let us
eat bread and salt together, I and thou." Accordingly the
Songstress came forward and ate of those meats and found therein
somewhat the like whereof she had never eaten; no, nor aught more
delicious than it, while the slave-girls stood around the table,
as the white compasseth the black of the eye, and she sat
conversing and laughing with the queen. Then said the lady, "O my
sister, a slave-girl told me of thee that thou saidst, 'How
loathly is what yonder Jinni Maymun eateth!"[FN#217] Tohfah
replied, "By Allah, O my lady, I have not any eye that can look
at him,[FN#218] and indeed I am fearful of him." When the queen
heard this, she laughed till she fell backwards and said "O my
sister, by the might of the graving upon the seal-ring of
Solomon, prophet of Allah, I am queen over all the Jann, and none
dare so much as cast on thee a glance of the eye;" whereat Tohfah
kissed her hand. Then the tables were removed and the twain sat
talking. Presently up came the kings of the Jinn from every side
and kissed ground before the queen and stood in her service; and
she thanked them for this, but moved not for one of them.[FN#219]
Then appeared the Shaykh Abu al-Tawáif Iblis (Allah curse him!)
and kissed the earth before her, saying, "O my lady, may I not be
bereft of these steps!"[FN#220] She replied, "O Shaykh Abu
al-Tawáif, it behoveth thee to thank the bounty of the Lady
Tohfah, who was the cause of my coming." Rejoined he, "Thou
sayest sooth," and kissed ground. Then the queen fared on towards
the palace and there arose and alighted upon the trees an hundred
thousand birds of manifold hues. The Songstress asked, "How many
are these birds?" and Queen Wakhimah answered her, "Know, O my
sister, that this queen is hight Queen al-Shahbá[FN#221] and that
she is queen over all the Jann from East to West. These birds
thou seest are of her host, and unless they appeared in this
shape, earth would not be wide enough for them. Indeed, they came
forth with her and are present with her presence at this
circumcision. She will give thee after the measure of that which
hath been given to thee from the first of the festival to the
last thereof;[FN#222] and indeed she honoureth us all with her
presence." Then the queen entered the palace and sat down on the
couch of the circumcision[FN#223] at the upper end of the hall,
where-upon Tohfah took the lute and pressing it to her breast,
touched its strings suchwise that the wits of all present were
bewildered and Shaykh Iblis cried to her, "O my lady Tohfah, I
conjure thee, by the life of this noble queen, sing for me and
praise thyself, and cross me not." Quoth she, "To hear is to
obey; still, but for thine adjuration, I had not done this. Say
me, doth any praise himself? What manner thing is this?" Then she
improvised these couplets:

"In all fêtes I'm Choice Gift[FN#224] to the minstrel-race;
Folk attest my worth, rank and my pride of place,
While Fame, merit and praises with honour engrace."

Her verses pleased the kings of the Jann and they cried, "By
Allah, thou sayst sooth!" Then she rose to her feet, hending lute
in hand, and played and sang, whilst the Jinns and the Shaykh Abu
al-Tawáif danced. Presently the Father of the Tribes came up to
her bussing her bosom, and gave her a Bráhmani[FN#225] carbuncle
he had taken from the hidden hoard of Yáfis bin Núh[FN#226] (on
whom be the Peace), and which was worth the reign of the world;
its light was as the sheen of the sun and he said to her, "Take
this and be equitable therewith to the people of the world."
[FN#227] She kissed his hand and rejoiced in the jewel and said,
"By Allah, this befitteth none save the Commander of the
Faithful." Now Queen Al-Shahba laughed with delight at the
dancing of Iblís and she said to him, "By Allah, this is a goodly
pavane!" He thanked her for this and said to the Songstress, "O
Tohfah, there is not on earth's face a skilfuller than Ishak
al-Nadim;[FN#228] but thou art more skilful than he. Indeed, I
have been present with him many a time and have shown him
positions[FN#229] on the lute, and there has betided me with him
that which betided. Indeed, the story of my dealings with him is
a long one but this is no time to repeat it; for now I would show
thee a shift on the lute, whereby thou shalt be exalted over all
folk." Quoth she, "Do what seemeth good to thee." So he took the
lute and played thereon a wondrous playing, with rare divisions
and marvellous modulations, and showed her a passage she knew
not; and this was goodlier to her than all that she had gotten.
Then she took the lute from him and playing thereon, sang and
presently returned to the passage which he had shown her; and he
said, "By Allah, thou singest better than I!" As for Tohfah, it
became manifest to her that her former practice was all of it
wrong and that what she had learnt from the Shaykh Abu al-Tawáif
Iblis was the root and foundation of all perfection in the art
and its modes. So she rejoiced in that which she had won of skill
in touching the lute far more than in all that had fallen to her
lot of wealth and honour-robes and kissed the Master's hand. Then
said Queen Al-Shahba, "By Allah, O Shaykh, my sister Tohfah is
indeed singular among the folk of her time, and I hear that she
singeth upon all sweetsmelling blooms." Iblis replied, "Yes, O my
lady, and I am in extremest wonderment thereat. But there
remaineth somewhat of sweet-scented flowers, which she hath not
besung, such as myrtle and tuberose and jessamine and the
moss-rose and the like." Then the Shaykh signed to her to sing
somewhat upon the rest of the flowers, that Queen Al-Shahba might
hear, and she said, "Hearing and obeying." So she took the lute
and played thereon in many modes, then returned to the first and
sang these couplets,

"I'm one of the lover-retinue * Whom long pine and patience have
     doomèd rue:
And sufferance of parting from kin and friends * Hath clothed me,
     O folk, in this yellow hue:
Then, after the joyance had passed away, * Heart-break, abasement
     and cark I knew,
Through the long, long day when the lift is light, * Nor, when
     night is murk, my pangs cease pursue:
So, 'twixt fairest hope and unfailing fear, * My bitter tears
     ever flow anew."

Thereat Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced with joy exceeding and cried,
"Brava, O queen of delight! No one is able to describe thee. Sing
to us on the Apple." Quoth Tohfah, "Hearkening and obedience."
Then she recited these couplets,

"I surpass all forms in my coquetry* For mine inner worth and
     mine outer blee;
Tend me noble hands in the sight of all * And slake with pure
     waters the thirst of me;
My robe is of sendal, and eke my veil * Is of sunlight the
     Ruthful hath bidden be:
When my fair companions are marched afar, * In sorrow fro' home
     they are forced to flee:
But noble hands deign hearten my heart * With beds where I sit in
     my high degree; [FN#230]
And where, like full moon at its rise, my light * 'mid the
     garden-fruits thou shalt ever see."

Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced in this with exceeding joy and cried
"Brava! By Allah, there is none excelleth thee." Tohfah kissed
the ground, then returned to her place and versified on the
Tuberose, saying,

"I'm a marvel-bloom to be worn on head! * Though a stranger among
     you fro' home I fled:
Make use of wine in my company * And flout at Time who in
     languish sped.
E'en so cloth camphor my hue attest, * O my lords, as I stand in
     my present stead.
So gar me your gladness when dawneth day, * And to highmost seat
     in your homes be I led:
And quaff your cups in all jollity, * And cheer and ease shall
     ne'er cease to be."

At this Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced with exceeding joy and cried,
"Brava, O queen of delight! By Allah, I know not how I shall do
to give thee thy due! May the Most High grant us the grace of thy
long continuance!" Then she strained her to her breast and bussed
her on the cheek; whereupon quoth Iblis (on whom be a curse!),
"This is a mighty great honour!" Quoth the queen, "Know that this
lady Tohfah is my sister and that her biddance is my biddance and
her forbiddance my forbiddance. So all of you hearken to her word
and render her worshipful obedience." Therewith the kings rose in
a body and kissed ground before Tohfah, who rejoiced in this.
Moreover, Queen Al-Shahba doffed dress and habited her in a suit
adorned with pearls, jewels and jacinths, worth an hundred
thousand ducats, and wrote for her on a slip of paper[FN#231] a
patent appointing her to be her deputy. So the Songstress rose
and kissed ground before the Queen, who said to her, "Of thy
favour, sing to us somewhat concerning the rest of the
sweet-scented flowers and herbs, so I may hear thy chant and
solace myself with witnessing thy skill." She replied, "To hear
is to obey, O lady mine," and, taking the lute, improvised these
couplets,

"My hue excelleth all hues in light, * And I would all eyes
     should enjoy my sight:
My site is the site of fillets and pearls * Where the fairest
     brows are with jasmine dight:
My light's uprist (and what light it shows!) * Is a silvern zone
     on the waist of Night."

Then she changed the measure and improvised these couplets,

"I'm the gem of herbs, and in seasons twain * My tryst I keep
     with my lovers-train:
I stint not union for length of time * Nor visits, though some be
     of severance fain;
The true one am I and my troth I keep, * And, easy of plucking,
     no hand disdain."

Then, changing measure and the mode, she played so that she
bewildered the wits of those who were present, and Queen
Al-Shahba, moved to mirth and merriment, cried, "Brava, O queen
of delight!" Presently she returned to the first mode and
improved these couplets on Nenuphar,

"I fear me lest freke espy me, * In air when I fain deny me;
So I root me beneath the wave, * And my stalks to bow down apply
me."

Hereat Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced with exceeding joy, and cried,
"Brava, O Tohfah! Let me hear more of thy chant." Accordingly,
she smote the lute and changing the mode, recited on the Moss-
rose these couplets,

"Look on Nasrín[FN#232] those branchy shoots surround; * With
     greenest leafery 'tis deckt and crowned:
Its graceful bending stem draws every gaze * While beauteous
     bearing makes their love abound."

Then she changed measure and mode and sang these couplets on the
Water-lily,

"O thou who askest Súsan[FN#233] of her scent, * Hear thou my
     words and beauty of my lay.
'Emir am I whom all mankind desire' * (Quoth she) 'or present or
     whenta'en away.'"

When Tohfah had made an end of her song, Queen Al-Shahba rose and
said, "I never heard from any the like of this;" and she drew the
Songstress to her and fell to kissing her. Then she took leave of
her and flew away; and on like wise all the birds took flight
with her, so that they walled the horizon; whilst the rest of the
kings tarried behind. Now as soon as it was the fourth night,
there came the boy who was to be circumcised, adorned with jewels
such as never saw eye nor heard ear of, and amongst the rest a
crown of gold crusted with pearls and gems, the worth whereof was
an hundred thousand sequins. He sat down upon the couch and
Tohfah sang to him, till the chirurgeon[FN#234] came and they
snipped his foreskin in the presence of all the kings, who
showered on him a mighty great store of jewels and jacinths and
gold. Queen Kamariyah bade her Eunuchs gather up all this and lay
it in Tohfah's closet and it was as much in value as all that had
fallen to her, from the first of the festivities to the last
thereof. Moreover, the Shaykh Iblis (whom Allah curse!) bestowed
upon the Songstress the crown worn by the boy and gave the
circumcisee another, whereat Tohfah's reason took flight. Then
the Jinn departed, in order of rank, whilst Iblis farewelled
them, band after band. Seeing the Shaykh thus occupied with
taking leave of the kings, Maymun seized his opportunity, the
place being empty, and taking up Tohfah on his shoulders, soared
aloft with her to the confines of the lift, and flew away with
her. Presently, Iblis came to look for the Songstress and see
what she purposed, but found her not and sighted the slave-girls
slapping their faces: so he said to them, "Fie on you! What may
be the matter?" They replied, "O our lord, Maymun hath snatched
up Tohfah and flown away with her." When Iblis heard this, he
gave a cry whereto earth trembled and said, "What is to be done?"
Then he buffetted his face and head, exclaiming, "Woe to you!
This be none other than exceeding insolence. Shall he carry off
Tohfah from my very palace and attaint mine honour? Doubtless,
this Maymun hath lost his wits." Then he cried out a second time,
so that the earth quaked, and rose on his wings high in air. The
news came to the rest of the kings; so they flew after him and
overtaking him, found him full of anxiety and affright, with fire
issuing from his nostrils, and said to him, "O Shaykh
al-Tawaif,[FN#235] what is to do?" He replied, "Know ye that
Maymun hath carried oh from my palace and attainted mine honour."
When they heard this, they cried, "There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah the Glorious, the Great. By God he hath
ventured upon a grave matter and verily he destroyeth self and
folk!" Then Shaykh Iblis ceased not flying till he fell in with
the tribes of the Jann, and they gathered together a world of
people, none may tell the tale of them save the Lord of
All-might. So they came to the Fortress of Copper and the Citadel
of Lead,[FN#236] and the people of the sconces saw the tribes of
the Jann issuing from every deep mountain-pass[FN#237] and said,
"What be the news?" Then Iblis went in to King Al-Shisban and
acquainted him with that which had befallen; whereupon quoth he,
"Verily, Allah hath destroyed Maymun and his many! He pretendeth
to possess Tohfah, and she is become queen of the Jann! But have
patience till we devise that which befitteth in the matter of
Tohfah." Iblis asked, "And what befitteth it to do?" And
Al-Shisban answered, "We will fall upon him and kill him and his
host with cut of brand." Then quoth Shaykh Iblis, "'Twere better
to acquaint Queen Kamariyah and Queen Zal-zalah and Queen
Shararah and Queen Wakhimah; and when they are assembled, Allah
shall ordain whatso He deemeth good in the matter of her
release." Quoth Al-Shisban, "Right is thy rede" and thy
despatched to Queen Kamariyah an Ifrit hight Salhab who came to
her palace and found her sleeping, so he roused her and she said,
"What is to do, O Salhab?" Cried he, "O my lady, come to the
succour of thy sister the Songstress, for Maymun hath carried her
off and attainted thine honour and that of Shaykh Iblis." Quoth
she, "What sayst thou?" and she sat up straight and cried out
with a great cry. And indeed she feared for Tohfah and said, "By
Allah, in very sooth she used to say that he gazed at her and
prolonged the gaze; but ill is that whereto his soul hath
prompted him." Then she rose in haste and mounting a Sataness of
her Satans, said to her, "Fly." So she flew off with her and
alighted in the palace of her sister Shararah, whereupon she sent
for her sisters Zalzalah and Wakhimah and acquainted them with
the tidings, saying, "Know that Maymun hath snatched up Tohfah
and flown off with her swiftlier than the blinding leven." Then
they all flew off in haste and lighting down in the place where
were their father Al-Shisban and their grandfather the Shaykh Abu
al-Tawáif, found the folk on the sorriest of situations. When
their grandfather Iblis saw them, he rose to them and wept, and
they all wept for the Songstress. Then said Iblis to them,
"Yonder hound hath attainted mine honour and taken Tohfah, and I
think not other wise[FN#238] but that she is like to die of
distress for herself and her lord Al-Rashid and saying, 'The
whole that they said and did was false.'"[FN#239] Quoth
Kamariyah, "O grandfather mine, nothing is left for it but
stratagem and device for her deliverance, for that she is dearer
to me than everything; and know that yonder accursed when he
waxeth ware of your coming upon him, will ken that he hath no
power to cope with you, he who is the least and meanest of the
Jann; but we dread that he, when assured of defeat, will slay
Tohfah; wherefore nothing will serve but that we contrive a
sleight for saving her; else will she perish." He asked, "And
what hast thou in mind of device?" and she answered, "Let us take
him with fair means, and if he obey, all will be well;[FN#240]
else will we practice stratagem against him; and expect not her
deliverance from other than myself." Quoth Iblis, "The affair is
thine; contrive what thou wilt, for that Tohfah is thy sister and
thy solicitude for her is more effectual than that of any other."
So Kamariyah cried out to an Ifrit of the Ifrits and a calamity
of the calamities,[FN#241] by name Al-Asad al-Tayyár, the Flying
Lion and said to him, "Hie with my message to the Crescent
Mountain,[FN#242] the wone of Maymun the Sworder, and enter and
say to him, My lady saluteth thee with the salam and asketh thee,
'How canst thou be assured for thyself of safety, after what thou
hast done, O Maymun? Couldst thou find none to maltreat in thy
drunken humour save Tohfah, she too being a queen? But thou art
excused, because thou didst not this deed, but 'twas thy drink,
and the Shaykh Abu al-Tawáif pardoneth thee, because thou wast
drunken. Indeed, thou hast attainted his honour; but now restore
her to her palace, for that she hath done well and favoured us
and rendered us service, and thou wottest that she is this day
our queen. Belike she may bespeak Queen Al-Shahba, whereupon the
matter will become grievous and that wherein there is no good
shall betide thee; and thou wilt get no title of gain. Verily, I
give thee good counsel, and so the Peace!'" Al-Asad answered
"Hearing and obeying," and flew till he came to the Crescent
Mountain, when he sought audience of Maymun, who bade admit him.
So he entered and kissing ground before him, gave him Queen
Kamariyah's message, which when he heard, he cried to the Ifrit,
"Return whence thou comest and say to thy mistress, 'Be silent
and thou wilt show thy good sense.' Else will I come and seize
upon her and make her serve Tohfah; and if the kings of the Jinn
assemble together against me and I be overcome by them, I will
not leave her to scent the wind of this world and she shall be
neither mine nor theirs, for that she is presently my sprite
[FN#243] from between my ribs; and how shall any part with his
sprite?" When the Ifrit heard Maymun's words, he said to him, "By
Allah, O Maymun, art thou a changeling in thy wits, that thou
speakest these words of my lady, and thou one of her page-boys?"
Whereupon Maymun cried out and said to him, "Woe to thee, O dog
of the Jinns! Wilt thou bespeak the like of me with these words?"
Then he bade those who were about him bastinado Al-Asad, but he
took flight and soaring high in air, betook himself to his
mistress and told her the tidings: when she said, "Thou hast done
well, O good knight!" Then she turned to her sire and said to
him, "Hear that which I shall say to thee." Quoth he, "Say on;"
and quoth she, "I rede thee take thy troops and go to him, for
when he heareth this, he will in turn levy his many and come
forth to thee; whereupon do thou offer him battle and prolong the
fight with him and make a show to him of weakness and giving way.
Meantime, I will devise me a device for getting at Tohfah and
delivering her, what while he is busied with you in battle; and
when my messenger cometh to thee and informeth thee that I have
gotten possession of Tohfah and that she is with me, return thou
upon Maymun forthwith and overthrow him and his hosts, and take
him prisoner. But, an my device succeed not with him and we fail
to deliver Tohfah, he will assuredly practice to slay her,
without recourse, and regret for her will remain in our hearts."
Quoth Iblis, "This is the right rede" and bade call a march among
the troops, whereupon an hundred thousand knights, doughty wights
of war, joined themselves to him and set out for the country of
Maymun. As for Queen Kamariyah, she flew off to the palace of her
sister Wakhimah, and told her what deed Maymun had done and how
he declared that, whenas he saw defeat nearhand, he would slay
Tohfah; adding, "And indeed, he is resolved upon this; otherwise
had he not dared to work such sleight. So do thou contrive the
affair as thou see fit, for in rede thou hast no superior." Then
they sent for Queen Zalzalah and Queen Shararah and sat down to
take counsel, one with other, concerning what they had best do in
the matter. Presently said Wakhimah, " 'Twere advisable we fit
out a ship in this our island home and embark therein, disguised
as Adam's sons, and fare on till we come to anchor under a little
island that lieth over against Maymun's palace. There will we sit
drinking and smiting the lute and singing; for Tohfah will
assuredly be seated there overlooking the sea, and needs must she
see us and come down to us, whereupon we will take her by force
and she will be under our hands, so that none shall be able to
molest her any more. Or, an Maymun be gone forth to do battle
with the Jinns, we will storm his stronghold and take Tohfah and
raze his palace and slay all therein. When he hears of this, his
heart will be broken and we will send to let our father know,
whereat he will return upon him with his troops and he will be
destroyed and we shall have rest of him." They answered her,
saying, "This is a good counsel." Then they bade fit out a ship
from behind the mountain,[FN#244] and it was fitted out in less
than the twinkling of an eye; so they launched it on the sea and
embarking therein, together with four thousand Ifrits, set out,
intending for Maymun's palace. They also bade other five thousand
Ifrits betake themselves to the island under the Crescent
Mountain and there lie in wait for them ambushed well. Thus fared
it with the kings of the Jann; but as regards Shaykh Abu
al-Tawáif Iblis and his son Al-Shisban the twain set out, as we
have said, with their troops, who were of the doughtiest of the
Jinn and the prowest of them in wing-flying and horse-manship,
and fared on till they drew near the Crescent Mountain. When the
news of their approach reached Maymun, he cried out with a mighty
great cry to the troops, who were twenty thousand riders, and
bade them make ready for departure. Then he went in to Tohfah and
kissing her, said, "Know that thou art this day my life of the
world, and indeed the Jinns are gathered together to wage war on
me for thy sake. An I win the day from them and am preserved
alive, I will set all the kings of the Jann under thy feet and
thou shalt become queen of the world." But she shook her head and
shed tears; and he said, "Weep not, for I swear by the virtue of
the mighty inscription borne on the seal-ring of Solomon, thou
shalt never again see the land of men; no, never! Say me, can any
one part with his life? Give ear, then, to my words; else will I
slay thee." So she was silent. And forthright he sent for his
daughter, whose name was Jamrah,[FN#245] and when she came, he
said to her, "Harkye, Jamrah! Know that I am going to fight the
clans of Al-Shisban and Queen Kamariyah and the Kings of the
Jann. An I be vouch-safed the victory over them, to Allah be the
laud and thou shalt have of me largesse;[FN#246] but, an thou see
or hear that I am worsted and any come to thee with ill news of
me, hasten to kill Tohfah, so she may fall neither to me nor to
them." Then he farewelled her and mounted, saying, "When this
cometh about, pass over to the Crescent Mountain and take up
thine abode there, and await what shall befal me and what I shall
say to thee." And Jamrah answered "Hearkening and obedience." Now
when the Songstress heard these words, she fell to weeping and
wailing and said, "By Allah, naught irketh me but severance from
my lord Al-Rashid; however, when I am dead, let the world be
ruined after me!"[FN#247] And she was certified in herself that
she was assuredly lost. Then Maymun set forth with his army and
departed in quest of the hosts of the Jinn, leaving none in the
palace save his daughter Jamrah and Tohfah and an Ifrit which was
dear to him. They fared on till they met with the army of
Al-Shisban; and when the two hosts came face to face, they fell
each upon other and fought a fight, a passing sore than which
naught could be more. After a while, Al-Shisban's troops began to
give way, and when Maymun saw them do thus, he despised them and
made sure of victory over them. On this wise it befel them; but
as regards Queen Kamariyah and her company they sailed on without
ceasing, till they came under the palace wherein was Tohfah, to
wit, that of Maymun the Sworder; and by the decree of the Lord of
destiny, the Songstress herself was at that very time sitting on
the belvedere of the palace, pondering the affair of Harun
al-Rashid and her own and that which had befallen her and weeping
for that she was doomed to death. She saw the vessel and what was
therein of those we have named, and they in mortal guise, and
said, "Alas, my sorrow for this ship and for the men that be
therein!" As for Kamariyah and her many, when they drew near the
palace, they strained their eyes and seeing the Songstress
sitting, cried, "Yonder sitteth Tohfah. May Allah not bereave us
of her!" Then they moored their craft and, making for the island
which lay over against the palace, spread carpets and sat eating
and drinking; whereupon quoth Tohfah, "Well come and welcome to
yonder faces! These be my kinswomen and I conjure thee by Allah,
O Jamrah, that thou let me down to them, so I may sit with them
awhile and enjoy kindly converse with them and return." Quoth
Jamrah, "I may on no wise do that;" and Tohfah wept. Then the
folk brought out wine and drank, while Kamariyah took the lute
and sang these couplets,

"By Allah, had I never hoped to greet you * Your guide had failed
     on camel to seat you!
Far bore you parting from friend would greet you * Till meseems
     mine eyes for your wone entreat you."

When Tohfah heard this, she cried out so great a cry, that the
folk heard her and Kamariyah said, "Relief is nearhand." Then the
Songstress looked out to them and called to them, saying, "O
daughters of mine uncle, I am a lonely maid, an exile from kin
and country: so for the love of Allah Almighty, repeat that
song!" Accordingly Kamariyah repeated it and Tohfah swooned away.
When she came to herself, she said to Jamrah, "By the rights of
the Apostle of Allah (whom may He save and assain!) unless thou
suffer me go down to them and look on them and sit with them for
a full hour, I will hurl myself headlong from this palace, for
that I am aweary of my life and know that I am slain to all
certainty; wherefore will I kill myself, ere you pass sentence
upon me." And she was instant with her in asking. When Jamrah
heard her words, she knew that, an she let her not down, she
would assuredly destroy herself. So she said to her, "O Tohfah,
between thee and them are a thousand cubits, but I will bring the
women up to thee." The Songstress replied, "Nay, there is no help
but that I go down to them and solace me in the island and look
upon the sea anear; then will we return, I and thou; for that, an
thou bring them up to us, they will be affrighted and there will
betide them neither joy nor gladness. As for me, I wish but to be
with them, that they may cheer me with their company neither give
over their merrymaking, so peradventure I may broaden my breast
with them, and indeed I swear that needs must I go down to them;
else I will cast myself upon them." And she cajoled Jamrah and
kissed her hands, till she said, "Arise and I will set thee down
beside them." Then she took Tohfah under her armpit and flying up
swiftlier than the blinding leven, set her down with Kamariyah
and her company; whereupon she went up to them and accosted them,
saying, "Fear ye not: no harm shall befal you; for I am a mortal,
like unto you, and I would fain look on you and talk with you and
hear your singing." So they welcomed her and kept their places
whilst Jamrah sat down beside them and fell a-snuffing their
odours and saying, "I smell the scent of the Jinn![FN#248] Would
I wot whence it cometh!" Then said Wakhimah to her sister
Kamariyah, "Yonder foul slut smelleth us and presently she will
take to flight; so what be this inaction concerning her?"[FN#249]
Thereupon Kamariyah put out an arm long as a camel's neck, and
dealt Jamrah a buffet on the head, that made it fly from her body
and cast it into the sea. Then cried she, "Allah is
All-great!"[FN#250] And they uncovered their faces, whereupon
Tohfah knew them and said to them, "Protection!" Queen Kamariyah
embraced her, as also did Queen Zalzalah and Queen Wakhimah and
Queen Shararah, and the first-named said to her, "Receive the
good tidings of assured safety, for there abideth no harm for
thee; but this is no time for talk." Then they cried out,
whereupon up came the Ifrits ambushed in that island, hending
swords and maces in hand, and taking up Tohfah, flew her to the
palace and made themselves masters of it, whilst the Ifrit
aforesaid, who was dear to Maymun and whose name was
Dukhán,[FN#251] fled like an arrow and stinted not flying till he
came to Maymun and found him fighting a sore fight with the Jinn.
When his lord saw him, he cried out at him, saying, "Fie upon
thee! Whom hast thou left in the palace?" Dukhan answered,
saying, "And who abideth in the palace? Thy beloved Tohfah they
have captured and Jamrah is slain and they have taken the palace,
all of it." At these ill tidings Maymun buffeted his face and
head and said, "Oh! Out on it for a calamity!" Then he cried
aloud. Now Kamariyah had sent to her sire and reported to him the
news, whereat the raven of the wold[FN#252] croaked for the foe.
So, when Maymun saw that which had betided him (and indeed the
Jinn smote upon him and the wings of eternal severance overspread
his host), he planted the heel of his lance in the earth and
turning its head to his heart, urged his charger thereat and
pressed upon it with his breast, till the point came forth
gleaming from his back. Meanwhile the messenger had made the
friendly host with the news of Tohfah's deliverance, whereat the
Shaykh Abu al-Tawáif rejoiced and bestowed on the bringer of lief
tidings a sumptuous robe of honour and made him commander over a
company of the Jann. Then they charged home upon Maymun's host
and wiped them out to the last man; and when they came to Maymun,
they found that he had slain himself and was even as we have
said. Presently Kamariyah and her sister Wakhimah came up to
their grandfather and told him what they had done; whereupon he
came to Tohfah and saluted her with the salam and congratulated
her on deliverance. Then he made over Maymun's palace to Salhab;
and, taking all the rebel's wealth gave it to the Songstress,
while the troops encamped upon the Crescent Mountain.
Furthermore, the Shaykh Abu al-Tawáif said to Tohfah, "Blame me
not," and she kissed his hands, when behold, there appeared to
them the tribes of the Jinn, as they were clouds, and Queen
Al-Shahba flying in their van, drawn sword in grip. As she came
in sight of the folk, they kissed ground between her hands and
she said to them, "Tell me what hath betided Queen Tohfah from
yonder dog Maymun and why did ye not send to me and report to
me?" Quoth they, "And who was this dog that we should send to
thee on his account? Indeed he was the least and lowest of the
Jinn." Then they told her what Kamariyah and her sisters had done
and how they had practiced upon Maymun and delivered the
Songstress from his hand, fearing lest he should slay her when he
found himself defeated; and she said, "By Allah, the accursed was
wont to lengthen his looking upon her!" And Tohfah fell to
kissing Al-Shahba's hand, whilst the queen strained her to her
bosom and kissed her, saying, "Trouble is past; so rejoice in
assurance of deliverance." Then they rose and went up to the
palace whereupon the trays of food were brought and they ate and
drank; after which quoth Queen Al-Shahba, "O Tohfah, sing to us,
by way of sweetmeat[FN#253] for thine escape, and favour us with
that which shall solace our minds, for that indeed my thoughts
have been occupied with thee." And quoth Tohfah, "Hearkening and
obedience, O my lady." So she improvised and sang these couplets,

"Breeze of East[FN#254] an thou breathe o'er the dear ones' land
     * Speed, I pray thee, my special salute and salam:
And say them I'm pledged to love them and * In pine that passeth
     all pine I am."

Thereat Queen Al-Shahba rejoiced and