 with her all who were
present; and they admired her speech and fell to kissing her; and
when she had made an end of her song, Queen Kamariyah said to
her, "O my sister, ere thou go to thy palace, I would fain bring
thee to look upon Al-'Anká,[FN#255] daughter of Bahram Júr, whom
Al-'Anka, daughter of the wind, carried off, and her beauty; for
that there is not her fellow on earth's face." And Queen
Al-Shahba said, "O Kamariyah, I also think it were well an I
beheld her." Quoth Kamirayah, "I saw her three years ago; but my
sister Wakhimah seeth her at all times, for she is near to her
people, and she saith that there is not in the world fairer than
she. Indeed, this Queen Al-Anka is become a byword for beauty and
comeliness." And Wakhimah said, "By the mighty inscription on the
seal-ring of Solomon, there is not her like for loveliness here
below." Then said Queen Al-Shahba, "An it needs must be and the
affair is as ye say, I will take Tohfah and go with her to
Al-Anka, so she may look upon her!" So they all arose and
repaired to Al-Anka, who abode in the Mountain Kaf. When she saw
them, she drew near to them and saluted them, saying, "O my
ladies, may I not be bereaved of you!" Quoth Wakhimah to her,
"Who is like unto thee, O Anka? Behold, Queen Al-Shahba is come
to thee." So Al-Anka kissed the Queen's feet and lodged them in
her palace; whereupon Tohfah came up to her and fell to kissing
her and saying, "Never saw I seemlier than this semblance." Then
she set before them somewhat of food and they ate and washed
their hands; after which the Songstress took the lute and smote
it well; and Al-Anka also played, and they fell to improvising
verses in turns, whilst Tohfah embraced Al-Anka every moment.
Al-Shahba cried, "O my sister, each kiss is worth a thousand
dinars;" and Tohfah replied, "And a thousand dinars were little
therefor;" whereat Al-Anka laughed and after nighting in her
pavilion on the morrow they took leave of her and went away to
Maymun's palace. Here Queen Al-Shahba farewelled them and taking
her troops, returned to her capital, whilst the kings also went
away to their abodes and the Shaykh Abu al-Tawáif applied himself
to diverting Tohfah till nightfall, when he mounted her on the
back of one of the Ifrits and bade other thirty gather together
all that she had gotten of treasure and raiment, jewels and robes
of honour. Then they flew off, whilst Iblis went with her, and in
less than the twinkling of an eye he set her down in her sleeping
room, where he and those who were with him bade adieu to her and
went away. When Tohfah found herself in her own chamber[FN#256]
and on her couch, her reason fled for joy and it seemed to her as
if she had never stirred thence: then she took the lute and tuned
it and touched it in wondrous fashion and improvised verses and
sang. The Eunuch heard the smiting of the lute within the chamber
and cried, "By Allah, that is the touch of my lady Tohfah!" So he
arose and went, as he were a madman, falling down and rising up,
till he came to the Castrato on guard at the gate of the
Commander of the Faithful and found him sitting. When his fellow
neutral saw him, and he like a madman, slipping down and
stumbling up, he asked him, "What aileth thee and what bringeth
thee hither at this hour?" The other answered, "Wilt thou not
make haste and awaken the Prince of True Believers?" And he fell
to crying out at him; whereupon the Caliph awoke and heard them
bandying words together and Tohfah's slave crying to the other,
"Woe to thee! Awaken the Commander of the Faithful in haste." So
quoth he, "O Sawab, what hast thou to say?" and quoth the Chief
Eunuch, "O our lord, the Eunuch of Tohfah's lodging hath lost his
wits and crieth, 'Awaken the Commander of the Faithful in haste!'
" Then said Al-Rashid to one of his slave-girls, "See what may be
the matter." Accordingly she hastened to admit the Castrato, who
entered at her order; and when he saw the Commander of the
Faithful, he salamed not neither kissed ground, but cried in his
hurry, "Quick: up with thee! My lady Tohfah sitteth in her
chamber, singing a goodly ditty. Come to her in haste and see all
that I say to thee! Hasten! She sitteth awaiting thee." The
Caliph was amazed at his speech and asked him, "What sayst thou?"
He answered, "Didst thou not hear the first of the speech? Tohfah
sitteth in the sleeping-chamber, singing and lute-playing. Come
thy quickest! Hasten!" Accordingly Al-Rashid sprang up and donned
his dress; but he believed not the Eunuch's words and said to
him, "Fie upon thee! What is this thou sayst? Hast thou not seen
this in a dream?" Quoth the Eunuch, "By Allah, I wot not what
thou sayest, and I was not asleep;" and quoth Al-Rashid, "An thy
speech be soothfast, it shall be for thy good luck, for I will
free thee and give thee a thousand gold pieces; but, an it be
untrue and thou have seen this in dream-land, I will crucify
thee." The Eunuch said within himself, "O Protector, let me not
have seen this in vision!" then he left the Caliph and running to
the chamber-door, heard the sound of singing and lute-playing;
whereupon he returned to Al-Rashid and said to him, "Go and
hearken and see who is asleep." When the Prince of True Believers
drew near the door of the sleeping-chamber, he heard the sound of
the lute and Tohfah's voice singing; whereat he could not
restrain his reason and was like to faint for excess of delight.
Then he pulled out the key but his hand refused to draw the bolt:
however, after a while, he took heart and applying himself,
opened the door and entered, saying, "Methinks this is none other
than a vision or an imbroglio of dreams." When Tohfah saw him,
she rose and coming to meet him, pressed him to her breast; and
he cried out a cry wherein his sprite was like to depart and fell
down in a fit. She again strained him to her bosom and sprinkled
on him rose-water mingled with musk, and washed his face, till he
came to himself, as he were a drunken man, and shed tears for the
stress of his joy in Tohfah's return to him, after he had
despaired of her returning. Then she took the lute and smote
thereon, after the fashion she had learnt from Shaykh Iblis, so
that Al-Rashid's wit was bewildered for excess of joy and his
understanding was confounded for exultation; after which she
improvised and sang these couplets,

"That I left thee my heart to believe is unlief; * For the life
     that's in it ne'er leaveth; brief,
An thou say 'I went,' saith my heart 'What a fib!' * And I bide
     'twixt believing and unbelief."

When she had made an end of her verses, Al-Rashid said to her, "O
Tohfah, shine absence was wondrous, yet is thy presence still
more marvellous." She replied, "By Allah, O my lord, thou sayst
sooth;" then, taking his hand, she said to him, "O Commander of
the Faithful, see what I have brought with me." So he looked and
spied treasures such as neither words could describe nor
registers could document, pearls and jewels and jacinths and
precious stones and unions and gorgeous robes of honour, adorned
with margarites and jewels and purfled with red gold. There he
beheld what he never had beheld all his life long, not even in
idea; and she showed him that which Queen Al-Shahba had bestowed
on her of those carpets, which she had brought with her, and that
throne, the like whereof neither Kisrà possessed nor Cæsar, and
those tables inlaid with pearls and jewels and those vessels
which amazed all who looked on them, and that crown which was on
the head of the circumcised boy, and those robes of honour, which
Queen Al-Shahba and Shaykh Abu al-Tawáif had doffed and donned
upon her, and the trays wherein were those treasures; brief, she
showed him wealth whose like he had never in his life espied and
which the tongue availeth not to describe and whereat all who
looked thereon were bewildered, Al-Rashid was like to lose his
wits for amazement at this spectacle and was confounded at that
he sighted and witnessed. Then said he to Tohfah, "Come, tell me
thy tale from beginning to end, and let me know all that hath
betided thee, as if I had been present." She answered,
"Hearkening and obedience," and acquainting him with all that had
betided her first and last, from the time when she first saw the
Shaykh Abu al-Tawáif, how he took her and descended with her
through the side of the Chapel of Ease; and she told him of the
horse she had ridden, till she came to the meadow aforesaid and
described it to him, together with the palace and that was
therein of furniture, and related to him how the Jinn rejoiced in
her, and whatso she had seen of their kings, masculine and
feminine, and of Queen Kamariyah and her sisters and Queen
Shu'a'ah, Regent of the Fourth Sea, and Queen Al-Shahba, Queen of
Queens, and King Al-Shisban, and that which each one of them had
bestowed upon her. Moreover, she recited to him the story of
Maymun the Sworder and described to him his fulsome favour, which
he had not deigned to change, and related to him that which befel
her from the kings of the Jinn, male and female, and the coming
of the Queen of Queens, Al-Shahba, and how she had loved her and
appointed her her vice-reine and how she was thus become ruler
over all the kings of the Jann; and she showed him the writ of
investiture which Queen Al-Shahba had written her and told him
what had betided her with the Ghulish Head, when it appeared to
her in the garden, and how she had despatched it to her palace,
beseeching it to bring her news of the Commander of the Faithful
and of what had betided him after her. Then she described to him
the flower-gardens, wherein she had taken her pleasure, and the
Hammam-baths inlaid with pearls and jewels and told him that
which had befallen Maymun the Sworder, when he bore her off, and
how he had slain himself; in fine, she related to him everything
she had seen of wonders and marvels and that which she had beheld
of all kinds and colours among the Jinn. Then she told him the
story of Al-Anka, daughter of Bahram Jur, with Al-Anka, daughter
of the wind, and described to him her dwelling-place and her
island, whereupon quoth Al-Rashid, "O Tohfat al-Sadr,[FN#257]
tell me of Al-Anka, daughter of Bahram Jur; is she of the
Jinn-kind or of mankind or of the bird-kind? For this long time
have I desired to find one who should tell me of her." Tohfah
replied, "'Tis well, O Commander of the Faithful. I asked the
queen of this and she acquainted me with her case and told me who
built her the palace." Quoth Al-Rashid, "Allah upon thee, tell it
me;" and quoth Tohfah, "I will well," and proceeded to tell him.
And he was amazed at that which he heard from her and what she
reported to him and at that which she had brought back of jewels
and jacinths of various hues and precious stones of many sorts,
such as amazed the beholder and confounded thought and mind. As
for this, Tohfah was the means of the enrichment of the
Barmecides and the Abbasides, and they had endurance in their
delight. Then the Caliph went forth and bade decorate the city:
so they decorated it and the drums of glad tidings were beaten;
and they made banquets to the people for whom the tables were
spread seven days. And Tohfah and the Commander of the Faithful
ceased not to enjoy the most delightsome of life and the most
prosperous till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and
the Severer of societies; and this is all that hath come down to
us of their story.




                     WOMEN'S WILES[FN#258]



On the following night Dunyazad said to her sister Shahrazad, "O
sister mine, an thou incline not unto sleep, prithee tell us a
tale which shall beguile our watching through the dark hours."
She replied:--With love and gladness.[FN#259] It hath reached me,
O magnificent King, that whilome there was in the city of
Baghdad, a comely youth and a well bred, fair of favour, tall of
stature, and slender of shape. His name was Alá al-Dín and he was
of the chiefs of the sons of the merchants and had a shop wherein
he sold and bought. One day, as he sat in his shop, there passed
by him a merry girl[FN#260] who raised her head and casting a
glance at the young merchant, saw written in a flowing hand on
the forehead[FN#261] of his shop door these words, "THERE BE NO
CRAFT SAVE MEN'S CRAFT, FORASMUCH AS IT OVERCOMETH WOMEN'S
CRAFT." When she beheld this, she was wroth and took counsel with
herself, saying, As my head liveth, there is no help but I show
him a marvel trick of the wiles of women and put to naught this
his inscription!" Thereupon she hied her home; and on the morrow
she made her ready and donning the finest of dress, adorned
herself with the costliest of ornaments and the highest of price
and stained her hands with henna. Then she let down her tresses
upon her shoulders and went forth, walking with coquettish gait
and amorous grace, followed by her slave-girl carrying a parcel,
till she came to the young merchant's shop and sitting down under
pretext of seeking stuffs, saluted him with the salam and
demanded of him somewhat of cloths. So he brought out to her
various kinds and she took them and turned them over, talking
with him the while. Then said she to him, "Look at the
shapeliness of my shape and my semblance! Seest thou in me aught
of default?" He replied, "No, O my lady;" and she continued, "Is
it lawful in any one that he should slander me and say that I am
humpbacked?" Then she discovered to him a part of her bosom, and
when he saw her breasts his reason took flight from his head and
his heart crave to her and he cried, "Cover it up,[FN#262] so may
Allah veil thee!" Quoth she, "Is it fair of any one to decry my
charms?" and quoth he, "How shall any decry thy charms, and thou
the sun of loveliness?" Then said she, "Hath any the right to say
of me that I am lophanded?" and tucking up her sleeves, she
showed him forearms as they were crystal; after which she
unveiled to him a face, as it were a full moon breaking forth on
its fourteenth night, and said to him, "Is it lawful for any to
decry me and declare that my face is pitted with smallpox or that
I am one eyed or crop eared?" and said he, "O my lady, what is it
moveth thee to discover unto me that lovely face and those fair
limbs, wont to be so jealously veiled and guarded? Tell me the
truth of the matter, may I be thy ransom!" And he began to
improvise,[FN#263]

"White Fair now drawn from sheath of parted hair, * Then in the
     blackest tresses hid from sight,
Flasheth like day irradiating Earth * While round her glooms the
     murk of nightliest night."

--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. Whereupon cried Dunyazad her sister, "O sister
mine, how delectable is this tale and how desirable!" She
replied, saying, "And where is this compared with that which I
will recount to thee next night, Inshallah?"

             The Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night.

Now when came the night, quoth Dunyazad to her sister Shahrazad,
"O sister mine, an thou incline not unto sleep, prithee finish
thy tale which shall beguile our watching through the dark
hours." She replied:--With love and gladness! It hath reached me,
O auspicious King, that the girl said to the young merchant,
"Know, O my lord, that I am a maid oppressed of my sire, who
speaketh at me and saith to me, Thou art loathly of looks and
semblance and it besitteth not that thou wear rich raiment; for
thou and the slave-girls are like in rank, there is no
distinguishing thee from them. Now he is a richard, having a
mighty great store of money and saith not thus save because he is
a pinchpenny, and grudgeth the spending of a farthing; wherefore
he is loath to marry me, lest he be put to somewhat of expense in
my marriage, albeit Almighty Allah hath been bounteous to him and
he is a man puissant in his time and lacking naught of worldly
weal." The youth asked, "Who is thy father and what is his
condition?" and she answered, "He is the Chief Kazi of the well-
known Supreme Court, under whose hands are all the Kazis who
administer justice in this city." The merchant believed her and
she farewelled him and fared away, leaving in his heart a
thousand regrets, for that the love of her had prevailed over him
and he knew not how he should win to her; wherefore he woned
enamoured, love-distracted, unknowing if he were alive or dead.
As soon as she was gone, he shut up shop and walked straightway
to the Court, where he went in to the Chief Kazi and saluted him.
The magistrate returned his salam and treated him with
distinction and seated him by his side. Then said Ala al-Din to
him, "I come to thee seeking thine alliance and desiring the hand
of thy noble daughter." Quoth the Kazi, "O my lord merchant,
welcome to thee and fair welcome; but indeed my daughter
befitteth not the like of thee, neither beseemeth she the
goodliness of thy youth and the pleasantness of thy compostition
and the sweetness of thy speech;" but Ala al-Din replied, "This
talk becometh thee not, neither is it seemly in thee; if I be
content with her, how should this vex thee?" So the Kazi was
satisfied and they came to an accord and concluded the marriage
contract at a dower precedent of five purses[FN#264] ready money
and a dower contingent of fifteen purses, so it might be hard for
him to put her away, her father having given him fair warning,
but he would not be warned. Then they wrote out the contract
document and the merchant said, "I desire to go in to her this
night." Accordingly they carried her to him in procession that
very evening, and he prayed the night prayer and entered the
private chamber prepared for him; but, when he lifted the head
gear from the bride's head and the veil from her face and looked,
he saw a foul face and a favour right fulsome; indeed he beheld
somewhat whereof may Allah never show thee the like! loathly,
dispensing from description, inasmuch as there were reckoned in
her all legal defects.[FN#265] So he repented, when repentance
availed him naught, and knew that the girl had cheated him.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. Whereupon cried Dunyazad, her sister, "O sister
mine, how delectable is thy story and how sweet!" She replied,
saying, "And where is this compared with that which I will
recount to thee next night an I be spared and suffered to live by
the King, whom Almighty Allah preserve?"

              The Hundred and Ninety-eight Night.

Now whenas came the night, quoth Dunyazad to her sister
Shahrazad, "O sister mine, an thou incline not unto sleep,
prithee finish thy story which shall beguile our watching through
the dark hours, for indeed ‘tis a fine tale and a wondrous." She
replied:--With love and gladness! It hath reached me, O generous
King, that the unhappy merchant carnally knew the loathly bride,
sore against the grain, and abode that night troubled in mind, as
he were in the prison of Al-Daylam.[FN#266] Hardly had the day
dawned when he arose from her side and betaking himself to one of
the Hammams, dozed there awhile, after which he made the
Ghusl-ablution of ceremonial impurity[FN#267] and donned his
every day dress. Then he went out to the coffee house and drank a
cup of coffee; after which he returned to his shop and opening
the door, sat down, with concern and chagrin manifest on his
countenance. After an hour or so, his friends and intimates among
the merchants and people of the market began to come up to him,
by ones and twos; to give him joy, and said to him, laughing, "A
blessing! a blessing! Where be the sweetmeats? Where be the
coffee?[FN#268] 'Twould seem thou hast forgotten us; and nothing
made thee oblivious save that the charms of the bride have
disordered thy wit and taken thy reason, Allah help thee! We give
thee joy, we give thee joy." And they mocked at him whilst he
kept silence before them, being like to rend his raiment and shed
tears for rage. Then they went away from him, and when it was the
hour of noon, up came his mistress, the crafty girl, trailing her
skirts and swaying to and fro in her gait, as she were a branch
of Ban in a garden of bloom. She was yet more richly dressed and
adorned and more striking and cutting[FN#269] in her symmetry and
grace than on the previous day, so that she made the passers stop
and stand in espalier to gaze upon her. When she came to Ala
al-Din's shop, she sat down thereon and said to him, "Blessed be
the day to thee, O my lord Ala al-Din! Allah prosper thee and be
good to thee and perfect thy gladness and make it a wedding of
weal and welfare!" He knitted his brows and frowned in answer to
her; then asked her, "Wherein have I failed of thy due, or what
have I done to harm thee, that thou shouldst requite me after
this fashion?" She answered, "Thou hast been no wise in default;
but ‘tis yonder inscription written on the door of thy shop that
irketh me and vexeth my heart. An thou have the courage to change
it and write up the contrary thereof, I will deliver thee from
thine evil plight." And he answered, "Thy requirement is right
easy: on my head and eyes!" So saying, he brought out a
sequin[FN#270] and summoning one of his Mamelukes said to him,
"Get thee to Such-an-one the Scribe and bid him write us an
epigraph, adorned with gold and lapis lazuli, in these words,
"THERE BE NO CRAFT SAVE WOMEN'S CRAFT, FOR INDEED THEIR CRAFT IS
A MIGHTY CRAFT[FN#271] AND OVERCOMETH AND HUMBLETH THE FALSES OF
MEN." And she said to the white slave "Fare thee forthright." So
he repaired to the Scribe, who wrote him the scroll, and he
brought it to his master, who set it on the door and asked the
damsel, "Is thy heart satisfied?" She answered, "Yes! Arise
forthwith and get thee to the place before the citadel, where do
thou foregather with all the mountebanks and ape-dancers and
bear-leaders and drummers and pipers and bid them come to thee
to-morrow early, with their kettle drums and flageolets, whilst
thou art drinking coffee with thy father in law the Kazi, and
congratulate thee and wish thee joy, saying, ‘A blessing, O son
of our uncle! Indeed, thou art the vein[FN#272] of our eye! We
rejoice for thee, and if thou be ashamed of us, verily we pride
ourselves upon thee; so, although thou banish us from thee, know
that we will not forsake thee, albeit thou forsake us.' And do
thou fall to throwing diners and dirhams amongst them; whereupon
the Kazi will question thee, and do thou answer him, saying, My
father was an ape-dancer and this is our original condition; but
our Lord opened on us the gate of fortune and we have gotten us a
name amongst the merchants and with their provost.' Upon this he
will say to thee, ‘Then thou art an ape-leader of the tribe of
the mountebanks?' and do thou rejoin, ‘I may in nowise deny my
origin, for the sake of thy daughter and in her honour.' The Kazi
will say, ‘It may not be that thou shalt be given the daughter of
a Shaykh who sitteth upon the carpet of the Law and whose descent
is traceable by genealogy to the loins of the Apostle of
Allah,[FN#273] nor is it meet that his daughter be in the power
of a man who is an ape-dancer, a minstrel.' Then do thou reply,
‘Nay, O Efendi, she is my lawful wife, and every hair of her is
worth a thousand lives, and I will not put her away though I be
given the kingship of the world.' At last be thou persuaded to
speak the word of divorce and so shall the marriage be voided and
ye be saved each from other." Quoth Ala al-Din, "Right is thy
rede," and locking up his shop, betook himself to the place --And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say. Whereupon cried Dunyazad, her sister, "O sister
mine, how goodly is thy story and how sweet!" She replied,
saying, "And where is this compared with that which I will
recount to thee next night, Inshallah!"

              The Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night.

And whenas came the night, quoth Dunyazad to her sister, "O
sister mine, an thou incline not unto sleep, pray finish thy tale
which shall beguile our watching through the dark hours." She
replied:--With love and gladness! It hath reached me, O generous
King, that the young merchant betook himself to the place before
the citadel, where he foregathered with the dancers, the drummers
and pipers and instructed them how they should do, promising them
a mighty fine reward. They received his word with "Hearing and
obeying;" and he betook himself on the morrow, after the morning
prayer, to the presence of the Judge, who received him with
humble courtesy and seated him by his side. Then he addressed him
and began questioning him of matters of selling and buying and of
the price current of the various commodities which were carried
to Baghdad from all quarters, whilst his son-in-law replied to
all whereof he was questioned. As they were thus conversing,
behold, up came the dancers and drummers with their drums and
pipers with their pipes, whilst one of their number preceded
them, with a long pennon-like banner in his hand, and played all
manner antics with voice and limbs. When they came to the Court
house, the Kazi cried, "I seek refuge with Allah from yonder
Satans!" and the young merchant laughed but said naught. Then
they entered and saluting his worship the Kazi, kissed Ala
al-Din's hands and said, "A blessing on thee, O son of our uncle!
Indeed, thou coolest our eyes in whatso thou doest, and we
beseech Allah for the enduring greatness of our lord the Kazi,
who hath honoured us by admitting thee to his connection and hath
allotted to us a portion in his high rank and degree." When the
Judge heard this talk, it bewildered his wit and he was dazed and
his face flushed with rage, and quoth he to his son-in-law, "What
words are these?" Quoth the merchant, "Knowest thou not, O my
lord, that I am of this tribe? Indeed this man is the son of my
maternal uncle and that other the son of my paternal uncle, and
if I be reckoned of the merchants, ‘tis but by courtesy!" When
the Kazi heard these words his colour changed--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day, whereupon cried Dunyazad her sister,
"O sister mine, how delectable is thy story and how desirable!"
She replied, saying, "And where is its first compared with its
last? But I will forthwith relate it to you an I be spared and
suffered to live by the King, whom may Allah the Most High keep!"
Quoth the King within himself, "By the Almighty, I will not slay
her until I hear the end of her tale!"

                    The Two Hundredth Night.

Now whenas came the night, quoth Dunyazad to her sister, "O
sister mine, an thou incline not unto sleep, prithee finish thy
tale which shall beguile our watching through the dark hours."
She replied:--With love and gladness! It hath reached me, O
auspicious king, that the Kazi's colour changed and he was
troubled and waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and was like to
burst for stress of rage. Then said he to the young merchant,
"Allah forfend that this should last! How shall it be permitted
that the daughter of the Kazi of the Moslems cohabit with a man
of the dancers and vile of origin? By Allah, unless thou
repudiate her forthright, I will bid beat thee and cast thee into
prison and there confine thee till thou die. Had I foreknown that
thou wast of them, I had not suffered thee near me, but had spat
in thy face, for that thou art more ill-omened than a dog or a
hog."[FN#274] Then he kicked him down from his place and
commanded him to divorce; but he said, "Be ruthful to me, O
Efendi, for that Allah is ruthful, and hasten not: I will not
divorce my wife, though thou give me the kingdom of Al-Irak." The
judge was perplexed and knew that compulsion was not permitted of
Holy Law;[FN#275] so he bespake the young merchant fair and said
to him, "Veil me,[FN#276] so may Allah veil thee. An thou divorce
her not, this dishonour shall cleave to me till the end of time."
Then his fury gat the better of his wit and he cried, "An thou
divorce her not of thine own will, I will forthright bid strike
off thy head and slay myself; Hell-flame but not shame."[FN#277]
The merchant bethought himself awhile, then divorced her with a
manifest divorce and a public[FN#278] and on this wise he won
free from that unwelcome worry. Then he returned to his shop and
presently sought in marriage of her father her who had done with
him what she did[FN#279] and who was the daughter of the Shaykh
of the guild of the blacksmiths. So he took her to wife and they
abode each with other and lived the pleasantest of lives and the
most delightsome, till the day of death: and praise be to Allah
the Lord of the Three Worlds.




           NUR AL-DIN ALI OF DAMASCUS AND THE DAMSEL
                     SITT AL-MILAH.[FN#280]



There was one, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone
before, a merchant of the merchants of Damascus, by name Abu
al-Hasan, who had money and means, slave-blacks and slave-girls,
lands and gardens, houses and Hammams in that city; but he was
not blessed with boon of child and indeed his age waxed great. So
he addressed himself to supplicate[FN#281] Allah Almighty in
private and in public and in his bows and his prostrations and at
the season of prayer-call, beseeching Him to vouchsafe him,
before his decease, a son who should inherit his wealth and
possessions. The Lord answered his prayer; his wife conceived and
the days of her pregnancy were accomplished and her months and
her nights; and the travail-pangs came upon her and she gave
birth to a boy, as he were a slice of Luna. He had not his match
for beauty and he put to shame the sun and the resplendent moon;
for he had a beaming face and black eyes of Bábilí
witchery[FN#282] and aquiline nose and carnelian lips; in fine,
he was perfect of attributes, the loveliest of folk of his time,
sans dubitation or gainsaying. His father joyed in him with
exceeding joy and his heart was solaced and he was at last happy:
he made banquets to the folk and he clad the poor and the widows.
Presently he named the boy Sídí Nur al-Din Ali and reared him in
fondness and delight among the hand-maids and thralls. When he
had passed his seventh year, his father put him to school, where
he learned the sublime Koran and the arts of writing and
reckoning ; and when he reached his tenth year, he was taught
horsemanship and archery and to occupy himself with arts and
sciences of all kinds, part and parts.[FN#283] He grew up
pleasant and polite, winsome and lovesome; a ravishment to all
who saw him, and he inclined to companying with brethren and
comrades and mixing with merchants and travelled men. From these
he heard tell of that which they had witnessed of the wonders of
the cities in their wayfare and heard them say, "Whoso journeyeth
not enjoyeth naught;[FN#284] especially of the city of Baghdad."
So he was concerned with exceeding concern for his lack of travel
and disclosed this to his sire, who said to him, "O my son, why
do I see thee chagrined?" Quoth he, "I would fain travel;" and
quoth Abu al-Hasan, "O my son, none travelleth save those whose
need is urgent and those who are compelled thereto by want. As
for thee, O my son, thou enjoyest ample means; so do thou content
thyself with that which Allah hath given thee and be bounteous to
others, even as He hath been bountiful to thee; and afflict not
thyself with the toil and tribulation of travel, for indeed it is
said that travel is a piece of Hell-torment."[FN#285] But the
youth said, "Needs must I journey to Baghdad, the House of
Peace." When his father saw the strength of his resolve to travel
he fell in with his wishes and fitted him out with five thousand
dinars in cash and the like in merchandise and sent with him two
serving-men. So the youth fared forth, on the blessing of Allah
Almighty;[FN#286] and his parent went out with him, to take leave
of him, and returned to Damascus. As for Nur al-Din Ali, he
ceased not travelling days and nights till he entered Baghdad
city, and laying up his loads in the Wakálah,[FN#287] made for
the Hammam-bath, where he did away that which was upon him of the
soil of the road and doffing his travelling clothes, donned a
costly suit of Yamaní stuff, worth an hundred dinars. Then he
loaded his sleeve with a thousand miskals of gold and sallied
forth a-walking and swaying gracefully as he paced along. His
gait confounded all those who gazed upon him, as he shamed the
branches with his shape and belittled the rose with the redness
of his cheeks and his black eyes of Babilí witchcraft: thou
wouldst deem that whoso looked on him would surely be preserved
from bane and bale;[FN#288] for he was even as saith of him one
of his describers in these couplets:--

"Thy haters and enviers say for jeer * A true say that profits
     what ears will hear;
'No boast is his whom the gear adorns; * The boast be his who
     adorns the gear!'"

So Sidi Nur al-Din went walking in the highways of the city and
viewing its edifices and its bazars and thoroughfares and gazing
on its folk. Presently, Abú Nowás met him. (Now he was of those
of whom it is said, "They love fair lads," and indeed there is
said what is said concerning him.)[FN#289] When he saw Nur al-Din
Ali, he stared at him in amazement and exclaimed, "Say, I take
refuge with the Lord of the Daybreak!" Then he accosted the youth
and saluting him, asked him, "Why do I see my lord lone and lorn?
Meseemeth thou art a stranger and knowest not this country; so,
with leave of my lord, I will put myself at his service and
acquaint him with the streets, for that I know this city." Nur
al-Din answered, "This will be of thy favour, O nuncle." Abu
Nowas rejoiced at this and fared on with him, showing him the
streets and bazars, till they came to the house of a
slave-dealer, where he stopped and said to the youth, "From what
city art thou?" "From Damascus," replied Nur al-Din; and Abu
Nowas said, "By Allah, thou art from a blessed city, even as
saith of it the poet in these couplets,

'Now is Damascus a garth adorned * For her seekers, the Houris
     and Paradise-boys.'"

Sidi Nur al-Din thanked him and the twain entered the mansion of
the slave-merchant. When the people of the house saw Abu Nowas,
they rose to do him reverence, for that which they knew of his
rank with the Commander of the Faithful; and the slave-dealer
himself came up to them with two chairs whereon they seated
themselves. Then the slave-merchant went inside and returning
with a slave-girl, as she were a branch of Ban or a rattan-cane,
clad in a vest of damask silk and tired with a black and white
headdress whose ends fell down over her face, seated her on a
chair of ebony; after which he cried to those who were present,
"I will discover to you a favour as it were a full moon breaking
forth from under a cloud-bank." They replied, "Do so;" whereupon
he unveiled the damsel's face and behold, she was like the
shining sun, with shapely shape and dawn-bright cheeks and
thready waist and heavy hips; brief, she was endowed with an
elegance, whose description is unfound, and was even as saith of
her the poet,[FN#290]

"A fair one, to idolaters if she herself should show, They'd
     leave their idols and her face for only Lord would know;
And if into the briny sea one day she chanced to spit, Assuredly
     the salt sea's floods straight fresh and sweet would grow."

The dealer stood at the hand-maid's head and one of the merchants
said, "I bid a thousand dinars for her." Quoth another, "I bid
one thousand one hundred dinars;" and a third, "I bid twelve
hundred." Then said a fourth merchant, "Be she mine for fourteen
hundred ducats." And the biddings standing still at that sum, her
owner said, "I will not sell her save with her consent: an if she
desire to be sold, I will sell her to whom she willeth." The
slave-dealer asked him, "What is her name?" Answered the other,
"Her name is Sitt al-Miláh;"[FN#291] whereupon the dealer said to
her, "With thy leave, I will sell thee to yonder merchant for
this price of fourteen hundred dinars." Quoth she, "Come hither
to me." So the man-vendor came up to her and when he drew near,
gave him a kick with her foot and cast him to the ground, saying,
"I will not have that oldster." The slave-dealer arose, shaking
the dust from his dress and head, and cried, "Who biddeth more of
us? Who is desirous?"[FN#292] Said one of the merchants, "I," and
the dealer said to her, "O Sitt al-Milah, shall I sell thee to
this merchant?" She replied, "Come hither to me;" but he
rejoined, "Nay; speak and I will hear thee from my place, for I
will not trust myself to thee nor hold myself safe when near
thee." So she cried, "Indeed I will not have him." Then the
slave-dealer looked at her and seeing her fix eyes on the young
Damascene, for that in very deed he had fascinated her with his
beauty and loveliness, went up to him and said to him, "O my
lord, art thou a looker-on or a buyer? Tell me." Quoth Nur
al-Din, "I am both looker-on and buyer. Wilt thou sell me yonder
slave-girl for sixteen hundred ducats?" And he pulled out the
purse of gold. Hereupon the dealer returned, dancing and clapping
his hands and saying, "So be it, so be it, or not at all!" Then
he came to the damsel and said to her, "O Sitt al-Milah, shall I
sell thee to yonder young Damascene for sixteen hundred dinars?"
But she answered, "No," of bashfulness before her master and the
bystanders; whereupon the people of the bazar and the
slave-merchant departed, and Abu Nowas and Ali Nur al-Din arose
and went each his own way, whilst the damsel returned to her
owner's house, full of love for the young Damascene. When the
night darkened on her, she called him to mind and her heart hung
to him and sleep visited her not; and on this wise she abode days
and nights, till she sickened and abstained from food. So her
lord went in to her and asked her, "O Sitt al-Milah, how findest
thou thyself?" Answered she, "O my lord, dead without chance of
deliverance and I beseech thee to bring me my shroud, so I may
look upon it ere I die." Therewith he went out from her, sore
concerned for her, and betaking himself to the bazar, found a
friend of his, a draper, who had been present on the day when the
damsel was cried for sale. Quoth his friend to him, "Why do I see
thee troubled?" and quoth he, "Sitt al-Milah is at the point of
death and for three days she hath neither eaten nor drunken. I
questioned her to-day of her case and she said, 'O my lord, buy
me a shroud so I may look upon it ere I die.'" The draper
replied, "Methinks naught aileth her but that she is in love with
the young Damascene, and I counsel thee to mention his name to
her and declare to her that he hath foregathered with thee on her
account and is desirous of coming to thy quarters, so he may hear
somewhat of her singing. An she say, 'I reck not of him, for
there is that to do with me which distracteth me from the
Damascene and from other than he,' know that she saith sooth
concerning her sickness; but, an she say thee other than this,
acquaint me therewith." So the man returned to his lodging and
going in to his slave-girl said to her, "O Sitt al-Milah, I went
out for thy need and there met me the young man of Damascus, and
he saluted me with the salam and saluteth thee; he seeketh to win
thy favour and prayed me to admit him as a guest in our dwelling,
so thou mayst let him hear somewhat of thy singing." When she
heard speak of the young Damascene, she gave a sob, that her soul
was like to leave her body, and answered, "He knoweth my plight
and how these three days past I have not eaten nor drunken, and I
beseech thee, O my lord, by Allah of All-Might, to do thy duty by
the stranger and bring him to my lodging and make excuse to him
for me." When her master heard this, his reason fled for joy, and
he went to his familiar the draper and said to him, "Thou wast
right in the matter of the damsel, for that she is in love with
the young Damascene; so how shall I manage?" Said the other, "Go
to the bazar and when thou seest him, salute him, and say to him,
'Thy departure the other day, without winning thy wish, was
grievous to me; so, an thou be still minded to buy the maid, I
will abate thee of that which thou badest for her an hundred
sequins by way of gaining thy favour; seeing thou be a stranger
in our land.' If he say to thee, 'I have no desire for her,' and
hold off from thee, be assured that he will not buy; in which
case, let me know, so I may devise thee another device; and if he
say to thee other than this, conceal not from me aught." So the
girl's owner betook himself to the bazar, where he found the
youth seated at the upper end of the place where the merchants
mostly do meet, selling and buying and taking and giving, as he
were the moon on the night of its full, and saluted him. The
young man returned his salam and he said to him, "O my lord, be
not offended at the damsel's speech the other day, for her price
shall be lowered to the intent that I may secure thy favour. An
thou desire her for naught, I will send her to thee or an thou
wouldst have me abate to thee her price, I will well, for I
desire nothing save what shall content thee; seeing thou art a
stranger in our land and it behoveth us to treat thee hospitably
and have consideration for thee." The youth replied, "By Allah, I
will not take her from thee but at an advance on that which I
bade thee for her afore; so wilt thou now sell her to me for one
thousand and seven hundred dinars?" And the other rejoined, "O my
lord, I sell her to thee, may Allah bless thee in her!" Thereupon
the young man went to his quarters and fetching a purse, sent for
the girl's owner and weighed out to him the price aforesaid,
whilst the draper was between the twain. Then said he, "Bring her
forth;" but the other replied, "She cannot come forth at this
present; but be thou my guest the rest of this day and night, and
on the morrow thou shalt take thy slave-girl and go in the ward
of Allah." The youth agreed with him on this and he carried him
to his house, where, after a little, he bade meat and wine be
brought, and they ate and drank. Then said Nur al-Din to the
girl's owner, "I would have thee bring me the damsel, because I
bought her not but for the like of this time." So he arose and
going in to the girl, said to her, "O Sitt al-Milah, the young
man hath paid down thy price and we have bidden him hither; so he
hath come to our quarters and we have entertained him, and he
would fain have thee be present with him." Therewith the damsel
rose deftly and doffing her dress, bathed and donned sumptuous
apparel and perfumed herself and went out to him, as she were a
branch of Ban or a cane of rattan, followed by a black
slave-girl, bearing the lute. When she came to the young man, she
saluted him and sat down by his side. Then she took the lute from
the slave-girl and screwing up its pegs,[FN#293] smote thereon in
four-and-twenty modes, after which she returned to the first and
sang these couplets,

"My joy in this world is to see and sit near thee. * Thy love's
     my religion; thy Union my pleasure.
Attest it these tears when in memory I speer thee, * And
     unchecked down my cheeks pours the flood without measure.
By Allah, no rival in love hast to fear thee; * I'm thy slave as
     I sware, and this troth is my treasure.
Be not this our last meeting: by Allah I swear thee * Thy
     severance to me were most bitter displeasure!"

The young man was moved to delight and cried, "By Allah, thou
sayest well, O Sitt al-Milah! Let me hear more." Then he
largessed her with fifty gold pieces and they drank and the cups
made circuit among them; and her seller said to her, "O Sitt
al-Milah, this is the season of farewelling; so let us hear
somewhat thereon." Accordingly she struck the lute and touching
upon that which was in her heart, improvised these couplets,

"I thole longing, remembrance and sad repine, * Nor my heart can
     brook woes in so lengthened line.
O my lords think not I forget your love; * My case is sure case
     and cure shows no sign.
If creature could swim in the flood of his tears, * I were first
     to swim in these floods of brine:
O Cup-boy withhold cup and bowl from a wretch * Who ne'er ceaseth
     to drink of her tears for wine!
Had I known that parting would do me die, * I had shirked to
     part, but--'twas Fate's design."

Now whilst they were thus enjoying whatso is most delicious of
ease and delight, and indeed the wine was to them sweet and the
talk a treat, behold, there came a knocking at the door. So the
house-master went out, that he might see what might be the
matter, and found ten head of the Caliph's eunuchs at the
entrance. When he saw this, he was startled and said, "What is to
do?" "The Commander of the Faithful saluteth thee and requireth
of thee the slave-girl whom thou hast exposed for sale and whose
name is Sitt al-Milah." "By Allah, I have sold her." "Swear by
the head of the Commander of the Faithful that she is not in thy
quarters." The slaver made oath that he had sold her and that she
was no longer at his disposal: yet they paid no heed to his word
and forcing their way into the house, found the damsel and the
young Damascene in the sitting-chamber. So they laid hands upon
her, and the youth said, "This is my slave-girl, whom I have
bought with my money;" but they hearkened not to his speech and
taking her, carried her off to the Prince of True Believers.
Therewith Nur al-Din's pleasure was troubled: he arose and donned
his dress, and his host said, "Whither away this night, O my
lord?" Said he, "I purpose going to my quarters, and tomorrow I
will betake myself to the palace of the Commander of the Faithful
and demand my slave-girl." The other replied, "Sleep till the
morning, and fare not forth at the like of this hour." But he
rejoined, "Needs must I go;" and the host said to him, "Go in
Allah his safeguard." So the youth went forth and, drunkenness
having got the mastery of his wits, he threw himself down on a
bench before one of the shops. Now the watchmen were at that hour
making their rounds and they smelt the sweet scent of essences
and wine that reeked from him; so they made for it and suddenly
beheld the youth lying on the bench, without sign of recovering.
They poured water upon him, and he awoke, whereupon they carried
him off to the office of the Chief of Police and he questioned
him of his case. He replied "O my lord, I am an alien in this
town and have been with one of my friends: I came forth from his
house and drunkenness overcame me." The Wali bade carry him to
his lodging; but one of those in attendance upon him, Al-Murádi
hight, said to him, "What wilt thou do? This man is robed in rich
raiment and on his finger is a golden ring, whose bezel is a ruby
of great price; so we will carry him away and slay him and take
that which is upon him of clothes and bring to thee all we get;
for that thou wilt not often see profit the like thereof,
especially as this fellow is a foreigner and there is none to ask
after him."[FN#294] Quoth the Chief, "This wight is a thief and
that which he saith is leasing." Nur al-Din said, "Allah forfend
that I should be a thief!" but the Wali answered, "Thou liest."
So they stripped him of his clothes and taking the seal-ring from
his finger, beat him with a grievous beating, what while he cried
out for succour, but none succoured him, and besought protection,
but none protected him. Then said he to them, "O folk, ye are
quit[FN#295] of that which ye have taken from me; but now restore
me to my lodging." They replied, "Leave this knavery, O rascal!
thine intent is to sue us for thy clothes on the morrow." The
youth cried, "By the truth of the One, the Eternal One, I will
not sue any for them!" but they said, "We find no way to this."
And the Prefect bade them bear him to the Tigris and there slay
him and cast him into the stream. So they dragged him away, while
he wept and said the words which shall nowise shame the sayer:
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great!" When they came to the Tigris, one of them
drew the sword upon him and Al-Muradi said to the sworder, "Smite
off his head;" but one of them, hight Ahmad, cried, "O folk, deal
softly with this poor wretch and slay him not unjustly and
wickedly, for I stand in fear of Allah Almighty, lest He burn me
with his fire." Quoth Al-Muradi, "A truce to this talk!" and
quoth the Ahmad aforesaid, "An ye do with him aught, I will
acquaint the Commander of the Faithful." They asked, "How, then,
shall we do with him?" and he answered, "Let us deposit him in
prison and I will be answerable to you for his provision; so
shall we be quit of his blood, for indeed he is a wronged man."
Accordingly they agreed to this and taking him up cast him into
the Prison of Blood,[FN#296] and then went their ways. So far as
regards them; but returning to the damsel, they carried her to
the Commander of the Faithful and she pleased him; so he assigned
her a chamber of the chambers of choice. She tarried in the
palace, neither eating nor drinking, and weeping sans surcease
night and day, till, one night, the Caliph sent for her to his
sitting-hall and said to her, "O Sitt al-Milah, be of good cheer
and keep thine eyes cool of tear, for I will make thy rank higher
than any of the concubines and thou shalt see that which shall
rejoice thee." She kissed ground and wept; whereupon the Prince
of True Believers called for her lute and bade her sing: so in
accordance with that which was in her heart, she sang these
improvised couplets,

"By the sheen of thy soul and the sheen of thy smile,[FN#297] *
     Say, moan'st thou for doubt or is't ring-dove's moan?
How many have died who by love were slain! * Fails my patience
     but blaming my blamers wone."

Now when she had made an end of her song, she threw the lute from
her hand and wept till she fainted away, whereupon the Caliph
bade carry her to her chamber. But he was fascinated by her and
loved her with exceeding love; so, after a while, he again
commanded to bring her in to the presence, and when she came, he
ordered her to sing. Accordingly, she took the lute and chanted
to it that which was in her heart and improvised these couplets,

"Have I patience and strength to support this despair? * Ah, how
     couldst thou purpose afar to fare?
Thou art swayed by the spy to my cark and care: * No marvel an
     branchlet sway here and there![FN#298]
With unbearable load thou wouldst load me, still * Thou loadest
     with love which I theewards bear."

Then she cast the lute from her hand and fainted away; so she was
carried to her sleeping-chamber and indeed passion grew upon her.
After along while the Prince of True Believers sent for her a
third time and commanded her to sing. So she took the lute and
chanted these couplets,

"O of piebald wild ye dunes sandy and drear, * Shall the teenful
     lover 'scape teen and tear?
Shall ye see me joined with a lover, who * Still flies or shall
     meet we in joyful cheer?
O hail to the fawn with the Houri eye, * Like sun or moon on
     horizon clear!
He saith to lovers, 'What look ye on?' * And to stony hearts,
     'Say, what love ye dear?'[FN#299]
I pray to Him who departed us * With severance-doom, 'Be our
     union near!'"

When she had made an end of her verse, the Commander of the
Faithful said to her, "O damsel, thou art in love." She replied,
"Yes;" and he asked, "With whom?" Answered she, "With my lord and
sovran of my tenderness, for whom my love is as the love of the
earth for rain, or as the desire of the female for the male; and
indeed the love of him is mingled with my flesh and my blood and
hath entered into the channels of my bones. O Prince of True
Believers, whenever I call him to mind my vitals are consumed,
for that I have not yet won my wish of him, and but that I fear
to die, without seeing him, I had assuredly slain myself."
Thereupon quoth he, "Art thou in my presence and durst bespeak me
with the like of these words? Forsure I will gar thee forget thy
lord." Then he bade take her away; so she was carried to her
pavilion and he sent her a concubine, with a casket wherein were
three thousand ducats and a collar of gold set with seed-pearls
and great unions, and jewels, worth other three thousand, saying
to her, "The slave-girl and that which is with her are a gift
from me to thee.