" When she heard this, she cried, "Allah forfend
that I be consoled for the love of my lord and my master, though
with an earth-full of gold!" And she improvised and recited these
couplets,

"By his life I swear, by his life I pray; * For him fire I'd
     enter unful dismay!
'Console thee (cry they) with another fere * Thou lovest!' and I,
     'By 's life, nay, NAY!'
He's moon whom beauty and grace array; * From whose cheeks and
     brow shineth light of day."

Then the Commander of the Faithful summoned her to his presence a
fourth time and said, "O Sitt al-Milah, sing." So she recited and
sang these couplets,

"The lover's heart by his beloved is oft disheartenèd * And by
     the hand of sickness eke his sprite dispiritèd,
One asked, 'What is the taste of love?"[FN#300] and I to him
     replied, * 'Love is a sweet at first but oft in fine
     unsweetened.'
I am the thrall of Love who keeps the troth of love to
     them[FN#301] * But oft they proved themselves 'Urkúb[FN#302]
     in pact with me they made.
What in their camp remains? They bound their loads and fared
     away; * To other feres the veilèd Fairs in curtained litters
     sped;
At every station the beloved showed all of Joseph's charms: * The
     lover wone with Jacob's woe in every shift of stead."

When she had made an end of her song, she threw the lute from her
hand and wept herself a-swoon. So they sprinkled on her
musk-mingled rose-water and willow-flower water; and when she
came to her senses, Al-Rashid said to her, "O Sitt al-Milah, this
is not just dealing in thee. We love thee and thou lovest
another." She replied, "O Commander of the Faithful, there is no
help for it." Thereupon he was wroth with her and cried, "By the
virtue of Hamzah[FN#303] and 'Akíl[FN#304] and Mohammed, Prince
of the Apostles, an thou name in my presence one other than I, I
will assuredly order strike off thy head!" Then he bade return
her to her chamber, whilst she wept and recited these couplets,

'Oh brave!' I'd cry an I my death could view; * My death were
     better than these griefs to rue,
Did sabre hew me limb by limb; this were * Naught to affright a
     lover leal-true."

Then the Caliph went in to the Lady Zubaydah, complexion-altered
with anger, and she noted this in him and said to him, "How
cometh it that I see the Commander of the Faithful changed of
colour?" He replied, "O daughter of my uncle, I have a beautiful
slave-girl, who reciteth verses by rote and telleth various
tales, and she hath taken my whole heart; but she loveth other
than myself and declareth that she affecteth her former lord; so
I have sworn a great oath that, if she come again to my sitting-
hall and sing for other than for me, I will assuredly shorten her
highest part by a span."[FN#305] Quoth Zubaydah, "Let the
Commander of the Faithful favour me by presenting her, so I may
look on her and hear her singing." Accordingly he bade fetch her
and she came, upon which the Lady Zubaydah withdrew behind the
curtain,[FN#306] where the damsel saw her not, and Al-Rashid said
to her, "Sing to us." So she took the lute and tuning it, recited
these couplets,

"O my lord! since the day when I lost your sight, * My life was
     ungladdened, my heart full of teen;
The memory of you kills me every night; * And by all the worlds
     is my trace unseen;
All for love of a Fawn who hath snared my sprite * By his love
     and his brow as the morning sheen.
Like a left hand parted from brother right * I became by parting
     thro' Fortune's spleen.
On the brow of him Beauty deigned indite * 'Blest be Allah, whom
     best of Creators I ween!'
And Him I pray, who could disunite * To re-unite us. Then cry
     'Ameen!'"[FN#307]

When Al-Rashid heard the end of this, he waxed exceeding wroth
and said, "May Allah not reunite you twain in gladness!" Then he
summoned the headsman, and when he presented himself, he said to
him, "Strike off the head of this accursed slavegirl." So Masrur
took her by the hand and led her away; but, when she came to the
door, she turned and said to the Caliph, "O Commander of the
Faithful, I conjure thee, by thy fathers and forefathers, behead
me not until thou give ear to that I shall say!" Then she
improvised and recited these couplets,

"Emir of Justice, be to lieges kind * For Justice ever guides thy
     generous mind;
And, oh, who blamest love to him inclining! * Are lovers blamed
     for lâches undesigned?
By Him who gave thee rule, deign spare my life * For rule on
     earth He hath to thee assigned."

Then Masrur carried her to the other end of the sitting-hall and
bound her eyes and making her sit, stood awaiting a second order:
whereupon quoth the Lady Zubaydah, "O Prince of True Believers,
with thy permission, wilt thou not vouchsafe this damsel a
portion of thy clemency? An thou slay her, 'twere injustice."
Quoth he, "What is to be done with her?" and quoth she, "Forbear
to slay her and send for her lord. If he be as she describeth him
in beauty and loveliness, she is excused, and if he be not on
this wise then kill her, and this shall be thy plea aainst
her."[FN#308] Al-Rashid replied, "No harm in this rede;" and
caused return the damsel to her chamber, saying to her, "The Lady
Zubaydah saith thus and thus." She rejoined, "God requite her for
me with good! Indeed, thou dealest equitably, O Commander of the
Faithful, in this judgment." And he retorted, "Go now to thy
place, and tomorrow we will bid them bring thy lord." So she
kissed ground and recited these couplets,

"I indeed will well for whom love I will: * Let chider chide and
     let blamer blame:
All lives must die at fixt tide and term * But I must die ere my
     life-term came:
Then Oh whose love hath afflicted me * Well I will but thy
     presence in haste I claim."

Then she arose and returned to her chamber. Now on the morrow,
the Commander of the Faithful sat in his hall of audience and his
Wazir Ja'afar bin Yahya the Barmecide came in to him; whereupon
he called to him, saying, "I would have thee bring me a youth who
is lately come to Baghdad, hight Sidi Nur al-Din Ali the
Damascene." Quoth Ja'afar, "Hearing and obeying," and going forth
in quest of the youth, sent to the bazars and Wakalahs and Khans
for three successive days, but discovered no trace of him,
neither happened upon the place of him. So on the fourth day he
presented himself before the Caliph and said to him, "O our lord,
I have sought him these three days, but have not found him." Said
Al-Rashid, "Make ready letters to Damascus. Peradventure he hath
returned to his own land." Accordingly Ja'afar wrote a letter and
despatched it by a dromedary-courier to the Damascus-city; and
they sought him there and found him not. Meanwhile, news was
brought that Khorasan had been conquered;[FN#309] whereupon
Al-Rashid rejoiced and bade decorate Baghdad and release all in
the gaol, giving each of them a ducat and a dress. So Ja'afar
applied himself to the adornment of the city and bade his brother
Al-Fazl ride to the prison and robe and set free the prisoners.
Al-Fazl did as his brother commanded and released all save the
young Damascene, who abode still in the Prison of Blood, saying,
"There is no Majesty, and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! Verily, we are God's and to Him are we
returning." Then quoth Al-Fazl to the gaoler, "Is there any left
in the prison?" Quoth he, "No," and Al-Fazl was about to depart,
when Nur al-Din called out to him from within the prison, saying,
"O our lord, tarry awhile, for there remaineth none in the prison
other than I and indeed I am wronged. This is a day of pardon and
there is no disputing concerning it." Al-Fazl bade release him;
so they set him free and he gave him a dress and a ducat.
Thereupon the young man went out, bewildered and unknowing
whither he should wend, for that he had sojourned in the gaol a
year or so and indeed his condition was changed and his favour
fouled, and he abode walking and turning round, lest Al-Muradi
come upon him and cast him into another calamity. When Al-Muradi
learnt his release, he betook himself to the Wali and said, "O
our lord, we are not assured of our lives from that youth,
because he hath been freed from prison and we fear lest he
complain of us." Quoth the Chief, "How shall we do?" and quoth
Al-Muradi, "I will cast him into a calamity for thee." Then he
ceased not to follow the Damascene from place to place till he
came up with him in a narrow stead and cul-de-sac; whereupon he
accosted him and casting a cord about his neck, cried out, "A
thief!" The folk flocked to him from all sides and fell to
beating and abusing Nur al-Din,[FN#310] whilst he cried out for
aidance but none aided him, and Al-Muradi kept saying to him,
"But yesterday the Commander of the Faithful released thee and
to-day thou robbest!" So the hearts of the mob were hardened
against him and again Al-Muradi carried him to the Chief of
Police, who bade hew off his hand. Accordingly, the hangman took
him and bringing out the knife, proceeded to cut off his hand,
while Al-Muradi said to him, "Cut and sever the bone and
fry[FN#311] not in oil the stump for him, so he may lose all his
blood and we be at rest from him." But Ahmad, he who had before
been the cause of his deliverance, sprang up to him and cried, "O
folk, fear Allah in your action with this youth, for that I know
his affair, first and last, and he is clear of offence and
guiltless: he is of the lords of houses,[FN#312] and unless ye
desist from him, I will go up to the Commander of the Faithful
and acquaint him with the case from beginning to end and that the
youth is innocent of sin or crime." Quoth Al-Muradi, "Indeed, we
are not assured from his mischief;" and quoth Ahmad, "Set him
free and commit him to me and I will warrant you against his
doings, for ye shall never see him again after this." So they
delivered Nur al-Din to him and he took him from their hands and
said to him, "O youth, have ruth on thyself, for indeed thou hast
fallen into the hands of these folk twice and if they prevail
over thee a third time, they will make an end of thee; and I in
doing thus with thee, aim at reward for thee and recompense in
Heaven and answer of prayer."[FN#313] So Nur al-Din fell to
kissing his hand and blessing him said, "Know that I am a
stranger in this your city and the completion of kindness is
better than its commencement; wherefore I pray thee of thy favour
that thou make perfect to me thy good offices and generosity and
bring me to the city-gate. So will thy beneficence be
accomplished unto me and may God Almighty requite thee for me
with good!" Ahmad replied, "No harm shall betide thee: go; I will
bear thee company till thou come to thy place of safety." And he
left him not till he brought him to the city-gate and said to
him, "O youth, go in Allah's guard and return not to the city,
for, an they fall in with thee again, they will make an end of
thee." Nur al-Din kissed his hand and going forth the city, gave
not over walking, till he came to a mosque that stood in one of
the suburbs of Baghdad and entered therein with the night. Now he
had with him naught wherewith he might cover himself; so he
wrapped himself up in one of the mats of the mosque and thus
abode till dawn, when the Muezzins came and finding him seated in
such case, said to him, "O youth, what is this plight?" Said he,
"I cast myself on your protection, imploring this defence from a
company of folk who seek to slay me unjustly and wrongously,
without cause." And one of the Muezzins said, "I will protect
thee; so be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool of tear." Then
he brought him old clothes and covered him therewith; he also set
before him somewhat of victual and seeing upon him signs of fine
breeding, said to him, "O my son, I grow old and desiring help
from thee, I will do away thy necessity." Nur al-Din replied, "To
hear is to obey;" and abode with the old man, who rested and took
his ease, while the youth did his service in the mosque,
celebrating the praises of Allah and calling the Faithful to
prayer and lighting the lamps and filling the spout-pots[FN#314]
and sweeping and cleaning out the place of worship. On this-wise
it befel the young Damascene; but as regards Sitt al-Milah, the
Lady Zubaydah, the wife of the Commander of the Faithful, made a
banquet in her palace and assembled her slave-girls. And the
damsel came, weeping-eyed and heavy-hearted, and those present
blamed her for this, whereupon she recited these couplets,

"Ye blame the mourner who weeps his woe; * Needs must the mourner
     sing, weeping sore;
An I see not some happy day I'll weep * Brine-tears till followed
     by gouts of gore."

When she had made an end of her verses, the Lady Zubaydah bade
each damsel sing a song, till the turn came round to Sitt
al-Milah, whereupon she took the lute and tuning it, carolled
thereto four-and-twenty carols in four-and-twenty modes; then she
returned to the first and sang these couplets,

"The World hath shot me with all her shafts * Departing friends
     parting-grief t' aby:
So in heart the burn of all hearts I bear * And in eyes the
     tear-drops of every eye."

When she had made an end of her song, she wept till she garred
the bystanders weep and the Lady Zubaydah condoled with her and
said to her, "Allah upon thee, O Sitt al-Milah, sing us some,
what, so we may hearken to thee." The damsel replied, "Hearing
and obeying," and sang these couplets,

"People of passion, assemble ye! * This day be the day of our
     agony:
The Raven o' severance croaks at our doors; * Our raven which
     nigh to us aye see we.
The friends we love have appointed us * The grievousest
     parting-dule to dree.
Rise, by your lives, and let all at once * Fare to seek our
     friends where their sight we see."

Then she threw the lute from her hand and shed tears till she
drew tears from the Lady Zubaydah who said to her, "O Sitt
al-Milah, he whom thou lovest methinks is not in this world, for
the Commander of the Faithful hath sought him in every place, but
hath not found him." Whereupon the damsel arose and kissing the
Princess's hands, said to her, "O my lady, an thou wouldst have
him found, I have this night a request to make whereby thou mayst
win my need with the Caliph." Quoth the Lady, "And what is it?"
and quoth Sitt al-Milah, "'Tis that thou get me leave to fare
forth by myself and go round about in quest of him three days,
for the adage saith, Whoso keeneth for herself is not like whoso
is hired to keen![FN#315] An if I find him, I will bring him
before the Commander of the Faithful, so he may do with us what
he will, and if I find him not, I shall be cut off from hope of
him and the heat of that which is with me will be cooled." Quoth
the Lady Zubaydah, "I will not get thee leave from him but for a
whole month; so be of good cheer and eyes cool and clear."
Whereat Sitt al-Milah rejoiced and rising, kissed ground before
her once more and went away to her own place, and right glad was
she. As for Zubaydah, she went in to the Caliph and talked with
him awhile; then she fell to kissing him between the eyes and on
his hands and asked him for that which she had promised to Sitt
al-Milah, saying, "O Commander of the Faithful, I doubt me her
lord is not found in this world; but, an she go about seeking him
and find him not, her hopes will be cut off and her mind will be
set at rest and she will sport and laugh; and indeed while she
nourisheth hope, she will never take the right direction." And
she ceased not cajoling him till he gave Sitt al-Milah leave to
fare forth and make search for her lord a month's space and
ordered a riding-mule and an eunuch to attend her and bade the
privy purse give her all she needed, were it a thousand dirhams a
day or even more. So the Lady Zubaydah arose and returning to her
palace bade summon Sitt al-Milah and, as soon as she came,
acquainted her with that which had passed; whereupon she kissed
her hand and thanked her and called down blessings on her. Then
she took leave of the Princess and veiling her face with a
mask,[FN#316] disguised herself;[FN#317] after which she mounted
the she-mule and sallying forth, went round about seeking her
lord in the highways of Baghdad three days' space, but happed on
no tidings of him; and on the fourth day, she rode forth without
the city. Now it was the noon-hour and fierce was the heat, and
she was aweary and thirst came upon her. Presently, she reached
the mosque of the Shaykh who had lodged the young Damascene, and
dismounting at the door, said to the old Muezzin, "O Shaykh, hast
thou a draught of cold water? Verily, I am overcome with heat and
thirst." Said he, "'Tis with me in my house." So he carried her
up into his lodging and spreading her a carpet, seated her; after
which he brought her cold water and she drank and said to her
eunuch, "Go thy ways with the mule and to-morrow come back to me
here." Accordingly he went away and she slept and rested herself.
When she awoke, she asked the old man, "O Shaykh, hast thou aught
of food?" and he answered, "O my lady, I have bread and olives."
Quoth she, "That be food which befitteth only the like of thee.
As for me, I will have naught save roast lamb and soups and
reddened fowls right fat and ducks farcis with all manner
stuffing of pistachio-nuts and sugar." Quoth the Muezzin, "O my
lady, I have never heard of this chapter[FN#318] in the Koran,
nor was it revealed to our lord Mohammed, whom Allah save and
assain!"[FN#319] She laughed and said, "O Shaykh, the matter is
even as thou sayest; but bring me pen-case and paper." So he
brought her what she sought and she wrote a note and gave it to
him, together with a seal-ring from her finger, saying, "Go into
the city and enquire for Such-an-one the Shroff and give him this
my note." Accordingly the oldster betook himself to the city, as
she bade him, and asked for the money-changer, to whom they
directed him. So he gave him ring and writ, seeing which, he
kissed the letter and breaking it open, read it and apprehended
its contents. Then he repaired to the bazar and buying all that
she bade him, laid it in a porter's crate and made him go with
the Shaykh. The old man took the Hammál and went with him to the
mosque, where he relieved him of his burden and carried the rich
viands in to Sitt al-Milah. She seated him by her side and they
ate, he and she, of those dainty cates, till they were satisfied,
when the Shaykh rose and removed the food from before her. She
passed that night in his lodging and when she got up in the
morning, she said to him, "O elder, may I not lack thy kind
offices for the breakfast! Go to the Shroff and fetch me from him
the like of yesterday's food." So he arose and betaking himself
to the money-changer, acquainted him with that which she had
bidden him. The Shroff brought him all she required and set it on
the heads of Hammals; and the Shaykh took them and returned with
them to the damsel, when she sat down with him and they ate their
sufficiency, after which he removed the rest of the meats. Then
she took the fruits and the flowers and setting them over against
herself, wrought them into rings and knots and writs, whilst the
Shaykh looked on at a thing whose like he had never in his life
seen and rejoiced in the sight. Presently said she to him "O
elder, I would fain drink." So he arose and brought her a gugglet
of water; but she cried to him, "Who said to thee, Fetch that?"
Quoth he, "Saidst thou not to me, I would fain drink?" and quoth
she, "'I want not this; nay, I want wine, the solace of the soul,
so haply, O Shaykh, I may refresh myself therewith." Exclaimed
the old man, "Allah forfend that strong drink be drunk in my
house, and I a stranger in the land and a Muezzin and an Imam,
who leadeth the True Believers in prayer, and a servant of the
House of the Lord of the three Worlds!" "Why wilt thou forbid me
to drink thereof in thy house?" "Because 'tis unlawful." "O
elder, Allah hath forbidden only the eating of blood and
carrion[FN#320] and hog's flesh: tell me, are grapes and honey
lawful or unlawful?" "They are lawful." "This is the juice of
grapes and the water of honey." "Leave this thy talk, for thou
shalt never drink wine in my house." "O Shaykh, people eat and
drink and enjoy themselves and we are of the number of the folk
and Allah is indulgent and merciful."[FN#321] "This is a thing
that may not be." "Hast thou not heard what the poet saith?" And
she recited these couplets,

"Cease thou to hear, O Sim'án-son,[FN#322] aught save the say of
     me; * How bitter 'twas to quit the monks and fly the
     monast'ry!
When, on the Fête of Palms there stood, amid the hallowed
     fane,[FN#323] * A pretty Fawn whose lovely pride garred me
     sore wrong to dree.
May Allah bless the night we spent when he to us was third, *
     While Moslem, Jew, and Nazarene all sported fain and free.
Quoth he, from out whose locks appeared the gleaming of the morn,
     * 'Sweet is the wine and sweet the flowers that joy us
     comrades three.
The garden of the garths of Khuld where roll and rail amain, *
     Rivulets 'neath the myrtle shade and Bán's fair branchery;
And birds make carol on the boughs and sing in blithest lay, *
     Yea, this indeed is life, but, ah! how soon it fades away.'"

She then asked him, "O Shaykh, an Moslems and Jews and Nazarenes
drink wine, who are we that we should reject it?" Answered he,
"By Allah, O my lady, spare thy pains, for this be a thing
whereto I will not hearken." When she knew that he would not
consent to her desire, she said to him, "O Shaykh, I am of the
slave-girls of the Commander of the Faithful and the food waxeth
heavy on me and if I drink not, I shall die of indigestion, nor
wilt thou be assured against the issue of my case.[FN#324] As for
me, I acquit myself of blame towards thee, for that I have bidden
thee beware of the wrath of the Commander of the Faithful, after
making myself known to thee." When the Shaykh heard her words and
that wherewith she threatened him, he sprang up and went out,
perplexed and unknowing what he should do, and there met him a
Jewish man, which was his neighbour, and said to him, "How cometh
it that I see thee, O Shaykh, strait of breast? Eke, I hear in
thy house a noise of talk, such as I am unwont to hear with
thee." Quoth the Muezzin, "'Tis of a damsel who declareth that
she is of the slave-girls of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun
al-Rashid; and she hath eaten meat and now would drink wine in my
house, but I forbade her. However she asserteth that unless she
drink thereof, she will die, and indeed I am bewildered
concerning my case." Answered the Jew, "Know, O my neighbour,
that the slavel-girls of the Commander of the Faithful are used
to drink wine, and when they eat and drink not, they die; and I
fear lest happen some mishap to her, when thou wouldst not be
safe from the Caliph's fury." The Shaykh asked, "What is to be
done?" and the Jew answered, "I have old wine that will suit
her." Quoth the Shaykh, "By the right of neighbourship, deliver
me from this descent[FN#325] of calamity and let me have that
which is with thee!" Quoth the Jew, "Bismillah, in the name of
Allah," and passing to his quarters, brought out a glass flask of
wine, wherewith the Shaykh returned to Sitt al-Milah. This
pleased her and she cried to him, "Whence hadst thou this?" He
replied, "I got it from the Jew, my neighbour: I set forth to him
my case with thee and he gave me this." Thereupon Sitt al-Milah
filled a cup and emptied it; after which she drank a second and a
third. Then she crowned the cup a fourth time and handed it to
the Shaykh, but he would not accept it from her. However, she
conjured him, by her own head and that of the Prince of True
Believers, that he take the cup from her, till he received it
from her hand and kissed it and would have set it down; but she
sware him by her life to smell it. Accordingly he smelt it and
she said to him, "How deemest thou?" Said he, "I find its smell
is sweet;" and she conjured him by the Caliph's life to taste
thereof. So he put it to his mouth and she rose to him and made
him drink; whereupon quoth be, "O Princess of the Fair,[FN#326]
this is none other than good." Quoth she, "So deem I: hath not
our Lord promised us wine in Paradise?" He answered, "Yes! The
Most High saith, 'And rivers of wine, delicious to the
drinkers.'[FN#327] And we will drink it in this world and in the
next world." She laughed and emptying the cup, gave him to drink,
and he said, "O Princess of the Fair, indeed thou art excusable
in thy love for this." Then he bent in hand from her another and
another, till he became drunken and his talk waxed great and his
prattle. The folk of the quarter heard him and assembled under
the window; and when the Shaykh was ware of them, he opened the
window and said to them, "Are ye not ashamed, O pimps? Every one
in his own house doth whatso he willeth and none hindereth him;
but we drink one single day and ye assemble and come, panders
that ye are! To-day, wine, and to-morrow business;[FN#328] and
from hour to hour cometh relief." So they laughed together and
dispersed. Then the girl drank till she was drunken, when she
called to mind her lord and wept, and the Shaykh said to her,
"What maketh thee weep, O my lady?" Said she, "O elder, I am a
lover and a separated." He cried, "O my lady, what is this love?"
Cried she, "And thou, hast thou never been in love?" He replied,
"By Allah, O my lady, never in all my life heard I of this thing,
nor have I ever known it! Is it of the sons of Adam or of the
Jinn?" She laughed and said, "Verily, thou art even as those of
whom the poet speaketh, in these couplets,

"How oft shall they admonish and ye shun this nourishment; * When
     e'en the shepherd's bidding is obeyèd by his flocks?
I see you like in shape and form to creatures whom we term *
     Mankind, but in your acts and deeds you are a sort of
     ox"[FN#329]

The Shaykh laughed at her speech and her verses pleased him. Then
cried she to him, "I desire of thee a lute." So he arose and
brought her a bit of fuel.[FN#330] Quoth she, "What is that?" and
quoth he "Didst thou not say: Bring me fuel?" Said she, "I do not
want this," and said he, "What then is it that is hight fuel,
other than this?" She laughed and replied, "The lute is an
instrument of music, whereunto I sing." Asked he, "Where is this
thing found and of whom shall I get it for thee?" and answered
she, "Of him who gave thee the wine." So he arose and betaking
himself to his neighbour the Jew, said to him, "Thou favouredst
us before with the wine; so now complete thy favours and look me
out a thing hight lute, which be an instrument for singing; for
she seeketh this of me and I know it not." Replied the Jew,
"Hearkening and obedience," and going into his house, brought him
a lute. The old man carried it to Sitt al-Milah, whilst the Jew
took his drink and sat by a window adjoining the Shaykh's house,
so he might hear the singing. The damsel rejoiced, when the old
man returned to her with the lute, and taking it from him, tuned
its strings and sang these couplets,

"Remains not, after you are gone, or trace of you or sign, * But
     hope to see this parting end and break its lengthy line:
You went and by your wending made the whole world desolate; * And
     none may stand this day in stead to fill the yearning eyne.
Indeed, you've burdened weakling me, by strength and force of you
     * With load no hill hath power t'upheave nor yet the plain
     low li'en:
And I, whenever fain I scent the breeze your land o'erbreathes, *
     Lose all my wits as though they were bemused with heady
     wine.
O folk no light affair is Love for lover woe to dree * Nor easy
     'tis to satisfy its sorrow and repine.
I've wandered East and West to hap upon your trace, and when *
     Spring-camps I find the dwellers cry, 'They've marched,
     those friends o' thine!'
Never accustomed me to part these intimates I love; * Nay, when I
     left them all were wont new meetings to design."

Now when she had ended her song, she wept with sore weeping, till
presently sleep overcame her and she slept. On the morrow, she
said to the Shaykh, "Get thee to the Shroff and fetch me the
ordinary;" so he repaired to the money-changer and delivered him
the message, whereupon he made ready meat and drink, according to
his custom, with which the old man returned to the damsel and
they ate their sufficiency. When she had eaten, she sought of him
wine and he went to the Jew and fetched it. Then the twain sat
down and drank; and when she waxed drunken, she took the lute and
smiting it, fell a-singing and chanted these couplets,

"How long ask I the heart, the heart drowned, and eke * Refrain
     my complaint while I my tear-floods speak?
They forbid e'en the phantom to visit me, * (O marvel!) her
     phantom my couch to seek."[FN#331]

And when she had made an end of her song, she wept with sore
weeping. All this time, the young Damascene was listening, and
now he likened her voice to the voice of his slave-girl and then
he put away from him this thought, and the damsel had no
knowledge whatever of his presence. Then she broke out again into
song and chanted these couplets,

"Quoth they, 'Forget him! What is he?' To them I cried, * 'Allah
     forget me when forget I mine adored!'
Now in this world shall I forget the love o' you? * Heaven grant
     the thrall may ne'er forget to love his lord!
I pray that Allah pardon all except thy love * Which, when I meet
     Him may my bestest plea afford."

After ending this song she drank three cups and filling the old
man other three, improvised these couplets,

"His love he hid which tell-tale tears betrayed; * For burn of
     coal that 'neath his ribs was laid:
Giv'n that he seek his joy in spring and flowers * Some day, his
     spring's the face of dear-loved maid.
O ye who blame me for who baulks my love! * What sweeter thing
     than boon to man denayed?
A sun, yet scorcheth he my very heart! * A moon, but riseth he
     from breasts a-shade!"

When she had made an end of her song, she threw the lute from her
hand and wept, whilst the Shaykh wept for her weeping. Then she
fell down in a fainting fit and presently recovering, crowned the
cup and drinking it off, gave the elder to drink, after which she
took the lute and breaking out into song, chanted these couplets,

"Thy parting is bestest of woes to my heart, * And changed my
     case till all sleep it eschewed:
The world to my being is desolate; * Then Oh grief! and O
     lingering solitude!
Maybe The Ruthful incline thee to me * And join us despite what
     our foes have sued!"

Then she wept till her voice rose high and her wailing was
discovered to those without; after which she again began to drink
and plying the Shaykh with wine, sang these couplets,

"An they hid thy person from eyen-sight, * They hid not thy name
     fro' my mindful sprite:
Or meet me; thy ransom for meeting I'll be[FN#332] * Or fly me;
     and ransom I'll be for thy flight!
Mine outer speaks for mine inner case, * And mine inner speaks
     for mine outer plight."

When she had made an end of her verses, she threw the lute from
her hand and wept and wailed. Then she slept awhile and presently
awaking, said, "O Shaykh, say me, hast thou what we may eat?" He
replied, "O my lady, I have the rest of the food;" but she cried,
"I will not eat of the orts I have left. Go down to the bazar and
fetch us what we may eat." He rejoined, "Excuse me, O my lady, I
cannot rise to my feet, because I am bemused with wine; but with
me is the servant of the mosque, who is a sharp youth and an
intelligent. I will call him, so he may buy thee whatso thou
wantest." Asked she, "Whence hast thou this servant?" and he
answered, "He is of the people of Damascus." When she heard him
say "of the people of Damascus," she sobbed such a sob that she
swooned away; and when she came to herself, she said, "Woe is me
for the people of Damascus and for those who are therein! Call
him, O Shaykh, that he may do our need." Accordingly, the old man
put his head forth of the window and called the youth, who came
to him from the mosque and sought leave to enter. The Muezzin
bade him come in, and when he appeared before the damsel, he knew
her and she knew him; whereupon he turned back in bewilderment
and would have fled at hap-hazard; but she sprang up to him and
held him fast, and they embraced and wept together, till they
fell to the floor in a fainting fit. When the Shaykh saw them in
this condition, he feared for himself and fared forth in fright,
seeing not the way for drunkenness. His neighbour the Jew met him
and asked him, "How is it that I behold thee astounded?" Answered
the old man, "How should I not be astounded, seeing that the
damsel who is with me is fallen in love with the mosque servant
and they have embraced and slipped down in a swoon? Indeed, I
fear lest the Caliph come to know of this and be wroth with me;
so tell me thou what is thy device for that wherewith I am
afflicted in the matter of this damsel." Quoth the Jew, "For the
present, take this casting-bottle of rose-water and go forthright
and sprinkle them therewith: an they be aswoon for this their
union and embrace, they will recover, and if otherwise, then take
to flight." The Shaykh snatched the casting-bottle from the Jew
and going up to the twain, sprinkled their faces, whereupon they
came to themselves and fell to relating each to other that which
they had suffered, since both had been parted, for the pangs of
severance. Nur al-Din also acquainted Sitt al-Milah with that
which he had endured from the folk who would have killed[FN#333]
him and utterly annihilated him; and she said to him, "O my lord,
let us for the nonce leave this talk and praise Allah for reunion
of loves, and all this shall cease from us." Then she gave him
the cup and he said, "By Allah, I will on no wise drink it,
whilst I am in this case!" So she drank it off before him and
taking the lute, swept the strings and sang these couplets,

"O absent fro' me and yet present in place, * Thou art far from
     mine eyes and yet ever nigh!
Thy farness bequeathed me all sorrow and care * And my troublous
     life can no joy espy:
Lone, forlorn, weeping-eyelidded, miserablest, * I abide for thy
     sake as though banisht I:
Then (ah grief o' me!) far thou hast fared from sight * Yet canst
     no more depart me than apple of eye!"

When she had made an end of her verse, she wept and the young man
of Damascus, Nur al-Din, wept also. Then she took the lute and
improvised these couplets,

"Well Allah wots I never namèd you * But tears o'erbrimming eyes
     in floods outburst;
And passion raged and pine would do me die, * Yet my heart rested
     wi' the thought it nurst;
O eye-light mine, O wish and O my hope! * Your face can never
     quench mine eyes' hot thirst."

When Nur al-Din heard these his slave-girl's verses, he fell
a-weeping, while she strained him to her bosom and wiped away his
tears with her sleeve and questioned him and comforted his mind.
Then she took the lute and sweeping its strings, played thereon
with such performing as would move the staidest to delight and
sang these couplets,

"Indeed, what day brings not your sight to me, * That day I
     rem'mber not as dight to me!
And, when I vainly long on you to look, * My life is lost, Oh
     life and light o' me!"

After this fashion they fared till the morning, tasting not the
nourishment of sleep;[FN#334] and when the day lightened, behold
the eunuch came with the she-mule and said to Sitt al-Milah, "The
Commander of the Faithful calleth for thee." So she arose and
taking by the hand her lord, committed him to the Shaykh, saying,
"This is the deposit of Allah, then thy deposit,[FN#335] till
this eunuch cometh to thee; and indeed, O elder, my due to thee
is the white hand of favour such as filleth the interval betwixt
heaven and earth." Then she mounted the mule and repairing to the
palace of the Commander of the Faithful, went in to him and
kissed ground before him. Quoth he to her, as who should make
mock of her, "I doubt not but thou hast found thy lord;" and
quoth she, "By thy felicity and the length of thy continuance on
life, I have indeed found him!" Now Al-Rashid was leaning back;
but, when he heard this, he sat upright and said to her "By my
life, true?" She replied, "Ay, by thy life!" He said, "Bring him
into my presence, so I may see him;" but she said, "O my lord,
there have happened to him many hardships and his charms are
changed and his favour faded; and indeed the Prince of True
Believers vouchsafed me a month; wherefore I will tend him the
rest of the month and then bring him to do his service to the
Commander of the Faithful." Quoth Al-Rashid, "Sooth thou sayest:
the condition certainly was for a month; but tell me what hath
betided him." Quoth she, "O my lord (Allah prolong thy
continuance and make Paradise thy place of returning and thine
asylum and the fire the abiding-place of thy foes!), when he
presenteth himself to serve thee, he will assuredly expound to
thee his case and will name to thee his wrongdoers; and indeed
this is an arrear that is due to the Prince of True Believers, by
whom may Allah fortify the Faith and vouchsafe him the victory
over rebel and froward wretch!" Thereupon he ordered her a fine
house and bade furnish it with carpets and vessels of choice and
commanded them to give all she needed. This was done during the
rest of the day, and when the night came, she sent the eunuch
with a suit of clothes and the mule, to fetch Nur al-Din from the
Muezzin's lodging. So the young man donned the dress and
mounting, rode to the house, where he abode in comfort and luxury
a full-told month, while she solaced him with four things, the
eating of fowls and the drinking of wine and the sleeping upon
brocade and the entering the bath after horizontal
refreshment.[FN#336] Furthermore, she brought him six suits of
linen stuffs and took to changing his clothes day by day; nor was
the appointed time of delay accomplished ere his beauty and
loveliness returned to him; nay, his favour waxed tenfold fairer
and he became a seduction to all who looked upon him. One day of
the days Al-Rashid bade bring him to the presence; so his
slave-girl changed his clothes and robing him in sumptuous
raiment, mounted him on the she-mule. Then he rode to the palace
and presenting himself before the Caliph, saluted him with the
goodliest of salutations and bespake him with Truchman's[FN#337]
speech eloquent and deep-thoughted. When Al-Rashid saw him, he
marvelled at the seemliness of his semblance and his loquence and
eloquence and asking of him, was told that he was Sitt al-Milah's
lord; whereupon quoth he, "Indeed, she is excusable in her love
for him, and if we had put her to death wrongfully, as we were
minded to do, her blood would have been upon our heads." Then he
accosted the young man and entering into discourse with him,
found him well-bred, intelligent, clever, quick-witted, generous,
pleasant, elegant, excellent. So he loved him with exceeding love
and questioned him of his native city and of his sire and of the
cause of his journey to Baghdad. Nur al-Din acquainted him with
that which he would know in the goodliest words and concisest
phrases; and the Caliph asked him, "And where hast thou been
absent all this while? Verily, we sent after thee to Damascus and
Mosul and all other cities, but happened on no tidings of thee."
Answered the young man, "O my lord, there betided thy slave in
thy capital that which never yet betided any." Then he acquainted
him with his case, first and last, and told him that which had
befallen him of evil from Al-Muradi and the Chief of Police. Now
when Al-Rashid heard this, he was chagrined with sore chagrin and
waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and cried, "Shall this thing
happen in a city wherein I am?" And the Háshimí vein [FN#338]
started out between his eyes. Then he bade fetch Ja'afar, and
when he came between his hands, he acquainted him with the
adventure and said to him, "Shall this thing come to pass in my
city and I have no news of it?" Thereupon he bade Ja'afar fetch
all whom the young Damascene had named,and when they came, he
bade smite their necks: he also summoned him whom they called
Ahmad and who had been the means of the young man's deliverance a
first time and a second, and thanked him and showed him favour
and bestowed on him a costly robe of honour and made him Chief of
Police in his city.[FN#339] Then he sent for the Shaykh, the
Muezzin, and when the messenger came to him and told him that the
Commander of the Faithfull summoned him, he feared the
denunciation of the damsel and walked with him to the palace,
farting for fear as he went, whilst all who passed him by laughed
at him. When he came into the presence of the Commander of the
Faithful, he fell a-trembling and his tongue was tied,[FN#340] so
that he could not speak. The Caliph smiled at him and said, "O
Shaykh, thou hast done no offence; so why fearest thou?" Answered
the old man (and indeed he was in the sorest of that which may be
of fear), "O my lord, by the virtue of thy pure forefathers,
indeed I have done naught, and do thou enquire of my manners and
morals." The Caliph laughed at him and ordering him a thousand
dinars, bestowed on him a costly robe of honour and made him
headman of the Muezzins in his mosque. Then he called Sitt
al-Milah and said to her, "The house wherein thou lodgest with
all it containeth is a largesse to thy lord: so do thou take him
and depart with him in the safeguard of Allah Almighty; but
absent not yourselves from our presence." Accordingly she went
forth with the young Damascene and when she came to the house,
she found that the Prince of True Believers had sent them gifts
galore and good things in store. As for Nur al-Din, he sent for
his father and mother and appointed for himself agents in the
city of Damascus, to receive the rent of the houses and gardens
and Wakalahs and Hammams; and they occupied themseves with
collecting that which accrued to him and sending it to him every
year. Meanwhile, his father and mother came to him, with that
which they had of monies and merchandise of price and,
foregathering with their son, found that he was become of the
chief officers and familiars of the Commander of the Faithful and
of the number of his sitting-companions and nightly entertainers,
wherefore they rejoiced in reunion with him and he also rejoiced
in them. The Caliph assigned them solde and allowances; and as
for Nur al-Din, his father brought him those riches and his
wealth waxed and his estate was stablished, till he became the
richest of the folk of his time in Baghdad and left not the
presence of the Commander of the Faithful or by night or by day.
He was vouchsafed issue by Sitt al-Milah, and he ceased not to
live the goodliest of lives, he and she and his father and his
mother, a while of time, till Abu al-Hasan sickened of a sore
sickness and departed to the mercy of Allah Almighty. Presently,
his mother also died and he carried them forth and shrouded them
and buried and made them expiations and funeral
ceremonies.[FN#341] In due course his children grew up and became
like moons, and he reared them in splendour and affection, while
his wealth waxed and his case never waned. He ceased not to pay
frequent visits to the Commander of the Faithful, he and his
children and his slave-girl Sitt al-Milah, and they abode in all
solace of life and prosperity till there came to them the
Destroyer of delights and the Sunderer of societies; and laud to
the Abiding, the Eternal! This is all that hath come down to us
of their story.




           TALE OF KING INS BIN KAYS AND HIS DAUGHTER
            WITH THE SON OF KING AL-'ABBAS.[FN#342]



There was once, in days of yore and in ages and times long gone
before, in the city of Baghdad, the House of Peace, a king mighty
of estate, lord of understanding and beneficence and generosity
and munificence, and he was strong of sultanate and endowed with
might and majesty and magnificence. His name was Ins bin Kays bin
Rabí' al-Shaybání,[FN#343] and when he took horse, there rode
about him riders from the farthest parts of the two
Iraks.[FN#344] Almighty Allah decreed that he should take to wife
a woman hight 'Afífah, daughter of Asad al-Sundúsi, who was
endowed with beauty and loveliness and brightness and perfect
grace and symmetry of shape and stature; her face was like the
crescent moon and she had eyes as they were gazelle's eyes and an
aquiline nose like Luna's cymb. She had learned cavalarice and
the use of arms and had mastered the sciences of the Arabs; eke
she had gotten by heart all the dragomanish[FN#345] tongues and
indeed she was a ravishment to mankind. She abode with Ins bin
Kays twelve years, during which time he was not blessed with
children by her; so his breast was straitened by reason of the
failure of lineage, and he besought his Lord to vouchsafe him a
son. Accordingly the queen conceived, by permission of Allah
Almighty; and when the days of her pregnancy were accomplished,
she gave birth to a maid-child, than whom never saw eyes fairer,
for that her face was as it were a pearl pure-bright or a lamp
raying light or a candle gilt with gold or a full moon breaking
cloudy fold, extolled be He who her from vile water dight and
made her to the beholders a delight! When her father saw her in
this fashion of loveliness, his reason fled for joy, and when she
grew up, he taught her writing and belles-lettres and philosophy
and all manner of tongues. So she excelled the folk of her time
and surpassed her peers; and the sons of the kings heard of her
and all of them longed to look upon her. The first who sought her
to wife was King Nabhán[FN#346] of Mosul, who came to her with a
great company, bringing an hundred she-camels, laden with musk
and lign-aloes and ambergris and five score loaded with camphor
and jewels and other hundred laden with silver monies and yet
other hundred loaded with raiment of silken stuffs, sendal and
brocade, besides an hundred slave-girls and a century of choice
steeds of swift and generous breeds, completely housed and
accoutred, as they were brides; and all this he had laid before
her father, demanding her of him in wedlock. Now King Ins bin
Kays had bound himself by an oath that he would not marry his
daughter save to him whom she should choose; so, when King Nabhan
sought her in marriage, her father went in to her and consulted
her concerning his affair. She consented not and he repeated to
Nabhan that which she said, whereupon he departed from him. After
this came King Bahrám, lord of the White Island, with treasures
richer than the first; but she accepted not of him and he
returned disappointed; nor did the kings cease coming to her
sire, on her account, one after other, from the farthest of the
lands and the climes, each glorying in bringing more than those
who forewent him; but she heeded not any one of them. Presently,
Al-'Abbás, son of King Al-'Azíz, lord of the land of Al-Yaman and
Zabídún[FN#347] and Meccah (which Allah increase in honour and
brightness and beauty!) heard of her; and he was of the great
ones of Meccah and Al-Hijáz,[FN#348] and was a youth without hair
on his side-face. So he presented himself one day in his sire's
assembly, whereupon the folk made way for him and the king seated
him on a chair of red gold, crusted with pearls and gems. The
Prince sat, with his head bowed groundwards, and spake not to
any: whereby his father knew that his breast was straitened and
bade the cup-companions and men of wit relate marvellous
histories, such as beseem the sessions of kings; nor was there
one of them but spoke forth the goodliest of that which was with
him; but Al-'Abbás still abode with his head bowed down. Then the
king bade his sitting-companions withdraw, and when the chamber
was private, he looked at his son and said to him, "By Allah,
thou cheerest me with thy coming in to me and chagrinest me for
that thou payest no heed to any of the familiars nor of the
cup-companions. What is the cause of this?" Answered the Prince,
"O my papa, I have heard tell that in the land of Al-Irák is a
woman of the daughters of the kings, and her father is called
King Ins bin Kays, lord of Baghdad; she is famed for beauty and
loveliness and brightness and perfect grace, and indeed many of
the kings have sought her in marriage; but her soul consented not
unto any one of them. Wherefore my thought prompteth me to travel
herwards, for that my heart cleaveth to her, and I beseech thee
suffer me to go to her." His sire replied, "O my son, thou
knowest that I have none other than thyself of children and thou
art the coolth of mine eyes and the fruit of my vitals; nay, I
cannot brook to be parted from thee a single hour and I purpose
to seat thee on the throne of the kingship and espouse thee to
one of the daughters of the kings, who shall be fairer than she."
Al-Abbas gave ear to his father's word and dared not gainsay him;
wherefore he abode with him awhile, whilst the love-fire raged in
his vitals. Then the king took rede with himself to build his son
a Hammam and adorn it with various paintings, so he might display
it to him and divert him with the sight thereof, to the intent
that his body might be solaced thereby and that the accident of
travel might cease from him and he be turned from his purpose of
removal from his parents. Presently he addressed himself to the
building of the bath and assembling architects and artisans from
all his cities and citadels and islands, assigned them a
foundation-site and marked out its boundaries. Then the workmen
occupied themselves with the building of the Hammam and the
ordinance and adornment of its cabinets and roofs. They used
paints and precious minerals of all kinds, according to the
contrast of their colours, red and green and blue and yellow and
what not else of all manner tincts; and each artisan wrought at
his craft and each painter at his art, whilst the rest of the
folk busied themselves with transporting thither vari-coloured
stones. One day, as the Master-painter wrought at his work, there
came in to him a poor man, who looked long upon him and observed
his mystery; whereupon quoth the artist to him, "Knowest thou
aught of painting?" Quoth the stranger, "Yes;" so he gave him
tools and paints and said to him, "Limn for us a rare semblance."
Accordingly the pauper stranger entered one of the bath-chambers
and drew on its walls a double border, which he adorned on both
sides, after a fashion than which eyes never saw a fairer.
Moreover, amiddlemost the chamber he limned a picture to which
there lacked but the breath,[FN#349] and it was the portraiture
of Mariyah, daughter to the king of Baghdad. Then, when he had
finished the portrait, he went his way and told none of what he
had done, nor knew any wight the chambers and doors of the bath
and the adornment and ordinance thereof. Presently the chief
artisan came to the palace and sought audience of the king who
bade admit him. So he entered and kissing the earth, saluted him
with a salam beseeming Sultans and said, "O king of the time and
lord of the age and the tide, may prosperity endure to thee and
acceptance and eke thy degree over all the kings both morning and
evening[FN#350] exalted be! The work of the bath is accomplished,
by the king's fair fortune and the purity of his purpose, and
indeed, we have done all that behoved us and there remaineth but
that which behoveth the king." Al-Aziz ordered him a costly robe
of honour and expended monies galore, giving unto each who had
wroughten after the measure of his work. Then he assembled in the
Hammam all the Lords of his realm, Emirs and Wazirs and
Chamberlains and Nabobs, and the chief officers of his kingdom
and household, and sending for his son Al-Abbas, said to him, "O
my son, I have builded thee a bath, wherein thou mayst take thy
pleasance; so enter that thou mayst see it and divert thyself by
gazing upon it and viewing the beauty of its ordinance and
decoration." "With love and gladness," replied the Prince and
entered the bath, he and the king and the