 folk about them, so
they might divert themselves with viewing that which the
workmen's hands had worked. Al-Abbas went in and passed from
place to place and chamber to chamber, till he came to the room
aforesaid and espied the portrait of Mariyah, whereupon he fell
down in a fainting-fit and the workmen went to his father and
said to him, "Thy son Al-Abbas hath swooned away." So the king
came and finding his son cast down, seated himself at his head
and bathed his face with rose-water. After awhile he revived and
the king said to him, "I seek refuge with Allah for thee, O my
son! What accident hath befallen thee?" The Prince replied, "O my
father, I did but look on yonder picture and it bequeathed me a
thousand qualms and there befel me that which thou beholdest."
Therewith the king bade fetch the Master-painter, and when he
stood before him, he said to him, "Tell me of yonder portrait and
what girl is this of the daughters of the kings; else I will take
thy head." Said the painter, "By Allah, O king, I limned it not,
neither know I who she is; but there came to me a poor man and
looked hard at me. So I asked him, Knowest thou the art of
painting? and he answered, Yes. Whereupon I gave him the gear and
said to him, Limn for us a rare semblance. Accordingly he painted
yonder portrait and went away and I wot him not neither have I
ever set eyes on him save that day." Hearing this, the king
ordered all his officers to go round about in the thoroughfares
and colleges and to bring before him all strangers they found
there. So they went forth and brought him much people, amongst
whom was the pauper who had painted the portrait. When they came
into the presence, the Sultan bade the crier make public
proclamation that whoso wrought the portrait should discover
himself and have whatso he wished. Thereupon the poor man came
forward and kissing the ground before the king, said to him, "O
king of the age, I am he who limned yonder likeness." Quoth
Al-Aziz, "And knowest thou who she is?" and quoth the other,
"Yes, this is the portrait of Mariyah, daughter of the king of
Baorhdad." The king ordered him a robe of honour and a slave-girl
and he went his way. Then said Al-Abbas, "O my papa, give me
leave to seek her, so I may look upon her: else shall I farewell
the world, withouten fail." The king his father wept and
answered, "O my son, I builded thee a Hammam, that it might turn
thee from leaving me, and behold, it hath been the cause of thy
going forth; but the behest of Allah is a determinate
decree."[FN#351] Then he wept again and Al-Abbas said to him,
"Fear not for me, for thou knowest my prowess and puissance in
returning answers in the assemblies of the land and my good
breeding and accomplishments together with my skill in rhetoric;
and indeed for him whose father thou art and whom thou hast
reared and bred and in whom thou hast united praiseworthy
qualities, the repute whereof hath traversed the East and the
West, thou needest not fear aught, more especially as I purpose
but to seek pleasuring and return to thee, an it be the will of
Allah Almighty." Quoth the king, "Whom wilt thou take with thee
of attendants and what of monies?" Replied Al-Abbas, "O my papa,
I have no need of horses or camels or weapons, for I purpose not
warfare, and I will have none go forth with me save my page 'Amir
and no more." Now as he and his father were thus engaged in talk,
in came his mother and caught hold of him; and he said to her,
"Allah upon thee, let me gang my gait and strive not to divert me
from what purpose I have purposed, for needs must I go." She
replied, "O my son, if it must be so and there be no help for it,
swear to me that thou wilt not be absent from me more than a
year." And he sware to her. Then he entered his father's
treasuries and took therefrom what he would of jewels and
jacinths and everything weighty of worth and light of load: he
also bade his servant Amir saddle him two steeds and the like for
himself, and whenas the night beset his back,[FN#352] he rose
from his couch and mounting his horse, set out for Baghdad, he
and Amir, whilst the page knew not whither he intended.[FN#353]
He gave not over going and the journey was joyous to him, till
they came to a goodly land, abounding in birds and wild beasts,
whereupon Al-Abbas started a gazelle and shot it with a shaft.
Then he dismounted and cutting its throat, said to his servant,
"Alight thou and skin it and carry it to the water." Amir
answered him with "Hearkening and obedience" and going down to
the water, built a fire and broiled the gazelle's flesh. Then
they ate their fill and drank of the water, after which they
mounted again and fared on with diligent faring, and Amir still
unknowing whither Al-Abbas was minded to wend. So he said to him,
"O my lord, I conjure thee by Allah of All-might, wilt thou not
tell me whither thou intendest?" Al-Abbas looked at him and in
reply improvised these couplets,

"In my vitals are fires of desire and repine; * And naught I
     reply when they flare on high:
Baghdad-wards I hie me on life-and-death work, * Loving one who
     distorts my right judgment awry:
A swift camel under me shortcuts the wold * And deem it a cloud
     all who nearhand espy:
O 'Ámir make haste after model of her * Who would heal mine ill
     and Love's cup drain dry:
For the leven of love burns the vitals of me; * So with me seek
     my tribe and stint all reply."

When Amir heard his lord's verses, he knew that he was a slave of
love and that she whom he loved abode in Baghdad. Then they fared
on night and day, traversing plain and stony way, till they
sighted Baghdad and lighted down in its environs[FN#354] and
there lay their night. When they arose in the morning, they
removed to the bank of the Tigris where they encamped and
sojourned a second day and a third. As they abode thus on the
fourth day, behold, a company of folk giving their beasts the
rein and crying aloud and saying, "Quick! Quick! Haste to our
rescue, Ho thou the King!" Therewith the King's chamberlains and
officers accosted them and said, "What is behind you and what
hath betided you?" Quoth they, "Bring us before the King." So
they carried them to Ins bin Kays; and when they saw him, they
said to him, "O king, unless thou succour us, we are dead men;
for that we are a folk of the Banú Shaybán,[FN#355] who have
taken up our abode in the parts of Bassorah, and Hodhayfah the
wild Arab hath come down on us with his steeds and his men and
hath slain our horse-men and carried off our women and children;
nor was one saved of the tribe but he who fled; wherefore we
crave help first by Allah Almighty, then by thy life." When the
king heard their speech, he bade the crier proclaim in the
highways of the city that the troops should busk them to march
and that the horsemen should mount and the footmen fare forth;
nor was it but the twinkling of the eye ere the kettle-drums beat
and the trumpets blared; and scarce was the forenoon of the day
passed when the city was blocked with horse and foot. Presently,
the king reviewed them and behold, they were four-and-twenty
thousand in number, cavalry and infantry. He bade them go forth
to the enemy and gave the command of them to Sa'ad ibn al-Wákidí,
a doughty cavalier and a dauntless champion; so the horsemen set
out and fared on along the Tigris-bank. Al-Abbas, son of King
Al-Aziz, looked at them and saw the flags flaunting and the
standards stirring and heard the kettle-drums beating; so he bade
his page saddle him a blood-steed and look to the surcingles and
bring him his harness of war, for indeed horsemanship[FN#356] was
rooted in his heart. Quoth Amir, "And indeed I saw Al-Abbas, his
eyes waxed red and the hair of his hands on end." So he mounted
his charger, whilst Amir also bestrode a destrier, and they went
forth with the commando and fared on two days. On the third day,
after the hour of the midafternoon prayer, they came in sight of
the foe and the two armies met and the two ranks joined in fight.
The strife raged amain and sore was the strain, whilst the dust
rose in clouds and hung in vaulted shrouds, so that all eyes were
blinded; and they ceased not from the battle till the night
overtook them,[FN#357] when the two hosts drew off from the
mellay and passed the night, perplexed concerning themselves.
When Allah caused the morning to morrow, the two hosts were
aligned in line and their thousands fixed their eyne and the
troops stood looking one at other. Then sallied forth Al-Háris
ibn Sa'ad between the two lines and played with his lance and
cried out and improvised these couplets,

"You are in every way this day our prey; * And ever we prayed
     your sight to see:
The Ruthful drave you Hodhayfah-wards * To the Brave, the Lion
     who sways the free:
Say, amid you's a man who would heal his ills, * With whose lust
     of battle shrewd blows agree?
Then by Allah meet me who come to you * And whoso is wronged
     shall the wronger be."[FN#358]

Thereupon there sallied forth to him Zuhayr bin Habíb, and they
wheeled about and wiled a while, then they exchanged strokes.
Al-Haris forewent his foe in smiting and stretched him weltering
in his gore; whereupon Hodhayfah cried out to him, "Gifted of
Allah[FN#359] art thou, O Haris! Call out another of them." So he
cried aloud, "I say, who be a champion?" But they of Baghdad held
back from him; and when it appeared to Al-Haris that
consternation was amongst them, he charged down upon them and
overrolled the first of them upon the last of them and slew of
them twelve men. Then the evening caught him and the Baghdadis
began addressing themselves to flight. No sooner had the morning
morrowed than they found themselves reduced to a fourth part of
their number and there was not one of them had dismounted from
his horse. Wherefore they made sure of destruction and Hodhayfah
rushed out between the two lines (now he was reckoned good for a
thousand knights) and cried out, "Harkye, my masters of Baghdad!
Let none come forth to me but your Emir, so I may talk with him
and he with me; and he shall meet me in combat singular and I
will meet him, and may he who is clear of offence come off safe."
Then he repeated his words and said, "How is it I see your Emir
refuse me a reply?" But Sa'ad, the Emir of the army of Baghdad,
answered him not, and indeed his teeth chattered in his mouth,
when he heard him summon him to the duello. Now when Al-Abbas
heard Hodhayfah's challenge and saw Sa'ad in this case, he came
up to the Emir and asked him, "Wilt thou suffer me to answer him
and I will be thy substitute in replying him and in monomachy
with him and will make my life thy sacrifice?" Sa'ad looked at
him and seeing knighthood shining from between his eyes, said to
him, "O youth, by the virtue of Mustafá the Chosen Prophet (whom
Allah save and assain), tell me who thou art and whence thou
comest to bring us victory."[FN#360] Quoth the Prince, "This is
no place for questioning;" and quoth Sa'ad to him, "O Knight, up
and at Hodhayfah! Yet, if his Satan prove too strong for thee,
afflict not thyself on thy youth."[FN#361] Al-Abbas cried, "Allah
is He of whom help is to be sought;"[FN#362] and, taking his
arms, fortified his purpose and went down into the field, as he
were a fort of the forts or a mountain's contrefort. Thereupon
Hodhayfah cried out to him, saying, "Haste thee not, O youth! Who
art thou of the folk?" He replied, "I am Sa'ad ibn al-Wakidi,
commander of the host of King Ins, and but for thy pride in
challenging me, I had not come forth to thee; for thou art no
peer for me to front nor as mine equal dost thou count nor canst
thou bear my brunt. Wherefore get thee ready for the last
march[FN#363] seeing that there abideth but a little of thy
life." When Hodhayfah heard this speech, he threw himself
backwards,[FN#364] as if in mockery of him, whereat Al-Abbas was
wroth and called out to him, saying, "O Hodhayfah, guard thyself
against me." Then he rushed upon him, as he were a swooper of the
Jinn,[FN#365] and Hodhayfah met him and they wheeled about a long
while. Presently, Al-Abbas cried out at Hodhayfah a cry which
astounded him and struck him a stroke, saying, "Take this from
the hand of a brave who feareth not the like of thee." Hodhayfah
met the sabre-sway with his shield, thinking to ward it off from
him; but the blade shore the target in sunder and descending upon
his shoulder, came forth gleaming from the tendons of his throat
and severed his arm at the armpit; whereupon he fell down,
wallowing in his blood, and Al-Abbas turned upon his host; not
had the sun departed the dome of the welkin ere Hodhayfah's army
was in full flight before Al-Abbas and the saddles were empty of
men. Quoth Sa'ad, "By the virtue of Mustafa the Chosen Prophet,
whom Allah save and assain, I saw Al-Abbas with the blood upon
his saddle-pads, in clots like camels' livers, smiting with the
sword right and left, till he scattered them abroad in every
gorge and wold; and when he hied him back to the camp, the men of
Baghdad were fearful of him." But as soon as they saw this
victory which had betided them over their foes, they turned back
and gathering together the weapons and treasures and horses of
those they had slain, returned to Baghdad, victorious, and all by
the knightly valour of Al-Abbas. As for Sa'ad, he foregathered
with his lord, and they fared on in company till they came to the
place where Al-Abbas had taken horse, whereupon the Prince
dismounted from his charger and Sa'ad said to him, "O youth,
wherefore alightest thou in other than thy place? Indeed, thy
rights be incumbent upon us and upon our Sultan; so go thou with
us to the dwellings, that we may ransom thee with our souls."
Replied Al-Abbas, "O Emir Sa'ad, from this place I took horse
with thee and herein is my lodging. So, Allah upon thee, mention
not me to the king, but make as if thou hadst never seen me
because I am a stranger in the land." So saying he turned away
from him and Sa'ad fared on to his palace, where he found all the
courtiers in attendance on the king and recounting to him that
which had betided them with Al-Abbas. Quoth the king, "Where is
he?" and quoth they, "He is with the Emir Sa'ad." So, when the
Emir entered, the king looked, but found none with him; and
Sa'ad, seeing at a glance that he longed to look upon the youth,
cried out to him, saying, "Allah prolong the king's days! Indeed,
he refuseth to present himself before thee, without order or
leave." Asked the king, "O Sa'ad, whence cometh this man?" and
the Emir answered, "O my lord, I know not; but he is a youth fair
of favour, amiable of aspect, accomplished in address, ready of
repartee, and valour shineth from between his eyes." Quoth the
king, "O Sa'ad, fetch him to me, for indeed thou describest to me
at full length a mighty matter."[FN#366] And he answered, saying,
"By Allah, O my lord, hadst thou but seen our case with
Hodhayfah, when he challenged me to the field of fight and the
stead of cut-and-thrust and I held back from doing battle with
him! Then, as I thought to go forth to him, behold, a knight gave
loose to his bridle-rein and called out to me, saying, 'O Sa'ad,
wilt thou suffer me to be thy substitute in waging war with him
and I will ransom thee with myself?' and quoth I, 'By Allah, O
youth, whence comest thou?' and quoth he, 'This be no time for
thy questions, while Hodhayfah standeth awaiting thee.'"
Thereupon he repeated to the king all that had passed between
himself and Al-Abbas from first to last; whereat cried Ins bin
Kays, "Bring him to me in haste, so we may learn his tidings and
question him of his case." "'Tis well," replied Sa'ad, and going
forth of the king's presence, repaired to his own house, where he
doffed his war-harness and took rest for himself. On this wise
fared it with the Emir Sa'ad, but as regards Al-Abbas, when he
dismounted from his destrier, he doffed his war-gear and repose
himself awhile; after which he brought out a body-dress of
Venetian[FN#367] silk and a gown of green damask and donning
them, bound about his head a turband of Damietta stuff and zoned
his waist with a kerchief. Then he went out a-walking in the
highways of Baghdad and fared on till he came to the bazar of the
traders. There he found a merchant, with chess before him; so the
Prince stood watching him, and presently the other looked up at
him and asked him, "O youth, what wilt thou bet upon the game?"
He answered, "Be it thine to decide." Said the merchant, "Then be
it an hundred dinars," and Al-Abbas consented to him; whereupon
quoth he, "Produce the money, O youth, so the game may be fairly
stablished." Accordingly Al-Abbas brought out a satin purse,
wherein were a thousand dinars, and laid down an hundred dinars
therefrom on the edge of the carpet, whilst the merchant produced
the like, and indeed his reason fled for joy when he saw the gold
in possession of Al-Abbas. The folk flocked about them, to divert
themselves with watching the play, and they called the bystanders
to witness the wager and after the stakes were duly staked, the
twain fell a-playing. Al-Abbas forebore the merchant, so he might
lead him on, and dallied with him a full hour; and the merchant
won and took of him the hundred dinars. Then said the Prince,
"Wilt thou play another partie?" and the other said, "O youth, I
will not play again, save for a thousand dinars." Quoth the
youth, 'Whatsoever thou stakest, I will match thy stake with its
like." So the merchant brought out a thousand dinars and the
Prince covered them with other thousand. Then the game began, but
Al-Abbas was not long with him ere he beat him in the house of
the elephant[FN#368] nor did he cease to do thus till he had
beaten him four times and won of him four thousand dinars. This
was all the merchant had of money; so he said, "O youth, I will
play thee another game for the shop." Now the value of the shop
was four thousand dinars; so they played and Al-Ahbas beat him
and won his shop, with whatso was therein; upon which the other
arose, shaking his clothes,[FN#369] and said to him, "Up, O
youth, and take thy shop." Accordingly Al-Abbas arose and
repairing to the shop, took possession thereof, after which he
returned to the place where he had left his servant 'Amir, and
found there the Emir Sa'ad, who was come to bid him to the
presence of the king. The Prince consented to this and
accompanied him till they came before King Ins bin Kays,
whereupon he kissed the ground and saluted him and
exaggerated[FN#370] the salutation. So the king asked him,
"Whence comest thou, O youth, and whither goest thou?" and he
answered, "I come from Al-Yaman." Then said the king, "Hast thou
a need we may fulfil to thee; for indeed thou hast strong claims
to our favour after that which thou didst in the matter of
Hodhayfah and his folk." And he commanded to cast over him a
mantle of Egyptian satin, worth an hundred dinars. He also bade
his treasurer give him a thousand dinars and said to him, "O
youth, take this in part of that which thou deservest of us; and
if thou prolong thy sojourn with us, we will give thee slaves and
servants." Al-Abbas kissed ground and said, "O king, Allah grant
thee abiding weal, I deserve not all this." Then he put his hand
to his pouch and pulling out two caskets of gold, in each of
which were rubies whose value none could estimate, gave them to
the king, saying, "O king, Allah cause thy welfare to endure, I
conjure thee by that which the Almighty hath vouchsafed thee,
heal my heart by accepting these two caskets, even as I have
accepted thy present." So the king accepted the two caskets and
Al-Abbas took his leave and went away to the bazar. Now when the
merchants saw him, they accosted him and said, "O youth, wilt
thou not open thy shop?" As they were addressing him, up came a
woman, having with her a boy bare of head, and stood looking at
Al-Abbas, till he turned to her, when she said to him, "O youth,
I conjure thee by Allah, look at this boy and have ruth on him,
for that his father hath forgotten his skull-cap in the shop he
lost to thee; so, an thou see fit to give it him, thy reward be
with Allah! For indeed the child maketh our hearts ache with his
excessive weeping, and the Lord be witness for us that, had they
left us aught wherewith to buy him a cap in its stead, we had not
sought it of thee." Replied Al-Abbas, "O adornment of
womankind,[FN#371] indeed, thou bespeakest me with thy fair
speech and supplicatest me with thy goodly words! But bring me
thy husband." So she went and fetched the merchant, whilst a
crowd collected to see what Al-Abbas would do. When the man came,
he returned him the gold he had won of him, art and part, and
delivered him the keys of the shop, saying, "Requite us with thy
pious prayers." Therewith the woman came up to him and kissed his
feet, and in like fashion did the merchant her husband: and all
who were present blessed him, and there was no talk but of
Al-Abbas. Thus fared it with him; but as for the merchant, he
bought him a head of sheep[FN#372] and slaughtering it, roasted
it and dressed birds and other meats of various kinds and colours
and purchased dessert and sweetmeats and fresh fruits; then he
repaired to Al-Abbas and conjured him to accept of his
hospitality and visit his home and eat of his provaunt. The
Prince consented to his wishes and went with him till they came
to his house, when the merchant bade him enter: so Al-Abbas went
in and saw a goodly house, wherein was a handsome saloon, with a
vaulted ceiling. When he entered the saloon, he found that the
merchant had made ready food and dessert and perfumes, such as
may not be described; and indeed he had adorned the table with
sweet-scented flowers and sprinkled musk and rose-water upon the
food; and he had smeared the saloon walls with ambergris and had
burned aloes-wood therein and Nadd. Presently, Al-Abbas looked
out of the window of the saloon and saw by its side a house of
goodly ordinance, tall of base and wide of space, with rooms
manifold and two upper stories crowning the whole; but therein
was no sign of inhabitants. So he said to the merchant, "Verily,
thou exaggeratest in doing us honour; but, by Allah, I will not
eat of thy meat until thou tell me what hath caused the voidance
of yonder house." Said he, "O my lord, that was Al-Ghitrif's
house and he passed away to the mercy of the Almighty and left no
heir save myself; whereupon the mansion became mine, and by
Allah, an thou have a mind to sojourn in Baghdad, take up thine
abode in this house, whereby thou mayst be in my neighbourhood;
for that verily my heart inclineth unto thee with affection and I
would have thee never absent from mine eyes, so I may still have
my fill of thee and hearken to thy speech." Al-Abbas thanked him
and said to him, "By Allah, thou art indeed friendly in thy
converse and thou exaggeratest in thy discourse, and needs must I
sojourn in Baghdad. As for the house, if it please thee to lodge
me, I will abide therein; so accept of me its price." Therewith
he put hand to his pouch and bringing out from it three hundred
dinars, gave them to the merchant, who said in himself, "Unless I
take his dirhams, he will not darken my doors." So he pocketed
the monies and sold him the mansion, taking witnesses against
himself of the sale. Then he arose and set food before Al-Abbas
and they sat down to his good things; after which he brought him
dessert and sweetmeats whereof they ate their sufficiency, and
when the tables were removed they washed their hands with musked
rose-water and willow-water. Then the merchant brought Al-Abbas a
napkin scented with the smoke of aloes-wood, on which he wiped
his right hand, and said to him, "O my lord, the house is become
thy house; so bid thy page transport thither the horses and arms
and stuffs." The Prince did this and the merchant rejoiced in his
neighbourhood and left him not night nor day,[FN#373] so that
Al-Abbas said to him, "By the Lord, we distract thee from thy
livelihood." He replied, "Allah upon thee, O my lord, name not to
me aught of this, or thou wilt break my heart, for the best of
traffic art thou and the best of livelihood." So there befel
straight friendship between them and all ceremony was laid aside.
Meanwhile[FN#374] the king said to his Wazir, "How shall we do in
the matter of yonder youth, the Yamáni, on whom we thought to
confer gifts, but he hath gifted us with tenfold our largesse and
more, and we know not an he be a sojourner with us or not?" Then
he went into the Harim and gave the rubies to his wife Afifah,
who asked him, "What is the worth of these with thee and with
other of the kings?" Quoth he, "They are not to be found save
with the greatest of sovrans nor can any price them with monies."
Quoth she, "Whence gottest thou them?" So he recounted to her the
story of Al-Abbas from beginning to end, and she said, "By Allah,
the claims of honour are imperative on us and the King hath
fallen short of his devoir; for that we have not seen him bid the
youth to his assembly, nor hath he seated him on his left hand."
When the king heard his wife's words, it was as if he had been
asleep and awoke; so he went forth the Harim and bade kill
poultry and dress meats of every kind and colour. Moreover, he
assembled all his courtiers and let bring sweetmeats and dessert
and all that beseemeth the tables of kings. Then he adorned his
palace and despatched after Al-Abbas a man of the chief officers
of his household, who found him coming forth of the Hammam, clad
in a jerkin[FN#375] of fine goats' hair and over it a Baghdádi
scarf; his waist was girt with a Rustaki[FN#376] kerchief and on
his head he wore a light turband of Damietta[FN#377] stuff. The
messenger wished him joy of the bath and exaggerated in doing him
honour: then he said to him, "The king biddeth thee in
weal."[FN#378] "To hear is to obey," quoth Al-Abbas and
accompanied the officer to the king's palace. Now Afifah and her
daughter Mariyah were behind the curtain, both looking at him;
and when he came before the sovran he saluted him and greeted him
with the greeting of kings, whilst all present gazed at him and
at his beauty and loveliness and perfect grace. The king seated
him at the head of the table; and when Afifah saw him and
considered him straitly, she said, "By the virtue of Mohammed,
prince of the Apostles, this youth is of the sons of the kings
and cometh not to these parts save for some noble purpose!" Then
she looked at Mariyah and saw that her favour was changed, and
indeed her eye-balls were as dead in her face and she turned not
her gaze from Al-Abbas a twinkling of the eyes, for that the love
of him had sunk deep into her heart. When the queen saw what had
befallen her daughter, she feared for her from reproach
concerning Al-Abbas; so she shut the casement-wicket that the
Princess might not look upon him any more. Now there was a
pavilion set apart for Mariyah, and therein were boudoirs and
bowers, balconies and lattices, and she had with her a nurse, who
served her as is the fashion with the daughters of the Kings.
When the banquet was ended and the folk had dispersed, the King
said to Al-Abbas, "I would fain have thee abide with me and I
will buy thee a mansion, so haply we may requite thee for thy
high services; and indeed imperative upon us is thy due and
magnified in our eyes is thy work; and soothly we have fallen
short of thy deserts in the matter of distance."[FN#379] When the
youth heard the king's speech, he rose and sat down[FN#380] and
kissing ground, returned thanks for his bounty and said, "I am
the King's thrall, wheresoever I may be, and under his eye." Then
he told him the tale of the merchant and the manner of the buying
of the house, and the king said, "In very truth I would fain have
had thee in my neighbourhood and by side of me." Presently
Al-Abbas took leave of the king and went away to his own house.
Now it chanced that he passed under the palace of Mariyah, the
king's daughter, and she was sitting at a casement. He happened
to look round and his eyes met those of the Princess, whereupon
his wit departed and he was ready to swoon away, whilst his
colour changed, and he said, "Verily, we are Allah's and unto Him
are we returning!" But he feared for himself lest severance
betide him; so he concealed his secret and discovered not his
case to any of the creatures of Allah Almighty. When he reached
his quarters, his page Amir said to him, "I seek refuge for thee
with Allah, O my lord, from change of colour! Hath there betided
thee a pain from the Lord of All-might or aught of vexation? In
good sooth, sickness hath an end and patience doeth away
trouble." But the Prince returned him no answer. Then he brought
out ink-case[FN#381] and paper and wrote these couplets:

I cry (and mine's a frame that pines alway), * A mind which fires
     of passion e'er waylay;
And eyeballs never tasting sweets of sleep; * Yet Fortune spare
     its cause I ever pray!
While from world-perfidy and parting I * Like Bishram with
     Hind,[FN#382] that well-loved may;--
Yea, grown a bye-word 'mid the folk but aye * Spend life
     unwinning wish or night or day.
"Ah say, wots she my love when her I spied * At the high lattice
     shedding sunlike ray?"
Her glances, keener than the brand when bared * Cleave soul of
     man nor ever 'scapes her prey:
I looked on her in lattice pierced aloft * When bare her cheat of
     veil that slipped away;
And shot me thence a shaft my liver pierced * When thrall to care
     and dire despair I lay
Knowst thou, O Fawn o' the palace, how for thee * I fared from
     farness o'er the lands astray?
Then read my writ, dear friends, and show some ruth * To wight
     who wones black-faced, distraught, sans stay!

And when he ended inditing, he folded up the letter. Now the
merchant's wife aforesaid, who was the nurse of the king's
daughter, was watching him from a window, unknown of him, and
when she saw him writing and reciting, she knew that some rare
tale attached to him; so she went in to him and said, "Peace be
with thee, O afflicted wight, who acquaintest not leach with thy
plight! Verily, thou exposest thy life to grievous blight. I
conjure thee by the virtue of Him who hath afflicted thee and
with the constraint of love-liking hath stricken thee, that thou
acquaint me with thine affair and disclose to me the truth of thy
secret; for that indeed I have heard from thee verses which
trouble the mind and melt the body." Accordingly he acquainted
her with his case and enjoined her to secrecy, whereof she
consented, saying, "What shall be the recompense of whoso goeth
with thy letter and bringeth thee its reply?" He bowed his head
for shame before her and was silent; and she said to him, "Raise
thy head and give me thy writ": so he gave her the letter and she
hent it and carrying it to the Princess, said to her, "Take this
epistle and give me its answer." Now the dearest of all things to
Mariyah was the recitation of poesy and verses and linked rhymes
and the twanging of lute-strings, and she was versed in all
tongues; wherefore she took the writ and opening it, read that
which was therein and understood its purport. Then she threw it
to the ground and cried, "O nurse, I have no answer to make to
this letter." Quoth the nurse, "Indeed, this is weakness in thee
and a reproach to thee, for that the people of the world have
heard of thee and commend thee for keenness of wit and
understanding; so do thou return him an answer, such as shall
trick his heart and tire his soul." Quoth she, "O nurse, who may
be the man who presumeth upon me with this correspondence? Haply
'tis the stranger youth who gave my father the rubies." The woman
said, "It is himself," and Mariyah said, "I will answer his
letter in such fashion that thou shalt not bring me other than
it." Cried the nurse, "So be it."[FN#383] Thereupon the Princess
called for ink-case and paper and wrote these couplets:--

Thou art bold in the copy thou sentest! May be * 'Twill increase
     the dule foreign wight must dree!
Thou hast spied me with glance that bequeaths thee woe * Ah! far
     is thy hope, a mere foreigner's plea!
Who art thou, poor freke, that wouldst win my love * Wi' thy
     verse? What seeks thine insanity?
An thou hope for my favours and greed therefor; * Where find thee
     a leach for such foolish gree?
Then rhyme-linking leave and fool-like be not * Hanged to Cross
     at the doorway of ignomy!
Deem not that to thee I incline, O youth! * 'Mid the Sons of the
     Path[FN#384] is no place for me.
Thou art homeless waif in the wide wide world; * So return thee
     home where they keen for thee:[FN#385]
Leave verse-spouting, O thou who a-wold dost wone, * Or minstrel
     shall name thee in lay and glee:
How many a friend who would meet his love * Is baulked when the
     goal is right clear to see!
So begone and ne'er grieve for what canst not win * Albe time be
     near, yet thy grasp 'twill flee.
Now such is my say and the tale I'd tell; * So master my meaning
     and--fare thee well!


When Mariyah had made an end of her verses, she folded the letter
and delivered it to the nurse, who hent it and went with it to
Al-Abbas. When she gave it to him, he took it and breaking it
open, read it and comprehended its contents; and when he reached
the end of it, he swooned away. After awhile, he came to himself
and cried, "Praise be to Allah who hath caused her return a reply
to my writ! Canst thou carry her another missive, and with Allah
Almighty be thy requital?" Said she, "And what shall letters
profit thee, seeing that such is her reply;" but he said,
"Peradventure, she may yet be softened." Then he took ink-case
and paper and wrote these couplets:--

Reached me the writ and what therein didst write, * Whence grew
     my pain and bane and blight:
I read the marvel-lines made wax my love * And wore my body out
     till slightest slight.[FN#386]
Would Heaven ye wot the whole I bear for love * Of you, with
     vitals clean for you undight!
And all I do t' outdrive you from my thought * 'Vails naught and
     'gainst th' obsession loses might:
Couldst for thy lover feel 'twould ease his soul; * E'en thy dear
     Phantom would his sprite delight!
Then on my weakness lay not coyness-load * Nor in such breach of
     troth be traitor-wight:
And, weet ye well, for this your land I fared * Hoping to 'joy
     the union-boon forthright:
How many a stony wold for this I spanned; * How oft I waked when
     men kept watch o'night!
To fare fro' another land for sight of you * Love bade, while
     length of way forbade my sprite:
So by His name[FN#387] who molt my frame, have ruth, * And quench
     the flames thy love in me did light:
Thou fillest, arrayed with glory's robes and rays, * Heaven's
     stars with joy and Luna with despight.
Then who dare chide or blame me for my love * Of one that can all
     Beauty's boons unite?

When Al-Abbas had made an end of his verses, he folded the letter
and delivering it to the nurse, charged her keep the secret. So
she took it and carrying it to Mariyah, gave it to her. The
Princess broke it open and read it and apprehended its purport;
then cried she, "By Allah, O nurse, my heart is chagrined with
exceeding chagrin, never knew I a sorer, because of this
correspondence and of these verses." And the nurse made answer to
her "O my lady, thou art in thy dwelling and thy palace and thy
heart is void of care; so return to him a reply and reck not."
Accordingly, the Princess called for ink-case and paper and wrote
these couplets:--

Ho thou who wouldst vaunt thee of cark and care; * How many
     love-molten, tryst-craving be there?
An hast wandered the wold in the murks of night * Bound afar and
     anear on the tracks to fare,
And to eyne hast forbidden the sweets of sleep, * Borne by Devils
     and Marids to dangerous lair;
And beggest my boons, O in tribe-land[FN#388] homed * And to urge
     thy wish and desire wouldst dare;
Now, woo Patience fair, an thou bear in mind * What The Ruthful
     promised to patient prayer![FN#389]
How many a king for my sake hath vied, * Craving love and in
     marriage with me to pair.
Al-Nabhan sent, when a-wooing me, * Camels baled with musk and
     Nadd scenting air.
They brought camphor in boxes and like thereof * Of pearls and
     rubies that countless were;
Brought pregnant lasses and negro-lads, * Blood steeds and arms
     and gear rich and rare;
Brought us raiment of silk and of sendal sheen, * And came
     courting us but no bride he bare:
Nor could win his wish, for I 'bode content * To part with far
     parting and love forswear;
So for me greed not, O thou stranger wight * Lest thou come to
     ruin and dire despair!

When she had made an end of her verses, she folded the letter and
delivered it to the nurse, who took it and carried it to
Al-Abbas. He broke it open and read it and comprehended its
contents; then took ink-case and paper and wrote these improvised
couplets:--

Thou hast told me the tale of the Kings, and of them * Each was
     rending lion, a furious foe:
And thou stolest the wits of me, all of them * And shotst me with
     shaft of thy magic bow:
Thou hast boasted of slaves and of steeds and wealth; * And of
     beauteous lasses ne'er man did know;
How presents in mighty store didst spurn, * And disdainedst
     lovers both high and low:
Then I followed their tracks in desire for thee, * With naught
     save my scymitar keen of blow;
Nor slaves nor camels that run have I; * Nor slave-girls the
     litters enveil, ah, no!
But grant me union and soon shalt sight * My trenchant blade with
     the foeman's woe;
Shalt see the horsemen engird Baghdad * Like clouds that wall the
     whole world below,
Obeying behests which to them I deal * And hearing the words to
     the foes I throw.
An of negro chattels ten thousand head * Wouldst have, or Kings
     who be proud and prow
Or chargers led for thee day by day * And virgin girls high of
     bosom, lo!
Al-Yaman land my command doth bear * And my biting blade to my
     foes I show.
I have left this all for the sake of thee, * Left Aziz and my
     kinsmen for ever-mo'e;
And made Al-Irák making way to thee * Under nightly murks over
     rocks arow;
When the couriers brought me account of thee * Thy beauty,
     perfection, and sunny glow,
Then I sent thee verses whose very sound * Burns the heart of
     shame with a fiery throe;
Yet the world with falsehood hath falsed me, * Though Fortune was
     never so false as thou,
Who dubbest me stranger and homeless one * A witless fool and a
     slave-girl's son!

Then he folded the letter and committed it to the nurse and gave
her five hundred dinars, saying, "Accept this from me, for by
Allah thou hast indeed wearied thyself between us." She replied,
"By Allah, O my lord, my aim is to bring about forgathering
between you, though I lose that which my right hand possesseth."
And he said, "May the Lord of All-might requite thee with good!"
Then she carried the letter to Mariyah and said to her, "Take
this letter; haply it may be the end of the correspondence." So
she took it and breaking it open, read it, and when she had made
an end of it, she turned to the nurse and said to her, "This one
foisteth lies upon me and asserteth unto me that he hath cities
and horsemen and footmen at his command and submitting to his
allegiance; and he wisheth of me that which he shall not win; for
thou knowest, O nurse, that kings' sons have sought me in
marriage, with presents and rarities; but I have paid no heed
unto aught of this; how, then, shall I accept of this fellow, who
is the ignoramus of his time and possesseth naught save two
caskets of rubies, which he gave to my sire, and indeed he hath
taken up his abode in the house of Al-Ghitrif and abideth without
silver or gold? Wherefore, Allah upon thee, O nurse, return to
him and cut off his hope of me." Accordingly the nurse rejoined
Al-Abbas, without letter or answer; and when she came in to him,
he looked at her and saw that she was troubled, and he noted the
marks of anger on her face; so he said to her, "What is this
plight?" Quoth she, "I cannot set forth to thee that which
Mariyah said; for indeed she charged me return to thee without
writ or reply." Quoth he, "O nurse of kings, I would have thee
carry her this letter and return not to her without it." Then he
took ink-case and paper and wrote these couplets:--

My secret now to men is known though hidden well and true * By
     me: enough is that I have of love and love of you:
I left familiars, friends, and kin to weep the loss of me * With
     floods of tears which like the tide aye flowed and flowed
     anew:
Then, left my home myself I bore to Baghdad-town one day, * When
     parting drave me there his pride and cruelty to rue:
I have indeed drained all the bowl whose draught
     repression[FN#390] was * Handed by friend who bitter
     gourd[FN#391] therein for drinking threw.
And, oft as strove I to enjoin the ways of troth and faith, * So
     often on refusal's path he left my soul to sue.
Indeed my body molten is with care I'm doomèd dree; * And yet I
     hoped relenting and to win some grace, my due.
But wrong and rigour waxed on me and changed to worse my case; *
     And love hath left me weeping-eyed for woes that aye pursue.
How long must I keep watch for you throughout the nightly gloom?
     * How many a path of pining pace and garb of grief endue?
And you, what while you joy your sleep, your restful pleasant
     sleep, * Reck naught of sorrow and of shame that to your
     friend accrue:
For wakefulness I watched the stars before the peep o' day, *
     Praying that union with my dear in bliss my soul imbrue;
Indeed the throes of long desire laid waste my frame and I * Rise
     every morn in weaker plight with hopes e'er fewer few:
"Be not" (I say) "so hard of heart!" for did you only deign * In
     phantom guise to visit me 'twere joy enough to view.
But when ye saw my writ ye grudged to me the smallest boon * And
     cast adown the flag of faith though well my troth ye knew;
Nor aught of answer you vouchsafe, albe you wot full well * The
     words therein address the heart and pierce the spirit
     through.
You deemed yourself all too secure for changes of the days * And
     of the far and near alike you ever careless grew.
Hadst thou (dear maid) been doomed like me to woes, forsure hadst
     felt * The lowe of love and Laza-hell which paring doth
     enmew;
Yet soon shalt suffer torments such as those from thee I bear *
     And storm of palpitation-pangs in vitals thine shall brew:
Yea, thou shalt taste the bitter smack of charges false and foul,
     * And public make the privacy best hid from meddling crew;
And he thou lovest shall approve him hard of heart and soul * And
     heedless of the shifts of Time thy very life undo.
Then hear the fond Salam I send and wish thee every day * While
     swayeth spray and sparkleth star all good thy life ensue!

When Al-Abbas had made an end of his verses, he folded the scroll
and gave it to the nurse, who took it and carried it to Mariyah.
When she came into the Princess's presence, she saluted her; but
Mariyah returned not her salutation and she said, "O my lady, how
hard is thy heart that thou grudgest to return the salam! Accept
this letter, because 'tis the last that shall come to thee from
him." Quoth Mariyah, "Take my warning and never again enter my
palace, or 'twill be the cause of thy destruction; for I am
certified that thou purposest my disgrace. So get thee gone from
me." And she bade beat the nurse who went forth fleeing from her
presence, changed of colour and 'wildered of wits, and gave not
over going till she came to the house of Al-Abbas. When the
Prince saw her in this plight, he became like a sleeper awakened
and cried to her, "What hath befallen thee? Acquaint me with thy
case." She replied, "Allah upon thee, nevermore send me to
Mariyah, and do thou protect me, so the Lord protect thee from
the fires of Gehenna!" Then she related to him that which had
betided her with Mariyah which when Al-Abbas heard, there took
him the pride and high spirit of the generous and this was
grievous to him. The love of Mariyah fled forth of his heart and
he said to the nurse, "How much hadst thou of Mariyah every
month?" Quoth she, "Ten dinars" and quoth he, "Be not concerned."
Then he put hand to pouch and bringing out two hundred ducats,
gave them to her and said,"Take this wage for a whole year and
turn not again to serve anyone of the folk. When the twelvemonth
shall have passed away, I will give thee a two years' wage, for
that thou hast wearied thyself with us and on account of the
cutting off the tie which bound thee to Mariyah." Also he gifted
her with a complete suit of clothes and raising his head to her,
said, "When thou toldest me that which Mariyah had done with
thee, Allah uprooted the love of her from out my heart, and never
again will she occur to my thought; so extolled be He who turneth
hearts and eyes! 'Twas she who was the cause of my coming out
from Al-Yaman, and now the time is past for which I engaged with
my folk and I fear lest my father levy his forces and ride forth
in quest of me, for that he hath no child other than myself nor
can he brook to be parted from me; and in like way 'tis with my
mother." When the nurse heard his words, she asked him, "O my
lord, and which of the kings is thy sire?" He answered, saying,
"My father is Al-Aziz, lord of Al-Yaman, and Nubia and the
Islands[FN#392] of the Banu Kahtán, and the Two
Sanctuaries[FN#393] (Allah of All-might have them in His
keeping!), and whenever he taketh horse, there ride with him an
hundred and twenty and four thousand horsemen, each and every
smiters with the sword, besides attendants and servants and
followers, all of whom give ear to my word and obey my bidding."
Asked the nurse, "Why, then, O my lord, didst thou conceal the
secret of thy rank and lineage and passedst thyself off for a
foreigner and a wayfarer? Alas for our disgrace before thee by
reason of our shortcoming in rendering thee thy due! What shall
be our excuse with thee, and thou of the sons of the kings?" But
he rejoined, "By Allah, thou hast not fallen short! Indeed, 'tis
incumbent on me to requite thee, what while I live, though from
thee I be far distant." Then he called his man Amir and said to
him, "Saddle the steeds." When the nurse heard his words and
indeed she saw that Amir brought him the horses and they were
resolved upon departure, the tears ran down upon her cheeks and
she said to him, "By Allah, thy separation is saddening to me, O
coolth of the eye!" Then quoth she, "Where is the goal of thine
intent, so we may know thy news and solace ourselves with thy
report?" Quoth he, "I go hence to visit 'Akíl, the son of my
paternal uncle, for that he hath his sojourn in the camp of
Kundah bin Hishám, and these twenty years have I not seen him nor
hath he seen me; so I purpose to repair to him and discover his
news and return. Then will I go hence to Al-Yaman, Inshallah!" So
saying, he took leave of the nurse and her husband and set out,
intending for 'Akil, the son of his father's brother. Now there
was between Baghdad and 'Akíl's abiding-place forty days'
journey; so Al-Abbas settled himself on the back of his steed and
his servant Amir mounted also and they fared forth on their way.
Presently, Al-Abbas turned right and left and recited these
couplets,

"I'm the singular knight and my peers I slay! * I lay low the foe
     and his whole array:
I fare me to visit my friend Al-Akíl, * And in safety and
     Allah-lauds,[FN#394] shorten the way;
And roll up the width of the wold while still * Hears 'Amir my
     word or in earnest or play.[FN#395]
I spring with the spring of a lynx or a pard * Upon whoso dareth
     our course to stay;
O'erthrow him in ruin and abject shame, * Make him drain the
     death-cup in fatal fray.
My lance is long with its steely blade; * A brand keen-grided,
     thin-edged I sway:
With a stroke an it fell on a towering hill * Of the hardest
     stone, this would cleave in tway:
I lead no troops, nor seek aid save God's, * The creating Lord
     (to whom laud alwày!)
On Whom I rely in adventures all * And Who pardoneth lâches of
     freeman and thrall."

Then they fell a-faring night and day, and as they went, behold,
they sighted a camp of the camps of the Arabs. So Al-Abbas
enquired thereof and was told that it was the camp of the Banu
Zohrah. Now there were around them herds and flocks, such as
filled the earth, and they were enemies to Al-Akil, the cousin of
Al-Abbas, upon whom they made daily raids and took his cattle,
wherefore he used to pay them tribute every year because he
lacked power to cope wth them. When Al-Abbas came to the skirts
of the camp, he dismounted from his destrier and his servant Amir
also dismounted; and they set down the provaunt and ate their
sufficiency and rested an hour of the day. Then said the Prince
to his page, "Fetch water from the well and give the horses to
drink and draw up a supply for us in thy bag,[FN#396] by way of
provision for the road." So Amir took the water-skin and made for
the well; but, when he came there, behold, two young men slaves
were leading gazelles, and when they saw him, they said to him,
"Whither wendest thou, O youth, and of which of the Arabs art
thou?" Quoth he, "Harkye, lads, fill me my water-skin, for that I
am a stranger astray and a farer of the way, and I have a comrade
who awaiteth me." Quoth the thralls, "Thou art no wayfarer, but a
spy from Al-Akíl's camp." Then they took him and carried him to
their king Zuhayr bin Shabib; and when he came before him, he
said to him, "Of which of the Arabs art thou?" Quoth Amir, "I am
a wayfarer." So Zuhayr said, "Whence comest thou and whither
wendest thou?" and Amir replied, "I am on my way to Al-Akíl."
When he named Al-Akíl, those who were present were excited; but
Zuhayr signed to them with his eyes and asked him, "What is thine
errand with Al-Akíl?" and he answered, "We would fain see him, my
friend and I." As soon as Zuhayr heard his words, he bade smite
his neck;' but his Wazir said to him, "Slay him not, till his
friend be present." So he commanded the two slaves to fetch his
friend; whereupon they repaired to Al-Abbas and called to him,
saying, "O youth, answer the summons of King Zuhayr." He
enquired, "What would the king with me?" and they replied, "We
know not." Quoth he, "Who gave the king news of me?" and quoth
they, "We went to draw water, and found a man by the well. So we
questioned him of his case, but he would not acquaint us
therewith, wherefore we carried him willy-nilly to King Zuhayr,
who asked him of his adventure and he told him that he was going
to Al-Akíl. Now Al-Akíl is the king's enemy and he intendeth to
betake himself to his camp and make prize of his offspring, and
cut off his traces." Said Al-Abbas, "And what hath Al-Akíl done
with King Zuhayr?" They replied. "He engaged for himself that he
would bring the King every year a thousand dinars and a thousand
she-camels, besides a thousand head of thoroughbred steeds and
two hundred black slaves and fifty hand-maids; but it hath
reached the king that Al-Akíl purposeth to give naught of this;
wherefore he is minded to go to him. So hasten thou with us, ere
the King be wroth with thee and with us." Then said Al-Abbas to
them, "O youths, sit by my weapons and my stallion till I
return." But they said, "By Allah, thou prolongest discourse with
that which beseemeth not of words! Make haste, or we will go with
thy head, for indeed the King purposeth to slay thee and to slay
thy comrade and take that which is with you." When the Prince
heard this, his skin bristled with rage and he cried out at them
with a cry which made them tremble. Then he sprang upon his horse
and settling himself in the saddle, galloped till he came to the
King's assembly, when he shouted at the top of his voice, saying,
"To horse, O horsemen!" and couched his spear at the pavilion
wherein was Zuhayr. Now there were about the King a thousand
smiters with the sword; but Al-Abbas charged home upon them and
dispersed them from around him; and there abode none in the tent
save Zuhayr and hi