rought him up. Later on he became one of the officers of state
with his own father, who had in the meanwhile found another
kingdom, and decided with fairness, the cases brought before him.
He was, however, put in prison on account of a supposed attempt
on the king's life, and would have been put to death had he not
stayed the execution by telling various beautiful stories.  Even
the king came repeatedly to listen to him.  At one of these
visits Bakhtyár's foster-father Idrís was present, and related to
his adopted son how he had found him in the jungle.  The king, on
hearing this, perceived that it was his son who had been brought
up by Idrís, recognised Bakhtyár as such, as made over to him the
kingdom."--I have little doubt that this romance is of Indian
extraction.




     STORY OF KING DADBIN AND HIS WAZIRS.--Vol. XI. p. 68.



This agrees pretty closely with the Turkí version of the same
story (rendered into French by M. Jaubert), though in the latter
the names of the characters are the same as in the Persian, King
Dádín and the Wazírs Kámgár and Kárdár.  In the Persian story,
the damsel is tied hands and feet and placed upon a camel, which
is then turned into a dreary wilderness.  "Here she suffered from
the intense heat and from thirst; but she resigned herself to the
will of Providence, conscious of her own innocence.  Just then
the camel lay down, and on the spot a fountain of delicious water
suddenly sprang forth; the cords which bound her hands and feet
dropped off; she refreshed herself by a draught of the water, and
fervently returned thanks to Heaven for this blessing and her
wonderful preservation."  This two-fold miracle does not appear
in the Turkí and Arabian versions.  It is not the cameleer of the
King of Persia, but of King Dádín, who meets with the pious
damsel in the wilderness.  He takes her to his own house and one
day relates his adventure to King Dádín, who expresses a wish to
see such a prodigy of sanctity.  The conclusion of the Persian
story is quite dramatic: The cameleer, having consented, returned
at once to his house, accompanied by the king, who waited at the
door of the apartment where the daughter of Kámgár was engaged in
prayer.  When she had concluded he approached, and with
astonishment recognised her.  Having tenderly embraced her, he
wept, and entreated her forgiveness.  This she readily granted,
but begged that he would conceal himself in the apartment while
she should converse with Kárdár, whom she sent for.  When he
arrived, and beheld her with a thousand expressions of fondness,
he inquired how she had escaped, and told her that on the day the
king had banished her into the wilderness, he had sent people to
seek her and bring her to him.  "How much better would it have
been," he added, "had you followed my advice, and agreed to my
proposal of poisoning the king, who, I said, would one day
destroy you as he had done your father!  But you rejected my
advice, and declared yourself ready to submit to whatever
Providence should decree.  Hereafter you will pay more attention
to my words.  But now let us not think of what is past.  I am
your slave, and you are dearer to me than my own eyes."  So
saying, he attempted to clasp the daughter of Kámgár in his arms,
when the king, who was concealed behind the hangings, rushed
furiously on him and put him to death.  After this he conducted
the damsel to his palace, and constantly lamented his
precipitancy in having killed her father.--This tale seems to
have been taken from the Persian "Tútí Náma," or Parrot-book,
composed by Nahkshabí about the year 1306;[FN#486] it occurs in
the 51st Night of the India Office MS. 2573, under the title of
"Story of the Daughter of the Vazír Khássa, and how she found
safety through the blessing of her piety:"  the name of the king
is Bahram, and the Wazírs are called Khássa and Khalássa.




       STORY OF AYLAN SHAH AND ABÚ TAMMÁM--Vol. XI p. 82.



The catastrophe of this story forms the subject of the Lady's
37th tale in the text of the Turkish "Forty Vezírs," translated
by Mr. E. J. W. Gibb.  This is how it goes:

In the palace of the world there was a king, and that king had
three vezírs, but there was rivalry between them.  Two of them
day and night incited the king against the third, saying, "He is
a traitor."  But the king believed them not.  At length they
promised two pages much gold, and instructed them thus: "When the
king has lain down, ere he yet fall asleep, do ye feign to think
him asleep, and while talking with each other, say at a fitting
time, 'I have heard from such a one that yon vezír says this and
that concerning the king, and that he hates him; many people say
that vezír is an enemy to our king.'"  So they did this, and when
the king heard this, he said in his heart, "What those vezírs
said is then true; when the very pages have heard it somewhat it
must indeed have some foundation.  Till now, I believed not those
vezírs, but it is then true."  And the king executed that vezír.
The other vezírs were glad and gave the pages the gold they had
promised.  So they took it and went to a private place, and while
they were dividing it one of them said, "I spake first; I want
more."  The other said, "If I had not said he was an enemy to our
king, the king would not have killed him; I shall take more."
And while they were quarrelling with one another the king passed
by there, and he listened attentively to their words, and when he
learned of the matter, he said, "Dost thou see, they have by a
trick made us kill that hapless vezír."  And he was repentant.




  STORY OF KING SULAYMAN SHAH AND HIS NIECE.--Vol. XI. p. 97.



The Persian original has been very considerably amplified by the
Arabian translator.  In the "Bakhtyár Náma" there is not a word
about the two brothers and their fair cousin, the attempted
murder of the infant, and the adventures of the fugitive young
prince.  This story has also been taken from the "Tútí Náma" of
Nakhshabú, Night the 50th of the Indian Office MS. 2573, where,
under the title of "Story of the Daughter of the Kaysar of Roum,
and her trouble by reason of her son," it is told somewhat as
follows:

In former times there was a great king, whose army was numerous
and whose treasury was full to overflowing; but, having no enemy
to contend with, he neglected to pay his soldiers, in consequence
of which they were in a state of destitution and discontent.  At
length one day the soldiers went to the prime minister and made
their condition known to him.  The vazír promised that he would
speedily devise a plan by which they should have employment and
money.  Next morning he presented himself before the king, and
said that it was widely reported the Kaysar of Rou, had a
daughter unsurpassed for beauty--one who was fit only for such a
great monarch as his Majesty; and suggested that it would be
advantageous if an alliance were formed between two such great
potentates.  The notion pleased the king well, and he forthwith
despatched to Roum an ambassador with rich gifts, and requested
the Kaysar to grant him his daughter in marriage.  But the Kaysar
waxed wroth at this, and refused to give his daughter to the
king.  When the ambassador returned thus unsuccessful, the king,
enraged at being made of no account, resolved to make war upon
the Kaysar; so, opening the doors of his treasury, he distributed
much money among his troops, and then, "with a woe-bringing host,
and a blood-drinking army, he trampled Roum and the folk of Roum
in the dust."  And when the Kaysar was become powerless, he sent
his daughter to the king, who married her according to the law of
Islam.

Now that princess had a son by a former husband, and the Kaysar
had said to her before she departed, "Beware that thou mention
not thy son, for my love for his society is great, and I cannot
part with him."[FN#487]  But the princess was sick at heart for
the absence of her son, and she was ever pondering how she should
speak to the king about him, and in what manner she might
contrive to bring him to her.  It happened one day the king gave
her a string of pearls and a casket of jewels.  She said, "With
my father is a slave who is well skilled in the science of
jewels."  The king replied, "If I should ask that slave of thy
father, would he give him to me?"  "Nay," said she, "for he holds
him in the place of a son.  But if the king desire him, I will
send a merchant to Roum, and I myself will give him a token, and
with pleasant wiles and fair speeches will bring him hither."
Then the king sent for a clever merchant who knew Arabic
eloquently and the language of Roum, and gave him goods for
trading and sent him to Roum with the object of procuring the
slave.  But the daughter of the Kaysar said privily to the
merchant, "That slave is my son; I have, for a good reason, said
to the king that he is a slave; so thou must bring him as a
slave, and let it be thy duty to take care of him."  In due
course the merchant brought the youth to the king's service; and
when the king saw his fair face, and discovered in him many
pleasing and varied accomplishments, he treated him with
distinction and favour, and conferred on the merchant a robe of
honour and gifts.  His mother saw him from afar, and was pleased
with receiving a secret salutation from him.

One day the eking had gone to the chase, and the palace remained
void of rivals; so the mother called in her son, kissed his fair
face, and told him the tale of her great sorrow.  A chamberlain
became aware of the secret and another suspicion fell upon him,
and he said to himself, "The harem of the king is the sanctuary
of security and the palace of protection.  If I speak not of
this, I shall be guilty of treachery and shall have wrought
unfaithfulness."  When the king returned from the chase, the
chamberlain related to him what he had seen, and the eking was
angry and said, "This woman hath deceived me with words and
deeds, and has brought hither her desire by craft and cunning.
This conjecture must be true, else why did she play such a trick?
And why did she hatch such a plot?  And why did she send the
merchant?"  Then the king, enraged, went into the harem, and the
queen saw from his countenance that the occurrence of the night
before had become known to him, and she said, "Be it not that I
see the king angry?"  He said, "How should I not be angry?  Thou,
by craft and trickery, and intrigue, and plotting, hast brought
thy desire from Roum--what wantonness is this that thou hast
done?"  And then he thought to slay her, but he forbore, because
of his great love for her.  But he ordered the chamberlain to
carry the youth to some obscure place, and straightway sever his
head from his body.  When the poor mother saw this, she well-nigh
fell on her face, and her soul was near leaving her body.  But
she knew that sorry would not avail, and so she restrained
herself.

And when the chamberlain took the youth into his own house, he
said to him, "O youth, knowest thou not that the harem of the
king is the sanctuary of security?  What great treachery is this
that thou hast perpetrated?"  The youth replied, "That queen is
my mother, and I am her true son.  Because of her natural
delicacy, she said not to the king that she had a son by another
husband.  And when yearning came over her, she contrived to bring
me here from Roum; and while the king was engaged in the chase,
maternal love stirred in her, and she called me to her and
embraced me."  On hearing this, the chamberlain said to himself,
"What is passing in his mother's breast?  What have I not done I
can yet do, and it were better that I preserve this youth some
days, for such a rose may not be wounded through idle words, and
such a bough may not be broken by a breath.  For some day the
truth of this matter will be disclosed, and it will become known
to the king when repentance may be of no avail."  So he went
before the king and said, "That which was commanded have I
fulfilled."  On hearing this the king's wrath was to some extent
removed but his trust in the Kaysar's daughter was departed;
while she, poor creature, was grieved and dazed at the loss of
her son.

Now in the palace-harem there was an old woman, who said to the
queen, "How is it that I find thee sorrowful?"  And the queen
told the whole story, concealing nothing.  This old woman was a
heroine in the field of craft, and she answered, "Keep thy mind
at ease; I will devise a stratagem by which the heart of the king
will be pleased with thee, and every grief he has will vanish
from his heart."  The queen said that, if she did so, she should
be amply rewarded.  One day the old woman, seeing the king alone,
said to him, "Why is thy former aspect altered?  And why are
there traces of care and anxiety visible on thy countenance?"
The king then told her all.  Then said the old woman, "I have an
amulet of the charms of Sulayman, in the Syriac language, and in
the writing of the jinn (genii).  When the queen is asleep, do
thou place it on her breast, and whatever it may be, she will
tell the truth of it.  But take care, fall not asleep, but listen
well to what she says."  The king wondered at this and said,
"Give me that amulet, that the truth of this matter may be
learned."  So the old woman gave him the amulet, and then went to
the queen and explained what she had done, and said, "Do thou
feign to be asleep, and relate the whole of thy story
faithfully."

When a watch of the night was past, the king laid the amulet upon
his wife's breast, and she thus began: "By a former husband I had
a son, and when my father gave me to this king, I was ashamed to
say I had a tall son.  When my yearning passed all bounds, I
brought him here by an artifice.  One day that the king was gone
to the chase I called him into the house, when, after the way of
mothers, I took him in my arms and kissed him.  This reached the
king's ears; he unwittingly gave it another construction, and cut
off the head of that innocent boy, and withdrew from me his own
heart.  Alike is my son lost to me and the king angry."  When the
king heard these words he kissed her and exclaimed, "O my life,
what an error is this thou hast committed?  Thou hast brought
calumny upon thyself, and hast given such a son to the winds, and
hast made me ashamed!"  Straightway he called the chamberlain,
and said, "That boy whom thou hast killed is the son of my
beloved and the darling of my beauty! Where is his grave, that we
may make there a guest-house?"  The chamberlain said, "That youth
is yet alive.  When the king commanded his death, I was about to
kill him, but he said, 'That queen is my mother.  Through modesty
before the king, she revealed not the secret that she has a tall
son.  Kill me not; it may be that some day the truth will become
known, and repentance profiteth not, and regret is useless."  The
king commanded them to bring the youth; so they brought him
forthwith.  And when the mother saw the face of her son, she
thanked God and praised the Most High, and became one of the
Muslims, and from the sect of unbelievers came into the faith of
Islam.  And the king favoured the chamberlain in the highest
degree, and they passed the rest of their lives in comfort and
ease.




             FIRUZ AND HIS WIFE.--Vol. XI. p. 125.



This tale, as Sir R. F. Burton remarks, is a rechauffé of that of
the King and the Wazir's Wife in the "Malice of Women," or the
Seven Wazírs (vol. vi. 129); and at p. 308 we have yet another
variant.[FN#488]  it occurs in all the Eastern texts of the Book
of Sindibád, and it is commonly termed by students of that cycle
of stories "The Lion's Track," from the parabolical manner in
which the husband justifies his conduct before the king.  I have
cited some versions in the Appendix to my edition of the Book of
Sindibád (p. 256 ff.), and to these may be added the following
Venetian variant, from Crane's "Italian Popular Tales," as an
example of how a story becomes garbled in passing orally from one
generation unto another generation.

A king, averse from marriage, commanded his steward to remain
single.  The latter, however, one day saw a beautiful girl named
Vigna and married her secretly.  Although he kept her closely
confined in her chamber, the king became suspicious, and sent the
steward on an embassy.  After his departure the king entered the
apartment occupied by him, and saw his wife asleep.  He did not
disturb her, but in leaving the room accidentally dropped one of
his gloves on the bed.  When the husband returned he found the
glove, but kept a discreet silence, ceasing, however, all
demonstration of affection, believing his wife had been
unfaithful.  The king, desirous to see again the beautiful woman,
made a feast and ordered the steward to bring his wife.  He
denied that he had one, but brought her at last, and while every
one else was talking gaily at the feast she was silent.  The king
observed it and asked the cause of her silence, and she answered
with a pun on her own name, "Vineyard I was, and Vineyard I am.
I was loved and no longer am. I know not for what reason the
Vineyard has lost its season." Her husband, who heard this,
replied, "Vineyard thou wast, and Vineyard thou art: the Vineyard
lost its season, for the lion's claw."  The king, who understood
what he meant, answered, "I entered the Vineyard; I touched the
leaves; but I swear by my crown that I have not tasted the
fruit."  Then the steward understood that his wife was innocent,
and the two made peace, and always after lived happy and
contented.

So far as I am aware, this tale of "The Lion's Track" is not
popularly known in any European country besides Italy; and it is
not found in any of the Western versions of the Book of Sindibád,
generally known under the title of the "History of the Seven Wise
Masters," how, then, did it reach Venice, and become among the
people "familiar in their mouths as household words?"  I answer,
that the intimate commercial relations which long existed between
the Venetian Republic and Egypt and Syria are amply sufficient to
account for the currency of this and scores of other Eastern
tales in Italy.  This is not one of those fictions introduced
into the south of Europe through the Ottomans, since Boccaccio
has made use of the first part of it in his "Decameron," Day I.
nov. 5; and it is curious to observe that the garbled Venetian
popular version has preserved the chief characteristic of the
Eastern story--the allegorical reference to the king as a lion
and his assuring the husband that the lion had done no injury to
his "Vineyard."




   KING SHAH BAKHT AND HIS WAZIR AL-RAHWAN.--Vol. XI. p. 127.



While the frame-story of this interesting group is similar to
that of the Ten Wazírs (vol. i. p. 37), insomuch as in both a
king's favourite is sentenced to death in consequence of the
false accusations of his enemies, and obtains a respite from day
to day by relating stories to the king, there is yet a very
important difference: Like those of the renowned Shahrazad, the
stories which Al-Rahwan tells have no particular, at least no
uniform, "purpose," his sole object being to prolong his life by
telling the king an entertaining story, promising, when he has
ended his recital, to relate one still "stranger" the next night,
if the king will spare his life another day.  On the other hand,
Bakhtyár, while actuated by the same motive, appeals to the
king's reason, by relating stories distinctly designed to exhibit
the evils of hasty judgements and precipitate conduct--in fact,
to illustrate the maxim,

     Each order given by a reigning king,
          Should after long reflection be expressed;
     For it may be that endless woe will spring
          From a command he paused not to digest.

And in this respect they are consistent with the circumstances of
the case, like the tales of the Book of Sindibád, from which the
frame of the Ten Wazírs was imitated, and in which the Wazírs
relate stories showing the depravity and profligacy of women and
that no reliance should be placed on their unsupported
assertions, and to these the lady opposes equally cogent stories
setting forth the wickedness and perfidy of men.  Closely
resembling the frame-story of the Ten Wazírs, however, is that of
a Tamil romance entitled, "Alakeswara Kathá," a copy of which,
written on palm leaves, was in the celebrated Mackenzie
collection, of which Dr. H. H. Wilson published a descriptive
catalogue; it is "a story of the Rájá of Alakespura and his four
ministers, who, being falsely accused of violating the sanctity
of the inner apartments, vindicate their innocence and disarm the
king's wrath by relating a number of stories."  Judging by the
specimen given by Wilson, the well-known tale of the Lost Camel,
it seems probable that the ministers' stories, like those of
Bakhtyár, are suited to their own case and illustrate the truth
of the adage that "appearances are often deceptive."  Whether in
the Siamese collection "Nonthuk Pakkaranam" (referred to in vol.
i. p. 127) the stories related by the Princess Kankras to the
King of Pataliput (Palibothra), to save her father's life, are
similarly designed, does not appear from Benfey's notice of the
work in his paper in "Orient and Occident," iii. 171 ff.  He says
that the title of the book, "Nonthuk Pakkaranam," is taken from
the name of a wise ox, Nonthuk, that plays the principal part in
the longest of the tales, which are all apparently translated
from the Sanskrit, in which language the title would be Nandaka
Prakaranam, the History of Nandaka.

Most of the tales related by the wazir Al-Rahwan are not only in
themselves entertaining, but are of very considerable importance
from the story-comparer's point of view, since in this group
occur Eastern forms of tales which were known in Italy in the
14th century, and some had spread over Europe even earlier.  The
reader will have seen from Sir R. F. Burton's notes that not a
few of the stories have their parallels or analogues in countries
far apart, and it is interesting to find four of them which
properly belong to the Eastern texts of the Book of Sindibad,
with the frame-story of which that of this group has so close an
affinity.




         THE ART OF ENGARGING PEARLS.--Vol. XI. p.131.



"Quoth she, I have a bangle; sell it and buy seed pearls with the
                     price; then round them
              and fashion them into great pearls."

For want of a more suitable place, I shall here reproduce an
account of the "Method of making false pearls" (nothing else
being meant in the above passage), cited, from Post. Com. Dict.
In vol. xxvi. Of Rees' Cyclopaedia," London, 1819:

"Take of thrice distilled vinegar two pounds, Venice turpentine
one pound, mix them together into a mass and put them into a
cucurbit, fit a head and receiver to it, and after you have luted
the joints set it when dry on a sand furnace, to distil the
vinegar from it; do not give it too much heat, lest the stuff
swell up.  After this put the vinegar into another glass cucurbit
in which there is a quantity of seed pearls wrapped in a piece of
thin silk, but so as not to touch the vinegar; put a cover or
head upon the cucurbit, lute it well and put it in bal. Mariæ,
where you may let it remain a fortnight.  The heat of the balneum
will raise the fumes of the vinegar, and they will soften the
pearls in the silk and bring them to the consistence of a paste,
which being done, take them out and mould them to what bigness,
form, and shape you please.  Your mould must be of fine silver,
the inside gilt; you must also refrain from touching the paste
with your fingers, but use silver-gilt utensils, with which fill
your moulds.  When they are moulded, bore them through with a
hog's bristle or gold wire, and then tread them again on gold
wire, and put them into a glass, close it up, and set them in the
sun to dry.  After they are thoroughly dry, put them in a glass
matrass into a stream of running water and leave them there
twenty days; by that time they will contract the natural hardness
and solidity of pearls.  Then take them out of th matrass and
hang them in mercurial water, where they will moisten, swell, and
assume their Oriental beauty; after which shift them into a
matrass hermitically closed to prevent any water coming to them,
and let it down into a well, to continue there about eight days.
Then draw the matrass up, and in opening it you will find pearls
exactly resembling Oriental ones."  (Here follows a recipe for
making the mercurial water used in the process, with which I need
not occupy more space.)

A similar formula, "To make of small pearls a necklace of large
ones," is given in the "Lady's Magazine" for 1831, vol. iv., p.
119, which is said to be extracted from a scarce old book.  Thus,
whatever mystery may surround the art is Asiatic countreis there
is evidently none about it in Europe.  The process appears to be
somewhat tedious and complicated, but is doubtless profitable.

In Philostratus' Life of Appolonius there is a curious passage
about pearl-making which has been generally considered as a mere
"traveller's tale":  Apollonious relates that the inhabitants of
the shores of the Red Sea, after having calmed the water by means
of oil, dived after the shell-fish, enticed them with some bait
to open their shells, and having pricked the animals with a
sharp-pointed instrument, received the liquor that flowed from
them in small holes made in an iron vessel, in which is hardened
into real pearls.--It is stated by several reputable writers that
the Chinese do likewise at the present day.  And Sir R. F. Burton
informs me that when he was on the coast of Midian he found the
Arabs were in the habit of "growing" pearls by inserting a grain
of sand into the shells.




         THE SINGER AND THE DRUGGIST.--Vol. XI. p. 136.



The diverting adventures related in the first part of this tale
should be of peculiar interest to the student of Shakspeare as
well as to those engaged in tracing the genealogy of popular
fiction.  Jonathan Scott has given--for reasons of his own--a
meagre abstract of a similar tale which occurs in the "Bahár-i-
Dánish" (vol. iii. App., p. 291), as follows:


                        PERSIAN VERSION

A young man, being upon business in a certain city, goes on a
hunting excursion, and, fatigued with the chase, stops at a
country house to ask refreshment.  The lady of the mansion
receives him kindly, and admits him as her lover.  In the midst
of their dalliance the husband comes home, and the young man had
no recourse to escape discovery but to jump into a basin which
was in the court of the house, and stand with head in a hollow
gourd that happened to be in the water.  The husband, surprised
to see the gourd stationary in the water, which was itself
agitated by the wind, throws a stone at it, when the lover slips
from beneath it and holds his breath till almost suffocated.
Fortunately, the husband presently retires with his wife into an
inner room of the house, and thus the young man was enabled to
make good his escape.

The next day he relates his adventure before a large company at a
coffee-house.  The husband happens to be one of the audience,
and, meditating revenge, pretends to admire the gallantry of the
young man and invites him to his home.  The lover accompanies
him, and on seeing his residence is overwhelmed with confusion;
but, recovering himself, resolves to abide all hazards, in hopes
of escaping by some lucky stratagem.  His host introduces him to
his wife, and begs him to relate his merry adventure before her,
having resolved, when he should finish, to put them both to
death.  The young man complies, but with an artful presence of
mind exclaims at the conclusion, "Glad was I when I awoke from so
alarming a dream."  The husband upon this, after some questions,
is satisfied that he had only told his dream, and, having
entertained him nobly, dismisses him kindly.

This story is told in an elaborate form by Ser Giovanni
Fiorentino, in "Il Pecorone" (The Big Sheep, or, as Dunlop has
it, The Dunce), which was begun in 1378 but not published till
1554 (at Milan).  It is the second novel of the First Day and has
been thus translated by Roscoe:


                     SER GIOVANNI'S VERSION

There were once two very intimate friends, both of the family of
Saveli, in Rome; the name of one of whom was Bucciolo; that of
the other Pietro Paolo, both of good birth and easy
circumstances.  Expressing a mutual wish to study for a while
together at Bologna they took leave of their relatives and set
out.  One of them attached himself to the study of the civil law,
the other to that of the canon law, and thus they continued to
apply themselves for some length of time.  But the subject of
Decretals takes a much narrower range than is embraced by the
common law, so Bucciolo, who pursued the former, made greater
progress than did Pietro Paolo, and, having taken a licentiate's
degree, he began to think of returning to Rome.  "You see, my
dear fellow student," he observed to his friend Paolo, "I am now
a licentiate, and it is time for me to think of moving
homewards."  "Nay, not so," replied his companion; "I have to
entreat you will not think of leaving me here this winter.  Stay
for me till spring, and we can return together.  In the meantime
you may pursue some other study, so that you need not lose any
time;" and to this Bucciolo at length consented, promising to
await his relative's own good time.

Having thus resolved, he had immediate recourse to his former
tutor, informing him of his determination to bear his friend
company a little longer, and entreating to be employed in some
pleasant study to beguile the period during which he had to
remain.  The professor begged him to suggest something he should
like, as he should be very happy to assist him in its attainment.
"My worthy tutor," replied Bucciolo, "I think I should like to
learn the way in which one falls in love, and the best manner to
begin."  "O very good!" cried the tutor, laughing.  "You could
not have hit upon anything better, for you must know that, if
such be your object, I am a complete adept in the art.  To lose
no time, in the first place go next Sunday to the church of the
Frati Minori (Friars Minor of St. Francis), where all the ladies
will be clustered together, and pay proper attention during
service in order to discover if any one of them in particular
happens to please you.  When you have done this, keep your eye
upon her after service, to see the way she takes to her
residence, and then come back to me.  And let this be the first
lesson--the first part--of that in which it is my intention to
instruct you."  Bucciolo went accordingly, and taking his station
the next Sunday in the church, as he had been directed, his eyes,
wandering in every direction, were fixed upon all the pretty
women in the place, and upon one in particular, who pleased him
above all the rest.  She was by far the most beautiful and
attractive lady he could discover, and on leaving church he took
care to obey his master and follow her until he had made himself
acquainted with her residence.  Nor was it long before the young
lady began to perceive that the student was smitten with her;
upon which Bucciolo returned to his master and informed him of
what he had done.  "I have," said he, "learned as much as you
ordered me, and have found somebody I like very well."  "So far,
good," cried the professor, not a little amused at the sort of
science to which his pupil had thus seriously devoted himself--
"so far, good!  And now observe what I have next to say to you:
Take care to walk two or three times a day very respectfully
before her house, casting your eyes about you in such a way that
no one may catch you staring in her face; look in a modest and
becoming manner, so that she cannot fail to notice and be struck
with it.  And then return to me; and this, sir, will be the
second lesson in this gay science."

So the scholar went and promenaded with great discretion before
the lady's door, who observed that he appeared to be passing to
and fro out of respect to one of the inhabitants.  This attracted
her attention, for which Bucciolo very discreetly expressed his
gratitude by looks and bows, which being as often returned, the
scholar began to be aware that the lady liked him.  He
immediately went and told the professor all that had passed, who
replied, "Come, you have done very well.  I am hitherto quite
satisfied.  It is now time for you to find some way of speaking
to her, which you may easily do by means of those gipsies who
haunt the streets of Bologna, crying ladies' veils, purses and
other articles for sale.  Send word by her that you are the
lady's most faithful, devoted servant, and that there is no one
in the world you so much wish to please.  In short, let her urge
your suit, and take care to bring the answer to me as soon as you
have received it.  I will then tell you how you are to proceed."

Departing in all haste, he soon found a little old pedlar woman,
quite perfect in the trade, to whom he said he should take it as
a particular favour if she would do one thing, for which he would
reward her handsomely.  Upon this she declared her readiness to
serve him in anything he pleased.  "For you know," she added, "it
is my business to get money in every way I can."  Bucciolo gave
her two florins, saying, ‘I wish you to go for me to-day as far
as the Via Maccarella, where resides a young lady of the name of
Giovanna, for whom I have the very highest regard.  Pray tell her
so, and recommend me to her most affectionately, so as to obtain
for me her good graces by every means in your power.  I entreat
you to have my interest at heart, and to say such pretty things
as she cannot refuse to hear."  "O leave that to me, sir," said
the little old woman, "I will not fail to say a good word for you
at the proper time."  "Delay not," said Bucciolo, "but go now,
and I will wait for you here;" and she set off at once, taking
her basket of trinkets under her arm.  On approaching the place,
she saw the lady before the door, enjoying the air and curtseying
to her very low, "Do I happen to have anything here you would
fancy?" she said, displaying her wares.  "Pray, take something,
madam--whatever pleases you best."  Veils, stays, purses, and
mirrors were now spread in the most tempting way before the
lady's eyes.  Out of all these things her attention seemed to be
most attracted by a beautiful purse, which, she observed, if she
could afford, she should like to purchase. "Nay, madam,"
exclaimed the crone, "do not think anything about the price--take
anything yo please, since they are all paid for already, I assure
you."  Surprised at hearing this, and perceiving the very
respectful manner of the speaker, the lady rejoined, "Do you know
what you are saying?  What do you mean by that?"  The old woman,
pretending now to be much affected, said, "Well, madam, if it
must be so, I shall tell you.  It is very true that a young
gentleman of the name of Bucciolo sent me hither; one who loves
you better than all the world besides.  There is nothing he would
not do to please you, and indeed he appears to very wretched
because he cannot speak to you, and he is so very good, that it
is quite a pity.  I think it will be the death of him, and then
he is such a fine--such an elegant--young man, the more is the
pity!"  on hearing this, the lady, blushing deeply, turned
sharply round upon the little old woman, exclaiming, "O you
wicked creature! were it not for the sake of my own reputation, I
would give you such a lesson that you should remember it to the
latest day of your life!  A pretty story to come before decent
people with! Are you not ashamed of yourself to let such words
come out of your mouth?"  then seizing an iron bar that lay
across the doorway, "Ill betide you, little wretch!" she cried,
as she brandished it.  "If you ever come this way again, depend
on it, you will never go back alive!"  the trembling old trot,
quickly bundling up her wares, scampered off, in dread of feeling
that cruel weapon on her shoulders, nor did she think of stopping
till she had reached the place where Bucciolo stood waiting her
return.  Eagerly inquiring the news and how she succeeded, "O
very badly--very badly," answered the crone.  "I was never in
such a fright in all my life.  Why, she will neither see nor
listen to you, and if I had not run away, I should have felt the
weight of a great iron bar upon my shoulders.  For my own part, I
shall go there no more; and I advise you, signor, to look to
yourself how you proceed in such affairs in future."

Poor Bucciolo became quite disconsolate, and returned in all
haste to acquaint the professor with this unlucky result.  But
the professor, not a whit cast down, consoled him, saying, "Do
not despair; a tree is not levelled at a single stroke, you know.
I think you must have a repetition of your lesson to-night.  So
go and walk before her door as usual; notice how she eyes you,
and whether she appears angry or not, and then come back again to
me."  Bucciolo accordingly proceeded without delay to the lady's
house.  The moment she perceived him she called her maid and said
to her, "Quick, quick--hasten after the young man--that is he,
and tell him from me that he must come and speak with me this
evening without fail--without fail."  The girl soon came up with
Bucciolo and thus addressed him: "My lady, signor, my lady,
Giovanna, would be glad of your company this evening, she would
be very glad to speak with you."  Greatly surprised at this,
Bucciolo replied, "Tell your lady I shall be most happy to wait
upon her," so saying, he set off once more to the professor, and
reported the progress of the affair.  But this time the master
looked a little more serious; for, from some trivial
circumstances put together, he began to entertain suspicions that
the lady was (as it really turned out) no other than his own
wife.  So he rather anxiously inquired of Bucciolo whether he
intended to accept the invitation.  "To be sure I do," replied
his pupil.  "Then," said the professor, "promise that you will
come here before you set off."  "Certainly I will," answered
Bucciolo readily, and took his leave.

Now Bucciolo was far from suspecting that the lady bore so near a
relationship to his respected tutor, although the latter began to
be rather uneasy as to the result, feeling some twinges of
jealousy which were by no means pleasant.  For he passed most of
his winter evenings at the college where he gave lectures, and
not unfrequently remained there for the night.  "I should be
sorry," said he to himself, "if this young gentleman were
learning these things at my expense, and I must therefore know
the real state of the case."  In the evening his pupil called
according to promise, saying, "Worthy master, I am now ready to
go."  "Well, go," replied the professor; "but be wise, Signor
Bucciolo--be wise and think more than once what you are about."
"Trust me for that," said the scholar, a little piqued: "I shall
go well provided, and not walk into the mouth of danger unarmed."
And away he went, furnished with a good cuirass, a rapier, and a
stiletto in his belt.  He was no sooner on his way than the
professor slipped out quietly after him, dogging his steps
closely, until, trembling with rage, he saw him stop at his own
house-door, which, on a smart tap being given, was quickly opened
by the lady herself and the pupil admitted.  When the professor
saw that it was indeed his own wife, he was quite overwhelmed and
thought, "Alas, I fear this young fellow has learned more than he
confesses at my expense;" and vowing to be revenged, he ran back
to the college, where arming himself with sword and dagger, he
then hastened to his house in a terrible passion. Arriving at his
own door, he knocked loudly, and the lady, sitting before the
fire with Bucciolo, instantly knew it was her husband, so taking
hold of Bucciolo, she concealed him hurriedly under a heap of
damp clothes lying on a table near the window for ironing, which
done, she ran to the door and inquired who was there.  "Open
quickly," exclaimed the professor.  "You vile woman, you shall
soon know who is here!"  On opening the door, she beheld him with
a drawn sword, and cried in well-affected alarm, "O my dearest
life, what means this?"  "You know very well what it means," said
he.  "The villain is now in the house."  "Good Heaven! what is
that you say?" exclaimed the lady.  "Are you gone out of your
wits? Come and search the house, and if you find anybody, I will
give you leave to kill me on the spot.  What! do you think I
should now begin to misconduct myself as I never before did – as
none of my family ever did before? Beware lest the Evil One
should be tempting you, and, suddenly depriving you of your
senses, draw you to perdition!"  But the professor, calling for
candles, began to search the house from the cellar upwards--among
the tubs and casks--in every place but the right place--running
his sword through the beds and under the beds, and into every
inch of the bedding--leaving no corner or crevice of the whole
house untouched.  The lady accompanied him with a candle in her
hand, frequently interrupting him with, "Say your beads--say your
beads, good signor; it is certain that the Evil One is dealing
with you, for were I half so bad as you esteem me, I would kill
myself with my own hands.  But I entreat you not to give way to
this evil suggestion: oppose the adversary while you can."
Hearing these virtuous observations of his wife, and not being
able to discover any one after the strictest search, the
professor began to think that he must, after all, be possessed,
and presently extinguished the lights and returned to the
college.  The lady, on shutting the door after him, called out to
Bucciolo to come from his hiding place, and then, stirring the
fire, began to prepare a fine capon for supper, with some
delicious wines and fruits.  And thus they regaled themselves,
highly entertained with each other, nor was it their least
satisfaction that the professor had just left them, apparently
convinced that they had learned nothing at his expense.

Proceeding to the college the next morning, Bucciolo, without the
least suspicion of the truth, informed his master that he had
something for his ear which he was sure would make him laugh.
"How so?" demanded the professor. "Why," said his pupil, "you
must know that last night, just as I had entered the lady's
house, who should come in but her husband, and in such a rage!
He searched the whole house from top to bottom, without being
able to find me.  I lay under a heap of newly-washed clothes,
which were not half dry.  In short, the lady placed her part so
well that the poor gentleman forthwith took his leave, and we
afterwards ate a fine capon for supper and drank such wines--and
with such zest!  It was really one of the pleasantest evenings I
ever spent in my life.  But I think I'll go and take a nap, for I
promised to return this evening about the same hour."  "Then be
sure before you go," said the professor, trembling with
suppressed rage, "be sure to come and tell me when you set out."
"O certainly," responded Bucciolo, and away he went.  Such was
now the unhappy tutor's condition as to render him incapable of
delivering a single lecture during the whole day, and such was
his extreme vexation and eagerness for evening, that he spent his
time in arming himself with sword and dagger and cuirass,
meditating only upon deeds of blood.  At the appointed time came
Bucciolo, with the utmost innocence, saying, "My dear master, I
am going now."  "Yes, go," replied the professor, "and come back
to-morrow morning, if you can, and tell me how you have fared."
"I intend doing so," said Bucciolo, and departed at a brisk pace
for the house of the lady.

Armed cap-à-pie, the professor ran out after him, keeping pretty
close to his heels, with the intention of catching him just as he
entered.  But the lady, being on the watch, opened the door
suddenly for the pupil and shut it in her husband's face.  The
professor began to knock and to call out with a furious noise.
Extinguishing the light in a moment, the lady placed Bucciolo
behind the door, and throwing her arms round her husband's neck
as he entered, motioned to her lover while thus she held his
enemy to make his escape, and he, upon the husband's rushing
forward, slipped out from behind the door unperceived.  She then
began to scream as loud as she could, "Help! Help! The professor
has gone mad! Will nobody help me?" for he was in an ungovernable
rage, and she clung faster to him than before.  The neighbors
running to her assistance and seeing the peaceable professor
armed with deadly weapons, and his wife crying out, "Help, for
the love of Heaven!--too much study hath driven him mad!"{ they
readily believed such to be the fact.  "Come, good signor," they
said, "what is all this about?  Try to compose yourself--nay, do
not struggle so hard, but let us help you to your couch."  "How
can I rest, think you," he replied, "while this wicked woman
harbours paramours in my house?  I saw him come in with my own
eyes."  "Wretch that I am!" cried his wife.  "inquire of all my
friends and neighbors whether any one of them ever saw anything
the least unbecoming in my conduct."  The whole party entreated
the professor to lay such thoughts aside, for there was not a
better lady breathing, or one who set a higher value upon her
reputation.  "But how can that be," said he, "when I saw him
enter the house, and he is in it now?"  in the meanwhile the
lady's two brothers arrived, when she began to weep bitterly,
exclaiming, "O my dear brothers, my poor husband has gone mad,
quite mad--and he even says there is a man in the house.  I
believe he would kill me if he could; but you know me too well to
listen for a moment to such a story," and she continued to weep.

The brothers then accosted the professor in no gentle terms:  "We
are surprised, signor--we are shocked to find that you dare
bestow such epithets on our sister.  What can have led you, after
living so amicably together, to bring these charges against her
now?" "I can only tell you," answered the professor, "that there
is a man in the house.  I saw him enter."  "Then come, and let us
find him.  Show him to us," retorted the incensed brothers, "for
we will sift this matter to the bottom.  Show us the man, and we
will then punish her in such a way as will satisfy you."  One of
the brothers, taking his sister aside, said, "First tell me, have
you really got any one hidden in the house? Tell the truth."
"Heavens!" cried his sister, "I tell you, I would rather suffer
death.  Should I be the first to bring a scandal on our house?  I
wonder you are not ashamed to mention such a thing."  Rejoiced to
hear this, the brothers, directed by the professor, at once
commenced a search.  Half frantic, he led them at once to the
great bundle of linen, which he pierced through and through with
his sword, firmly believing that he was killing Bucciolo, all the
while taunting him at every blow.  "There! I told you," cried his
wife, "that he was mad.  To think of destroying your own property
thus!  It is plain he did not help to get them up," she
continued, whimpering--"all my best clothes!"

Having now sought everywhere in vain, one of the brothers
observed, "He is indeed mad," to which the other agreed, while he
again attacked the professor in the bitterest terms:  "You have
carried matters too far, signor; your conduct to our sister is
shameful, and nothing but insanity can excuse it."  Vexed enough
before, the professor upon this flew into a violent passion, and
brandished his naked sword in such a way that the others were
obliged to use their sticks, which they did so very effectively
that, after breaking them over his head, they chained him down
like a maniac upon the floor, declaring he had lost his wits by
excessive study, and taking possession of his house, they
remained with their sister all night.  next morning they sent for
a physician, who ordered a couch to be placed as near as possible
to the fire, that no one should be allowed to speak or reply to
the patient, and that he should be strictly dieted until he
recovered his wits; and this regimen was diligently
enforced.[FN#489]

A report immediately spread through Bologna that the good
professor had become insane, which caused very general regret,
his friends observing to each other, "It is indeed a bad
business; but I suspected yesterday how it was--he could scarcely
get a word out as he was delivering his lecture, did you not
perceive?"  "Yes," said another, "I saw him change colour, poor
fellow."  And by everybody, everywhere, it was decided that the
professor was mad.  In this situation numbers of his scholars
went to see him, and among the rest Bucciolo, knowing nothing of
what had happened, agreed to accompany them to the college,
desirous of acquainting his master with last night's adventure.
What was his surprise to learn that he had actually taken leave
of his senses, and being directed on leaving the college to the
professor's house, he was almost panic-struck on approaching the
place, beginning to comprehend the whole affair.  Yet, in order
that no one might be led to suspect the truth, he walked into the
house along with the rest, and on reaching a certain apartment
which he knew, he beheld his poor tutor almost beaten to a mummy,
and chained down upon his bed, close to the fire.  His pupils
were standing round condoling with him and lamenting his piteous
case.  At length it came to Bucciolo's turn to say something to
him, which he did as follows:  "My dear master, I am truly
concerned for you as if you were my own father, and if there is
anything in which I can be of service to you, command me as your
own son."  To this the poor professor only replied, "No,
Bucciolo, depart in peace, my pupil; depart, for you have learned
much, very much, at my expense."  Here his wife interrupted him:
"You see how he wanders--heed not what he says--pay no attention
to him, signor."  Bucciolo, however, prepared to depart, and
taking a hasty leave of the professor, he proceeded to the
lodging of his friend Pietro Paolo, and said to him, "Fare you
well.  god bless you, my friend.  I must away; and I have lately
learned so much at other people's expense that I am going home."
So saying, he hurried away, and in due course arrived in safety
in Rome.

The affliction of the professor of Giovanni's sprightly tale will
probably be considered by most readers as well-merited
punishment; the young gallant proved an apt scholar in the art of
love, and here was the inciter to evil repaid with the same coin!

Straparola also tells the story, but in a different form, in his
"Pleasant Nights" (Piacevoli Notti), First Day, second novella;
and his version is taken into a small collection entitled
"Tarlton's Newes out of Purgatorie," first published in or before
1590--a catchpenny tract in which, of course, Dick Tarlton had
never a hand, any more than he had in the collection of jests
which goes under his name.


                  STRAPAROLA'S VERSION[FN#490]

In Pisa, a famous city of Italye, there lived a gentleman of good
lineage and landes, feared as well for his wealth, as honoured
for his vertue, but indeed well thought on for both; yet the
better for his riches.  This gentleman had one onelye daughter,
called Margaret, who for her beauty was liked of all, and desired
of many.  But neither might their sutes nor her owne prevaile
about her father's resolution, who was determyned not to marrye
her, but to such a man as should be able in abundance to maintain
the excellency of her beauty.  Divers young gentlemen proffered
large feoffments, but in vaine, a maide shee must bee still: till
at last an olde doctor in the towne, that professed phisicke,
became a sutor to her, who was a welcome man to her father, in
that he was one of the wealthiest men in all Pisa; a tall
stripling he was and a proper youth, his age about foure score,
his heade as white as milke, wherein for offence sake there was
left never a tooth.  But it is no matter, what he wanted in
person he had in the purse, which the poore gentlewoman little
regarded,