 wishing rather to tie herself to one that might fit her
content, though they lived meanly, then to him with all the
wealth in Italye.  But shee was yong, and forcst to follow her
father's direction, who, upon large covenants, was content his
daughter should marry with the doctor, and whether she likte him
or no, the match was made up, and in short time she was married.
The poore wench was bound to the stake, and had not onely an olde
impotent man, but one that was so jealous, as none might enter
into his house without suspition, nor shee doo any thing without
blame; the least glance, the smallest countenance, any smile was
a manifest instance to him that she thought of others better than
himselfe.  Thus he himselfe lived in a hell, and tormented his
wife in as ill perplexitie.

At last it chaunced that a young gentleman of the citie, coming
by her house, and seeing her looke out at her window, noting her
rare and excellent proportion, fell in love with her, and that so
extreamelye, as his passions had no meanes till her favour might
mittigate his heart sicke discontent.  The yong man that was
ignorant in amorous matters, and had never beene used to courte
anye gentlewoman, thought to reveale his passions to some one
freend that might given him counsaile for the winning of her
love, and thinking experience was the surest maister, on a daye
seeing the olde doctor walkinge in the churche that was
Margaret's husband, little knowing who he was, he thought this
the fittest man to whom he might discover his passions, for that
hee was olde and knew much, and was a phisition that with his
drugges might helpe him forward in his purposes, so that seeing
the olde man walke solitary, he joinde unto him, and after a
curteous salute, tolde him that he was to impart a matter of
great import to him, wherein, if hee would not onely be secrete,
but indevour to pleasure him, his pains should bee every way to
the full considered.  You must imagine, gentleman, quoth Mutio,
for so was the doctor's name, that men of our profession are no
blabs, but hold their secrets in their hearts bottome, and
therefore reveale what you please, it shall not onely be
concealed, but cured, if either my art or counsaile may doo it.
Upon this, Lyonell, so was the young gentleman called, told and
discourst unto him from point to point, how he was falne in love
with a gentlewoman that was married to one of his profession,
discovered her dwelling and the house, for that he was
unacquainted with the woman, and a man little experienced in love
matters, he required his favour to further him with his advice.
Mutio at this motion was stung to the hart, knowing it was his
wife hee was fallen in love withall, yet to conceale the matter,
and to experience his wive's chastity, and that if she plaide
false, he might be revenged on them both, he dissembled the
matter, and answered that he knewe the woman very well, and
commended her highly: but said she had a churle to her husband,
and therefore he thought shee would bee the more tractable: Trye
her, man, quoth hee, fainte harte never wonne faire lady, and if
shee will not be brought to the bent of your bowe, I will provide
such a potion as shall dispatch all to your owne content: and to
give you further instructions for oportunitie, knowe that her
husband is foorth every after-noone from three till sixe.  Thus
farre I have advised you, because I pitty your passions, as my
selfe being once a lover, but now I charge thee reveale it to
none whomsoever, least it doo disparage my credit to meddle in
amorous matters.

The yong gentleman not onely promised all carefull secrecy, but
gave him harty thanks for his good counsell, promising to meete
him there the next day, and tell him what newes.  Then hee left
the old man, who was almost mad for feare his wife any way should
play false; he saw by experience brave men came to besiege the
castle, and seeing it was in woman's custodie, and had so weeke a
governor as himselfe, he doubted it would in time be delivered
up: which feare made him almost franticke, yet he drivde of the
time great torment, till he might heare from his rival.  Lionello
he hastes him home and sutes him in his braverye, and goes downe
toward the house of Mutio, where he sees her at the windowe whome
he courted with a passionate looke, with such humble salute and
shee might perceive how the gentleman was affectionate.
Margaretta, looking earnestlye upon him, and noting the
perfection of his proportion, accounted him in her eye the flower
of all Pisa, thinkte herselfe fortunate if shee might have him
for her freend, to supply the defaultes that she found in Mutio.
Sundry times that afternoone he past by her window, and he cast
not up more loving lookes, than he received gratious favours,
which did so incourage him that the next daye betweene three and
sixe hee went to her house, and knocking at the doore, desired to
speake with the mistris of the house, who hearing by her maid's
description what he was, commaunded him to come in, where she
intertained him with all courtesie.

The youth that never before had given the attempt to court a
ladye, began his exordium with a blushe; and yet went forward so
well, that hee discourst unto her howe hee loved her, and that if
it might please her to accept of his service, as of a freende
ever vowde in all dutye to bee at her commaunde, the care of her
honour should bee deerer to him than his life, and hee would be
ready to prise her discontent with his bloud at all times.  The
gentlewoman was a little coye, but, before they part, they
concluded that the next daye at foure of the clock hee should
come thither and eate a pound of cherries, which was resolved on
with a succado des labras, and so with a loath to depart they
tooke their leaves.  Lionello as joyfull a man as might be, hyed
him to the church to meete his olde doctor, where he found him in
his olde walke: What newes, syr, quoth Mutio, how have you sped?
Even as I can wishe, quoth Lionello, for I have been with my
mistrisse, and have found her so tractable, that I hope to make
the olde peasant, her husband, looke broadheaded by a paire of
browantlers.  How deepe this strooke into Mutio's hart, let them
imagine that can conjecture what jealousie is; insomuch that the
olde doctor askte when should be the time.  marry, quoth
Lionello, at foure of the clocke in the afternoone, and then
Maister Doctor, quoth hee, will I dub the old squire knight of
the forked order.

Thus they past on in that, till it grew late, and then Lyonello
went home to his lodging and Mutio to his house, covering all his
sorrows with a merrye countenance, with full resolution to
revenge them both the next daye with extremitie.  He past the
night as patiently as he could, and the next daye, after dinner,
awaye hee went, watching when it should bee foure of the clocke.
At the hour justly came Lyonello and was intertained with all
curtesie; but scarce had they kist, ere the maid cryed out to her
mistresse that her maister was at the doore; for he hasted,
knowing that a horne was but a litle while in grafting.
Margaret, at this alarum, was amazed, and yet for a shift chopt
Lionello into a great driefatte[FN#491] full of feathers,[FN#492]
and sat her downe close to her woorke.  By that came Mutio in
blowing, and as though hee came to looke somewhat in haste,
called for the keyes of his chamber, and looked in everye place,
searching so narrowlye in everye corner of the house, that he
left not the very privie unsearcht.  Seeing he could not finde
him, hee said nothing, but fayning himselfe not well at ease,
staide at home, so that poor Lionello was faine to staye in the
drifatte till the old churle was in bed with his wife; and then
the maide let him out at a backe doore, who went home with a flea
in his eare to his lodging.

Well, the next day he went againe to meete his doctor, whome he
founde in his wonted  walke.  What newes? Quoth Mutio, how have
you sped?  A poxe of the olde slave, quoth Lyonello; I was no
sooner in and had given my mistresse one kisse, but the jelous
asse was at the doore; the maide spied him, and cryed her
maister; so that the poore gentlewoman, for very shifte, was
faine to put me in a driefatte of feathers that stoode in an olde
chamber, and there I was faine to tarry while[FN#493] he was in
bed and a-sleepe, and then the maide let me out, and I departed.
But it is no matter; 'twas but a chaunce, and I hope to crye
quittance with him ere it be long.  As how? Quoth Mutio.  Marry,
thus, quoth Lionello: shee sent me woord by her maide this daye
that upon Thursday next the olde churle suppeth with a patient of
his a mile out of Pisa, and then I feare not but to
quitte[FN#494] him for all.  It is well, quoth Mutio; fortune bee
your frende.  I thanke you, quoth Lionello: and so, after a
little more prattle, they departed.

To bee shorte, Thursdaye came, and about sixe of the clocke,
foorth goes Mutio no further than a freendes house of his, from
whence he might descrye who went into his house; straight hee saw
Lionello enter in, and after goes hee, insomuche that hee was
scarcelye sitten downe, before the mayde cryed out againe, my
maister comes.  The goodwife, that before had provided for after-
claps,[FN#495] had found out a privie place between two seelings
of a plauncher,[FN#496] and there she thrust Lionello, and her
husband came sweting.  What news, quoth shee, drives you home
againe so soone, husband?  Marry, sweete wife, quoth he, a
fearfull dream that I had this night, which came to my
remembrance, and that was this: me thought there was a villaine
that came secretlye into my house, with a naked poinard in his
hand, and hid himselfe, but I could not finde the place; with
that mine nose bled, and I came back; and, by the grace of God, I
will seeke every corner in the house for the quiet of my minde.
Marry, I pray you doo, husband, quoth she.  With that he lockt in
all the doors, and began to search every chamber, every hole,
every chest, every tub, the very well; he stabd every feather bed
through, and made havocke like a mad man, which made him thinke
all was in vaine; and hee began to blame his eies that thought
they saw that which they did not.  Upon this he rest halfe
lunaticke, and all night he was very wakefull, that towards the
morning he fell into a dead sleepe, and then was Lionello
conveighed away.

In the morning when Mutio wakened, hee thought how by no meanes
hee should be able to take Lionello tardy: yet he laid in his
head a most dangerous plot; and that was this:  Wife, quoth he, I
must the next Monday ride to Vycensa, to visit an olde patient of
mine; till my returne, which will be some ten dayes, I will have
thee staye at our little graunge house in the countrey.  Marry,
very well content, quoth she.  With that he kist her, and was
verye pleasant, as though he had suspected nothing, and away hee
flings to the church, where he meetes Lionello.  What, sir, quoth
he, what news? is your mistresse yours in possession?  No, a
plague of the olde slave, quoth hee.  I think he is either a
witch or els woorkes by magick; for I can no sooner enter into
the doores, but he is at my backe, and so he was againe
yesternight; for I was not warm in my seate before the maide
cryed, my maister comes; and then was the poore soule faine to
conveigh me betweene two seelings of a chamber, in a fit place
for the purpose, wher I laught hartely to myself too see how he
sought every corner, ransakt every tub, and stabd every feather
bed, but in vaine; I was safe enough until the morning, and then,
when he was fast asleepe, I lept out.  Fortune frownes on you,
quoth Mutio.  I,[FN#497] but I hope, quoth Lionello, this is the
last time, and now shee will begin to smile; for on Monday next
he rides to Vicensa, and his wife lyes at the grange house a
little (out) of the towne, and there in his absence I will
revenge all forepast misfortunes.  God sent it be so, quoth
Mutio; and so took his leave.

These two lovers longd for Monday, and at last it came.  Early in
the morning Mutio horst himselfe and his wife, his maide and a
man, and no more, and away he rides to his grange house, wher,
after he had brok his fast, he took his leave, and away towards
Vincensa.  He rode not far ere, by a false way, he returned into
a thicket, and there, with a company of cuntry peasants, lay in
an ambuscade to take the young gentleman.  In the afternoon comes
Lionello galloping, and as soon as he came within sight of the
house, he sent back his horse by his boy, and went easily afoot,
and there, at the very entry, was entertained by Margaret, who
led him up the staires, and convaid him into her bedchamber,
saying he was welcome into so mean a cottage.  But, quoth she,
now I hope fortun shall not envy the purity of our loves.  Alas!
alas! mistris, cried the maid, heer is my maister, and 100 men
with him, with bils and staves.  We are betraid, quoth Lionel,
and I am but a dead man.  Feare not, quoth she, but follow me:
and straight she carried him downe into a low parlor, where
stoode an olde rotten chest full of writinges; she put him into
that, and covered him with olde papers and evidences, and went to
the gate to meet her husband.

Why, Signor Mutio, what meanes this hurly burly? quoth she.  Vile
and shameless strumpet as thou art, thou shalt know by and by,
quoth he.  Where is thy love?  All we have watcht him and seen
him enter in.  Now, quoth he, shall neither thy tub of feathers
or thy seeling serve, for perish he shall with fire, or els fall
into my handes.  Doo thy worst, jealous foole, quoth she, I ask
thee no favour.  With that, in a rage, he beset the house round,
and then set fire on it.  Oh, in what perplexitie was poore
Lionello in that he was shut in a chest, and the fire about his
eares! and how was Margaret passionat, that knew her lover was in
such danger!  Yet she made light of the matter, and, as one in a
rage, called her maid to her and said: Come on, wench, seeing thy
maister, mad with jealousie, hath set the house and al my living
on fire, I will be revenged on him: help me heer to lift this old
chest where all his writings and deeds are; let that burne first,
and as soon as I see that on fire I will walke towards my
freends, for the olde foole will be beggard, and I will refuse
him.  Mutio, that knew al his obligations and statutes lay there,
puld her back and had two of his men carry the chest into the
field, and see it were safe, himselfe standing by and seeing his
house burned downe sticke and stone.  Then, quieted in his mind,
he went home with his wife and began to flatter her, thinking
assuredly that he had burnt her paramour, causing his chest to be
carried in a cart to his house in Pisa.  Margaret, impatient,
went to her mother's and complained to her and her brethren of
the jealousie of her husband, who maintaned her it to be true,
and desired but a daies respite to proove it.

Wel, hee was bidden to supper the next night at her mother's, she
thinking to make her daughter and him freends againe.  In the
meane time he to his woonted walk in the church, and there,
præter expectationem, he found Lionello walking.  Wondring at
this, he straight enquires what newes.  What newes, Maister
Doctor, quoth he, and he fell in a great laughing; in faith
yesterday, I scapt a scouring, for syrrha, I went to the grange-
house, where I was appointed to come, and I was no sooner gotten
up to the chamber, but the magicall villeine, her husband, beset
the house with bils and staves, and that he might be sure no
seeling nor corner should shrowde me, he set the house on fire,
and so burnt it downe to the ground.  Why, quoth Mutio, and how
did you escape?  Alas, quoth he, wel fare a woman's wit; she
conveighed me into an old chest full of writings, which she knew
her husband durst not burne, and so I was saved and brought to
Pisa, and yesternight, by her maide, let home to my lodging.
This, quoth he, is the pleasantest jest that ever I heard; and
upon this I have a sute to you: I am this night bidden foorth to
supper, you shall be my guest, onely I will crave so much favour,
as after supper for a pleasant sporte, to make relation what
successe you have had in your loves.  For that I will not sticke,
quoth he, and so he conveyed Lionello to his mother-in-law's
house with him, and discovered to his wive's brethren who he was,
and how at supper he would disclose the whole matter; For, quoth
he, he knowes not that I am Margaret's husband.  At this all the
brethren bad him welcome, and so did the mother to, and Margaret,
she was kept out of sight.  Supper time being come they fell to
their victals, and Lionello was carrowst unto by Mutio, who was
very pleasant, to drawe him into a merry humour, that he might to
the ful discourse the effect and fortunes of his love.  Supper
being ended, Mutio requested him to tel to the gentlemen what had
hapned between him and his mistresse.  Lionello, with a smiling
countenance, began to describe his mistresse, the house and
street where she dwelt, how he fell in love with her, and how he
used the councell of this doctor, who in all his affaires was his
secretarye.  Margaret heard all this with a great feare, and when
he came to the last point, she caused a cup of wine to be given
him by one of her sisters, wherein was a ring that he had given
Margaret.  As he had told how he had escapt burning, and was
ready to confirme all for a troth, the gentlewoman drunke to him,
who taking the cup and seeing the ring, having a quick wit and a
reaching head, spide the fetch, and perceived that all this while
this was his lover's husband to whome hee had revealed these
escapes; at this drinking the wine and swallowing the ring into
his mouth he went forward.  Gentlemen, quoth he, how like you of
my loves and my fortunes?  Wel, quoth the gentlemen; I pray you
is it true?  As true, quoth he, as if I would be so simple as to
reveal what I did to Margaret's husband; for, know you,
gentlemen, that I knew this Mutio to be her husband whom I
notified to be my lover; and for that he was generally known
throughout Pisa to be a jealous fool, therefore, with these tales
I brought him into paradice, which are follies of mine owne
braine; for, trust me, by the faith of a gentleman, I never spake
to the woman, was never in her companye, neyther doo I know her
if I see her.  At this they all fell in a laughing at Mutio, who
was ashamde that Lionello had so scoft him.  But all was well;
they were made friends, but the jest went so to his hart that he
shortly after died, and Lionello enjoyed the ladye.

Ser Giovanni's story, Roscoe observes, is "curious as having
through the medium of translation suggested the idea of those
amusing scenes in which the renowned Falstaff acquaints Master
Ford, disguised under the name of Brooke, with his progress in
the good graces of Mrs. Ford.  The contrivances likewise by which
he eludes the vengeance of the jealous husband are similar to
those recounted in the novel, with the addition of throwing the
unweildy knight into the river.  Dunlop says that the same story
has been translated is a collection entitled ‘The Fortunate,
Deceived, and Unfortunate Lovers,' and that Shakspeare may
probably also have seen it in ‘Tarlton's Newes out of
Purgatorie,' where the incidents related in the Lovers of Pisa
are given according to Straparola's story.  Moliere made a happy
use of it in his ‘Ecole des Femmes,' where the humour of the
piece turns upon a young gentleman confiding his progress in the
affections of a lady to the ear of her guardian, who believed he
was on the point of espousing her himself."  Two other French
plays were based upon the story, one of which was written by La
Fontaine under the title of "La Maitre en Droit."  Readers of
"Gil Blas" will also recollect how Don Raphael confides to
Balthazar the progress of his amour with his wife, and expresses
his vexation at the husband's unexpected return.

It is much to be regretted that nothing is known as to the date
and place of the composition of the Breslau edition of The
Nights, which alone contains this and several other tales found
in the collections of the early Italian novelists.




THE KING WHO KENNED THE QUINTESSENCE OF THINGS.--Vol. XI. p. 142.



Although we may find, as already stated, the direct source of
this tale in the forty-sixth chapter of Al-Mas'údi's "Meadows of
Gold and Mines of Gems," which was written about A.D. 943, yet
there exists a much older version--if not the original form--in a
Sanskrit collection entitled, "Vetálapanchavinsatí," or Twenty-
five Tales of a Vampyre.  This ancient work is incorporated with
the "Kathá Sarit Ságara," or Ocean of the Streams of Story,
composed in Sanskrit verse by Somadeva in the 11th century, after
a similar work, now apparently lost, entitled "Vrihat Kathá," or
Great Story, written by Gunadhya, in the 6th century.[FN#498]  In
the opinion of Benfey all the Vampyre Tales are of Buddhist
extraction (some are unquestionably so), and they probably date
from before our era.  As a separate work they exist, more or less
modified, in many of the Indian vernaculars; in Hindí, under the
title of "Baital Pachísí"; in Tamil, "Vedala Kadai"; and there
are also versions in Telegu, Mahratta, and Canarese.  The
following is from Professor C. H. Tawney's complete translation
of the "Kathá Sarit Ságara" (it is the 8th recital of the
Vetala):


                         INDIAN VERSION

There is a great tract of land assigned to Bráhmans in the
country of Anga, called Vrikshaghata.  In it there lived a rich
sacrificing Bráhman named Vishnusvámin.  And he had a wife equal
to himself in birth.  And by her he had three sons born to him,
who were distinguished for preternatural acuteness.  In course of
time they grew up to be young men.  One day, when he had begun a
sacrifice, he sent those three brothers to the sea to fetch a
turtle.  So off they went, and when they had found a turtle, the
eldest said to his two brothers, "Let one of you take the turtle
for our father's sacrifice; I cannot take it, as it is all
slippery with slime."  When the eldest said this, the two younger
ones answered him, "If you hesitate about taking it, why should
not we?"  When the eldest heard that, he said, "You two must take
the turtle; if you do not, you will have obstructed your father's
sacrifice, and then you will certainly sink down to hell." When
he told the younger brother's this, they laughed and said to him,
"If you see our duty so clearly, why do you not see that your own
is the same?"  Then the eldest said, "What, do you not know how
fastidious I am?  I am very fastidious about eating, and I cannot
be expected to touch what is repulsive."  The middle brother,
when he heard this speech of his, said to his brother, "Then I am
a more fastidious person than you, for I am a most fastidious
connoisseur of the fair sex."  When the middle one said this, the
eldest went on to say, "Then let the younger of you two take the
turtle."  Then the youngest brother frowned, and in his turn said
to the two elder, "You fools, I am very fastidious about beds; so
I am the most fastidious of the lot."

So the three brothers fell to quarrelling with one another, and
being completely under the dominion of conceit, they left that
turtle and went off immediately to the court of the king of that
country, whose name was Prasenajit, and who lived in a city named
Vitankapura, in order to have the dispute decided.  There they
had themselves announced by the warder, and went in, and gave the
king a circumstantial account of their case.  The king said,
"Wait here, and I will put you all in turn to the proof;' so they
agreed and remained there.  And at the time that the king took
his meal, he had them conducted to a seat of honour, and given
delicious food fit for a king, possessing all the six flavours.
And while all were feasting around him, the Bráhman who was
fastidious about eating along of the company did not eat, but sat
there with his face puckered up with disgust.  The king himself
asked the Bráhman why he did not eat his food, though it was
sweet and fragrant, and he slowly answered him, "I perceive in
this food an evil smell of the reek from corpses, so I cannot
bring myself to eat it, however delicious it may be."  When he
said this before the assembled multitude, they all smelled it by
the king's orders, and said, "This food is prepared from white
rice and is good and fragrant."  But the Bráhman who was so
fastidious about eating would not touch it, but stopped his nose.
Then the king reflected, and proceeded to inquire into the
matter, and found out from his officers that the food had been
made from rice which had been grown in a field near the burning
ghát of a certain village.  Then the king was much astonished,
and, being pleased, he said to him, "In truth you are very
particular as to what you eat; so eat of some other dish."

And after they had finished their dinner, the king dismissed the
Bráhmans to their apartments and sent for the loveliest lady of
his court.  And in the evening he sent that fair one, all whose
limbs were of faultless beauty, splendidly adorned, to the second
Bráhman, who was so squeamish about the fair sex.  And that
matchless kindler of Cupid's flame, with a face like the full
moon of midnight, went, escorted by the king's servants, to the
chamber of the Bráhman.  But when she entered, lighting up the
chamber with her brightness, that gentleman who was so fastidious
about the fair sex felt quite faint, and stopping his nose with
his left hand, said to the king's servants, "Take her away; if
you do not, I am a dead man: a smell comes from her like that of
a goat."  When the king's servants heard this, they took the
bewildered fair one to their sovereign, and told him what had
taken place.  And the eking immediately had the squeamish
gentleman sent for, and said to him, "How can this lovely woman,
who has perfumed herself with sandal-wood, camphor, black aloes,
and other splendid scents, so that she diffuses exquisite
fragrance through the world, smell like a goat?"  But though the
king used this argument to the squeamish gentleman he stuck to
his point; and then the king began to have his doubts on the
subject, and at last, by artfully framed questions, he elicited
from the lady herself that, having been separated in her
childhood from her mother and nurse, she had been brought up on
goat's milk.

Then the king was much astonished, and praised highly the
discernment of the man who was fastidious about the fair sex, and
immediately had given to the third Bráhman, who was fastidious
about beds, in accordance with his taste, a bed composed of seven
mattresses placed upon a bedstead.  White smooth sheets and
coverlets were laid upon the bed, and the fastidious man slept
upon it in a splendid room.  But, before half a watch of the
night had passed, he rose up from that bed, with his hand pressed
to his side, screaming in an agony of pain.  And the king's
officers, who were there, saw a red crooked mark on his side, as
if a hair had been pressed deep into it. And they went and told
the king, and the king said to them, "Look and see if there is
not something under the mattress."  So they went and examined the
bottom of the mattresses one by one, and they found a hair in the
middle of the bedstead underneath them all.  And they took it and
showed it to the king, and they also brought the man who was
fastidious about beds, and when the king saw the state of his
body, he was astonished.  And he spent the whole night in
wondering how a hair could make so deep an impression on his skin
through seven mattresses.[FN#499]

And the next morning the king gave three hundred thousand gold
pieces to those fastidious men, because they were persons of
wonderful discernment and refinement.  And they remained in great
comfort in the king's court, forgetting all about the turtle, and
little did they reck of the fact that they had incurred sin by
obstructing their father's sacrifice.[FN#500]

The story of the brothers who were so very "knowing" is common to
most countries, with occasional local modifications.  It is not
often we find the knowledge of the "quintessence of things"
concentrated in a single individual, as in the case of the ex-
king of our tale, but we have his exact counterpart--and the
circumstance is significant--in No. 2 of the "Cento Novelle
Antiche," the first Italian collection of short stories, made in
the 13th century, where a prisoner informs the king of Greece
that a certain horse has been suckled by a she-ass, that a jewel
contains a flaw, and that the king himself is a baker.  Mr.
Tawney, in a note on the Vetála story, as above, refers also to
the decisions of Hamlet in Saxo Grammaticus, 1839, p. 138, in
Simrock's "Quellen des Shakespeare," I, 81-85; 5, 170; he lays
down that some bread tastes of blood (the corn was grown on a
battlefield); that some liquor tastes of iron (the malt was mixed
with water taken from a well in which some rusty swords had
lain); that some bacon tastes of corpses (the pig had eaten a
corpse); lastly, that the king is a servant and his wife a
serving-maid.  But in most versions of the story three brothers
are the gifted heroes.

In "Mélusine"[FN#501] for 5 Nov. 1885, M. René Basset cites an
interesting variant (in which, as is often the case, the "Lost
Camel" plays a part, but are not concerned about it at present)
from Radloff's "Proben der Volksliteratur der turkischen Stamme
des Sud-Siberiens," as follows:


                        SIBERIAN VERSION

Meat and bread were set before the three brothers, and the prince
went out.  The eldest said, "The prince is a slave;" the second,
"This is dog's flesh;" the youngest, "This bread has grown over
the legs of a dead body."  The prince heard them.  He took a
knife and ran to find his mother.  "Tell me the truth," cried he-
-"were you unfaithful to my father during his absence?  A man who
is here has called me a slave."  "My son," replied she, "If I
don't tell the truth, I shall die; if I tell it, I shall die.
When thy father was absent, I gave myself up to a slave."  The
prince left his mother and ran to the house of the shepherd:
"The meat which you have cooked to-day--what is it?  Tell the
truth, otherwise I'll cut your head off."  "Master, if I tell it,
I shall die; if I don't I shall die.  I will be truthful.  It was
a lamb whose mother had no milk; on the day of its birth, it was
suckled by a bitch: that is to-day's ewe."  The prince left the
shepherd and ran to the house of the husbandman: "Tell the truth,
or else I'll cut off your head.  Three young men have come to my
house, I have placed bread before them, and they say that the
grain has grown over the limbs of a dead man."  "I will be frank
with you.  I ploughed with my plough in a place where were
(buried) the limbs of a man; without knowing it, I sowed some
wheat, which grew up."  the prince quitted his slave and returned
to his house, where were seated the strangers.  He said to the
first, "Young man, how do you know that I am a slave?"  "Because
you went out as soon as the repast was brought in."  He asked the
second, "How do you know that the meat which was served was that
of a dog?" "Because it has a disagreeable taste like the flesh of
a dog."  Then to the third: "How come you to know that this bread
was grown over the limbs of a dead person?"  "What shall I say?
It smells of the limbs of a dead body; that is why I recognised
it.  If you do not believe me, ask your slave; he will tell you
that what I say is true."

In the same paper (col. 516) M. René Basset cites a somewhat
elaborate variant, from Stier's "Ungarische Sagen und Märchen,"
in which, once more, the knowledge of the "quintessence of
things" is concentrated in a single individual.


                       HUNGARIAN VERSION

A clever Magyar is introduced with his companions in disguise
into the camp of the king of the Tátárs, who is menacing his
country.  The prince, suspicious, causes him to be carefully
watched by his mother, a skilful sorceress.  They brought in the
evening's repast.  "What good wine the prince has!" said she.
"Yes," replied one, "but it contains human blood."  The sorceress
took not of the bed from whence these words proceeded, and when
all were asleep she deftly cut a lock of hair from him who had
spoken, crept stealthily out of the room, and brought this mark
to her son.  the strangers started up, and when our hero
discovered what had been done to him, he cut a lock from all, to
render his decision impossible.  When they came to dinner, the
king knew not from whom the lock had been taken.  The following
night the mother of the prince again slipped into the room, and
said, "What good bread has the prince of the Tátárs!"  "Very
good," replied one, "it is made with the milk of a woman."  When
all were asleep, she cut a little off the moustache of him who
was lying in the bed from which the voice proceeded.  This time
the Magyars were still more on the alert, and when they were
apprised of the matter, they all cut a little from their
moustaches, so that next morning the prince found himself again
foiled.  The third night the old lady hid herself, and said in a
loud voice, "What a handsome man is the prince of the Tátárs!"
"Yes," said one, "but he is a bastard."  When all were asleep,
the old lady made a mark on the visor of the helmet of the one
from whence had come the words, and then acquainted her son of
what she had done.  In the morning the prince perceived that all
the helmets were similarly marked.[FN#502] At length he
refrained, and said, "I see that there is among you a master
greater than myself; that is why I desire very earnestly to know
him.  He may make himself known; I should like to see and know
this extraordinary man, who is more clever and powerful than
myself."  The young man started up from his seat and said, "I
have not wished to be stronger or wiser than yourself.  I have
only wished to find out what you had preconcerted for us.  I am
the person who has been marked three nights."  "It is well, young
man.  But prove now your words:  How is there human blood in the
wine?"  "Call your butler and he will tell you."  The butler came
in trembling all over, and confessed that when he corked the wine
he had cut his finger with the knife, and a drop of blood had
fallen into the cask.  "But how is there woman's milk in the
bread?" asked the king.  "Call the bakeress," he replied, "and
she will tell it you."  When they questioned her, she confessed
that she was kneading the bread and at the same time suckling her
baby, and that on pressing it to her breast some milk flowed and
was mixed with the bread.  The sorceress, the mother of the king,
when they came to the third revelation of the young man,
confessed in her turn that the king was illegitimate.

Mr. Tawney refers to the Chevalier de Mailly's version of the
Three Princes of Serendip (Ceylon):  The three are sitting at
table, and eating a leg of lamb, sent with some splendid wine
from the table of the emperor Bahrám.  The eldest maintains that
the wine was made of grapes that grew in a cemetery; the second,
that the lamb was brought up on dog's milk; while the third
asserts that the emperor had put to death the son of the wazír.
And that the latter is bent on vengeance.  All these statements
turn out to be well-grounded.  Mr. Tawney also refers to parallel
stories in the Breslau edition of The Nights; namely, in Night
458, it is similarly conjectured that the bread was baked by a
sick woman; that the kid was suckled by a bitch, and that the
sultan is illegitimate; and in Night 459, a gem-cutter guesses
that a jewel has an internal flaw, a man skilled in the pedigrees
of horses divines that a horse is the offspring of a female
buffalo, and a man skilled in human pedigrees that the mother of
the favourite queen was a rope-dancer.  Similar incidents occur
in "The Sultan of Yemen and his Three Sons," one of the
Additional Tales translated by Scott, from the Wortley-Montague
MS., now in the Bodleian Library, and comprised in vol. vi. of
his edition of "The Arabian Nights Entertainments," published at
London in 1811.

An analogous tale occurs in Mr. E. J. W. Gibb's recently-
published translation of the "History of the Forty Vezirs (the
Lady's Fourth Story, p. 69 ff.), the motif of which is that "all
things return to their origin:"


                        TURKISH ANALOGUE

There was in the palace of the world a king who was very desirous
of seeing Khizr[FN#503] (peace on him!), and he would even say,
"If there be any one who will show me Khizr, I will give him
whatsoever he may wish."  Now there was at that time a man poor
of estate, and from the stress of his poverty he said to himself,
"Let me go and speak to the king, that if he provide for me
during three years, either I will be dead, or the king will be
dead, or he will forgive me my fault, or I shall on somewise win
to escape, and in this way shall I make merry for a time."  so he
went to the king and spake these words to him.[FN#504]  the king
said, "An thou show him not, then I will kill thee," and that
poor man consented.  Then the king let give him much wealth and
money, and the poor man took that wealth and money and went to
his house.  Three years he spent in merriment and delight, and he
rested at ease till the term was accomplished.  At the end of
that time he fled and hid himself in a trackless place and he
began to quake for fear.  Of a sudden he saw a personage with
white raiment and shining face, who saluted him.  The poor man
returned the salutation, and the radiant being asked, "Why art
thou thus sad?"  but he gave no answer.  Again the radiant being
asked him and sware to him, saying, "Do indeed tell to me thy
plight, that I may find thee some remedy."  So that hapless one
narrated his story from its beginning to its end, and the radiant
being said, "Come, I will go with thee to the king, and I will
answer for thee."  So they arose.

Now the king wanted that hapless one, and while they were going
some of the king's officers who were seeking met them, and they
straightway seized the poor man and brought him to the king.
Quoth the king, "Lo, the three years are accomplished; come now,
and show me Khizr."  The poor man said, "My king, grace and
bounty are the work of kings--forgive my sin."  Quoth the king,
"I made a pact; till I have killed thee, I shall not have
fulfilled it."  And he looked to his chief vezír and said, "How
should this be done?"  quoth the vezír, "This man should be hewn
in many pieces and then hung up on butchers' hooks, that others
may see and lie not before the king."  Said that radiant being,
"True spake the vezír;--all things return to their origin."  Then
the king looked to the second vezír and said, "What sayest thou?"
he replied, "This man should be boiled in a cauldron."  Said that
radiant being, "True spake the vezír;--all things return to their
origin."  The king looked to the third vezir and said, "What
sayest though?"  the vezír replied, "This man should be hewn in
small pieces and baked in an oven."  Again said that elder, "True
spake the vezír;--all things return to their origin."  Then quoth
the king to the fourth vezír, "Let us see what sayest thou?"  The
vezír replied, "O king, the wealth thou gavest this poor creature
was for the love of Khizr (peace on him!).  he, thinking to find
him, accepted it; now that he has not found him he seeks pardon.
This were befitting, that thou set free this poor creature for
love of Khizr."  Said that elder, "True spake the vezír;--all
things return to their origin."  Then the king said to the elder,
"O elder, my vezírs have said different things contrary the one
to the other, and thou hast said concerning each of them, ‘True
spake the vezír; - all things return to their origin.'  What is
the reason thereof?"  that elder replied, "O king, thy first
vezír is a butcher's son; therefore did he draw to his origin.
Thy second vezír is a cook's son, and he likewise proposed a
punishment as became his origin.  Thy third vezír is a baker's
son; he likewise proposed a punishment as became his origin.
But thy fourth vezír is of gentle birth; compassion therefore
becomes his origin, so he had compassion on that hapless one, and
sought to do good and counselled liberation.  O king, all things
return to their origin."[FN#505]  And he gave the king much
counsel, and at last said, "Lo, I am Khizr," and
vanished.[FN#506]

The discovery of the king's illegitimate birth, which occurs in
so many versions, has its parallels in the story of the Nephew of
Hippocrates in the "Seven Wise Masters," and the Lady's 2nd Story
in Mr. Gibb's translation of the "Forty Vezírs."  The
extraordinary sensitiveness of the third young Bráhman, in the
Vetála story, whose side was scratched by a hair that was under
the seventh of the mattresses on which he lay, Rohde (says
Tawney), in his "Greichische Novellistik," p. 62, compares with a
story told by Aelian of the Sybarite Smindyrides, who slept on a
bed of rose-leaves and got up in the morning covered with
blisters.  He also quotes from the Chronicle of Tabari a story of
a princess who was made to bleed by a rose-leaf lying in her
bed.[FN#507]

The eleventh recital of the Vetála is about a king's three
sensitive wives:  As one of the queens was playfully pulling the
hair of the king, a blue lotus leaped from her ear and fell on
her lap; immediately a would was produced on the front of her
thigh by the blow, and the delicate princess exclaimed, "Oh! oh!"
and fainted. At night, the second retired with the king to an
apartment on the roof of the palace exposed to the rays of the
moon, which fell on the body of the queen, who was sleeping by
the king's side, where it was exposed by her garment blowing
aside; immediately she woke up, exclaiming, "Alas! I am burnt,"
and rose up from the bed rubbing her limbs.  The king woke up in
a state of alarm, crying out, "What is the meaning of this?"
then he got up and saw that blisters had been produced on the
queen's body.  In the meanwhile the king's third wife heard of it
and left her palace to come to him.  And when she got into the
open air, she heard distinctly, as the night was still, the sound
of a pestle pounding in a distant house.  The moment the gazelle-
eyed one heard it, she said, "Alas! I am killed," and she sat
down on the path, shaking her hands in an agony of pain.  Then
the girl turned back, and was conducted by her attendants to her
own chamber, where she fell on her bed and groaned.  And when her
weeping attendants examined her, they saw that her hands were
covered with bruises, and looked like lotuses upon which black
beetles had settled.

To this piteous tale of the three very sensitive queens Tawney
appends the following note:  Rohde, in his "Greichische
Novellistik," p. 62, compares with this a story told by Timæus,
of a Sybarite who saw a husbandman hoeing a field, and contracted
rupture from it.  Another Sybarite, to whom he told the tale of
his sad mishap, got ear-ache from hearing it.  Oesterley, in his
German translation of the Baitál Pachísí, points out that Grimm,
in his "Kindermärchen," iii. p. 238, quotes a similar incident
from the travels of the Three sons of Giaffar:  out of four
princesses, one faints because a rose-twig is thrown into her
face among some roses; a second shuts her eyes in order not to
see the statue of a man; a third says, "Go away; the hairs in
your fur cloak run into me;" and the fourth covers her face,
fearing that some of the fish in a tank may belong to the male
sex.  He also quotes a striking parallel from the "Elites des
contes du Sieur d'Onville:" Four ladies dispute as to which of
them is the most delicate.  One has been lame for three months
owing to a rose-leaf having fallen on her foot; another has had
three ribs broken by a sheet in her bed having been crumpled; a
third has held her head on one side for six weeks owing to one
half of her head having three more hairs on it than the other; a
fourth has broken a blood-vessel by a slight movement, and the
rupture cannot be healed without breaking the whole limb.[Poor
things!]




THE PRINCE WHO FELL IN LOVE WITH THE PICTURE.--Vol. XI. p. 153.



In the Persian tales of "The Thousand and One Days," a young
prince entered his father's treasury one day, and saw there a
little cedar chest "set with pearls, diamonds, emeralds, and
topazes;" on opening it (for the key was in the lock) he beheld
the picture of an exceedingly beautiful woman, with whom he
immediately fell in love.  Ascertaining the name of the lady from
an inscription on the back of the portrait, he set off with a
companion to discover her, and having been told by an old man at
Baghdad that her father at one reigned in Ceylon, he continued
his journey thither, encountering many unheard-of adventures by
the way.  Ultimately he is informed that the lady with whose
portrait he had become enamoured was one of the favourites of
King Solomon.  One should suppose that his would have effectually
cured the love-sick prince; but no:  he "could never banish her
sweet image from his heart."[FN#508]

Two instances of falling in love with the picture of a pretty
woman occur in the "Kathá Sarít Ságara."  In Book ix., chap. 51,
a painter shows King Prithvirúpa the "counterfeit presentment" of
the beauteous Princess Rapalatá, and "as the king gazed on it his
eye was drowned in that sea of beauty her person, so that he
could not draw it out again.  For the king, whose longing was
excessive, could not be satisfied with devouring her form, which
poured forth a stream of the nectar of beauty, as the partridge
cannot be satisfied with devouring the moonlight."  In Book xii.,
chap. 100, a female ascetic shows a wandering prince the portrait
of the Princess Mandáravatí, "and Sundarasena when he beheld that
maiden, who, though she was present there only in a picture,
seemed to be of romantic beauty and like a flowing forth of joy,
immediately felt as if he had been pierced with the arrows of the
god of the flowery bow [i.e. Káma]."  In chapter 35 of Scott's
translation of the "Bahár-i-Dánish," Prince Ferokh-Faul opens a
volume, "which he had scarcely done when the fatal portrait of
the fair princess who, the astrologers had foretold, was to
occasion him so many perils, presented itself to his view.  He
instantly fainted, when the slave, alarmed, conveyed intelligence
of his condition to the sultan, and related the unhappy cause of
the disorder."  In Gomberville's romances of Polexandre, the
African prince, Abd-el-Malik, falls in love with the portrait of
Alcidiana, and similar incidents occur in the romance of
Agesilaus of Colchos and in the Story of the Seven Wazírs (vol.
vi.); but why multiply instances?  Nothing is more common in
Asiatic fictions.




    THE FULLER, HIS WIFE, AND THE TROOPER.--Vol. XI. p. 157.



In addition to the versions of this amusing story referred to on
p. 157--all of which will be found in the second volume of my
work on "Popular Tales and Fictions," pp. 212-228--there is yet
another in a Persian story-book, of unknown date, entitled,
"Shamsa ú Kuhkuha," written by Mirza Berkhorder Turkman, of which
an account, together with specimens, is given in a recently-
published little book (Quaritch), "Persian Portraits, a sketch of
Persian History, Literature, and Politics," by Mr. F. F.
Arbuthnot, author of "Early Ideas: a Group of Hindoo Stories."

This version occurs in a tale of three artful wives--or, to
employ the story-teller's own graphic terms, "three whales of the
sea of fraud and deceit: three dragons of the nature of thunder
and the quickness of lightning; three defamers of honour and
reputation; namely, three men-deceiving, lascivious women, each
of whom had from the chicanery of her cunning issued the diploma
of turmoil to a hundred cities and countries, and in the arts of
fraud they accounted Satan as an admiring spectator in the
theatre of their stratagems.[FN#509]  One of them was sitting in
the court of justice of the kazi's embrace; the second was the
precious gem of the bazaar-master's diadem of compliance; and the
third was the beazle and ornament of the signet-ring of the life
and soul of the superintendent of police.  They were constantly
entrapping the fawns of the prairie of deceit within the grasp of
cunning, and plundered the wares of the caravans of tranquillity
of hearts of strangers and acquaintances, by means of the edge of
the scimitar of fraud.  One day this trefoil of roguery met at
the public bath, and, according to their homogeneous nature they
intermingled as intimately as the comb with the hair; they tucked
up their garment of amity to the waist of union, entered the tank
of agreement, seated themselves in the hot-house of love, and
poured from the dish of folly, by means of the key of hypocrisy,
the water of profusion upon the head of intercourse; they rubbed
with the brush of familiarity and the soap of affection the
stains of jealousies from each other's limbs.  After a while,
when they had brought the pot of concord to boil by the fire of
mutual laudation, they warmed the bath of association with the
breeze of kindness, and came out.  In the dressing-room all three
of them happened simultaneously to find a ring, the gem of which
surpassed the imagination of the jeweler of destiny, and the like
of which he had never beheld in the storehouse of possibility.
In short, these worthy ladies contended with each other for
possession of the ring, until at length the mother of the bathman
came forward and proposed that they should entrust the ring to
her in the meanwhile, and it should be the prize of the one who
most cleverly deceived and befooled her husband, to which they
all agreed, and then departed for their respective
domiciles.[FN#510]

Mr. Arbuthnot's limits pertained only of abstracts of the tricks
played upon their husbands by the three ladies--which the story-
teller gives at great length--and that of the kazi's wife is as
follows:

The kazi's wife knows that a certain carpenter, who lived close
to her, was very much in love with her.  She sends her maid to
him with a message to say that the flame of his love had taken
effect upon her heart, and that he must make an underground
passage between his house and her dwelling, so that they might
communicate with each other freely by means of the mine.  The
carpenter digs the passage, and the lady pays him a visit, and
says to him, "To-morrow I shall come here, and you must bring the
kazi to marry me to you."  The next day the kazi goes to his
office; the lady goes to the carpenter's house, and send him to
bring her husband, the kazi, to marry them.  The carpenter
fetches him, and, as the kazi hopes for a good present, he comes
willingly enough, but is much surprised at the extreme likeness
between the bride and his own wife.  The more he looks at her,
the more he is in doubt; and at last, offering an excuse to fetch
something, he rushes off to his own house, but is forestalled by
his souse, who had gone thither by the passage, and on his
arrival is lying on her bed.  The kazi makes some excuses for his
sudden entry into her room, and, after some words, goes back to
the carpenter's house; but his wife had preceded him, and is
sitting in her place.  Again he begins the ceremony, but is
attracted by a black mole on the corner of the bride's lip, which
he could have sworn was the same as that possessed by his wife.
Making more excuses, and in spite of the remonstrances of the
carpenter, he hurries back to his house once more; but his wife
had again got there before him, and he finds her reading a book,
and much astonished at his second visit.  She suggests that he is
mad, and he admits that his conduct is curious, and returns to
the carpenter's house to complete the ceremony.  This is again
frequently interrupted, but finally he marries his own wife to
the carpenter, and, having behaved in such an extraordinary
manner throughout, is sent off to a lunatic asylum.

For the tricks of the two other ladies, and for many other
equally diverting tales, I refer the reader to Mr. Arbuthnot's
pleasing and instructive little book, which is indeed an
admirable epitome of the history and literature of Persia, and
one whi