n; in the
Panjábí version, he relinquishes his wealth to a fakír as a pious
action; in the Kashmírí and in the romance of Sir Isumbras, the
hero loses his wealth as a punishment for his overweening ride,
in the legend of St. Eustache, as in the story of Job, the
calamities which overtake the Christian convert are designed by
Heaven as a trial of his patience and fortitude; while even in
the corrupted Tibetan story the ruin of the monarch is reflected
in the destruction of the parents of the heroine by a hurricane.
In both the Kashmírí and the Panjábí versions, the father is
swallowed by a fish (or an alligator) in re-crossing the river to
fetch his second child, in the Tibetan story the wife loses her
husband, who is killed by a snake, and having taken one of her
children over the river, she is returning for the other when,
looking back, she discovers her babe in the jaws of a wolf: both
her children perish: in the European versions they are carried
off by wild beasts and rescued by strangers--the romance of Sir
Isumbras is singular in representing the number of children to be
three. Only in the Arabian story do we find the father carrying
his wife and children in safety across the stream, and the latter
afterwards lost in the forest. The Kashmírí and Gesta versions
correspond exactly in representing the shipman as seizing the
lady because her husband could not pay the passage-money: in the
Arabian she is entrapped in the ship, owned by a Magian, on the
pretext that there is on board a woman in labour; in Sir Isumbras
she is forcibly "bought" by the Soudan. She is locked up in a
chest by the Magian; sent to rule his country by the Soudan;
respectfully treated by the merchant in the Kashmírí story, and,
apparently, also by Kandan in the Panjábí legend; in the story of
St. Eustache her persecutor dies and she is living in humble
circumstances when discovered by her husband.--I think there is
internal evidence, apart from the existence of the Tibetan
version, to lead to the conclusion that the story is of Buddhist
extraction, and if such be the fact, it furnishes a further
example of the indebtedness of Christian hagiology to Buddhist
tales and legends.




AL-MALIK AL-ZAHIR AND THE SIXTEEN CAPTAINS OF POLICE.--Vol. XII.
                             p. 1.



We must, I think, regard this group of tales as being genuine
narratives of the exploits of Egyptian sharpers. From the days of
Herodotus to the present time, Egypt has bred the most expert
thieves in the world. The policemen don't generally exhibit much
ability for coping with the sharpers whose tricks they so well
recount; but indeed our home-grown "bobbies" are not particularly
quick-witted.




              THE THIEF'S TALE.--Vol. XII. p. 28.



A parallel to the woman's trick of shaving off the beards and
blackening the faces of the robbers is found in the well-known
legend, as told by Herodotus (Euterpe, 121), of the robbery of
the treasure-house of Rhampsinitus king of Egypt, where the
clever thief, having made the soldiers dead drunk, shaves off the
right side of their beards and then decamps with his brother's
headless body.




         THE NINTH CONSTABLE'S STORY.--Vol. XII. p. 29.



The narrow escape of the singing-girl hidden under a pile of
halfah grass may be compared with an adventure of a fugitive
Mexican prince whose history, as related by Prescott, is as full
of romantic daring and hair's breadth 'scapes as that of
Scanderbeg or the "Young Chevader." This prince had just time to
turn the crest of a hill as his enemies were climbing it on the
other side, when he fell in with a girl who was reaping chian, a
Mexican plant, the seed of which is much used in the drinks of
the country. He persuaded her to cover him with the stalks she
had been cutting. When his pursuers came up and inquired if she
had seen the fugitive, the girl coolly answered that she had, and
pointed out a path as the one he had taken.




       THE FIFTEENTH CONSTABLE'S STORY.--Vol. XII. p. 40.



The concluding part of this story differs very materially from
that of the Greek legend of Ibycus (fl. B.C. 540), which is thus
related in a small MS. collection of Arabian and Persian
anecdotes in my possession, done into English from the French:

It is written in the history of the first kings that in the reign
of a Grecian king there lived a philosopher named Ibycus, who
surpassed in sagacity all other sages of Greece. Ibycus was once
sent by the king to a neighbouring court. On the way he was
attacked by robbers who, suspecting him to have much money,
formed the design of killing him "Your object in taking my life,"
said Ibycus, "is to obtain my money; I give it up to you, but
allow me to live." The robbers paid no attention to his words,
and persisted in their purpose. The wretched Ibycus, in his
despair, looked about him to see if any one was coming to his as
assistance, but no person was in sight. At that very moment a
flock of cranes flew overhead. "O cranes!" cried Ibycus, "know
that I have been seized in this desert by these wicked men, and I
die from their blows. Avenge me, and demand from them my blood."
At these words the robbers burst into laughter: "To take away
life from those who have lost their reason," they observed, "is
to add nothing to their hurt." So saying, they killed Ibycus and
divided his money. On receipt of the news that Ibycus had been
murdered, the inhabitants of the town were exasperated and felt
great sorrow. They caused strict inquiries to be made for the
murderers, but they could not be found. After some time the
Greeks were celebrating a feast. The inhabitants of the adjoining
districts came in crowds to the temples. The murderers of Ibycus
also came, and everywhere showed themselves. Meanwhile a flock of
cranes appeared in the air and hovered above the people, uttering
cries so loud and prolonged that the prayers and ceremonies were
interrupted. One of the robbers looked with a smile at his
comrades, saying, by way of joke, "These cranes come without
doubt to avenge the blood of Ibycus." Some one of the town, who
was near them, heard these words, repeated them to his neighbour,
and they together reported them to the king The robbers were
taken, strictly cross-examined, confessed their crime, and
suffered for it a just punishment. In this way the cranes
inflicted vengeance on the murderers of Ibycus. But we ought to
see in this incident a matter which is concealed in it: This
philosopher although apparently addressing his words to the
cranes, was really imploring help from their Creator; he hoped,
in asking their aid, that He would not suffer his blood to flow
unavenged. So God accomplished his hopes, and willed that cranes
should be the cause that his death was avenged in order that the
sages of the world should learn from it the power and wisdom of
the Creator.

This ancient legend was probably introduced into Arabian
literature in the 9th century when translations of so many of the
best Greek works were made, and, no doubt, it was adapted in the
following Indian (Muslim) story:[FN#595]

There was a certain pir, or saint, of great wisdom, learning, and
sanctity, who sat by the wayside expounding the Kurán to all who
would listen to him. He dwelt in the out-buildings of a ruined
mosque close by, his only companion being a maina, or
hill-starling, which he had taught to proclaim the excellence of
the formula of his religion, saying, "The Prophet is just!" It
chanced that two travellers passing that way beheld the holy man
at his devotions, and though far from being religious persons yet
tarried a while to hear the words of truth. Evening now drawing
on, the saint invited his apparently pious auditors to his
dwelling, and set before them such coarse food as he had to
offer. Having eaten and refreshed themselves, they were
astonished at the wisdom displayed by the bird, who continued to
repeat holy texts from the Kurán. The meal ended, they all lay
down to sleep, and while the good man reposed, his treacherous
guests, who envied him the possession a bird that in their hands
might be the means of enriching them, determined to steal the
treasure and murder its master. So they stabbed the sleeping
devotee to the heart and then seized hold of the bird's cage.
But, unperceived by them, the door of it had been left open and
the bird was not to be found. After searching for the bird in
vain, they considered it necessary to dispose of the body, since,
if discovered, suspicion would assuredly fall upon them, and
carrying it away to what they deemed a safe distance they buried
it. Vexed to be obliged to leave the place without obtaining the
reward of their evil deeds, they again looked carefully for the
bird, but without success; it was nowhere to be seen, and so they
were compelled to go forward without the object of their search.
The maina had witnessed the atrocious deed, and unseen had
followed the murderers to the place were they had buried the
body, it then perched upon the tree beneath which the saint had
been wont to enlighten the minds of his followers, and when they
assembled flew into their midst, exclaiming, "The Prophet is
just!" making short flights and then returning. These unusual
motions, together with the absence of their preceptor, induced
the people to follow it and directing its flight to the grave of
its master, it uttered a mournful cry over the newly-covered
grave. The villagers, astonished, began to remove the earth, and
soon discovered the bloody corse.  Surprised and horror-stricken,
they looked about for some traces of the murderers, and
perceiving that the bird had resumed the movements which had
first induced them to follow it, they suffered it to lead them
forward. Before evening fell, the avengers came up with two men,
who no sooner heard the maina exclaim, "The Prophet is just'" and
saw the crowd that accompanied it, than they fell upon their
knees, confessing that the Prophet had indeed brought their evil
deeds to light; so, their crime being thus made manifest, summary
justice was inflicted upon them.




     TALE OF THE DAMSEL TOHFAT AL-KULUB.--Vol. XII. p. 47.



An entertaining story, but very inconsistent in the character of
Iblis, who is constantly termed, in good Muslim fashion, "the
accursed," yet seems to be somewhat of a follower of the Prophet,
and on the whole a good-natured sort of fellow. His mode of
expressing his approval of the damsel's musical "talent" is, to
say the least, original.




                WOMEN'S WILES.--Vol. XII. p. 99.



A variant--perhaps an older form--of this story occurs in the
tale of Prince Fadlallah, which is interwoven with the History of
Prince Calaf and the Princess of China, in the Persian tales of
"The Thousand and One Days":

The prince, on his way to Baghdad, is attacked by robbers, his
followers are all slain, and himself made prisoner, but he is set
at liberty by the compassionate wife of the robber-chief during
his absence on a plundering expedition. When he reaches Baghdad
he has no resource but to beg his bread, and having stationed
himself in front of a large mansion, an old female slave
presently comes out and gives him a loaf. At this moment a gust
of wind blew aside the curtain of a window and discovered to his
admiring eyes a most beautiful damsel, of whom he became
immediately enamoured. He inquired of a passerby the name of the
owner of the mansion, and was informed that it belonged to a man
called Mouaffac, who had been lately governor of the city, but
having quarrelled with the kází, who was of a revengeful
disposition, the latter had found means to disgrace him with the
khalíf and to have him deprived of his office. After lingering
near the house in vain till nightfall, in hopes of once more
obtaining a glimpse of this beauty, he retired for the night to a
burying-ground, where he was soon joined by two thieves, who
pressed upon him a share of the good cheer with which they had
provided themselves, but while the thieves were feasting and
talking over a robbery which they had just accomplished, the
police suddenly pounced upon them, and took all three and cast
them into prison.

In the morning they were examined by the kází, and the thieves,
seeing it was useless to deny it, confessed their crime.  The
prince then told the kází how he chanced to fall into company of
the thieves, who confirmed all he said, and he was set at
liberty. Then the kází began to question him as to how he had
employed his time since he came to Baghdád, to which he answered
very frankly but concealed his rank. On his mentioning the brief
glance he had of the beautiful lady at the window of the
ex-governor's house, the kází's eyes sparkled with apparent
satifaction, and he assured the prince that he should have the
lady for his bride; for, believing the prince to be a mere
beggarly adventurer, he resolved to foist him on Mouaffac as the
son of a great monarch So, having sent the prince to the bath and
provided him with rich garments, the kází dispatched a messenger
to request Mouaffac to come to him on important business. When
the ex-governor arrived, the kází told him blandly that there was
now an excellent opportunity for doing away the ill will that had
so long existed between them. "It is this," continued he: "the
prince of Basra, having fallen in love with your daughter from
report of her great beauty, has just come to Baghdád, unknown to
his father, and intends to demand her of you in marriage. He is
lodged in my house, and is most anxious that this affair should
be arranged by my interposition, which is the more agreeable to
me, since it will, I trust, be the means of reconciling our
differences." Mouaffac expressed his surprise that the prince of
Basra should think of marrying his daughter, and especially that
the proposal should come through the kází, of all men. The kází
begged him to forget their former animosity and consent to the
immediate celebration of the nuptials. While they were thus
talking, the prince entered, in a magnificent dress, and was not
a little astonished to be presented to Mouaffac by the
treacherous kází as the prince of Basra, who had come as a suitor
for his daughter in marriage. The ex-governor saluted him with
every token of profound respect, and expressed his sense of the
honour of such an alliance: his daughter was unworthy to wait
upon the meanest of the prince's slaves. In brief, the marriage
is at once celebrated, and the prince duly retires to the bridal
chamber with the beauteous daughter of Mouaffac. But in the
morning, at an early hour, a servant of the kází knocks at his
door, and, on the prince opening it, says that he brings him his
rags of clothes and is required to take back the dress which the
kází had lent him yesterday to personate the prince of Basra. The
prince, having donned his tattered garments, said to his wife,
"The kází thinks he has married you to a wretched beggar, but I
am no whit inferior in rank to the prince of Basra--I am also a
prince, being the only son of the king of Mosel," and then
proceeded to recount all his adventures. When he had concluded
his recital, the lady despatched a servant to procure a suitable
dress for the prince, which when he had put on, she said, "I see
it all: the kází no doubt, believes that by this time we are all
overwhelmed with shame and grief. But what must be his feelings
when he learns that he has been a benefactor to his enemies!
Before you disclose to him your real rank, however, we must
contrive to punish him for his malicious intentions. There is a
dyer in this town who has a frightfully ugly daughter-- but leave
this affair in my hands."

The lady then dressed herself in plain but becoming apparel, and
went out of the house alone. She proceeded to the court of the
kází, who no sooner cast his eyes upon her than he was struck
with her elegant form. He sent an officer to inquire of her who
she was and what she had come about. She made answer that she was
the daughter of an artisan in the city. and that she desired to
have some private conversation with the kází. When the officer
reported the lady's reply, the kází directed her to be conducted
into a private chamber, where he presently joined her, and
gallantly placed his services at her disposal. The lady now
removed her veil, and asked him whether he saw anything ugly or
repulsive in her features. The kází on seeing her beautiful face
was suddenly plunged in the sea of love, and declared that her
forehead was of polished silver, her eyes were sparkling
diamonds, her mouth a ruby casket containing a bracelet of
pearls. Then she displayed her arms, so white and plump, the
sight of which threw the kází into ecstasies and almost caused
him to faint. Quoth the lady, "I must tell you, my lord, that
with all the beauty I possess, my father, a dyer in the city,
keeps me secluded, and declares to all who come to ask me in
marriage that I am an ugly, deformed monster, a mere skeleton,
lame, and full of diseases." On this the kází burst into a tirade
against the brutal father who could thus traduce so much beauty,
and vowed that he would make her his wife that same day. The
lady, after expressing her fears that he would not find it easy
to gain her father's consent, took her leave and returned home.

The kází lost no time in sending for the dyer, and, after
complimenting him upon his reputation for piety, said to him, "I
am informed that behind the curtain of chastity you have a
daughter ripe for marriage. Is not this true?" Replied the dyer,
"My lord, you have been rightly informed. I have a daughter who
is indeed fully ripe for marriage, or she is more than thirty
years of age, but the poor creature is not fit to be a wife to
any man. She is very ugly, lame, leprous, and foolish. In short,
she is such a monster that I am obliged to keep her out of all
people's sight." "Ha!" exclaimed the kází, "you can't impose on
me with such a tale. I was prepared for it. But let me tell you
that I myself am ready and willing to marry that same ugly and
leprous daughter of yours, with all her defects." When the dyer
heard this, he looked the kází full in the face and said, "My
lord, you are welcome to divert yourself by making a jest of my
daughter." No," replied the kází "I am quite in earnest. I demand
your daughter in marriage." The dyer broke into laughter, saying,
'By Allah, some one has meant to play you a trick, my lord. I
forewarn you that she is ugly, lame, and leprous."  "True,"
responded the kází, with a knowing smile; "I know her by these
tokens. I shall take her notwithstanding." The dyer, seeing him
determined to marry his daughter, and being now convinced that he
had been imposed upon by some ill-wisher, thought to himself, "I
must demand of him a round sum of money which may cause him to
cease troubling me any further about my poor daughter." So he
said to the kází, "My lord, I am ready to obey your command; but
I will not part with my daughter unless you pay me beforehand a
dowry of a thousand sequins." Replied the kází, "Although,
methinks, your demand is somewhat exorbitant, yet I will pay you
the money at once." which having done, he ordered the contract to
be drawn up. But when it came to be signed the dyer declared that
he would not sign save in the presence of a hundred men of the
law.  "Thou art very distrustful," said the kází, "but I will
comply in everything, for I am resolved to make sure of thy
daughter." So he sent for all the men of law in the city, and
when they were assembled at the house of the kází, the dyer said
that he was now willing to sign the contract; "But I declare," he
added, "in the presence of these honourable witnesses, that I do
so on the condition that if my daughter should not prove to your
liking when you have seen her, and you should determine to
divorce her, you shall oblige yourself to give her a thousand
sequins of gold in addition to the same amount which I have
already received from you. "Agreed," said the kází, "I oblige
myself to it, and call this whole assembly to be witnesses. Art
thou now satisfied?" "I am," replied the dyer, who then went his
way, saying that he would at once send him his bride.

As soon as the dyer was gone, the assembly broke up, and the kází
was left a house. He had been two years married to the daughter
of a merchant of Baghdád, whom he had hitherto lived on very
amicable terms. When she heard that he was arranging for a second
marriage, she came to him in a great rage. "How now," said she,
"two hands in one glove! two swords in one scabbard! two wives in
one house! Go, fickle man! Since the caresses of a young and
faithful wife cannot secure your constancy, I am ready to yield
my place to my rival and retire to my own family. Repudiate me--
return my dowry--and you shall never see me more." "I am glad you
have thus anticipated me," answered the kází, "for I was somewhat
perplexed how to acquaint you of my new marriage." So saying, he
opened a coffer and took out a purse of five hundred sequins of
gold, and putting it into her hands, "There, woman," said he,
"thy dowry is in that purse: begone, and take with you what
belongs to you. I divorce thee once; I divorce thee twice, three
times I divorce thee. And that thy parents may be satisfied thou
art divorced from me, I shall give thee a certificate signed by
myself and my nayb." This he did accordingly, and his wife went
to her father's house, with her bill of divorce and her dowry.

The kází then gave orders to furnish an apartment sumptuously for
the reception of his bride. The floor was spread with velvet
carpets, the walls were hung with rich tapestry, and couches of
gold and silver brocade were placed around the room. The bridal
chamber was decked with caskets filled with the most exquisite
perfumes. When everything was in readiness, the kází impatiently
expected the arrival of his bride, and at last was about to
despatch a messenger to the dyer's when a porter entered,
carrying a wooden chest covered with a piece of green taffeta.
"What hast thou brought me there, friend?" asked the kází. "My
lord," replied the porter, setting the chest on the floor, "I
bring your bride." The kází opened the chest, and discovered a
woman of three feet and a half, defective in every limb and
feature. He was horrified at the sight of this object, and
throwing the covering hastily over it, demanded of the porter,
"What wouldst thou have me do with this frightful creature?" "My
lord," said the porter, "this is the daughter of Omar the dyer,
who told me that you had espoused her out of pure inclination."
"O Allah!" exclaimed the kází, "is it possible to marry such a
monster as this?" Just then, the dyer, well knowing that the kází
must be surprised, came in. "Thou wretch," cried the kází, "how
cost thou dare to trifle with me? In place of this hideous
object, send hither your other daughter, whose beauty is beyond
comparison; otherwise thou shalt soon know what it is to insult
me." Quoth the dyer, "My lord, I swear, by Him who out of
darkness produced light, that I have no other daughter but this.
I told you repeatedly that she was not for your purpose, but you
would not believe my words. Who, then, is to blame?" Upon this
the kází began to cool, and said so the dyer, "I must tell you,
friend Omar, that this morning there came to me a most beautiful
damsel, who pretended that you were her father, and that you
represented her to everybody as a monster, on purpose to deter
all suitors that came to ask her in marriage." "My lord,"
answered the dyer, "this beautiful damsel must be an impostor;
some one, undoubtedly, owes you a grudge." Then the kází, having
reflected for a few minutes, said to the dyer, "Bid the porter
carry thy daughter home again. Keep the thousand sequins of gold
which I gave thee, but ask no more of me, if thou desirest that
we should continue friends." The dyer, knowing the implacable
disposition of the kází, thought it advisable to content himself
with what he had already gained, and the kází, having formally
divorced his hideous bride, sent her away with her father. The
affair soon got wind in the city and everybody was highly
diverted with the trick practiced on the kází.

It will be observed that in the Arabian story there are two
clever devices: that of the lady who tricks the boastful
merchant, whose motto was that men's craft is superior to women's
craft, into marrying the ugly daughter of the kází; and that of
the merchant to get rid of his bad bargain by disgusting the kází
with the alliance. The scene at the house of the worthy judge--
the crowd of low rascals piping, drumming, and capering, and
felicitating themselves on their pretended kinsman the merchant's
marriage--is highly humorous. This does not occur in the Persian
story, because it is the kází, who has been duped into marrying
the dyer's deformed daughter, and she is therefore simply packed
off again to her father's house.

That the tales of the "Thousand and One Days" are not (as is
supposed by the writer of an article on the several English
versions of The Nights in the "Edinburgh Review" for July 1886,
p. 167) mere imitations of Galland[FN#596] is most certain, apart
from the statement in the preface to Petis' French translation,
which there is no reason to doubt--see vol. x. of The Nights, p.
166, note 1. Sir William Ouseley, in his Travels, vol. ii., p.
21, note, states that he brought from Persia a manuscript which
comprised, inter alia, a portion of the "Hazár ú Yek Rúz," or the
Thousand and One Days, which agreed with Petis' translation of
the same stories. In the Persian collection entitled "Shamsa ú
Kuhkuha" occur several of the tales and incidents, for example,
the Story of Nasiraddoli King of Mousel, the Merchant of Baghdád,
and the Fair Zeinib, while the Story of the King of Thibet and
the Princess of the Naimans has its parallel in the Turkish "Kirk
Vazír," or Forty Vazírs. Again, the Story of Couloufe and the
Beautiful Dilara reminds us of that of Haji the Cross-grained in
Malcolm's "Sketches of Persia." But of the French translation not
a single good word can be said--the Oriental "costume" and
phraseology have almost entirely disappeared, and between Petis
de la Croix and the author of "Gil Blas"--who is said to have had
a hand in the work--the tales have become ludicrously
Frenchified. The English translation made from the French is, if
possible, still worse. We there meet with "persons of quality,"
"persons of fashion," with "seigneurs," and a thousand and one
other inconsistencies and absurdities. A new translation is much
to be desired. The copy of the Persian text made by Petis is
probably in the Paris Library and Ouseley's fragment is doubtless
among his other Oriental MSS. in the Bodleian. But one should
suppose that copies of the "Hazár ú Yek Rúz" may be readily
procured at Ispahán or Tehrán, and at a very moderate cost, since
the Persians now-a-days are so poor in general that they are
eager to exchange any books they possess for the "circulating
medium."




  NUR AL-DIN AND THE DAMSEL SITT AL-MILAH.--Vol. XII. p. 107.



This is an excellent tale, the incidents occur naturally and the
reader's interest in the fortunes of the hero and heroine never
flags. The damsel's sojourn with the old Muezzin--her dispatching
him daily to the shroff--bears some analogy to part of the tale
of Ghanim the Slave of Love (vol. ii. of The Nights), which, by
the way, finds close parallels in the Turkish "Forty Vazírs" (the
Lady's 18th story in Mr. Gibb's translation), the Persian
"Thousand and One Days" (story of Aboulcasem of Basra), and the
"Bagh o Bahár" (story of the First Dervish). This tale is, in
fact, a compound of incidents occurring in a number of different
Arabian fictions.




 TALE OF KING INS BIN KAYS AND HIS DAUGHTER.--Vol. XII. p. 138.



Here we have another instance of a youth falling in love with the
portrait of a pretty girl (see ante, p. 236). The doughty deeds
performed by the young prince against thousands of his foes throw
into the shade the exploits of the Bedouin hero Antar, and those
of our own famous champions Sir Guy of Warwick and Sir Bevis of
Hampton.




                       ADDITIONAL NOTES.



                  FIRUZ AND HIS WIFE, p. 216.



I find yet another variant of this story in my small MS.
collection of Arabian and Persian anecdotes, translated from the
French (I have not ascertained its source):

They relate that a lord of Basra, while walking one day in his
garden, saw the wife of his gardener, who was very beautiful and
virtuous. He gave a commission to his gardener which required him
to leave his home. He then said to his wife "Go and shut all the
doors." She went out and soon returned, saying, "I have shut all
the doors except one, which I am unable to shut." The lord asked,
"And where is that door?" She replied "That which is between you
and the respect due to your Maker: there is no way of closing
it." When the lord heard these words, he asked the woman's
pardon, and became a better and a wiser man.

We have here a unique form of the wide-spread tale of "The Lion's
Track," which, while it omits the husband's part, yet reflects
the virtuous wife's rebuke of the enamoured sultan.




              THE SINGER AND THE DRUGGIST, p. 219.



If Straparola's version is to be considered as an adaptation of
Ser Giovanni's novella-- which I do not think very probable--it
must be allowed to be an improvement on his model. In the Arabian
story the singer is first concealed in a mat, next in the oven,
and again in the mat, after which he escapes by clambering over
the parapet of the druggist's roof to that of an adjoining house,
and his subsequent adventures seem to be added from a different
story. In Ser Giovanni's version the lover is first hid beneath a
heap of half dried clothes, and next behind the street door, from
which he escapes the instant the husband enters, and the latter
is treated as a madman by the wife's relatives and the
neighbours--an incident which has parallels in other tales of
women's craft and its prototype, perhaps, in the story of the man
who compiled a book of the Wiles of Woman, as told in "Syntipas,"
the Greek version of the Book of Sindibad. In Straparola the
lover--as in the Arabian story--is concealed three times, first
in a basket, then between two boardings, and lastly in a chest
containing law papers; and the husband induces him to recount his
adventures in presence of the lady's friends, which having
concluded, the lover declares the story to be wholly fictitious:
this is a much more agreeable ending than that of Giovanni's
story, and, moreover, it bears a close analogy to the latter part
of the Persian tale, where the lover exclaims he is right glad to
find it all a dream. Straparola's version has another point of
resemblance in the Persian story--so far as can be judged from
Scott's abstract--and also in the Arabian story: the lover
discovers the lady by chance, and is not advised to seek out some
object of love, as in Giovanni; in the Arabian the singer is
counselled by the druggist to go about and entertain wine
parties. Story-comparers have too much cause to be dissatisfied
with Jonathan Scott's translation of the "Bahár-i- Dánish"--a
work avowedly derived from Indian sources--although it is far
superior to Dow's garbled version. The abstracts of a number of
the tales which Scott gives in an appendix, while of some use,
are generally tantalising: some stories he has altogether omitted
"because they are similar to tales already well known"
(unfortunately the comparative study of popular fictions was
hardly begun in his time), while of others bare outlines are
furnished, because he considered them "unfit for general
perusal." But his work, even as it is, has probably never been
"generally" read, and he seems to have had somewhat vague notions
of "propriety," to judge by his translations from the Arabic and
Persian. A complete English rendering of the "Bahár-i-Dánish"
would be welcomed by all interested in the history of fiction.




         THE FULLER, HIS WIFE AND THE TROOPER, p. 236.



The trick played on the silly fuller of dressing him up as a
Turkish soldier resembles that of the Three Deceitful Women who
found a gold ring in the public bath, as related in the Persian
story-book, "Shamsa ú Kuhkuha:"

When the wife of the superintendent of police was apprised that
her turn had come, she revolved and meditated for some time what
trick she was to play off on her lord, and after having come to a
conclusion she said one evening to him, "To-morrow I wish that we
should both enjoy ourselves at home without interruptions, and I
mean to prepare some cakes." He replied, "Very well, my dear; I
have also longed for such an occasion." The lady had a servant
who was very obedient and always covered with the mantle of
attachment to her. The next morning she called this youth and
said to him, "I have long contemplated the hyacinth grove of thy
symmetrical stature; and I know that thou travellest constancy
and faithfully on the road of compliance with all my wishes, and
that thou seekest to serve me. I have a little business which I
wish thee to do for me." The servant answered, "I shall be happy
to comply. Then the lady gave him a thousand diners and said, "Go
to the convent which is in our vicinity; give this money to one
of the kalandars there and say to him, 'A prisoner whom the Amír
had surrendered to the police has escaped last night. He closely
resembles thee, and as the superintendent of the police is unable
to account to the Amír, he has sent a man to take thee instead of
the escaped criminal. I have compassion for thee and mean to
rescue thee. Take this sum of money; give me thy dress; and flee
from the town; for if thou remainest in it till the morning thou
wilt be subjected to torture and wilt lose thy life.'" The
servant acted as he was bid, and brought the garments to his
mistress. When it was morning she said to her husband, "I know
you have long wished to eat sweetmeats, and I shall make some
to-day." He answered, "Very well." His wife made all her
preparations and commenced to bake the sweetmeats. He said to
her, "Last night a theft was committed in a certain place, and I
sat up late to extort confessions; and as I have spent a
sleepless night, I feel tired and wish to repose a little." The
lady replied, "Very well."

Accordingly the superintendent of the police reclined on the
pillow of rest; and when the sweetmeat was ready his wife took a
little and putting an opiate into it she handed it to him,
saying, "How long will you sleep? To-day is a day of feasting and
pleasure, not of sleep and laziness. Lift up your head and see
whether I have made the sweets according to your taste." He
raised his head, swallowed a piece of the hot cake and lay down
again. The morsel was still in his throat when consciousness left
and a deep sleep overwhelmed him. His wife immediately undressed
him and put on him the garments of the kalandar. The servant
shaved his head and made some tattoo marks on his body. When the
night set in the lady called her servant and said, "Hyacinth, be
kind enough to take the superintendent on thy back, and carry him
to the convent instead of that kalandar, and if he wishes to
return to the house in the morning, do not let him." The servant
obeyed. Towards dawn the superintendent recovered his senses a
little; but as the opiate had made his palate very bitter, he
became extremely thirsty. He fancied that he was in his own
house, and so he exclaimed, "Narcissus, bring water." The
kalandars awoke from sleep, and after hearing several shouts of
this kind, they concluded that he was under the influence of
bang, and said, "Poor fellow! the narcissus is in the garden;
this is the convent of sufferers, and there are green garments
enough here. Arise and sober thyself, for the morning and
harbinger of benefits as well as of the acquisition of the
victuals for subsistence is approaching." When the superintendent
heard these words he thought they were a dream, for he had not
yet fully recovered his senses. He sat quietly, but was amazed on
beholding the walls and ceiling of the convent: he got up, looked
at the clothes in which he was dressed and at the marks tattooed
on his body, and began to doubt whether he was awake or asleep.
He washed his face, and perceived that the caravan of his
mustachios had likewise departed from the plain of his
countenance.

In this state of perplexity he went out of the convent and
proceeded to his house. There his wife, with her male and female
servants, was expecting his arrival. He approached the house and
placed his hand on the knocker of the door, but was received by
Hyacinth, who said, "Kalandar, whom seekest thou?" The
superintendent rejoined, "I want to enter the house." Hyacinth
continued, "Thou hast to-day evidently taken thy morning draught
of bang earlier and more copiously than usual, since thou hast
foolishly mistaken the road to thy convent. Depart! This is not a
place in which vagabond kalandars are harboured. This is the
palace of the superintendent of the police. and if the symurgh
looks with incivility from the fastness of the west of Mount Káf
at this place, the wings of its impertinence will at once become
singed." The superintendent said, "What nonsense art thou
speaking? Go out of my way, for I do not relish thy imbecile
prattle." But when he wanted to enter, Hyacinth struck him with a
bludgeon on the shoulder, which the superintendent returned with
a box on the ear, and both began to wrestle together. At that
moment the lady and her maid-servants rushed forth from the rear
and assailed him with sticks and stones, shouting, "This kalandar
wishes in plain daylight to force his way into the house of the
superintendent. What a pity that the superintendent is sick, or
else this crime would have to be expiated on the gallows!" In the
meantime all the neighbours assembled, and on seeing the
shameless kalandar's proceedings they cried, "Look at that
impudent kalandar who wants forcibly to enter the house of the
superintendent." Ultimately the crowd amounted to more than five
hundred persons, and the gentleman was put to flight and pursued
by all the little boys, who pelted him with stones till they
expelled him from the town.

At the distance of three farsangs from the town there was a
village where the superintendent concealed himself in the corner
of a mosque. During the evenings he went from house to house and
begged for food to sustain life, until his mustachios again grew
and the tattooed scars gradually began to disappear. Whenever
anyone inquired for the superintendent at his house, he was
informed by the servants that the gentleman was sick. After one
month had expired, the grief of separation and the misery of his
condition had again driven him back to the city. He went to the
convent because fear hindered him from going to the house. His
wife happened one day to catch a glimpse of him from her window,
and perceived him sitting in the same dress with a company of
kalandars. She felt compassion for him, called the servant and
said, "The superintendent has had enough of this!" She made a
loaf of bread and put some opiate into it, and said, "When the
kalandars are asleep, you must go and place this loaf under the
pillow of the superintendent." The servant obeyed, and when the
gentleman awoke in the middle of the night he was surprised to
find the loaf. He fancied that when his companions had during the
night returned from begging, they had placed it there, and so he
ate some of it. During the same night the servant went there by
the command of the lady, took his master on his back and carried
him home. When it was morning, the lady took off the kalandar's
clothes from her husband and dressed him in his own garments, and
began to make sweetmeats as on the former occasion. After some
time he began to move, and his wife exclaimed, "O superintendent,
do not sleep so much. I have told you that we shall spend this
day in joy and pleasure, and it was not fair of you to pass the
time in this lazy way. Lift up your head and see what beautiful
sweetmeats I have baked for you." When he opened his eyes, and
saw himself dressed in his own clothes and at home, the rosebush
of his amazement again brought forth the flowers of astonishment,
and he said, "God be praised! What has happened to me?" He sat
up, and exclaimed, "Wife, things have happened to me which I can
scarcely describe." She replied, "From the uneasy motions which
you have made in your sleep, it appears you must have had
extraordinary dreams." "Dreams, forsooth," said he, "since the
moment I lay down I have experienced the most strange
adventures." "Certainly," rejoined the lady, "last night you have
been eating food disagreeing with your constitution, and to-day
the vapours of it have ascended into your brains, and have caused
you all this distress." The superintendent said, "Yes last night
we went to a party in the house of Serjeant Bahman, and there was
roasted pillau, of which I ate somewhat more than usual, and the
vapour of it has occasioned me all this trouble.''[FN#597]

Strikingly similar to this story is the trick of the first lady
on her husband in the "Fabliau des Trois Dames qui trouverent un
Anel." Having made him drunk, she causes his head to be shaved,
dresses him in the habit of a monk, and carries him, assisted by
her lover, to the entrance of a convent. When he awakes and sees
himself thus transformed he imagines that God by a miraculous
exercise of His grace had called him to the monastic life. He
presents himself before the abbot and requests to be received
among the brethren. The lady hastens to the convent in
well-feigned despair, and is exhorted to be resigned and to
congratulate her husband on the saintly vow he has taken. "Many a
good man, ' says the poet, "has been betrayed by woman and by her
harlotry. This one became a monk in the abbey, where he abode a
very long time. Wherefore, I counsel all people who hear this
story told, that they ought not to trust in their wives, nor in
their households, if they have not first proved that they are
full of virtues. Many a man has been deceived by women and by
their treachery. This one became monk against right, who would
never have been such in his life, if his wife had not deceived
him.''[FN#598]

The second lady's trick in the fabliau is a very close parallel
to the story in The Nights, vol. v. p. 96.[FN#599] She had for
dinner on a Friday some salted and smoked eels, which her husband
bade her cook, but there was no fire in the house. Under the
pretext of going to have them cooked at a neighbour's fire she
goes out and finds her lover, at whose house she remains a whole
week. On the following Friday, at the hour of dinner, she enters
a neighbour's house and asks leave to cook the eels, saying that
her husband is angry with her for having no fire, and that she
did not dare to go back, lest he should take off her head. As
soon as the eels are cooked she carries them piping hot to her
own house. The husband asks her where she has been for eight
days, and commences to beat her. She cries for help and the
neighbours come in, and amongst them the one at whose fire the
eels had been cooked, who swears that the wife had only just left
her house and ridicules the husband for his assertion that she
had been away a whole week. The husband gets into a great rage
and is locked up for a madman.

The device of the third lady seems a reflection of the
"Elopement," but without the underground tunnel between the
houses of the wife and the lover. The lady proposes to her lover
to marry him, and he believes that she is only jesting, seeing
that she is already married, but she assures him that she is
quite in earnest, and even undertakes that her husband will
consent. The lover is to come for her husband and take him to the
house of Dan Eustace, where he has a fair niece, whom the lover
is to pretend he wishes to espouse, if he will give her to him.
The wife will go thither, and she will have done her business
with Eustace before they arrive. Her husband cannot but believe
that he has left her at home, and she will be so apparelled that
he cannot recognise her. This plan is accordingly carried out.
The lover asks the husband for the hand of his niece in marriage,
to which he joyously consents, and without knowing it makes a
present of his own wife. "All his life long the lover possessed
her, because the husband gave and did not lend her; nor could he
ever get her back."

Le Grand mentions that this fabliau is told at great length in
the tales of the Sieur d'Ouville, tome iv. p. 255. In the
"Facetiæ Bebelianæ," p. 86, three women wager which of them will
play the best trick on her husband. One causes him to believe he
is a monk, and he goes and sings mass, the second husband
believed himself to be dead, and allows himself to be carried to
that mass on a bier; and the third sings in it quite naked.
(There is a very similar story in Campbell's "Popular Tales of
the West Highlands.") It is also found, says Le Grand, in the
"Convivales Sermones," tome i. p. 200, in the "Delices de
Verboquet," p. 166; and in the Facetiæ of Lod. Domenichi, p. 172.
In the "Comes pour Rire," p. 197, three women find a diamond, and
the arbiter whom they select promises it, as in the fabliau, to
her who concocts the best device for deceiving her husband, but
their ruses are different.



End of Supplemental Nights Volume 2.






                   Arabian Nights, Volume 12
                           Footnotes



[FN#1] Bresi. Edit., vol. xi. pp. 321-99, Nights dccccxxx-xl.

[FN#2] Arab. "Iklím" from the Gr. {Greek}, often used as amongst
us (e.g. "other climes") for land.

[FN#3] Bibars whose name is still famous and mostly pronounced
"Baybars," the fourth of the Baharite Mamelukes whom I would call
the "Soldans." Originally a slave of Al-Sálih, seventh of the
Ayyubites, he rose to power by the normal process, murdering his
predecessor, in A. D. 1260; and he pushed his conquests from
Syria to Armenia. In his day "Saint" Louis died before Tunis (A.
D. 1270).

[FN#4] There are sundry Sáhils or shore-lands. "Sahil Misr" is
the River-side of Cairo often extended to the whole of Lower
Egypt (vol. i. 290): here it means the lowlands of Palestine once
the abode of the noble Philistines; and lastly the term extends
to the sea-board of Zanzibar, where, however, it is mostly used
in the plur. "Sawáhil"=the Shores.

[FN#5] Arab. "Sammár" (from Samar,=conversatio nocturna),=the
story-teller who in camp or house whiles away the evening hours.

[FN#6] "Flag of the Faith:" Sanjar in old Persian=a Prince, a
King.

[FN#7] "Aider of the Faith."

[FN#8] These policemen's tales present a curious contrast with
the detective stories of M. Gaboriau and his host of imitators.
In the East the police, like the old Bow Street runners, were and
are still recruited principally amongst the criminal classes on
the principle of "Set a thief," &c. We have seen that the
Barmecide Wazirs of Baghdad "anticipated Fourier's doctrine of
the passionel treatment of lawless inclinations," and employed as
subordinate officers, under the Wali or Prefect of Police,
accomplished villains like Ahmad al-Danaf (vol. iv. 75), Hasan
Shuuman and Mercury Ali (ibid.) and even women (Dalilah the
Crafty) to coerce and checkmate their former comrades. Moreover a
gird at the police is always acceptable, not only to a
coffee-house audience, but even to a more educated crowd; witness
the treatment of the "Charley" and the "Bobby" in our truly
English pantomimes.

[FN#9] i.e. the Chief of Police, as the sequel shows.

[FN#10] About £4.

[FN#11] i.e. of the worlds visible and invisible.

[FN#12] Arab. "Mukaddam:" see vol. iv, 42.

[FN#13] "Faithful of Command;" it may be a title as well as a P.
N. For "Al-Amín," see vol. iv. 261.

[FN#14] i. e. "What have I to do with, etc.?" or "How great is
the difference between me and her." The phrase is still popular
in Egypt and Syria; and the interrogative form only intensifies
it. The student of Egyptian should always try to answer a
question by a question. His labours have been greatly facilitated
by the conscientious work of my late friend Spitta Bey. I tried
hard to persuade the late Rogers Bey, whose knowledge of Egyptian
and Syrian (as opposed to Arabic) was considerable, that a simple
grammar of Egyptian was much wanted; he promised to undertake it)
but death cut short the design.

[FN#15] Arab. "Nawwáb," plur. of Náib (lit. deputies,
lieutenants)=a Nabob. Till the unhappy English occupation of
Egypt, the grand old Kil'ah (Citadel) contained the palace of the
Pasha and the lodgings and offices of the various officials.
Foreign rulers, if they are wise, should convert it into a fort
with batteries commanding the town, like that of Hyderabad, in
Sind.

[FN#16] For this famous and time-honoured building, see vol. i.
269.

[FN#17] Arab. "Tamkín," gravity, assurance.

[FN#18] Arab. " Iyál-hu" lit. his family, a decorous
circumlocution for his wives and concubines.

[FN#19] Arab. "Darb," lit. a road; here a large thoroughfare.

[FN#20] When Mohammed Ali Pasha (the "Great") began to rule, he
found Cairo "stifled" with filth, and gave orders that each
householder, under pain of confiscation, should keep the street
before his house perfectly clean. This was done after some
examples had been made and the result was that since that time
Cairo never knew the plague. I am writing at Tangier where a
Mohammed Ali is much wanted.

[FN#21] i.e. Allah forfend!

[FN#22] Arab. "Mustauda'"=a strong place where goods are
deposited and left in charge.

[FN#23] Because, if she came to grief, the people of the street,
and especially those of the adjoining houses would get into
trouble. Hence in Moslem cities, like Damascus and Fez, the Hárát
or quarters are closed at night with strong wooden doors, and the
guards will not open them except by means of a silver key.
Mohammed Ali abolished this inconvenience, but fined and
imprisoned all night-walkers who carried no lanterns. See
Pilgrimage, vol. i. 173,

[FN#24] As Kazi of the quarter he was ex-officio guardian of the
orphans and their property, and liable to severe punishment
(unless he could pay for the luxury) in case of fraud or neglect.

[FN#25] Altogether six thousand dinars=£3000. This sentence is
borrowed from the sequel and necessary to make the sense clear.

[FN#26] i.e. "I am going at once to complain of thee before the
king unless thou give me due satisfaction by restoring the money
and finding the thief."

[FN#27] The Practice (of the Prophet) and the Holy Law (Koranic):
see vols. v. 36, 167 and i. 169.

[FN#28] In the corrupt text "Who knew me not;" thus spoiling the
point.

[FN#29] Arab. "Maut Ahmar"=violent or bloody death. For the
various coloured deaths, see vol. vi. 250.

[FN#30] i.e. for lack of sleep.

[FN#31] i.e. of the Kazi.

[FN#32] Arab. "Mubáh," in the theologic sense, an action which is
not sinful (harám) or quasisinful (makruh); vulgarly "permitted,
allowed"; so Shahrazad "ceased to say her say permitted" (by
Shahryar).

[FN#33] Arab. "Yá Khawand"; see vol. vii. 315.

[FN#34] i.e. we both make different statements equally credible,
but without proof, and the case will go against me, because thou
art the greater man.

[FN#35] Arab. "Irtiyád"=seeking a place where to stale, soft and
sloping, so that the urine spray may not defile the dress. All
this in one word!

[FN#36] Arab. "Bahár," the red buphthalmus sylvester often used
for such comparisons. In Algeria it is called 'Aráwah: see the
Jardin Parfumé, p. 245, note 144.

[FN#37] i.e. parties.

[FN#38] i.e. amongst men.

[FN#39] Almost as neat as "oú sont les neiges d'autan?"

[FN#40] Arab. "Ádí," one transgressing, an enemy, a scoundrel.

[FN#41] It was probably stuck in the ground like an amphora.

[FN#42] i.e. hush up the matter.

[FN#43] In Egypt; the former being the Eastern of the Seven
Provinces extending to the Pelusium branch, and the latter to the
Canobic. The "Barári" or deserts, i.e. grounds not watered by the
Nile, lie scattered between the two and both are bounded South by
the Kalúbíyah Province and Middle Egypt.

 [FN#44] i.e. a man ready of wit and immediate of action, as
opposed to his name Al-Atwash -- one notable for levity of mind