ner let a time elapse, so that
thine entry may cause a noise and a disturbance, and when after much
bustling thou hast taken thy seat, say not:  "Waiter, will you order
me green peas and a glass of college," but say:  "Waiter (and then a
pause), peas," and then suffer him to depart, and when he hath gone
some little way recall him with a loud voice, which shall reach even
unto the ears of the fellows, say, "and, waiter, college"; and when
they are brought unto thee complain bitterly of the same.  When thou
goest to chapel talk much during the service, or pray much; do not
the thing by halves; thou must either be the very religious power,
which kind though the less remarked yet on the whole hath the
greater advantage, or the thoughtless power, but above all see thou
combine not the two, at least not in the same company, but let thy
religion be the same to the same men.  Always, if thou be a careless
power, come in late to chapel and hurriedly; sit with the other
powers and converse with them on the behaviour of others or any
other light and agreeable topic.  And, as I said above, under this
love of show thou must include the choice of thine acquaintance, and
as it is not possible for thee to order it so as not to have
knowledge of certain men whom it will not be convenient for thee to
know at all times and in all places, see thou cultivate those two
excellent defects of both sight and hearing which will enable thee
to pass one thou wouldst not meet, without seeing him or hearing his
salutation.  If thou hast a cousin or schoolfellow who is somewhat
rustic or uncouth in his manner but nevertheless hath an excellent
heart, know him in private in thine individual capacity, but when
thou art abroad or in the company of other powers shun him as if he
were a venomous thing and deadly.  Again, if thou sittest at table
with a man at the house of a friend and laughest and talkest with
him and playest pleasant, if he be not perfect in respect of
externals see thou pass him the next day without a smile, even
though he may have prepared his countenance for a thousand grins;
but if in the house of the same friend or another thou shouldst
happen to stumble upon him, deal with him as though thy previous
conversation had broken off but five minutes previously; but should
he be proud and have all nothing to say unto thee, forthwith
calumniate him to thine acquaintance as a sorry-spirited fellow and
mean.

And with regard to smoking, though that, too, is advantageous, it is
not necessary so much for the power as for the fast man, for the
power is a more calculating and thoughtful being than this one; but
if thou smokest, see that others know it; smoke cigars if thou canst
afford them; if not, say thou wonderest at such as do, for to thy
liking a pipe is better.  And with regard to all men except thine
own favoured and pre-eminent clique, designate them as "cheerful,"
"lively," or use some other ironical term with regard to them.  So
much then for the love of show.

And of the love of sound I would have thee observe that it is but a
portion of the love of show, but so necessary for him who would be
admired without being at the same time excellent and worthy of
admiration as to deserve a separate heading to itself.  At meal-
times talk loudly, laugh loudly, condemn loudly; if thou sneezest
sneeze loudly; if thou call the waiter do so with a noise and, if
thou canst, while he is speaking to another and receiving orders
from him; it will be a convenient test of thine advance to see
whether he will at once quit the other in the midst of his speech
with him and come to thee, or will wait until the other hath done;
if thou handle it well he will come to thee at once.  When others
are in their rooms, as thou passeth underneath their windows, sing
loudly and all men will know that a power goeth by and will hush
accordingly; if thou hast a good voice it will profit thee much, if
a bad one, care not so long as it be a loud one; but above all be it
remembered that it is to be loud at all times and not low when with
powers greater than thyself, for this damneth much--even powers
being susceptible of awe, when they shall behold one resolutely bent
to out-top them, and thinking it advisable to lend such an one a
helping hand lest he overthrow them--but if thy voice be not a loud
one, thou hadst better give up at once the hope of rising to a
height by thine own skill, but must cling to and flatter those who
have, and if thou dost this well thou wilt succeed.

And of personal strength and prowess in bodily accomplishment,
though of great help in the origin, yet are they not necessary; but
the more thou lackest physical and mental powers the more must thou
cling to the powerful and rise with them; the more careful must thou
be of thy dress, and the more money will it cost thee, for thou must
fill well the bladders that keep thee on the surface, else wilt thou
sink.

And of reserve, let no man know anything about thee.  If thy father
is a greengrocer, as I dare say is the case with some of the most
mighty powers in the land, what matter so long as another knoweth it
not?  See that thou quell all inquisitive attempts to discover
anything about thine habits, thy country, thy parentage, and, in a
word, let no one know anything of thee beyond the exterior; for if
thou dost let them within thy soul, they will find but little, but
if it be barred and locked, men will think that by reason of thy
strong keeping of the same, it must contain much; and they will
admire thee upon credit.

And of openness, be reserved in the particular, open in the general;
talk of debts, of women, of money, but say not what debts, what
women, or what money; be most open when thou doest a shabby thing,
which thou knowest will not escape detection.  If thy coat is bad,
laugh and boast concerning it, call attention to it and say thou
hast had it for ten years, which will be a lie, but men will
nevertheless think thee frank, but run not the risk of wearing a bad
coat, save only in vacation time or in the country.  But when thou
doest a shabby thing which will not reach the general light, breathe
not a word of it, but bury it deeply in some corner of thine own
knowledge only; if it come out, glory in it; if not, let it sleep,
for it is an unprofitable thing to turn over bad ground.

And of distrust, distrust all men, most of all thine own friends;
they will know thee best, and thou them; thy real worth cannot
escape them, think not then that thou wilt get service out of them
in thy need, think not that they will deny themselves that thou
mayest be saved from want, that they will in after life put out a
finger to save thee, when thou canst be of no more use to them, the
clique having been broken up by time.  Nay, but be in thyself
sufficient; distrust, and lean not so much as an ounce-weight upon
another.

These things keep and thou shalt do well; keep them all and thou
wilt be perfect; the more thou keep, the more nearly wilt thou
arrive at the end I proposed to thee at the commencement, and even
if thou doest but one of these things thoroughly, trust me thou wilt
still have much power over thy fellows.



A SKIT ON EXAMINATIONS



[It should be explained that Tom Bridges was a gyp at St. John's
College, during Butler's residence at Cambridge.]

We now come to the most eventful period in Mr. Bridges' life:  we
mean the time when he was elected to the shoe-black scholarship,
compared with which all his previous honours sank into
insignificance.

Mr. Bridges had long been desirous of becoming a candidate for this
distinction, but, until the death of Mr. Leader, no vacancy having
occurred among the scholars, he had as yet had no opportunity of
going in for it.  The income to be derived from it was not
inconsiderable, and as it led to the porter fellowship the mere
pecuniary value was not to be despised, but thirst of fame and the
desire of a more public position were the chief inducements to a man
of Mr. Bridges' temperament, in which ambition and patriotism formed
so prominent a part.  Latin, however, was not Mr. Bridges' forte; he
excelled rather in the higher branches of arithmetic and the
abstruse sciences.  His attainments, however, in the dead languages
were beyond those of most of his contemporaries, as the letter he
sent to the Master and Seniors will abundantly prove.  It was
chiefly owing to the great reverence for genius shown by Dr. Tatham
that these letters have been preserved to us, as that excellent man,
considering that no circumstance connected with Mr. Bridges'
celebrity could be justly consigned to oblivion, rescued these
valuable relics from the Bedmaker, as she was on the point of using
them to light the fire.  By him they were presented to the author of
this memoir, who now for the first time lays them before the public.
The first was to the Master himself, and ran as follows:-


Reverende Sir,

Possum bene blackere shoas, et locus shoe-blackissis vacuus est.
Makee me shoeblackum si hoc tibi placeat, precor te, quia desidero
hoc locum.

Your very humble servant,
THOMASUS BRIDGESSUS.


We subjoin Mr. Bridges' autograph.  The reader will be astonished to
perceive its resemblance to that of Napoleon I, with whom he was
very intimate, and with anecdotes of whom he used very frequently to
amuse his masters.  We add that of Napoleon.


THOMAS BRIDGES
NAPOLEON


The second letter was to the Senior Bursar, who had often before
proved himself a friend to Mr Bridges, and did not fail him in this
instance.


BURSARE SENIOR,

Ego humiliter begs pardonum te becausus quaereri dignitatum
shoeblacki and credo me getturum esse hoc locum.

Your humble servant,
THOMASUS BRIDGESSUS.


Shortly afterwards Mr. Bridges was called upon, with six other
competitors, to attend in the Combination Room, and the following
papers were submitted to him.


I

1.  Derive the word "blacking."  What does Paley say on this
subject?  Do you, or do you not, approve of Paley's arguments, and
why?  Do you think that Paley knew anything at all about it?

2.  Who were Day and Martin?  Give a short sketch of their lives,
and state their reasons for advertising their blacking on the
Pyramids.  Do you approve of the advertising system in general?

3.  Do you consider the Japanese the original inventors of blacking?
State the principal ingredients of blacking, and give a chemical
analysis of the following substances:  Sulphate of zinc, nitrate of
silver, potassium, copperas and corrosive sublimate.

4.  Is blacking an effective remedy against hydrophobia?  Against
cholera?  Against lock-jaw?  And do you consider it as valuable an
instrument as burnt corks in playing tricks upon a drunken man?

This was the Master's paper.  The Mathematical Lecturer next gave
him a few questions, of which the most important were:-

II

1.  Prove that the shoe may be represented by an equation of the
fifth degree.  Find the equation to a man blacking a shoe:  (1) in
rectangular co-ordinates; (2) in polar co-ordinates.

2.  A had 500 shoes to black every day, but being unwell for two
days he had to hire a substitute, and paid him a third of the wages
per shoe which he himself received.  Had A been ill two days longer
there would have been the devil to pay; as it was he actually paid
the sum of the geometrical series found by taking the first n
letters of the substitute's name.  How much did A pay the
substitute?  (Answer, 13s. 6d.)

3.  Prove that the scraping-knife should never be a secant, and the
brush always a tangent to a shoe.

4.  Can you distinguish between meum and tuum?  Prove that their
values vary inversely as the propinquity of the owners.

5.  How often should a shoe-black ask his master for beer notes?
Interpret a negative result.



AN EMINENT PERSON



Among the eminent persons deceased during the past week we have to
notice Mr. Arthur Ward, the author of the very elegant treatise on
the penny whistle.  Mr. Ward was rather above the middle height,
inclined to be stout, and had lost a considerable portion of his
hair.  Mr. Ward did not wear spectacles, as asserted by a careless
and misinformed contemporary.  Mr. Ward was a man of great humour
and talent; many of his sayings will be treasured up as household
words among his acquaintance, for instance, "Lor!"  "Oh, ah!"  "Sech
is life."  "That's cheerful."  "He's a lively man is Mr. . . . "
His manners were affable and agreeable, and his playful gambols
exhibited an agility scarcely to be expected from a man of his
stature.  On Thursday last Mr. Ward was dining off beef-steak pie
when a bit of gristle, unfortunately causing him to cough, brought
on a fit of apoplexy, the progress of which no medical assistance
was able to arrest.  It is understood that the funeral arrangements
have been entrusted to our very respectable fellow-townsman Mr.
Smith, and will take place on Monday.



NAPOLEON AT ST. HELENA



I see a warrior 'neath a willow tree;
His arms are folded, and his full fixed eye
Is gazing on the sky.  The evening breeze
Blows on him from the sea, and a great storm
Is rising.  Not the storm nor evening breeze,
Nor the dark sea, nor the sun's parting beam
Can move him; for in yonder sky he sees
The picture of his life, in yonder clouds
That rush towards each other he beholds
The mighty wars that he himself hath waged.
Blow on him, mighty storm; beat on him, rain;
You cannot move his folded arms nor turn
His gaze one second from the troubled sky.
Hark to the thunder!  To him it is not thunder;
It is the noise of battles and the din
Of cannons on the field of Austerlitz,
The sky to him is the whole world disturbed
By war and rumours of great wars.
He tumbled like a thunderbolt from heaven
Upon the startled earth, and as he came
The round world leapt from out her usual course
And thought her time was come.  Beat on him, rain;
And roar about him, O thou voice of thunder.
But what are ye to him?  O more to him
Than all besides.  To him ye are himself,
He knows it and your voice is lovely to him.
Hath brought the warfare to a close.
The storm is over; one terrific crash
Now, now he feels it, and he turns away;
His arms are now unfolded, and his hands
Pressed to his face conceal a warrior's tears.
He flings himself upon the springing grass,
And weeps in agony.  See, again he rises;
His brow is calm, and all his tears are gone.
The vision now is ended, and he saith:
"Thou storm art hushed for ever.  Not again
Shall thy great voice be heard.  Unto thy rest
Thou goest, never never to return.
I thank thee, that for one brief hour alone
Thou hast my bitter agonies assuaged;
Another storm may scare the frightened heavens,
And like to me may rise and fill
The elements with terror.  I, alas!
Am blotted out as though I had not been,
And am become as though I was not born.
My day is over, and my night is come -
A night which brings no rest, nor quiet dreams,
Nor calm reflections, nor repose from toil,
But pain and sorrow, anguish never ceasing,
With dark uncertainty, despair and pain,
And death's wide gate before me.  Fare ye well!
The sky is clear and the world at rest;
Thou storm and I have but too much in common."



THE TWO DEANS



I

Williams, I like thee, amiable divine!
No milk-and-water character is thine.
A lay more lovely should thy worth attend
Than my poor muse, alas! hath power to lend.
Shall I describe thee as thou late didst sit,
The gater gated and the biter bit,
When impious hands at the dead hour of night
Forbade the way and made the barriers tight?
Next morn I heard their impious voices sing;
All up the stairs their blasphemies did ring:
"Come forth, O Williams, wherefore thus supine
Remain within thy chambers after nine?
Come forth, suffer thyself to be admired,
And blush not so, coy dean, to be desired."
The captive churchman chafes with empty rage,
Till some knight-errant free him from his cage.
Pale fear and anger sit upon yon face
Erst full of love and piety and grace,
But not pale fear nor anger will undo
The iron might of gimlet and of screw.
Grin at the window, Williams, all is vain;
The carpenter will come and let thee out again.
   Contrast with him the countenance serene
And sweet remonstrance of the junior dean;
The plural number and the accents mild,
The language of a parent to a child.
With plaintive voice the worthy man doth state,
We've not been very regular of late.
It should more carefully its chapels keep,
And not make noises to disturb our sleep
By having suppers and at early hours
Raising its lungs unto their utmost powers.
We'll put it, if it makes a noise again,
On gatesey patsems at the hour of ten;
And leafy peafy it will turn I'm sure,
And never vex its own dear Sharpey more.

II

SCENE.--The Court of St. John's College, Cambridge.  Enter the two
Deans on their way to morning chapel.

JUNIOR DEAN.  Brother, I am much pleased with Samuel Butler,
I have observed him mightily of late;
Methinks that in his melancholy walk
And air subdued whene'er he meeteth me
Lurks something more than in most other men.

SENIOR DEAN.  It is a good young man.  I do bethink me
That once I walked behind him in the cloister;
He saw me not, but whispered to his fellow:
"Of all men who do dwell beneath the moon
I love and reverence most the senior Dean."

JUNIOR DEAN.  One thing is passing strange, and yet I know not
How to condemn it, but in one plain brief word
He never comes to Sunday morning chapel.
Methinks he teacheth in some Sunday-school,
Feeding the poor and starveling intellect
With wholesome knowledge, or on the Sabbath morn
He loves the country and the neighbouring spire
Of Madingley or Coton, or perchance
Amid some humble poor he spends the day,
Conversing with them, learning all their cares,
Comforting them and easing them in sickness.

SENIOR DEAN.  I will advance him to some public post,
He shall be chapel clerk, some day a Fellow,
Some day perhaps a Dean, but as thou say'st
He is indeed an excellent young man -

Enter BUTLER suddenly, without a coat or anything on his head,
rushing through the cloisters, bearing a cup, a bottle of cider,
four lemons, two nutmegs, half a pound of sugar and a nutmeg grater.

Curtain falls on the confusion of BUTLER and the horror-stricken
dismay of the two Deans.



THE BATTLE OF ALMA MATER



I

The Temperance commissioners
   In awful conclave sat,
Their noses into this to poke
To poke them into that -
In awful conclave sat they,
   And swore a solemn oath,
That snuff should make no Briton sneeze,
That smokers all to smoke should cease,
   They swore to conquer both.

II

Forth went a great Teetotaller,
   With pamphlet armed and pen,
He travelled east, he travelled west,
   Tobacco to condemn.
At length to Cantabrigia,
   To move her sons to shame,
Foredoomed to chaff and insult,
   That gallant hero came.

III

'Tis Friday:  to the Guildhall
   Come pouring in apace
The gownsmen and the townsmen
   Right thro' the market place -
They meet, these bitter foemen
   Not enemies but friends -
Then fearless to the rostrum,
   The Lecturer ascends.

IV

He cursed the martyr'd Raleigh,
   He cursed the mild cigar,
He traced to pipe and cabbage leaf
   Consumption and catarrh;
He railed at simple bird's-eye,
   By freshmen only tried,
And with rude and bitter jest assailed
   The yard of clay beside.

V

When suddenly full twenty pipes,
   And weeds full twenty more
Were seen to rise at signal,
   Where none were seen before.
No mouth but puffed out gaily
   A cloud of yellow fume,
And merrily the curls of smoke
   Went circling 'thro the room.

VI

In vain th' indignant mayor harangued,
   A mighty chandler he!
While peas his hoary head around
   They whistled pleasantly.
In vain he tenderly inquired,
   'Mid many a wild "hurrah!"
"Of this what father dear would think,
   Of that what dear mamma?"

VII

In rushed a host of peelers,
   With a sergeant at the head,
Jaggard to every kitchen known,
   Of missuses the dread.
In rushed that warlike multitude,
   Like bees from out their hive,
With Fluffy of the squinting eye,
   And fighting No. 5.

VIII

Up sprang Inspector Fluffy,
   Up Sergeant Jaggard rose,
And playfully with staff he tapped
   A gownsman on the nose.
As falls a thundersmitten oak,
   The valiant Jaggard fell,
With a line above each ogle,
   And a "mouse" or two as well.

IX

But hark! the cry is "Smuffkins!
   And loud the gownsmen cheer,
And lo! a stalwart Johnian
   Comes jostling from the rear:
He eyed the flinching peelers,
   He aimed a deadly blow,
Then quick before his fist went down
   Inspector, Marshal, Peelers, Town,
While fiercer fought the joyful Gown,
   To see the claret flow.

X

They run, they run! to win the door
   The vanquished peelers flew;
They left the sergeant's hat behind,
   And the lecturer's surtout:
Now by our Lady Margaret,
   It was a goodly sight,
To see that routed multitude
   Swept down the tide of flight.

XI

Then hurrah! for gallant Smuffkins,
   For Cantabs one hurrah!
Like wolves in quest of prey they scent
   A peeler from afar.
Hurrah! for all who strove and bled
   For liberty and right,
What time within the Guildhall
   Was fought the glorious fight.



ON THE ITALIAN PRIESTHOOD



This an adaptation of the following epigram, which appeared in
Giuseppe Giusti's RACCOLTA DI PROVERBI TOSCANI (Firenze, 1853)


Con arte e con inganno si vive mezzo l'anno
Con inganno e con arte si vive l'altra parte.

In knavish art and gathering gear
They spend the one half of the year;
In gathering gear and knavish art
They somehow spend the other part.



SAMUEL BUTLER AND THE SIMEONITES



The following article, which originally appeared in the CAMBRIDGE
MAGAZINE, 1 March, 1913, is by Mr. A. T. Bartholomew, of the
University Library, Cambridge, who has most kindly allowed me to
include it in the present volume.  Mr. Bartholomew's discovery of
Samuel Butler's parody of the Simeonite tract throws a most
interesting light upon a curious passage in THE WAY OF ALL FLESH,
and it is a great pleasure to me to be able to give Butlerians the
story of Mr. Bartholomew's "find" in his own words.


Readers of Samuel Butler's remarkable story The Way of All Flesh
will probably recall his description of the Simeonites (chap.
xlvii), who still flourished at Cambridge when Ernest Pontifex was
up at Emmanuel.  Ernest went down in 1858; so did Butler.
Throughout the book the spiritual and intellectual life and
development of Ernest are drawn from Butler's own experience.

"The one phase of spiritual activity which had any life in it during
the time Ernest was at Cambridge was connected with the name of
Simeon.  There were still a good many Simeonites, or as they were
more briefly called 'Sims,' in Ernest's time.  Every college
contained some of them, but their head-quarters were at Caius,
whither they were attracted by Mr. Clayton, who was at that time
senior tutor, and among the sizars of St. John's.  Behind the then
chapel of this last-named college was a 'labyrinth' (this was the
name it bore) of dingy, tumble-down rooms," and here dwelt many
Simeonites, "unprepossessing in feature, gait, and manners, unkempt
and ill-dressed beyond what can be easily described.  Destined most
of them for the Church, the Simeonites held themselves to have
received a very loud call to the ministry . . . They would be
instant in season and out of season in imparting spiritual
instruction to all whom they could persuade to listen to them.  But
the soil of the more prosperous undergraduates was not suitable for
the seed they tried to sow.  When they distributed tracts, dropping
them at night into good men's letter boxes while they were asleep,
their tracts got burnt, or met with even worse contumely."  For
Ernest Pontifex "they had a repellent attraction; he disliked them,
but he could not bring himself to leave them alone.  On one occasion
he had gone so far as to parody one of the tracts they had sent
round in the night, and to get a copy dropped into each of the
leading Simeonites' boxes.  The subject he had taken was 'Personal
Cleanliness.'"

Some years ago I found among the Cambridge papers in the late Mr. J.
W. Clark's collection three printed pieces bearing on the subject.
The first is a genuine Simeonite tract; the other two are parodies.
All three are anonymous.  At the top of the second parody is written
"By S. Butler.  March 31."  It will be necessary to give a few
quotations from the Simeonite utterance in order to bring out the
full flavour of Butler's parody, which is given entire.  Butler went
up to St. John's in October, 1854; so at the time of writing this
squib he was in his second term, and 18 years of age.

A.T.B.


I.--Extracts from the sheet dated "St. John's College, March 13th,
1855."  In a manuscript note this is stated to be by Ynyr Lamb, of
St. John's (B.A., 1862).


1.  When a celebrated French king once showed the infidel
philosopher Hume into his carriage, the latter at once leaped in, on
which his majesty remarked:  "That's the most accomplished man
living."

It is impossible to presume enough on Divine grace; this kind of
presumption is the characteristic of Heaven. . .

2.  Religion is not an obedience to external forms or observances,
but "a bold leap in the dark into the arms of an affectionate
Father."

4.  However Church Music may raise the devotional feelings, these
bring a man not one iota nearer to Christ, neither is it acceptable
in His sight.

13.  The ONE thing needful is Faith:  Faith = 0.25 (historical
faith) + 0.75 (heart-belief, or assurance, or justification) 1.25
peace; and peace=Ln Trust--care+joy^(n-r+1)

18.  The Lord's church has been always peculiarly tried at different
stages of history, and each era will have its peculiar glory in
eternity. . . . At the present time the trial for the church is
peculiar; never before, perhaps, were the insinuations of the
adversary so plausible and artful--his ingenuity so subtle--himself
so much an angel of light--experience has sharpened his wit--"WHILE
MEN SLEPT the enemy sowed tares"--he is now the base hypocrite--he
suits his blandishments to all--the Church is lulled in the arms of
the monster, rolling the sweet morsel under her tongue . . .


II.--Samuel Butler's Parody


1.  Beware!  Beware!  Beware!  The enemy sowed tracts in the night,
and the righteous men tremble.

2.  There are only 10 good men in John's; I am one; reader,
calculate your chance of salvation.

3.  The genuine recipe for the leaven of the Pharisees is still
extant, and runs as follows: --Self-deceit 0.33 + want of charity
0.5 + outward show 0.33, humbug infinity, insert Sim or not as
required.  Reader, let each one who would seem to be righteous take
unto himself this leaven.

4.  "The University Church is a place too much neglected by the
young men up here."  Thus said the learned Selwyn, {5} and he said
well.  How far better would it be if each man's own heart was a
little University Church, the pericardium a little University
churchyard, wherein are buried the lust of the flesh, the pomps and
vanities of this wicked world; the veins and arteries, little
clergymen and bishops ministering therein; and the blood a stream of
soberness, temperance and chastity perpetually flowing into it.

5.  The deluge went before, misery followed after, in the middle
came a Puseyite playing upon an organ.  Reader, flee from him, for
he playeth his own soul to damnation.

6.  Church music is as the whore of Babylon, or the ramping lion who
sought whom he might devour; music in a church cannot be good, when
St. Paul bade those who were merry to sing psalms.  Music is but
tinkling brass, and sounding cymbals, which is what St. Paul says he
should himself be, were he without charity; he evidently then did
not consider music desirable.

7.  The most truly religious and only thoroughly good man in
Cambridge is Clayton, {6} of Cams.

8.  "Charity is but the compassion that we feel for our own vices
when we perceive their hatefulness in other people."  Charity, then,
is but another name for selfishness, and must be eschewed
accordingly.

9.  A great French king was walking one day with the late Mr. B.,
when the king dropped his umbrella.  Mr. B. instantly stooped down
and picked it up.  The king said in a very sweet tone, "Thank you."

10.  The Cam is the river Jordan.  An unthinking mind may consider
this a startling announcement.  Let such an one pray for grace to
read the mystery aright.

11.  When I've lost a button off my trousers I go to the tailors'
and get a new one sewn on.

12.  Faith and Works were walking one day on the road to Zion, when
Works turned into a public-house, and said he would not go any
further, at the same time telling Faith to go on by himself, and
saying that "he should be only a drag upon him."  Faith accordingly
left Works in the ale-house, and went on.  He had not gone far
before he began to feel faint, and thought he had better turn back
and wait for Works.  He suited the action to the word, and finding
Works in an advanced state of beer, fell to, and even surpassed that
worthy in his potations.  They then set to work and fought lustily,
and would have done each other a mortal injury had not a Policeman
providentially arrived, and walked them off to the station-house.
As it was they were fined Five Shillings each, and it was a long
time before they fully recovered.

13.  What can 10 fools do among 300 sinners?  They can do much harm,
and had far better let the sinners seek peace their own way in the
wilderness than ram it down their throats during the night.

14.  Barnwell is a place near Cambridge.  It is one of the descents
into the infernal regions; nay, the infernal regions have there
ascended to the upper earth, and are rampant.  He that goeth by it
shall be scorched, but he that seeketh it knowingly shall be
devoured in the twinkling of an eye, and become withered as the
grass at noonday.

15.  Young men do not seem to consider that houses were made to pray
in, as well as to eat and to drink in.  Spiritual food is much more
easily procured and far cheaper than bodily nutriment; that,
perhaps, is the reason why many overlook it.

16.  When we were children our nurses used to say, "Rock-a-bye baby
on the tree top, when the bough bends the cradle will rock."  Do the
nurses intend the wind to represent temptation and the storm of
life, the tree-top ambition, and the cradle the body of the child in
which the soul traverses life's ocean?  I cannot doubt all this
passes through the nurses' minds.  Again, when they say, "Little Bo-
peep has lost her sheep and doesn't know where to find them; let
them alone and they'll come home with their tails all right behind
them," is Little Bo-peep intended for mother Church?  Are the sheep
our erring selves, and our subsequent return to the fold?  No doubt
of it.

17.  A child will often eat of itself what no compulsion can induce
it to touch.  Men are disgusted with religion if it is placed before
them at unseasonable times, in unseasonable places, and clothed in a
most unseemly dress.  Let them alone, and many will perhaps seek it
for themselves, whom the world suspects not.  A whited sepulchre is
a very picturesque object, and I like it immensely, and I like a Sim
too.  But the whited sepulchre is an acknowledged humbug and most of
the Sims are not, in my opinion, very far different.



Footnotes:

{1}  This was called to my attention by a distinguished Greek
scholar of this University.

{2}  The Hauenstein tunnel was not completed until later.  Its
construction was delayed by a fall of earth which occurred in 1857
and buried sixty-three workmen.--R. A. S.

{3}  Mr. J. F. Harris has identified Butler's rooms in the third
court of St. John's College.--R. A. S.

{4}  As Walmisley died in January, 1856, this piece must evidently
date from Butler's first year at Cambridge.--R. A. S.

{5}  William Selwyn D.D., Fellow of St. John's Lady Margaret
Professor of Divinity, died 1875.--A. T. B.

{6} Charles Clayton, M.A., of Gonville and Caius, Vicar of Holy
Trinity, Cambridge, 1851-65.  Died 1883.--A. T. B.










This etext was produced by Eve Sobol, South Bend, Indiana, USA





CAESAR AND CLEOPATRA

GEORGE BERNARD SHAW




ACT I

An October night on the Syrian border of Egypt towards the end of
the XXXIII Dynasty, in the year 706 by Roman computation,
afterwards reckoned by Christian computation as 48 B.C. A great
radiance of silver fire, the dawn of a moonlit night, is rising
in the east. The stars and the cloudless sky are our own
contemporaries, nineteen and a half centuries younger than we
know them; but you would not guess that from their appearance.
Below them are two notable drawbacks of civilization: a palace,
and soldiers. The palace, an old, low, Syrian building of
whitened mud, is not so ugly as Buckingham Palace; and the
officers in the courtyard are more highly civilized than modern
English officers: for example, they do not dig up the corpses of
their dead enemies and mutilate them, as we dug up Cromwell and
the Mahdi. They are in two groups: one intent on the gambling of
their captain Belzanor, a warrior of fifty, who, with his spear
on the ground beside his knee, is stooping to throw dice with a
sly-looking young Persian recruit; the other gathered about a
guardsman who has just finished telling a naughty story (still
current in English barracks) at which they are laughing
uproariously. They are about a dozen in number, all highly
aristocratic young Egyptian guardsmen, handsomely equipped with
weapons and armor, very unEnglish in point of not being ashamed
of and uncomfortable in their professional dress; on the
contrary, rather ostentatiously and arrogantly warlike, as
valuing themselves on their military caste.

Belzanor is a typical veteran, tough and wilful; prompt, capable
and crafty where brute force will serve; helpless and boyish when
it will not: an effective sergeant, an incompetent general, a
deplorable dictator. Would, if influentially connected, be
employed in the two last capacities by a modern European State on
the strength of his success in the first. Is rather to be pitied
just now in view of the fact that Julius Caesar is invading his
country. Not knowing this, is intent on his game with the
Persian, whom, as a foreigner, he considers quite capable of
cheating him.

His subalterns are mostly handsome young fellows whose interest
in the game and the story symbolizes with tolerable completeness
the main interests in life of which they are conscious. Their
spears are leaning against the walls, or lying on the ground
ready to their hands. The corner of the courtyard forms a
triangle of which one side is the front of the palace, with a
doorway, the other a wall with a gateway. The storytellers are on
the palace side: the gamblers, on the gateway side. Close to the
gateway, against the wall, is a stone block high enough to enable
a Nubian sentinel, standing on it, to look over the wall. The
yard is lighted by a torch stuck in the wall. As the laughter
from the group round the storyteller dies away, the kneeling
Persian, winning the throw, snatches up the stake from the
ground.

BELZANOR. By Apis, Persian, thy gods are good to thee.

THE PERSIAN. Try yet again, O captain. Double or quits!

BELZANOR. No more. I am not in the vein.

THE SENTINEL (poising his javelin as he peers over the wall).
Stand. Who goes there?

They all start, listening. A strange voice replies from without.

VOICE. The bearer of evil tidings.

BELZANOR (calling to the sentry). Pass him.

THE SENTINEL. (grounding his javelin). Draw near, O bearer of
evil tidings.

BELZANOR (pocketing the dice and picking up his spear). Let us
receive this man with honor. He bears evil tidings.

The guardsmen seize their spears and gather about the gate,
leaving a way through for the new comer.

PERSIAN (rising from his knee). Are evil tidings, then,
honorable?

BELZANOR. O barbarous Persian, hear my instruction. In Egypt the
bearer of good tidings is sacrificed to the gods as a thank
offering but no god will accept the blood of the messenger of
evil. When we have good tidings, we are careful to send them in
the mouth of the cheapest slave we can find. Evil tidings are
borne by young noblemen who desire to bring themselves into
notice. (They join the rest at the gate.)

THE SENTINEL. Pass, O young captain; and bow the head in the
House of the Queen.

VOICE. Go anoint thy javelin with fat of swine, O Blackamoor; for
before morning the Romans will make thee eat it to the very butt.

The owner of the voice, a fairhaired dandy, dressed in a
different fashion to that affected by the guardsmen, but no less
extravagantly, comes through the gateway laughing. He is somewhat
battlestained; and his left forearm, bandaged, comes through a
torn sleeve. In his right hand he carries a Roman sword in its
sheath. He swaggers down the courtyard, the Persian on his right,
Belzanor on his left, and the guardsmen crowding down behind him.

BELZANOR. Who art thou that laughest in the House of Cleopatra
the Queen, and in the teeth of Belzanor, the captain of her
guard?

THE NEW COMER. I am Bel Affris, descended from the gods.

BELZANOR (ceremoniously). Hail, cousin!

ALL (except the Persian). Hail, cousin!

PERSIAN. All the Queen's guards are descended from the gods, O
stranger, save myself. I am Persian, and descended from many
kings.

BEL AFFRIS (to the guardsmen). Hail, cousins! (To the Persian,
condescendingly) Hail, mortal!

BELZANOR. You have been in battle, Bel Affris; and you are a
soldier among soldiers. You will not let the Queen's women have
the first of your tidings.

BEL AFFRIS. I have no tidings, except that we shall have our
throats cut presently, women, soldiers, and all.

PERSIAN (to Belzanor). I told you so.

THE SENTINEL (who has been listening). Woe, alas!

BEL AFFRIS (calling to him). Peace, peace, poor Ethiop: destiny
is with the gods who painted thee black. (To Belzanor) What has
this mortal (indicating the Persian) told you?

BELZANOR. He says that the Roman Julius Caesar, who has landed on
our shores with a handful of followers, will make himself master
of Egypt. He is afraid of the Roman soldiers. (The guardsmen
laugh with boisterous scorn.) Peasants, brought up to scare crows
and follow the plough. Sons of smiths and millers and tanners!
And we nobles, consecrated to arms, descended from the gods!

PERSIAN. Belzanor: the gods are not always good to their poor
relations.

BELZANOR (hotly, to the Persian). Man to man, are we worse than
the slaves of Caesar?

BEL AFFRIS (stepping between them). Listen, cousin. Man to man,
we Egyptians are as gods above the Romans.

THE GUARDSMEN (exultingly). Aha!

BEL AFFRIS. But this Caesar does not pit man against man: he
throws a legion at you where you are weakest as he throws a stone
from a catapult; and that legion is as a man with one head, a
thousand arms, and no religion. I have fought against them; and I
know.

BELZANOR (derisively). Were you frightened, cousin?

The guardsmen roar with laughter, their eyes sparkling at the
wit of their captain.

BEL AFFRIS. No, cousin; but I was beaten. They were frightened
(perhaps); but they scattered us like chaff.

The guardsmen, much damped, utter a growl of contemptuous
disgust.

BELZANOR. Could you not die?

BEL AFFRIS. No: that was too easy to be worthy of a descendant of
the gods. Besides, there was no time: all was over in a moment.
The attack came just where we least expected it.

BELZANOR. That shows that the Romans are cowards.

BEL AFFRIS. They care nothing about cowardice, these Romans: they
fight to win. The pride and honor of war are nothing to them.

PERSIAN. Tell us the tale of the battle. What befell?

THE GUARDSMEN (gathering eagerly round Bel Afris). Ay: the tale
of the battle.

BEL AFFRIS. Know then, that I am a novice in the guard of the
temple of Ra in Memphis, serving neither Cleopatra nor her
brother Ptolemy, but only the high gods. We went a journey to
inquire of Ptolemy why he had driven Cleopatra into Syria, and
how we of Egypt should deal with the Roman Pompey, newly come to
our shores after his defeat by Caesar at Pharsalia. What, think
ye, did we learn? Even that Caesar is coming also in hot pursuit
of his foe, and that Ptolemy has slain Pompey, whose severed head
he holds in readiness to present to the conqueror. (Sensation
among the guardsmen.) Nay, more: we found that Caesar is already
come; for we had not made half a day's journey on our way back
when we came upon a city rabble flying from his legions, whose
landing they had gone out to withstand.

BELZANOR. And ye, the temple guard! Did you not withstand these
legions?

BEL AFFRIS. What man could, that we did. But there came the sound
of a trumpet whose voice was as the cursing of a black mountain.
Then saw we a moving wall of shields coming towards us. You know
how the heart burns when you charge a fortified wall; but how if
the fortified wall were to charge YOU?

THE PERSIAN (exulting in having told them so). Did I not say it?

BEL AFFRIS. When the wall came nigh, it changed into a line of
men--common fellows enough, with helmets, leather tunics, and
breastplates. Every man of them flung his javelin: the one that
came my way drove through my shield as through a papyrus--lo
there! (he points to the bandage on his left arm) and would have
gone through my neck had I not stooped. They were charging at the
double then, and were upon us with short swords almost as soon as
their javelins. When a man is close to you with such a sword, you
can do nothing with our weapons: they are all too long.

THE PERSIAN. What did you do?

BEL AFFRIS. Doubled my fist and smote my Roman on the sharpness
of his jaw. He was but mortal after all: he lay down in a stupor;
and I took his sword and laid it on. (Drawing the sword) Lo! a
Roman sword with Roman blood on it!

THE GUARDSMEN (approvingly). Good! (They take the sword and hand
it round, examining it curiously.)

THE PERSIAN. And your men?

BEL AFFRIS. Fled. Scattered like sheep.

BELZANOR (furiously). The cowardly slaves! Leaving the
descendants of the gods to be butchered!

BEL AFFRIS (with acid coolness). The descendants of the gods did
not stay to be butchered, cousin. The battle was not to the
strong; but the race was to the swift. The Romans, who have no
chariots, sent a cloud of horsemen in pursuit, and slew
multitudes. Then our high priest's captain rallied a dozen
descendants of the gods and exhorted us to die fighting. I said
to myself: surely it is safer to stand than to lose my breath and
be stabbed in the back; so I joined our captain and stood. Then
the Romans treated us with respect; for no man attacks a lion
when the field is full of sheep, except for the pride and honor
of war, of which these Romans know nothing. So we escaped with
our lives; and I am come to warn you that you must open your
gates to Caesar; for his advance guard is scarce an hour behind
me; and not an Egyptian warrior is left standing between you and
his legions.

THE SENTINEL. Woe, alas! (He throws down his javelin and flies
into the palace.)

BELZANOR. Nail him to the door, quick! (The guardsmen rush for
him with their spears; but he is too quick for them.) Now this
news will run through the palace like fire through stubble.

BEL AFFRIS. What shall we do to save the women from the Romans?

BELZANOR. Why not kill them?

PERSIAN. Because we should have to pay blood money for some of
them. Better let the Romans kill them: it is cheaper.

BELZANOR (awestruck at his brain power). O subtle one! O
serpent!

BEL AFFRIS. But your Queen?

BELZANOR. True: we must carry off Cleopatra.

BEL AFFRIS. Will ye not await her command?

BELZANOR. Command! A girl of sixteen! Not we. At Memphis ye deem
her a Queen: here we know better. I will take her on the crupper
of my horse. When we soldiers have carried her out of Caesar's
reach, then the priests and the nurses and the rest of them can
pretend she is a queen again, and put their commands into her
mouth.

PERSIAN. Listen to me, Belzanor.

BELZANOR. Speak, O subtle beyond thy years.

THE PERSIAN. Cleopatra's brother Ptolemy is at war with her. Let
us sell her to him.

THE GUARDSMEN. O subtle one! O serpent!

BELZANOR. We dare not. We are descended from the gods; but
Cleopatra is descended from the river Nile; and the lands of our
fathers will grow no grain if the Nile rises not to water them.
Without our father's gifts we should live the lives of dogs.

PERSIAN. It is true: the Queen's guard cannot live on its pay.
But hear me further, O ye kinsmen of Osiris.

THE GUARDSMEN. Speak, O subtle one. Hear the serpent begotten!

PERSIAN. Have I heretofore spoken truly to you of Caesar, when
you thought I mocked you?

GUARDSMEN. Truly, truly.

BELZANOR (reluctantly admitting it). So Bel Affris says.

PERSIAN. Hear more of him, then. This Caesar is a great lover of
women: he makes them his friends and counselors.

BELZANOR. Faugh! This rule of women will be the ruin of Egypt.

THE PERSIAN. Let it rather be the ruin of Rome! Caesar grows old
now: he is past fifty and full of labors and battles. He is too
old for the young women; and the old women are too wise to
worship him.

BEL AFFRIS. Take heed, Persian. Caesar is by this time almost
within earshot.

PERSIAN. Cleopatra is not yet a woman: neither is she wise. But
she already troubles men's wisdom.

BELZANOR. Ay: that is because she is descended from the river
Nile and a black kitten of the sacred White Cat. What then?

PERSIAN. Why, sell her secretly to Ptolemy, and then offer
ourselves to Caesar as volunteers to fight for the overthrow of
her brother and the rescue of our Queen, the Great Granddaughter
of the Nile.

THE GUARDSMEN. O serpent!

PERSIAN. He will listen to us if we come with her picture in our
mouths. He will conquer and kill her brother, and reign in Egypt
with Cleopatra for his Queen. And we shall be her guard.

GUARDSMEN. O subtlest of all the serpents! O admiration! O
wisdom!

BEL AFFRIS. He will also have arrived before you have done
talking, O word spinner.

BELZANOR. That is true. (An affrighted uproar in the palace
interrupts him.) Quick: the flight has begun: guard the door.
(They rush to the door and form a cordon before it with their
spears. A mob of women-servants and nurses surges out. Those in
front recoil from the spears, screaming to those behind to keep
back. Belzanor's voice dominates the disturbance as he shouts)
Back there. In again, unprofitable cattle.

THE GUARDSMEN. Back, unprofitable cattle.

BELZANOR. Send us out Ftatateeta, the Queen's chief nurse.

THE WOMEN (calling into the palace). Ftatateeta, Ftatateeta.
Come, come. Speak to Belzanor.

A WOMAN. Oh, keep back. You are thrusting me on the spearheads.

A huge grim woman, her face covered with a network of tiny
wrinkles, and her eyes old, large, and wise; sinewy handed, very
tall, very strong; with the mouth of a bloodhound and the jaws of
a bulldog, appears on the threshold. She is dressed like a person
of consequence in the palace, and confronts the guardsmen
insolently.

FTATATEETA. Make way for the Queen's chief nurse.

BELZANOR. (with solemn arrogance). Ftatateeta: I am Belzanor, the
captain of the Queen's guard, descended from the gods.

FTATATEETA. (retorting his arrogance with interest). Belzanor: I
am Ftatateeta, the Queen's chief nurse; and your divine ancestors
were proud to be painted on the wall in the pyramids of the kings
whom my fathers served.

The women laugh triumphantly.

BELZANOR (with grim humor) Ftatateeta: daughter of a
long-tongued, swivel-eyed chameleon, the Romans are at hand. (A
cry of terror from the women: they would fly but for the spears.)
Not even the descendants of the gods can resist them; for they
have each man seven arms, each carrying seven spears. The blood
in their veins is boiling quicksilver; and their wives become
mothers in three hours, and are slain and eaten the next day.

A shudder of horror from the women. Ftatateeta, despising them
and scorning the soldiers, pushes her way through the crowd and
confronts the spear points undismayed.

FTATATEETA. Then fly and save yourselves, O cowardly sons of the
cheap clay gods that are sold to fish porters; and leave us to
shift for ourselves.

BELZANOR. Not until you have first done our bidding, O terror of
manhood. Bring out Cleopatra the Queen to us and then go whither
you will.

FTATATEETA (with a derisive laugh). Now I know why the gods have
taken her out of our hands. (The guardsmen start and look at one
another). Know, thou foolish soldier, that the Queen has been
missing since an hour past sun down.

BELZANOR (furiously). Hag: you have hidden her to sell to Caesar
or her brother. (He grasps her by the left wrist, and drags her,
helped by a few of the guard, to the middle of the courtyard,
where, as they fling her on her knees, he draws a murderous
looking knife.) Where is she? Where is she? or-- (He threatens to
cut her throat.)

FTATATEETA (savagely). Touch me, dog; and the Nile will not rise
on your fields for seven times seven years of famine.

BELZANOR (frightened, but desperate). I will sacrifice: I will
pay. Or stay. (To the Persian) You, O subtle one: your father's
lands lie far from the Nile. Slay her.

PERSIAN (threatening her with his knife). Persia has but one god;
yet he loves the blood of old women. Where is Cleopatra?

FTATATEETA. Persian: as Osiris lives, I do not know. I chide her
for bringing evil days upon us by talking to the sacred cats of
the priests, and carrying them in her arms. I told her she would
be left alone here when the Romans came as a punishment for her
disobedience. And now she is gone--run away--hidden. I speak the
truth. I call Osiris to witness.

THE WOMEN (protesting officiously). She speaks the truth,
Belzanor.

BELZANOR. You have frightened the child: she is hiding. Search--
quick--into the palace--search every corner.

The guards, led by Belzanor, shoulder their way into the palace
through the flying crowd of women, who escape through the
courtyard gate.

FTATATEETA (screaming). Sacrilege! Men in the Queen's chambers!
Sa-- (Her voice dies away as the Persian puts his knife to her
throat.)

BEL AFFRIS (laying a hand on Ftatateeta's left shoulder). Forbear
her yet a moment, Persian. (To Ftatateeta, very significantly)
Mother: your gods are asleep or away hunting; and the sword is at
your throat. Bring us to where the Queen is hid, and you shall
live.

FTATATEETA (contemptuously). Who shall stay the sword in the hand
of a fool, if the high gods put it there? Listen to me, ye young
men without understanding. Cleopatra fears me; but she fears the
Romans more. There is but one power greater in her eyes than the
wrath of the Queen's nurse and the cruelty of Caesar; and that is
the power of the Sphinx that sits in the desert watching the way
to the sea. What she would have it know, she tells into the ears
of the sacred cats; and on her birthday she sacrifices to it and
decks it with poppies. Go ye therefore into the desert and seek
Cleopatra in the shadow of the Sphinx; and on your heads see to
it that no harm comes to her.

BEL AFFRIS (to the Persian). May we believe this, O subtle one?

PERSIAN. Which way come the Romans?

BEL AFFRIS. Over the desert, from the sea, by this very Sphinx.

PERSIAN (to Ftatateeta). O mother of guile! O aspic's tongue! You
have made up this tale so that we two may go into the desert and
perish on the spears of the Romans. (Lifting his knife) Taste
death.

FTATATEETA. Not from thee, baby. (She snatches his ankle from
under him and flies stooping along the palace wall vanishing in
the darkness within its precinct. Bel Affris roars with laughter
as the Persian tumbles. The guardsmen rush out of the palace with
Belzanor and a mob of fugitives, mostly carrying bundles.)

PERSIAN. Have you found Cleopatra?

BELZANOR. She is gone. We have searched every corner.

THE NUBIAN SENTINEL (appearing at the door of the palace). Woe!
Alas! Fly, fly!

BELZANOR. What is the matter now?

THE NUBIAN SENTINEL. The sacred white cat has been stolen. Woe!
Woe! (General panic. They all fly with cries of consternation.
The torch is thrown down and extinguished in the rush. Darkness.
The noise of the fugitives dies away. Dead silence. Suspense.
Then the blackness and stillness breaks softly into silver mist
and strange airs as the windswept harp of Memnon plays at the
dawning of the moon. It rises full over the desert; and a vast
horizon 