egas, and his brother, Reduan Vanegas, likewise high in rank in
the court of Muley Abul Hassan, and they had about them numerous
and powerful connections, all basking in court favor.  Though Moslems
in faith, they were all drawn to Zoraya by the tie of foreign and
Christian descent, and sought to elevate her and her children to the
disparagement of Ayxa la Horra and her son Boabdil.  The latter, on
the other hand, were supported by the noble and once-potent family
of the Abencerrages and by Aben Comixa, alcayde of the Alhambra;
and between these two factions, headed by rival sultanas, the harem
of Muley Abul Hassan became the scene of inveterate jealousies and
intrigues, which in time, as will be shown, led to popular commotions
and civil wars.**

*Cura de los Palacios, Hist. de los Reyes Catol., cap. 56.

**It is to be noted that several historians have erroneously
 represented Zoraya as the mother of Boabdil, instead of Ayxa la
 Horra, and the Abencerrages as the opponents of Boabdil, instead
 of his strenuous adherents.  The statement in the text is according
 to the most reliable authorities.


While these female feuds were threatening Muley Abul Hassan with
trouble and disaster at home, his evil genius prompted him to an
enterprise which involved him in tenfold danger from abroad.  The
reader has already been apprised of a singular clause in the truce
existing between the Christians and the Moors, permitting hasty
dashes into each other's territories and assaults of towns and
fortresses, provided they were carried on as mere forays and without
the parade of regular warfare.  A long time had elapsed, however,
without any incursion of the kind on the part of the Moors, and the
Christian towns on the frontiers had, in consequence, fallen into a
state of the most negligent security.   In an unlucky moment Muley
Abul Hassan was tempted to one of these forays by learning that the
fortress of Zahara, on the frontier between Ronda and Medina
Sidonia, was but feebly garrisoned and scantily supplied, and that
its alcayde was careless of his charge.  This important  post was
built on the crest of a rocky mountain, with a strong castle perched
above it upon a cliff, so high that it was said to be above the flight
of birds or drift of clouds.  The streets and many of the houses were
mere excavations wrought out of the living rock.  The town had but
one gate, opening to the west and defended by towers and bulwarks.
The only ascent to this cragged fortress was by roads cut in the rock,
so rugged in many places as to resemble broken stairs.  In a word,
the impregnable security of Zahara had become so proverbial throughout
Spain that a woman of forbidding and inaccessible virtue was called a
Zaharena.  But the strongest fortress and sternest virtue have weak
points, and require unremitting vigilance to guard them: let warrior
and dame take warning from the fate of Zahara.



CHAPTER IV.

EXPEDITION OF MULEY ABUL HASSAN AGAINST THE FORTRESS
    OF ZAHARA.


In the year of our Lord one thousand four hundred and eighty-
one, and but a night or two after the festival of the most blessed
Nativity, the inhabitants of Zahara were sunk in profound sleep
the very sentinel had deserted his post, and sought shelter from
a tempest which had raged for three nights in succession, for it
appeared but little probable that an enemy would be abroad during
such an uproar of the elements.  But evil spirits work best during a
storm.  In the midst of the night an uproar rose within the walls of
Zahara more awful than the raging of the storm.  A fearful alarm-cry,
"The Moor! the Moor!" resounded through the streets, mingled with
the clash of arms, the shriek of anguish, and the shout of victory.
Muley Abul Hassan, at the head of a powerful force, had hurried from
Granada, and passed unobserved through the mountains in the
obscurity of the tempest.  While the storm pelted the sentinel from
his post and bowled round tower and battlement, the Moors had
planted their scaling-ladders and mounted securely into both town
and castle.  The garrison was unsuspicious of danger until battle
and massacre burst forth within its very walls.  It seemed to the
affrighted inhabitants as if the fiends of the air had come upon the
wings of the wind and possessed themselves of tower and turret.
The war-cry resounded on every side, shout answering shout, above,
below, on the battlements of the castle, in the streets of the town;
the foe was in all parts, wrapped in obscurity, but acting in concert
by the aid of preconcerted signals. Starting from sleep, the soldiers
were intercepted and cut down as they rushed from their quarters,
or if they escaped they knew not where to assemble or where to
strike.  Wherever lights appeared the flashing scimetar was at its
deadly work, and all who attempted resistance fell beneath its edge.

In a little while the struggle was at an end.  Those who were not
slain took refuge in the secret places of their houses or gave
themselves up as captives.  The clash of arms ceased, and the
storm continued its howling, mingled with the occasional shout of
the Moorish soldiery roaming in search of plunder.  While the
inhabitants were trembling for their fate, a trumpet resounded
through the streets summoning them all to assemble, unarmed, in the
public square.  Here they were surrounded by soldiery and strictly
guarded until daybreak.  When the day dawned it was piteous to
behold this once-prosperous community, who had laid down to rest in
peaceful security, now crowded together without distinction of age
or rank or sex, and almost without raiment, during the severity of a
wintry storm.  The fierce Muley Abul Hassan turned a deaf ear to all
their prayers and remonstrances, and ordered them to be conducted
captives to Granada.  Leaving a strong garrison in both town and
castle, with orders to put them in a complete state of defence, he
returned, flushed with victory, to his capital, entering it at the
head of his troops, laden with spoil and bearing in triumph the
banners and pennons taken at Zahara.

While preparations were making for jousts and other festivities in
honor of this victory over the Christians, the captives of Zahara
arrived--a wretched train of men, women, and children, worn out
with fatigue and haggard with despair, and driven like cattle into
the city gates by a detachment of Moorish soldiery.

Deep was the grief and indignation of the people of Granada at
this cruel scene.  Old men, who had experienced the calamities of
warfare, anticipated coming troubles.  Mothers clasped their infants
to their breasts as they beheld the hapless females of Zahara with
their children expiring in their arms.  On every side the accents of
pity for the sufferers were mingled with execrations of the barbarity
of the king. The preparations for festivity were neglected, and the
viands which were to have feasted the conquerors were distributed
among the captives.

The nobles and alfaquis, however, repaired to the Alhambra to
congratulate the king; for, whatever storms may rage in the lower
regions of society, rarely do any clouds but clouds of incense rise
to the awful eminence of the throne.  In this instance, however, a
voice rose from the midst of the obsequious crowd, and burst like
thunder upon the ears of Abul Hassan.  "Woe! woe! woe! to Granada!"
exclaimed the voice; "its hour of desolation approaches.  The ruins
of Zahara will fall upon our heads; my spirit tells me that the end
of our empire is at hand."  All shrank back aghast, and left the
denouncer of woe standing alone in the centre of the hall.  He was
an ancient and hoary man in the rude attire of a dervise.  Age had
withered his form without quenching the fire of his spirit, which
glared in baleful lustre from his eyes.  He was (say the Arabian
historians) one of those holy men termed santons who pass their
lives in hermitages in fasting, meditation, and prayer until they
attain to the purity of saints and the foresight of prophets.  "He
was," says the indignant Fray Antonio Agapida, "a son of Belial, one
of those fanatic infidels possessed by the devil who are sometimes
permitted to predict the truth to their followers, but with the
proviso that their predictions shall be of no avail."

The voice of the santon resounded through the lofty hall of the
Alhambra, and struck silence and awe into the crowd of courtly
sycophants.  Muley Abul Hassan alone was unmoved: he eyed
the hoary anchorite with scorn as he stood dauntless before him,
and treated his predictions as the ravings of a maniac.  The santon
rushed from the royal presence, and, descending into the city, hurried
through its streets and squares with frantic gesticulations.  His voice
was heard in every part in awful denunciation: "The peace is broken!
exterminating war is commenced.  Woe! woe! woe to Granada! its fall
is at hand! desolation will dwell in its palaces; its strong men will fall
beneath the sword, its children and maidens be led into captivity.
Zahara is but a type of Granada!"

Terror seized upon the populace, for they considered these ravings
as the inspirations of prophecy.  Some hid themselves in their
dwellings as in a time of general mourning, while some gathered
together in knots in the streets and squares, alarming each other
with dismal forebodings and cursing the rashness and cruelty of
the king.

The Moorish monarch heeded not their murmurs.  Knowing that his
exploit must draw upon him the vengeance of the Christians, he now
threw off all reserve, and made attempts to surprise Castellan and
Elvira, though without success.  He sent alfaquis also to the Barbary
powers, informing them that the sword was drawn, and inviting the
African princes to aid him with men and supplies in maintaining the
kingdom of Granada and the religion of Mahomet against the violence
of unbelievers.

While discontent exhaled itself in murmurs among the common people,
however, it fomented in dangerous conspiracies among the nobles, and
Muley Abul Hassan was startled by information of a design to depose
him and place his son Boabdil upon the throne.  His first measure was
to confine the prince and his mother in the Tower of Comares; then,
calling to mind the prediction of the astrologers, that the youth would
one day sit on the throne of Granada, he impiously set the stars at
defiance.  "The sword of the executioner," said he, "shall prove the
fallacy of those lying horoscopes, and shall silence the ambition of
Boabdil."

The sultana Ayxa, apprised of the imminent danger of her son,
concerted a plan for his escape.  At the dead of the night she
gained access to his prison, and, tying together the shawls and
scarfs of herself and her female attendants, lowered him down from
a balcony of the Alhambra to the steep rocky hillside which sweeps
down to the Darro.  Here some of her devoted adherents were
waiting to receive him, who, mounting him on a swift horse, spirited
him away to the city of Guadix, in the Alpuxarras.



CHAPTER V.

EXPEDITION OF THE MARQUES OF CADIZ AGAINST ALHAMA.


Great was the indignation of King Ferdinand when he heard of the
storming of Zahara, though the outrage of the Moor happened most
opportunely.  The war between Castile and Portugal had come to a
close; the factions of Spanish nobles were for the most part quelled.
The Castilian monarchs had now, therefore, turned their thoughts
to the cherished object of their ambition, the conquest of Granada.
The pious heart of Isabella yearned to behold the entire Peninsula
redeemed from the domination of the infidel, while Ferdinand, in
whom religious zeal was mingled with temporal policy, looked with
a craving eye to the rich territory of the Moor, studded with wealthy
towns and cities.  Muley Abul Hassan had rashly or unwarily thrown
the brand that was to produce the wide conflagration.  Ferdinand was
not the one to quench the flames.  He immediately issued orders to
all the adelantados and alcaydes of the frontiers to maintain the
utmost vigilance at their several posts, and to prepare to carry fire
and sword into the territories of the Moors.

Among the many valiant cavaliers who rallied round the throne of
Ferdinand and Isabella, one of the most eminent in rank and renowned
in arms was Don Roderigo Ponce de Leon, marques of Cadiz.  As he
was the distinguished champion of this holy war, and commanded in
most of its enterprises and battles, it is meet that some particular
account should be given of him.  He was born in 1443 of the valiant
lineage of the Ponces, and from his earliest youth had rendered
himself illustrious in the field.  He was of the middle stature, with a
muscular and powerful frame, capable of great exertion and fatigue.
His hair and beard were red and curled, his countenance was open and
magnanimous, of a ruddy complexion and slightly marked with the small-
pox.  He was temperate, chaste, valiant, vigilant; a just and generous
master to his vassals; frank and noble in his deportment toward his
equals; loving and faithful to his friends; fierce and terrible, yet
magnanimous, to his enemies.  He was considered the mirror of
chivalry of his times, and compared by contemporary historians to
the immortal Cid.

The marques of Cadiz had vast possessions in the most fertile parts
of Andalusia, including many towns and castles, and could lead forth
an army into the field from his own vassals and dependants.  On
receiving the orders of the king he burned to signalize himself by
some sudden incursion into the kingdom of Granada that should give a
brilliant commencement to the war, and should console the sovereigns
for the insult they had received in the capture of Zahara.  As his
estates lay near to the Moorish frontiers and were subject to sudden
inroads, he had always in his pay numbers of adalides, or scouts and
guides, many of them converted Moors.  These he sent out in all
directions to watch the movements of the enemy and to procure all
kinds of information important to the security of the frontier.  One
of these spies came to him one day in his town of Marchena, and
informed him that the Moorish town of Alhama was slightly garrisoned
and negligently guarded, and might be taken by surprise.  This was a
large, wealthy, and populous place within a few leagues of Granada.
It was situated on a rocky height, nearly surrounded by a river, and
defended by a fortress to which there was no access but by a steep
and cragged ascent.  The strength of its situation and its being
embosomed in the centre of the kingdom had produced the careless
security which now invited attack.

To ascertain fully the state of the fortress the marques despatched
secretly a veteran soldier who was highly in his confidence.  His
name was Ortega de Prado, a man of great activity, shrewdness,
and valor, and captain of escaladors (soldiers employed to scale the
walls of fortresses in time of attack).  Ortega approached Alhama
one moonless night, and paced along its walls with noiseless step,
laying his ear occasionally to the ground or to the wall.  Every time
he distinguished the measured tread of a sentinel, and now and
then the challenge of the night-watch going its rounds.  Finding the
town thus guarded, he clambered to the castle: there all was silent.
 As he ranged its lofty battlements between him and the sky he saw
no sentinel on duty.  He noticed certain places where the wall might
be ascended by scaling-ladders, and, having marked the hour of
relieving guard and made all necessary observations, he retired
without being discovered.

Ortega returned to Marchena, and assured the marques of Cadiz of
the practicability of scaling the castle of Alhama and taking it by
surprise. The marques had a secret conference with Don Pedro
Enriques, adelantado of Andalusia, Don Diego de Merlo, commander
of Seville, Sancho de Avila, alcayde of Carmona, and others, who
all agreed to aid him with their forces.  On an appointed day the
several commanders assembled at Marchena with their troops and
retainers.  None but the leaders knew the object or destination of
the enterprise, but it was enough to rouse the Andalusian spirit to
know that a foray was intended into the country of their old
enemies, the Moors.  Secrecy and celerity were necessary for
success.  They set out promptly with three thousand genetes or light
cavalry and four thousand infantry.  They chose a route but little
travelled, by the way of Antiquera, passing with great labor through
rugged and solitary defiles of the sierra or chain of mountains of
Arrecife, and left all their baggage on the banks of the river Yeguas,
to be brought after them.  This march was principally in the night;
all day they remained quiet; no noise was suffered in their camp,
and no fires were made, lest the smoke should betray them.  On
the third day they resumed their march as the evening darkened,
and, forcing themselves forward at as quick a pace as the rugged
and dangerous mountain-roads would permit, they descended toward
midnight into a small deep valley only half a league from Alhama.
Here they made a halt, fatigued by this forced march, during a long
dark evening toward the end of February.

The marques of Cadiz now explained to the troops the object of
the expedition.  He told them it was for the glory of the most holy
faith and to avenge the wrongs of their countrymen at Zahara, and
that the town of Alhama, full of wealthy spoil, was the place to be
attacked.  The troops were roused to new ardor by these words,
and desired to be led forthwith to the assault.  They arrived close to
Alhama about two hours before daybreak.  Here the army remained in
ambush, while three hundred men were despatched to scale the walls
and get possession of the castle.  They were picked men, many of
them alcaydes and officers, men who preferred death to dishonor.
This gallant band was guided by the escalador Ortega de Prado at the
head of thirty men with scaling-ladders.  They clambered the ascent
to the castle in silence, and arrived under the dark shadow of its
towers without being discovered.  Not a light was to be seen, not a
sound to be heard; the whole place was wrapped in profound repose.

Fixing their ladders, they ascended cautiously and with noiseless
steps. Ortega was the first that mounted upon the battlements,
followed by one Martin Galindo, a youthful esquire full of spirit
and eager for distinction.  Moving stealthily along the parapet to
the portal of the citadel, they came upon the sentinel by surprise.
Ortega seized him by the throat, brandished a dagger before his
eyes, and ordered him to point the way to the guard-room.  The
infidel obeyed, and was instantly despatched, to prevent his giving
an alarm.  The guard-room was a scene rather of massacre than
combat.  Some of the soldiery were killed while sleeping, others
were cut down almost without resistance, bewildered by so unexpected
an assault: all were despatched, for the scaling party was too small
to make prisoners or to spare.  The alarm spread throughout the
castle, but by this time the three hundred picked men had mounted
the battlements.  The garrison, startled from sleep, found the enemy
already masters of the towers.  Some of the Moors were cut down at
once, others fought desperately from room to room, and the whole
castle resounded with the clash of arms, the cries of the combatants,
and the groans of the wounded.  The army in ambush, finding by
the uproar that the castle was surprised, now rushed from their
concealment, and approached the walls with loud shouts and sound
of kettle-drums and trumpets to increase the confusion and dismay
of the garrison.  A violent conflict took place in the court of the
castle, where several of the scaling party sought to throw open
the gates to admit their countrymen.  Here fell two valiant alcaydes,
Nicholas de Roja and Sancho de Avila, but they fell honorably, upon
a heap of slain.  At length Ortega de Prado succeeded in throwing
open a postern through which the marques of Cadiz, the adelantado
of Andalusia, and Don Diego de Merlo entered with a host of followers,
and the citadel remained in full possession of the Christians.

As the Spanish cavaliers were ranging from room to room, the marques
of Cadiz, entering an apartment of superior richness to the rest,
beheld, by the light of a silver lamp, a beautiful Moorish female,
the wife of the alcayde of the castle, whose husband was absent
attending a wedding-feast at Velez Malaga.  She would have fled at
the sight of a Christian warrior in her apartment, but, entangled in
the covering of the bed, she fell at the feet of the marques, imploring
mercy.  That Christian cavalier, who had a soul full of honor and
courtesy toward the sex, raised her from the floor and endeavored
to allay her fears; but they were increased at the sight of her female
attendants pursued into the room by the Spanish soldiery.  The
marques reproached his soldiers with unmanly conduct, and reminded
them that they made war upon men, not on defenceless women.
Having soothed the terrors of the females by the promise of honorable
protection, he appointed a trusty guard to watch over the security of
their apartment.

The castle was now taken, but the town below it was in arms.  It was
broad day, and the people, recovered from their panic, were enabled
to see and estimate the force of the enemy.  The inhabitants were
chiefly merchants and tradespeople, but the Moors all possessed a
knowledge of the use of weapons and were of brave and warlike
spirit.  They confided in the strength of their walls and the certainty
of speedy relief from Granada, which was but about eight leagues
distant.  Manning the battlements and towers, they discharged
showers of stones and arrows whenever the part of the Christian
army without the walls attempted to approach.  They barricadoed
the entrances of their streets also which opened toward the castle,
stationing men expert at the crossbow and arquebuse.  These kept
up a constant fire upon the gate of the castle, so that no one could
sally forth without being instantly shot down.  Two valiant cavaliers
who attempted to lead forth a party in defiance of this fatal tempest
were shot dead at the very portal.

The Christians now found themselves in a situation of great peril.
Reinforcements must soon arrive to the enemy from Granada: unless,
therefore, they gained possession of the town in the course of the
day, they were likely to be surrounded and beleaguered, without
provisions, in the castle.  Some observed that even if they took the
town they should not be able to maintain possession of it.  They
proposed, therefore, to make booty of everything valuable, to sack
the castle, set it on fire, and make good their retreat to Seville.

The marques of Cadiz was of different counsel.  "God has given the
citadel into Christian hands," said he; "he will no doubt strengthen
them to maintain it.  We have gained the place with difficulty and
bloodshed; it would be a stain upon our honor to abandon it through
fear of imaginary dangers."  The adelantado and Don Diego de
Merlo joined in his opinion, but without their earnest and united
remonstrances the place would have been abandoned, so exhausted
were the troops by forced marches and hard fighting, and so
apprehensive of the approach of the Moors of Granada.

The strength and spirits of the party within the castle were in some
degree restored by the provisions which they found.  The Christian
army beneath the town, being also refreshed by a morning's repast,
advanced vigorously to the attack of the walls.  They planted their
scaling-ladders, and, swarming up, sword in hand, fought fiercely
with the Moorish soldiery upon the ramparts.

In the mean time, the marques of Cadiz, seeing that the gate of the
castle, which opened toward the city, was completely commanded by
the artillery of the enemy, ordered a large breach to be made in the
wall, through which he might lead his troops to the attack, animating
them in this perilous moment by assuring them that the place should
be given up to plunder and its inhabitants made captives.

The breach being made, the marques put himself at the head of his
troops, and entered sword in hand.  A simultaneous attack was make
by the Christians in every part--by the ramparts, by the gate, by
the roofs and walls which connected the castle with the town.  The
Moors fought valiantly in their streets, from their windows, and from
the tops of their houses.  They were not equal to the Christians in
bodily strength, for they were for the most part peaceful men, of
industrious callings, and enervated by the frequent use of the warm
bath; but they were superior in number and unconquerable in spirit;
old and young, strong and weak, fought with the same desperation.
The Moors fought for property, for liberty, for life.  They fought at
their thresholds and their hearths, with the shrieks of their wives
and children ringing in their ears, and they fought in the hope that
each moment would bring aid from Granada.  They regarded neither
their own wounds nor the death of their companions, but continued
fighting until they fell, and seemed as if, when they could no longer
contend, they would block up the thresholds of their beloved homes
with their mangled bodies.  The Christians fought for glory, for
revenge, for the holy faith, and for the spoil of these wealthy
infidels.  Success would place a rich town at their mercy; failure
would deliver them into the hands of the tyrant of Granada.

The contest raged from morning until night, when the Moors began
to yield.  Retreating to a large mosque near the walls, they kept up
so galling a fire from it with lances, crossbows, and arquebuses
that for some time the Christians dared not approach.  Covering
themselves, at length, with bucklers and mantelets* to protect them
from the deadly shower, the latter made their way to the mosque and
set fire to the doors.  When the smoke and flames rolled in upon
them the Moors gave up all as lost.  Many rushed forth desperately
upon the enemy, but were immediately slain; the rest surrendered
themselves captives.

*Mantelet--a movable parapet, made of thick planks, to protect
 troops when advancing to sap or assault a walled place.


The struggle was now at an end: the town remained at the mercy of
the Christians; and the inhabitants, both male and female, became
the slaves of those who made them prisoners.  Some few escaped
by a mine or subterranean way which led to the river, and concealed
themselves, their wives and children, in caves and secret places,
but in three or four days were compelled to surrender themselves
through hunger.

The town was given up to plunder, and the booty was immense.
There were found prodigious quantities of gold and silver, and
jewels and rich silks and costly stuffs of all kinds, together with
horses and beeves, and abundance of grain and oil and honey,
and all other productions of this fruitful kingdom; for in Alhama
were collected the royal rents and tributes of the surrounding
country: it was the richest town in the Moorish territory, and from
its great strength and its peculiar situation was called the key to
Granada.

Great waste and devastation were committed by the Spanish soldiery;
for, thinking it would be impossible to keep possession of the place,
they began to destroy whatever they could not take away.  Immense
jars of oil were broken, costly furniture shattered to pieces, and
magazines of grain broken open and their contents scattered to the
winds.  Many Christian captives who had been taken at Zahara were
found buried in a Moorish dungeon, and were triumphantly restored to
light and liberty; and a renegado Spaniard, who had often served as
guide to the Moors in their incursions into the Christian territories,
was hanged on the highest part of the battlements for the edification
of the army.



CHAPTER VI.

HOW THE PEOPLE OF GRANADA WERE AFFECTED ON HEARING
    OF THE CAPTURE OF ALHAMA, AND HOW THE MOORISH KING
    SALLIED FORTH TO REGAIN IT.


A moorish horseman had spurred across the Vega, nor reined his
panting steed until he alighted at the gate of the Alhambra.  He
brought tidings to Muley Abul Hassan of the attack upon Alhama.
"The Christians," said he, "are in the land.  They came upon us, we
know not whence or how, and scaled the walls of the castle in the
night.  There have been dreadful fighting and carnage in its towers
and courts; and when I spurred my steed from the gate of Alhama
the castle was in possession of the unbelievers."

Muley Abul Hassan felt for a moment as if swift retribution had come
upon him for the woes he had inflicted upon Zahara.  Still, he
flattered himself that this had only been some transient inroad of
a party of marauders intent upon plunder, and that a little succor
thrown into the town would be sufficient to expel them from the
castle and drive them from the land.  He ordered out, therefore, a
thousand of his chosen cavalry, and sent them in all speed to the
assistance of Alhama.  They arrived before its walls the morning
after its capture: the Christian standards floated upon its towers,
and a body of cavalry poured forth from its gates and came wheeling
down into the plain to receive them.

The Moorish horsemen turned the reins of their steeds and galloped
back for Granada.  They entered its gates in tumultuous confusion,
spreading terror and lamentation by their tidings.  "Alhama is fallen!
Alhama is fallen!" exclaimed they; "the Christians garrison its walls;
the key of Granada is in the hands of the enemy!"

When the people heard these words they remembered the denunciation
of the santon.  His prediction seemed still to resound in every ear,
and its fulfilment to be at hand.  Nothing was heard throughout the
city but sighs and wailings.  "Woe is me, Alhama!" was in every
mouth; and this ejaculation of deep sorrow and doleful foreboding
came to be the burden of a plaintive ballad which remains until the
present day.*

*The mournful little Spanish romance of "Ay de mi Alhama!" is
 supposed to be of Moorish origin, and to embody the grief of
 the people of Granada on this occasion.


Many aged men, who had taken refuge in Granada from other Moorish
dominions which had fallen into the power of the Christians, now
groaned in despair at the thoughts that war was to follow them into
this last retreat, to lay waste this pleasant land, and to bring trouble
and sorrow upon their declining years.  The women were more loud
and vehement in their grief, for they beheld the evils impending over
their children, and what can restrain the agony of a mother's heart?
Many of them made their way through the halls of the Alhambra into
the presence of the king, weeping, and wailing, and tearing their
hair.  "Accursed be the day," cried they, "that thou hast lit the flame
of war in our land!  May the holy Prophet bear witness before Allah
that we and our children are innocent of this act!  Upon thy head,
and upon the heads of thy posterity, until the end of the world, rest
the sin of the desolation of Zahara!*

*Garibay, lib. 40, c. 29.


Muley Abul Hassan remained unmoved amidst all this storm; his heart
was hardened (observes Fray Antonio Agapida) like that of Pharaoh,
to the end that through his blind violence and rage he might produce
the deliverance of the land from its heathen bondage.  In fact, he
was a bold and fearless warrior, and trusted soon to make this blow
recoil upon the head of the enemy.  He had ascertained that the
captors of Alhama were but a handful: they were in the centre of
his dominions, within a short distance of his capital.  They were
deficient in munitions of war and provisions for sustaining a siege.
By a rapid movement he might surround them with a powerful army,
cut off all aid from their countrymen, and entrap them in the fortress
they had taken.

To think was to act with Muley Abul Hassan, but he was prone to act
with too much precipitation.  He immediately set forth in person with
three thousand horse and fifty thousand foot, and in his eagerness
to arrive at the scene of action would not wait to provide artillery
and the various engines required in a siege.  "The multitude of my
forces," said he, confidently, "will be sufficient to overwhelm the
enemy."

The marques of Cadiz, who thus held possession of Alhama, had
a chosen friend and faithful companion-in-arms, among the most
distinguished of the Christian chivalry.  This was Don Alonso de
Cordova, senior and lord of the house of Aguilar, and brother of
Gonsalvo of Cordova, afterward renowned as grand captain of Spain.
As yet, Alonso de Aguilar was the glory of his name and race, for
his brother was but young in arms.  He was one of the most hardy,
valiant, and enterprising of the Spanish knights, and foremost in
all service of a perilous and adventurous nature.  He had not been
at hand to accompany his friend Ponce de Leon, marques of Cadiz,
in his inroad into the Moorish territory, but he hastily assembled a
number of retainers, horse and foot, and pressed forward to join
the enterprise.  Arriving at the river Yeguas, he found the baggage
of the army still upon its banks, and took charge of it to carry it to
Alhama.  The marques of Cadiz heard of the approach of his friend,
whose march was slow in consequence of being encumbered by the
baggage.  He was within but a few leagues of Alhama when scouts
came hurrying into the place with intelligence that the Moorish king
was at hand with a powerful army.  The marques of Cadiz was filled
with alarm lest De Aguilar should fall into the hands of the enemy.
Forgetting his own danger and thinking only of that of his friend,
he despatched a well-mounted messenger to ride full speed and
warn him not to approach.

The first determination of Alonso de Aguilar when he heard that the
Moorish king was at hand was to take a strong position in the
mountains and await his coming.  The madness of an attempt with his
handful of men to oppose an immense army was represented to him
with such force as to induce him to abandon the idea; he then thought
of throwing himself into Alhama to share the fortunes of his friend;
but it was now too late.  The Moor would infallibly intercept him,
and he should only give the marques the additional distress of
beholding him captured beneath his walls.  It was even urged upon
him that he had no time for delay if he would consult his own safety,
which could only be ensured by an immediate retreat into the
Christian territory.  This last opinion was confirmed by the return
of scouts, who brought information that Muley Abul Hassan had
received notice of his movements, and was rapidly advancing in quest
of him.  It was with infinite reluctance that Don Alonso de Aguilar
yielded to these united and powerful reasons.  Proudly and sullenly
he drew off his forces, laden with the baggage of the army, and made
an unwilling retreat toward Antiquera.  Muley Abul Hassan pursued
him for some distance through the mountains, but soon gave up the
chase and turned with his forces upon Alhama.

As the army approached the town they beheld the fields strewn
with the dead bodies of their countrymen, who had fallen in defence
of the place, and had been cast forth and left unburied by the
Christians.  There they lay, mangled and exposed to every indignity,
while droves of half-famished dogs were preying upon them and
fighting and howling over their hideous repast.*  Furious at the
sight, the Moors, in the first transports of their rage, attacked
those ravenous animals: their next measure was to vent their fury
upon the Christians.  They rushed like madmen to the walls, applied
scaling-ladders in all parts without waiting for the necessary
mantelets and other protections-- thinking by attacking suddenly
and at various points to distract the enemy and overcome them by
the force of numbers.

*Pulgar, Cronica.


The marques of Cadiz, with his confederate commanders, distributed
themselves along the walls to direct and animate their men in the
defence.  The Moors in their blind fury often assailed the most
difficult and dangerous places.  Darts, stones, and all kinds of
missiles were hurled down upon their defenceless heads.  As fast
as they mounted they were cut down or dashed from the battlements,
their ladders overturned, and all who were on them precipitated
headlong below.

Muley Abul Hassan stormed with passion at the sight: he sent
detachment after detachment to scale the walls, but in vain; they
were like waves rushing upon a rock, only to dash themselves to
pieces.  The Moors lay in heaps beneath the wall, and among them
many of the bravest cavaliers of Granada.  The Christians also
sallied frequently from the gates, and made great havoc in the
irregular multitude of assailants.

Muley Abul Hassan now became sensible of his error in hurrying from
Granada without the proper engines for a siege.  Destitute of all
means to batter the fortifications, the town remained uninjured,
defying the mighty army which raged and roamed before it.  Incensed
at being thus foiled, Muley Abul Hassan gave orders to undermine the
walls.  The Moors advanced with shouts to the attempt.  They were
received with a deadly fire from the ramparts, which drove them from
their works. Repeatedly were they repulsed, and repeatedly did they
return to the charge.  The Christians not merely galled them from
the battlements, but issued forth and cut them down in the
excavations they were attempting to form.  The contest lasted
throughout a whole day, and by evening two thousand Moors were
either killed or wounded.

Muley Abul Hassan now abandoned all hope of carrying the place
by assault, and attempted to distress it into terms by turning the
channel of the river which runs by its walls.  On this stream the
inhabitants depended for their supply of water, the place being
destitute of fountains and cisterns, from which circumstance it is
called Alhama "la seca," or "the dry."

A desperate conflict ensued on the banks of the river, the Moors
endeavoring to plant palisades in its bed to divert the stream, and
the Christians striving to prevent them.  The Spanish commanders
exposed themselves to the utmost danger to animate their men, who
were repeatedly driven back into the town.  The marques of Cadiz was
often up to his knees in the stream fighting hand to hand with the
Moors.  The water ran red with blood, and was encumbered with dead
bodies.  At length the overwhelming numbers of the Moors gave them
the advantage, and they succeeded in diverting the greater part of
the water.  The Christians had to struggle severely to supply
themselves from the feeble rill which remained.  They sallied to the
river by a subterraneous passage, but the Moorish crossbowmen
stationed themselves on the opposite bank, keeping up a heavy fire
upon the Christians whenever they attempted to fill their vessels
from the scanty and turbid stream.  One party of the Christians had,
therefore, to fight while another drew water.  At all hours of the
day and night this deadly strife was maintained, until it seemed as
if every drop of water were purchased with a drop of blood.

In the mean time the sufferings of the town became intense.  None
but the soldiery and their horses were allowed the precious beverage
so dearly earned, and even that in quantities that only tantalized
their wants. The wounded, who could not sally to procure it, were
almost destitute, while the unhappy prisoners shut up in the mosques
were reduced to frightful extremities.  Many perished raving mad,
fancying themselves swimming in boundless seas, yet unable to
assuage their thirst.  Many of the soldiers lay parched and panting
along the battlements, no longer able to draw a bowstring or hurl
a stone; while above five thousand Moors, stationed upon a rocky
height which overlooked part of the town, kept up a galling fire
into it with slings and crossbows, so that the marques of Cadiz was
obliged to heighten the battlements by using the doors from the
private dwellings.

The Christian cavaliers, exposed to this extreme peril and in
imminent danger of falling into the hands of the enemy, despatched
fleet messengers to Seville and Cordova, entreating the chivalry of
Andalusia to hasten to their aid.  They sent likewise, imploring
assistance from the king and queen, who at that time held their
court in Medina del Campo.  In the midst of their distress a tank or
cistern of water was fortunately discovered in the city, which gave
temporary relief to their sufferings.


CHAPTER VII.

HOW THE DUKE OF MEDINA SIDONIA AND THE CHIVALRY OF
    ANDALUSIA HASTENED TO THE RELIEF OF ALHAMA.


The perilous situation of the Christian cavaliers, pent up and
beleaguered within the walls of the Alhama, spread terror among
their friends and anxiety throughout all Andalusia.  Nothing,
however, could equal the anguish of the marchioness of Cadiz, the
wife of the gallant Roderigo Ponce de Leon. In her deep distress she
looked round for some powerful noble who had the means of rousing
the country to the assistance of her husband.  No one appeared more
competent for the purpose than Don Juan de Guzman, the duke of
Medina Sidonia.  He was one of the most wealthy and puissant grandees
of Spain; his possessions extended over some of the most fertile
parts of Andalusia, embracing towns and seaports and numerous
villages.  Here he reigned in feudal state like a petty sovereign,
and could at any time bring into the field an immense force of
vassals and retainers.

The duke of Medina Sidonia and the marques of Cadiz, however, were
at this time deadly foes.  An hereditary feud existed between them,
which had often risen to bloodshed and open war; for as yet the
fierce contests between the proud and puissant Spanish nobles had
not been completely quelled by the power of the Crown, and in this
respect they exerted a right of sovereignty in leading their vassals
against each other in open field.

The duke of Medina Sidonia would have appeared, to many, the very
last person to whom to apply for aid of the marques of Cadiz; but
the marchioness judged of him by the standard of her own high
and generous mind.  She knew him to be a gallant and courteous
knight, and had already experienced the magnanimity of his spirit,
having been relieved by him when besieged by the Moors in her
husband's fortress of Arcos.  To the duke, therefore, she applied in
this moment of sudden calamity, imploring him to furnish succor to
her husband.  The event showed how well noble spirits understand
each other.  No sooner did the duke receive this appeal from the wife
of his enemy than he generously forgot all feeling of animosity and
determined to go in person to his succor.  He immediately despatched
a courteous letter to the marchioness, assuring her that in
consideration of the request of so honorable and estimable a lady,
and to rescue from peril so valiant a cavalier as her husband, whose
loss would be great, not only to Spain, but to all Christendom, he
would forego the recollection of all past grievances, and hasten to
his relief with all the forces he could raise.

The duke wrote at the same time to the alcaydes of his towns and
fortresses, ordering them to join him forthwith at Seville with all
the forces they could spare from their garrisons.  He called on all
the chivalry of Andalusia to make a common cause in the rescue of
those Christian cavaliers, and he offered large pay to all volunteers
who would resort to him with horses, armor, and provisions.  Thus
all who could be incited by honor, religion, patriotism, or thirst of
gain were induced to hasten to his standard, and he took the field
with an army of five thousand horse and fifty thousand foot.*  Many
cavaliers of distinguished name accompanied him in this generous
enterprise.  Among these was the redoubtable Alonso de Aguilar,
the chosen friend of the marques of Cadiz, and with him his younger
brother, Gonsalvo Fernandez de Cordova, afterward renowned as
the grand captain; Don Roderigo Giron also, master of the order of
Calatrava, together with Martin Alonso de Montemayor and the
marques de Villena, esteemed the best lance in Spain.  It was a
gallant and splendid army, comprising the flower of Spanish chivalry,
and poured forth in brilliant array from the gates of Seville bearing
the great standard of that ancient and renowned city.

*Cronica de los Duques de Medina Sidonia, por Pedro de Medina, MS.


Ferdinand and Isabella were at Medina del Campo when tidings came
of the capture of Alhama.  The king was at mass when he received the
news, and ordered "Te Deum" to be chanted for this signal triumph
of the holy faith.  When the first flush of triumph had subsided, and
the king learnt the imminent peril of the valorous Ponce de Leon and
his companions, and the great danger that this stronghold might
again be wrested from their grasp, he resolved to hurry in person to
the scene of action.  So pressing appeared to him the emergency that
he barely gave himself time to take a hasty repast while horses were
providing, and then departed at furious speed for Andalusia, leaving
a request for the queen to follow him.*  He was attended by Don
Beltram de la Cueva, duke of Albuquerque, Don Inigo Lopez de
Mendoza, count of Tendilla, and Don Pedro Mauriques, count of
Trevino, with a few more cavaliers of prowess and distinction.  He
travelled by forced journeys, frequently changing his jaded horses,
being eager to arrive in time to take command of the Andalusian
chivalry.  When he arrived within five leagues of Cordova the duke of
Albuquerque remonstrated with him upon entering with such incautious
haste into the enemies' country.  He represented to him that there
were troops enough assembled to succor Alhama, and that it was
not for him to venture his royal person in doing what could be done
by his subjects, especially as he had such valiant and experienced
captains to act for him.  "Besides, sire," added the duke, "Your
Majesty should bethink you that the troops about to take the
field are mere men of Andalusia, whereas your illustrious
predecessors never made an inroad into the territory of the Moors
without being accompanied by a powerful force of the stanch and
iron warriors of Old Castile."

*Illescas, Hist. Pontifical.


"Duke," replied the king, "your counsel might have been good had I
not departed from Medina with the avowed determination of succoring
these cavaliers in person.  I am now near the end of my journey, and
it would be beneath my dignity to change my intention before even I
had met with an impediment.  I shall take the troops of this country
who are assembled, without waiting for those of Castile, and with
the aid of God shall prosecute my journey."*

*Pulgar, Cronica, p. 3, cap. 3.


As King Ferdinand approached Cordova the principal inhabitants came
forth to receive him.  Learning, however, that the duke of Medina
Sidonia was already on the march and pressing forward into the
territory of the Moors, the king was all on fire to overtake him and
to lead in person the succor to Alhama.  Without entering Cordova,
therefore, he exchanged his weary horses for those of the inhabitants
who had come forth to meet him, and pressed forward for the army.
He despatched fleet couriers in advance, requesting the duke of
Medina Sidonia to await his coming, that he might take command of
the forces.

Neither the duke nor his companions-in-arms, however, felt inclined
to pause in their generous expedition and gratify the inclinations
of the king.  They sent back missives representing that they were far
within the enemies' frontier, and it was dangerous either to pause
or turn back.  They had likewise received pressing entreaties from
the besieged to hasten their speed, setting forth their great
sufferings and their hourly peril of being overwhelmed by the enemy.


The king was at Ponton del Maestre when he received these missives.
So inflamed was he with zeal for the success of this enterprise that
he would have penetrated into the kingdom of Granada with the
handful of cavaliers who accompanied him, but they represented the
rashness of such a journey through the mountainous defiles of a
hostile country thickly beset with towns and castles.  With some
difficulty, therefore, he was dissuaded from his inclination, and
prevailed upon to await tidings from the army in the frontier city
of Antiquera.



CHAPTER VIII.

SEQUEL OF THE EVENTS AT ALHAMA.


While all Andalusia was thus in arms and pouring its chivalry
through the mountain-passes of the Moorish frontiers, the garrison
of Alhama was reduced to great extremity and in danger of sinking
under its sufferings before the promised succor could arrive.  The
intolerable thirst that prevailed in consequence of the scarcity of
water, the incessant watch that had to be maintained over the vast
force of enemies without and the great number of prisoners within,
and the wounds which almost every soldier had received in the
incessant skirmishes and assaults, had worn grievously both flesh
and spirit.  The noble Ponce de Leon, marques of Cadiz, still animated
the soldiery, however, by word and example, sharing every hardship
and being foremost in every danger, exemplifying that a good
commander is the vital spirit of an army.

When Muley Abul Hassan heard of the vast force that was approaching
under the command of the duke of Medina Sidonia, and that Ferdinand
was coming in person with additional troops, he perceived that no
time was to be lost: Alhama must be carried by one powerful attack
or abandoned entirely to the Christians.

A number of Moorish cavaliers, some of the bravest youth of Granada,
knowing the wishes of the king, proposed to undertake a desperate
enterprise which, if successful, must put Alhama in his power.  Early
one morning, when it was scarcely the gray of the dawn, about the
time of changing the watch, these cavaliers approached the town at
a place considered inaccessible from the steepness of the rocks on
which the wall was founded, which, it was supposed, elevated the
battlements beyond the reach of the longest scaling-ladder.  The
Moorish knights, aided by a number of the strongest and most active
escaladors, mounted these rocks and applied the ladders without
being discovered, for to divert attention from them Muley Abul
Hassan made a false attack upon the town in another quarter.

The scaling party mounted with difficulty and in small numbers; the
sentinel was killed at his post, and seventy of the Moors made their
way into the streets before an alarm was given.  The guards rushed
to the walls to stop the hostile throng that was still pouring in.  A
sharp conflict, hand to hand and man to man, took place on the
battlements, and many on both sides fell.  The Moors, whether
wounded or slain, were thrown headlong without the walls, the
scaling-ladders were overturned, and those who were mounting were
dashed upon the rocks, and from thence tumbled upon the plain.  Thus
in a little while the ramparts were cleared by Christian prowess,
led on by that valiant knight Don Alonzo Ponce, the uncle, and that
brave esquire Pedro Pineda, nephew, of the marques of Cadiz.

The walls being cleared, these two kindred cavaliers now hastened
with their forces in pursuit of the seventy Moors who had gained an
entrance into the town.  The main party of the garrison being engaged
at a distance resisting the feigned attack of the Moorish king, this
fierce band of infidels had ranged the streets almost without
opposition, and were making their way to the gates to throw them
open to the army.*  They were chosen men from among the Moorish
forces, several of them gallant knights of the proudest families of
Granada.  Their footsteps through the city were in a manner printed
in blood, and they were tracked by the bodies of those they had
killed and wounded.  They had attained the gate; most of the guard
had fallen beneath their scimetars; a moment more and Alhama would
have been thrown open to the enemy.

*Zurita, lib. 20, c. 43.


Just at this juncture Don Alonzo Ponce and Pedro de Pineda reached
the spot with their forces.  The Moors had the enemy in front and
rear; they placed themselves back to back, with their banner in
the centre.  In this way they fought with desperate and deadly
determination, making a rampart around them with the slain.  Mor