f which they beheld
the turbaned heads of their fierce and exulting foes.  What a
different appearance did the unfortunate cavaliers present from that
of the gallant band that marched so vauntingly out of Antiquera!
Covered with dust and blood and wounds, and haggard with fatigue
and horror, they looked like victims rather than like warriors.  Many
of their banners were lost, and not a trumpet was heard to rally up
their sinking spirits.  The men turned with imploring eyes to their
commanders, while the hearts of the cavaliers were ready to burst
with rage and grief at the merciless havoc made among their faithful
followers.

All day they made ineffectual attempts to extricate themselves from
the mountains.  Columns of smoke rose from the heights where in
the preceding night had blazed the alarm-fire.  The mountaineers
assembled from every direction: they swarmed at every pass, getting
in the advance of the Christians, and garrisoning the cliffs like so
many towers and battlements.

Night closed again upon the Christians when they were shut up in
a narrow valley traversed by a deep stream and surrounded by
precipices which seemed to reach the skies, and on which blazed and
flared the alarm-fires.  Suddenly a new cry was heard resounding
along the valley.  "El Zagal! El Zagal!" echoed from cliff to cliff.

"What cry is that?" said the master of Santiago.

"It is the war-cry of El Zagal, the Moorish general," said an old
Castilian soldier: "he must be coming in person, with the troops
of Malaga."

The worthy master turned to his knights: "Let us die," said he,
"making a road with our hearts, since we cannot with our swords.
Let us scale the mountain and sell our lives dearly, instead of
staying here to be tamely butchered."

So saying, he turned his steed against the mountain and spurred him
up its flinty side.  Horse and foot followed his example, eager, if
they could not escape, to have at least a dying blow at the enemy.
As they struggled up the height a tremendous storm of darts and
stones was showered upon them by the Moors.  Sometimes a fragment
of rock came bounding and thundering down, ploughing its way through
the centre of their host.  The foot-soldiers, faint with weariness and
hunger or crippled by wounds, held by the tails and manes of the
horses to aid them in their ascent, while the horses, losing their
foothold among the loose stones or receiving some sudden wound,
tumbled down the steep declivity, steed, rider, and soldier rolling
from crag to crag until they were dashed to pieces in the valley.
In this desperate struggle the alferez or standard-bearer of the
master, with his standard, was lost, as were many of his relations
and his dearest friends.  At length he succeeded in attaining the
crest of the mountain, but it was only to be plunged in new
difficulties.  A wilderness of rocks and rugged dells lay before him
beset by cruel foes.  Having neither banner nor trumpet by which
to rally his troops, they wandered apart, each intent upon saving
himself from the precipices of the mountains and the darts of the
enemy.  When the pious master of Santiago beheld the scattered
fragments of his late gallant force, he could not restrain his grief.
"O God!" exclaimed he, "great is thine anger this day against
thy servants.  Thou hast converted the cowardice of these infidels
into desperate valor, and hast made peasants and boors victorious
over armed men of battle."

He would fain have kept with his foot-soldiers, and, gathering them
together, have made head against the enemy, but those around
him entreated him to think only of his personal safety.  To remain
was to perish without striking a blow; to escape was to preserve a
life that might be devoted to vengeance on the Moors.  The master
reluctantly yielded to the advice.  "O Lord of hosts!" exclaimed he
again, "from thy wrath do I fly, not from these infidels: they are
but instruments in thy hands to chastise us for our sins."  So saying,
he sent the guides in the advance, and, putting spurs to his horse,
dashed through a defile of the mountains before the Moors could
intercept him.  The moment the master put his horse to speed,
his troops scattered in all directions.  Some endeavored to follow
his traces, but were confounded among the intricacies of the
mountain.  They fled hither and thither, many perishing among
the precipices, others being slain by the Moors, and others taken
prisoners.

The gallant marques of Cadiz, guided by his trusty adalid, Luis Amar,
had ascended a different part of the mountain.  He was followed
by his friend, Don Alonso de Aguilar, the adelantado, and the count
of Cifuentes, but in the darkness and confusion the bands of these
commanders became separated from each other.  When the marques
attained the summit, he looked around for his companions-in-arms,
but they were no longer following him, and there was no trumpet to
summon them.  It was a consolation to the marques, however, that
his brothers and several of his relations, with a number of his
retainers, were still with him: he called his brothers by name,
and their replies gave comfort to his heart.

His guide now led the way into another valley, where he would be
less exposed to danger: when he had reached the bottom of it the
marques paused to collect his scattered followers and to give time
for his fellow-commanders to rejoin him.  Here he was suddenly
assailed by the troops of El Zagal, aided by the mountaineers
from the cliffs.  The Christians, exhausted and terrified, lost all
presence of mind: most of them fled, and were either slain or taken
captive.  The marques and his valiant brothers, with a few tried
friends, made a stout resistance.  His horse was killed under him;
his brothers, Don Diego and Don Lope, with his two nephews, Don
Lorenzo and Don Manuel, were one by one swept from his side,
either transfixed with darts and lances by the soldiers of El Zagal
or crushed by stones from the heights.  The marques was a veteran
warrior, and had been in many a bloody battle, but never before
had death fallen so thick and close around him.  When he saw
his remaining brother, Don Beltran, struck out of his saddle by a
fragment of a rock and his horse running wildly about without his
rider, he gave a cry of anguish and stood bewildered and aghast.
A few faithful followers surrounded him and entreated him to fly for
his life.  He would still have remained, to have shared the fortunes
of his friend Don Alonso de Aguilar and his other companions-in-arms,
but the forces of El Zagal were between him and them, and death
was whistling by on every wind.  Reluctantly, therefore, he consented
to fly.  Another horse was brought him: his faithful adalid guided him
by one of the steepest paths, which lasted for four leagues, the
enemy still hanging on his traces and thinning the scanty ranks of
his followers.  At length the marques reached the extremity of the
mountain-defiles, and with a haggard remnant of his men escaped
by dint of hoof to Antiquera.

The count of Cifuentes, with a few of his retainers, in attempting
to follow the marques of Cadiz wandered into a narrow pass, where
they were completely surrounded by the band of El Zagal.  The
count himself was assailed by six of the enemy, against whom he
was defending himself with desperation, when their leader, struck
with the inequality of the fight, ordered the others to desist, and
continued the combat alone.  The count, already exhausted, was soon
compelled to surrender; his brother, Don Pedro de Silva, and the few
of his retainers who survived, were likewise taken prisoners.  The
Moorish cavalier who had manifested such a chivalrous spirit in
encountering the count singly was[3]Reduan Vanegas, brother of
the former vizier of Muley Abul Hassan, and one of the leaders of
the faction of the sultana Zoraya.

The dawn of day found Don Alonso de Aguilar with a handful of his
followers still among the mountains.  They had attempted to follow
the marques of Cadiz, but had been obliged to pause and defend
themselves against the thickening forces of the enemy.  They at
length traversed the mountain, and reached the same valley where the
marques had made his last disastrous stand.  Wearied and perplexed,
they sheltered themselves in a natural grotto under an overhanging
rock, which kept off the darts of the enemy, while a bubbling
fountain gave them the means of slaking their raging thirst and
refreshing their exhausted steeds.  As day broke the scene of
slaughter unfolded its horrors.  There lay the noble brothers and
nephews of the gallant marques, transfixed with darts or gashed and
bruised with unseemly wounds, while many other gallant cavaliers lay
stretched out dead and dying around, some of them partly stripped
and plundered by the Moors.  De Aguilar was a pious knight, but his
piety was not humble and resigned, like that of the worthy master
of Santiago.  He imprecated holy curses upon the infidels for having
thus laid low the flower of Christian chivalry, and he vowed in his
heart bitter vengeance upon the surrounding country.

By degrees the little force of De Aguilar was augmented by numbers
of fugitives who issued from caves and chasms where they had taken
refuge in the night.  A little band of mounted knights was gradually
formed, and, the Moors having abandoned the heights to collect the
spoils of the slain, this gallant but forlorn squadron was enabled
to retreat to Antiquera.

This disastrous affair lasted from Thursday evening, throughout
Friday, the twenty-first of March, the festival of St. Benedict.
It is still recorded in Spanish calendars as the defeat of the
mountains of Malaga, and the spot where the greatest slaughter
took place is called "la Cuesta de la Matanza," or the Hill of the
Massacre.  The principal leaders who survived returned to Antiquera.
Many of the knights took refuge in Alhama and other towns: many
wandered about the mountains for eight days, living on roots and
herbs, hiding themselves during the day and sallying forth at night.
So enfeebled and disheartened were they that they offered no
resistance if attacked.  Three or four soldiers would surrender to a
Moorish peasant, and even the women of Malaga sallied forth and
made prisoners.  Some were thrown into the dungeons of frontier
towns, others led captive to Granada, but by far the greater number
were conducted to Malaga, the city they had threatened to attack.
Two hundred and fifty principal cavaliers, alcaydes, commanders,
and hidalgos of generous blood were confined in the alcazaba, or
citadel, of Malaga to await their ransom, and five hundred and
seventy of the common soldiery were crowded in an enclosure
or courtyard of the alcazaba to be sold as slaves.*

*Cura de los Palacios.


Great spoils were collected of splendid armor and weapons taken
from the slain or thrown away by the cavaliers in their flight, and
many horses, magnificently caparisoned, together with numerous
standards,--all which were paraded in triumph in the Moorish towns.

The merchants also who had come with the army, intending to traffic
in the spoils of the Moors, were themselves made objects of traffic.
Several of them were driven like cattle before the Moorish viragoes
to the market of Malaga, and, in spite of all their adroitness in
trade and their attempts to buy themselves off at a cheap ransom,
they were unable to purchase their freedom without such draughts
upon their money-bags at home as drained them to the very bottom.



CHAPTER XIII.

EFFECTS OF THE DISASTERS AMONG THE MOUNTAINS OF MALAGA.


The people of Antiquera had scarcely recovered from the tumult of
excitement and admiration caused by the departure of the gallant
band of cavaliers upon their foray when they beheld the scattered
wrecks flying for refuge to their walls.  Day after day and hour after
hour brought some wretched fugitive, in whose battered plight and
haggard woebegone demeanor it was almost impossible to recognize
the warrior who had lately issued so gayly and gloriously from
their gates.

The arrival of the marques of Cadiz almost alone, covered with dust
and blood, his armor shattered and defaced, his countenance the
picture of despair, filled every heart with sorrow, for he was greatly
beloved by the people.  The multitude asked of his companions
where was the band of brothers which had rallied round him as he
went forth to the field, and when told that one by one they had been
slaughtered at his side, they hushed their voices or spake to each
other only in whispers as he passed, gazing at him in silent
sympathy.  No one attempted to console him in so great an affliction,
nor did the good marques speak ever a word, but, shutting himself
up, brooded in lonely anguish over his misfortune.  It was only
the arrival of Don Alonso de Aguilar that gave him a gleam of
consolation, rejoicing to find that amidst the shafts of death
which had fallen so thickly among his family his chosen friend
and brother-in-arms had escaped uninjured.

For several days every eye was turned in fearful suspense toward
the Moorish border, anxiously looking in every fugitive from the
mountains for the lineaments of some friend or relative whose fate
was yet a mystery.  At length every hope and doubt subsided into
certainty; the whole extent of this great calamity was known,
spreading grief and consternation throughout the land and laying
desolate the pride and hopes of palaces.  It was a sorrow that
visited the marble hall and silken pillow.  Stately dames mourned
over the loss of their sons, the joy and glory of their age, and
many a fair cheek was blanched with woe which had lately mantled
with secret admiration.  "All Andalusia," says a historian of the
time, "was overwhelmed by a great affliction; there was no drying
of the eyes which wept in her."*

*Cura de los Palacios.


Fear and trembling reigned for a time along the frontier.  Their
spear seemed broken, their buckler cleft in twain: every border town
dreaded an attack, and the mother caught her infant to her bosom
when the watch-dog howled in the night, fancying it the war-cry of
the Moor.  All for a time seemed lost, and despondency even found
its way to the royal breasts of Ferdinand and Isabella amidst the
splendors of their court.

Great, on the other hand, was the joy of the Moors when they saw
whole legions of Christian warriors brought captive into their towns
by rude mountain-peasantry.  They thought it the work of Allah in
favor of the faithful.  But when they recognized among the captives
thus dejected and broken down some of the proudest of Christian
chivalry; when they saw several of the banners and devices of the
noblest houses of Spain, which they had been accustomed to behold
in the foremost of the battle, now trailed ignominiously through their
streets; when, in short, they witnessed the arrival of the count of
Cifuentes, the royal standard-bearer of Spain, with his gallant
brother, Don Pedro de Silva, brought prisoners into the gates of
Granada,--there were no bounds to their exultation.  They thought
that the days of their ancient glory were about to return, and that
they were to renew their career of triumph over the unbelievers.

The Christian historians of the time are sorely perplexed to account
for this misfortune, and why so many Christian knights, fighting in
the cause of the holy faith, should thus miraculously, as it were,
be given captive to a handful of infidel boors, for we are assured
that all this rout and destruction was effected by five hundred foot
and fifty horse, and those mere mountaineers without science or
discipline.*  "It was intended," observes one historiographer, "as
a lesson to their confidence and vainglory, overrating their own
prowess and thinking that so chosen a band of chivalry had but
to appear in the land of the enemy and conquer.  It was to teach
them that the race is not to the swift nor the battle to the strong,
but that God alone giveth the victory."

*Cura de los Palacios.


The worthy father Fray Antonio Agapida, however, asserts it to be
a punishment for the avarice of the Spanish warriors.  They did not
enter the kingdom of the infidels with the pure spirit of Christian
knights, zealous only for the glory of the faith, but rather as
greedy men of traffic, to enrich themselves by vending the spoils
of the infidels.  Instead of preparing themselves by confession and
communion, and executing their testaments, and making donations and
bequests to churches and convents, they thought only of arranging
bargains and sales of their anticipated booty.  Instead of taking
with them holy monks to aid them with their prayers, they were
followed by a train of trading-men to keep alive their worldly and
sordid ideas, and to turn what ought to be holy triumphs into scenes
of brawling traffic.  Such is the opinion of the excellent Agapida,
in which he is joined by that most worthy and upright of chroniclers,
the curate of Los Palacios.  Agapida comforts himself, however, with
the reflection that this visitation was meant in mercy to try the
Castilian heart, and to extract from its present humiliation the
elements of future success, as gold is extracted from amidst the
impurities of earth; and in this reflection he is supported by the
venerable historian Pedro Abarca of the Society of Jesuits.*

*Abarca, Anales de Aragon, Rey 30, cap. 2, \0xA4 7.



CHAPTER XIV.

HOW KING BOABDIL EL CHICO MARCHED OVER THE BORDER.


The defeat of the Christian cavaliers among the mountains of Malaga,
and the successful inroad of Muley Abul Hassan into the lands of
Medina Sidonia, had produced a favorable effect on the fortunes of
the old monarch.  The inconstant populace began to shout forth
his name in the streets, and to sneer at the inactivity of his son
Boabdil el Chico.  The latter, though in the flower of his age and
distinguished for vigor and dexterity in jousts and tournaments,
had never yet fleshed his weapon in the field of battle; and it was
murmured that he preferred the silken repose of the cool halls of
the Alhambra to the fatigue and danger of the foray and the hard
encampments of the mountains.

The popularity of these rival kings depended upon their success
against the Christians, and Boabdil el Chico found it necessary to
strike some signal blow to counterbalance the late triumph of
his father.  He was further incited by his father-in-law, Ali Atar,
alcayde of Loxa, with whom the coals of wrath against the Christians
still burned among the ashes of age, and had lately been blown into
a flame by the attack made by Ferdinand on the city under his
command.


Ali Atar informed Boabdil that the late discomfiture of the Christian
knights had stripped Andalusia of the prime of her chivalry and
broken the spirit of the country.  All the frontier of Cordova and
Ecija now lay open to inroad; but he especially pointed out the
city of Lucena as an object of attack, being feebly garrisoned and
lying in a country rich in pasturage, abounding in cattle and grain,
in oil and wine.  The fiery old Moor spoke from thorough information,
for he had made many an incursion into these parts, and his very
name was a terror throughout the country.  It had become a by-
word in the garrison of Loxa to call Lucena the garden of Ali Atar,
for he was accustomed to forage its fertile territories for all his
supplies.

Boabdil el Chico listened to the persuasions of this veteran of the
borders.  He assembled a force of nine thousand foot and seven
hundred horse, most of them his own adherents, but many the
partisans of his father; for both factions, however they might fight
among themselves, were ready to unite in any expedition against the
Christians.  Many of the most illustrious and valiant of the Moorish
nobility assembled round his standard, magnificently arrayed in
sumptuous armor and rich embroidery, as though for a festival or
a tilt of canes rather than an enterprise of iron war.  Boabdil's
mother, the sultana Ayxa la Horra, armed him for the field, and gave
him her benediction as she girded his scimetar to his side.  His
favorite wife Morayma wept as she thought of the evils that might
befall him.  "Why dost thou weep, daughter of Ali Atar?" said the
high-minded Ayxa: "these tears become not the daughter of a
warrior nor the wife of a king.  Believe me there lurks more danger
for a monarch within the strong walls of a palace than within the
frail curtains of a tent.  It is by perils in the field that thy husband
must purchase security on his throne."

But Morayma still hung upon his neck with tears and sad forebodings,
and when he departed from the Alhambra she betook herself to her
mirador, overlooking the Vega, whence she watched the army as it
went in shining order along the road leading to Loxa, and every
burst of warlike melody that came swelling on the breeze was
answered by a gush of sorrow.

As the royal cavalcade issued from the palace and descended
through the streets of Granada the populace greeted their youthful
sovereign with shouts, anticipating deeds of prowess that would
wither the laurels of his father.  The appearance of Boabdil was well
calculated to captivate the public eye, if we may judge from the
description given by the abbot of Rute in his manuscript history of
the House of Cordova.  He was mounted on a superb white charger
magnificently caparisoned.  His corselets were of polished steel
richly ornamented, studded with gold nails, and lined with crimson
velvet.  He wore a steel casque exquisitely chiselled and embossed;
his scimetar and dagger of Damascus were of highest temper; he had a
round buckler at his shoulder and bore a ponderous lance.  In passing
through the gate of Elvira, however, he accidentally broke his lance
against the arch.  At this certain of his nobles turned pale and
entreated him to turn back, for they regarded it as an evil omen.
Boabdil scoffed at their fears as idle fancies.  He refused to take
another spear, but drew forth his scimetar and led the way (adds
Agapida) in an arrogant and haughty style, as though he would set
both Heaven and earth at defiance.  Another evil omen was sent to
deter him from his enterprise: arriving at the rambla, or dry ravine,
of Beyro, which is scarcely a bowshot from the city, a fox ran through
the whole army and close by the person of the king, and, though
a thousand bolts were discharged at it, escaped uninjured to the
mountains.  The principal courtiers now reiterated their remonstrances
against proceeding; the king, however, was not to be dismayed by
these portents, but continued to march forward.*

*Marmol, Rebel. de los Moros, lib. 1, c. xii., fol. 14.


At Loxa the army was reinforced by old Ali Atar with the chosen
horsemen of his garrison and many of the bravest warriors of the
border towns.  The people of Loxa shouted with exultation when
they beheld Ali Atar armed at all points and mounted on his Barbary
steed, which had often borne him over the borders.  The veteran
warrior, with nearly a century of years upon his head, had all the
fire and animation of youth at the prospect of a foray, and careered
from rank to rank with the velocity of an Arab of the desert.  The
populace watched the army as it paraded over the bridge and wound
into the passes of the mountains, and still their eyes were fixed
upon the pennon of Ali Atar as if it bore with it an assurance
of victory.

The Moorish army entered the Christian frontier by forced marches,
hastily ravaging the country, driving off the flocks and herds, and
making captives of the inhabitants.  They pressed on furiously,
and made the latter part of their march in the night, to elude
observation and come upon Lucena by surprise.  Boabdil was
inexperienced in warfare, but had a veteran counsellor in his old
father-in-law; for Ali Atar knew every secret of the country, and as
he prowled through it his eye ranged over the land, uniting in its
glare the craft of the fox with the sanguinary ferocity of the wolf.
He had flattered himself that their march had been so rapid as to
outstrip intelligence, and that Lucena would be an easy capture,
when suddenly he beheld alarm-fires blazing upon the mountains.
"We are discovered," said he to Boabdil; "the country will be up in
arms; we have nothing left but to strike boldly for Lucena: it is but
slightly garrisoned, and we may carry it by assault before it can
receive assistance."  The king approved of his counsel, and they
marched rapidly for the gate of Lucena.



CHAPTER XV.

HOW THE COUNT DE CABRA SALLIED FORTH FROM HIS CASTLE IN
    QUEST OF KING BOABDIL.


Don Diego de Cordova, count of Cabra, was in the castle of Vaena,
which, with the town of the same name, is situated on a lofty sun-
burnt hill on the frontier of the kingdom of Cordova and but a few
leagues from Lucena.  The range of mountains of Horquera lies
between them.  The castle of Vaena was strong and well furnished with
arms, and the count had a numerous band of vassals and retainers;
for it behooved the noblemen of the frontiers in those times to be
well prepared with man and horse, with lance and buckler, to resist
the sudden incursions of the Moors.  The count of Cabra was a hardy
and experienced warrior, shrewd in council, prompt in action, rapid
and fearless in the field.  He was one of the bravest of cavaliers
for an inroad, and had been quickened and sharpened in thought
and action by living on the borders.

On the night of the 20th of April, 1483, the count was about to
retire to rest when the watchman from the turret brought him word
that there were alarm-fires on the mountains of Horquera, and that
they were made on the signal-tower overhanging the defile through
which the road passes to Cabra and Lucena.

The count ascended the battlement and beheld five lights blazing on
the tower--a sign that there was a Moorish army attacking some place
on the frontier.  The count instantly ordered the alarm-bells to be
sounded, and despatched couriers to rouse the commanders of the
neighboring towns.  He called upon his retainers to prepare for
action, and sent a trumpet through the town summoning the men
to assemble at the castle-gate at daybreak armed and equipped for
the field.

Throughout the remainder of the night the castle resounded with the
din of preparation.  Every house in the town was in equal bustle, for
in these frontier towns every house had its warrior, and the lance
and buckler were ever hanging against the wall ready to be snatched
down for instant service.  Nothing was heard but the din of armorers,
the shoeing of steeds, and furbishing up of weapons, and all night
long the alarm-fires kept blazing on the mountains.

When the morning dawned the count of Cabra sallied forth at the head
of two hundred and fifty cavaliers of the best families of Vaena, all
well appointed, exercised in arms, and experienced in the warfare of
the borders.  There were besides twelve hundred foot-soldiers, brave
and well-seasoned men of the same town.  The count ordered them
to hasten forward, whoever could make most speed, taking the road
to Cabra, which was three leagues distant.  That they might not loiter
on the road he allowed none of them to break their fast until they
arrived at that place.  The provident count despatched couriers in
advance, and the little army on reaching Cabra found tables spread
with food and refreshments at the gates of the town.  Here they were
joined by Don Alonso de Cordova, senior of Zuheros.

Having made a hearty repast, they were on the point of resuming
their march when the count discovered that in the hurry of his
departure from home he had forgotten to bring the standard of Vaena,
which for upward of eighty years had always been borne to battle by
his family.  It was now noon, and there was no time to return: he
took, therefore, the standard of Cabra, the device of which is a
goat, and which had not been seen in the wars for the last half
century.  When about to depart a courier came galloping at full
speed, bringing missives to the count from his nephew, Don Diego
Fernandez de Cordova, senior of Lucena and alcayde de los Donceles,*
entreating him to hasten to his aid, as his town was beset by the
Moorish king, Boabdil el Chico, with a powerful army, who were
actually setting fire to the gates.

*The "Donceles" were young cavaliers who had been pages in
 the royal household, but now formed an elite corps in the army.


The count put his little army instantly in movement for Lucena,
which is only one league from Cabra; he was fired with the idea of
having the Moorish king in person to contend with.  By the time he
reached Lucena the Moors had desisted from the attack and were
ravaging the surrounding country.  He entered the town with a few of
his cavaliers, and was received with joy by his nephew, whose whole
force consisted but of eighty horse and three hundred foot.  Don
Diego Fernandez de Cordova was a young man, yet he was a prudent,
careful, and capable officer.  Having learnt, the evening before,
that the Moors had passed the frontiers, he had gathered within his
walls all the women and children from the environs, had armed the
men, sent couriers in all directions for succor, and had lighted
alarm-fires on the mountains.

Boabdil had arrived with his army at daybreak, and had sent in a
message threatening to put the garrison to the sword if the place
were not instantly surrendered.  The messenger was a Moor of Granada,
named Hamet, whom Don Diego had formerly known: he contrived to
amuse him with negotiation to gain time for succor to arrive.  The
fierce old Ali Atar, losing all patience, had made an assault upon
the town and stormed like a fury at the gate, but had been repulsed.
Another and more serious attack was expected in the course of
the night.

When the count de Cabra had heard this account of the situation of
affairs, he turned to his nephew with his usual alacrity of manner,
and proposed that they should immediately sally forth in quest of
the enemy.  The prudent Don Diego remonstrated at the rashness
of attacking so great a force with a mere handful of men.  "Nephew,"
said the count, "I came from Vaena with a determination to fight
this Moorish king, and I will not be disappointed."

"At any rate," replied Don Diego, "let us wait but two hours, and we
shall have reinforcements which have been promised me from Rambla,
Santaella, Montilla, and other places in the neighborhood."  "If we
await these," said the hardy count, "the Moors will be off, and all our
trouble will have been in vain.  You may await them if you please; I
am resolved on fighting."

The count paused for no reply, but in his prompt and rapid manner
sallied forth to his men.  The young alcayde de los Donceles, though
more prudent than his ardent uncle, was equally brave; he determined
to stand by him in his rash enterprise, and, summoning his little force,
marched forth to join the count, who was already on the move. They
then proceeded together in quest of the enemy.

The Moorish army had ceased ravaging the country, and was not to
be seen, the neighborhood being hilly and broken with deep ravines.
The count despatched six scouts on horseback to reconnoitre, ordering
them to return with all speed on discovering the enemy, and by
no means to engage in skirmishing with stragglers.  The scouts,
ascending a high hill, beheld the Moorish army in a valley behind
it, the cavalry ranged in five battalions keeping guard, while the
foot-soldiers were seated on the grass making a repast.  They
returned immediately with the intelligence.

The count now ordered the troops to march in the direction of the
enemy.  He and his nephew ascended the hill, and saw that the five
battalions of Moorish cavalry had been formed into two, one of about
nine hundred lances, the other of about six hundred.  The whole force
seemed prepared to march for the frontier.  The foot-soldiers were
already under way with many prisoners and a great train of mules
and beasts of burden laden with booty.  At a distance was Boabdil
el Chico: they could not distinguish his person, but they knew him
by his superb black and white charger, magnificently caparisoned,
and by his being surrounded by a numerous guard sumptuously
armed and attired.  Old Ali Atar was careering about the valley with
his usual impatience, hurrying the march of the loitering troops.

The eyes of the count de Cabra glistened with eager joy as he
beheld the royal prize within his reach.  The immense disparity
of their forces never entered into his mind.  "By Santiago!" said
he to his nephew as they hastened down the hill, "had we waited
for more forces the Moorish king and his army would have escaped us."

The count now harangued his men to inspirit them to this hazardous
encounter.  He told them not to be dismayed at the number of the
Moors, for God often permitted the few to conquer the many, and he
had great confidence that through the divine aid they were that day
to achieve a signal victory which should win them both riches and
renown.  He commanded that no man should hurl his lance at the
enemy, but should keep it in his hands and strike as many blows
with it as he could.  He warned them also never to shout except
when the Moors did, for when both armies shouted together there
was no perceiving which made the most noise and was the strongest.
He desired his uncle Lope de Mendoza, and Diego de Cabrera, alcayde
of Dona Mencia, to alight and enter on foot in the battalion of infantry
to animate them to the combat.  He appointed also the alcayde of
Vaena and Diego de Clavijo, a cavalier of his household, to remain
in the rear, and not to permit any one to lag behind, either to despoil
the dead or for any other purpose.

Such were the orders given by this most adroit, active, and intrepid
cavalier to his little army, supplying by admirable sagacity and
subtle management the want of a more numerous force.  His orders
being given and all arrangements made, he threw aside his lance,
drew his sword, and commanded his standard to be advanced against
the enemy.



CHAPTER XVI.

THE BATTLE OF LUCENA.


The Moorish king had descried the Spanish forces at a distance,
although a slight fog prevented his seeing them distinctly and
ascertaining their numbers.  His old father-in-law, Ali Atar, was by
his side, who, being a veteran marauder, was well acquainted with
all the standards and armorial bearings of the frontiers.  When the
king beheld the ancient and long-disused banner of Cabra emerging
from the mist, he turned to Ali Atar and demanded whose ensign it
was.  The old borderer was for once at a loss, for the banner had not
been displayed in battle in his time.  "In truth," replied he, after a
pause, "I have been considering that standard for some time, but
I confess I do not know it.  It cannot be the ensign of any single
commander or community, for none would venture single-handed
to attack you.  It appears to be a dog, which device is borne by the
towns of Baeza and Ubeda. If it be so, all Andalusia is in movement
against you, and I would advise you to retire."

The count de Cabra, in winding down the hill toward the Moors,
found himself on much lower ground than the enemy: he ordered
in all haste that his standard should be taken back, so as to gain
the vantage- ground.  The Moors, mistaking this for a retreat, rushed
impetuously toward the Christians.  The latter, having gained the
height proposed, charged upon them at the same moment with the
battle-cry of "Santiago!" and, dealing the first blows, laid many of
the Moorish cavaliers in the dust.

The Moors, thus checked in their tumultuous assault, were thrown
into confusion, and began to give way, the Christians following
hard upon them.  Boabdil el Chico endeavored to rally them.  "Hold!
hold! for shame!" cried he; "let us not fly, at least until we know
our enemy."  The Moorish chivalry were stung by this reproof, and
turned to make front with the valor of men who feel that they are
fighting under their monarch's eye.

At this moment, Lorenzo de Porres, alcayde of Luque, arrived with
fifty horse and one hundred foot, sounding an Italian trumpet from
among a copse of oak trees which concealed his force.  The quick ear
of old Ali Atar caught the note.  "That is an Italian trumpet," said he
to the king; "the whole world seems in arms against Your Highness!"

The trumpet of Lorenzo de Porres was answered by that of the
count de Cabra in another direction, and it seemed to the Moors
as if they were between two armies.  Don Lorenzo, sallying from
among the oaks, now charged upon the enemy: the latter did not
wait to ascertain the force of this new foe; the confusion, the
variety of alarums, the attacks from opposite quarters, the obscurity
of the fog, all conspired to deceive them as to the number of their
adversaries.  Broken and dismayed, they retreated fighting, and
nothing but the presence and remonstrances of the king prevented
their retreat from becoming a headlong flight.  If Boabdil had
displayed little of the talents of a general in the outset of his
enterprise, he manifested courage and presence of mind amid the
disasters of its close.  Seconded by a small body of cavalry, the
choicest and most loyal of his guards, he made repeated stand
against the press of the foe in a skirmishing retreat of about three
leagues, and the way was strewn with the flower of his chivalry.
At length they came to the brook of Martin Gonzales (or Mingozales,
as it is called by the Moorish chroniclers), which, swollen by recent
rain, was now a deep and turbid torrent.  Here a scene of confusion
ensued.  Horse and foot precipitated themselves into the stream.
Some of the horses stuck fast in the mire and blocked up the ford;
others trampled down the foot-soldiers; many were drowned and
more carried down the stream.  Such of the foot-soldiers as gained
the opposite side immediately took to flight; the horsemen, too, who
had struggled through the stream, gave reins to their steeds and
scoured for the frontier.

The little band of devoted cavaliers about the king serried their
forces to keep the enemy in check, fighting with them hand to hand
until he should have time to cross.  In the tumult his horse was
shot down, and he became environed in the throng of foot-soldiers
struggling forward to the ford and in peril from the lances of their
pursuers.  Conscious that his rich array made him a conspicuous
object, he retreated along the bank of the river, and endeavored
to conceal himself in a thicket of willows and tamarisks.  Thence,
looking back, he beheld his loyal band at length give way,
supposing, no doubt, he had effected his escape.  They crossed
the ford, followed pell-mell by the enemy, and several of them
were struck down in the stream.

While Boabdil was meditating to throw himself into the water and
endeavor to swim across, he was discovered by Martin Hurtado,
regidor of Lucena, a brave cavalier who had been captive in the
prisons of Granada and exchanged for a Christian knight.  Hurtado
attacked the king with a pike, but was kept at bay until, seeing
other soldiers approaching, Boabdil cried for quarter, proclaiming
himself a person of high rank who would pay a noble ransom.  At
this moment came up several men of Vaena, of the troop of the count
de Cabra.  Hearing the talk of ransom and noticing the splendid attire
of the Moor, they endeavored to secure for themselves so rich a
prize.  One of them seized hold of Boabdil, but the latter resented
the indignity by striking him to the earth with a blow of his
poniard.  Others of Hurtado's townsmen coming up, a contest arose
between the men of Lucena and Vaena as to who had a right to the
prisoner.  The noise brought Don Diego Fernandez de Cordova to
the spot, who by his authority put an end to the altercation.
Boabdil, finding himself unknown by all present, concealed his
quality, giving himself out as the son of Aben Alnayer, a cavalier of
the royal household.*  Don Diego treated him with great courtesy,
put a red band round his neck in sign of his being a captive, and
sent him under an escort to the castle of Lucena where his quality
would be ascertained, his ransom arranged, and the question settled
as to who had made him prisoner.

*Garibay, lib. 40, cap 31.


This done, the count put spurs to his horse and hastened to rejoin
the count de Cabra, who was in hot pursuit of the enemy.  He overtook
him at a stream called Reanaul, and they continued together to press
on the skirts of the flying army during the remainder of the day.  The
pursuit was almost as hazardous as the battle, for had the enemy
at any time recovered from their panic, they might, by a sudden
reaction, have overwhelmed the small force of their pursuers.  To
guard against this peril, the wary count kept his battalion always
in close order, and had a body of a hundred chosen lancers in the
advance.  The Moors kept up a Parthian retreat; several times
they turned to make battle, but, seeing this solid body of steeled
warriors pressing upon them, they again took to flight.

The main retreat of the army was along the valley watered by the
Xenil and opening through the mountains of Algaringo to the city
of Loxa.  The alarm-fires of the preceding night had aroused the
country; every man snatched sword and buckler from the wall, and
the towns and villages poured forth their warriors to harass the
retreating foe.  Ali Atar kept the main force of the army together,
and turned fiercely from time to time upon his pursuers: he was like
a wolf hunted through the country he had often made desolate by
his maraudings.

The alarm of this invasion had reached the city of Antiquera, where
were several of the cavaliers who had escaped from the carnage
in the mountains of Malaga.  Their proud minds were festering with
their late disgrace, and their only prayer was for vengeance on the
infidels.  No sooner did they hear of the Moor being over the border
than they were armed and mounted for action.  Don Alonso de Aguilar
led them forth--a small body of but forty horsemen, but all cavaliers
of prowess and thirsting for revenge.  They came upon the foe on
the banks of the Xenil where it winds through the valleys of Cordova.
The river, swelled by the late rains, was deep and turbulent and only
fordable at certain places.  The main body of the army was gathered
in confusion on the banks, endeavoring to ford the stream, protected
by the cavalry of Ali Atar.

No sooner did the little band of Alonso de Aguilar come in sight of
the Moors than fury flashed from their eyes.  "Remember the mountains
of Malaga!" cried they to each other as they rushed to combat.  Their
charge was desperate, but was gallantly resisted.  A scrambling and
bloody fight ensued, hand to hand and sword to sword, sometimes on
land, sometimes in the water.  Many were lanced on the banks; others,
throwing themselves into the river, sank with the weight of their armor
and were drowned; some, grappling together, fell from their horses,
but continued their struggle in the waves, and helm and turban rolled
together down the stream.  The Moors were far greater in number, and
among them were many warriors of rank; but they were disheartened
by defeat, while the Christians were excited even to desperation.

Ali Atar alone preserved all his fire and energy amid his reverses.
He had been enraged at the defeat of the army and the ignominious
flight he had been obliged to make through a country which had so
often been the scene of his exploits; but to be thus impeded in his
flight and harassed and insulted by a mere handful of warriors
roused the violent passions of the old Moor to perfect frenzy.
He had marked Don Alonso de Aguilar dealing his blows (says
Agapida) with the pious vehemence of a righteous knight, who
knows that in every wound inflicted upon the infidels he is doing God
service.  Ali Atar spurred his steed along the bank of the river to
come upon Don Alonso by surprise.  The back of the warrior was
toward him, and, collecting all his force, the Moor hurled his lance
to transfix him on the spot.  The lance was not thrown with the
usual accuracy of Ali Atar: it tore away a part of the cuirass of
Don Alonso, but failed to inflict a wound.  The Moor rushed upon
Don Alonso with his scimetar, but the latter was on the alert and
parried his blow.  They fought desperately upon the borders of the
river, alternately pressing each other into the stream and fighting
their way again up the bank.  Ali Atar was repeatedly wounded,
and Don Alonso, having pity on his age, would have spared his life:
he called upon him to surrender.  "Never," cried Ali Atar, "to a
Christian dog!"  The words were scarce out of his mouth when the
sword of Don Alonso clove his turbaned head and sank deep into the
brain.  He fell dead without a groan; his body rolled into the Xenil,
nor was it ever found or recognized.*  Thus fell Ali Atar, who had
long been the terror of Andalusia. As he had hated and warred
upon the Christians all his life, so he died in the very act of bitter
hostility.

*Cura de los Palacios.


The fall of Ali Atar put an end to the transient stand of the cavalry.
Horse and foot mingled together in the desperate struggle across
the Xenil, and many were trampled down and perished beneath
the waves.  Don Alonso and his band continued to harass them until
they crossed the frontier, and every blow struck home to the Moors
seemed to lighten the load of humiliation and sorrow which had
weighed heavy on their hearts.

In this disastrous rout the Moors lost upward of five thousand
killed and made prisoners, many of whom were of the most noble
lineages of Granada; numbers fled to rocks and mountains, where
they were subsequently taken.

Boabdil remained a prisoner in the state tower of the citadel of
Lucena under the vigilance of Alonso de Rueda, esquire of the
alcayde of the Donceles; his quality was still unknown until the
24th of April, three days after the battle.  On that day some
prisoners, natives of Granada, just brought in, caught a sight of
the unfortunate Boabdil despoiled of his royal robes.  Throwing
themselves at his feet, they broke forth in loud lamentations,
apostrophizing him as their lord and king.

Great was the astonishment and triumph of the count de Cabra and Don
Diego Fernandez de Cordova on learning the rank of the supposed
cavalier.  They both ascended to the castle to see that he was lodged
in a style befitting his quality.  When the good count beheld in the
dejected captive before him the monarch who had so recently appeared
in royal splendor surrounded by an army, his generous heart was
touched by sympathy.  He said everything to comfort him that became
a courteous and Christian knight, observing that the same mutability
of things which had suddenly brought him low might as rapidly restore
him to prosperity, since in this world nothing is stable, and sorrow,
like joy, has its allotted term.

The action here recorded was called by some the battle of Lucena,
by others the battle of the Moorish king, because of the capture of
Boabdil.  Twenty-two banners, taken on the occasion, were borne in
triumph into Vaena on the 23d of April, St. George's Day, and hung
up in the church.  There they remain (says a historian of after
times) to this day.  Once a year, on the festival of St. George,
they are borne about in procession by the inhabitants, who at
the same time give thanks to God for this signal victory granted
to their forefathers.*

*Several circumstances relative to the capture of Boabdil vary in
 this from the first edition, in consequence of later light thrown
 on the subject by Don Miguel Lafuente Alcantara in his History of
 Granada.  He has availed himself much of various ancient documents
 relative to the battle, especially the History of the House of
 Cordova by the abbot of Rute, a descendant of that family--a rare
 manuscript of which few copies exist.


The question as to the person entitled to the honor and reward for
having captured the king long continued a matter of dispute between
the people of Lucena and Vaena.  On the 20th of October, 1520,
about thirty-seven years after the event, an examination of several
witnesses to the fact took place before the chief justice of the
fortress of Lucena, at the instance of Bartolomy Hurtado, the son of
Martin, when the claim of his father was established by Dona Leonora
Hernandez, lady in attendant on the mother of the alcayde of los
Donceles, who testified being present when Boabdil signalized Martin
Hurtado as his captor.

The chief honor of the day, and of course of the defeat and capture
of the Moorish monarch, was given by the sovereign to the count de
Cabra; the second to his nephew, Don Diego Fernandez de Cordova.

Among the curious papers cited by Alcantara is one existing in the
archives of the House of Medina Celi, giving the account of the
treasurer of Don Diego Fernandez as to the sums expended by his
lord in the capture of the king, the reward given to some soldiers
for a standard of the king's which they had taken, to others for the
wounds they had received, etc.

Another paper speaks of an auction at Lucena on the 28th of April
of horses and mules taken in the battle.  Another paper states the
gratuities of the alcayde of los Donceles to the soldiery--four
fanegas, or about four hundredweight, of wheat and a lance to each
horseman, two fanegas of wheat and a lance to each foot-soldier.



CHAPTER XVII.

LAMENTATIONS OF THE MOORS FOR THE BATTLE OF LUCENA.


The sentinels looked out from the watch-towers of Loxa along
the valley of the Xenil, which passes through the mountains of
Algaringo.  They looked to behold the king returning in triumph
at the head of his shining host, laden with the spoil of the
unbeliever.   They looked to behold the standard of their warlike
idol, the fierce Ali Atar, borne by the chivalry of Loxa, ever
foremost in the wars of the border.

In the evening of the 21st of April they descried a single horseman
urging his faltering steed along the banks of the Xenil.  As he drew
near they perceived, by the flash of arms, that he was a warrior,
and on nearer approach by the richness of his armor and the
caparison of his steed they knew him to be a warrior of rank.

He reached Loxa faint and aghast, his courser covered with foam and
dust and blood, panting and staggering with fatigue and gashed with
wounds.  Having brought his master in safety, he sank down and died
before the gate of the city.  The soldiers at the gate gathered round
the cavalier as he stood by his expiring steed: they knew him to be
Cidi Caleb, nephew of the chief alfaqui of the mosque in the Albaycin,
and their hearts were filled with fearful forebodings.

"Cavalier," said they, "how fares it with the king and army?"

He cast his hand mournfully toward the land of the Christians.
"There they lie!" exclaimed he.  "The heavens have fallen upon
them.  All are lost! all dead!"*

*Bernaldez (Cura de los Palacios), Hist. de los Reyes Catol.,
 MS., cap. 61.


Upon this there was a great cry of consternation among the people,
and loud wailings of women, for the flower of the youth of Loxa were
with the army.

An old Moorish soldier, scarred in many a border battle, stood leaning
on his lance by the gateway.  "Where is Ali Atar?" demanded he eagerly.
"If he lives the army cannot be lost."

"I saw his helm cleft by the Christian sword; his body is floating
in the Xenil."

When the soldier heard these words he smote his breast and threw
dust upon his head, for he was an old follower of Ali Atar.

Cidi Caleb gave himself no repose, but, mounting another steed,
hastened toward Granada.  As he passed through the villages and
hamlets he spread sorrow around, for their chosen men had followed
the king to the wars.

When he entered the gates of Granada and announced the loss of
the king and army, a voice of horror went throughout the city.  Every
one thought but of his own share in the general calamity, and crowded
round the bearer of ill tidings.  One asked after a father, another
after a brother, some after a lover, and many a mother after her
son.  His replies all spoke of wounds and death.  To one he replied,
"I saw thy father pierced with a lance as he defended the person
of the king;" to another, "Thy brother fell wounded under the hoofs
of the horses, but there was no time to aid him, for the Christian
cavalry