 were upon us;" to another, "I saw the horse of thy lover
covered with blood and galloping without his rider;" to another,
"Thy son fought by my side on the banks of the Xenil: we were
surrounded by the enemy and driven into the stream.  I heard him
cry upon Allah in the midst of the waters: when I reached the other
bank he was no longer by my side."

Cidi Caleb passed on, leaving all Granada in lamentation: he
urged his steed up the steep avenue of trees and fountains that
leads to the Alhambra, nor stopped until he arrived before the Gate
of Justice.  Ayxa, the mother of Boabdil, and Morayma, his beloved
and tender wife, had daily watched from the Tower of Comares to
behold his triumphant return.  Who shall describe their affliction
when they heard the tidings of Cidi Caleb?  The sultana Ayxa spake
not much, but sat as one entranced.  Every now and then a deep sigh
burst forth, but she raised her eyes to heaven.  "It is the will of
Allah!" said she, and with these words endeavored to repress the
agonies of a mother's sorrow.  The tender Morayma threw herself
on the earth and gave way to the full turbulence of her feelings,
bewailing her husband and her father.  The high-minded Ayxa rebuked
the violence of her grief.  "Moderate these transports, my daughter,"
said she; "remember magnanimity should be the attribute of princes:
it becomes not them to give way to clamorous sorrow, like common
and vulgar minds."  But Morayma could only deplore her loss with the
anguish of a tender woman.  She shut herself up in her mirador, and
gazed all day with streaming eyes upon the Vega.  Every object
recalled the causes of her affliction.  The river Xenil, which ran
shining amidst groves and gardens, was the same on whose banks
had perished her father, Ali Atar; before her lay the road to Loxa,
by which Boabdil had departed, in martial state, surrounded by the
chivalry of Granada.  Ever and anon she would burst into an agony
of grief.  "Alas! my father!" she would exclaim; "the river runs smiling
before me that covers thy mangled remains; who will gather them to
an honored tomb in the land of the unbeliever?  And thou, O Boabdil,
light of my eyes! joy of my heart! life of my life! woe the day and
woe the hour that I saw thee depart from these walls!  The road by
which thou hast departed is solitary; never will it be gladdened by
thy return: the mountain thou hast traversed lies like a cloud in
the distance, and all beyond is darkness."

The royal minstrels were summoned to assuage her sorrows:
they attuned their instruments to cheerful strains, but in a little
while the anguish of their hearts prevailed and turned their songs
to lamentations.

"Beautiful Granada!" exclaimed they, "how is thy glory faded!
The flower of thy chivalry lies low in the land of the stranger; no
longer does the Vivarrambla echo to the tramp of steed and sound of
trumpet; no longer is it crowded with thy youthful nobles gloriously
arrayed for the tilt and tourney.  Beautiful Granada! the soft note
of the lute no longer floats through thy moonlit streets; the
serenade is no more heard beneath thy balconies; the lively castanet
is silent upon thy hills; the graceful dance of the Zambra is no more
seen beneath thy bowers!  Beautiful Granada! why is the Alhambra
so lorn and desolate?  The orange and myrtle still breathe their
perfumes into its silken chambers; the nightingale still sings
within its groves; its marble halls are still refreshed with the
plash of fountains and the gush of limpid rills.  Alas! alas! the
countenance of the king no longer shines within those halls!
The light of the Alhambra is set for ever!"

Thus all Granada, say the Arabian chroniclers, gave itself up to
lamentation; there was nothing but the voice of wailing from the
palace to the cottage.  All joined to deplore their youthful monarch,
cut down in the freshness and promise of his youth; many feared
that the prediction of the astrologers was about to be fulfilled, and
that the downfall of the kingdom would follow the death of Boabdil;
while all declared that had he survived he was the very sovereign
calculated to restore the realm to its ancient prosperity and glory.



CHAPTER XVIII.

HOW MULEY ABUL HASSAN PROFITED BY THE MISFORTUNES OF
    HIS SON BOABDIL.


An unfortunate death atones, with the world, for a multitude of
errors.  While the populace thought their youthful monarch had
perished in the field nothing could exceed their grief for his loss
and their adoration of his memory; when, however, they learnt
that he was still alive and had surrendered himself captive to the
Christians, their feelings underwent an instant change.  They decried
his talents as a commander, his courage as a soldier; they railed at
his expedition as rash and ill-conducted; and they reviled him for
not having dared to die on the field of battle, rather than
surrender to the enemy.

The alfaquis, as usual, mingled with the populace and artfully
guided their discontents.  "Behold," exclaimed they, "the prediction
is accomplished which was pronounced at the birth of Boabdil!  He
has been seated on the throne, and the kingdom has suffered
downfall and disgrace by his defeat and captivity.  Comfort yourselves,
O Moslems!  The evil day has passed by; the prophecy is fulfilled:
the sceptre which has been broken in the feeble hand of Boabdil is
destined to resume its former sway in the vigorous grasp of Abul
Hassan."

The people were struck with the wisdom of these words: they rejoiced
that the baleful prediction which had so long hung over them was at
an end, and declared that none but Muley Abul Hassan had the valor
and capacity necessary for the protection of the kingdom in this
time of trouble.

The longer the captivity of Boabdil continued, the greater grew
the popularity of his father.  One city after another renewed
allegiance to him, for power attracts power and fortune creates
fortune.  At length he was enabled to return to Granada and establish
himself once more in the Alhambra.  At his approach his repudiated
spouse, the sultana Ayxa, gathered together the family and treasures
of her captive son, and retired, with a handful of the nobles, into
the Albaycin, the rival quarter of the city, the inhabitants of which
still retained feelings of loyalty to Boabdil.  Here she fortified
herself and held the semblance of a court in the name of her son.
The fierce Muley Abul Hassan would have willingly carried fire and
sword into this factious quarter of the capital, but he dared not
confide in his new and uncertain popularity.  Many of the nobles
detested him for his past cruelty, and a large portion of the soldiery,
besides many of the people of his own party, respected the virtues
of Ayxa la Horra and pitied the misfortunes of Boabdil.

Granada therefore presented the singular spectacle of two
sovereignties within the same city.  The old king fortified himself
in the lofty towers of the Alhambra, as much against his own
subjects as against the Christians; while Ayxa, with the zeal of a
mother's affection, which waxes warmer and warmer toward her
offspring when in adversity, still maintained the standard of
Boabdil on the rival fortress of the Alcazaba, and kept his powerful
faction alive within the walls of the Albaycin.



CHAPTER XIX.

CAPTIVITY OF BOABDIL EL CHICO.


The unfortunate Boabdil remained a prisoner closely guarded, but
treated with great deference and respect, in the castle of Lucena,
where the noblest apartments were appointed for his abode.  From the
towers of his prison he beheld the town below filled with armed men,
and the lofty hill on which it was built girdled by massive walls and
ramparts, on which a vigilant watch was maintained night and day.
The mountains around were studded with watch-towers overlooking
the lonely roads which led to Granada, so that a turban could not
stir over the border without the alarm being given and the whole
country put on the alert.  Boabdil saw that there was no hope of
escape from such a fortress, and that any attempt to rescue him
would be equally in vain.  His heart was filled with anxiety as he
thought on the confusion and ruin which his captivity must cause
in his affairs, while sorrows of a softer kind overcame his fortitude
as he thought on the evils it might bring upon his family.

A few days only had passed away when missives arrived from the
Castilian sovereigns.  Ferdinand had been transported with joy at
hearing of the capture of the Moorish monarch, seeing the deep
and politic uses that might be made of such an event; but the
magnanimous spirit of Isabella was filled with compassion for
the unfortunate captive.  Their messages to Boabdil were full of
sympathy and consolation, breathing that high and gentle courtesy
which dwells in noble minds.

This magnanimity in his foe cheered the dejected spirit of the
captive monarch.  "Tell my sovereigns, the king and queen," said
he to the messenger, "that I cannot he unhappy being in the power
of such high and mighty princes, especially since they partake so
largely of that grace and goodness which Allah bestows upon the
monarchs whom he greatly loves.  Tell them, further, that I had long
thought of submitting myself to their sway, to receive the kingdom
of Granada from their hands in the same manner that my ancestor
received it from King John II., father to the gracious queen.  My
greatest sorrow, in this my captivity, is that I must appear to do
that from force which I would fain have done from inclination."

In the mean time, Muley Abul Hassan, finding the faction of his son
still formidable in Granada, was anxious to consolidate his power by
gaining possession of the person of Boabdil.  For this purpose he
sent an embassy to the Catholic monarchs, offering large terms for
the ransom, or rather the purchase, of his son, proposing, among
other conditions, to release the count of Cifuentes and nine other
of his most distinguished captives, and to enter into a treaty of
confederacy with the sovereigns.  Neither did the implacable father
make any scruple of testifying his indifference whether his son were
delivered up alive or dead, so that his person were placed assuredly
within his power.

The humane heart of Isabella revolted at the idea of giving up
the unfortunate prince into the hands of his most unnatural and
inveterate enemy: a disdainful refusal was therefore returned to
the old monarch, whose message had been couched in a vaunting spirit.
He was informed that the Castilian sovereigns would listen to no
proposals of peace from Muley Abul Hassan until he should lay down
his arms and offer them in all humility.

Overtures in a different spirit were made by the mother of Boabdil,
the sultana Ayxa la Horra, with the concurrence of the party which
still remained faithful to him.  It was thereby proposed that Mahomet
Abdallah, otherwise called Boabdil, should hold his crown as vassal
to the Castilian sovereigns, paying an annual tribute and releasing
seventy Christian captives annually for five years; that he should,
moreover, pay a large sum upon the spot for his ransom, and at the
same time give freedom to four hundred Christians to be chosen by
the king; that he should also engage to be always ready to render
military aid, and should come to the Cortes, or assemblage of nobles
and distinguished vassals of the Crown, whenever summoned.  His
only son and the sons of twelve distinguished Moorish houses were
to be delivered as hostages.

An embassy composed of the alcayde Aben Comixa, Muley, the royal
standard-bearer, and other distinguished cavaliers bore this
proposition to the Spanish court at Cordova, where they were
received by King Ferdinand.  Queen Isabella was absent at the time.
He was anxious to consult her in so momentous an affair, or, rather,
he was fearful of proceeding too precipitately, and not drawing from
this fortunate event all the advantage of which it was susceptible.
Without returning any reply, therefore, to the mission, he ordered
that the captive monarch should be brought to Cordova.

The alcayde of the Donceles was the bearer of this mandate, and
summoned all the hidalgos of Lucena and of his own estates to
form an honorable escort for the illustrious prisoner.  In this style
he conducted him to the capital.  The cavaliers and authorities of
Cordova came forth to receive the captive king with all due
ceremony, and especial care was taken to prevent any taunt or
insult from the multitude, or anything that might remind him of his
humiliation.  In this way he entered the once proud capital of the
Abda'rahmans, and was lodged in the house of the king's major-
domo.  Ferdinand, however, declined seeing the Moorish monarch.
He was still undetermined what course to pursue--whether to retain
him prisoner, set him at liberty on ransom, or treat him with politic
magnanimity; and each course would require a different kind of
reception.  Until this point should be resolved, therefore, he gave
him in charge to Martin de Alarcon, alcayde of the ancient fortress
of Porcuna, with orders to guard him strictly, but to treat him with
the distinction and deference due unto a prince.  These commands
were strictly obeyed: he was escorted, as before, in royal state,
to the fortress which was to form his prison, and, with the exception
of being restrained in his liberty, was as nobly entertained there
as he could have been in his regal palace at Granada.

In the mean time, Ferdinand availed himself of this critical moment,
while Granada was distracted with factions and dissensions, and
before he had concluded any treaty with Boabdil, to make a puissant
and ostentatious inroad into the very heart of the kingdom at the
head of his most illustrious nobles.  He sacked and destroyed several
towns and castles, and extended his ravages to the very gates of
Granada.  Muley Abul Hassan did not venture to oppose him.  His
city was filled with troops, but he was uncertain of their affection.
He dreaded that should he sally forth the gates of Granada might be
closed against him by the faction of the Albaycin.

The old Moor stood on the lofty tower of the Alhambra (says Antonio
Agapida) grinding his teeth and foaming like a tiger shut up in
his cage as he beheld the glittering battalions of the Christians
wheeling about the Vega, and the standard of the cross shining forth
from among the smoke of infidel villages and hamlets.  The most
Catholic king (continues Agapida) would gladly have continued
this righteous ravage, but his munitions began to fail.  Satisfied,
therefore, with having laid waste the country of the enemy and
insulted Muley Abul Hassan in his very capital, he returned to
Cordova covered with laurels and his army laden with spoils, and
now bethought himself of coming to an immediate decision in regard
to his royal prisoner.



CHAPTER XX.

OF THE TREATMENT OF BOABDIL BY THE CASTILIAN SOVEREIGNS.


A stately convention was held by King Ferdinand in the ancient city
of Cordova, composed of several of the most reverend prelates and
renowned cavaliers of the kingdom, to determine upon the fate of the
unfortunate Boabdil.

Don Alonso de Cardenas, the worthy master of Santiago, was one of
the first who gave his counsel.  He was a pious and zealous knight,
rigid in his devotion to the faith, and his holy zeal had been
inflamed to peculiar vehemence since his disastrous crusade among
the mountains of Malaga.  He inveighed with ardor against any
compromise or compact with the infidels: the object of this war,
he observed, was not the subjection of the Moors, but their utter
expulsion from the land, so that there might no longer remain a
single stain of Mahometanism throughout Christian Spain.  He gave
it as his opinion, therefore, that the captive king ought not to be
set at liberty.

Roderigo Ponce de Leon, marques of Cadiz, on the contrary, spoke
warmly for the release of Boabdil.  He pronounced it a measure of
sound policy, even if done without conditions. It would tend to keep
up the civil war in Granada, which was as a fire consuming the
entrails of the enemy, and effecting more for the interests of
Spain, without expense, than all the conquests of its arms.

The grand cardinal of Spain, Don Pedro Gonzalez de Mendoza,
coincided in opinion with the marques of Cadiz.  Nay (added that
pious prelate and politic statesman), it would be sound wisdom to
furnish the Moor with men and money and all other necessaries to
promote the civil war in Granada: by this means would be produced
great benefit to the service of God, since we are assured by his
infallible word that "a kingdom divided against itself cannot stand."*

*Salazar, Cronica del Gran Cardinal, p. 188.


Ferdinand weighed these counsels in his mind, but was slow in coming
to a decision: he was religiously attentive to his own interests
(observes Fray Antonio Agapida), knowing himself to be but an
instrument of Providence in this holy war, and that, therefore, in
consulting his own advantage he was promoting the interests of
the faith.  The opinion of Queen Isabella relieved him from his
perplexity.  That high-minded princess was zealous for the promotion
of the faith, but not for the extermination of the infidels.  The
Moorish kings had held their thrones as vassals to her progenitors:
she was content at present to accord the same privilege, and that
the royal prisoner should be liberated on condition of becoming a
vassal to the Crown.  By this means might be effected the deliverance
of many Christian captives who were languishing in Moorish chains.

King Ferdinand adopted the magnanimous measure recommended by
the queen, but he accompanied it with several shrewd conditions,
exacting tribute, military services, and safe passages and
maintenance for Christian troops throughout the places which should
adhere to Boabdil.  The captive king readily submitted to these
stipulations, and swore, after the manner of his faith, to observe
them with exactitude.  A truce was arranged for two years, during
which the Castilian sovereigns engaged to maintain him on his throne
and to assist him in recovering all places which he had lost during
his captivity.

When Boabdil el Chico had solemnly agreed to this arrangement in the
castle of Porcuna, preparations were made to receive him in Cordova
in regal style.  Superb steeds richly caparisoned and raiments of
brocade and silk and the most costly cloths, with all other articles
of sumptuous array, were furnished to him and to fifty Moorish
cavaliers who had come to treat for his ransom, that he might appear
in state befitting the monarch of Granada and the most distinguished
vassal of the Castilian sovereigns.  Money also was advanced to
maintain him in suitable grandeur during his residence at the
Castilian court and his return to his dominions.  Finally, it was
ordered by the sovereigns that when he came to Cordova all the
nobles and dignitaries of the court should go forth to receive him.

A question now arose among certain of those ancient and experienced
men who grow gray about a court in the profound study of forms and
ceremonials, with whom a point of punctilio is as a vast political
right, and who contract a sublime and awful idea of the external
dignity of the throne.  Certain of these court sages propounded the
momentous question whether the Moorish monarch, coming to do
homage as a vassal, ought not to kneel and kiss the hand of the
king.  This was immediately decided in the affirmative by a large
number of ancient cavaliers, accustomed (says Antonio Agapida)
to the lofty punctilio of our most dignified court and transcendent
sovereigns.  The king, therefore, was informed by those who arranged
the ceremonials that when the Moorish monarch appeared in his
presence he was expected to extend his royal hand to receive the
kiss of homage.

"I should certainly do so," replied King Ferdinand, "were he at
liberty and in his own kingdom, but I certainly shall not do so,
seeing that he is a prisoner and in mine."

The courtiers loudly applauded the magnanimity of this reply, though
many condemned it in secret as savoring of too much generosity
toward an infidel; and the worthy Jesuit, Fray Antonio Agapida,
fully concurs in their opinion.

The Moorish king entered Cordova with his little train of faithful
knights and escorted by all the nobility and chivalry of the
Castilian court.  He was conducted with great state and ceremony
to the royal palace.  When he came in presence of Ferdinand he knelt
and offered to kiss his hand, not merely in homage as his subject,
but in gratitude for his liberty.  Ferdinand declined the token of
vassalage, and raised him graciously from the earth.  An interpreter
began, in the name of Boabdil, to laud the magnanimity of the
Castilian monarch and to promise the most implicit submision.
"Enough!" said King Ferdinand, interrupting the interpreter in the
midst of his harangue: "there is no need of these compliments.  I
trust in his integrity that he will do everything becoming a good
man and a good king." With these words he received Boabdil el
Chico into his royal friendship and protection.



CHAPTER XXI.

RETURN OF BOABDIL FROM CAPTIVITY.


In the month of August a noble Moor, of the race of the
Abencerrages, arrived with a splendid retinue at the city of
Cordova, bringing with him the son of Boabdil el Chico and other of
the noble youth of Granada as hostages for the fulfilment of the
terms of ransom.  When the Moorish king beheld his son, his only
child, who was to remain in his stead a sort of captive in a hostile
land, he folded him in his arms and wept over him.  "Woe the day that
I was born!" exclaimed he, "and evil the stars that presided at my
birth!  Well was I called El Zogoybi, or the Unlucky, for sorrow is
heaped upon me by my father, and sorrow do I transmit to my son!"
The afflicted heart of Boabdil, however, was soothed by the kindness
of the Christian sovereigns, who received the hostage prince with a
tenderness suited to his age and a distinction worthy of his rank.
They delivered him in charge to the worthy alcayde Martin de
Alarcon, who had treated his father with such courtesy during his
confinement in the castle of Porcuna, giving orders that after the
departure of the latter his son should be entertained with great
honor and princely attention in the same fortress.

On the 2d of September a guard of honor assembled at the gate of
the mansion of Boabdil to escort him to the frontiers of his kingdom.
He pressed his child to his heart at parting, but he uttered not a
word, for there were many Christian eyes to behold his emotion.  He
mounted his steed, and never turned his head to look again upon the
youth, but those who were near him observed the vehement struggle
that shook his frame, wherein the anguish of the father had wellnigh
subdued the studied equanimity of the king.

Boabdil el Chico and King Ferdinand sallied forth side by side from
Cordova, amidst the acclamations of a prodigious multitude.  When
they were a short distance from the city they separated, with many
gracious expressions on the part of the Castilian monarch, and many
thankful acknowledgments from his late captive, whose heart had been
humbled by adversity.  Ferdinand departed for Guadalupe, and Boabdil
for Granada.  The latter was accompanied by a guard of honor, and the
viceroys of Andalusia and the generals on the frontier were ordered
to furnish him with escorts and to show him all possible honor on
his journey.  In this way he was conducted in royal state through
the country he had entered to ravage, and was placed in safety in
his own dominions.

He was met on the frontier by the principal nobles and cavaliers of
his court, who had been secretly sent by his mother, the sultana
Ayxa, to escort him to the capital.  The heart of Boabdil was lifted
up for a moment when he found himself on his own territories,
surrounded by Moslem knights, with his own banners waving over his
head, and he began to doubt the predictions of the astrologers: he
soon found cause, however, to moderate his exultation.  The royal
train which had come to welcome him was but scanty in number, and
he missed many of his most zealous and obsequious courtiers.  He had
returned, indeed, to his kingdom, but it was no longer the devoted
kingdom he had left.  The story of his vassalage to the Christian
sovereigns had been made use of by his father to ruin him with the
people.  He had been represented as a traitor to his country, a
renegado to his faith, and as leagued with the enemies of both to
subdue the Moslems of Spain to the yoke of Christian bondage.  In
this way the mind of the public had been turned from him; the
greater part of the nobility had thronged round the throne of his
father in the Alhambra; and his mother, the resolute sultana Ayxa,
with difficulty maintained her faction in the opposite towers
of the Alcazaba.

Such was the melancholy picture of affairs given to Boabdil by the
courtiers who had come forth to meet him.  They even informed him
that it would be an enterprise of difficulty and danger to make his
way back to the capital and regain the little court which still
remained faithful to him in the heart of the city.  The old tiger,
Muley Abul Hassan, lay couched within the Alhambra, and the walls
and gates of the city were strongly guarded by his troops.  Boabdil
shook his head at these tidings.  He called to mind the ill omen of
his breaking his lance against the gate of Elvira when issuing
forth so vaingloriously with his army, which he now saw clearly
had foreboded the destruction of that army on which he had so
confidently relied.  "Henceforth," said he, "let no man have the
impiety to scoff at omens."

Boabdil approached his capital by stealth and in the night, prowling
about its walls like an enemy seeking to destroy rather than a
monarch returning to his throne.  At length he seized upon a
postern-gate of the Albaycin, that part of the city which had always
been in his favor; he passed rapidly through the streets before the
populace were aroused from their sleep, and reached in safety the
fortress of the Alcazaba.  Here he was received into the embraces of
his intrepid mother and his favorite wife Morayma.  The transports of
the latter on the safe return of her husband were mingled with tears,
for she thought of her father, Ali Atar, who had fallen in his cause,
and of her only son, who was left a hostage in the hand of the
Christians.

The heart of Boabdil, softened by his misfortunes, was moved by
the changes in everything round him; but his mother called up his
spirit.  "This," said she, "is no time for tears and fondness.  A
king must think of his sceptre and his throne, and not yield to
softness like common men.  Thou hast done well, my son, in throwing
thyself resolutely into Granada: it must depend upon thyself whether
thou remain here a king or a captive."

The old king, Muley Abul Hassan, had retired to his couch that night
in one of the strongest towers of the Alhambra, but his restless
anxiety kept him from repose.  In the first watch of the night he
heard a shout faintly rising from the quarter of the Albaycin, which
is on the opposite side of the deep valley of the Darro.  Shortly
afterward horsemen came galloping up the hill that leads to the main
gate of the Alhambra, spreading the alarm that Boabdil had entered
the city and possessed himself of the Alcazaba.

In the first transports of his rage the old king would have struck
the messenger to earth.  He hastily summoned his counsellors and
commanders, exhorting them to stand by him in this critical moment,
and during the night made every preparation to enter the Albaycin
sword in hand in the morning.

In the mean time the sultana Ayxa had taken prompt and vigorous
measures to strengthen her party.  The Albaycin was the part of
the city filled by the lower orders.  The return of Boabdil was
proclaimed throughout the streets, and large sums of money were
distributed among the populace.  The nobles assembled in the Alcazaba
were promised honors and rewards by Boabdil as soon as he should be
firmly seated on the throne.  These well-timed measures had the
customary effect, and by daybreak all the motley populace of the
Albaycin were in arms.

A doleful day succeeded.  All Granada was a scene of tumult and
horror.  Drums and trumpets resounded in every part; all business
was interrupted; the shops were shut, the doors barricadoed.  Armed
bands paraded the streets, some shouting for Boabdil, and some for
Muley Abul Hassan.  When they encountered each other they fought
furiously and without mercy; every public square became a scene of
battle.  The great mass of the lower orders was in favor of Boabdil,
but it was a multitude without discipline or lofty spirit: part of the
people were regularly armed, but the greater number had sallied
forth with the implements of their trade.  The troops of the old king,
among whom were many cavaliers of pride and valor, soon drove
the populace from the squares.  They fortified themselves, however,
in the streets and lanes, which they barricadoed.  They made
fortresses of their houses, and fought desperately from the windows
and the roofs, and many a warrior of the highest blood of Granada
was laid low by plebeian hands and plebeian weapons in this
civic brawl.*

*Conde, Domin. de los Arabes, p. 4, c. 37.


It was impossible that such violent convulsions should last long in
the heart of the city.  The people soon longed for repose and a
return to their peaceful occupations, and the cavaliers detested
these conflicts with the multitude, in which were all the horrors
of war without its laurels.  By the interference of the alfaquis an
armistice was at length effected.  Boabdil was persuaded that there
was no dependence upon the inconstant favor of the multitude, and
was prevailed upon to quit a capital where he could only maintain a
precarious seat upon his throne by a perpetual and bloody struggle.
He fixed his court at the city of Almeria, which was entirely
devoted to him, and which at that time vied with Granada in splendor
and importance.  This compromise of grandeur for tranquillity,
however, was sorely against the counsels of his proud-spirited
mother, the sultana Ayxa.  Granada appeared, in her eyes, the only
legitimate seat of dominion, and she observed, with a smile of
disdain, that he was not worthy of being called a monarch who was
not master of his capital.



CHAPTER XXII.

FORAY OF THE MOORISH ALCAYDES, AND BATTLE OF LOPERA.


Though Muley Abul Hassan had regained undivided sway over the city
of Granada, and the alfaquis, by his command, had denounced his son
Boabdil as an apostate doomed by Heaven to misfortune, still the
latter had many adherents among the common people.  Whenever,
therefore, any act of the old monarch was displeasing to the
turbulent multitude, they were prone to give him a hint of the
slippery nature of his standing by shouting out the name of Boabdil
el Chico.  Long experience had instructed Muley Abul Hassan in the
character of the inconstant people over whom he ruled.  "A successful
inroad into the country of the unbelievers," said he, "will make
more converts to my cause than a thousand texts of the Koran
expounded by ten thousand alfaquis."

At this time King Ferdinand was absent from Andalusia on a distant
expedition with many of his troops.  The moment was favorable for a
foray, and Muley Abul Hassan cast about his thoughts for a leader to
conduct it.  Ali Atar, the terror of the border, the scourge of
Andalusia, was dead, but there was another veteran general, scarce
inferior to him for predatory warfare.  This was old Bexir, the gray
and crafty alcayde of Malaga, and the people under his command were
ripe for an expedition of the kind.  The signal defeat and slaughter
of the Spanish knights in the neighboring mountains had filled the
people of Malaga with vanity and self-conceit.  They had attributed
to their own valor the defeat caused by the nature of the country.
Many of them wore the armor and paraded in public with the horses
of the unfortunate cavaliers slain on that occasion, vauntingly
displaying them as trophies of their boasted victory.  They had
talked themselves into a contempt for the chivalry of Andalusia, and
were impatient for an opportunity to overrun a country defended by
such troops.  This Muley Abul Hassan considered a favorable state
of mind for a daring inroad, and sent orders to old Bexir to gather
together the choicest warriors of the borders and carry fire and
sword into the very heart of Andalusia.  Bexir immediately despatched
his emissaries among the alcaydes of the border towns, calling upon
them to assemble with their troops at the city of Ronda.

Ronda was the most virulent nest of Moorish depredators in the whole
border country.  It was situated in the midst of the wild Serrania,
or chain of mountains of the same name, which are uncommonly lofty,
broken, and precipitous.  It stood on an almost isolated rock, nearly
encircled by a deep valley, or rather chasm, through which ran the
beautiful river called Rio Verde.  The Moors of this city were the
most active, robust, and warlike of all the mountaineers, and their
very children discharged the crossbow with unerring aim.  They
were incessantly harassing the rich plains of Andalusia; their city
abounded with Christian captives, who might sigh in vain for
deliverance from this impregnable fortress.  Such was Ronda in the
time of the Moors, and it has ever retained something of the same
character, even to the present day.  Its inhabitants continue to be
among the boldest, fiercest, and most adventurous of the Andalusian
mountaineers, and the Serrania de Ronda is famous as the most
dangerous resort of the bandit and the contrabandista.

Hamet Zeli, surnamed El Zegri, was the commander of this belligerent
city and its fierce inhabitants.  He was of the tribe of the Zegries,
and one of the most proud and daring of that warlike race.  Besides
the inhabitants of Ronda and some of his own tribe, he had a legion
of African Moors in his immediate service.  They were of the tribe of
the Gomeres, so called from their native mountains--mercenary troops
whose hot African blood had not yet been tempered by the softer
living of Spain, and whose whole business was to fight.  These he
kept always well armed and well appointed.  The rich pasturage of
the valley of Ronda produced a breed of horses famous for strength
and speed; no cavalry, therefore, was better mounted than the band
of Gomeres.  Rapid on the march, fierce in the attack, it would
sweep down upon the Andalusian plains like a sudden blast from
the mountains, and pass away as suddenly before there was time
for pursuit.

There was nothing that stirred up the spirit of the Moors of the
frontiers more thoroughly than the idea of a foray.  The summons of
Bexir was gladly obeyed by the alcaydes of the border towns, and in
a little while there was a force of fifteen hundred horse and four
thousand foot, the very pith and marrow of the surrounding country,
assembled within the walls of Ronda.  The people of the place
anticipated with eagerness the rich spoils of Andalusia soon to
crowd their gates; throughout the day the city resounded with the
noise of kettle-drum and trumpet; the high-mettled steeds stamped
and neighed in their stalls as if they shared the impatience for
the foray; while the Christian captives sighed as the varied din
of preparation reached their rocky dungeons, denoting a fresh
expedition against their countrymen.

The infidel host sallied forth full of spirits, anticipating an easy
ravage and abundant booty.  They encouraged each other in a contempt
for the prowess of the foe.  Many of the warriors of Malaga and of
some of the mountain-towns had insultingly arrayed themselves in the
splendid armor of the Christian knights slain or taken prisoners in
the famous massacre, and some of them rode the Andalusian steeds
captured on that occasion.

The wary Bexir concerted his plans so secretly and expeditiously
that the Christian towns of Andalusia had not the least suspicion
of the storm gathering beyond the mountains.  The vast rocky range
of the Serrania de Ronda extended like a screen, covering all their
movements from observation.

The army made its way as rapidly as the rugged nature of the
mountains would permit, guided by Hamet el Zegri, the bold alcayde
of Ronda, who knew every pass and defile: not a drum nor the clash
of a cymbal nor the blast of a trumpet was permitted to be heard.
The mass of war rolled quietly on as the gathering cloud to the brow
of the mountains, intending to burst down like the thunderbolt upon
the plain.

Never let the most wary commander fancy himself secure from
discovery, for rocks have eyes, and trees have ears, and the birds
of the air have tongues, to betray the most secret enterprise.  There
chanced at this time to be six Christian scouts prowling about the
savage heights of the Serrania de Ronda.  They were of that kind of
lawless ruffians who infest the borders of belligerent countries,
ready at any time to fight for pay or prowl for plunder.  The wild
mountain-passes of Spain have ever abounded with loose rambling
vagabonds of the kind--soldiers in war, robbers in peace, guides,

guards, smugglers, or cutthroats according to the circumstances of
the case.

These six marauders (says Fray Antonio Agapida) were on this
occasion chosen instruments, sanctified by the righteousness of
their cause.  They were lurking among the mountains to entrap Moorish
cattle or Moorish prisoners, both of which were equally salable in
the Christian market.  They had ascended one of the loftiest cliffs,
and were looking out like birds of prey, ready to pounce upon
anything that might offer in the valley, when they descried the
Moorish army emerging from a mountain-glen.  They watched it as
it wound below them, remarking the standards of the various towns
and the pennons of the commanders.  They hovered about it on its
march, skulking from cliff to cliff, until they saw the route by which it
intended to enter the Christian country.  They then dispersed, each
making his way by the secret passes of the mountains to some
different alcayde, that they might spread the alarm far and wide,
and each get a separate reward.

One hastened to Luis Fernandez Puerto Carrero, the same valiant
alcayde who had repulsed Muley Abul Hassan from the walls of Alhama,
and who now commanded at Ecija in the absence of the master of
Santiago.  Others roused the town of Utrera and the places of that
neighborhood, putting them all on the alert.*

*Pulgar, p. 3, c. 24; Cura de los Palacios, cap. 67.


Puerto Carrero was a cavalier of consummate vigor and activity.
He immediately sent couriers to the alcaydes of the neighboring
fortresses, to Herman Carrello, captain of a body of the Holy
Brotherhood, and to certain knights of the order of Alcantara.
Puerto Carrero was the first to take the field.  Knowing the hard and
hungry service of these border scampers, he made every man take a
hearty repast and see that his horse was well shod and perfectly
appointed.  Then, all being refreshed and in valiant heart, he
sallied forth to seek the Moors.  He had but a handful of men, the
retainers of his household and troops of his captaincy, but they were
well armed and mounted, and accustomed to the sudden rouses of
the border--men whom the cry of "Arm and out! to horse and to the
field!" was sufficient at any time to put in a fever of animation.

While the northern part of Andalusia was thus on the alert, one of
the scouts had hastened southward to the city of Xeres, and given
the alarm to the valiant marques of Cadiz.  When the marques heard
that the Moor was over the border and that the standard of Malaga
was in the advance, his heart bounded with a momentary joy, for he
remembered the massacre in the mountains, where his valiant brothers
had been mangled before his eyes.  The very authors of his calamity
were now at hand, and he flattered himself that the day of vengeance
had arrived.  He made a hasty levy of his retainers and of the
fighting men of Xeres, and hurried off with three hundred horse
and two hundred foot, all resolute men and panting for revenge.

In the mean time, the veteran Bexir had accomplished his march, as
he imagined, undiscovered.  From the openings of the craggy defiles
he pointed out the fertile plains of Andalusia, and regaled the eyes
of his soldiery with the rich country they were about to ravage.  The
fierce Gomeres of Ronda were flushed with joy at the sight, and even
their steeds seemed to prick up their ears and snuff the breeze as
they beheld the scenes of their frequent forays.

When they came to where the mountain-defile opened into the low
land, Bexir divided his force into three parts: one, composed of
foot-soldiers and such as were weakly mounted, he left to guard the
pass, being too experienced a veteran not to know the importance of
securing a retreat; a second body he placed in ambush among the
groves and thickets on the banks of the river Lopera; the third,
consisting of light cavalry, he sent forth to ravage the Campina (or
great plain) of Utrera.  Most of this latter force was composed of
the Gomeres of Ronda, mounted on the fleet steeds bred among the
mountains.  It was led by Hamet el Zegri, ever eager to be foremost
in the forage.  Little suspecting that the country on both sides was
on the alarm, and rushing from all directions to close upon them in
the rear, this fiery troop dashed forward until they came within two
leagues of Utrera.  Here they scattered themselves about the plain,
careering round the great herds of cattle and flocks of sheep, and
sweeping them into droves to be hurried to the mountains.

While thus dispersed a troop of horse and body of foot from Utrera
came suddenly upon them.  The Moors rallied together in small parties
and endeavored to defend themselves; but they were without a leader,
for Hamet el Zegri was at a distance, having, like a hawk, made a
wide circuit in pursuit of prey.  The marauders soon gave way and
fled toward the ambush on the banks of the Lopera, being hotly
pursued by the men of Utrera.

When they reached the Lopera the Moors in ambush rushed forth
with furious cries, and the fugitives, recovering courage from this
reinforcement, rallied and turned upon their pursuers.  The
Christians stood their ground, though greatly inferior in number.
Their lances were soon broken, and they came to sharp work with
sword and scimetar.  The Christians fought valiantly, but were in
danger of being overwhelmed.  The bold Hamet collected a handful of
his scattered Gomeres, left his prey, and galloped toward the scene
of action.  His little troop of horsemen had reached the crest of a
rising ground at no great distance when trumpets were heard in
another direction, and Luis Fernandez Puerto Carrero and his
followers came galloping into the field, and charged upon the
infidels in flank.

The Moors were astounded at finding war thus breaking upon them from
various quarters of what they had expected to find an unguarded
country.  They fought for a short time with desperation, and resisted
a vehement assault from the knights of Alcantara and the men-at-arms
of the Holy Brotherhood.  At length the veteran Bexir was struck from
his horse by Puerto Carrero and taken prisoner, and the whole force
gave way and fled.  In their flight they separated and took two roads
to the mountains, thinking by dividing their forces to distract the
enemy.  The Christians were too few to separate.  Puerto Carrero kept
them together, pursuing one division of the enemy with great
slaughter.  This battle took place at the fountain of the fig tree,
near to the Lopera.  Six hundred Moorish cavaliers were slain and
many taken prisoners.  Much spoil was collected on the field, with
which the Christians returned in triumph to their homes.

The larger body of the enemy had retreated along a road leading
more to the south, by the banks of the Guadalete.  When they reached
that river the sound of pursuit had died away, and they rallied to
breathe and refresh themselves on the margin of the stream.  Their
force was reduced to about a thousand horse and a confused multitude
of foot.  While they were scattered and partly dismounted on the
banks of the Guadalete a fresh storm of war burst upon them from
an opposite direction.  It was the[4]marques of Cadiz, leading on his
household troops and the fighting men of Xeres.  When the Christian
warriors came in sight of the Moors, they were roused to fury at
beholding many of them arrayed in the armor of the cavaliers who had
been slain among the mountains of Malaga.  Nay, some who had been in
that defeat beheld their own armor, which they had cast away in their
flight to enable themselves to climb the mountains.  Exasperated at
the sight they rushed upon the foe with the ferocity of tigers rather
than the temperate courage of cavaliers.  Each man felt as if he were
avenging the death of a relative or wiping out his own disgrace.  The
good marques himself beheld a powerful Moor bestriding the horse of
his brother Beltran: giving a cry of rage and anguish at the sight,
he rushed through the thickest of the enemy, attacked the Moor with
resistless fury, and after a short combat hurled him breathless to
the earth.

The Moors, already vanquished in spirit, could not withstand the
assault of men thus madly excited.  They soon gave way, and fled
for the defile of the Serrania de Ronda, where the body of troops
had been stationed to secure a retreat.  These, seeing them come
galloping wildly up the defile, with Christian banners in pursuit
and the flash of weapons at their deadly work, thought all Andalusia
was upon them, and fled without awaiting an attack.  The pursuit
continued among glens and defiles, for the Christian warriors, eager
for revenge, had no compassion on the foe.

When the pursuit was over the marques of Cadiz and his followers
reposed themselves upon the banks of the Guadalete, where they
divided the spoil.  Among this were found many rich corselets,
helmets, and weapons, the Moorish trophies of the defeat in the
mountains of Malaga.  Several were claimed by their owners; others
were known to have belonged to noble cavaliers who had been slain or
taken prisoners.  There were several horses also, richly caparisoned,
which had pranced proudly with the unfortunate warriors as they
sallied out of Antiquera upon that fatal expedition.  Thus the
exultation of the victors was dashed with melancholy, and many a
knight was seen lamenting over the helmet or corselet of some loved
companion-in-arms.


NOTE.--"En el despojo de la Batalla se vieron muchas ricas corazas
 e capacetes, e barberas de las que se habian perdido en el Axarquia,
 e otras muchas armas, e algunes fueron conocidas de sus duenos que
 las habian dejado por fuir, e otras fueron conocidas, que eran mui
 senaladas de hombres principales que habian quedado muertos e
 cautivos, i fueron tornados muchos de los mismos Caballos con sus
 ricas sillas, de los que quedaron en la Axerquia, e fueron concidos
 cuios eran."--"Cura de los Palacios," cap. 67.



CHAPTER XXIII.

RETREAT OF HAMET EL ZEGRI, ALCAYDE OF RONDA.


The bold alcayde of Ronda, Hamet el Zegri, had careered wide over
the Campina of Utrera, encompassing the flocks and herds, when he
heard the burst of war at a distance.  There were with him but a
handful of his Gomeres.  He saw the scamper and pursuit afar off,
and beheld the Christian horsemen spurring madly toward the ambuscade
on the banks of the Lopera.  Hamet tossed his hand triumphantly aloft
for his men to follow him.  "The Christian dogs are ours!" said he as
he put spurs to his horse to take the enemy in rear.

The little band which followed Hamet scarcely amounted to thirty
horsemen.  They spurred across the plain, and reached a rising
ground just as the force of Puerto Carrero had charged, with
sound of trumpet, upon the flank of the party in ambush.  Hamet
beheld the headlong rout of the army with rage and consternation.
He found the country was pouring forth its legions from every
quarter, and perceived that there was no safety but in precipitate
flight.

But which way to fly?  An army was between him and the mountain-
pass; all the forces of the neighborhood were rushing to the borders;
the whole route by which he had come was by this time occupied by
the foe.  He checked his steed, rose in the stirrups, and rolled a stern
and thoughtful eye over the country; then, sinking into his saddle,
he seemed to commune a moment with himself.  Turning quickly to
his troop, he singled out a renegado Christian, a traitor to his
religion and his king.  "Come hither," said Hamet.  "Thou knowest all
the secret passes of the country?"--"I do," replied the renegado.--
"Dost thou know any circuitous route, solitary and untravelled,
by which we can pass wide within these troops and reach the Serrania?"
--The renegado paused: "Such a route I know, but it is full of peril,
for it leads through the heart of the Christian land."--"'Tis well,"
said Hamet; "the more dangerous in appearance, the less it will be
suspected.  Now hearken to me.  Ride by my side. Thou seest this purse
of gold and this scimetar.  Take us, by the route thou hast mentioned,
safe to the pass of the Serrania, and this purse shall be thy reward;
betray us, and this scimetar shall cleave thee to the saddle-bow."*

*Cura de los Palacios, ubi sup.


The renegado obeyed, trembling.  They turned off from the direct road
to the mountains and struck southward toward Lebrixa, passing by
the most solitary roads and along those deep ramblas and ravines
by which the country is intersected.  It was indeed a daring course.
Every now and then they heard the distant sound of trumpets and the
alarm-bells of towns and villages, and found that the war was still
hurrying to the borders.  They hid themselves in thickets and in dry
beds of rivers until the danger had passed by, and then resumed
their course.  Hamet el Zegri rode on in silence, his hand upon his
scimetar and his eye upon the renegado guide, prepared to sacrifice
him on the least sign of treachery, while his band followed, gnawing
their lips with rage at having thus to skulk through a country they
had come to ravage.

When night fell they struck into more practicable roads, always
keeping wide of the villages and hamlets, lest the watch-dogs should
betray them.  In this way they passed in deep midnight by Arcos,
crossed the Guadalete, and effected their retreat to the mountains.
The day dawned as they made their way up the savage defiles.  Their
comrades had been hunted up these very glens by the enemy.  Every
now and then they came to where there had been a partial fight or
a slaughter of the fugitives, and the rocks were red with blood
and strewed with mangled bodies.  The alcayde of Ronda was almost
frantic with rage at seeing many of his bravest warriors lying stiff
and stark, a prey to the hawks and vultures of the mountains.  Now
and then some wretched Moor would crawl out of a cave or glen,
whither he had fled for refuge, for in the retreat many of the
horsemen had abandoned their steeds, thrown away their armor,
and clambered up the cliffs, where they could not be pursued by
the Christian cavalry.

The Moorish army had sallied forth from Ronda amidst shouts and
acclamations, but wailings were heard within its walls as the
alcayde and his broken band returned without banner or trumpet and
haggard with famine and fatigue.  The tidings of their disaster had
preceded them, borne by the fugitives of the army.  No one ventured
to speak to the stern Hamet as he entered the city, for they saw a
dark cloud upon his brow.

It seemed (says the pious Antonio Agapida) as if Heaven meted
out this defeat in exact retribution for the ills inflicted upon the
Christian warriors in the heights of Malaga.  It was equally signal
and disastrous.  Of the brilliant array of Moorish chivalry which had
descended so confidently into Andalusia, not more than two hundred
escaped.  The choicest troops of the frontier were either taken or
destroyed, the Moorish garrisons enfeebled, and many alcaydes
and cavaliers of noble lineage carried into captivity, who were
afterward obliged to redeem themselves with 