heavy ransoms.

This was called the battle of Lopera, and was fought on the 17th of
September, 1483.  Ferdinand and Isabella were at Vittoria in Old
Castile when they received news of the victory and the standards
taken from the enemy.  They celebrated the event with processions,
illuminations, and other festivities.  Ferdinand sent to the marques
of Cadiz the royal raiment which he had worn on that day, and
conferred on him and all those who should inherit his title the
privilege of wearing royal robes on our Lady's Day in September
in commemoration of this victory.*

*Mariana, Abarca, Zurita, Pulgar, etc.


Queen Isabella was equally mindful of the great services of Don Luis
Fernandez Puerto Carrero.  Besides many encomiums and favors, she
sent to his wife the royal vestments and robe of brocade which she
had worn on the same day, to be worn by her during her life on the
anniversary of that battle.*



CHAPTER XXIV.

OF THE RECEPTION AT COURT OF THE COUNT DE CABRA AND THE
    ALCAYDE DE LOS DONCELES.


In the midst of the bustle of warlike affairs the worthy chronicler
Fray Antonio Agapida pauses to note, with curious accuracy, the
distinguished reception given to the count de Cabra and his nephew,
the alcayde de los Donceles, at the stately and ceremonious court of
the Castilian sovereigns, in reward for the capture of the Moorish
king Boabdil.  The court (he observes) was held at the time in the
ancient Moorish palace of the city of Cordova, and the ceremonials
were arranged by that venerable prelate Don Pedro Gonzales de
Mendoza, bishop of Toledo and grand cardinal of Spain.

It was on Wednesday, the 14th of October (continues the precise
Antonio Agapida), that the good count de Cabra, according to
arrangement, appeared at the gate of Cordova.  Here he was met by
the grand cardinal and the duke of Villahermosa, illegitimate brother
of the king, together with many of the first grandees and prelates
of the kingdom.  By this august train was he attended to the palace
amidst strains of martial music and the shouts of a prodigious
multitude.

When the count arrived in the presence of the sovereigns, who were
seated in state on a dais or raised part of the hall of audience,
they both arose.  The king advanced exactly five steps toward the
count, who knelt and kissed his royal hand; however, the king would
not receive him as a mere vassal, but embraced him with affectionate
cordiality.  The queen also advanced two steps, and received the
count with a countenance full of sweetness and benignity: after
he had kissed her hand the king and queen returned to their thrones,
and, cushions being brought, they ordered the count de Cabra to be
seated in their presence.  This last circumstance is written in
large letters and followed by several notes of admiration in the
manuscript of the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida, who considers the
extraordinary privilege of sitting in presence of the Catholic
sovereigns an honor well worth fighting for.

The good count took his seat at a short distance from the king, and
near him was seated the duke of Najera, then the bishop of Palencia,
then the count of Aguilar, the count Luna, and Don Gutierre de
Cardenas, senior commander of Leon.

On the side of the queen were seated the grand cardinal of Spain,
the duke of Villahermosa, the count of Monte Rey, and the bishops
of Jaen and Cuenca, each in the order in which they are named.  The
infanta Isabella was prevented by indisposition from attending the
ceremony.

And now festive music resounded through the hall, and twenty ladies
of the queen's retinue entered, magnificently attired; upon which
twenty youthful cavaliers, very gay and galliard in their array,
stepped forth, and, each seeking his fair partner, they commenced
a stately dance.  The court in the mean time (observes Fray Antonio
Agapida) looked on with lofty and becoming gravity.

When the dance was concluded the king and queen rose to retire to
supper, and dismissed the count with many gracious expressions.  He
was then attended by all the grandees present to the palace of the
grand cardinal, where they partook of a sumptuous banquet.

On the following Saturday the alcayde de los Donceles was received
likewise with great honors, but the ceremonies were so arranged
as to be a degree less in dignity than those shown to his uncle,
the latter being considered the principal actor in this great
achievement.  Thus the grand cardinal and the duke of Villahermosa
did not meet him at the gate of the city, but received him in the
palace and entertained him in conversation until summoned to
the sovereigns.
#
When the alcayde de los Donceles entered the presence-chamber the
king and queen rose from their chairs, but without advancing.  They
greeted him graciously, and commanded him to be seated next to the
count de Cabra.

The infanta Isabella came forth to this reception, and took her seat
beside the queen.  When the court were all seated the music again
sounded through the hall, and the twenty ladies came forth as on the
preceding occasion, richly attired, but in different raiment.  They
danced as before, and the infanta Isabella, taking a young Portuguese
damsel for a partner, joined in the dance.  When this was concluded
the king and queen dismissed the alcayde de los Donceles with great
courtesy, and the court broke up.

The worthy Fray Antonio Agapida here indulges in a long eulogy
on the scrupulous discrimination of the Castilian court in the
distribution of its honors and rewards, by which means every smile
and gesture and word of the sovereigns had its certain value and
conveyed its equivalent of joy to the heart of the subject--a matter
well worthy the study (says he) of all monarchs, who are too apt
to distribute honors with a heedless caprice that renders them of
no avail.

On the following Sunday both the count de Cabra and the alcayde
de los Donceles were invited to sup with the sovereigns.  The court
that evening was attended by the highest nobility, arrayed with that
cost and splendor for which the Spanish nobility of those days
were renowned.

Before supper there was a stately and ceremonious dance, befitting
the dignity of so august a court.  The king led forth the queen in
grave and graceful measure; the count de Cabra was honored with
the hand of the infanta Isabella; and the alcayde de los Donceles
danced with a daughter of the marques de Astorga.

The dance being concluded, the royal party repaired to the
supper-table, which was placed on an elevated part of the saloon.
Here, in full view of the court, the count de Cabra and the alcayde
de los Donceles supped at the same table with the king, the queen,
and the infanta.  The royal family were served by the marques of
Villena.  The cup-bearer to the king was his nephew, Fadrigue de
Toledo, son to the duke of Alva.  Don Alexis de Estaniga had the
honor of fulfilling that office for the queen, and Tello de Aguilar
for the infanta.  Other cavaliers of rank and distinction waited on
the count and the alcayde de los Donceles.  At one o'clock the two
distinguished guests were dismissed with many courteous expressions
by the sovereigns.

Such (says Fray Antonio Agapida) were the great honors paid at our
most exalted and ceremonious court to these renowned cavaliers,
but the gratitude of the sovereigns did not end here.  A few days
afterward they bestowed upon them large revenues for life, and
others to descend to their heirs, with the privilege for them and
their descendants to prefix the title of Don to their names.  They
gave them, moreover, as armorial bearings a Moor's head crowned,
with a golden chain round the neck, in a sanguine field, and
twenty-two banners round the margin of the escutcheon.  Their
descendants, of the houses of Cabra and Cordova, continue to bear
these arms at the present day in memorial of the victory of Lucena
and the capture of Boabdil el Chico.*

*The account given by Fray Antonio Agapida of this ceremonial, so
 characteristic of the old Spanish court, agrees in almost every
 particular with an ancient manuscript made up from the chronicles
 of the curate of los Palacios and other old Spanish writers.



CHAPTER XXV.

HOW THE MARQUES OF CADIZ CONCERTED TO SURPRISE ZAHARA,
    AND THE RESULT OF HIS ENTERPRISE.


The valiant Roderigo Ponce de Leon, marques of Cadiz, was one of
the most vigilant of commanders.  He kept in his pay a number of
converted Moors to serve as adalides, or armed guides.  These mongrel
Christians were of great service in procuring information.  Availing
themselves of their Moorish character and tongue, they penetrated
into the enemy's country, prowled about the castles and fortresses,
noticed the state of the walls, the gates, and towers, the strength
of their garrisons, and the vigilance or negligence of their
commanders.  All this they minutely reported to the marques, who thus
knew the state of every fortress upon the frontier and when it might
be attacked with advantage.  Besides the various town and cities over
which he held feudal sway, he had always an armed force about him
ready for the field.  A host of retainers fed in his hall who were
ready to follow him to danger, and death itself, without inquiring
who or why they fought.  The armories of his castles were supplied
with helms and cuirasses and weapons of all kinds, ready burnished
for use; and his stables were filled with hardy steeds that could
stand a mountain-scamper.

The marques was aware that the late defeat of the Moors on the banks
of the Lopera had weakened their whole frontier, for many of the
castles and fortresses had lost their alcaydes and their choicest
troops.  He sent out his war-hounds, therefore, upon the range to
ascertain where a successful blow might be struck; and they soon
returned with word that Zahara was weakly garrisoned and short
of provisions.

This was the very fortress which, about two years before, had been
stormed by Muley Abul Hassan, and its capture had been the first
blow of this eventful war.  It had ever since remained a thorn in the
side of Andalusia.  All the Christians had been carried away captive,
and no civil population had been introduced in their stead.  There
were no women or children in the place.  It was kept up as a mere
military post, commanding one of the most important passes of the
mountains, and was a stronghold of Moorish marauders.  The
marques was animated by the idea of regaining this fortress for his
sovereigns and wresting from the old Moorish king this boasted
trophy of his prowess.  He sent missives, therefore, to the brave
Luis Fernandez Puerto Carrero, who had distinguished himself in the
late victory, and to Juan Almaraz, captain of the men-at-arms of the
Holy Brotherhood, informing them of his designs, and inviting them
to meet him with their forces on the banks of the Guadalete.

It was on the day (says Fray Antonio Agapida) of the glorious
apostles St. Simon and Judas, the twenty-eighth of October, in the
year of grace one thousand four hundred and eighty-three, that this
chosen band of Christian soldiers assembled suddenly and secretly
at the appointed place.  Their forces when united amounted to six
hundred horse and fifteen hundred foot.  Their gathering-place was
at the entrance of the defile leading to Zahara.  That ancient town,
renowned in Moorish warfare, is situated in one of the roughest
passes of the Serrania de Ronda.  It is built round the craggy cone
of a hill, on the lofty summit of which is a strong castle.  The
country around is broken into deep barrancas or ravines, some of
which approach its very walls.  The place had until recently been
considered impregnable, but (as the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida
observes) the walls of impregnable fortresses, like the virtue of
self-confident saints, have their weak points of attack.

The marques of Cadiz advanced with his little army in the dead of
the night, marching silently into the deep and dark defiles of the
mountains, and stealing up the ravines which extended to the walls
of the town.  Their approach was so noiseless that the Moorish
sentinels upon the walls heard not a voice or a footfall.  The
marques was accompanied by his old escalador, Ortega de Prado,
who had distinguished himself at the scaling of Alhama.  This hardy
veteran was stationed, with ten men furnished with scaling-ladders,
in a cavity among the rocks close to the walls.  At a little distance
seventy men were hid in a ravine, to be at hand to second him when
he should have fixed his ladders.  The rest of the troops were
concealed in another ravine commanding a fair approach to the gate
of the fortress.  A shrewd and wary adalid, well acquainted with the
place, was appointed to give signals, and so stationed that he could
be seen by the various parties in ambush, but not by the garrison.

By orders of the marques a small body of light cavalry passed along
the glen, and, turning round a point of rock, showed themselves
before the town: they[6]skirred the fields almost to the gates, as
if by way of bravado and to defy the garrison to a skirmish.  The
Moors were not slow in replying to it.  About seventy horse and a
number of foot who had guarded the walls sallied forth impetuously,
thinking to make easy prey of these insolent marauders.  The Christian
horsemen fled for the ravine; the Moors pursued them down the hill,
until they heard a great shouting and tumult behind them.  Looking
round toward the town, they beheld a scaling party mounting the
walls sword in hand.  Wheeling about, they galloped for the gate:
the marques of Cadiz and Luis Fernandez Puerto Carrero rushed
forth at the same time with their ambuscade, and endeavored
to cut them off, but the Moors succeeded in throwing themselves
within the walls.

While Puerto Carrero stormed at the gate the marques put spurs to
his horse and galloped to the support of Ortega de Prado and his
scaling party.  He arrived at a moment of imminent peril, when the
party was assailed by fifty Moors armed with cuirasses and lances,
who were on the point of thrusting them from the walls.  The marques
sprang from his horse, mounted a ladder sword in hand, followed by
a number of his troops, and made a vigorous attack upon the enemy.*
They were soon driven from the walls, and the gates and towers
remained in possession of the Christians.  The Moors defended
themselves for a short time in the streets, but at length took
refuge in the castle, the walls of which were strong and capable of
holding out until relief should arrive.  The marques had no desire
to carry on a siege, and he had not provisions sufficient for many
prisoners; he granted them, therefore, favorable terms.  They were
permitted, on leaving their arms behind them, to march out with
as much of their effects as they could carry, and it was stipulated
that they should pass over to Barbary.  The marques remained in
the place until both town and castle were put in a perfect state of
defence and strongly garrisoned.

*Cura de los Palacios, c. 68.


Thus did Zahara return once more in possession of the Christians, to
the great confusion of old Muley Abul Hassan, who, having paid the
penalty of his ill-timed violence, was now deprived of its vaunted
fruits.  The Castilian sovereigns were so gratified by this
achievement of the valiant Ponce de Leon that they authorized
him thenceforth to entitle himself duke of Cadiz and marques of
Zahara.  The warrior, however, was so proud of the original title
under which he had so often signalized himself that he gave it the
precedence, and always signed himself marques, duke of Cadiz.  As
the reader may have acquired the same predilection, we shall continue
to call him by his ancient title.



CHAPTER XXVI.

OF THE FORTRESS OF ALHAMA, AND HOW WISELY IT WAS GOVERNED
    BY THE COUNT DE TENDILLA.


In this part of his chronicle the worthy father Fray Antonio Agapida
indulges in triumphant exultation over the downfall of Zahara.
Heaven sometimes speaks (says he) through the mouths of false
prophets for the confusion of the wicked.  By the fall of this fortress
was the prediction of the santon of Granada in some measure
fulfilled, that "the ruins of Zahara should fall upon the heads of
the infidels."

Our zealous chronicler scoffs at the Moorish alcayde who lost his
fortress by surprise in broad daylight, and contrasts the vigilance
of the Christian governor of Alhama, the town taken in retaliation
for the storming of Zahara.

The important post of Alhama was at this time confided by King
Ferdinand to Don Inigo Lopez de Mendoza, count of Tendilla, a
cavalier of noble blood, brother to the grand cardinal of Spain.  He
had been instructed by the king not merely to maintain his post, but
also to make sallies and lay waste the surrounding country.  His
fortress was critically situated.  It was within seven leagues of
Granada, and at no great distance from the warlike city of Loxa.  It
was nestled in the lap of the mountains commanding the high-road
to Malaga and a view over the extensive Vega.  Thus situated, in the
heart of the enemy's country, surrounded by foes ready to assail him
and a rich country for him to ravage, it behooved this cavalier to
be for ever on the alert.  He was in fact an experienced veteran, a
shrewd and wary officer, and a commander amazingly prompt and
fertile in expedients.

On assuming the command he found that the garrison consisted but of
one thousand men, horse and foot.  They were hardy troops, seasoned
in rough mountain-campaigning, but reckless and dissolute, as
soldiers are apt to be when accustomed to predatory warfare.  They
would fight hard for booty, and then gamble it heedlessly away or
squander it in licentious revelling.  Alhama abounded with hawking,
sharping, idle hangers-on, eager to profit by the vices and follies
of the garrison.  The soldiers were oftener gambling and dancing
beneath the walls than keeping watch upon the battlements, and
nothing was heard from morning till night but the noisy contests of
cards and dice, mingled with the sound of the bolero or fandango,
the drowsy strumming of the guitar, and the rattling of the castanets,
while often the whole was interrupted by the loud brawl and fierce
and bloody contest.

The count of Tendilla set himself vigorously to reform these
excesses: he knew that laxity of morals is generally attended
by neglect of duty, and that the least breach of discipline in the
exposed situation of his fortress might be fatal.  "Here is but a
handful of men," said he; "it is necessary that each man should
be a hero."

He endeavored to awaken a proper ambition in the minds of his
soldiers and to instil into them the high principles of chivalry.  "A
just war," he observed, "is often rendered wicked and disastrous by
the manner in which it is conducted; for the righteousness of the
cause is not sufficient to sanction the profligacy of the means, and
the want of order and subordination among the troops may bring ruin
and disgrace upon the best-concerted plans."  But we cannot describe
the character and conduct of this renowned commander in more
forcible language than that of Fray Antonio Agapida, excepting that
the pious father places in the foreground of his virtues his hatred
of the Moors.  "The count de Tendilla," says he, "was a mirror of
Christian knighthood--watchful, abstemious, chaste, devout, and
thoroughly filled with the spirit of the cause.  He labored
incessantly and strenuously for the glory of the faith and the
prosperity of their most Catholic majesties; and, above all, he
hated the infidels with a pure and holy hatred.  This worthy cavalier
discountenanced all idleness, rioting, chambering, and wantonness
among his soldiery.  He kept them constantly to the exercise of arms,
making them adroit in the use of their weapons and management of
their steeds, and prompt for the field at a moment's notice.  He
permitted no sound of lute or harp or song or other loose minstrelsy
to be heard in his fortress, debauching the ear and softening the
valor of the soldier; no other music was allowed but the wholesome
rolling of the drum and braying of the trumpet, and such like
spirit-stirring instruments as fill the mind with thoughts of iron
war.  All wandering minstrels, sharping peddlers, sturdy trulls, and
other camp trumpery were ordered to pack up their baggage, and
were drummed out of the gates of Alhama.  In place of such lewd
rabble he introduced a train of holy friars to inspirit his people by
exhortation and prayer and choral chanting, and to spur them on to
fight the good fight of faith.  All games of chance were prohibited
except the game of war, and this he labored, by vigilance and vigor,
to reduce to a game of certainty.  Heaven smiled upon the efforts of
this righteous cavalier.  His men became soldiers at all points and
terrors to the Moors.  The good count never set forth on a ravage
without observing the rites of confession, absolution, and
communion, and obliging his followers to do the same.  Their banners
were blessed by the holy friars whom he maintained in Alhama; and in

this way success was secured to his arms and he was enabled to lay
waste the land of the heathen."

The fortress of Alhama (continues Fray Antonio Agapida) overlooked
from its lofty site a great part of the fertile Vega, watered by the
Cazin and the Xenil; from  this he made frequent sallies,  sweeping
away the flocks and herds from the pasture, the laborer from the
field, and the convoy from the road; so that it was said by the Moors
that a beetle could not crawl across the Vega without being seen
by Count Tendilla.  The peasantry, therefore, were fain to betake
themselves to watch-towers and fortified hamlets, where they shut
up their cattle, garnered their corn, and sheltered their wives and
children.  Even there they were not safe: the count would storm
these rustic fortresses with fire and sword, make captives of their
inhabitants, carry off the corn, the oil, the silks, and cattle, and
leave the ruins blazing and smoking within the very sight of Granada.

"It was a pleasing and refreshing sight," continues the good father,
"to behold this pious knight and his followers returning from one of
these crusades, leaving the rich land of the infidel in smoking
desolation behind them; to behold the long line of mules and asses
laden with the plunder of the Gentiles--the hosts of captive Moors,
men, women, and children--droves of sturdy beeves, lowing kine, and
bleating sheep,--all winding up the steep acclivity to the gates of
Alhama, pricked on by the Catholic soldiery.  His garrison thus
thrived on the fat of the land and the spoil of the infidel; nor was
he unmindful of the pious fathers whose blessings crowned his
enterprises with success.  A large portion of the spoil was always
dedicated to the Church, and the good friars were ever ready at the
gate to hail him on his return and receive the share allotted them.
Besides these allotments, he made many votive offerings, either in
time of peril or on the eve of a foray, and the chapels of Alhama
were resplendent with chalices, crosses, and other precious gifts
made by this Catholic cavalier."

Thus eloquently does the venerable Fray Antonio Agapida dilate in
praise of the good count de Tendilla; and other historians of equal
veracity, but less unction, agree in pronouncing him one of the
ablest of Spanish generals.  So terrible, in fact, did he become
in the land that the Moorish peasantry could not venture a league
from Granada or Loxa to labor in the fields without peril of being
carried into captivity.  The people of Granada clamored against
Muley Abul Hassan for suffering his lands to be thus outraged and
insulted, and demanded to have this bold marauder shut up in his
fortress.  The old monarch was roused by their remonstrances.  He
sent forth powerful troops of horse to protect the country during the
season that the husbandmen were abroad in the fields.  These troops
patrolled in formidable squadrons in the neighborhood of Alhama,
keeping strict watch upon its gates, so that it was impossible for
the Christians to make a sally without being seen and intercepted.

While Alhama was thus blockaded by a roving force of Moorish
cavalry, the inhabitants were awakened one night by a tremendous
crash that shook the fortress to its foundations.  The garrison flew
to arms, supposing it some assault of the enemy.  The alarm proved
to have been caused by the rupture of a portion of the wall, which,
undermined by heavy rains, had suddenly given way, leaving a large
chasm yawning toward the plain.

The count de Tendilla was for a time in great anxiety.  Should this
breach be discovered by the blockading horsemen, they would arouse
the country, Granada and Loxa would pour out an overwhelming force,
and they would find his walls ready sapped for an assault.  In this
fearful emergency the count displayed his noted talent for
expedients.  He ordered a quantity of linen cloth to be stretched in
front of the breach, painted in imitation of stone and indented with
battlements, so as at a distance to resemble the other parts of the
walls: behind this screen he employed workmen day and night in
repairing the fracture.  No one was permitted to leave the fortress,
lest information of its defenceless plight should be carried to the
Moor.  Light squadrons of the enemy were seen hovering about the
plain, but never approached near enough to discover the deception;
and thus in the course of a few days the wall was rebuilt stronger
than before.

There was another expedient of this shrewd veteran which greatly
excites the marvel of Agapida.  "It happened," he observes, "that
this Catholic cavalier at one time was destitute of gold and silver
wherewith to pay the wages of his troops; and the soldiers murmured
greatly, seeing that they had not the means of purchasing
necessaries from the people of the town.  In this dilemma what does
this most sagacious commander?  He takes me a number of little
morsels of paper, on the which he inscribes various sums, large and
small, according to the nature of the case, and signs me them with
his own hand and name.  These did he give to the soldiery in earnest
of their pay.  'How!' you will say, 'are soldiers to be paid with
scraps of paper?'  Even so, I answer, and well paid too, as I will
presently make manifest, for the good count issued a proclamation
ordering the inhabitants of Alhama to take these morsels of paper
for the full amount thereon inscribed, promising to redeem them at a
future time with silver and gold, and threatening severe punishment
to all who should refuse.  The people, having full confidence in his
word, and trusting that he would be as willing to perform the one
promise as he certainly was able to perform the other, took those
curious morsels of paper without hesitation or demur.  Thus by a
subtle and most miraculous kind of alchymy did this Catholic
cavalier turn worthless paper into precious gold, and make his
late impoverished garrison abound in money!"

It is but just to add that the count de Tendilla redeemed his
promises like a loyal knight; and this miracle, as it appeared in
the eyes of Fray Antonio Agapida, is the first instance on record of
paper money, which has since inundated the civilized world with
unbounded opulence.



CHAPTER XXVII.

FORAY OF CHRISTIAN KNIGHTS INTO THE TERRITORY OF THE MOORS.


The Spanish cavaliers who had survived the memorable massacre
among the mountains of Malaga, although they had repeatedly
avenged the deaths of their companions, could not forget the horror
and humiliation of their defeat.  Nothing would satisfy them but a
second expedition of the kind to carry fire and sword throughout a
wide part of the Moorish territories, and leave the region which had
triumphed in their disaster a black and burning monument of their
vengeance.  Their wishes accorded with the policy of the king to
destroy the resources of the enemy; every assistance was therefore
given to their enterprise.

In the spring of 1484 the ancient city of Antiquera again resounded
with arms; numbers of the same cavaliers who had assembled there
so gayly the preceding year came wheeling into the gates with their
steeled and shining warriors, but with a more dark and solemn brow
than on that disastrous occasion, for they had the recollection of
their slaughtered friends present to their minds, whose deaths they
were to avenge.

In a little while there was a chosen force of six thousand horse and
twelve thousand foot assembled in Antiquera, many of them the very
flower of Spanish chivalry, troops of the established military and
religious orders and of the Holy Brotherhood.

Precautions had been taken to furnish this army with all things
needful for its perilous inroad.  Numerous surgeons accompanied it,
who were to attend upon the sick and wounded without charge,
being paid for their services by the queen.  Isabella also, in her
considerate humanity, provided six spacious tents furnished with
beds and all things needful for the wounded and infirm.  These
continued to be used in all great expeditions throughout the war,
and were called the Queen's Hospital.  The worthy father, Fray
Antonio Agapida, vaunts this benignant provision of the queen as the
first introduction of a regular camp hospital in campaigning service.

Thus thoroughly prepared, the cavaliers issued forth from Antiquera
in splendid and terrible array, but with less exulting confidence
and vaunting ostentation than on their former foray; and this was
the order of the army: Don Alonso de Aguilar led the advance guard,
accompanied by Don Diego Fernandez de Cordova, the alcayde de los
Donceles, and Luis Fernandez Puerto Carrero, count of Palma, with
their household troops.  They were followed by Juan de Merlo, Juan
de Almara, and Carlos de Biezman of the Holy Brotherhood, with the
men-at-arms of their captaincies.

The second battalion was commanded by the marques of Cadiz and the
master of Santiago, with the cavaliers of Santiago and the troops of
the house of Ponce Leon; with these also went the senior commander
of Calatrava and the knights of that order, and various other
cavaliers and their retainers.

The right wing of this second battalion was led by Gonsalvo de
Cordova, afterward renowned as grand captain of Spain; the left by
Diego Lopez de Avila.  They were accompanied by several distinguished
cavaliers and certain captains of the Holy Brotherhood with their
men-at-arms.

The duke of Medina Sidonia and the count de Cabra commanded the
third battalion, with the troops of their respective houses.  They
were accompanied by other commanders of note with their forces.

The rear-guard was brought up by the senior commander and knights
of Alcantara, followed by the Andalusian chivalry from Xeres, Ecija,
and Carmona.

Such was the army that issued forth from the gates of Antiquera on
one of the most extensive "talas," or devastating inroads, that ever
laid waste the kingdom of Granada.

The army entered the Moorish territory by the way of Alora,
destroying all the cornfields, vineyards, and orchards and
plantations of olives round that city.  It then proceeded through the
rich valleys and fertile uplands of Coin, Cazarabonela, Almexia, and
Cartama, and in ten days all those fertile regions were a smoking
and frightful desert.  Hence it pursued its slow and destructive
course, like the stream of lava of a volcano, through the regions of
Pupiana and Alhendin, and so on to the vega of Malaga, laying waste
the groves of olives and almonds and the fields of grain, and
destroying every green thing.  The Moors of some of those places
interceded in vain for their groves and fields, offering to deliver
up their Christian captives.  One part of the army blockaded the
towns, while the other ravaged the surrounding country.  Sometimes
the Moors sallied forth desperately to defend their property, but
were driven back to their gates with slaughter and their suburbs
pillaged and burnt.  It was an awful spectacle at night to behold the
volumes of black smoke mingled with lurid flames rising from the
burning suburbs, and the women on the walls of the town wringing
their hands and shrieking at the desolation of their dwellings.

The destroying army on arriving at the sea-coast found vessels lying
off shore laden with all kinds of provisions and munitions sent from
Seville and Xeres, and was thus enabled to continue its desolating
career.  Advancing to the neighborhood of Malaga, it was bravely
assailed by the Moors of that city, and there was severe skirmishing
for a whole day; but, while the main part of the army encountered
the enemy, the rest ravaged the whole vega and destroyed all the
mills.  As the object of the expedition was not to capture places, but
merely to burn, ravage, and destroy, the host, satisfied with the
mischief they had done in the vega, turned their backs upon Malaga
and again entered the mountains.  They passed by Coin and
through the regions of Allazayna, and Gatero, and Alhaurin, all
which were likewise desolated.  In this way did they make the circuit
of a chain of rich and verdant valleys, the glory of those mountains
and the pride and delight of the Moors.  For forty days did they
continue on like a consuming fire, leaving a smoking and howling
waste to mark their course, until, weary with the work of
destruction, and having fully sated their revenge for the massacre
of the Axarquia, they returned in triumph to the meadows of
Antiquera.

In the month of June, King Ferdinand took command in person of this
destructive army; he increased its force, and added to its means of
mischief several lombards and other heavy artillery, intended for
the battering of towns and managed by engineers from France and
Germany.  With these the[7]marques of Cadiz assured the king he
would soon be able to reduce the Moorish fortresses, which were
only calculated for defence against the engines anciently used in
warfare.  Their walls and towers were high and thin, depending for
security on their rough and rocky situations.  The stone and iron
balls thundered from the lombards would soon tumble them in ruins
upon the heads of their defenders.

The fate of Alora speedily proved the truth of this opinion.  It was
strongly posted on a rock washed by a river.  The artillery soon
battered down two of the towers and a part of the wall.  The Moors
were thrown into consternation at the vehemence of the assault and
the effect of those tremendous engines upon their vaunted bulwarks.
The roaring of the artillery and the tumbling of the walls terrified
the women, who beset the alcayde with vociferous supplications
to surrender.  The place was given up on the 20th of June, on
condition that the inhabitants might depart with their effects.  The
people of Malaga, as yet unacquainted with the power of this
battering ordnance, were so incensed at those of Alora for what
they considered a tame surrender that they would not admit them
into their city.

A similar fate attended the town of Setenil, built on a lofty rock and
esteemed impregnable.  Many times had it been besieged under
former Christian kings, but never taken.  Even now, for several days
the artillery was directed against it without effect, and many of
the cavaliers murmured at the marques of Cadiz for having counselled
the king to attack this unconquerable place.*

*Cura de los Palacios.


On the same night that these reproaches were uttered the marques
directed the artillery himself: he levelled the lombards at the
bottom of the walls and at the gates.  In a little while the gates
were battered to pieces, a great breach was effected in the walls,
and the Moors were fain to capitulate.  Twenty-four Christian
captives, who had been taken in the defeat of the mountains of
Malaga, were rescued from the dungeons of this fortress, and hailed
the marques as their deliverer.

Needless is it to mention the capture of various other places which
surrendered without waiting to be attacked.  The Moors had always
shown great bravery and perseverance in defending their towns;
they were formidable in their sallies and skirmishes, and patient in
enduring hunger and thirst when besieged; but this terrible
ordnance, which demolished their walls with such ease and rapidity,
overwhelmed them with dismay and rendered vain all resistance.
King Ferdinand was so struck with the effect of this artillery that
he ordered the number of lombards to be increased; and these
potent engines had henceforth a great influence on the fortunes
of this war.

The last operation of this year, so disastrous to the Moors, was an
inroad by Ferdinand, in the latter part of summer, into the Vega, in
which he ravaged the country, burnt two villages near to Granada,
and destroyed the mills near the very gates of the city.

Old Muley Abul Hassan was overwhelmed with dismay at the desolation
which during the whole year had raged throughout his territories and
had now reached the walls of his capital.  His fierce spirit was
broken by misfortunes and infirmity; he offered to purchase a peace
and to hold his crown as a tributary vassal.  Ferdinand would listen
to no propositions: the absolute conquest of Granada was the great
object of this war, and he was resolved never to rest content
without its complete fulfilment.  Having supplied and strengthened
the garrisons of the places taken in the heart of the Moorish
territories, he enjoined their commanders to render every assistance
to the younger Moorish king in the civil war against his father.  He
then returned with his army to Cordova in great triumph, closing a
series of ravaging campaigns which had filled the kingdom of Granada
with grief and consternation.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

ATTEMPT OF EL ZAGAL TO SURPRISE BOABDIL IN ALMERIA.


During this year of sorrow and disaster to the Moors the younger
king, Boabdil, most truly called the Unfortunate, held a diminished
and feeble court in the maritime city of Almeria.  He retained little
more than the name of king, and was supported in even this shadow
of royalty by the countenance and treasures of the Castilian
sovereigns.  Still he trusted that in the fluctuation of events the
inconstant nation might once more return to his standard and replace
him on the throne of the Alhambra.

His mother, the high-spirited sultana Ayxa la Horra, endeavored to
rouse him from this passive state.  "It is a feeble mind," said she,
"that waits for the turn of fortune's wheel; the brave mind seizes
upon it and turns it to its purpose.  Take the field, and you may
drive danger before you; remain cowering at home, and it besieges
you in your dwelling.  By a bold enterprise you may regain your
splendid throne in Granada; by passive forbearance you will forfeit
even this miserable throne in Almeria."

Boabdil had not the force of soul to follow these courageous
counsels, and in a little time the evils his mother had predicted
fell upon him.

Old Muley Abul Hassan was almost extinguished by age and paralysis.
He had nearly lost his sight, and was completely bedridden.  His
brother, Abdallah, surnamed El Zagal, or the Valiant, the same who
had assisted in the massacre of the Spanish chivalry among the
mountains of Malaga, was commander-in-chief of the Moorish armies,
and gradually took upon himself most of the cares of sovereignty.
Among other things, he was particularly zealous in espousing his
brother's quarrel with his son, and he prosecuted it with such
vehemence that many affirmed there was something more than
mere fraternal sympathy at the bottom of his zeal.

The disasters and disgraces inflicted on the country by the
Christians during this year had wounded the national feelings of
the people of Almeria, and many felt indignant that Boabdil should
remain passive at such a time, or, rather, should appear to make a
common cause with the enemy.  His uncle Abdallah diligently fomented
this feeling by his agents.  The same arts were made use of that
had been successful in Granada.  Boabdil was secretly but actively
denounced by the alfaquis as an apostate leagued with the Christians
against his country and his early faith; the affections of the 
populace and soldiery were gradually alienated from him, and a
deep conspiracy concerted for his destruction.

In the month of February, 1485, El Zagal suddenly appeared before
Almeria at the head of a troop of horse.  The alfaquis were prepared
for his arrival, and the gates were thrown open to him.  He entered
with his band and galloped to the citadel.  The alcayde would have
made resistance, but the garrison put him to death and received El
Zagal with acclamations.  The latter rushed through the apartments of
the Alcazar, but he sought in vain for Boabdil.  He found the sultana
Ayxa la Horra in one of the saloons with Aben Haxig, a younger
brother of the monarch, and several Abencerrages, who rallied round
them to protect them.  "Where is the traitor Boabdil?" exclaimed El
Zagal.

"I know no traitor more perfidious than thyself," exclaimed the
intrepid sultana; "and I trust my son is in safety, to take
vengeance on thy treason."

The rage of El Zagal was without bounds when he learnt that
his intended victim had escaped.  In his fury he slew the prince
Aben Haxig, and his followers fell upon and massacred the
Abencerrages.  As to the proud sultana, she was borne away prisoner
and loaded with revilings as having upheld her son in his rebellion
and fomented a civil war.

The unfortunate Boabdil had been apprised of his danger by a
faithful soldier just in time to make his escape.  Throwing himself
on one of his fleetest horses and followed by a handful of
adherents, he galloped in the confusion out of the gates of Almeria.
Several of the cavalry of El Zagal, stationed without the walls,
perceived his flight and attempted to pursue him; their horses were
jaded with travel, and he soon left them far behind.  But whither was
he to fly?  Every fortress and castle in the kingdom of Granada was
closed against him; he knew not whom among the Moors to trust, for
they had been taught to detest him as a traitor and an apostate.
He had no alternative but to seek refuge among the Christians, his
hereditary enemies.  With heavy heart he turned his horse's head
toward Cordova.  He had to lurk, like a fugitive, through a part of
his own dominions, nor did he feel himself secure until he had
passed the frontier and beheld the mountain-barrier of his country
towering behind him.  Then it was that he became conscious of his
humiliated state--a fugitive from his throne, an outcast from his
nation, a king without a kingdom.  He smote his breast in an agony
of grief.  "Evil indeed," exclaimed he, "was the day of my birth, and
truly I was named El Zogoybi, the Unlucky."

He entered the gates of Cordova with downcast countenance and with
a train of but forty followers.  The sovereigns were absent, but the
cavaliers of Andalusia manifested that sympathy in the misfortunes
of the monarch which becomes men of lofty and chivalrous souls.  They
received him with great distinction, attended him with the utmost
courtesy, and he was honorably entertained by the civil and military
commanders of that ancient city.

In the mean time, El Zagal put a new alcayde over Almeria to govern
in the name of his brother, and, having strongly garrisoned the
place, repaired to Malaga, where an attack of the Christians was
apprehended.  The young monarch being driven out of the land, and the
old monarch blind and bedridden, El Zagal at the head of the armies
was virtually the sovereign of Granada.  He was supported by the
brave and powerful families of the Alnayans and Vanegas; the people
were pleased with having a new idol to look up to and a new name to
shout forth; and El Zagal was hailed with acclamations as the main
hope of the nation.



CHAPTER XXIX.

HOW KING FERDINAND COMMENCED ANOTHER CAMPAIGN AGAINST
    THE MOORS, AND HOW HE LAID SIEGE TO COIN AND CARTAMA.


The recent effect of the battering ordnance in demolishing the
Moorish fortresses induced King Ferdinand to procure a powerful
train for the campaign of 1485, intending to assault some of the
most formidable holds of the enemy.

An army of nine thousand cavalry and twenty thousand infantry
assembled at Cordova early in the spring, and the king took the
field on the 5th of April.  It had been determined in secret council
to attack the city of Malaga, that ancient and important seaport on
which Granada depended for foreign aid and supplies.  It was thought
proper previously, however, to get possession of various towns and
fortresses in the valleys of Santa Maria and Cartama, through which
pass the roads to Malaga.

The first place assailed was the town of Benamexi or Bonameji.  It
had submitted to the Catholic sovereigns in the preceding year, but
had since renounced its allegiance.  King Ferdinand was enraged at
the rebellion of the inhabitants.  "I will make their punishment,"
said he, "a terror to others: they shall be loyal through force, if
not through faith."  The place was carried by storm: one hundred
and eight of the principal inhabitants were either put to the sword
or hanged on the battlements; the rest were carried into captivity.*

*Pulgar, Garibay, Cura de los Palacios.


The towns of Coin and Cartama were besieged on the same day-- the
first by a division of the army led on by the marques of Cadiz; the
second by another division commanded by Don Alonso de Aguilar
and Luis Fernandez Puerto Carrero, the brave senior of Palma.  The
king, with the rest of the army, remained posted between the two
places to render assistance to either division.  The batteries opened
upon both places at the same time, and the thunder of the lombards
was mutually heard from one camp to the other.  The Moors made
frequent sallies and a valiant defence, but they were confounded by
the tremendous uproar of the batteries and the destruction of their
walls.  In the mean time, the alarm-fires gathered together the
Moorish mountaineers of all the Serrania, who assembled in great
numbers in the city of Monda, about a league from Coin.  They made
several attempts to enter the besieged town, but in vain: they were
each time intercepted and driven back by the Christians, and were
reduced to gaze at a distance in despair on the destruction of the
place.  While thus situated there rode one day into Monda a fierce
and haughty Moorish chieftain at the head of a band of swarthy
African horsemen: it was Hamet el Zegri, the fiery-spirited alcayde
of Ronda, at the head of his band of Gomeres.  He had not yet
recovered from the rage and mortification of his defeat on the banks
of the Lopera in the disastrous foray of old Bexir, when he had been
obliged to steal back furtively to his mountains with the loss of
the bravest of his followers.  He had ever since panted for revenge.
He now rode among the host of warriors assembled at Monda.  "Who
among you," cried he, "feels pity for the women and children of Coin
exposed to captivity and death?  Whoever he is, let him follow me,
who am ready to die as a Moslem for the relief of Moslems."  So
saying, he seized a white banner, and, waving it over his head, rode
forth from the town, followed by the Gomeres.  Many of the warriors,
roused by his words and his example, spurred resolutely after his
banner.  The people of Coin, being prepared for this attempt, sallied
forth as they saw the white banner and made an attack upon the
Christian camp, and in the confusion of the moment Hamet and his
followers galloped into the gates.  This reinforcement animated the
besieged, and Hamet exhorted them to hold out obstinately in defence
of life and town.  As the Gomeres were veteran warriors, the more
they were attacked the harder they fought.

At length a great breach was made in the walls, and Ferdinand, who
was impatient of the resistance of the place, ordered the duke of
Naxara and the count of Benavente to enter with their troops, and,
as their forces were not sufficient, he sent word to Luis de Cerda,
duke of Medina Celi, to send a part of his people to their assistance.

The feudal pride of the duke was roused at this demand.  "Tell my
lord the king," said the haughty grandee, "that I have come to
succor him with my household troops: if my people are ordered to any
place, I am to go with them; but if I am to remain in the camp, my
people must remain with me.  For the troops cannot serve without
their commander, nor their commander without his troops."

The reply of the high-spirited grandee perplexed the cautious
Ferdinand, who knew the jealous pride of his powerful nobles.  In the
mean time, the people of the camp, having made all preparations for
the assault, were impatient to be led forward.  Upon this Pero Ruyz
de Alarcon put himself at their head, and, seizing their mantas or
portable bulwarks, and their other defences, they made a gallant
assault and fought their way in at the breach.  The Moors were so
overcome by the fury of their assault that they retreated, fighting,
to the square of the town.  Pero Ruyz de Alarcon thought the place
was carried, when suddenly Hamet and his Gomeres came scouring
through the streets with wild war-cries, and fell furiously upon the
Christians.  The latter were in their turn beaten back, and, while
attacked in front by the Gomeres, were assailed by the inhabitants
with all kinds of missiles from their roofs and windows.  They at
length gave way and retreated through the breach.  Pero Ruyz de
Alarcon still maintained his ground in one of the principal streets:
the few cavaliers that stood by him urged him to fly: "No," said he;
"I came here to fight, and not to fly."  He was presently surrounded
by the Gomeres; his companions fled for their lives: the last they
saw of him he was covered with wounds, but still fighting desperately
for the fame of a good cavalier.*

*Pulgar, part 3, cap. 42.


The resistance of the inhabitants, though aided by the valor of the
Gomeres, was of no avail.  The battering artillery of the Christians
demolished their walls; combustibles thrown into their town set it
on fire in various places; and they were at length compelled to
capitulate.  They were permitted to depart with their effects, and
the Gomeres with their arms.  Hamet el Zegri and his African band
rode proudly through the Christian camp, nor could the Spanish
cavaliers refrain from regarding with admiration that haughty
warrior and his devoted and dauntless followers.

The capture of Coin was accompanied by that of Cartama: the
fortifications of the latter were repaired and garrisoned, but Coin,
being too extensive to be defended by a moderate force, its walls
were demolished.  The siege of these places struck such terror into
the surrounding country that the Moors of many of the neighboring
towns abandoned their homes, and fled with such of their effects as
they could carry away, upon which the king gave orders to demolish
their walls and towers.

King Ferdinand now left his camp and his heavy artillery near
Cartama, and proceeded with his lighter troops to reconnoitre
Malaga.  By this time the secret plan of attack arranged in the
council of war at Cordova was known to all the world.  The vigilant
warrior, El Zagal, had thrown himself into the place, put all
the fortifications, which were of vast strength, into a state of
defence, and sent orders to the alcaydes of the mountain-towns
to hasten with their forces to his assistance.

The very day that Ferdinand appeared before the place El Zagal
sallied forth to receive him at the head of a thousand cavalry, the
choicest warriors of Granada.  A sharp skirmish took place among
the gardens and olive trees near the city.  Many were killed on both
sides, and this gave the Christians a foretaste of what they might
expect if they attempted to besiege the place.

When the skirmish was over the marques of Cadiz had a private
conference with the king.  He represented the difficulty of besieging
Malaga with their present force, especially as their plans had been
discovered and anticipated, and the whole country was marching to
oppose them.  The marques, who had secret intelligence from all
quarters, had received a letter from Juceph Xerife, a Moor of Ronda
of Christian lineage, apprising him of the situation of that
important place and its garrison, which at that moment laid it open
to attack