, and the marques was urgent with the king to seize upon
this critical moment, and secure a place which was one of the most
powerful Moorish fortresses on the frontiers, and in the hands of
Hamet el Zegri had been the scourge of Andalusia.  The good marques
had another motive for his advice, becoming a true and loyal knight.
In the deep dungeons of Ronda languished several of his companion-
in-arms who had been captured in the defeat in the Axarquia.  To
break their chains and restore them to liberty and light he felt to
be his peculiar duty as one of those who had most promoted that
disastrous enterprise.

King Ferdinand listened to the advice of the marques.  He knew the
importance of Ronda, which was considered one of the keys to the
kingdom of Granada, and he was disposed to punish the inhabitants
for the aid they had rendered to the garrison of Coin.  The siege of
Malaga therefore, was abandoned for the present, and preparations
made for a rapid and secret move against the city of Ronda.



CHAPTER XXX.

SIEGE OF RONDA.


The bold Hamet el Zegri, the alcayde of Ronda, had returned sullenly
to his stronghold after the surrender of Coin.  He had fleshed his
sword in battle with the Christians, but his thirst for vengeance
was still unsatisfied.  Hamet gloried in the strength of his fortress
and the valor of his people.  A fierce and warlike populace was at
his command; his signal-fires could summon all the warriors of the
Serrania; his Gomeres almost subsisted on the spoils of Andalusia;
and in the rock on which his fortress was built were hopeless
dungeons filled with Christian captives carried off by these war-
hawks of the mountains.

Ronda was considered as impregnable.  It was situated in the heart of
wild and rugged mountains, and perched upon an isolated rock crested
by a strong citadel, with triple walls and towers.  A deep ravine, or
rather a perpendicular chasm of the rocks, of frightful depth,
surrounded three parts of the city; through this flowed the Rio
Verde, or Green River.  There were two suburbs to the city, fortified
by walls and towers, and almost inaccessible from the natural
asperity of the rocks.  Around this rugged city were deep rich
valleys, sheltered by the mountains, refreshed by constant streams,
abounding with grain and the most delicious fruits, and yielding
verdant meadows, in which was reared a renowned breed of horses,
the best in the whole kingdom for a foray.

Hamet el Zegri had scarcely returned to Ronda when he received
intelligence that the Christian army was marching to the siege of
Malaga, and orders from El Zagal to send troops to his assistance.
Hamet sent a part of his garrison for that purpose; in the mean
time he meditated an expedition to which he was stimulated by pride
and revenge.  All Andalusia was now drained of its troops; there was
an opportunity, therefore, for an inroad by which he might wipe out
the disgrace of his defeat at the battle of Lopera.  Apprehending no
danger to his mountain-city, now that the storm of war had passed
down into the vega of Malaga, he left but a remnant of his garrison
to man its walls, and, putting himself at the head of his band of
Gomeres, swept down suddenly into the plains of Andalusia.  He
careered, almost without resistance, over those vast campinas or
pasture-lands which formed a part of the domains of the duke of
Medina Sidonia.  In vain the bells were rung and the alarm-fires
kindled: the band of Hamet had passed by before any force could
be assembled, and was only to be traced, like a hurricane, by the
devastation it had made.

Hamet regained in safety the Serrania de Ronda, exulting in
his successful inroad.  The mountain-glens were filled with long
droves of cattle and flocks of sheep from the campinas of Medina
Sidonia.  There were mules, too, laden with the plunder of the
villages, and every warrior had some costly spoil of jewels for his
favorite mistress.

As the Zegri drew near to Ronda he was roused from his dream of
triumph by the sound of heavy ordnance bellowing through the
mountain-defiles.  His heart misgave him: he put spurs to his horse
and galloped in advance of his lagging cavalgada.  As he proceeded
the noise of the ordnance increased, echoing from cliff to cliff.
Spurring his horse up a craggy height which commanded an extensive
view, he beheld, to his consternation, the country about Ronda white
with the tents of a besieging army.  The royal standard, displayed
before a proud encampment, showed that Ferdinand himself was
present, while the incessant blaze and thunder of artillery and the
volumes of overhanging smoke told the work of destruction that was
going on.

The royal army had succeeded in coming upon Ronda by surprise
during the absence of its alcayde and most of its garrison; but its
inhabitants were warlike and defended themselves bravely, trusting
that Hamet and his Gomeres would soon return to their assistance.

The fancied strength of their bulwarks had been of little avail
against the batteries of the besiegers.  In the space of four days
three towers and great masses of the walls which defended the
suburbs were battered down and the suburbs taken and plundered.
Lombards and other heavy ordnance were now levelled at the walls
of the city, and stones and missiles of all kinds hurled into the
streets.  The very rock on which the city stood shook with the
thunder of the artillery, and the Christian captives, deep within
its dungeons, hailed the sound as a promise of deliverance.

When Hamet el[8]Zegri beheld his city thus surrounded and assailed,
he called upon his men to follow him and cut their way through to
its relief.  They proceeded stealthily through the mountains until
they came to the nearest heights above the Christian camp.  When
night fell and part of the army was sunk in sleep, they descended
the rocks, and, rushing suddenly upon the weakest part of the camp,
endeavored to break their way through and gain the city.  The camp
was too strong to be forced; they were driven back to the crags of
the mountains, whence they defended themselves by showering down
darts and stones upon their pursuers.

Hamet now lit alarm-fires about the heights: his standard was joined
by the neighboring mountaineers and by troops from Malaga.  Thus
reinforced, he made repeated assaults upon the Christians, cutting
off all stragglers from the camp.  All his attempts to force his way
into the city, however, were fruitless; many of his bravest men
were slain, and he was obliged to retreat into the fastnesses of
the mountains.

In the mean while the distress of Ronda increased hourly.  The
marques of Cadiz, having possession of the suburbs, was enabled to
approach to the very foot of the perpendicular precipice rising from
the river on the summit of which the city is built.  At the foot of
this rock is a living fountain of limpid water gushing into a great
natural basin.  A secret mine led down from within the city to this
fountain by several hundred steps cut in the solid rock.  Hence the
city obtained its chief supply of water, and these steps were deeply
worn by the weary feet of Christian captives employed in this painful
labor.  The marques of Cadiz discovered this subterraneous passage,
and directed his pioneers to countermine in the side of the rock; they
pierced to the shaft, and, stopping it up, deprived the city of the
benefit of this precious fountain.

While the marques was thus pressing the siege with the generous
thought of soon delivering his companions-in-arms from the Moorish
dungeons, far other were the feelings of the alcayde, Hamet el
Zegri.  He smote his breast and gnashed his teeth in impotent fury
as he beheld from the mountain-cliffs the destruction of the city.
Every thunder of the Christian ordnance seemed to batter against his
heart.  He saw tower after tower tumbling by day, and various parts
of the city in a blaze at night.  "They fired not merely stones from
their ordnance," says a chronicler of the times, "but likewise great
balls of iron cast in moulds, which demolished everything they
struck.  They threw also balls of tow steeped in pitch and oil and
gunpowder, which, when once on fire, were not to be extinguished,
and which set the houses in flames.  Great was the horror of the
inhabitants: they knew not where to fly for refuge: their houses
were in a blaze or shattered by the ordnance; the streets were
perilous from the falling ruins and the bounding balls, which dashed
to pieces everything they encountered.  At night the city looked like
a fiery furnace; the cries and wailings of the women between the
thunders of the ordnance reached even to the Moors on the
opposite mountains, who answered them by yells of fury and despair.

All hope of external succor being at an end, the inhabitants of
Ronda were compelled to capitulate.  Ferdinand was easily prevailed
upon to grant them favorable terms.  The place was capable of longer
resistance, and he feared for the safety of his camp, as the forces
were daily augmenting on the mountains and making frequent assaults.
The inhabitants were permitted to depart with their effects, either
to Barbary, Granada, or elsewhere, and those who chose to reside in
Spain had lands assigned them and were indulged in the practice of
their religion.

No sooner did the place surrender than detachments were sent to
attack the Moors who hovered about the neighboring mountains.
Hamet el Zegri, however, did not remain to make a fruitless battle.
He gave up the game as lost, and retreated with his Gomeres,
filled with grief and rage, but trusting to fortune to give him
future vengeance.

The first care of the good marques of Cadiz on entering Ronda was
to deliver his unfortunate companion-in-arms from the dungeons of
the fortress.  What a difference in their looks from the time when,
flushed with health and hope and arrayed in military pomp, they
had sallied forth upon the mountain-foray!  Many of them were
almost naked, with irons at their ankles and beards reaching to
their waists.  Their meeting with the marques was joyful, yet it
had the look of grief, for their joy was mingled with many bitter
recollections.  There was an immense number of other captives,
among whom were several young men of noble families who
with filial piety had surrendered themselves prisoners in place
of their fathers.

The captives were all provided with mules and sent to the queen
at Cordova.  The humane heart of Isabella melted at the sight of
the piteous cavalcade.  They were all supplied by her with food
and raiment, and money to pay their expenses to their homes.
Their chains were hung as pious trophies against the exterior of
the church of St. Juan de los Reyes in Toledo, where the Christian
traveller may regale his eyes with the sight of them at this very day.*

*Seen by the author in 1826.


Among the Moorish captives was a young infidel maiden, of great
beauty, who desired to become a Christian and to remain in Spain.
She had been inspired with the light of the true faith through the
ministry of a young man who had been a captive in Ronda.  He was
anxious to complete his good work by marrying her.  The queen
consented to their pious wishes, having first taken care that the
young maiden should be properly purified by the holy sacrament
of baptism.

"Thus this pestilent nest of warfare and infidelity, the city of
Ronda," says the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida, "was converted to
the true faith by the thunder of our artillery--an example which was
soon followed by Cazarabonela, Marbella, and other towns in these
parts, insomuch that in the course of this expedition no less than
seventy-two places were rescued from the vile sect of Mahomet and
placed under the benignant domination of the Cross."



CHAPTER XXXI.

HOW THE PEOPLE OF GRANADA INVITED EL ZAGAL TO THE THRONE,
    AND HOW HE MARCHED TO THE CAPITAL.


The people of Granada were a versatile, unsteady race, and
exceedingly given to make and unmake kings.  They had for a
long time vacillated between old Muley Abul Hassan and his son,
Boabdil el Chico, sometimes setting up the one, sometimes the
other, and sometimes both at once, according to the pinch and
pressure of external evils.  They found, however, that the evils still
went on increasing in defiance of every change, and were at their
wits' end to devise some new combination or arrangement by which
an efficient government might be wrought out of two bad kings.
When the tidings arrived of the fall of Ronda, and the consequent
ruin of the frontier, a tumultuous assemblage took place in one of
the public squares.  As usual, the people attributed the misfortunes
of the country to the faults of their rulers, for the populace never
imagine that any part of their miseries can originate with themselves.
A crafty alfaqui, named Alyme Mazer, who had watched the current of
their discontents, rose and harangued them.  "You have been choosing
and changing," said he, "between two monarchs; and who and what
are they?  Muley Abul Hassan for one, a man worn out by age and
infirmities, unable to sally forth against the foe, even when ravaging
to the very gates of the city; and Boabdil el Chico for the other, an
apostate, a traitor, a deserter from his throne, a fugitive among the
enemies of his nation, a man fated to misfortune, and proverbially
named 'the Unlucky.'  In a time of overwhelming war like the present
he only is fit to sway a sceptre who can wield a sword.  Would you
seek such a man?  You need not look far.  Allah has sent such a one
in this time of distress to retrieve the fortunes of Granada.  You
already know whom I mean.  You know that it can be no other than
your general, the invincible Abdallah, whose surname of El Zagal has
become a watchword in battle rousing the courage of the faithful and
striking terror into the unbelievers."

The multitude received the words of the alfaqui with acclamations;
they were delighted with the idea of a third king over Granada,
and Abdallah el Zagal being of the royal family, and already in the
virtual exercise of royal power, the measure had nothing in it that
appeared either rash or violent.  A deputation was therefore sent
to El Zagal at Malaga inviting him to repair to Granada to receive
the crown.

El Zagal expressed great surprise and repugnance when the mission
was announced to him, and nothing but his patriotic zeal for the
public safety and his fraternal eagerness to relieve the aged Abul
Hassan from the cares of government prevailed upon him to accept
the offer.  Leaving, therefore, Reduan Vanegas, one of the bravest
Moorish generals, in command of Malaga, he departed for Granada,
attended by three hundred trusty cavaliers.

Muley Abul Hassan did not wait for the arrival of his brother.
Unable any longer to buffet with the storms of the times, his only
solicitude was to seek some safe and quiet harbor of repose.  In one
of the deep valleys which indent the Mediterranean coast, and which
are shut up on the land side by stupendous mountains, stood the
little city of Almunecar.  The valley was watered by the limpid river
Frio, and abounded with fruits, with grain, and pasturage.  The city
was strongly fortified, and the garrison and alcayde were devoted to
the old monarch.  This was the place chosen by Muley Abul Hassan
for his asylum.  His first care was to send thither all his treasures;
his next care was to take refuge there himself; his third, that his
sultana Zoraya and their two sons should follow him.

In the mean time, Muley Abdallah el Zagal pursued his journey toward
the capital, attended by his three hundred cavaliers.  The road from
Malaga to Granada winds close by Alhama, and is dominated by that
lofty fortress.  This had been a most perilous pass for the Moors
during the time that Alhama was commanded by the count de Tendilla:
not a traveller could escape his eagle eye, and his garrison was
ever ready for a sally.  The count de Tendilla, however, had been
relieved from this arduous post, and it had been given in charge
to Don Gutiere de Padilla, clavero (or treasurer) of the order of
Calatrava--an easy, indulgent man, who had with him three hundred
gallant knights of his order, besides other mercenary troops.  The
garrison had fallen off in discipline; the cavaliers were hardy in
fight and daring in foray, but confident in themselves and negligent
of proper precautions.  Just before the journey of El Zagal a number
of these cavaliers, with several soldiers of fortune of the garrison, in
all about one hundred and seventy men, had sallied forth to harass
the Moorish country during its present distracted state, and, having
ravaged the valleys of the Sierra Nevada, or Snowy Mountains, were
returning to Alhama in gay spirits and laden with booty.

As El Zagal passed through the neighborhood of Alhama he recollected
the ancient perils of the road, and sent light cerradors in advance to
inspect each rock and ravine where a foe might lurk in ambush.  One
of these scouts, overlooking a narrow valley which opened upon the
road, descried a troop of horsemen on the banks of a little stream.
They were dismounted, and had taken the bridles from their steeds,
that they might crop the fresh grass on the banks of the river.  The
horsemen were scattered about, some reposing in the shades of rocks
and trees, others gambling for the spoil they had taken: not a sentinel
was posted to keep guard; everything showed the perfect security of
men who consider themselves beyond the reach of danger.

These careless cavaliers were in fact the knights of Calatrava
returning from their foray.  A part of their force had passed on
with the cavalgada; ninety of the principal cavaliers had halted
to refresh themselves in this valley.  El Zagal smiled with ferocious
joy when he heard of their negligent security.  "Here will be
trophies," said he, "to grace our entrance into Granada."

Approaching the valley with cautious silence, he wheeled into it at
full speed at the head of his troop, and attacked the Christians so
suddenly that they had no time to put the bridles upon their horses
or even to leap into the saddles.  They made a confused but valiant
defence, fighting among the rocks and in the rugged bed of the river.
Their defence was useless; seventy-nine were slain, and the remaining
eleven were taken prisoners.

A party of the Moors galloped in pursuit of the cavalgada: they soon
overtook it winding slowly up a hill.  The horsemen who convoyed it,
perceiving the enemy at a distance, made their escape, and left the
spoil to be retaken by the Moors.  El Zagal gathered together his
captives and his booty, and proceeded, elate with success, to Granada.

He paused before the gate of Elvira, for as yet he had not been
proclaimed king.  This ceremony was immediately performed, for
the fame of his recent exploit had preceded him and intoxicated
the minds of the giddy populace.  He entered Granada in a sort of
triumph.  The eleven captive knights of Calatrava walked in front:
next were paraded the ninety captured steeds, bearing the armor
and weapons of their late owners, and led by as many mounted
Moors: then came seventy Moorish horsemen, with as many Christian
heads hanging at their saddle-bows: Muley Abdallah followed,
surrounded by a number of distinguished cavaliers splendidly attired,
and the pageant was closed by a long cavalgada of the flocks and
herds and other booty recovered from the Christians.*

*Zurita, lib. 20, c. 62; Mariana, Hist. de Espana; Abarca, Anales
 de Aragon.


The populace gazed with almost savage triumph at these captive
cavaliers and the gory heads of their companions, knowing them to
have been part of the formidable garrison of Alhama, so long the
scourge of Granada and the terror of the Vega.  They hailed this
petty triumph as an auspicious opening of the reign of their new
monarch; for several days the name of Muley Abul Hassan and
Boabdil el Chico were never mentioned but with contempt, and
the whole city resounded with the praises of El Zagal, or the Valiant.



CHAPTER XXXII.

HOW THE COUNT DE CABRA ATTEMPTED TO CAPTURE ANOTHER
    KING, AND HOW HE FARED IN HIS ATTEMPT.


The elevation of a bold and active veteran to the throne of Granada
in place of its late bedridden king made an important difference in
the aspect of the war, and called for some blow that should dash
the confidence of the Moors in their new monarch and animate the
Christians to fresh exertions.

Don Diego de Cordova, the brave count de Cabra, was at this time in
his castle of Vaena, where he kept a wary eye upon the frontier. It
was now the latter part of August, and he grieved that the summer
should pass away without an inroad into the country of the foe.  He
sent out his scouts on the prowl, and they brought him word that
the important post of Moclin was but weakly garrisoned.  This was
a castellated town, strongly situated upon a high mountain, partly
surrounded by thick forests and partly girdled by a river.  It
defended one of the rugged and solitary passes by which the
Christians were wont to make their inroads, insomuch that the
Moors, in their figurative way, denominated it the shield of Granada.

The count de Cabra sent word to the monarchs of the feeble state
of the garrison, and gave it as his opinion that by a secret and rapid
expedition the place might be surprised.  King Ferdinand asked the
advice of his councillors.  Some cautioned him against the sanguine
temperament of the count and his heedlessness of danger: Moclin,
they observed, was near to Granada and might be promptly reinforced.
The opinion of the count, however, prevailed, the king considering him
almost infallible in matters of border warfare since his capture of
Boabdil el Chico.

The king departed, therefore, from Cordova, and took post at Alcala
la Real, for the purpose of being near to Moclin.  The queen also
proceeded to Vaena, accompanied by her children, Prince Juan and
the princess Isabella, and her great counsellor in all matters, public
and private, spiritual and temporal, the venerable grand cardinal
of Spain.

Nothing could exceed the pride and satisfaction of the loyal count
de Cabra when he saw the stately train winding along the dreary
mountain-roads and entering the gates of Vaena.  He received his
royal guests with all due ceremony, and lodged them in the best
apartments that the warrior castle afforded.

King Ferdinand had concerted a wary plan to ensure the success
of the enterprise.  The count de Cabra and Don Martin Alonso de
Montemayor were to set forth with their troops so as to reach Moclin
by a certain hour, and to intercept all who should attempt to enter
or should sally from the town.  The master of Calatrava, the troops
of the grand cardinal, commanded by the count of Buendia, and
the forces of the bishop of Jaen, led by that belligerent prelate,
amounting in all to four thousand horse and six thousand foot,
were to set off in time to co-operate with the count de Cabra, so
as to surround the town.  The king was to follow with his whole
force and encamp before the place.

And here the worthy padre Fray Antonio Agapida breaks forth into a
triumphant eulogy of the pious prelates who thus mingled personally
in these scenes of warfare.  As this was a holy crusade (says he),
undertaken for the advancement of the faith and the glory of the
Church, so was it always countenanced and upheld by saintly men;
for the victories of their most Catholic majesties were not followed,
like those of mere worldly sovereigns, by erecting castles and
towers and appointing alcaydes and garrisons, but by the founding
of convents and cathedrals and the establishment of wealthy
bishoprics.  Wherefore their majesties were always surrounded in
court or camp, in the cabinet or in the field, by a crowd of ghostly
advisers inspiriting them to the prosecution of this most righteous
war.  Nay, the holy men of the Church did not scruple, at times, to
buckle on the cuirass over the cassock, to exchange the crosier for
the lance, and thus with corporal hands and temporal weapons to
fight the good fight of the faith.

But to return from this rhapsody of the worthy friar.  The count de
Cabra, being instructed in the complicated arrangements of the king,
marched forth at midnight to execute them punctually.  He led his
troops by the little river that winds below Vaena, and so up to the
wild defiles of the mountains, marching all night, and stopping only
in the heat of the following day to repose under the shadowy cliffs
of a deep barranca, calculating to arrive at Moclin exactly in time
to co-operate with the other forces.

The troops had scarcely stretched themselves on the earth to take
repose, when a scout arrived bringing word that El Zagal had
suddenly sallied out of Granada with a strong force, and had
encamped in the vicinity of Moclin.  It was plain that the wary Moor
had received information of the intended attack.  This, however,
was not the idea that presented itself to the mind of the count de
Cabra.  He had captured one king; here was a fair opportunity to
secure another.  What a prisoner to deliver into the hands of his
royal mistress!  Fired with the thoughts, the good count forgot all
the arrangements of the king; or rather, blinded by former success,
he trusted everything to courage and fortune, and thought that by
one bold swoop he might again bear off the royal prize and wear
his laurels without competition.*  His only fear was that the master
of Calatrava and the belligerent bishop might come up in time to
share the glory of the victory; so, ordering every one to horse, this
hot-spirited cavalier pushed on for Moclin without allowing his
troops the necessary time for repose.

*Mariana, lib. 25, c. 17; Abarca, Zurita, etc.


The evening closed as the count arrived in the neighborhood of
Moclin.  It was the full of the moon and a bright and cloudless
night.  The count was marching through one of those deep valleys or
ravines worn in the Spanish mountains by the brief but tremendous
torrents which prevail during the autumnal rains.  It was walled on
each side by lofty and almost perpendicular cliffs, but great masses
of moonlight were thrown into the bottom of the glen, glittering on
the armor of the shining squadrons as they silently passed through
it.  Suddenly the war-cry of the Moors rose in various parts of the
valley.  "El Zagal! El Zagal!" was shouted from every cliff,
accompanied by showers of missiles that struck down several of the
Christian warriors.  The count lifted up his eyes, and beheld, by the
light of the moon, every cliff glistening with Moorish soldiery.  The
deadly shower fell thickly round him, and the shining armor of his
followers made them fair objects for the aim of the enemy.  The count
saw his brother Gonzalo struck dead by his side; his own horse sank
under him, pierced by four Moorish lances, and he received a wound
in the hand from an arquebuse.  He remembered the horrible massacre
of the mountains of Malaga, and feared a similar catastrophe.  There
was no time to pause.  His brother's horse, freed from his slaughtered
rider, was running at large: seizing the reins, he sprang into the
saddle, called upon his men to follow him, and, wheeling round,
retreated out of the fatal valley.

The Moors, rushing down from the heights, pursued the retreating
Christians. The chase endured for a league, but it was a league of
rough and broken road, where the Christians had to turn and fight at
almost every step.  In these short but fierce combats the enemy lost
many cavaliers of note, but the loss of the Christians was infinitely
more grievous, comprising numbers of the noblest warriors of Vaena
and its vicinity.  Many of the Christians, disabled by wounds or
exhausted by fatigue, turned aside and endeavored to conceal
themselves among rocks and thickets, but never more rejoined
their companions, being slain or captured by the Moors or perishing
in their wretched retreats.

The arrival of the troops led by the master of Calatrava and the
bishop of Jaen put an end to the rout.  El Zagal contented himself
with the laurels he had gained, and, ordering the trumpets to call
off his men from the pursuit, returned in great triumph to Moclin.*

*Zurita, lib. 20, c. 4; Pulgar, Cronica.


Queen Isabella was at Vaena, awaiting with great anxiety the result
of the expedition.  She was in a stately apartment of the castle
looking toward the road that winds through the mountains from
Moclin, and regarding the watch-towers on the neighboring heights
in hopes of favorable signals.  The prince and princess, her children,
were with her, and her venerable counsellor, the grand cardinal.  All
shared in the anxiety of the moment.  At length couriers were seen
riding toward the town.  They entered its gates, but before they
reached the castle the nature of their tidings was known to the
queen by the shrieks and wailings from the streets below.  The
messengers were soon followed by wounded fugitives hastening
home to be relieved or to die among their friends and families.  The
whole town resounded with lamentations, for it had lost the flower
of its youth and its bravest warriors.  Isabella was a woman of
courageous soul, but her feelings were overpowered by spectacles
of woe on every side: her maternal heart mourned over the death
of so many loyal subjects, who shortly before had rallied round her
with devoted affection, and, losing her usual self-command, she sank
into deep despondency.

In this gloomy state of mind a thousand apprehensions crowded upon
her.  She dreaded the confidence which this success would impart
to the Moors; she feared also for the important fortress of Alhama,
the garrison of which had not been reinforced since its foraging
party had been cut off by this same El Zagal.  On every side she saw
danger and disaster, and feared that a general reverse was about
to attend the Castilian arms.

The grand cardinal comforted her with both spiritual and worldly
counsel.  He told her to recollect that no country was ever conquered
without occasional reverses to the conquerors; that the Moors were
a warlike people, fortified in a rough and mountainous country, where
they never could be conquered by her ancestors; and that, in fact,
her armies had already, in three years, taken more cities than those
of any of her predecessors had been able to do in twelve.  He
concluded by offering to take the field himself with three thousand
cavalry, his own retainers, paid and maintained by himself, and
either hasten to the relief of Alhama or undertake any other
expedition Her Majesty might command.  The discreet words of the
cardinal soothed the spirit of the queen, who always looked to him
for consolation, and she soon recovered her usual equanimity.

Some of the counsellors of Isabella, of that politic class who seek
to rise by the faults of others, were loud in their censures of the
rashness of the count.  The queen defended him with prompt
generosity.  "The enterprise," said she, "was rash, but not more
rash than that of Lucena, which was crowned with success, and
which we have all applauded as the height of heroism.  Had the
count de Cabra succeeded in capturing the uncle, as he did the
nephew, who is there that would not have praised him to the
skies?"

The magnanimous words of the queen put a stop to all invidious
remarks in her presence, but certain of the courtiers, who had
envied the count the glory gained by his former achievements,
continued to magnify, among themselves his present imprudence;
and we are told by Fray Antonio Agapida that they sneeringly
gave the worthy cavalier the appellation of count de Cabra the
king-catcher.

Ferdinand had reached the place on the frontier called the Fountain
of the King, within three leagues of Moclin, when he heard of the
late disaster.  He greatly lamented the precipitation of the count,
but forbore to express himself with severity, for he knew the value
of that loyal and valiant cavalier.*  He held a council of war to
determine what course was to be pursued.  Some of his cavaliers
advised him to abandon the attempt upon Moclin, the place being
strongly reinforced and the enemy inspirited by his recent victory.
Certain old Spanish hidalgos reminded him that he had but few
Castilian troops in his army, without which stanch soldiery his
predecessors never presumed to enter the Moorish territory, while
others remonstrated that it would be beneath the dignity of the king
to retire from an enterprise on account of the defeat of a single
cavalier and his retainers.  In this way the king was distracted by a
multitude of counsellors, when, fortunately, a letter from the queen
put an end to his perplexities.  Proceed we in the next chapter to
relate what was the purport of that letter.

*Abarca, Anales de Aragon.



CHAPTER XXXIII.

EXPEDITION AGAINST THE CASTLES OF CAMBIL AND ALBAHAR.


"Happy are those princes," exclaims the worthy padre Fray Antonio
Agapida, "who have women and priests to advise them, for in these

dwelleth the spirit of counsel."  While Ferdinand and his captains
were confounding each other in their deliberations at the Fountain
of the King, a quiet but deep little council of war was held in the
state apartment of the old castle of Vaena between Queen Isabella,
the venerable Pedro Gonzalez de Mendoza, grand cardinal of Spain,
and Don Garcia Osoria, the belligerent bishop of Jaen.  This last
worthy prelate, who had exchanged his mitre for a helm, no sooner
beheld the defeat of the enterprise against Moclin than he turned
the reins of his sleek, stall-fed steed and hastened back to Vaena,
full of a project for the employment of the army, the advancement
of the faith, and the benefit of his own diocese.  He knew that the
actions of the king were influenced by the opinions of the queen,
and that the queen always inclined a listening ear to the counsels
of saintly men: he laid his plans, therefore, with the customary
wisdom of his cloth, to turn the ideas of the queen into the proper
channel; and this was the purport of the worthy bishop's suggestions:

The bishopric of Jaen had for a long time been harassed by two
Moorish castles, the scourge and terror of all that part of the
country.  They were situated on the frontiers of the kingdom of
Granada, about four leagues from Jaen, in a deep, narrow, and
rugged valley surrounded by lofty mountains.  Through this valley
runs the Rio Frio (or Cold River) in a deep channel worn between
high, precipitous banks.  On each side of the stream rise two vast
rocks, nearly perpendicular, within a stone's throw of each other,
blocking up the gorge of the valley.  On the summits of these rocks
stood the two formidable castles, Cambil and Albahar, fortified with
battlements and towers of great height and thickness.  They were
connected together by a bridge thrown from rock to rock across the
river.  The road which passed through the valley traversed this
bridge, and was completely commanded by these castles.  They
stood like two giants of romance guarding the pass and dominating
the valley.

The kings of Granada, knowing the importance of these castles,
kept them always well garrisoned and victualled to stand a siege,
with fleet steeds and hard riders to forage the country of the
Christians.  The warlike race of the Abencerrages, the troops of the
royal household, and others of the choicest chivalry of Granada made
them their strongholds or posts of arms, whence to sally forth on
those predatory and roving enterprises in which they delighted.  As
the wealthy bishopric of Jaen lay immediately at hand, it suffered
more peculiarly from these marauders.  They drove off the fat beeves
and the flocks of sheep from the pastures and swept the laborers
from the field; they scoured the country to the very gates of Jaen,
so that the citizens could not venture from their walls without the
risk of being borne off captive to the dungeons of these castles.

The worthy bishop, like a good pastor, beheld with grief of heart
his fat bishopric daily waxing leaner and leaner and poorer and
poorer, and his holy ire was kindled at the thoughts that the
possessions of the Church should thus be at the mercy of a crew
of infidels.  It was the urgent counsel of the bishop, therefore,
that the military force thus providentially assembled in the
neighborhood, since it was apparently foiled in its attempt upon
Moclin, should be turned against these insolent castles and the
country delivered from their domination.  The grand cardinal
supported the suggestion of the bishop, and declared that he
had long meditated the policy of a measure of the kind.  Their
united opinions found favor with the queen, and she despatched
a letter on the subject to the king.  It came just in time to relieve
him from the distraction of a multitude of counsellors, and he
immediately undertook the reduction of those castles.

The marques of Cadiz was accordingly sent in advance, with two
thousand horse, to keep a watch upon the garrisons and prevent
all entrance or exit until the king should arrive with the main army
and the battering artillery.  The queen, to be near at hand in case
of need, moved her quarters to the city of Jaen, where she was
received with martial honors by the belligerent bishop, who had
buckled on his cuirass and girded on his sword to fight in the cause
of his diocese.

In the mean time, the marques of Cadiz arrived in the valley and
completely shut up the Moors within their walls.  The castles were
under the command of Mahomet Lentin Ben Usef, an Abencerrage,
and one of the bravest cavaliers of Granada.  In his garrisons were
many troops of the fierce African tribe of Gomeres.  Mahomet Lentin,
confident in the strength of his fortresses, smiled as he looked
down from his battlements upon the Christian cavalry perplexed in
the rough and narrow valley.  He sent forth skirmishing parties to
harass them, and there were many sharp combats between small
parties and single knights; but the Moors were driven back to their
castles, and all attempts to send intelligence of their situation to
Granada were frustrated by the vigilance of the marques of Cadiz.

At length the legions of the royal army came pouring, with vaunting
trumpet and fluttering banner, along the defiles of the mountains.
They halted before the castles, but the king could not find room in
the narrow and rugged valley to form his camp; he had to divide it
into three parts, which were posted on different heights, and his
tents whitened the sides of the neighboring hills.  When the
encampment was formed the army remained gazing idly at the
castles.  The artillery was upward of four leagues in the rear, and
without artillery all attack would be in vain.

The alcayde Mahomet Lentin knew the nature of the road by which
the artillery had to be brought.  It was merely a narrow and rugged
path, at times scaling almost perpendicular crags and precipices, up
which it was utterly impossible for wheel carriages to pass, neither
was it in the power of man or beast to draw up the lombards and
other ponderous ordnance.  He felt assured, therefore, that they
never could be brought to the camp, and without their aid what
could the Christians effect against his rock-built castles?  He scoffed
at them, therefore, as he saw their tents by day and their fires by
night covering the surrounding heights.  "Let them linger here a
little while longer," said he, "and the autumnal torrents will wash
them from the mountains."

While the alcayde was thus closely mewed up within his walls and
the Christians remained inactive in their camp, he noticed, one calm
autumnal day, the sound of implements of labor echoing among the
mountains, and now and then the crash of a falling tree or a
thundering report, as if some rock had been heaved from its bed
and hurled into the valley.  The alcayde was on the battlements of
his castle, surrounded by his knights.  "Methinks," said he, "these
Christians are making war upon the rocks and trees of the mountains,
since they find our castle unassailable."

The sounds did not cease even during the night: every now and then
the Moorish sentinel as he paced the battlements heard some crash
echoing among the heights.  The return of day explained the mystery.
Scarcely did the sun shine against the summits of the mountains than
shouts burst from the cliffs opposite to the castle, and were answered
from the camp with joyful sounds of kettledrums and trumpets.

The astonished Moors lifted up their eyes and beheld, as it were,
a torrent of war breaking out of a narrow defile.  There was a
multitude of men with pickaxes, spades, and bars of iron clearing
away every obstacle, while behind them slowly moved along great
teams of oxen dragging heavy ordnance and all the munitions of
battering artillery.

"What cannot women and priests effect when they unite in council?"
exclaims again the worthy Antonio Agapida.  The queen had held
another consultation with the grand cardinal and the belligerent
bishop of Jaen.  It was clear that the heavy ordnance could never be
conveyed to the camp by the regular road of the country, and without
battering artillery nothing could be effected.  It was suggested,
however, by the zealous bishop that another road might be opened
through a more practicable part of the mountains.  It would be an
undertaking extravagant and chimerical with ordinary means, and
therefore unlooked for by the enemy; but what could not kings effect
who had treasure and armies at command?

The project struck the enterprising spirit of the queen.  Six
thousand men with pickaxes, crowbars, and every other necessary
implement were set to work day and night to break a road through
the very centre of the mountains.  No time was to be lost, for it was
rumored that El Zagal was about to march with a mighty host to the
relief of the castles.  The bustling bishop of Jaen acted as pioneer
to mark the route and superintend the laborers, and the grand
cardinal took care that the work should never languish through
lack of means.*

*Zurita, Anales de Aragon, lib. 20, c. 64; Pulgar, part 3, cap. 51.


"When kings' treasures," says Fray Antonio Agapida, "are dispensed
by priestly hands, there is no stint, as the glorious annals of Spain
bear witness."  Under the guidance of these ghostly men it seemed
as if miracles were effected.  Almost an entire mountain was levelled,
valleys were filled up, trees hewn down, rocks broken and overturned;
in short, all the obstacles which nature had heaped around entirely
and promptly vanished.  In little more than twelve days this gigantic
work was effected and the ordnance dragged to the camp, to the
great triumph of the Christians and confusion of the Moors.*

*Zurita


No sooner was the heavy artillery arrived than it was mounted in
all haste upon the neighboring heights: Francisco Ramirez de Madrid,
the first engineer in Spain, superintended the batteries, and soon
opened a destructive fire upon the castles.

When the alcayde, Mahomet Lentin, found his towers tumbling about
him and his bravest men dashed from the walls without the power of
inflicting a wound upon the foe, his haughty spirit was greatly
exasperated.  "Of what avail," said he, bitterly, "is all the prowess
of knighthood against these cowardly engines that murder from afar?"

For a whole day a tremendous fire kept thundering upon the castle
of Albahar.  The lombards discharged large stones which demolished
two of the towers and all the battlements which guarded the portal.
If any Moors attempted to defend the walls or repair the breaches,
they were shot down by ribadoquines and other small pieces of
artillery.  The Christian soldiery issued from the camp under cover
of this fire, and, approaching the castles, discharged flights of
arrows and stones through the openings made by the ordnance.

At length, to bring the siege to a conclusion, Francisco Ramirez
elevated some of the heaviest artillery on a mount that rose in
form of a cone or pyramid on the side of the river near to Albahar
and commanded both castles.  This was an operation of great
skill and excessive labor, but it was repaid by complete success,
for the Moors did not dare to wait until this terrible battery should
discharge its fury.  Satisfied that all further resistance was in
vain, the valiant alcayde made signal for a parley.  The articles of
capitulation were soon arranged.  The alcayde and his garrisons
were permitted to return in safety to the city of Granada, and the
castles were delivered into the possession of King Ferdinand on the
day of the festival of St. Matthew in the month of September.  They
were immediately repaired, strongly garrisoned, and delivered in
charge to the city of Jaen.

The effects of this triumph were immediately apparent.  Quiet and
security once more settled upon the bishopric.  The husbandmen tilled
their fields in peace, the herds and flocks fattened unmolested in
the pastures, and the vineyards yielded corpulent skinsful of rosy
wine.  The good bishop enjoyed in the gratitude of his people the
approbation of his conscience, the increase of his revenues, and the
abundance of his table a reward for all his toils and perils.  "This
glorious victory," exclaims Fray Antonio Agapida, "achieved by such
extraordinary management and infinite labor, is a shining example of
what a bishop can effect for the promotion of the faith and the good
of his diocese."



CHAPTER XXXIV.

ENTERPRISE OF THE KNIGHTS OF CALATRAVA AGAINST ZALEA.


While these events were taking place on the northern frontier of the
kingdom of Granada the important fortress of Alhama was neglected,
and its commander, Don Gutiere de Padilla, clavero of Calatrava,
reduced to great perplexity.  The remnant of the foraging party which
had been surprised and massacred by El Zagal when on his way to
Granada to receive the crown had returned in confusion and dismay
to the fortress.  They could only speak of their own disgrace, being
obliged to abandon their cavalgada and fly, pursued by a superior
force: of the flower of their party, the gallant knights of Calatrava,
who had remained behind in the valley, they knew nothing.  A few
days cleared up the mystery of their fate: tidings were brought that
their bloody heads had been borne in triumph into Granada.  The
surviving knights of Calatrava, who formed a part of the garrison,
burned to revenge the death of their comrades and to wipe out the
stigma of this defeat; but the clavero had been rendered cautious by
disaster--he resisted all their entreaties for a foray.  His garrison was
weakened by the loss of so many of its bravest men; the Vega was
patrolled by numerous and powerful squadrons sent forth by El Zagal;
above all, the movements of the garrison were watched by the warriors
of Zalea, a strong town only two leagues distant on the road toward
Loxa.  This place was a continual check upon Alhama when in its most
powerful state, placing ambuscades to entrap the Christian cavaliers
in the course of their sallies.  Frequent and bloody skirmishes had
taken place in consequence; and the troops of Alhama, when returning
from their forays, had often to fight their way back through the
squadrons of Zalea.  Thus surrounded by dangers, Don Gutiere de
Padilla restrained the eagerness of his troops for a sally, knowing
that an additional disaster might be followed by the loss of Alhama.

In the mean while provisions began to grow scarce; they were
unable to forage the country as usual for supplies, and depended
for relief upon the Castilian sovereigns.  The defeat of the count de
Cabra filled the measure of their perplexities, as it interrupted the
intended reinforcements and supplies.  To such extremity were
they reduced that they were compelled to kill some of their horses
for provisions.

The worthy clavero, Don Gutiere de Padilla, was pondering one day
on this gloomy state of affairs when a Moor was brought before him
who had surrendered himself at the gate of Alhama and claimed an
audience.  Don Gutiere was accustomed to visits of the kind from
renegado Moors, who roamed the country as spies and adalides, but
the countenance of this man was quite unknown to him.  He had a
box strapped to his shoulders containing divers articles of traffic,
and appeared to be one of those itinerant traders who often resorted
to Alhama and the other garrison towns under pretext of vending trivial
merchandise, such as amulets, perfumes, and trinkets, but who often
produced rich shawls, golden chains and necklaces, and valuable gems
and jewels.

The Moor requested a private conference with the clavero.  "I have
a precious jewel," said he, "to dispose of."

"I want no jewels," replied Don Gutiere.

"For the sake of Him who died on the cross, the great prophet of
your faith," said the Moor solemnly, "refuse not my request; the
jewel I speak of you alone can purchase, but I can only treat about
it in secret."

Don Gutiere perceived there was something hidden under these
mystic and figurative terms, in which the Moors were often
accustomed to talk.  He motioned to his attendants to retire.  When
they were alone the Moor looked cautiously around the apartment,
and then, approaching close to the knight, demanded in a low
voice, "What will you give me if I deliver the fortress of Zalea into
your hands?"

Don Gutiere looked with surprise at the humble individual that made
such a suggestion.

"What means have you," said he, "of effecting such a proposition?"

"I have a brother in the garrison of Zalea," replied the Moor,
"who for a proper compensation would admit a body of troops
into the citadel."

Don Gutiere turned a scrutinizing eye upon the Moor.  "What right
have I to believe," said he, "that thou wilt be truer to me than to
those of thy blood and thy religion?"

"I renounce all ties to them, either of blood or religion," replied
the Moor; "my mother was a Christian captive; her country shall
henceforth be my country, and her faith my faith."*

*Cura de los Palacios.


The doubts of Don Gutiere were not dispelled by this profession
of mongrel Christianity.  "Granting the sincerity of thy conversion,"
said he, "art thou under no obligations of gratitude or duty to the
alcayde of the fortress thou wouldst betray?"

The eyes of the Moor flashed fire at the words; he gnashed his
teeth with fury.  "The alcayde," cried he, "is a dog!  He has deprived
my brother of his just share of booty; he has robbed me of my
merchandise, treated me worse than a Jew when I murmured at his
injustice, and ordered me to be thrust forth ignominiously from his
walls.  May the curse of God fall upon my head if I rest content until
I have full revenge!"  "Enough," said Don Gutiere: "I trust more to
thy revenge than thy religion."

The good clavero called a council of his officers.  The knights of
Calatrava were unanimous for the enterprise--zealous to appease
the manes of their slaughtered comrades.  Don Gutiere reminded
them of the state of the garrison, enfeebled by their late loss
and scarcely sufficient for the defence of the walls.  The cavaliers
replied that there was no achievement without risk, and that there
would have been no great actions recorded in history had there not
been daring spirits ready to peril life to gain renown.

Don Gutiere yielded to the wishes of his knights, for to have
resisted any further might have drawn on him the imputation of
timidity: he ascertained by trusty spies that everything in Zalea
remained in the usual state, and he made all the requisite
arrangements for the attack.

When the appointed night arrived all the cavaliers were anxious to
engage in the enterprise, but the individuals were decided by lot.
They set out under the guidance of the Moor, and when they had
arrived in the vicinity of Zalea they bound his hands behind his
back, and their leader pledged his knightly word to strike him dead
on the first sign of treachery.  He then bade him to lead the way.

It was near midnight when they reached the walls of the fortress.
They passed silently along until they found themselves below the
citadel.  Here their guide made a low and preconcerted signal: it was
answered from above, and a cord let down from the wall.  The knights
attached to it a ladder, which was drawn up and fastened.  Gutiere
Munoz was the first that mounted, followed by Pedro de Alvarado,
both brave and hardy so