ldiers.  A handful succeeded: they were
attacked by a party of guards, but held them at bay until more of
their comrades ascended; with their assistance they gained
possession of a tower and part of the wall.  The garrison by this
time was aroused, but before they could reach the scene of action
most of the cavaliers were within the battlements.  A bloody contest
raged for about an hour--several of the Christians were slain, but
many of the Moors: at length the citadel was carried and the town
submitted without resistance.

Thus did the gallant knights of Calatrava gain the strong town of
Zalea with scarcely any loss, and atone for the inglorious defeat of
their companions by El Zagal.  They found the magazines of the place
well stored with provisions, and were enabled to carry a seasonable
supply to their own famishing garrison.

The tidings of this event reached the sovereigns just after the
surrender of Cambil and Albahar.  They were greatly rejoiced at
this additional success of their arms, and immediately sent strong
reinforcements and ample supplies for both Alhama and Zalea.
They then dismissed the army for the winter.  Ferdinand and Isabella
retired to Alcala de Henares, where the queen on the 16th of
December, 1485, gave birth to the princess Catharine, afterward
wife of Henry VIII. of England.  Thus prosperously terminated the
checkered campaign of this important year.



CHAPTER XXXV.

DEATH OF MULEY ABUL HASSAN.


Muley Abdallah el Zagal had been received with great acclamations
at Granada on his return from defeating the count de Cabra.  He had
endeavored to turn his victory to the greatest advantage with his
subjects, giving tilts and tournaments and other public festivities
in which the Moors delighted.  The loss of the castles of Cambil and
Albahar and of the fortress of Zalea, however, checked this sudden
tide of popularity, and some of the fickle populace began to doubt
whether they had not been rather precipitate in deposing his
brother, Muley Abul Hassan.

That superannuated monarch remained in his faithful town of
Almunecar, on the border of the Mediterranean, surrounded by
a few adherents, together with his wife Zoraya and his children,
and he had all his treasures safe in his possession.  The fiery
heart of the old king was almost burnt out, and all his powers of
doing either harm or good seemed at an end.

While in this passive and helpless state his brother, El Zagal,
manifested a sudden anxiety for his health.  He had him removed,
with all tenderness and care, to Salobrena, another fortress on the
Mediterranean coast, famous for its pure and salubrious air; and the
alcayde, who was a devoted adherent to El Zagal, was charged to
have especial care that nothing was wanting to the comfort and
solace of his brother.

Salobrena was a small town, situated on a lofty and rocky hill in
the midst of a beautiful and fertile vega shut up on three sides by
mountains and opening on the fourth to the Mediterranean.  It was
protected by strong walls and a powerful castle, and, being deemed
impregnable, was often used by the Moorish kings as a place of
deposit for their treasures.  They were accustomed also to assign
it as a residence for such of their sons and brothers as might
endanger the security of their reign.  Here the princes lived in
luxurious repose: they had delicious gardens, perfumed baths, a
harem of beauties at their command--nothing was denied them but
the liberty to depart: that alone was wanting to render this abode
an earthly paradise.

Such was the delightful place appointed by El Zagal for the
residence of his brother, but, notwithstanding its wonderful
salubrity, the old monarch had not been removed thither many days
before he expired.  There was nothing extraordinary in his death:
life with him had long been glimmering in the socket, and for some
time past he might rather have been numbered with the dead than
with the living.  The public, however, are fond of seeing things in a
sinister and mysterious point of view, and there were many dark
surmises as to the cause of this event.  El Zagal acted in a manner
to heighten these suspicions: he caused the treasures of his
deceased brother to be packed on mules and brought to Granada,
where he took possession of them, to the exclusion of the children
of Abul Hassan.  The sultana Zoraya and her two sons were lodged
in the Alhambra, in the Tower of Comares.  This was a residence in
a palace, but it had proved a royal prison to the sultana Ayxa la
Horra and her youthful son Boabdil.  There the unhappy Zoraya had
time to meditate upon the disappointment of all those ambitious
schemes for herself and children for which she had stained her
conscience with so many crimes.

The corpse of old Muley was also brought to Granada--not in state
becoming the remains of a once-powerful sovereign, but transported
on a mule, like the corpse of the poorest peasant.  It received no
honor or ceremonial from El Zagal, and appears to have been interred
obscurely to prevent any popular sensation; and it is recorded by an
ancient and faithful chronicler of the time that the body of the old
monarch was deposited by two Christian captives in his osario or
charnel-house.*  Such was the end of the turbulent Muley Abul
Hassan, who, after passing his life in constant contests for empire,
could scarce gain quiet admission into the corner of a sepulchre.

*Cura de los Palacios, c. 77.


No sooner were the populace well assured that old Muley Abul
Hassan was dead and beyond recovery than they all began to
extol his memory and deplore his loss.  They admitted that he
had been fierce and cruel, but then he had been brave; he had,
to be sure, pulled this war upon their heads, but he had likewise
been crushed by it.  In a word, he was dead, and his death atoned
or every fault; for a king recently dead is generally either a hero or
a saint.

In proportion as they ceased to hate old Muley they began to
hate his brother.  The circumstances of the old king's death, the
eagerness to appropriate his treasures, the scandalous neglect
of his corpse, and the imprisonment of his sultana and children,
--all filled the public mind with gloomy suspicions, and the epithet
of Fratricide was sometimes substituted for that of El Zagal in the
low murmurings of the people.

As the public must always have some object to like as well as to
hate, there began once more to be an inquiry after their fugitive
king, Boabdil el Chico.  That unfortunate monarch was still at
Cordova, existing on the cool courtesy and meagre friendship of
Ferdinand, which had waned exceedingly ever since Boabdil had
ceased to have any influence in his late dominions.  The reviving
interest expressed in his fate by the Moorish public, and certain
secret overtures made to him, once more aroused the sympathy
of Ferdinand: he advised Boabdil again to set up his standard
within the frontiers of Granada, and furnished him with money
and means for the purpose.  Boabdil advanced but a little way into
his late territories; he took up his post at Velez el Blanco, a strong
town on the confines of Murcia: there he established the shadow of
a court, and stood, as it were, with one foot over the border, and
ready to draw that back upon the least alarm.  His presence in the
kingdom, however, and his assumption of royal state gave life to his
faction in Granada.  The inhabitants of the Albaycin, the poorest but
most warlike part of the populace, were generally in his favor: the
more rich, courtly, and aristocratical inhabitants of the quarter of
the Alhambra rallied round what appeared to be the most stable
authority and supported the throne of El Zagal.  So it is in the
admirable order of sublunary affairs: everything seeks its kind;
the rich befriend the rich, the powerful stand by the powerful,
the poor enjoy the patronage of the poor, and thus a universal
harmony prevails.



CHAPTER XXXVI.

OF THE CHRISTIAN ARMY WHICH ASSEMBLED AT THE CITY
    OF CORDOVA.


Great and glorious was the style with which the Catholic sovereigns
opened another year's campaign of this eventful war.  It was like
commencing another act of a stately and heroic drama, where the
curtain rises to the inspiring sound of martial melody and the whole
stage glitters with the array of warriors and the pomp of arms.  The
ancient city of Cordova was the place appointed by the sovereigns
for the assemblage of the troops; and early in the spring of 1486
the fair valley of the Guadalquivir resounded with the shrill blast
of trumpet and the impatient neighing of the war-horse.  In this
splendid era of Spanish chivalry there was a rivalship among the
nobles who most should distinguish himself by the splendor of his
appearance and the number and equipments of his feudal followers.
Every day beheld some cavalier of note, the representative of some
proud and powerful house, entering the gates of Cordova with sound
of trumpet, and displaying his banner and device renowned in many
a contest.  He would appear in sumptuous array, surrounded by
pages and lackeys no less gorgeously attired, and followed by a
host of vassals and retainers, horse and foot, all admirably equipped
in burnished armor.

Such was the state of Don Inigo Lopez de Mendoza, duke of Infantado,
who may be cited as a picture of a warlike noble of those times.  He
brought with him five hundred men-at-arms of his household armed and
mounted "a la gineta" and "a la guisa."  The cavaliers who attended
him were magnificently armed and dressed.  The housings of fifty of
his horses were of rich cloth embroidered with gold, and others were
of brocade.  The sumpter mules had housings of the same, with halters
of silk, while the bridles, head-pieces, and all the harnessing glittered
with silver.

The camp equipage of these noble and luxurious warriors was equally
magnificent.  Their tents were gay pavilions of various colors, fitted
up with silken hangings and decorated with fluttering pennons.  They
had vessels of gold and silver for the service of their tables, as if they
were about to engage in a course of stately feasts and courtly revels,
instead of the stern encounters of rugged and mountainous warfare.
Sometimes they passed through the streets of Cordova at night in
splendid cavalcade, with great numbers of lighted torches, the rays
of which, falling upon polished armor and nodding plumes and silken
scarfs and trappings of golden embroidery, filled all beholders with
admiration.*

*Pulgar, part 3, cap. 41, 56.


But it was not the chivalry of Spain alone which thronged the
streets of Cordova.  The fame of this war had spread throughout
Christendom: it was considered a kind of crusade, and Catholic
knights from all parts hastened to signalize themselves in so holy
a cause.  There were several valiant chevaliers from France, among
whom the most distinguished was Gaston du Leon, seneschal of
Toulouse.  With him came a gallant train, well armed and mounted
and decorated with rich surcoats and panaches of feathers.  These
cavaliers, it is said, eclipsed all others in the light festivities of the
court: they were devoted to the fair, but not after the solemn and
passionate manner of the Spanish lovers; they were gay, gallant,
and joyous in their amours, and captivated by the vivacity of their
attacks.  They were at first held in light estimation by the grave
and stately Spanish knights until they made themselves to be
respected by their wonderful prowess in the field. 

The most conspicuous of the volunteers, however, who appeared in
Cordova on this occasion was an English knight of royal connection.
This was the Lord Scales, earl of Rivers, brother to the queen of
England, wife of Henry VII.  He had distinguished himself in the
preceding year at the battle of Bosworth Field, where Henry Tudor,
then earl of Richmond, overcame Richard III.  That decisive battle
having left the country at peace, the earl of Rivers, having conceived
a passion for warlike scenes, repaired to the Castilian court to keep
his arms in exercise in a campaign against the Moors.  He brought
with him a hundred archers, all dextrous with the longbow and the
cloth-yard arrow; also two hundred yeomen, armed cap-a-pie,
who fought with pike and battle-axe--men robust of frame and
of prodigious strength.  The worthy padre Fray Antonio Agapida
describes this stranger knight and his followers with his accustomed
accuracy and minuteness.

"This cavalier," he observes, "was from the far island of England,
and brought with him a train of his vassals, men who had been
hardened in certain civil wars which raged in their country.  They
were a comely race of men, but too fair and fresh for warriors,
not having the sunburnt, warlike hue of our old Castilian soldiery.
They were huge feeders also and deep carousers, and could not
accommodate themselves to the sober diet of our troops, but must
fain eat and drink after the manner of their own country.  They were
often noisy and unruly also in their wassail, and their quarter of the
camp was prone to be a scene of loud revel and sudden brawl.
They were, withal, of great pride, yet it was not like our inflammable
Spanish pride: they stood not much upon the "pundonor," the high
punctilio, and rarely drew the stiletto in their disputes, but their
pride was silent and contumelious.  Though from a remote and
somewhat barbarous island, they believed themselves the most
perfect men upon earth, and magnified their chieftain, the Lord
Scales, beyond the greatest of their grandees.  With all this, it
must be said of them that they were marvellous good men in the
field, dextrous archers and powerful with the battle-axe.  In their
great pride and self-will they always sought to press in the advance
and take the post of danger, trying to outvie our Spanish chivalry.
They did not rush on fiercely to the fight, nor make a brilliant onset
like the Moorish and Spanish troops, but they went into the fight
deliberately and persisted obstinately and were slow to find out
when they were beaten.  Withal, they were much esteemed, yet
little liked, by our soldiery, who considered them stanch companions
in the field, yet coveted but little fellowship with them in the camp.

"Their commander, Lord Scales, was an accomplished cavalier, of
gracious and noble presence and fair speech: it was a marvel to see
so much courtesy in a knight brought up so far from our Castilian
court.  He was much honored by the king and queen, and found great
favor with the fair dames about the court, who, indeed, are rather
prone to be pleased with foreign cavaliers.  He went always in costly
state, attended by pages and esquires, and accompanied by noble
young cavaliers of his country, who had enrolled themselves under
his banner to learn the gentle exercise of arms.  In all pageants and
festivals the eyes of the populace were attracted by the singular
bearing and rich array of the English earl and his train, who prided
themselves in always appearing in the garb and manner of their
country, and were, indeed, something very magnificent, delectable,
and strange to behold."

The worthy chronicler is no less elaborate in his description of the
masters of Santiago, Calatrava, and Alcantara and their valiant
knights, armed at all points and decorated with the badges of their
orders.  These, he affirms, were the flower of Christian chivalry:
being constantly in service, they became more steadfast and
accomplished in discipline than the irregular and temporary levies
of the feudal nobles.  Calm, solemn, and stately, they sat like
towers upon their powerful chargers.  On parades they manifested
none of the show and ostentation of the other troops; neither in
battle did they endeavor to signalize themselves by any fiery
vivacity or desperate and vainglorious exploit: everything with
them was measured and sedate, yet it was observed that none
were more warlike in their appearance in the camp or more terrible
for their achievements in the field.

The gorgeous magnificence of the Spanish nobles found but little
favor in the eyes of the sovereigns.  They saw that it caused a
competition in expense ruinous to cavaliers of moderate fortune,
and they feared that a softness and effeminacy might thus be
introduced incompatible with the stern nature of the war.  They
signified their disapprobation to several of the principal noblemen,
and recommended a more sober and soldier-like display while in
actual service.

"These are rare troops for a tourney, my lord," said Ferdinand to
the duke of Infantado as he beheld his retainers glittering in gold
and embroidery, "but gold, though gorgeous, is soft and yielding:
iron is the metal for the field."

"Sire," replied the duke, "if my men parade in gold, Your Majesty
will find they fight with steel."  The king smiled, but shook his
head, and the duke treasured up his speech in his heart.

It remains now to reveal the immediate object of this mighty and
chivalrous preparation, which had, in fact, the gratification of a
royal pique at bottom.  The severe lesson which Ferdinand had
received from the veteran Ali Atar before the walls of Loxa, though
it had been of great service in rendering him wary in his attacks
upon fortified places, yet rankled sorely in his mind, and he had
ever since held Loxa in peculiar odium.  It was, in truth, one of
the most belligerent and troublesome cities on the borders,
incessantly harassing Andalusia by its incursions.  It also
intervened between the Christian territories and Alhama and
other important places gained in the kingdom of Granada.  For
all these reasons King Ferdinand had determined to make
another grand attempt upon this warrior city, and for this
purpose had summoned to the field his most powerful chivalry.

It was in the month of May that the king sallied from Cordova at the
head of his army.  He had twelve thousand cavalry and forty thousand
foot-soldiers armed with crossbows, lances, and arquebuses.  There
were six thousand pioneers with hatchets, pickaxes, and crowbars for
levelling roads.  He took with him also a great train of lombards and
other heavy artillery, with a body of Germans skilled in the service
of ordnance and the art of battering walls.

It was a glorious spectacle (says Fray Antonio Agapida) to behold
this pompous pageant issuing forth from Cordova, the pennons
and devices of the proudest houses of Spain, with those of gallant
stranger knights, fluttering above a sea of crests and plumes--to
see it slowly moving, with flash of helm and cuirass and buckler,
across the ancient bridge and reflected in the waters of the
Guadalquivir, while the neigh of steed and blast of trumpet vibrated
in the air and resounded to the distant mountains.  "But, above all,"
concludes the good father, with his accustomed zeal, "it was 
triumphant to behold the standard of the faith everywhere displayed,
and to reflect that this was no worldly-minded army, intent upon
some temporal scheme of ambition or revenge, but a Christian host
bound on a crusade to extirpate the vile seed of Mahomet from the
land and to extend the pure dominion of the Church."



CHAPTER XXXVII.

HOW FRESH COMMOTIONS BROKE OUT IN GRANADA, AND HOW THE
    PEOPLE UNDERTOOK TO ALLAY THEM.


While perfect unity of object and harmony of operation gave power
to the Christian arms, the devoted kingdom of Granada continued
a prey to internal feuds.  The transient popularity of El Zagal had
declined ever since the death of his brother, and the party of Boabdil
was daily gaining strength;  the Albaycin and the Alhambra were
again arrayed against each other in deadly strife, and the streets
of unhappy Granada were daily dyed in the blood of her children.  In
the midst of these dissensions tidings arrived of the formidable army
assembling at Cordova.  The rival factions paused in their infatuated
brawls, and were roused to a temporary sense of the common danger.
They forthwith resorted to their old expedient of new-modelling their
government, or rather of making and unmaking kings.  The elevation
of El Zagal to the throne had not produced the desired effect; what,
then, was to be done?  Recall Boabdil el Chico and acknowledge him
again as sovereign?  While they were in a popular tumult of
deliberation Hamet Aben Zarrax, surnamed El Santo, rose among
them.  This was the same wild, melancholy man who had predicted
the woes of Granada.  He issued from one of the caverns of the
adjacent height which overhangs the Darro, and has since been called
the Holy Mountain.  His appearance was more haggard than ever, for
the unheeded spirit of prophecy seemed to have turned inwardly and
preyed upon his vitals.  "Beware, O Moslems," exclaimed he, "of men
who are eager to govern, yet are unable to protect.  Why slaughter
each other for El Chico or El Zagal?  Let your kings renounce their
contests, unite for the salvation of Granada, or let them be deposed."

Hamet Aben Zarrax had long been revered as a saint--he was now
considered an oracle.  The old men and the nobles immediately
consulted together how the two rival kings might be brought to
accord.  They had tried most expedients: it was now determined to
divide the kingdom between them, giving Granada, Malaga, Velez
Malaga, Almeria, Almunecar, and their dependencies to El Zagal,
and the residue to Boabdil el Chico.  Among the cities granted to
the latter Loxa was particularly specified, with a condition that he
should immediately take command of it in person, for the council
thought the favor he enjoyed with the Castilian monarchs might
avert the threatened attack.

El Zagal readily agreed to this arrangement: he had been hastily
elevated to the throne by an ebullition of the people, and might be
as hastily cast down again.  It secured him one half of a kingdom to
which he had no hereditary right, and he trusted to force or fraud
to gain the other half hereafter.  The wily old monarch even sent a
deputation to his nephew, making a merit of offering him cheerfully
the half which he had thus been compelled to relinquish, and
inviting him to enter into an amicable coalition for the good of
the country.

The heart of Boabdil shrank from all connection with a man who
had sought his life, and whom he regarded as the murderer of his
kindred.  He accepted one half of the kingdom as an offer from the
nation, not to be rejected by a prince who scarcely held possession
of the ground he stood on.  He asserted, nevertheless, his absolute
right to the whole, and only submitted to the partition out of anxiety
for the present good of his people.  He assembled his handful of
adherents and prepared to hasten to Loxa.  As he mounted his horse
to depart, Hamet Aben Zarrax stood suddenly before him.  "Be true to
thy country and thy faith," cried he; "hold no further communication
with these Christian dogs.  Trust not the hollow-hearted friendship of
the Castilian king; he is mining the earth beneath thy feet.  Choose
one of two things: be a sovereign or a slave--thou canst not be both."

Boabdil ruminated on these words; he made many wise resolutions,
but he was prone always to act from the impulse of the moment, and
was unfortunately given to temporize in his policy.  He wrote to
Ferdinand, informing him that Loxa and certain other cities had
returned to their allegiance, and that he held them as vassal to
the Castilian Crown, according to their convention.  He conjured
him, therefore, to refrain from any meditated attack, offering free
passage to the Spanish army to Malaga or any other place under
the dominion of his uncle.*

*Zurita, lib. 20, c. 68.


Ferdinand turned a deaf ear to the entreaty and to all professions
of friendship and vassalage.  Boabdil was nothing to him but as an
instrument for stirring up the flames of civil war.  He now insisted
that he had entered into a hostile league with his uncle, and had
consequently forfeited all claims to his indulgence; and he prosecuted
with the greater earnestness his campaign against the city of Loxa.

"Thus," observes the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida, "thus did this
most sagacious sovereign act upon the text in the eleventh chapter
of the evangelist St. Luke, that 'a kingdom divided against itself
cannot stand.'  He had induced these infidels to waste and destroy
themselves by internal dissensions, and finally cast forth the
survivor, while the Moorish monarchs by their ruinous contests
made good the old Castilian proverb in cases of civil war, 'El vencido
vencido, y el vencidor perdido' (the conquered conquered, and the
conqueror undone)."*

*Garibay, lib. 40, c. 33.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

HOW KING FERDINAND HELD A COUNCIL OF WAR AT THE ROCK OF
    THE LOVERS.


The royal army on its march against Loxa lay encamped one pleasant
evening in May in a meadow on the banks of the river Yeguas, around
the foot of a lofty cliff called the Rock of the Lovers.  The quarters
of each nobleman formed as it were a separate little encampment,
his stately pavilion, surmounted by his fluttering pennon, rising
above the surrounding tents of his vassals and retainers.  A little
apart from the others, as it were in proud reserve, was the
encampment of the English earl.  It was sumptuous in its furniture
and complete in all its munitions.  Archers and soldiers armed with
battle-axes kept guard around it, while above the standard of
England rolled out its ample folds and flapped in the evening breeze.

The mingled sounds of various tongues and nations were heard from
the soldiery as they watered their horses in the stream or busied
themselves round the fires which began to glow here and there in the
twilight--the gay chanson of the Frenchman, singing of his amours on
the pleasant banks of the Loire or the sunny regions of the Garonne;
the broad guttural tones of the German, chanting some doughty
"krieger lied" or extolling the vintage of the Rhine; the wild romance
of the Spaniard, reciting the achievements of the Cid and many a
famous passage of the Moorish wars; and the long and melancholy
ditty of the Englishman, treating of some feudal hero or redoubtable
outlaw of his distant island.

On a rising ground, commanding a view of the whole encampment,
stood the ample and magnificent pavilion of the king, with the banner
of Castile and Aragon and the holy standard of the cross erected
before it.  In this tent there assembled the principal commanders of
the army, having been summoned by Ferdinand to a council of war
on receiving tidings that Boabdil had thrown himself into Loxa with a
considerable reinforcement.  After some consultation it was determined
to invest Loxa on both sides: one part of the army should seize upon
the dangerous but commanding height of Santo Albohacen in front of
the city, while the remainder, making a circuit, should encamp on the
opposite side.

No sooner was this resolved upon than the marques of Cadiz stood
forth and claimed the post of danger in behalf of himself and those
cavaliers, his companions-in-arms, who had been compelled to
relinquish it by the general retreat of the army on the former
siege.  The enemy had exulted over them as if driven from it in
disgrace.  To regain that perilous height, to pitch their tents upon
it, and to avenge the blood of their valiant compeer, the master
of Calatrava, who had fallen upon it, was due to their fame: the
marques demanded, therefore, that they might lead the advance
and secure that height, engaging to hold the enemy employed
until the main army should take its position on the opposite side
of the city.

King Ferdinand readily granted his permission, upon which the count
de Cabra entreated to be admitted to a share of the enterprise.  He
had always been accustomed to serve in the advance, and now that
Boabdil was in the field and a king was to be taken, he could not
content himself with remaining in the rear.  Ferdinand yielded his
consent, for he was disposed to give the good count every opportunity
to retrieve his late disaster.

The English earl, when he heard there was an enterprise of danger in
question, was hot to be admitted to the party, but the king restrained
his ardor.  "These cavaliers," said he, "conceive that they have an
account to settle with their pride; let them have the enterprise to
themselves, my lord: if you follow these Moorish wars long, you will
find no lack of perilous service."

The marques of Cadiz and his companions-in-arms struck their tents
before daybreak; they were five thousand horse and twelve thousand
foot, and marched rapidly along the defiles of the mountains, the
cavaliers being anxious to strike the blow and get possession of the
height of Albohacen before the king with the main army should arrive
to their assistance.

The city of Loxa stands on a high hill between two mountains on the
banks of the Xenil.  To attain the height of Albohacen the troops had
to pass over a tract of rugged and broken country and a deep valley
intersected by those canals and watercourses with which the Moors
irrigated their lands: they were extremely embarrassed in this part
of their march, and in imminent risk of being cut up in detail before
they could reach the height.

The count de Cabra, with his usual eagerness, endeavored to
push across this valley in defiance of every obstacle: he, in
consequence, soon became entangled with his cavalry among the
canals, but his impatience would not permit him to retrace his steps
and choose a more practicable but circuitous route.  Others slowly
crossed another part of the valley by the aid of pontoons, while the
marques of Cadiz, Don Alonso de Aguilar, and the count de Urena,
being more experienced in the ground from their former campaign,
made a circuit round the bottom of the height, and, winding up it,
began to display their squadrons and elevate their banners on the
redoubtable post which in their former siege they had been compelled
so reluctantly to abandon.



CHAPTER XXXIX.

HOW THE ROYAL ARMY APPEARED BEFORE THE CITY OF LOXA, AND
    HOW IT WAS RECEIVED; AND OF THE DOUGHTY ACHIEVEMENTS
    OF THE ENGLISH EARL.


The advance of the Christian army upon Loxa threw the wavering
Boabdil el Chico into one of his usual dilemmas, and he was greatly
perplexed between his oath of allegiance to the Spanish sovereigns
and his sense of duty to his subjects.  His doubts were determined
by the sight of the enemy glittering upon the height of Albohacen
and by the clamors of the people to be led forth to battle.  "Allah,"
exclaimed he, "thou knowest my heart: thou knowest I have been
true in my faith to this Christian monarch.  I have offered to hold
Loxa as his vassal, but he has preferred to approach it as an enemy:
on his head be the infraction of our treaty!"

Boabdil was not wanting in courage; he only needed decision.
When he had once made up his mind he acted vigorously; the
misfortune was, he either did not make it up at all or he made
it up too late.  He who decides tardily generally acts rashly,
endeavoring to make up by hurry of action for slowness of
deliberation.  Boabdil hastily buckled on his armor and sallied
forth surrounded by his guards, and at the head of five hundred
horse and four thousand foot, the flower of his army.  Some he
detached to skirmish with the Christians, who were scattered
and perplexed in the valley, and to prevent their concentrating
their forces, while with his main body he pressed forward to drive
the enemy from the height of Albohacen before they had time to
collect there in any number or to fortify themselves in that
important position.

The worthy count de Cabra was yet entangled with his cavalry among
the water-courses of the valley when he heard the war-cries of the
Moors and saw their army rushing over the bridge.  He recognized
Boabdil himself, by his splendid armor, the magnificent caparison of
his steed, and the brilliant guard which surrounded him.  The royal
host swept on toward the height of Albohacen: an intervening hill
hid it from his sight, but loud shouts and cries, the din of drums
and trumpets, and the reports of arquebuses gave note that the
battle had begun.

Here was a royal prize in the field, and the count de Cabra unable
to get into the action!  The good cavalier was in an agony of
impatience; every attempt to force his way across the valley only
plunged him into new difficulties.  At length, after many eager but
ineffectual efforts, he was obliged to order his troops to dismount,
and slowly and carefully to lead their horses back along slippery
paths and amid plashes of mire and water where often there was
scarce a foothold.  The good count groaned in spirit and sweat with
mere impatience as he went, fearing the battle might be fought and
the prize won or lost before he could reach the field.  Having at
length toilfully unravelled the mazes of the valley and arrived at
firmer ground, he ordered his troops to mount, and led them full
gallop to the height.  Part of the good count's wishes were satisfied,
but the dearest were disappointed: he came in season to partake
of the very hottest of the fight, but the royal prize was no longer
in the field.

Boabdil had led on his men with impetuous valor, or rather with
hurried rashness.  Heedlessly exposing himself in the front of the
battle, he received two wounds in the very first encounter.  His
guards rallied round him, defended him with matchless valor, and
bore him bleeding out of the action.  The count de Cabra arrived
just in time to see the loyal squadron crossing the bridge and
slowly conveying their disabled monarch toward the gate of
the city.

The departure of Boabdil made no difference in the fury of the
battle.  A Moorish warrior, dark and terrible in aspect, mounted on
a black charger, and followed by a band of savage Gomeres, rushed
forward to take the lead.  It was Hamet el Zegri, the fierce alcayde
of Ronda, with the remnant of his once-redoubtable garrison.
Animated by his example, the Moors renewed their assaults upon
the height.  It was bravely defended, on one side by the marques
of Cadiz, on another by Don Alonso de Aguilar, and as fast as the
Moors ascended they were driven back and dashed down the
declivities.  The count de Urena took his stand upon the fatal spot
where his brother had fallen; his followers entered with zeal into
the feelings of their commander, and heaps of the enemy sunk
beneath their weapons--sacrifices to the manes of the lamented
master of Calatrava.

The battle continued with incredible obstinacy.  The Moors knew
the importance of the height to the safety of the city; the cavaliers
felt their honors staked to maintain it.  Fresh supplies of troops
were poured out of the city: some battled on the height, while some
attacked the Christians who were still in the valley and among the
orchards and gardens to prevent their uniting their forces.  The
troops in the valley were gradually driven back, and the whole host
of the Moors swept around the height of Albohacen.  The situation of
the marques de Cadiz and his companions was perilous in the extreme:
they were a mere handful, and, while fighting hand to hand with the
Moors who assailed the height, were galled from a distance by the
crossbows and arquebuses of a host that augmented each moment
in number.  At this critical juncture King Ferdinand emerged from the
mountains with the main body of the army, and advanced to an
eminence commanding a full view of the field of action.  By his side
was the noble English cavalier, the earl of Rivers.  This was the
first time he had witnessed a scene of Moorish warfare.  He looked
with eager interest at the chance-medley fight before him, where
there was the wild career of cavalry, the irregular and tumultuous
rush of infantry, and where Christian and Moor were intermingled
in deadly struggle.  The high blood of the English knight mounted
at the sight, and his soul was stirred within him by the confused
war-cries, the clangor of drums and trumpets, and the reports of
arquebuses.  Seeing that the king was sending a reinforcement to
the field, he entreated permission to mingle in the affray and fight
according to the fashion of his country.  His request being granted,
he alighted from his steed: he was merely armed "en blanco"--that
is to say, with morion, back-piece, and breast-plate--his sword was
girded by his side, and in his hand he wielded a powerful battle-axe.
He was followed by a body of his yeomen armed in like manner, and
by a band of archers with bows made of the tough English yew tree.
The earl turned to his troops and addressed then briefly and bluntly,
according to the manner of his country.  "Remember, my merry men
all," said he, "the eyes of strangers are upon you; you are in a
foreign land, fighting for the glory of God and the honor of merry
old England!"  A loud shout was the reply.  The earl waved his battle-
axe over his head.  "St. George for England!" cried he, and to the
inspiring sound of this old English war-cry he and his followers
rushed down to the battle with manly and courageous hearts.*
They soon made their way into the midst of the enemy, but when
engaged in the hottest of the fight they made no shouts nor outcries.
They pressed steadily forward, dealing their blows to right and left,
hewing down the Moors and cutting their way with their battle-
axes like woodmen in a forest; while the archers, pressing into the
opening they made, plied their bows vigorously and spread death
on every side.

*Cura de los Palacios.


When the Castilian mountaineers beheld the valor of the English
yeomanry, they would not be outdone in hardihood.  They could
not vie with them in weight or bulk, but for vigor and activity they
were surpassed by none.  They kept pace with them, therefore,
with equal heart and rival prowess, and gave a brave support to
the stout Englishmen.

The Moors were confounded by the fury of these assaults and
disheartened by the loss of Hamet el Zegri, who was carried
wounded from the field.  They gradually fell back upon the bridge;
the Christians followed up their advantage, and drove them over
it tumultuously.  The Moors retreated into the suburb, and Lord
Rivers and his troops entered with them pell-mell, fighting in the
streets and in the houses.  King Ferdinand came up to the scene
of action with his royal guard, and the infidels were driven within
the city walls.  Thus were the suburbs gained by the hardihood of
the English lord, without such an event having been premeditated.*

*Cura de los Palacios, MS.


The earl of Rivers, notwithstanding he had received a wound, still
urged forward in the attack.  He penetrated almost to the city gate,
in defiance of a shower of missiles that slew many of his followers.
A stone hurled from the battlements checked his impetuous career:
it struck him in the face, dashed out two of his front teeth, and laid
him senseless on the earth.  He was removed to a short distance by
his men, but, recovering his senses, refused to permit himself to be
taken from the suburb.

When the contest was over the streets presented a piteous
spectacle, so many of their inhabitants had died in the defence
of their thresholds or been slaughtered without resistance.
Among the victims was a poor weaver who had been at work
in his dwelling at this turbulent moment.  His wife urged him to
fly into the city.  "Why should I fly?" said the Moor--"to be
reserved for hunger and slavery?  I tell you, wife, I will await
the foe here, for better is it to die quickly by the steel than to
perish piecemeal in chains and dungeons."  He said no more,
but resumed his occupation of weaving, and in the indiscriminate
fury of the assault was slaughtered at his loom.*

*Pulgar, part 3, c. 58.


The Christians remained masters of the field, and proceeded to pitch
three encampments for the prosecution of the siege.  The king, with
the great body of the army, took a position on the side of the city
next to Granada; the marques of Cadiz and his brave companions
once more pitched their tents upon the height of Santo Albohacen;
but the English earl planted his standard sturdily within the suburb
he had taken.



CHAPTER XL.

CONCLUSION OF THE SIEGE OF LOXA.


Having possession of the heights of Albohacen and the suburb of
the city, the Christians were enabled to choose the most favorable
situations for their batteries.  They immediately destroyed the stone
bridge by which the garrison had made its sallies, and they threw
two wooden bridges across the river and others over the canals and
streams, so as to establish an easy communication between the
different camps.

When all was arranged a heavy fire was opened upon the city from
various points.  They threw not only balls of stone and iron, but
great carcasses of fire, which burst like meteors on the houses,
wrapping them instantly in a blaze.  The walls were shattered and
the towers toppled down by tremendous discharges from the lombards.
Through the openings thus made they could behold the interior of the
city--houses tumbling or in flames, men, women, and children flying
in terror through the streets, and slaughtered by the shower of
missiles sent through the openings from smaller artillery and from
crossbows and arquebuses.

The Moors attempted to repair the breaches, but fresh discharges
from the lombards buried them beneath the ruins of the walls they
were mending.  In their despair many of the inhabitants rushed forth
into the narrow streets of the suburbs and assailed the Christians
with darts, scimetars, and poniards, seeking to destroy rather than
defend, and heedless of death in the confidence that to die fighting
with an unbeliever was to be translated at once to Paradise.

For two nights and a day this awful scene continued, when certain
of the principal inhabitants began to reflect upon the hopelessness
of the conflict: their king was disabled, their principal captains were
either killed or wounded, their fortifications little better than heaps
of ruins.  They had urged the unfortunate Boabdil to the conflict;
they now clamored for a capitulation.  A parley was procured from the
Christian monarch, and the terms of surrender were soon adjusted.
They were to yield up the city immediately, with all their Christian
captives, and to sally forth with as much of their property as they
could take with them.  The marques of Cadiz, on whose honor and
humanity they had great reliance, was to escort them to Granada
to protect them from assault or robbery: such as chose to remain in
Spain were to be permitted to reside in Castile, Aragon, or Valencia.
As to Boabdil el Chico, he was to do homage as vassal to King
Ferdinand, but no charge was to be urged against him of having
violated his former pledge.  If he should yield up all pretensions to
Granada, the title of duke of Guadix was to be assigned to him and
the territory thereto annexed, provided it should be recovered from
El Zagal within six months.

The capitulation being arranged, they gave as hostages the alcayde

of the city and the principal officers, together with the sons of their
late chieftain, the veteran Ali Atar.  The warriors of Loxa then issued
forth, humbled and dejected at having to surrender those walls which
they had so long maintained with valor and renown, and the women
and children filled the air with lamentations at being exiled from their
native homes.

Last came forth Boabdil, most truly called El Zogoybi, the Unlucky.
Accustomed, as he was, to be crowned and uncrowned, to be ransomed
and treated as a matter of bargain, he had acceded of course to the
capitulation.  He was enfeebled by his wounds and had an air of
dejection, yet, it is said, his conscience acquitted him of a breach of
faith toward the Castilian sovereigns, and the personal valor he had
displayed had caused a sympathy for him among many of the Christian
cavaliers.  He knelt to Ferdinand according to the forms of vassalage,
and then departed in melancholy mood for Priego, a town about three
leagues distant.

Ferdinand immediately ordered Loxa to be repaired and strongly
garrisoned.  He was greatly elated at the capture of this place, in
consequence of his former defeat before its walls.  He passed great
encomiums upon the commanders who had distinguished themselves,
and historians dwelt particularly upon his visit to the tent of the
English earl.  His Majesty consoled him for the loss of his teeth by
the consideration that he might otherwise have lost them by natural
decay, whereas the lack of them would now be esteemed a beauty
rather than a defect, serving as a trophy of the glorious cause in
which he had been engaged.

The earl replied that he gave thanks to God and to the Holy Virgin
for being thus honored by a visit from the most potent king in
Christendom; that he accepted with all gratitude his gracious
consolation for the loss of his teeth, though he held it little to
lose two teeth in the service of God, who had given him all--"A
speech," says Fray Antonio Agapida, "full of most courtly wit and
Christian piety; and one only marvels that it should have been
made by a native of an island so far distant from Castile."



CHAPTER XLI.

CAPTURE OF ILLORA.


King Ferdinand followed up his victory at Loxa by laying siege to
the strong town of Illora.  This redoubtable fortress was perched
upon a high rock in the midst of a spacious valley.  It was within
four leagues of the Moorish capital, and its lofty castle, keeping
vigilant watch over a wide circuit of country, was termed the right
eye of Granada.

The alcayde of Illora was one of the bravest of the Moorish
commanders, and made every preparation to defend his fortress
to the last extremity.  He sent the women and children, the aged
and infirm, to the metropolis.  He placed barricades in the suburbs,
opened doors of communication from house to house, and pierced
their walls with loopholes for the discharge of crossbows, arquebuses,
and other missiles.

King Ferdinand arrived before the place with all his forces; he
stationed himself upon the hill of Encinilla, and distributed the
other encampments in various situations so as to invest the
fortress.  Knowing the valiant character of the alcayde and the
desperate courage of the Moors, he ordered the encampments
to be fortified with trenches and palisadoes, the guards to be
doubled, and sentinels to be placed in all the watch-towers of
the adjacent heights.

When all was ready the duke del Infantado demanded the attack: it
was his first campaign, and he was anxious to disprove the royal
insinuation made against the hardihood of his embroidered chivalry.
King Ferdinand granted his demand, with a becoming compliment to
his spirit; he ordered the count de Cabra to make a simultaneous
attack upon a different quarter.  Both chiefs led forth their troops--
those of the duke in fresh and brilliant armor, richly ornamented,
and as yet uninjured by the service of the field; those of the count
were weatherbeaten veterans, whose armor was dented and
hacked in many a hard-fought battle.  The youthful duke blushed at
the contrast.  "Cavaliers," cried he, "we have been reproached with
the finery of our array: let us prove that a trenchant blade may
rest in a gilded sheath.  Forward! to the foe! and I trust in God
that as we enter this affray knights well accoutred, so we shall
leave it cavaliers well proved."  His men responded by eager
acclamations, and the duke led them forward to the assault.  He
advanced under a tremendous shower of stones, darts, balls, and
arrows, but nothing could check his career; he entered the suburb
sword in hand; his men fought furiously, though with great loss,
for every dwelling had been turned into a fortress.  After a severe
conflict they succeeded in driving the Moors into the town about the
same time that the other suburb was carried by the count de Cabra
and his veterans.  The troops of the duke del Infantado came out of
the contest thinned in number and covered with blood and dust and
wounds; they received the highest encomiums of the king, and there
was never afterward any sneer at their embroidery.

The suburbs being taken, three batteries, each furnished with eight
huge lombards, were opened upon the fortress.  The damage and
havoc were tremendous, for the fortifications had not been constructed
to withstand such engines.  The towers were overthrown, the walls
battered to pieces; the interior of the place was all exposed, houses
were demolished, and many people slain.  The Moors were terrified
by the tumbling ruins and the tremendous din.  The alcayde had
resolved to defend the place until the last extremity: he beheld it
a heap of rubbish; there was no prospect of aid from Granada;
his people had lost all spirit to fight and were vociferous for a
surrender; with a reluctant heart he capitulated.  The inhabitants
were permitted to depart with all their effects, excepting their arms,
and were escorted in safety by the duke del Infantado and the count
de Cabra to the bridge of Pinos, within two leagues of Granada.

King Ferdinand gave directions to repair the fortifications of Illora
and to place it in a strong state of defence.  He left as alcayde
of the town and fortress Gonsalvo de Cordova, younger brother
of Don Alonso de Aguilar.  This gallant cavalier was captain of the
royal guards of Ferdinand and Isabella, and gave already proofs
of that prowess which afterward rendered him so renowned.



CHAPTER XLII.

OF THE ARRIVAL OF QUEEN ISABELLA AT THE CAMP BEFORE MOCLIN,
    AND OF THE PLEASANT SAYINGS OF THE ENGLISH EARL.


The war of Granada, however poets may embroider it with the flowers
of their fancy, was certainly one of the sternest of those iron conflicts
which have been celebrated under the name of "holy wars."  The worthy
Fray Antonio Agapida dwells with unsated delight upon the succession
of rugged mountain-enterprises, bloody battles, and merciless sackings
and ravages which characterized it; yet we find him on one occasion
pausing in the full career of victory over the infidels to detail a stately
pageant of the Catholic sovereigns.

Immediately on the capture of Loxa, Ferdinand had written to Isabella,
soliciting her presence at the camp that he might consult with her as
to the disposition of their newly-acquired territories.

It was in the early part of June that the queen departed from Codova
with the princess Isabella and numerous ladies of her court.  She had
a glorious attendance of cavaliers and pages, with many guards and
domestics.  There were forty mules for the use of the queen, the
princess, and their train.

As this courtly cavalcade approached the Rock of the Lovers on the
banks of the river Yeguas, they beheld a splendid train of knights
advancing to meet them.   It was headed by that accomplished cavalier
the marques-duke de Cadiz, accompanied by the adelantado of
Andalusia.  He had left the camp the day after the capture of Illora,
and advanced thus far to receive the queen and escort her over
the borders.  The queen received the marques with distinguished
honor, for he was esteemed the mirror of chivalry.  His actions in
this war had become the theme of every tongue, and many hesitated
not to compare him in prowess with the immortal Cid.*

*Cura de los Palacios.


Thus gallantly attended, the queen entered the vanquished frontier
of Granada, journeying securely along the pleasant banks of the
Xenil, so lately subject to the scourings of the Moors.  She stopped
at Loxa, where she administered aid and consolation to the wounded,
distributing money among them for their support according to their rank.

The king after the capture of Illora had removed his camp before
the fortress of Moclin, with an intention of besieging it.  Thither
the queen proceeded, still escorted through the mountain-roads
by the marques of Cadiz.  As Isabella drew near to the camp the
duke del Infantado issued forth a league and a half to receive her,
magnificently arrayed and followed by all his chivalry in glorious
attire.  With him came the standard of Seville, borne by the men-
at-arms of that renowned city, and the prior of St. Juan with his
followers.  They ranged themselves in order of battle on the left
of the road by which the queen was to pass.

The worthy Agapida is loyally minute in his description of the state
and grandeur of the Catholic sovereigns.  The queen rode a chestnut
mule, seated in a magnificent saddle-chair decorated with silver
gilt.  The housings of the 