mule were of fine crimson cloth, the
borders embroidered with gold, the reins and head-piece were
of satin, curiously embossed with needlework of silk and wrought
with golden letters.  The queen wore a brial or regal skirt of velvet,
under which were others of brocade; a scarlet mantle, ornamented
in the Moresco fashion; and a black hat, embroidered round the crown
and brim.  The infanta was likewise mounted on a chestnut mule
richly caparisoned: she wore a brial or skirt of black brocade and a
black mantle ornamented like that of the queen.

When the royal cavalcade passed by the chivalry of the duke del
Infantado, which was drawn out in battle array, the queen made a
reverence to the standard of Seville and ordered it to pass to the
right hand.  When she approached the camp the multitude ran forth
to meet her with great demonstrations of joy, for she was universally
beloved by her subjects.  All the battalions sallied forth in military
array, bearing the various standards and banners of the camp, which
were lowered in salutation as she passed.

The king now came forth in royal state, mounted on a superb chestnut
horse and attended by many grandees of Castile.  He wore a jubon or
close vest of crimson cloth, with cuisses or short skirts of yellow satin,
a loose cassock of brocade, a rich Moorish scimetar, and a hat with
plumes.  The grandees who attended him were arrayed with wonderful
magnificence, each according to his taste and invention.

These high and mighty princes (says Antonio Agapida) regarded each
other with great deference as allied sovereigns, rather than with
connubial familiarity as mere husband and wife.  When they approached
each other, therefore, before embracing, they made three profound
reverences, the queen taking off her hat and remaining in a silk net
or caul, with her face uncovered.  The king then approached and
embraced her, and kissed her respectfully on the cheek.  He also
embraced his daughter the princess, and, making the sign of the
cross, he blessed her and kissed her on the lips.*

*Cura de los Palacios.


The good Agapida seems scarcely to have been more struck with
the appearance of the sovereigns than with that of the English earl.
He followed (says he) immediately after the king, with great pomp
and, in an extraordinary manner, taking precedence of all the rest.
He was mounted "a la guisa," or with long stirrups, on a superb
chestnut horse, with trappings of azure silk which reached to the
ground.  The housings were of mulberry powdered with stars of gold.
He was armed in proof, and wore over his armor a short French mantle
of black brocade; he had a white French hat with plumes, and carried
on his left arm a small round buckler banded with gold.  Five pages
attended him, apparelled in silk and brocade and mounted on horses
sumptuously caparisoned; he had also a train of followers bravely
attired after the fashion of his country.

He advanced in a chivalrous and courteous manner, making his
reverences first to the queen and infanta, and afterward to the
king.  Queen Isabella received him graciously, complimenting him
on his courageous conduct at Loxa, and condoling with him on the
loss of his teeth.  The earl, however, made light of his disfiguring
wound, saying that "our Blessed Lord, who had built all that house,
had opened a window there, that he might see more readily what
passed within;"* whereupon the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida is
more than ever astonished at the pregnant wit of this island cavalier.
The earl continued some little distance by the side of the royal
family, complimenting them all with courteous speeches, his horse
curveting and caracoling, but being managed with great grace and
dexterity, leaving the grandees and the people at large not more
filled with admiration at the strangeness and magnificence of his
state than at the excellence of his horsemanship.**

*Pietro Martyr, Epist. 61.

**Cura de los Palacios.


To testify her sense of the gallantry and services of this noble
English knight, who had come from so far to assist in their wars,
the queen sent him the next day presents of twelve horses, with
stately tents, fine linen, two beds with coverings of gold brocade,
and many other articles of great value.

Having refreshed himself, as it were, with the description of this
progress of Queen Isabella to the camp and the glorious pomp of
the Catholic sovereigns, the worthy Antonio Agapida returns with
renewed relish to his pious work of discomfiting the Moors.

The description of this royal pageant and the particulars concerning
the English earl, thus given from the manuscript of Fray Antonio
Agapida, agree precisely with the chronicle of Andres Bernaldez, the
curate of Los Palacios.  The English earl makes no further figure in
this war.  It appears from various histories that he returned in the
course of the year to England.  In the following year his passion
for fighting took him to the Continent, at the head of four hundred
adventurers, in aid of Francis, duke of Brittany, against Louis XI.
of France.  He was killed in the same year (1488) in the battle of
St. Alban's between the Bretons and the French.



CHAPTER XLIII.

HOW KING FERDINAND ATTACKED MOCLIN, AND OF THE STRANGE
    EVENTS THAT ATTENDED ITS CAPTURE.


"The Catholic sovereigns," says Fray Antonio Agapida, "had by
this time closely clipped the right wing of the Moorish vulture."
In other words, most of the strong fortresses along the western
frontier of Granada had fallen beneath the Christian artillery.  The
army now lay encamped before the town of Moclin, on the frontier
of Jaen, one of the most stubborn fortresses of the border.  It stood
on a high rocky hill, the base of which was nearly girdled by a river:
a thick forest protected the back part of the town toward the
mountain.  Thus strongly situated, it domineered, with its frowning
battlements and massive towers, all the mountain-passes into that
part of the country, and was called "the shield of Granada."  It had
a double arrear of blood to settle with the Christians: two hundred
years before, a master of Santiago and all his cavaliers had been
lanced by the Moors before its gates.  It had recently made terrible
slaughter among the troops of the good count de Cabra in his
precipitate attempt to entrap the old Moorish monarch.  The pride
of Ferdinand had been piqued by being obliged on that occasion
to recede from his plan and abandon his concerted attack on the
place; he was now prepared to take a full revenge.

El Zagal, the old warrior-king of Granada, anticipating a second
attempt, had provided the place with ample ammunitions and
provisions, had ordered trenches to be digged and additional
bulwarks thrown up, and caused all the old men, the women,
and the children to be removed to the capital.

Such was the strength of the fortress and the difficulties of its
position that Ferdinand anticipated much trouble in reducing it,
and made every preparation for a regular siege.  In the centre of
his camp were two great mounds, one of sacks of flour, the other of
grain, which were called the royal granary.  Three batteries of heavy
ordnance were opened against the citadel and principal towers, while
smaller artillery, engines for the discharge of missiles, arquebuses,
and crossbows, were distributed in various places to keep up a fire
into any breaches that might be made, and upon those of the
garrison who should appear on the battlements.

The lombards soon made an impression on the works, demolishing a
part of the wall and tumbling down several of those haughty towers
which, from their height, had been impregnable before the invention
of gunpowder.  The Moors repaired their walls as well as they were
able, and, still confiding in the strength of their situation, kept up a
resolute defence, firing down from their lofty battlements and towers
upon the Christian camp.  For two nights and a day an incessant fire
was kept up, so that there was not a moment in which the roaring
of ordnance was not heard or some damage sustained by the
Christians or the Moors.  It was a conflict, however, more of engineers
and artillerists than of gallant cavaliers; there was no sally of troops
nor shock of armed men nor rush and charge of cavalry.  The knights
stood looking on with idle weapons, waiting until they should have
an opportunity of signalizing their prowess by scaling the walls or
storming the breaches.  As the place, however, was assailable only in
one part, there was every prospect of a long and obstinate resistance.

The engineers, as usual, discharged not merely balls of stone and
iron to demolish the walls, but flaming balls of inextinguishable
combustibles designed to set fire to the houses.  One of these, which
passed high through the air like a meteor, sending out sparks and
crackling as it went, entered the window of a tower which was used
as a magazine of gunpowder.  The tower blew up with a tremendous
explosion; the Moors who were upon its battlements were hurled
into the air, and fell mangled in various parts of the town, and the
houses in its vicinity were rent and overthrown as with an earthquake.

The Moors, who had never witnessed an explosion of the kind,
ascribed the destruction of the tower to a miracle.  Some who had
seen the descent of the flaming ball imagined that fire had fallen
from heaven to punish them for their pertinacity.  The pious Agapida
himself believes that this fiery missive was conducted by divine
agency to confound the infidels--an opinion in which he is supported
by other Catholic historians.*

*Pulgar, Garibay; Lucio Marino Siculo, Cosas Memoral. de Hispan.,
 lib.20.


Seeing heaven and earth, as it were, combined against them, the
Moors lost all heart: they capitulated, and were permitted to depart
with their effects, leaving behind all arms and munitions of war.

The Catholic army (says Antonio Agapida) entered Moclin in solemn
state, not as a licentious host intent upon plunder and desolation,
but as a band of Christian warriors coming to purify and regenerate
the land.  The standard of the cross, that ensign of this holy crusade,
was borne in the advance, followed by the other banners of the
army.  Then came the king and queen at the head of a vast number
of armed cavaliers.  They were accompanied by a band of priests and
friars, with the choir of the royal chapel chanting the canticle "Te
Deum laudamus."  As they were moving through the streets in this
solemn manner, every sound hushed excepting the anthem of the
choir, they suddenly heard, issuing as it were from under ground, a
chorus of voices chanting in solemn response "Benedictum qui venit
in nomine Domini."*  The procession paused in wonder.  The sounds
rose from Christian captives, and among them several priests, who
were confined in subterraneous dungeons.

*Marino Siculo.


The heart of Isabella was greatly touched.  She ordered the captives
to be drawn forth from their cells, and was still more moved at
beholding, by their wan, discolored, and emaciated appearance, how
much they had suffered.  Their hair and beards were overgrown and
shagged; they were wasted by hunger, half naked, and in chains.
She ordered that they should be clothed and cherished, and money
furnished them to bear them to their homes.*

*Illescas, Hist. Pontif., lib. 6, c. 20, \0xA4 1.


Several of the captives were brave cavaliers who had been wounded
and made prisoners in the defeat of the count de Cabra by El Zagal
in the preceding year.  There were also found other melancholy traces
of that disastrous affair.  On visiting the narrow pass where the
defeat had taken place, the remains of several Christian warriors
were found in thickets or hidden behind rocks or in the clefts of the
mountains.  These were some who had been struck from their horses
and wounded too severely to fly.  They had crawled away from the
scene of action, and concealed themselves to avoid falling into the
hands of the enemy, and had thus perished miserably and alone.  The
remains of those of note were known by their armor and devices, and
were mourned over by their companions who had shared the disaster
of that day.*

*Pulgar, part 3, cap. 61.


The queen had these remains piously collected as the relics of so
many martyrs who had fallen in the cause of the faith.  They were
interred with great solemnity in the mosques of Moclin, which had
been purified and consecrated to Christian worship.  "There," says
Antonio Agapida, "rest the bones of those truly Catholic knights,
in the holy ground which in a manner had been sanctified by their
blood; and all pilgrims passing through those mountains offer up
prayers and masses for the repose of their souls."

The queen remained for some time at Moclin, administering comfort to
the wounded and the prisoners, bringing the newly-acquired territory
into order, and founding churches and monasteries and other pious
institutions.  "While the king marched in front, laying waste the land
of the Philistines," says the figurative Antonio Agapida, "Queen
Isabella followed his traces as the binder follows the reaper, gathering
and garnering the rich harvest that has fallen beneath his sickle.  In
this she was greatly assisted by the counsels of that cloud of bishops,
friars, and other saintly men which continually surrounded her,
garnering the first fruits of this infidel land into the granaries of the
Church."  Leaving her thus piously employed, the king pursued his
career of conquest, determined to lay waste the Vega and carry fire
and sword to the very gates of Granada.



CHAPTER XLIV.

HOW KING FERDINAND FORAGED THE VEGA; AND OF THE BATTLE
    OF THE BRIDGE OF PINOS, AND THE FATE OF THE TWO
    MOORISH BROTHERS.


Muley Abdallah el Zagal had been under a spell of ill-fortune ever
since the suspicious death of the old king his brother.  Success had
deserted his standard, and with his fickle subjects want of success
was one of the greatest crimes in a sovereign.  He found his
popularity declining, and he lost all confidence in his people.  The
Christian army marched in open defiance through his territories,
and sat down deliberately before his fortresses; yet he dared not
lead forth his legions to oppose them, lest the inhabitants of the
Albaycin, ever ripe for a revolt, should rise and shut the gates of
Granada against his return.

Every few days some melancholy train entered the metropolis, the
inhabitants of some captured town bearing the few effects spared
them, and weeping and bewailing the desolation of their homes.
When the tidings arrived that Illora and Moclin had fallen, the people
were seized with consternation.  "The right eye of Granada is
extinguished," exclaimed they; "the shield of Granada is broken:
what shall protect us from the inroad of the foe?"  When the
survivors of the garrisons of those towns arrived, with downcast
looks, bearing the marks of battle and destitute of arms and
standards, the populace reviled them in their wrath, but they
answered, "We fought as long as we had force to fight or walls
to shelter us; but the Christians laid our town and battlements
in ruins, and we looked in vain for aid from Granada."

The alcaydes of Illora and Moclin were brothers; they were alike
in prowess and the bravest among the Moorish cavaliers.  They
had been the most distinguished in those tilts and tourneys which
graced the happier days of Granada, and had distinguished
themselves in the sterner conflicts of the field.  Acclamation had
always followed their banners, and they had long been the delight
of the people.  Yet now, when they returned after the capture of
their fortresses, they were followed by the unsteady populace with
execrations.  The hearts of the alcaydes swelled with indignation;
they found the ingratitude of their countrymen still more intolerable
than the hostility of the Christians.

Tidings came that the enemy was advancing with his triumphant
legions to lay waste the country about Granada.  Still El Zagal did
not dare to take the field.  The two alcaydes of Illora and Moclin
stood before him.  "We have defended your fortresses," said they,
"until we were almost buried under their ruins, and for our reward
we receive scoffings and revilings: give us, O king, an opportunity
where knightly valor may signalize itself--not shut up behind stone
walls, but in the open conflict of the field.  The enemy approaches
to lay our country desolate: give us men to meet him in the advance,
and let shame light upon our heads if we be found wanting in the
battle!"

The two brothers were sent forth with a large force of horse and
foot; El Zagal intended, should they be successful, to issue forth
with his whole force, and by a decisive victory repair the losses he
had suffered.  When the people saw the well-known standards of
the brothers going forth to battle, there was a feeble shout, but
the alcaydes passed on with stern countenances, for they knew
the same voices would curse them were they to return unfortunate.
They cast a farewell look upon fair Granada and upon the beautiful
fields of their infancy, as if for these they were willing to lay down
their lives, but not for an ungrateful people.

The army of Ferdinand had arrived within two leagues of Granada,
at the bridge of Pinos, a pass famous in the wars of the Moors and
Christians for many a bloody conflict.  It was the pass by which the
Castilian monarchs generally made their inroads, and was capable of
great defence from the ruggedness of the country and the difficulty
of the bridge.  The king, with the main body of the army, had
attained the brow of a hill, when they beheld the advance guard,
under the marques of Cadiz and the master of Santiago, furiously
attacked by the enemy in the vicinity of the bridge.  The Moors
rushed to the assault with their usual shouts, but with more than
usual ferocity.  There was a hard struggle at the bridge; both
parties knew the importance of that pass.

The king particularly noted the prowess of two Moorish cavaliers,
alike in arms and devices, and whom by their bearing and attendance
he perceived to be commanders of the enemy.  They were the two
brothers, the alcaydes of Illora and Moclin.  Wherever they turned
they carried confusion and death into the ranks of the Christians,
but they fought with desperation rather than valor.  The count de
Cabra and his brother Don Martin de Cordova pressed forward with
eagerness against them, but, having advanced too precipitately, were
surrounded by the foe and in imminent danger.  A young Christian
knight, seeing their peril, hastened with his followers to their
relief.  The king recognized him for Don Juan de Aragon, count of
Ribargoza, his own nephew, for he was illegitimate son of the duke
of Villahermosa, illegitimate brother of King Ferdinand.  The
splendid armor of Don Juan and the sumptuous caparison of his
steed rendered him a brilliant object of attack.  He was assailed
on all sides and his superb steed slain under him, yet still he fought
valiantly, bearing for a time the brunt of the fight and giving the
exhausted forces of the count de Cabra time to recover breath.

Seeing the peril of these troops and the general obstinacy of the
fight, the king ordered the royal standard to be advanced, and
hastened with all his forces to the relief of the count de Cabra.  At
his approach the enemy gave way and retreated toward the bridge.
The two Moorish commanders endeavored to rally their troops and
animate them to defend this pass to the utmost: they used prayers,
remonstrances, menaces, but almost in vain.  They could only collect
a scanty handful of cavaliers; with these they planted themselves
at the head of the bridge and disputed it inch by inch.  The fight was
hot and obstinate, for but few could contend hand to hand, yet many
discharged crossbows and arquebuses from the banks.  The river
was covered with the floating bodies of the slain.  The Moorish band
of cavaliers was almost entirely cut to pieces; the two brothers fell,
covered with wounds, upon the bridge they had so resolutely
defended.  They had given up the battle for lost, but had determined
not to return alive to ungrateful Granada.

When the people of the capital heard how devotedly they had fallen,
they lamented greatly their deaths and extolled their memory: a
column was erected to their honor in the vicinity of the bridge,
which long went by the name of "the Tomb of the Brothers."

The army of Ferdinand now marched on and established its camp in
the vicinity of Granada.  The worthy Agapida gives many triumphant
details of the ravages committed in the Vega, which was again laid
waste, the grain, fruits, and other productions of the earth
destroyed, and that earthly paradise rendered a dreary desert.
He narrates several fierce but ineffectual sallies and skirmishes
of the Moors in defence of their favorite plain; among which one
deserves to be mentioned, as it records the achievements of one
of the saintly heroes of this war.

During one of the movements of the Christian army near the walls
of Granada a battalion of fifteen hundred cavalry and a large force
of foot had sallied from the city, and posted themselves near some
gardens, which were surrounded by a canal and traversed by ditches
for the purpose of irrigation.

The Moors beheld the duke del Infantado pass by with his two
splendid battalions--one of men-at-arms, the other of light cavalry
armed "a la gineta."  In company with him, but following as a rear-
guard, was Don Garcia Osorio, the belligerent bishop of Jaen,
attended by Francisco Bovadillo, the corregidor of his city, and
followed by two squadrons of men-at-arms from Jaen, Anduxar,
Ubeda, and Baeza.*  The success of last year's campaign had given
the good bishop an inclination for warlike affairs, and he had once
more buckled on his cuirass.

*Pulgar, part 3, cap. 62.


The Moors were much given to stratagem in warfare.  They looked
wistfully at the magnificent squadrons of the duke del Infantado,
but their martial discipline precluded all attack: the good bishop
promised to be a more easy prey.  Suffering the duke and his troops
to pass unmolested, they approached the squadrons of the bishop, and
making a pretended attack, skirmished slightly and fled in apparent
confusion.  The bishop considered the day his own, and, seconded
by his corregidor Bovadillo, followed with valorous precipitation.  The
Moors fled into the "Huerta del Rey," or Orchard of the King; the
troops of the bishop followed hotly after them.

When the Moors perceived their pursuers fairly embarrassed among
the intricacies of the garden, they turned fiercely upon them, while
some of their number threw open the sluices of the Xenil.  In an
instant the canal which encircled and the ditches which traversed
the garden were filled with water, and the valiant bishop and his
followers found themselves overwhelmed by a deluge.*  A scene of
great confusion succeeded.  Some of the men of Jaen, stoutest of
heart and hand, fought with the Moors in the garden, while others
struggled with the water, endeavoring to escape across the canal,
in which attempt many horses were drowned.

*Pulgar.


Fortunately, the duke del Infantado perceived the snare into which
his companions had fallen, and despatched his light cavalry to their
assistance.  The Moors were compelled to flight, and driven along
the road of Elvira up to the gates of Granada.*  Several Christian
cavaliers perished in this affray; the bishop himself escaped with
difficulty, having slipped from his saddle in crossing the canal,
but saving himself by holding on to the tail of his charger.  This
perilous achievement seems to have satisfied the good bishop's
belligerent propensities.  He retired on his laurels (says Agapida)
to his city of Jaen, where, in the fruition of all good things, he
gradually waxed too corpulent for his corselet, which was hung
up in the hall of his episcopal palace, and we hear no more of his
military deeds throughout the residue of the holy war of Granada.**

*Pulgar.

**"Don Luis Osorio fue obispo de Jaen desde el ano de 1483, y
 presidio in esta.  Iglesia hasta el de 1496 in que murio en Flandes,
 a donde fue acompanando a la princesa Dona Juana, esposa del
 archiduque Don Felipe."--"Espana Sagrada," por Fr. M. Risco, tom.
 41, trat. 77, cap. 4.


King Ferdinand, having completed his ravage of the Vega and kept
El Zagal shut up in his capital, conducted his army back through the
Pass of Lope to rejoin Queen Isabella at Moclin.

The fortresses lately taken being well garrisoned and supplied, he
gave the command of the frontier to his cousin, Don Fadrique de
Toledo, afterward so famous in the Netherlands as the duke of Alva.
The campaign being thus completely crowned with success, the
sovereigns returned in triumph to the city of Cordova.



CHAPTER XLV.

ATTEMPT OF EL ZAGAL UPON THE LIFE OF BOABDIL, AND HOW THE
    LATTER WAS ROUSED TO ACTION.


No sooner did the last squadron of Christian cavalry disappear
behind the mountains of Elvira and the note of its trumpets die away
upon the ear than the long-suppressed wrath of Muley el Zagal
burst forth.  He determined no longer to be half a king, reigning over
a divided kingdom in a divided capital, but to exterminate by any
means, fair or foul, his nephew Boabdil and his faction.  He turned
furiously upon those whose factious conduct had deterred him from
sallying upon the foe: some he punished by confiscations, others by
banishment, others by death.  Once undisputed monarch of the entire
kingdom, he trusted to his military skill to retrieve his fortunes and
drive the Christians over the frontier.

Boabdil, however, had again retired to Velez el Blanco, on the
confines of Murcia, where he could avail himself, in case of
emergency, of any assistance or protection afforded him by the
policy of Ferdinand.  His defeat had blighted his reviving fortunes,
for the people considered him as inevitably doomed to misfortune.
Still, while he lived El Zagal knew he would be a rallying-point for
faction, and liable at any moment to be elevated into power by
the capricious multitude.  He had recourse, therefore, to the most
perfidious means to compass his destruction.  He sent ambassadors
to him representing the necessity of concord for the salvation of the
kingdom, and even offering to resign the title of king and to become
subject to his sway on receiving some estate on which he could live
in tranquil retirement.  But while the ambassadors bore these words
of peace they were furnished with poisoned herbs, which they
were to administer secretly to Boabdil, and if they failed in this
attempt they had pledged themselves to despatch him openly while
engaged in conversation.  They were instigated to this treason by
promises of great reward, and by assurances from the alfaquis that
Boabdil was an apostate whose death would be acceptable to Heaven.

The young monarch was secretly apprised of the concerted treason,
and refused an audience to the ambassadors.  He denounced his uncle
as the murderer of his father and his kindred and the usurper of his
throne, and vowed never to relent in hostility to him until he should
place his head on the walls of the Alhambra.

Open war again broke out between the two monarchs, though feebly
carried on in consequence of their mutual embarrassments.  Ferdinand
again extended his assistance to Boabdil, ordering the commanders of
his fortresses to aid him in all enterprises against his uncle, and
against such places as refused to acknowledge him as king; and Don
Juan de Bonavides, who commanded in Lorca, even made inroads in his
name into the territories of Almeria, Baza, and Guadix, which owned
allegiance to El Zagal.

The unfortunate Boabdil had three great evils to contend with--
the inconstancy of his subjects, the hostility of his uncle, and the
friendship of Ferdinand.  The last was by far the most baneful: his
fortunes withered under it.  He was looked upon as the enemy of
his faith and of his country.  The cities shut their gates against him;
the people cursed him; even the scanty band of cavaliers who had
hitherto followed his ill-starred banner began to desert him, for he
had not wherewithal to reward nor even to support them.  His spirits
sank with his fortune, and he feared that in a little time he should
not have a spot of earth whereon to plant his standard nor an
adherent to rally under it.

In the midst of his despondency he received a message from his
lion-hearted mother, the sultana Ayxa la Horra.  It was brought by
the steadfast adherent to their fortunes, Aben Comixa.  "For shame,''
said she, "to linger timorously about the borders of your kingdom
when a usurper is seated in your capital!  Why look abroad for
perfidious aid when you have loyal hearts beating true to you in
Granada?  The Albaycin is ready to throw open its gates to receive
you.  Strike home vigorously--a sudden blow may mend all or make an
end.  A throne or a grave!--for a king there is no honorable medium."

Boabdil was of an undecided character, but there are circumstances
which bring the most wavering to a decision, and when once resolved
they are apt to act with a daring impulse unknown to steadier
judgments.  The message of the sultana roused him from a dream.
Granada, beautiful Granada, with its stately Alhambra, its delicious
gardens, its gushing and limpid fountains sparkling among groves
of orange, citron, and myrtle, rose before him.  "What have I done,"
exclaimed he, "that I should be an exile from this paradise of my
forefathers--a wanderer and fugitive in my own kingdom, while a
murderous usurper sits proudly upon my throne?  Surely Allah will
befriend the righteous cause; one blow, and all may be my own."

He summoned his scanty band of cavaliers.  "Who is ready to follow
his monarch unto the death?" said he; and every one laid his hand
upon his scimetar.  "Enough!" said he; "let each man arm himself
and prepare his steed in secret for an enterprise of toil and peril;
if we succeed, our reward is empire."



CHAPTER XLVI.

HOW BOABDIL RETURNED SECRETLY TO GRANADA, AND HOW HE
    WAS RECEIVED.--SECOND EMBASSY OF DON JUAN DE VERA,
    AND HIS PERILS IN THE ALHAMBRA.


"In the hand of God," exclaimed an old Arabian chronicler, "is the
destiny of princes; he alone giveth empire.  A Moorish horseman,
mounted on a fleet Arabian steed, was one day traversing the
mountains which extended between Granada and the frontier of Murcia.
He galloped swiftly through the valleys, but paused and looked out
cautiously from the summit of every height.  A squadron of cavaliers
followed warily at a distance.  There were fifty lances.  The richness
of their armor and attire showed them to be warriors of noble rank,
and their leader had a lofty and prince-like demeanor.''  The
squadron thus described by the Arabian chronicler was the Moorish
king Boabdil and his devoted followers.

For two nights and a day they pursued their adventurous journey,
avoiding all populous parts of the country and choosing the most
solitary passes of the mountains.  They suffered severe hardships and
fatigues, but suffered without a murmur: they were accustomed to
rugged campaigning, and their steeds were of generous and unyielding
spirit.  It was midnight, and all was dark and silent as they descended
from the mountains and approached the city of Granada.  They passed
along quietly under the shadow of its walls, until they arrived near the
gate of the Albaycin.  Here Boabdil ordered his followers to halt and
remain concealed.  Taking but four or five with him, he advanced
resolutely to the gate and knocked with the hilt of his scimetar.  The
guards demanded who sought to enter at that unseasonable hour.
"Your king!" exclaimed Boabdil; "open the gate and admit him!"

The guards held forth a light and recognized the person of the
youthful monarch.  They were struck with sudden awe and threw
open the gates, and Boabdil and his followers entered unmolested.
They galloped to the dwellings of the principal inhabitants of the
Albaycin, thundering at their portals and summoning them to arise
and take arms for their rightful sovereign.  The summons was
instantly obeyed: trumpets resounded throughout the streets--the
gleam of torches and the flash of arms showed the Moors hurrying to
their gathering-places; by daybreak the whole force of the Albaycin
was rallied under the standard of Boabdil, and Aben Comixa was
made alcayde of the fortress.  Such was the success of this sudden
and desperate act of the young monarch, for we are assured by
contemporary historians that there had been no previous concert or
arrangement.  "As the guards opened the gates of the city to admit
him," observes a pious chronicler, "so God opened the hearts of the
Moors to receive him as their king."*

*Pulgar.


In the morning early the tidings of this event roused El Zagal from
his slumbers in the Alhambra.  The fiery old warrior assembled his
guard in haste and made his way, sword in hand, to the Albaycin,
hoping to come upon his nephew by surprise.  He was vigorously
met by Boabdil and his adherents, and driven back into the quarter
of the Alhambra.  An encounter took place between the two kings
in the square before the principal mosque; here they fought hand
to hand with implacable fury, as though it had been agreed to decide
their competition for the crown by single combat.  In the tumult of
this chance-medley affray, however, they were separated, and the
party of El Zagal was ultimately driven from the square.

The battle raged for some time in the streets and places of the
city, but, finding their powers of mischief cramped within such
narrow limits, both parties sallied forth into the fields and fought
beneath the walls until evening.  Many fell on both sides, and at
night each party withdrew into its quarter until the morning gave
them light to renew the unnatural conflict.  For several days the
two grand divisions of the city remained like hostile powers arrayed
against each other.  The party of the Alhambra was more numerous
than that of the Albaycin, and contained most of the nobility and
chivalry; but the adherents of Boabdil were men hardened and
strengthened by labor and habitually skilled in the exercise of arms.

The Albaycin underwent a kind of siege by the forces of El Zagal;
they effected breaches in the walls, and made repeated attempts
to carry it sword in hand, but were as often repulsed.  The troops
of Boabdil, on the other hand, made frequent sallies, and in the
conflicts which took place the hatred of the combatants arose to
such a pitch of fury that no quarter was given on either side.

Boabdil perceived the inferiority of his force; he dreaded also that
his adherents, being for the most part tradesmen and artisans, would
become impatient of this interruption of their gainful occupations
and disheartened by these continual scenes of carnage.  He sent
missives, therefore, in all haste to Don Fadrique de Toledo, who
commanded the Christian forces on the frontier, entreating his
assistance.

Don Fadrique had received instructions from the politic Ferdinand
to aid the youthful monarch in all his contests with his uncle.  He
advanced with a body of troops near to Granada.  The moment Boabdil
discerned, from the towers of the Albaycin, the Christian banners
and lances winding round the base of the mountain of Elvira, he
sallied forth to meet them, escorted by a squadron of Abencerrages
under Aben Comixa.  El Zagal, who was equally on the alert, and
apprised that the Christian troops came in aid of his nephew,
likewise sallied forth and drew up his troops in battle array.  Don
Fadrique, wary lest some treachery should be intended, halted
among some plantations of olives, retained Boabdil by his side, and
signified his wish that Aben Comixa would advance with his squadron
and offer battle to the old king.  The provocation was given, but El
Zagal maintained his position.  He threw out some light parties,
however, which skirmished with the Abencerrages of Aben Comixa,
after which he caused his trumpets to sound a recall, and retired
into the city, mortified, it is said, that the Christian cavaliers
should witness these fratricidal discords between true believers.

Don Fadrique, still distrustful, drew off to a distance, and encamped
for the night near the bridge of Cabillas.

Early in the morning a Moorish cavalier with an escort approached
the advance guard, and his trumpets sounded a parley.  He craved an
audience as an envoy from El Zagal, and was admitted to the tent of
Don Fadrique.  El Zagal had learnt that the Christian troops had come
to aid his nephew, and now offered to enter into an alliance with
them on terms still more advantageous than those of Boabdil.  The
wary Don Fadrique listened to the Moor with apparent complacency,
but determined to send one of his most intrepid and discreet
cavaliers, under the protection of a flag, to hold a conference with
the old king within the very walls of the Alhambra.  The officer
chosen for this important mission was Don Juan de Vera, the same
stanch and devout cavalier who in times preceding the war had
borne the message from the Castilian sovereigns to old Muley Abul
Hassan demanding arrears of tribute.  Don Juan was received with
great ceremony by the king.  No records remain of his diplomatic
negotiations, but they extended into the night, and, it being too
late to return to camp, he was sumptuously lodged in an apartment of
the Alhambra.  In the morning one of the courtiers about the palace,
somewhat given to jest and raillery, invited Don Juan to a ceremony
which some of the alfaquis were about to celebrate in the mosque
of the palace.  The religious punctilio of this most discreet cavalier
immediately took umbrage at what he conceived a banter.  "The
servants of Queen Isabella of Castile," replied he, stiffly and sternly,
"who bear on their armor the cross of St. Jago, never enter the
temples of Mahomet but to level them to the earth and trample
on them.''

The Moslem courtier retired somewhat disconcerted by this Catholic
but not very courteous reply, and reported it to a renegado of
Antiquera.  The latter, eager, like all renegados, to show devotion
to his newly-adopted creed, volunteered to return with the courtier
and have a tilt of words with the testy diplomatist.  They found Don
Juan playing a game of chess with the alcayde of the Alhambra, and
took occasion to indulge in sportive comments on some of the
mysteries of the Christian religion.  The ire of this devout knight and
discreet ambassador began to kindle, but he restrained it within
the limits of lofty gravity.  "You would do well," said he, "to cease
talking about what you do not understand."  This only provoked light
attacks of the witlings, until one of them dared to make some
degrading and obscene comparison between the Blessed Virgin
and Amina, the mother of Mahomet.  In an instant Don Juan sprang
to his feet, dashed chess-board and chess-men aside, and, drawing
his sword, dealt, says the curate of los Palacios, such a "fermosa
cuchillada" (such a handsome slash) across the head of the
blaspheming Moor as felled him to the earth.  The renegado, seeing
his comrade fall, fled for his life, making the halls and galleries ring
with his outcries.  Guards, pages, and attendants rushed in, but
Don Juan kept them at bay until the appearance of the king restored
order.  On inquiring into the cause of the affray he acted with proper
discrimination.  Don Juan was held sacred as an ambassador, and
the renegado was severely punished for having compromised the
hospitality of the royal palace.

The tumult in the Alhambra, however, soon caused a more
dangerous tumult in the city.  It was rumored that Christians had
been introduced into the palace with some treasonable design.  The
populace caught up arms and ascended in throngs to the Gate of
Justice, demanding the death of all Christian spies and those who
had introduced them.  This was no time to reason with an infuriate
mob, when the noise of their clamors might bring the garrison of the
Albaycin to back them.  Nothing was left for El Zagal but to furnish
Don Juan with a disguise, a swift horse, and an escort, and to let
him out of the Alhambra by a private gate.  It was a sore grievance
to the stately cavalier to have to submit to these expedients, but
there was no alternative.  In Moorish disguise he passed through
crowds that were clamoring for his head, and, once out of the gate
of the city, gave reins to his horse, nor ceased spurring until he
found himself safe under the banners of Don Fadrique.

Thus ended the second embassy of Don Juan de Vera, less stately
but more perilous than the first.  Don Fadrique extolled his prowess,
whatever he may have thought of his discretion, and rewarded him
with a superb horse, while at the same time he wrote a letter to El
Zagal thanking him for the courtesy and protection he had observed
to his ambassador.  Queen Isabella also was particularly delighted
with the piety of Don Juan and his promptness in vindicating the
immaculate character of the Blessed Virgin, and, besides conferring
on him various honorable distinctions, made him a royal present of
three hundred thousand maravedis.*

*Alcantara, Hist. Granad., vol. 3, c. 17, apud De Harro, Nobiliario
 Genealogico, lib. 5, cap. 15.


The report brought by this cavalier of affairs in Granada, together
with the preceding skirmishings between the Moorish factions before
the walls, convinced Don Fadrique that there was no collusion
between the monarchs: on returning to his frontier post, therefore,
he sent Boabdil a reinforcement of Christian foot-soldiers and
arquebusiers, under Fernan Alvarez de Sotomayor, alcayde of
Colomera.  This was as a firebrand thrown in to light up anew
the flames of war in the city, which remained raging between
the Moorish inhabitants for the space of fifty days.



CHAPTER XLVII.

HOW KING FERDINAND LAID SIEGE TO VELEZ MALAGA.


Hitherto the events of this renowned war have been little else than
a succession of brilliant but brief exploits, such as sudden forays,
wild skirmishes among the mountains, and the surprisals of castles,
fortresses, and frontier towns.  We approach now to more important
and prolonged operations, in which ancient and mighty cities, the
bulwarks of Granada, were invested by powerful armies, subdued by
slow and regular sieges, and thus the capital left naked and alone.

The glorious triumphs of the Christian sovereigns (says Fray Antonio
Agapida) had resounded throughout the East and filled all
heathenesse with alarm.  The Grand Turk, Bajazet II., and his deadly
foe, the grand soldan of Egypt, suspending for a time their bloody
feuds, entered into a league to protect the religion of Mahomet and
the kingdom of Granada from the hostilities of the Christians.  It
was concerted between them that Bajazet should send a powerful
armada against the island of Sicily, then appertaining to the
Spanish Crown, for the purpose of distracting the attention of the
Castilian sovereigns, while at the same time great bodies of troops
should be poured into Granada from the opposite coast of Africa.

Ferdinand and Isabella received timely intelligence of these
designs.  They resolved at once to carry the war into the sea-
board of Granada, to possess themselves of its ports, and thus,
as it were, to bar the gates of the kingdom against all external aid.
Malaga was to be the main object of attack: it was the principal
seaport of the kingdom, and almost necessary to its existence.  It
had long been the seat of opulent commerce, sending many ships
to the coasts of Syria and Egypt.  It was also the great channel of
communication with Africa, through which were introduced supplies
of money, troops, arms, and steeds from Tunis, Tripoli, Fez, Tremezan,
and other Barbary powers.  It was emphatically called, therefore,
"the hand and mouth of Granada."  Before laying siege to this
redoubtable city, however, it was deemed necessary to secure the
neighboring city of Velez Malaga and its dependent places, which
might otherwise harass the besieging army.

For this important campaign the nobles of the kingdom were again
summoned to take the field with their forces in the spring of 1487.
The menaced invasion of the infidel powers of the East had awakened
new ardor in the bosoms of all true Christian knights, and so zealously
did they respond to the summons of the sovereigns that an army of
twenty thousand cavalry and fifty thousand foot, the flower of Spanish
warriors, led by the bravest of Spanish cavaliers, thronged the
renowned city of Cordova at the appointed time.

On the night before this mighty host set forth upon its march an
earthquake shook the city.  The inhabitants, awakened by the shaking
of the walls and rocking of the towers, fled to the courts and
squares, fearing to be overwhelmed by the ruins of their dwellings.
The earthquake was most violent in the quarter of the royal residence,
the site of the ancient palace of the Moorish kings.  Many looked upon
this as an omen of some impending evil; but Fray Antonio Agapida, in
that infallible spirit of divination which succeeds an event, plainly
reads in it a presage that the empire of the Moors was about to be
shaken to its centre.

It was on Saturday, the eve of the Sunday of Palms (says a worthy
and loyal chronicler of the time), that the most Catholic monarch
departed with his army to render service to Heaven and make war
upon the Moors.*  Heavy rains had swelled all the streams and
rendered the roads deep and difficult.  The king, therefore, divided
his host into two bodies.  In one he put all the artillery, guarded
by a strong body of horse, and commanded by the master of Alcantara
and Martin Alonso, senior of Montemayor.  This division was to proceed
by the road through the valleys, where pasturage abounded for the
oxen which drew the ordnance.

*Pulgar, Cronica de los Reyes Catholicos.


The main body of the army was led by the king in person.  It was
divided into numerous battalions, each commanded by some
distinguished cavalier.  The king took the rough and perilous road of
the mountains, and few mountains are more rugged and difficult than
those of Andalusia.  The roads are mere mule-paths straggling amidst
rocks and along the verge of precipices, clambering vast craggy
heights, or descending into frightful chasms and ravines, with scanty
and uncertain foothold for either man or steed.  Four thousand
pioneers were sent in advance, under the alcayde de los Donceles, to
conquer in some degree the asperities of the road.  Some had pickaxes
and crowbars to break the rocks, others had implements to construct
bridges over the mountain-torrents, while it was the duty of others
to lay stepping-stones in the smaller streams.  As the country was
inhabited by fierce Moorish mountaineers, Don Diego de Castrillo was
despatched with a body of horse and foot to take possession of the
heights and passes.  Notwithstanding every precaution, the royal army
suffered excessively on its march.  At one time there was no place to
encamp for five leagues of the most toilsome and mountainous country,
and many of the beasts of burden sank down and perished on the road.

It was with the greatest joy, therefore, that the royal army emerged
from these stern and frightful defiles, and came to where they looked
down upon the vega of Velez Malaga.  The region before them was
one of the most delectable to the eye that ever was ravaged by an
army.  Sheltered from every rude blast by a screen of mountains, and
sloping and expanding to the south, this lovely valley was quickened
by the most generous sunshine, watered by the silver meanderings
of the Velez, and refreshed by cooling breezes from the Mediterranean.
The sloping hills were covered with vineyards and olive trees; the
distant fields waved with grain or were verdant with pasturage; while
round the city were delightful gardens, the favorite retreats of the
Moors, where their white pavilions gleamed among groves of oranges,
citrons, and pomegranates, and were surrounded by stately palms--
those plants of southern growth bespeaking a generous climate and
a cloudless sky.

In the upper part of this delightful valley the city of Velez Malaga
reared its warrior battlements in stern contrast to the landscape.
It was built on the declivity of a steep and insulated hill, and
strongly fortified by walls and towers.  The crest of the hill rose
high above the town into a mere crag, inaccessible on every other
side, and crowned by a powerful castle, which domineered over
the surrounding country.  Two suburbs swept down into the valley
from the skirts of the town, and were defended by bulwarks and
deep ditches.  The vast ranges of gray mountains, often capped with
clouds, which rose to the north, were inhabited by a hardy and warlike
race, whose strong fortresses of Comares, Canillas, Competa, and
Benamargosa frowned down from cragged heights.

When the Christian host arrived in sight of this valley, a squadron
was hovering on the smooth sea before it displaying the banner of
Castile.  This was commanded by the count of Trevento, and consisted
of four armed galleys, convoying a number of caravels laden with
supplies for the army.

After surveying the ground, King Ferdinand encamped on the side of
a mountain which advanced close to the city, and was the last of a
rugged sierra, or chain of heights, that extended quite to Granada. 
On the summit of this mountain, and overlooking the camp, was a
Moorish town, powerfully fortified, called Bentomiz, considered capable
of yielding great assistance to Velez Malaga.  Several of the generals
remonstrated with the king for choosing a post so exposed to assaults
from the mountaineers, but he replied that he should thus cut off all
communication between Bentomiz and the city, and that, as to the
danger, his soldiers must keep the more vigilant guard against surprise.

King Ferdinand rode about, attended by several cavaliers and a small
number of cuirassiers, appointing the various stations of the camp.
Having directed a body of foot-soldiers to possess themselves, as
an advanced guard, of an important height which overlooked the
city, he retired to a tent to take refreshment.  While at table he was
startled by a sudden uproar, and, looking forth, beheld his soldiers
flying before a superior force of the enemy.  The king had on no
other armor but a cuirass: seizing a lance, however, he sprang upon
his horse and galloped to protect the fugitives, followed by his
handful of knights and cuirassiers.  When the soldiers saw the king
hastening to their aid, they turned upon their pursuers.  Ferdinand
in his eagerness threw himself into the midst of the foe.  One of his
grooms was killed beside him, but before the Moor who slew him
could escape the king transfixed him with his lance.  He then sought
to draw his sword, which hung at his saddle-bow, but in vain.  Never
had he been exposed to such peril; he was surrounded by the enemy
without a weapon wherewith to defend himself.

In this moment of awful jeopardy the marques of Cadiz, the count
de Cabra, the adelantado of Murcia, with two other cavaliers, named
Garcilasso de la Vega and Diego de Atayde, came galloping to the
scene of action, and, surrounding the king, made a rampart of their
bodies against the assaults of the Moors.  The horse of the marques
was pierced by an arrow, and that worthy cavalier exposed to
imminent danger; but with the aid of his valorous companions he
quickly put the enemy to flight, and pursued them with slaughter
to the very gates of the city.

When those loyal warriors returned from the pursuit they
remonstrated with the king for exposing his life in personal  conflict,
seeing that he had so many valiant captains whose business it was
to fight.  They reminded him that the life of a prince was the life of
his people, and that many a brave army was lost by the loss of its
commander.  They entreated him, therefore, in future to protect
them with the force of his mind in the cabinet, rather than of his
arm in the field.

Ferdinand acknowledged the wisdom of their advice, but declared
that he could not see his people in peril without venturing his
person to assist them--a reply (say the old chroniclers) which
delighted the whole army, inasmuch a