s they saw that he not only
governed them as a good king, but protected them as a valiant
captain.  He, however, was conscious of the extreme peril to which
he had been exposed, and made a vow never again to venture into
battle without having his sword girt to his side.*

*Illescas, Hist. Pontif., lib. 6, c. 20; Vedmar, Hist. Velez Malaga.


When this achievement of the king was related to Isabella, she
trembled amidst her joy at his safety, and afterward, in memorial
of the event, granted to Velez Malaga, as the arms of the city, the
figure of the king on horseback, with a groom lying dead at his feet
and the Moors flying.*

*Ibid.


The camp was formed, but the artillery was yet on the road,
advancing with infinite labor at the rate of merely a league a day,
for heavy rains had converted the streams of the valleys into raging
torrents and completely broken up the roads.  In the mean time, King
Ferdinand ordered an assault on the suburbs of the city.  They were
carried after a sanguinary conflict of six hours, in which many
Christian cavaliers were killed and wounded, and among the latter
Don Alvaro of Portugal, son of the duke of Braganza.  The suburbs
were then fortified toward the city with trenches and palisades, and
garrisoned by a chosen force under Don Fadrique de Toledo.  Other
trenches were digged round the city and from the suburbs to the
royal camp, so as to cut off all communication with the surrounding
country.

Bodies of troops were also sent to take possession of the mountain-
passes by which the supplies for the army had to be brought.  The
mountains, however, were so steep and rugged, and so full of defiles
and lurking-places, that the Moors could sally forth and retreat in
perfect security, frequently swooping down upon Christian convoys
and bearing off both booty and prisoners to their strongholds.
Sometimes the Moors would light fires at night on the sides of the
mountains, which would be answered by fires from the watch-towers
and fortresses.  By these signals they would concert assaults upon
the Christian camp, which in consequence was obliged to be continually
on the alert.

King Ferdinand flattered himself that the manifestation of his force
had struck sufficient terror into the city, and that by offers of
clemency it might be induced to capitulate.  He wrote a letter,
therefore, to the commanders, promising, in case of immediate
surrender, that all the inhabitants should be permitted to depart
with their effects, but threatening them with fire and sword if they
persisted in defence.  This letter was despatched by a cavalier named
Carvajal, who, putting it on the end of a lance, reached it to the
Moors on the walls of the city.  Abul Cacim Vanegas, son of Reduan,
and alcayde of the fortress, replied that the king was too noble and
magnanimous to put such a threat in execution, and that he should
not surrender, as he knew the artillery could not be brought to the
camp, and he was promised succor by the king of Granada.

At the same time that he received this reply the king learnt that
at the strong town of Comares, upon a height about two leagues
distant from the camp, a large number of warriors had assembled
from the Axarquia, the same mountains in which the Christian
cavaliers had been massacred in the beginning of the war, and
that others were daily expected, for this rugged sierra was capable
of furnishing fifteen thousand fighting-men.

King Ferdinand felt that his army, thus disjoined and enclosed in an
enemy's country, was in a perilous situation, and that the utmost
discipline and vigilance were necessary.  He put the camp under the
strictest regulations, forbidding all gaming, blasphemy, or brawl,
and expelling all loose women and their attendant bully ruffians,
the usual fomenters of riot and contention among soldiery.  He
ordered that none should sally forth to skirmish without permission
from their commanders; that none should set fire to the woods on
the neighboring mountains; and that all word of security given to
Moorish places or individuals should be inviolably observed.  These
regulations were enforced by severe penalties, and had such salutary
effect that, though a vast host of various people was collected
together, not an opprobrious epithet was heard nor a weapon
drawn in quarrel.

In the mean time the cloud of war continued to gather about the
summits of the mountains, and multitudes of the fierce warriors of
the sierra descended to the lower heights of Bentomiz, which
overhung the camp, intending to force their way to the city.  A
detachment was sent against them, which, after sharp fighting,
drove them to the higher cliffs, where it was impossible to pursue
them.

Ten days had elapsed since the encampment of the army, yet still the
artillery had not arrived.  The lombards and other heavy ordnance
were left in despair at Antiquera; the rest came groaning slowly
through the narrow valleys, which were filled with long trains of
artillery and cars laden with munitions.  At length part of the smaller
ordnance arrived within half a league of the camp, and the Christians
were animated with the hopes of soon being able to make a regular
attack upon the fortifications of the city.



CHAPTER XLVIII.

HOW KING FERDINAND AND HIS ARMY WERE EXPOSED TO IMMINENT
    PERIL BEFORE VELEZ MALAGA.


While the standard of the cross waved on the hills before Velez
Malaga, and every height and cliff bristled with hostile arms, the
civil war between the factions of the Alhambra and the Albaycin, or
rather between El Zagal and El Chico, continued to convulse the city
of Granada.  The tidings of the investment of Velez Malaga at length
roused the attention of the old men and the alfaquis, whose heads
were not heated by the daily broils, and they endeavored to arouse
the people to a sense of their common danger.

"Why," said they, "continue these brawls between brethren and
kindred?  What battles are these where even triumph is ignominious,
and the victor blushes and conceals his scars?  Behold the Christians
ravaging the land won by the valor and blood of your forefathers,
dwelling in the houses they built, sitting under the trees they planted,
while your brethren wander about houseless and desolate.  Do you
wish to seek your real foe?--he is encamped on the mountain of
Bentomiz.  Do you want a field for the display of your valor?--you
will find it before the walls of Velez Malaga."

When they had roused the spirit of the people they made their way to
the rival kings, and addressed them with like remonstrances.  Hamet
Aben Zarraz, the inspired santon, reproached El Zagal with his blind
and senseless ambition.  "You are striving to be king," said he,
bitterly, "yet suffer the kingdom to be lost!"

El Zagal found himself in a perplexing dilemma.  He had a double
war to wage--with the enemy without and the enemy within.  Should
the Christians gain possession of the sea-coast, it would be ruinous
to the kingdom; should he leave Granada to oppose them, his vacant
throne might be seized on by his nephew.  He made a merit of
necessity, and, pretending to yield to the remonstrances of the
alfaquis, endeavored to compromise with Boabdil.  He expressed deep
concern at the daily losses of the country caused by the dissensions
of the capital: an opportunity now presented to retrieve all by a
blow.  The Christians had in a manner put themselves in a tomb
between the mountains--nothing remained but to throw the earth
upon them.  He offered to resign the title of king, to submit to the
government of his nephew, and fight under his standard; all he
desired was to hasten to the relief of Velez Malaga and to take full
vengeance on the Christians.

Boabdil spurned his proposition as the artifice of a hypocrite and a
traitor.  "How shall I trust a man," said he, "who has murdered my
father and my kindred by treachery, and has repeatedly sought my
own life both by violence and stratagem?"

El Zagal boiled with rage and vexation, but there was no time to be
lost.  He was beset by the alfaquis and the nobles of his count; the
youthful cavaliers were hot for action, the common people loud in
their complaints that the richest cities were abandoned to the mercy
of the enemy.  The old warrior was naturally fond of fighting; he saw
also that to remain inactive would endanger both crown and kingdom,
whereas a successful blow might secure his popularity in Granada.
He had a much more powerful force than his nephew, having lately
received reinforcements from Baza, Guadix, and Almeria; he could
march with a large force, therefore, to the relief of Velez Malaga,
and yet leave a strong garrison in the Alhambra.  He took his
measures accordingly, and departed suddenly in the night at the
head of one thousand horse and twenty thousand foot, and urged
his way rapidly by the most unfrequented roads along the chain of
mountains extending from Granada to the heights above Velez Malaga.

The Christians were alarmed one evening by the sudden blazing
of great fires on the mountains about the fortress of Bentomiz.  By
the ruddy light they beheld the flash of weapons and the array of
troops, and they heard the distant sound of Moorish drums and
trumpets.  The fires of Bentomiz were answered by fires on the towers
of Velez Malaga.  The shouts of "El Zagal! El Zagal!" echoed along the
cliffs and resounded from the city, and the Christians found that the
old warrior-king of Granada was on the mountain above the camp.

The spirits of the Moors were suddenly raised to a pitch of the
greatest exultation, while the Christians were astonished to see the
storm of war ready to burst upon their heads.  The count de Cabra,
with his accustomed eagerness when there was a king in the field,
would fain have scaled the heights and attacked El Zagal before
he had time to form his camp; but Ferdinand, more cool and wary,
restrained him.  To attack the height would be to abandon the siege.
He ordered every one, therefore, to keep a vigilant watch at his
post and stand ready to defend it to the utmost, but on no account
to sally forth and attack the enemy.

All night the signal-fires kept blazing along the mountains, rousing
and animating the whole country.  The morning sun rose over the
lofty summit of Bentomiz on a scene of martial splendor.  As its rays
glanced down the mountain they lighted up the white tents of the
Christian cavaliers cresting its lower prominences, their pennons
and ensigns fluttering in the morning breeze.  The sumptuous
pavilions of the king, with the holy standard of the cross and the
royal banners of Castile and Aragon, dominated the encampment.
Beyond lay the city, its lofty castle and numerous towers glistening
with arms, while above all, and just on the profile of the height,
in the full blaze of the rising sun, were descried the tents of the
Moor, his troops clustering about them and his infidel banners
floating against the sky.  Columns of smoke rose where the night-
fires had blazed, and the clash of the Moorish cymbal, the bray of
trumpet, and the neigh of steed were faintly heard from the airy
heights.  So pure and transparent is the atmosphere in this region
that every object can be distinctly seen at a great distance, and
the Christians were able to behold the formidable hosts of fires
gathering on the summits of the surrounding mountains.

One of the first measures of the Moorish king was to detach a large
force, under Reduan de Vanegas, alcayde of Granada, to fall upon the
convoy of ordnance, which stretched for a great distance through the
mountain-defiles.  Ferdinand had anticipated this attempt, and sent
the commander of Leon with a body of horse and foot to reinforce the
master of Alcantara.  El Zagal from his mountain-height beheld the
detachment issue from the camp, and immediately recalled Reduan.
The armies now remained quiet for a time, the Moor looking grimly
down upon the Christian camp, like a tiger meditating a bound upon
his prey.  The Christians were in fearful jeopardy--a hostile city below
them, a powerful army above them, and on every side mountains filled
with implacable foes.

After El Zagal had maturely considered the situation of the Christian
camp, and informed himself of all the passes of the mountain, he
conceived a plan to surprise the enemy which he flattered himself
would ensure their ruin and perhaps the capture of King Ferdinand.
He wrote a letter to the alcayde of the city, commanding him in the
dead of the night, on a signal-fire being made from the mountain,
to sally forth with all his troops and fall furiously upon the Christian
camp.  The king would, at the same time, rush down with his army from
the mountain, and assail it on the opposite side, thus overwhelming
it at the hour of deep repose.  This letter he despatched by a renegado
Christian, who knew all the secret roads of the country, and if taken
could pass himself for a Christian who had escaped from captivity.

El Zagal, confident in his stratagem, looked down upon the Christians
as his devoted victims.  As the sun went down and the long shadows
of the mountains stretched across the vega, he pointed with exultation
to the camp below, apparently unconscious of the impending danger.
"Behold," said he, "the unbelievers are delivered into our hands; their
king and choicest chivalry will soon be at our mercy.  Now is the time
to show the courage of men, and by one glorious victory retrieve all
that we have lost.  Happy he who falls fighting in the cause of the
Prophet! he will at once be transported to the paradise of the faithful
and surrounded by immortal houris.  Happy he who shall survive
victorious! he will behold Granada--an earthly paradise!--once more
delivered from its foes and restored to all its glory."  The words of El
Zagal were received with acclamations by his troops, who waited
impatiently for the appointed hour to pour down from their mountain-
hold upon the Christians.



CHAPTER XLIX.

RESULT OF THE STRATAGEM OF EL ZAGAL TO SURPRISE
    KING FERDINAND.


Queen Isabella and her court had remained at Cordova in great
anxiety for the result of the royal expedition.  Every day brought
tidings of the difficulties which attended the transportation of the
ordnance and munitions and of the critical state of the army.

While in this state of anxious suspense couriers arrived with all
speed from the frontiers, bringing tidings of the sudden sally of El
Zagal from Granada to surprise the camp.  All Cordova was in
consternation.  The destruction of the Andalusian chivalry among
the mountains of this very neighborhood was called to mind; it
was feared that similar ruin was about to burst forth from rocks
and precipices upon Ferdinand and his army.

Queen Isabella shared in the public alarm, but it served to rouse
all the energies of her heroic mind.  Instead of uttering idle
apprehensions, she sought only how to avert the danger.  She called
upon all the men of Andalusia under the age of seventy to arm and
hasten to the relief of their sovereign, and she prepared to set out
with the first levies.  The grand cardinal of Spain, old Pedro Gonzalez
de Mendoza, in whom the piety of the saint and the wisdom of the
counsellor were mingled with the fire of the cavalier, offered high
pay to all horsemen who would follow him to aid their king and the
Christian cause, and, buckling on armor, prepared to lead them
to the scene of danger.

The summons of the queen roused the quick Andalusian spirit.
Warriors who had long since given up fighting and had sent their
sons to battle now seized the sword and lance rusting on the
wall, and marshalled forth their gray-headed domestics and their
grandchildren for the field.  The great dread was, that all aid
would arrive too late; El Zagal and his host had passed like a
storm through the mountains, and it was feared the tempest
had already burst upon the Christian camp.

In the mean time, the night had closed which had been appointed
by El Zagal for the execution of his plan.  He had watched the last
light of day expire, and all the Spanish camp remained tranquil.  As
the hours wore away the camp-fires were gradually extinguished.
No drum nor trumpet sounded from below.  Nothing was heard but
now and then the dull heavy tread of troops or the echoing tramp
of horses--the usual patrols of the camp--and the changes of the
guards.  El Zagal restrained his own impatience and that of his
troops until the night should be advanced and the camp sunk in
that heavy sleep from which men are with difficulty awakened, and
when awakened prone to be bewildered and dismayed.

At length the appointed hour arrived.  By order of the Moorish king
a bright flame sprang up from the height of Bentomiz, but El Zagal
looked in vain for the responding light from the city.  His impatience
would brook no longer delay; he ordered the advance of the army
to descend the mountain-defile and attack the camp.  The defile was
narrow and overhung by rocks; as the troops proceeded they came
suddenly, in a shadowy hollow, upon a dark mass of warriors who,
with a loud shout, rushed to assail them.  Surprised and disconcerted,
they retreated in confusion to the height.  When El Zagal heard of a
Christian force in the defile, he doubted some counter-plan of the
enemy, and gave orders to light the mountain-fires.  On a signal given
bright flames sprang up on every height from pyres of wood prepared
for the purpose: cliff blazed out after cliff until the whole atmosphere
was in a glow of furnace light.

The ruddy glare lit up the glens and passes, and fell strongly upon
the Christian camp, revealing all its tents and every post and
bulwark.  Wherever El Zagal turned his eyes he beheld the light of
his fires flashed back from cuirass and helm and sparkling lance; he
beheld a grove of spears planted in every pass, every assailable
point bristling with arms, and squadrons of horse and foot in battle
array awaiting his attack.

In fact, his letter to the alcayde of Velez Malaga had been
intercepted by the vigilant Ferdinand, the renegado messenger
hanged, and secret measures taken after nightfall to give the
Moors a warm reception.  El Zagal saw that his plan of surprise was
discovered and foiled; furious with disappointment, he ordered his
troops forward to the attack.  They rushed down the defile, but
were again encountered by the mass of Christian warriors, being the
advance guard of the army commanded by Don Hurtado de Mendoza,
brother of the grand cardinal.  The Moors were again repulsed, and
retreated up the height.  Don Hurtado would have followed them, but
the ascent was steep and rugged and easily defended.  A sharp action
was kept up through the night with crossbows, darts, and arquebuses.
The cliffs echoed with deafening uproar, while the fires blazing upon
the mountains threw a lurid and uncertain light upon the scene.

When the day dawned and the Moors saw that there was no co-
operation from the city, they slackened in their ardor: they beheld
also every pass of the mountain filled with Christian troops, and
began to apprehend an assault in return.  Just then King Ferdinand
sent the marques of Cadiz with horse and foot to seize upon a height
occupied by a battalion of the enemy.  The marques assailed the Moors
with his usual intrepidity, and soon put them to flight.  The others, who
were above, seeing their comrades fly, threw down their arms and
retreated.  One of those unaccountable panics which now and then
seize upon great bodies of people, and to which the light-spirited
Moors were prone, now spread throughout the camp.  They were
terrified, they knew not why nor at what, and, throwing away swords,
lances, breast-plates, crossbows, everything that could impede their
motions, scattered themselves wildly in every direction.  They fled
without pursuers--from the glimpse of each other's arms, from the
sound of each other's footsteps.  Reduan de Vanegas, the brave
alcayde of Granada, alone succeeded in collecting a body of the
fugitives; he made a circuit with them through the passes of the
mountain, and, forcing his way across a weak part of the Christian
lines, galloped toward Velez Malaga.  The rest of the Moorish host
was completely scattered.  In vain did El Zagal and his knights attempt
to rally them; they were left almost alone, and had to consult their
own security by flight.

The marques of Cadiz, finding no opposition, ascended from height
to height, cautiously reconnoitring and fearful of some stratagem or
ambush.  All, however, was quiet.  He reached with his men the place
which the Moorish army had occupied: the heights were abandoned
and strewed with cuirasses, scimetars, crossbows, and other weapons.
His force was too small to pursue the enemy, but returned to the royal
camp laden with spoils.

Ferdinand at first could not credit so signal and miraculous a defeat,
but suspected some lurking stratagem.  He ordered, therefore, that
a strict watch should be maintained throughout the camp and every
one be ready for instant action.  The following night a thousand
cavaliers and hidalgos kept guard about the royal tent, as they
had done for several preceding nights; nor did the king relax this
vigilance until he received certain intelligence that the enemy was
completely scattered and El Zagal flying in confusion.

The tidings of this rout and of the safety of the Christian army
arrived at Cordova just as reinforcements were on the point of
setting out.  The anxiety and alarm of the queen and the public
were turned to transports of joy and gratitude.  The forces were
disbanded, solemn processions were made, and "Te Deums"
chanted in the churches for so signal a victory.



CHAPTER L.

HOW THE PEOPLE OF GRANADA REWARDED THE VALOR OF
    EL ZAGAL.


The daring spirit of Muley Abdallah el Zagal in sallying forth to
defend his territories while he left an armed rival in his capital
struck the people of Granada with admiration.  They recalled his
former exploits, and again anticipated some hardy achievement from
his valor.  Couriers from the army reported its formidable position
on the height of Bentomiz.  For a time there was a pause in the
bloody commotions of the city; all attention was turned to the blow
about to be struck at the Christian camp.  The same considerations
which diffused anxiety and terror through Cordova swelled every
bosom with exulting confidence in Granada.  The Moors expected to
hear of another massacre like that in the mountains of Malaga.  "El
Zagal has again entrapped the enemy!" was the cry.  "The power of
the unbelievers is about to be struck to the heart.  We shall soon
see the Christian king led captive to the capital."  Thus was the name
of El Zagal on every tongue.  He was extolled as the savior of the
country, the only one worthy of wearing the Moorish crown.  Boabdil
was reviled as basely remaining passive while his country was invaded
and so violent became the clamor of the populace that his adherents
trembled for his safety.

While the people of Granada were impatiently looking out for tidings
of the anticipated victory scattered horsemen came spurring across
the Vega.  They were fugitives from the Moorish army, and brought
the first incoherent account of its defeat.  Every one who attempted
to tell the tale of this unaccountable panic and dispersion was as if
bewildered by the broken recollection of some frightful dream.  He
knew not how or why it came to pass.  He talked of a battle in the
night, among rocks and precipices, by the glare of bale-fires; of
multitudes of armed foes in every pass, seen by gleams and flashes;
of the sudden horror that seized upon the army at daybreak, its
headlong flight, and total dispersion.  Hour after hour the arrival
of other fugitives confirmed the story of ruin and disgrace.

In proportion to their recent vaunting was the humiliation that now
fell upon the people of Granada.  There was a universal burst, not of
grief, but indignation.  They confounded the leader with the army--
the deserted with those who had abandoned him, and El Zagal, from
being their idol, became suddenly the object of their execration.  He
had sacrificed the army; he had disgraced the nation; he had betrayed
the country.  He was a dastard, a traitor; he was unworthy to reign.

On a sudden one among the multitude shouted, "Long live Boabdil
el Chico!"  The cry was echoed on all sides, and every one shouted,
"Long live Boabdil el Chico! long live the legitimate king of Granada!
and death to all usurpers!"  In the excitement of the moment they
thronged to the Albaycin, and those who had lately besieged Boabdil
with arms now surrounded his palace with acclamations.  The keys of
the city and of all the fortresses were laid at his feet; he was borne in
state to the Alhambra, and once more seated with all due ceremony on
the throne of his ancestors.

Boabdil had by this time become so accustomed to be crowned and
uncrowned by the multitude that he put no great faith in the duration
of their loyalty.  He knew that he was surrounded by hollow hearts,
and that most of the courtiers of the Alhambra were secretly devoted
to his uncle.  He ascended the throne as the rightful sovereign who
had been dispossessed of it by usurpation, and he ordered the heads
of four of the principal nobles to be struck off who had been most
zealous in support of the[9]usurper.  Executions of the kind were
matters of course on any change in Moorish government, and Boabdil
was lauded for his moderation and humanity in being content with so
small a sacrifice.  The factions were awed into obedience; the populace,
delighted with any change, extolled Boabdil to the skies; and the name
of Muley Abdallah el Zagal was for a time a by-word of scorn and
opprobrium throughout the city.

Never was any commander more astonished and confounded by a
sudden reverse of fortune than El Zagal.  The evening had seen him
with a powerful army at his command, his enemy within his grasp,
and victory about to cover him with glory and to consolidate his
power: the morning beheld him a fugitive among the mountains, his
army, his prosperity, his power, all dispelled, he knew not how--gone
like a dream of the night.  In vain had he tried to stem the headlong
flight of the army.  He saw his squadrons breaking and dispersing
among the cliffs of the mountains, until of all his host only a handful
of cavaliers remained faithful.  With these he made a gloomy retreat
toward Granada, but with a heart full of foreboding.  As he drew near
to the city he paused on the banks of the Xenil and sent forth scouts
to collect intelligence.  They returned with dejected countenances.
"The gates of Granada," said they, "are closed against you.  The
banner of Boabdil floats on the tower of the Alhambra."

El Zagal turned his steed and departed in silence.  He retreated
to the town of Almunecar, and thence to Almeria, which places still
remained faithful to him.  Restless and uneasy at being so distant
from the capital, he again changed his abode, and repaired to the
city of Guadix, within a few leagues of Granada.  Here he remained,
endeavoring to rally his forces and preparing to avail himself of
any sudden change in the fluctuating politics of the metropolis.



CHAPTER LI.

SURRENDER OF VELEZ MALAGA AND OTHER PLACES.


The people of Velez Malaga had beheld the camp of Muley Abdallah
covering the summit of Bentomiz and glittering in the last rays of
the setting sun.  During the night they had been alarmed and
perplexed by signal-fires on the mountain and by the sound of distant
battle.  When the morning broke the Moorish army had vanished
as if by enchantment.  While the inhabitants were lost in wonder and
conjecture, a body of cavalry, the fragment of the army saved by
Reduan de Vanegas, the brave alcayde of Granada, came galloping
to the gates.  The tidings of the strange discomfiture of the host
filled the city with consternation, but Reduan exhorted the people
to continue their resistance.  He was devoted to El Zagal and
confident in his skill and prowess, and felt assured that he would
soon collect his scattered forces and return with fresh troops from
Granada.  The people were comforted by the words and encouraged
by the presence of Reduan, and they had still a lingering hope that the
heavy artillery of the Christians might be locked up in the impassable
defiles of the mountains.  This hope was soon at an end.  The very
next day they beheld long laborious lines of ordnance slowly moving
into the Spanish camp--lombards, ribadoquines, catapults, and cars
laden with munitions--while the escort, under the brave master of
Alcantara, wheeled in great battalions into the camp to augment the
force of the besiegers.

The intelligence that Granada had shut its gates against El Zagal,
and that no reinforcements were to be expected, completed the
despair of the inhabitants; even Reduan himself lost confidence
and advised capitulation.

Ferdinand granted favorable conditions, for he was eager to proceed
against Malaga.  The inhabitants were permitted to depart with their
effects except their arms, and to reside, if they chose it, in Spain in
any place distant from the sea.  One hundred and twenty Christians
of both sexes were rescued from captivity by the surrender, and were
sent to Cordova, where they were received with great tenderness by
the queen and her daughter the infanta Isabella in the famous
cathedral in the midst of public rejoicings for the victory.

The capture of Velez Malaga was followed by the surrender of
Bentomiz, Comares, and all the towns and fortresses of the Axarquia,
which were strongly garrisoned, and discreet and valiant cavaliers
appointed as their alcaydes.  The inhabitants of nearly forty towns
of the Alpuxarras mountains also sent deputations to the Castilian
sovereigns, taking the oath of allegiance as mudexares or Moslem
vassals.

About the same time came letters from Boabdil el Chico announcing
to the sovereigns the revolution of Granada in his favor.  He solicited
kindness and protection for the inhabitants who had returned to
their allegiance, and for those of all other places which should
renounce adherence to his uncle.  By this means (he observed) the
whole kingdom of Granada would soon be induced to acknowledge
his sway, and would be held by him in faithful vassalage to the
Castilian Crown.

The Catholic sovereigns complied with his request.  Protection was
immediately extended to the inhabitants of Granada, permitting
them to cultivate their fields in peace and to trade with the Christian
territories in all articles excepting arms, being provided with letters
of surety from some Christian captain or alcayde.  The same favor
was promised to all other places which within six months should
renounce El Zagal and come under allegiance to the younger king.
Should they not do so within that time, the sovereigns threatened
to make war upon them and conquer them for themselves.  This
measure had a great effect in inducing many to return to the
standard of Boabdil.

Having made every necessary arrangement for the government
and security of the newly-conquered territory, Ferdinand turned
his attention to the great object of his campaign, the reduction
of Malaga.



CHAPTER LII.

OF THE CITY OF MALAGA AND ITS INHABITANTS.--MISSION OF
    HERNANDO DEL PULGAR.


The city of Malaga lies in the lap of a fertile valley, surrounded by
mountains, excepting on the part which lies open to the sea.  As
it was one of the most important, so it was one of the strongest,
cities of the Moorish kingdom.  It was fortified by walls of prodigious
strength studded with a great number of huge towers.  On the land
side it was protected by a natural barrier of mountains, and on the
other the waves of the Mediterranean beat against the foundations
of its massive bulwarks.

At one end of the city, near the sea, on a high mound, stood the
Alcazaba, or citadel, a fortress of great strength.  Immediately
above this rose a steep and rocky mount, on the top of which in old
times had been a pharos or lighthouse, from which the height derived
its name of Gibralfaro.*  It was at present crowned by an immense
castle, which, from its lofty and cragged situation, its vast walls,
and mighty towers, was deemed impregnable.  It communicated
with the Alcazaba by a covered way six paces broad, leading down
between two walls along the profile or ridge of the rock.  The castle
of Gibralfaro commanded both citadel and city, and was capable, if
both were taken, of maintaining a siege.  Two large suburbs adjoined
the city: in the one toward the sea were the dwelling-houses of the
most opulent inhabitants, adorned with hanging gardens; the other,
on the land side, was thickly peopled and surrounded by strong walls
and towers.

*A corruption of "Gibel-faro," the hill of the lighthouse.


Malaga possessed a brave and numerous garrison, and the common
people were active, hardy, and resolute; but the city was rich and
commercial, and under the habitual control of numerous opulent
merchants, who dreaded the ruinous consequences of a siege.  They
were little zealous for the warlike renown of their city, and longed
rather to participate in the enviable security of property and the
lucrative privileges of safe traffic with the Christian territories
granted to all places which declared for Boabdil.  At the head of
these gainful citizens was Ali Dordux, a mighty merchant of
uncounted wealth, connected, it is said, with the royal family of
Granada, whose ships traded to every part of the Levant and whose
word was as a law in Malaga.  Ali Dordux assembled the most opulent
and important of his commercial brethren, and they repaired in a body
to the Alcazaba, where they were received by the alcayde, Aben
Comixa, with that deference generally shown to men of their great
local dignity and power of purse.  Ali Dordux was ample and stately
in his form and fluent and emphatic in his discourse; his eloquence
had an effect, therefore, upon the alcayde as he represented the
hopelessness of a defence of Malaga, the misery that must attend a
siege, and the ruin that must follow a capture by force of arms.  On
the other hand, he set forth the grace that might be obtained from
the Castilian sovereigns by an early and voluntary acknowledgment
of Boabdil as king, the peaceful possession of their property, and the
profitable commerce with the Christian ports that would be allowed
them.  He was seconded by his weighty and important coadjutors;
and the alcadye, accustomed to regard them as the arbiters of the
affairs of the place, yielded to their united counsels.  He departed,
therefore, with all speed to the Christian camp, empowered to
arrange a capitulation with the Castilian monarch, and in the mean
time his brother remained in command of the Alcazaba.

There was at this time as alcayde in the old crag-built castle of
Gibralfaro a warlike and fiery Moor, an implacable enemy of the
Christians.  This was no other than Hamet Zeli, surnamed El Zegri,
the once-formidable alcayde of Ronda and the terror of its mountains.
He had never forgiven the capture of his favorite fortress, and panted
for vengeance on the Christians.  Notwithstanding his reverses, he
had retained the favor of El Zagal, who knew how to appreciate a bold
warrior of the kind, and had placed him in command of this important
fortress of Gibralfaro.

Hamet el Zegri had gathered round him the remnant of his band
of Gomeres, with others of the same tribe recently arrived from
Morocco.  These fierce warriors were nestled like so many war-hawks
about their lofty cliff.  They looked down with martial contempt upon
the commercial city of Malaga, which they were placed to protect;
or, rather, they esteemed it only for its military importance and its
capability of defence.  They held no communion with its trading,
gainful inhabitants, and even considered the garrison of the Alcazaba
as their inferiors.  War was their pursuit and passion; they rejoiced
in its turbulent and perilous scenes; and, confident in the strength
of the city, and, above all, of their castle, they set at defiance the
menace of Christian invasion.  There were among them also many
apostate Moors, who had once embraced Christianity, but had since
recanted and fled from the vengeance of the Inquisition.*  These were
desperadoes who had no mercy to expect should they again fall into
the hands of the enemy.

*Zurita, lib. 30, cap. 71.


Such were the fierce elements of the garrison of Gibralfaro, and its
rage may easily be conceived at hearing that Malaga was to be given
up without a blow; that they were to sink into Christian vassals under
the intermediate sway of Boabdil el Chico; and that the alcayde of the
Alcazaba had departed to arrange the terms of capitulation.

Hamet determined to avert by desperate means the threatened
degradation.  He knew that there was a large party in the city
faithful to El Zagal, being composed of warlike men who had taken
refuge from the various mountain-towns which had been captured;
their feelings were desperate as their fortunes, and, like Hamet,
they panted for revenge upon the Christians.  With these he had a
secret conference, and received assurances of their adherence to
him in any measures of defence.  As to the counsel of the peaceful
inhabitants, he considered it unworthy the consideration of a soldier,
and he spurned at the interference of the wealthy merchant Ali
Dordux in matters of warfare.

"Still," said Hamet el Zegri, "let us proceed regularly."  So he
descended with his Gomeres to the citadel, entered it suddenly, put
to death the brother of the alcayde and such of the garrison as made
any demur, and then summoned the principal inhabitants of Malaga
to deliberate on measures for the welfare of the city.*  The wealthy
merchants again mounted to the citadel, excepting Ali Dordux, who
refused to obey the summons.  They entered with hearts filled with
awe, for they found Hamet surrounded by his grim African guard and
all the stern array of military power, and they beheld the bloody
traces of the recent massacre.

*Cura de los Palacios, c. 82.


Hamet rolled a dark and searching eye upon the assembly.  "Who,"
said he, "is loyal and devoted to Muley Abdallah el Zagal?"  Every
one present asserted his loyalty.  "Good!" said Hamet; "and who is
ready to prove his devotion to his sovereign by defending this his
important city to the last extremity?"  Every one present declared
his readiness.  "Enough!" observed Hamet.  "The alcayde Aben
Comixa has proved himself a traitor to his sovereign and to you
all, for he has conspired to deliver the place to the Christians.  It
behooves you to choose some other commander capable of defending
your city against the approaching enemy."  The assembly declared
unanimously that no one was so worthy of the command as himself.
So Hamet was appointed alcayde of Malaga, and immediately proceeded
to man the forts and towers with his partisans and to make every
preparation for a desperate resistance.

Intelligence of these occurrences put an end to the negotiations
between King Ferdinand and the superseded alcayde Aben Comixa,
and it was supposed there was no alternative but to lay siege to
the place.  The marques of Cadiz, however, found at Velez a Moorish
cavalier of some note, a native of Malaga, who offered to tamper
with Hamet el Zegri for the surrender of the city, or at least of the
castle of Gibralfaro.  The marques communicated this to the king.
"I put this business and the key of my treasury into your hands,"
said Ferdinand; "act, stipulate, and disburse in my name as you
think proper."

The marques armed the Moor with his own lance, cuirass, and
target and mounted him on one of his own horses.  He equipped in
similar style also another Moor, his companion and relative.  They
bore secret letters to Hamet from the marques offering him the town
of Coin in perpetual inheritance and four thousand doblas in gold if
he would deliver up Gibralfaro, together with a farm and two thousand
doblas for his lieutenant, Ibrahim Zenete, and large sums to be
distributed among his officers and soldiers; and he offered unlimited
rewards for the surrender of the city.

Hamet had a warrior's admiration of the marques of Cadiz, and
received his messengers with courtesy in his fortress of Gibralfaro.
He even listened to their propositions with patience, and dismissed
them in safety, though with an absolute refusal.  The marques thought
his reply was not so peremptory as to discourage another effort.  The
emissaries were despatched, therefore, a second time, with further
propositions.  They approached Malaga in the night, but found the
guards doubled, patrols abroad, and the whole place on the alert.
They were discovered, pursued, and only saved themselves by the
fleetness of their steeds and their knowledge of the passes of
the mountains.*

*Cura de los Palacios, MS., c. 82.


Finding all attempts to tamper with the faith of Hamet utterly futile,
King Ferdinand publicly summoned the city to surrender, offering
the most favorable terms in case of immediate compliance, but
threatening captivity to all the inhabitants in case of resistance.

It required a man of nerve to undertake the delivery of such a
summons in the present heated and turbulent state of the Moorish
community.  Such a one stepped forward in the person of a cavalier of
the royal guards, Hernan Perez del Pulgar by name, a youth of noble
descent, who had already signalized himself by his romantic valor
and daring enterprise.  Furnished with official papers for Hamet el
Zegri and a private letter from the king to Ali Dordux, he entered
the gates of Malaga under the protection of a flag, and boldly
delivered his summons in presence of the principal inhabitants.
The language of the summons or the tone in which it was delivered
exasperated the fiery spirit of the Moors, and it required all the
energy of Hamet and the influence of several of the alfaquis to
prevent an outrage to the person of the ambassador.  The reply
of Hamet was haughty and decided.  "The city of Malaga has been
confided to me," said he--"not to be surrendered, but defended, and
the king shall witness how I acquit myself of my charge."*

*Pulgar, part 3, cap. 74.


His mission at an end, Hernan del Pulgar rode slowly and deliberately
through the city, utterly regardless of the scowls and menaces and
scarcely restrained turbulence of the multitude, and bore to Ferdinand
at Velez the haughty answer of the Moor, but at the same time gave
him a formidable account of the force of the garrison, the strength of
the fortifications, and the determined spirit of the commander and his
men.  The king immediately sent orders to have the heavy artillery
forwarded from Antiquera, and on the 7th of May marched with his
army toward Malaga.



CHAPTER LIII.

ADVANCE OF KING FERDINAND AGAINST MALAGA.


The army of Ferdinand advanced in lengthened line, glittering along
the foot of the mountains which border the Mediterranean, while a
fleet of vessels, freighted with heavy artillery and warlike munitions,
kept pace with it at a short distance from the land, covering the sea
with a thousand gleaming sails.  When Hamet el Zegri saw this force
approaching, he set fire to the houses of the suburbs which adjoined
the walls and sent forth three battalions to encounter the advance
guard of the enemy.

The Christian army drew near to the city at that end where the
castle and rocky height of Gibralfaro defended the seaboard.
Immediately opposite, at about two bow-shots' distance, stood
the castle, and between it and the high chain of mountains was
a steep and rocky hill, at present called the hill of St. Christobal,
commanding a pass through which the Christians must march to
penetrate to the vega and surround the city.  Hamet ordered the
three battalions to take their stations--one on this hill, another in
the pass near the castle, and a third on the side of the mountain
near the sea.

A body of Spanish foot-soldiers of the advance guard, sturdy
mountaineers of Galicia, sprang forward to climb the side of the
height next the sea, at the same time a number of cavaliers and
hidalgos of the royal household attacked the Moors who guarded
the pass below.  The Moors defended their posts with obstinate
valor.  The Galicians were repeatedly overpowered and driven
down the hill, but as often rallied, and, being reinforced by the
hidalgos and cavaliers, returned to the assault.  This obstinate
struggle lasted for six hours: the strife was of a deadly kind, not
merely with crossbows and arquebuses, but hand to hand with
swords and daggers; no quarter was claimed or given on either
side--they fought not to make captives, but to slay.  It was but the
advance of the Christian army that was engaged; so narrow was
the pass along the coast that the army could proceed only in file:
horse and foot and beasts of burden were crowded one upon
another, impeding each other and blocking up the narrow and
rugged defile.  The soldiers heard the uproar of the battle, the
sound of trumpets, and the war-cries of the Moors, but tried in
vain to press forward to the assistance of their companions.

At length a body of foot-soldiers of the Holy Brotherhood climbed
with great difficulty the steep side of the mountain which overhung
the pass, and advanced with seven banners displayed.  The Moors,
seeing this force above them, abandoned the pass in despair.  The
battle was still raging on the height; the Galicians, though supported
by Castilian troops under Don Hurtado de Mendoza and Garcilasso
de la Vega, were severely pressed and roughly handled by the Moors:
at length a brave standard-bearer, Luys Mazeda by name, threw
himself into the midst of the enemy and planted his banner on the
summit.  The Galicians and Castilians, stimulated by this noble self-
devotion, followed him, fighting desperately, and the Moors were at
length driven to their castle of Gibralfaro.*

*Pulgar, Cronica.


This important height being taken, the pass lay open to the army,
but by this time evening was advancing, and the host was too weary
and exhausted to seek proper situations for the encampment.  The king,
attended by several grandees and cavaliers, went the rounds at night,
stationing outposts toward the city and guards and patrols to give the
alarm on the least movement of the enemy.  All night the Christians
lay upon their arms, lest there should be some attempt to sally forth
and attack them.

When the morning dawned the king gazed with admiration at this
city which he hoped soon to add to his dominions.  It was surrounded
on one side by vineyards, gardens, and orchards, which covered the
hills with verdure; on the other side its walls were bathed by the
smooth and tranquil sea.  Its vast and lofty towers and prodigious
castles, hoary with age, yet unimpaired in strength, showed the
labors of magnanimous men in former times to protect their favorite
abode.  Hanging gardens, groves of oranges, citrons, and pomegranates,
with tall cedars and stately palms, were mingled with the stern
battlements and towers, bespeaking the opulence and luxury that
reigned within.

In the mean time, the Christian army poured through the pass, and,
throwing out its columns and extending its lines, took possession of
every vantage-ground around the city.  King Ferdinand surveyed the
ground and appointed the stations of the different commanders.

The important mount of St. Christobal, which had cost so violent a
struggle and faced the powerful fortress of Gibralfaro, was given in
charge to Roderigo Ponce de Leon, marques of Cadiz, who in all
sieges claimed the post of danger.  He had several noble cavaliers
with their retainers in his encampment, which consisted of fifteen
hundred horse and fourteen thousand foot, and extended from the
summit of the mount to the margin of the sea, completely blocking
up the approach to the city on that side.  From this post a line of
encampments extended quite round the city to the seaboard, fortified
by bulwarks and deep ditches, while a fleet of armed ships and
galleys stretched before the harbor, so that the place was
completely invested by sea and land.  The various parts of the valley
now resounded with the din of preparation, and was filled with
artificers preparing warlike engines and munitions; armorers and
smiths with glowing forges and deafening hammers; carpenters and
engineers constructing machines wherewith to assail the walls;
stone-cutters shaping stone balls for the ordnance; and burners
of charcoal preparing fuel for the furnaces and forges.

When the encampment was formed the heavy ordnance was landed
from the ships and mounted in various parts of the camp.  Five huge
lombards were placed on the mount commanded by the marques of
Cadiz, so as to bear upon the castle of Gibralfaro.

The Moors made strenuous efforts to impede these preparations.
They kept up a heavy fire from their ordnance upon the men employed
in digging trenches or constructing batteries, so that the latter had
to work principally in the night.  The royal tents had been stationed
conspicuously and within reach of the Moorish batteries, but were so
warmly assailed that they had to be removed behind a hill.

When the works were completed the Christian batteries opened
in return, and kept up a tremendous cannonade, while the fleet,
approaching the land, assailed the city vigorously on the opposite
side.

"It was a glorious and delectable sight," observes Fray Antonio
Agapida, "to behold this infidel city thus surrounded by sea and
land by a mighty Christian force.  Every mound in its circuit was, as
it were, a little city of tents bearing the standard of some renowned
Catholic warrior.  Besides the warlike ships and galleys which lay
before the place, the sea was covered with innumerable sails,
passing and repassing, appearing and disappearing, being engaged
in bringing supplies for the subsistence of the army.  It seemed a
vast spectacle contrived to recreate the eye, did not the volleying
bursts of flame and smoke from the ships, which seemed to lie asleep
on the quiet sea, and the thunder of ordnance from camp and city,
from tower and battlement, tell the deadly warfare that was waging.

"At night the scene was far more direful than in the day.  The
cheerful light of the sun was gone; there was nothing but the
flashes of artillery or the baleful gleams of combustibles thrown
into the city, and the conflagration of the houses.  The fire kept up
from the Christian batteries was incessant: there were seven great
lombards in particular, called the Seven Sisters of Ximenes, which
did tremendous execution.  The Moorish ordnance replied in thunder
from the walls; Gibralfaro was wrapped in volumes of smoke rolling
about its base; and Hamet and his Gomeres looked out with triumph
upon the tempest of war they had awaked.  Truly they were so many
demons incarnate," concludes the pious Fray Antonio Agapida, "who
were permitted by Heaven to enter into and possess this infidel city
for its perdition."



CHAPTER LIV.

SIEGE OF MALAGA.


The attack on Malaga by sea and land was kept up for several
days with tremendous violence, but without producing any great
impression, so strong were the ancient bulwarks of the city.  The
count de Cifuentes was the first to signalize himself by any noted
achievement.  A main tower, protecting what is at present called the
suburb of Santa Ana, had been shattered by the ordnance and the
battlements demolished, so as to yield no shelter to its defenders.
Seeing this, the count assembled a gallant band of cavaliers of the
royal household and advanced to take it by storm.  They applied
scaling-ladders and mounted sword in hand. The Moors, having no
longer battlements to protect them, descended to a lower floor, and
made furious resistance from the windows and loopholes.  They poured
down boiling pitch and rosin, and hurled stones and darts and arrows
on the assailants.  Many of the Christians were slain, their ladders
were destroyed by flaming combustibles, and the count was obliged
to retreat from before the tower.  On the following day he renewed
the attack with superior force, and after a severe combat succeeded
in planting his victorious banner on the tower.

The Moors now assailed the tower in their turn.  They undermined the
part toward the city, placed props of woo