d under the foundation, and,
setting fire to them, drew off to a distance.  In a little while the props
gave way, the foundation sunk, and the tower was rent; part of its
wall fell with a tremendous noise; many of the Christians were thrown
out headlong, and the rest were laid open to the missiles of the enemy.

By this time, however, a breach had been made in the wall of the
suburb adjoining the tower, and troops poured in to the assistance
of their comrades.  A continued battle was kept up for two days and
a night by reinforcements from camp and city.  The parties fought
backward and forward through the breach of the wall and in the
narrow and winding streets adjacent with alternate success, and
the vicinity of the tower was strewn with the dead and wounded.
At length the Moors gradually gave way, disputing every inch of
ground, until they were driven into the city, and the Christians
remained masters of the greater part of the suburb.

This partial success, though gained with great toil and bloodshed,
gave temporary animation to the Christians; they soon found,
however, that the attack on the main works of the city was a much
more arduous task.  The garrison contained veterans who had served
in many of the towns captured by the Christians.  They were no longer
confounded and dismayed by the battering ordnance and other strange
engines of foreign invention, and had become expert in parrying their
effects, in repairing breaches, and erecting counter-works.

The Christians, accustomed of late to speedy conquests of Moorish
fortresses, became impatient of the slow progress of the siege.  Many
were apprehensive of a scarcity of provisions from the difficulty of
subsisting so numerous a host in the heart of the enemy's country,
where it was necessary to transport supplies across rugged and
hostile mountains or subjected to the uncertainties of the sea.  Many
also were alarmed at a pestilence which broke out in the neighboring
villages, and some were so overcome by these apprehensions as to
abandon the camp and return to their homes.

Several of the loose and worthless hangers-on that infest all great
armies, hearing these murmurs, thought that the siege would soon
be raised, and deserted to the enemy, hoping to make their fortunes.
They gave exaggerated accounts of the alarms and discontents of
the army, and represented the troops as daily returning home in
bands.  Above all, they declared that the gunpowder was nearly
exhausted, so that the artillery would soon be useless.  They
assured the Moors, therefore, that if they persisted a little longer
in their defence, the king would be obliged to draw off his forces
and abandon the siege.

The reports of these renegados gave fresh courage to the garrison;
they made vigorous sallies upon the camp, harassing it by night and
day, and obliging every part to be guarded with the most painful
vigilance.  They fortified the weak parts of their walls with ditches
and palisadoes, and gave every manifestation of a determined and
unyielding spirit.

Ferdinand soon received intelligence of the reports which had been
carried to the Moors: he understood that they had been informed,
likewise, that the queen was alarmed for the safety of the camp, and
had written repeatedly urging him to abandon the siege.  As the best
means of disproving all these falsehoods and destroying the vain
hopes of the enemy, he wrote to the queen entreating her to come
and take up her residence in the camp.



CHAPTER LV.

SIEGE OF MALAGA CONTINUED.--OBSTINACY OF HAMET EL ZEGRI.


Great was the enthusiasm of the army when they beheld their
patriot queen advancing in state to share the toils and dangers
of her people.  Isabella entered the camp attended by the
dignitaries and the whole retinue of her court to manifest that this
was no temporary visit.  On one side of her was her daughter, the
infanta; on the other, the grand cardinal of Spain: Hernando de
Talavera, the prior of Prado, confessor to the queen, followed,
with a great train of prelates, courtiers, cavaliers, and ladies of
distinction.  The cavalcade moved in calm and stately order through
the camp, softening the iron aspect of war by this array of courtly
grace and female beauty.

Isabella had commanded that on her coming to the camp the horrors
of war should be suspended and fresh offers of peace made to the
enemy.  On her arrival, therefore, there had been a general cessation
of firing throughout the camp.  A messenger was at the same time
despatched to the besieged, informing them of her being in the camp,
and of the determination of the sovereigns to make it their settled
residence until the city should be taken.  The same terms were
offered in case of immediate surrender that had been granted to
Velez Malaga, but the inhabitants were threatened with captivity
and the sword should they persist in their defence.

Hamet el Zegri received this message with haughty contempt, and
dismissed the messenger without deigning a reply, and accompanied
by an escort to prevent his holding any communication with the
inhabitants in the streets.  "The Christian sovereigns," said Hamet
to those about him, "have made this offer in consequence of their
despair.  The silence of their batteries proves the truth of what has
been told us, that their powder is exhausted.  They have no longer
the means of demolishing our walls, and if they remain much longer
the autumnal rains will interrupt their convoys and fill their camp with
famine and disease.  The first storm will disperse their fleet, which
has no neighboring port of shelter: Africa will then be open to us to
procure reinforcements and supplies."

The words of Hamet el Zegri were hailed as oracular by his
adherents.  Many of the peaceful part of the community, however,
ventured to remonstrate, and to implore him to accept the proffered
mercy.  The stern Hamet silenced them with a terrific threat: he
declared that whoever should talk of capitulating or should hold any
communication with the Christians should be put to death.  The
Gomeres, like true men of the sword, acted upon the menace of their
chieftain as upon a written law, and, having detected several of the
inhabitants in secret correspondence with the enemy, set upon and
slew them and confiscated their effects.  This struck such terror
into the citizens that those who had been loudest in their murmurs
became suddenly mute, and were remarked as evincing the greatest
bustle and alacrity in the defence of the city.

When the messenger returned to the camp and reported the
contemptuous reception of the royal message, King Ferdinand
was exceedingly indignant.  Finding the cessation of firing on the
queen's arrival had encouraged a belief among the enemy that
there was a scarcity of powder in the camp, he ordered a general
discharge from all the batteries.  The sudden burst of war from
every quarter soon convinced the Moors of their error and completed
the confusion of the citizens, who knew not which most to dread,
their assailants or their defenders, the Christians or the Gomeres.

That evening the sovereigns visited the encampment of the marques
of Cadiz, which commanded a view over a great part of the city, the
camp, and the sea with its flotillas.  The tent of the marques was of
great magnitude, furnished with hangings of rich brocade and French
cloth of the rarest texture.  It was in the Oriental style, and, as it
crowned the height, with the surrounding tents of other cavaliers,
all sumptuously furnished, presented a gay and silken contrast to the
opposite towers of Gibralfaro.  Here a splendid collation was served
up to the sovereigns, and the courtly revel that prevailed in this
chivalrous encampment, the glitter of pageantry, and the bursts of
festive music made more striking the gloom and silence that reigned
over the Moorish castle.

The marques of Cadiz while it was yet light conducted his royal
visitors to every point that commanded a view of the warlike scene
below.  He caused the heavy lombards also to be discharged, that
the queen and ladies of the court might witness the effect of those
tremendous engines.  The fair dames were filled with awe and
admiration as the mountain shook beneath their feet with the
thunder of the artillery and they beheld great fragments of the
Moorish walls tumbling down the rocks and precipices.

While the good marques was displaying these things to his royal
guests he lifted up his eyes, and to his astonishment beheld his own
banner hanging out from the nearest tower of Gibralfaro.  The blood
mantled in his cheek, for it was a banner which he had lost at the
time of the memorable massacre of the heights of Malaga.*  To make
this taunt more evident, several of the Gomeres displayed themselves
upon the battlements arrayed in the helmets and cuirasses of some
of the cavaliers slain or captured on that occasion.  The marques of
Cadiz restrained his indignation and held his peace, but several of,
his cavaliers vowed loudly to revenge this cruel bravado on the
ferocious garrison of Gibralfaro.

*Diego de Valera, Cronica, MS.



CHAPTER LVI.

ATTACK OF THE MARQUES OF CADIZ UPON GIBRALFARO.


The marques of Cadiz was not a cavalier that readily forgave an
injury or an insult.  On the morning after the royal banquet his
batteries opened a tremendous fire upon Gibralfaro.  All day the
encampment was wrapped in wreaths of smoke, nor did the assault
cease with the day, but throughout the night there was an incessant
flashing and thundering of the lombards, and the following morning
the assault rather increased than slackened in fury.  The Moorish
bulwarks were no proof against those formidable engines.   In a few
days the lofty tower on which the taunting banner had been displayed
was shattered, a smaller tower in its vicinity reduced to ruins, and
a great breach made in the intervening walls.

Several of the hot-spirited cavaliers were eager for storming the
breach sword in hand; others, more cool and wary, pointed out the
rashness of such an attempt, for the Moors had worked indefatigably
in the night; they had digged a deep ditch within the breach, and
had fortified it with palisadoes and a high breastwork.  All, however,
agreed that the camp might safely be advanced near to the ruined
walls, and that it ought to be done in return for the insolent defiance
of the enemy.

The marques of Cadiz felt the temerity of the measure, but was
unwilling to dampen the zeal of these high-spirited cavaliers, and,
having chosen the post of danger in the camp, it did not become him
to decline any service merely because it might appear perilous.  He
ordered his outposts, therefore, to be advanced within a stone's-
throw of the breach, but exhorted the soldiers to maintain the
utmost vigilance.

The thunder of the batteries had ceased; the troops, exhausted by
two nights' fatigue and watchfulness, and apprehending no danger
from the dismantled walls, were half of them asleep; the rest were
scattered about in negligent security.  On a sudden upward of two
thousand Moors sallied forth from the castle, led on by Ibrahim
Zenete, the principal captain under Hamet. They fell with fearful
havoc upon the advanced guard, slaying many of them in their
sleep and putting the rest to headlong flight.

The marques was in his tent, about a bow-shot distant, when he
heard the tumult of the onset and beheld his men dying in confusion.
He rushed forth, followed by his standard-bearer.  "Turn again,
cavaliers!" exclaimed he; "I am here, Ponce de Leon!  To the foe! to
the foe!"  The flying troops stopped at hearing his well-known voice,
rallied under his banner, and turned upon the enemy.  The encampment
by this time was roused; several cavaliers from the adjoining stations
had hastened to the scene of action, with a number of Galicians and
soldiers of the Holy Brotherhood.  An obstinate and bloody contest
ensued; the ruggedness of the place, the rocks, chasms, and
declivities broke it into numerous combats: Christian and Moor fought
hand to hand with swords and daggers, and often, grappling and
struggling, rolled together down the precipices.

The banner of the marques was in danger of being taken: he hastened
to its rescue, followed by some of his bravest cavaliers.  They were
surrounded by the enemy, and several of them cut down.  Don Diego
Ponce de Leon, brother to the marques, was wounded by an arrow,
and his son-in-law, Luis Ponce, was likewise wounded: they succeeded,
however, in rescuing the banner and bearing it off in safety.  The battle
lasted for an hour; the height was covered with killed and wounded and
the blood flowed in streams down the rocks; at length, Ibrahim Zenete
being disabled by the thrust of a lance, the Moors gave way and
retreated to the castle.

They now opened a galling fire from their battlements and towers,
approaching the breaches so as to discharge their crossbows and
arquebuses into the advanced guard of the encampment.  The
marques was singled out: the shot fell thick about him, and one
passed through his buckler and struck upon his cuirass, but without
doing him any injury.  Every one now saw the danger and inutility of
approaching the camp thus near to the castle, and those who had
counselled it were now urgent that it should be withdrawn.  It was
accordingly removed back to its original ground, from which the
marques had most reluctantly advanced it.  Nothing but his valor
and timely aid had prevented this attack on his outpost from ending
in a total rout of all that part of the army.

Many cavaliers of distinction fell in this contest, but the loss of
none was felt more deeply than that of Ortega del Prado, captain
of escaladors.  He was one of the bravest men in the service, the same
who had devised the first successful blow of the war, the storming
of Alhama, where he was the first to plant and mount the scaling-
ladders.  He had always been high in the favor and confidence of the
noble Ponce de Leon, who knew how to appreciate and avail himself
of the merits of all able and valiant men.*

*Zurita, Mariana, Abarca.



CHAPTER LVII.

SIEGE OF MALAGIA CONTINUED.--STRATAGEMS OF VARIOUS KINDS.


Great were the exertions now made, both by the besiegers and the
besieged, to carry on the contest with the utmost vigor.  Hamet went
the rounds of the walls and towers, doubling the guards and putting
everything in the best posture of defence.  The garrison was divided
into parties of a hundred, to each of which a captain was appointed.
Some were to patrol, others to sally forth and skirmish with the
enemy, and others to hold themselves armed and in reserve.  Six
albatozas, or floating batteries, were manned and armed with
pieces of artillery to attack the fleet.

On the other hand, the Castilian sovereigns kept open a
communication by sea with various parts of Spain, from which they
received provisions of all kinds; they ordered supplies of powder
also from Valencia, Barcelona, Sicily, and Portugal.  They made
great preparations also for storming the city.  Towers of wood
were constructed to move on wheels, each capable of holding one
hundred men; they were furnished with ladders to be thrown from
their summits to the tops of the walls, and within those ladders
others were encased, to be let down for the descent of the troops
into the city.  There were gallipagos, or tortoises, also being great
wooden shields, covered with hides, to protect the assailants and
those who undermined the walls.

Secret mines were commenced in various places: some were intended
to reach to the foundations of the walls, which were to be propped
up with wood, ready to be set on fire; others were to pass under the
walls, and remain ready to be broken open so as to give entrance to
the besiegers.  At these mines the army worked day and night, and
during these secret preparations the ordnance kept up a fire upon
the city to divert the attention of the besieged.

In the mean time, Hamet displayed wonderful vigor and ingenuity
in defending the city and in repairing or fortifying by deep ditches
the breaches made by the enemy.  He noted also every place where
the camp might be assailed with advantage, and gave the besieging
army no repose night or day.  While his troops sallied on the land,
his floating batteries attacked the besiegers on the sea, so that there
was incessant skirmishing.  The tents called the Queen's Hospital
were crowded with wounded, and the whole army suffered from
constant watchfulness and fatigue.  To guard against the sudden
assaults of the Moors, the trenches were deepened and palisadoes
erected in front of the camp; and in that part facing Gibralfaro, where
the rocky heights did not admit of such defences, a high rampart of
earth was thrown up.  The cavaliers Garcilasso de la Vega, Juan de
Zuniga, and Diego de Atayde were appointed to go the rounds and
keep vigilant watch that these fortifications were maintained in
good order.

In a little while Hamet discovered the mines secretly commenced by
the Christians: he immediately ordered counter-mines.  The soldiers
mutually worked until they met and fought hand to hand in these
subterranean passages.  The Christians were driven out of one of
their mines; fire was set to the wooden framework and the mine
destroyed.  Encouraged by this success, the Moors attempted a
general attack upon the camp, the mines, and the besieging fleet.
The battle lasted for six hours on land and water, above and below
ground, on bulwark, and in trench and mine; the Moors displayed
wonderful intrepidity, but were finally repulsed at all points, and
obliged to retire into the city, where they were closely invested,
without the means of receiving any assistance from abroad.

The horrors of famine were now added to the other miseries of
Malaga.  Hamet, with the spirit of a man bred up to war, considered
everything as subservient to the wants of the soldier, and ordered
all the grain in the city to be gathered and garnered up for the sole
use of those who fought.  Even this was dealt out sparingly, and
each soldier received four ounces of bread in the morning and two
in the evening for his daily allowance.

The wealthy inhabitants and all those peacefully inclined mourned
over a resistance which brought destruction upon their houses,
death into their families, and which they saw must end in their
ruin and captivity; still, none of them dared to speak openly of
capitulation, or even to manifest their grief, lest they should
awaken the wrath of their fierce defenders.  They surrounded their
civic champion, Ali Dordux, the great and opulent merchant, who
had buckled on shield and cuirass and taken spear in hand for
the defence of his native city, and with a large body of the braver
citizens had charge of one of the gates and a considerable portion
of the walls.  Drawing Ali Dordux aside, they poured forth their
griefs to him in secret.  "Why," said they, "should we suffer our
native city to be made a mere bulwark and fighting-place for foreign
barbarians and desperate men?  They have no families to care for,
no property to lose, no love for the soil, and no value for their
lives.  They fight to gratify a thirst for blood or a desire for
revenge, and will fight on until Malaga becomes a ruin and its
people slaves.  Let us think and act for ourselves, our wives,
and our children.  Let us make private terms with the Christians
before it is too late, and save ourselves from destruction."

The bowels of Ali Dordux yearned toward his fellow citizens; he
bethought him also of the sweet security of peace and the bloodless
yet gratifying triumphs of gainful traffic.  The idea also of a secret
negotiation or bargain with the Castilian sovereigns for the
redemption of his native city was more conformable to his accustomed
habits than this violent appeal to arms, for, though he had for a
time assumed the warrior, he had not forgotten the merchant.  Ali
Dordux communed, therefore, with the citizen-soldiers under his
command, and they readily conformed to his opinion.  Concerting
together, they wrote a proposition to the Castilian sovereigns,
offering to admit the army into the part of the city entrusted to
their care on receiving assurance of protection for the lives and
properties of the inhabitants.  This writing they delivered to a
trusty emissary to take to the Christian camp, appointing the
hour and place of his return that they might be ready to admit
him unperceived.

The Moor made his way in safety to the camp, and was admitted
to the presence of the sovereigns.  Eager to gain the city without
further cost of blood or treasure, they gave a written promise to
grant the condition, and the Moor set out joyfully on his return.
As he approached the walls where Ali Dordux and his confederates
were waiting to receive him, he was descried by a patrolling band of
Gomeres, and considered a spy coming from the camp of the besiegers.
They issued forth and seized him in sight of his employers, who gave
themselves up for lost.  The Gomeres had conducted him nearly to the
gate, when he escaped from their grasp and fled.  They endeavored to
overtake him, but were encumbered with armor; he was lightly clad,
and he fled for his life.  One of the Gomeres paused, and, levelling
his crossbow, let fly a bolt which pierced the fugitive between the
shoulders; he fell and was nearly within their grasp, but rose again
and with a desperate effort attained the Christian camp.  The Gomeres
gave over the pursuit, and the citizens returned thanks to Allah for
their deliverance from this fearful peril.  As to the faithful messenger,
he died of his wound shortly after reaching the camp, consoled with
the idea that he had preserved the secret and the lives of his employers.*

*Pulgar, Cronica, p. 3, c. 80.



CHAPTER LVIII.

SUFFERINGS OF THE PEOPLE OF MALAGA.


The sufferings of Malaga spread sorrow and anxiety among the
Moors, and they dreaded lest this beautiful city, once the bulwark
of the kingdom, should fall into the hands of the unbelievers.  The
old warrior-king, Abdallah el Zagal, was still sheltered in Guadix,
where he was slowly gathering together his shattered forces.  When
the people of Guadix heard of the danger and distress of Malaga,
they urged to be led to its relief, and the alfaquis admonished El
Zagal not to desert so righteous and loyal a city in its extremity.
His own warlike nature made him feel a sympathy for a place that
made so gallant a resistance, and he despatched as powerful a
reinforcement as he could spare under conduct of a chosen captain,
with orders to throw themselves into the city.

Intelligence of this reinforcement reached Boabdil el Chico in his
royal palace of the Alhambra.  Filled with hostility against his
uncle, and desirous of proving his loyalty to the Castilian sovereigns,
he immediately sent forth a superior force of horse and foot under
an able commander to intercept the detachment.  A sharp conflict
ensued; the troops of El Zagal were routed with great loss and
fled back in confusion to Guadix.

Boabdil, not being accustomed to victories, was flushed with
this melancholy triumph.  He sent tidings of it to the Castilian
sovereigns, accompanied with rich silks, boxes of Arabian perfume,
a cup of gold richly wrought, and a female captive of Ubeda as
presents to the queen, and four Arabian steeds magnificently
caparisoned, a sword and dagger richly mounted, and several
albornozes and other robes sumptuously embroidered for the
king.  He entreated them at the same time always to look upon
him with favor as their devoted vassal.

Boabdil was fated to be unfortunate, even in his victories.  His
defeat of the forces of his uncle destined to the relief of unhappy
Malaga shocked the feelings and cooled the loyalty of many of his
best adherents.  The mere men of traffic might rejoice in their
golden interval of peace, but the chivalrous spirits of Granada
spurned a security purchased by such sacrifices of pride and
affection.  The people at large, having gratified their love of
change, began to question whether they had acted generously
by their old fighting monarch.  "El Zagal," said they, "was fierce
and bloody, but then he was faithful to his country; he was an
usurper, it is true, but then he maintained the glory of the crown
which he usurped.  If his sceptre was a rod of iron to his subjects,
it was a sword of steel against their enemies.  This Boabdil sacrifices
religion, friends, country, everything, to a mere shadow of royalty,
and is content to hold a rush for a sceptre."

These factious murmurs soon reached the ears of Boabdil, and he
apprehended another of his customary reverses.  He sent in all haste
to the Castilian sovereigns beseeching military aid to keep him on
his throne.  Ferdinand graciously complied with a request so much in
unison with his policy.  A detachment of one thousand cavalry and two
thousand infantry was sent under the command of Don Fernandez
Gonsalvo of Cordova, subsequently renowned as the grand captain.
With this succor Boabdil expelled from the city all those who were
hostile to him and in favor of his uncle.  He felt secure in these
troops, from their being distinct in manners, language, and religion
from his subjects, and compromised with his pride in thus exhibiting
that most unnatural and humiliating of all regal spectacles, a
monarch supported on his throne by foreign weapons and by soldiers
hostile to his people.  Nor was Boabdil el Chico the only Moorish
sovereign that sought protection from Ferdinand and Isabella.  A
splendid galley with latine sails and several banks of oars, displaying
the standard of the Crescent, but likewise a white flag in sign of
amity, came one day into the harbor.  An ambassador landed from
it within the Christian lines.  He came from the king of Tremezan, and
brought presents similar to those of Boabdil, consisting of Arabian
coursers, with bits, stirrups, and other furniture of gold, together
with costly Moorish mantles: for the queen there were sumptuous
shawls, robes, and silken stuffs, ornaments of gold, and exquisite
Oriental perfumes.

The king of Tremezan had been alarmed at the rapid conquests of
the Spanish arms, and startled by the descent of several Spanish
cruisers on the coast of Africa.  He craved to be considered a vassal
to the Castilian sovereigns, and that they would extend such favor
and security to his ships and subjects as had been shown to other
Moors who had submitted to their sway.  He requested a painting
of their arms, that he and his subjects might recognize and respect
their standard whenever they encountered it.  At the same time he
implored their clemency toward unhappy Malaga, and that its
inhabitants might experience the same favor that had been shown
toward the Moors of other captured cities.

The embassy was graciously received by the Christian sovereigns.
They granted the protection required, ordering their commanders
to respect the flag of Tremezan unless it should be found rendering
assistance to the enemy.  They sent also to the Barbary monarch their
royal arms moulded in escutcheons of gold, a hand's-breadth in size.*

*Cura de los Palacios, c. 84; Pulgar, part 3, c. 68.


While thus the chances of assistance from without daily decreased,
famine raged in the city.  The inhabitants were compelled to eat the
flesh of horses, and many died of hunger.  What made the sufferings
of the citizens the more intolerable was to behold the sea covered
with ships daily arriving with provisions for the besiegers.  Day after
day also they saw herds of fat cattle and flocks of sheep driven into
the camp.  Wheat and flour were piled in huge mounds in the centre
of the encampments, glaring in the sunshine, and tantalizing the
wretched citizens, who, while they and their children were perishing
with hunger, beheld prodigal abundance reigning within a bow-shot
of their walls.



CHAPTER LIX.

HOW A MOORISH SANTON UNDERTOOK TO DELIVER THE CITY OF
    MALAGA FROM THE POWER OF ITS ENEMIES.


There lived at this time in a hamlet in the neighborhood of Guadix
an ancient Moor of the name of Ibrahim el Guerbi.  He was a native
of the island of Guerbes, in the kingdom of Tunis, and had for several
years led the life of a santon or hermit.  The hot sun of Africa had
dried his blood, and rendered him of an exalted yet melancholy
temperament.  He passed most of his time in caves of the mountains
in meditation, prayer, and rigorous abstinence, until his body was
wasted and his mind bewildered, and he fancied himself favored with
divine revelations and visited by angels sent by Mahomet.  The Moors,
who had a great reverence for all enthusiasts of the kind, believed in
his being inspired, listened to all his ravings as veritable prophecies,
and denominated him "el santo," or the saint.

The woes of the kingdom of Granada had long exasperated the gloomy
spirit of this man, and he had beheld with indignation this beautiful
country wrested from the dominion of the faithful and becoming a
prey to the unbelievers.  He had implored the blessings of Allah on
the troops which issued forth from Guadix for the relief of Malaga, but
when he saw them return routed and scattered by their own countrymen,
he retired to his cell, shut himself up from the world, and was plunged
for a time in the blackest melancholy.

On a sudden he made his appearance again in the streets of Guadix,
his face haggard, his form emaciated, but his eyes beaming with
fire.  He said that Allah had sent an angel to him in the solitude of
his cell, revealing to him a mode of delivering Malaga from its perils
and striking horror and confusion into the camp of the unbelievers.
The Moors listened with eager credulity to his words: four hundred
of them offered to follow him even to the death and to obey implicitly
his commands.  Of this number many were Gomeres, anxious to relieve
their countrymen who formed part of the garrison of Malaga.

They traversed the kingdom by the wild and lonely passes of the
mountains, concealing themselves in the day and travelling only in
the night to elude the Christian scouts.  At length they arrived at
the mountains which tower above Malaga, and, looking down, beheld
the city completely invested, a chain of encampments extending
round it from shore to shore and a line of ships blockading it by sea,
while the continual thunder of artillery and the smoke rising in
various parts showed that the siege was pressed with great activity.
The hermit scanned the encampments warily from his lofty height.  He
saw that the part of the encampment of the marques of Cadiz which
was at the foot of the height and on the margin of the sea was most
assailable, the rocky soil not admitting ditches or palisadoes.
Remaining concealed all day, he descended with his followers at
night to the sea-coast and approached silently to the outworks.
He had given them their instructions: they were to rush suddenly
upon the camp, fight their way through, and throw themselves into
the city.

It was just at the gray of the dawning, when objects are obscurely
visible, that they made this desperate attempt.  Some sprang suddenly
upon the sentinels, others rushed into the sea and got round the
works, others clambered over the breastworks.  There was sharp
skirmishing; a great part of the Moors were cut to pieces, but about
two hundred succeeded in getting into the gates of Malaga.

The santon took no part in the conflict, nor did he endeavor to
enter the city.  His plans were of a different nature.  Drawing
apart from the battle, he threw himself on his knees on a rising
ground, and, lifting his hands to heaven, appeared to be absorbed
in prayer.  The Christians, as they were searching for fugitives in
the clefts of the rocks, found him at his devotions.  He stirred not
at their approach, but remained fixed as a statue, without changing
color or moving a muscle.  Filled with surprise, not unmingled with
awe, they took him to the marques of Cadiz.  He was wrapped in a
coarse albornoz, or Moorish mantle, his beard was long and grizzled,
and there was something wild and melancholy in his look that
inspired curiosity.  On being examined, he gave himself out as a
saint to whom Allah had revealed the events that were to take place
in that siege.  The marques demanded when and how Malaga was to
be taken.  He replied that he knew full well, but he was forbidden to
reveal those important secrets except to the king and queen.  The
good marques was not more given to superstitious fancies than other
commanders of his time, yet there seemed something singular and
mysterious about this man; he might have some important intelligence
to communicate; so he was persuaded to send him to the king and
queen.  He was conducted to the royal tent, surrounded by a curious
multitude exclaiming "El Moro Santo!" for the news had spread through
the camp that they had taken a Moorish prophet.

The king, having dined, was taking his siesta, or afternoon's sleep,
in his tent, and the queen, though curious to see this singular man,
yet from a natural delicacy and reserve delayed until the king should
be present.  He was taken, therefore, to an adjoining tent, in which
were Dona Beatrix de Bovadilla, marchioness of Moya, and Don
Alvaro of Portugal, son of the duke of Braganza, with two or three
attendants.  The Moor, ignorant of the Spanish tongue, had not
understood the conversation of the guards, and supposed, from
the magnificence of the furniture and the silken hangings, that this
was the royal tent.  From the respect paid by the attendants to Don
Alvaro and the marchioness he concluded that they were the king
and queen.

He now asked for a draught of water: a jar was brought to him, and
the guard released his arm to enable him to drink.  The marchioness
perceived a sudden change in his countenance and something sinister
in the expression of his eye, and shifted her position to a more remote
part of the tent.  Pretending to raise the water to his lips, the Moor
unfolded his albornoz, so as to grasp a scimetar which he wore
concealed beneath; then, dashing down the jar, he drew his weapon
and gave Don Alvaro a blow on the head that struck him to the earth
and nearly deprived him of life.  Turning then upon the marchioness,
he made a violent blow at her; but in his eagerness and agitation his
scimetar caught in the drapery of the tent; the force of the blow was
broken, and the weapon struck harmless upon some golden ornaments
of her head-dress.*

*Pietro Martyr, Epist. 62.


Ruy Lopez de Toledo, treasurer to the queen, and Juan de Belalcazar,
a sturdy friar, who were present, grappled and struggled with the
desperado, and immediately the guards who had conducted him
from the marques de Cadiz fell upon him and cut him to pieces.*

*Cura de los Palacios


The king and queen, brought out of their tents by the noise, were
filled with horror when they learned the imminent peril from which
they had escaped.  The mangled body of the Moor was taken by the
people to the camp and thrown into the city from a catapult.  The
Gomeres gathered up the body with deep reverence as the remains
of a saint; they washed and perfumed it and buried it with great
honor and loud lamentations.  In revenge of his death they slew
one of their principal Christian captives, and, having tied his body
upon an ass, they drove the animal forth into the camp.

From this time there was appointed an additional guard around the
tents of the king and queen, composed of four hundred cavaliers of
rank of the kingdoms of Castile and Aragon.  No person was admitted
to the royal presence armed; no Moor was allowed to enter the camp
without a previous knowledge of his character and business; and on
no account was any Moor to be introduced into the presence of the
sovereigns.

An act of treachery of such ferocious nature gave rise to a train of
gloomy apprehensions.  There were many cabins and sheds about
the camp constructed of branches of trees which had become dry
and combustible, and fears were entertained that they might be
set on fire by the mudexares, or Moorish vassals, who visited the
army.  Some even dreaded that attempts might be made to poison
the wells and fountains.  To quiet these dismal alarms all mudexares
were ordered to leave the camp, and all loose, idle loiterers who
could not give a good account of themselves were taken into custody.



CHAPTER LX.

HOW HAMET EL ZEGRI WAS HARDENED IN HIS OBSTINACY BY THE
    ARTS OF A MOORISH ASTROLOGER.


Among those followers of the santon that had effected their entrance
into the city was a dark African of the tribe of the Gomeres, who was
likewise a hermit or dervise and passed among the Moors for a holy
and inspired man.  No sooner were the mangled remains of his
predecessor buried with the honors of martyrdom than this dervise
elevated himself in his place and professed to be gifted with the
spirit of prophecy.  He displayed a white banner, which he assured
the Moors was sacred, that he had retained it for twenty years for
some signal purpose, and that Allah had revealed to him that under
that banner the inhabitants of Malaga should sally forth upon the
camp of the unbelievers, put it to utter rout, and banquet upon the
provisions in which it abounded.*  The hungry and credulous Moors
were elated at this prediction, and cried out to be led forth at once
to the attack; but the dervise told them the time was not yet
arrived, for every event had its allotted day in the decrees of fate:
they must wait patiently, therefore, until the appointed time should
be revealed to him by Heaven.  Hamet el Zegri listened to the dervise
with profound reverence, and his example had great effect in
increasing the awe and deference of his followers.  He took the
holy man up into his stronghold of Gibralfaro, consulted him on all
occasions, and hung out his white banner on the loftiest tower as
a signal of encouragement to the people of the city.

*Cura de los Palacios, cap. 84.


In the mean time, the prime chivalry of Spain was gradually assembling
before the walls of Malaga.  The army which had commenced the siege
had been worn out by extreme hardships, having had to construct
immense works, to dig trenches and mines, to mount guard by sea
and land, to patrol the mountains, and to sustain incessant conflicts.
The sovereigns were obliged, therefore, to call upon various distant
cities for reinforcements of horse and foot.  Many nobles also
assembled their vassals and repaired of their own accord to the
royal camp.

Every little while some stately galley or gallant caravel would stand
into the harbor, displaying the well-known banner of some Spanish
cavalier and thundering from its artillery a salutation to the
sovereigns and a defiance to the Moors.  On the land side also
reinforcements would be seen winding down from the mountains
to the sound of drum and trumpet, and marching into the camp
with glistening arms as yet unsullied by the toils of war.

One morning the whole sea was whitened by the sails and vexed by
the oars of ships and galleys bearing toward the port.  One hundred
vessels of various kinds and sizes arrived, some armed for warlike
service, others deep freighted with provisions.  At the same time the
clangor of drum and trumpet bespoke the arrival of a powerful force
by land, which came pouring in lengthening columns into the camp.
This mighty reinforcement was furnished by the duke of Medina
Sidonia, who reigned like a petty monarch over his vast possessions.
He came with this princely force a volunteer to the royal standard,
not having been summoned by the sovereigns, and he brought,
moreover, a loan of twenty thousand doblas of gold.

When the camp was thus powerfully reinforced Isabella advised that
new offers of an indulgent kind should be made to the inhabitants,
for she was anxious to prevent the miseries of a protracted siege
or the effusion of blood that must attend a general attack.  A fresh
summons was therefore sent for the city to surrender, with a promise
of life, liberty, and property in case of immediate compliance, but
denouncing all the horrors of war if the defence were obstinately
continued.

Hamet again rejected the offer with scorn.  His main fortifications
as yet were but little impaired, and were capable of holding out
much longer; he trusted to the thousand evils and accidents that
beset a besieging army and to the inclemencies of the approaching
season; and it is said that he, as well as his followers, had an
infatuated belief in the predictions of the dervise.

The worthy Fray Antonio Agapida does not scruple to affirm that the
pretended prophet of the city was an arch nigromancer, or Moorish
magician, "of which there be countless many," says he, "in the
filthy sect of Mahomet," and that he was leagued with the prince of
the powers of the air to endeavor to work the confusion and defeat
of the Christian army.  The worthy father asserts also that Hamet
employed him in a high tower of the Gibralfaro, which commanded
a wide view over sea and land, where he wrought spells and
incantations with astrolabes and other diabolical instruments to
defeat the Christian ships and forces whenever they were engaged
with the Moors.

To the potent spells of this sorcerer he ascribes the perils and
losses sustained by a party of cavaliers of the royal household in a
desperate combat to gain two towers of the suburb near the gate
of the city called la Puerto de Granada.  The Christians, led on by
Ruy Lopez de Toledo, the valiant treasurer of the queen, took and
lost and retook the towers, which were finally set on fire by the
Moors and abandoned to the flames by both parties.  To the same
malignant influence he attributes the damage done to the Christian
fleet, which was so vigorously assailed by the albatozas, or floating
batteries, of the Moors that one ship, belonging to the duke of
Medina Sidonia, was sunk and the rest were obliged to retire.

"Hamet el Zegri," says Fray Antonio Agapida, "stood on the top
of the high tower of Gibralfaro and beheld this injury wrought upon
the Christian force, and his proud heart was puffed up.  And the
Moorish nigromancer stood beside him.  And he pointed out to him
the Christian host below, encamped on every eminence around the
city and covering its fertile valley, and the many ships floating upon
the tranquil sea, and he bade him be strong of heart, for that in a
few days all this mighty fleet would be scattered by the winds of
heaven, and that he should sally forth under the guidance of the
sacred banner and attack this host, and utterly defeat it, and make
spoil of those sumptuous tents; and Malaga should be triumphantly
revenged upon her assailants.  So the heart of Hamet was hardened
like that of Pharaoh, and he persisted in setting at defiance the
Catholic sovereigns and their army of saintly warriors."



CHAPTER LXI.

SIEGE OF MALAGA CONTINUED.--DESTRUCTION OF A TOWER BY
    FRANCISCO RAMIREZ DE MADRID.


Seeing the infatuated obstinacy of the besieged, the Christians
now approached their works to the walls, gaining one position after
another preparatory to a general assault.  Near the barrier of the
city was a bridge with four arches, defended at each end by a strong
and lofty tower, by which a part of the army would have to pass in
making an attack.  The commander-in-chief of the artillery, Francisco
Ramirez de Madrid, was ordered to take possession of this bridge.
The approach to it was perilous in the extreme, from the exposed
situation of the assailants and the number of Moors that garrisoned
the towers.  Francisco Ramirez therefore secretly excavated a mine
leading beneath the first tower, and placed a piece of ordnance with
its mouth upward immediately under the foundation, with a train of
powder to produce an explosion at the necessary moment.

When this was arranged he advanced slowly with his forces in face
of the towers, erecting bulwarks at every step, and gradually gaining
ground until he arrived near to the bridge.  He then planted several
pieces of artillery in his works and began to batter the tower.  The
Moors replied bravely from their battlements, but in the heat of the
combat the piece of ordnance under the foundation was discharged.
The earth was rent open, a part of the tower overthrown, and
several of the Moors were torn to pieces; the rest took to flight,
overwhelmed with terror at this thundering explosion bursting
beneath their feet and at beholding the earth vomiting flames and
smoke, for never before had they witnessed such a stratagem in
warfare.  The Christians rushed forward and took possession of the
abandoned post, and immediately commenced an attack upon the
other tower at the opposite end of the bridge, to which the Moors
had retired.  An incessant fire of crossbows and arquebuses was kept
up between the rival towers, volleys of stones were discharged, and
no one dared to venture upon the intermediate bridge.

Francisco de Ramirez at length renewed his former mode of approach,
making bulwarks step by step, while the Moors, stationed at the other
end, swept the bridge with their artillery.  The combat was long and
bloody--furious on the part of the Moors, patient and persevering on
the part of the Christians.  By slow degrees they accomplished their
advance across the bridge, drove the enemy before them, and
remained masters of this important pass.

For this valiant and skilful achievement King Ferdinand after the
surrender of the city conferred the dignity of knighthood upon
Francisco Ramirez in the tower which he had so gloriously gained.*
The worthy padre Fray Antonio Agapida indulges in more than a
page of extravagant eulogy upon this invention of blowing up the
foundation of the tower by a piece of ordnance; which, in fact, is
said to be the first instance on record of gunpowder being used
in a mine.

*Pulgar, part 3, c. 91.



CHAPTER LXII.

HOW THE PEOPLE OF MALAGA EXPOSTULATED WITH HAMET EL ZEGRI.


While the dervise was deluding the garrison of Malaga with vain hopes
the famine increased to a terrible degree.  The Gomeres ranged about
the city as though it had been a conquered place, taking by force
whatever they found eatable in the houses of the peaceful citizens,
and breaking open vaults and cellars and demolishing walls wherever
they thought provisions might be concealed.

The wretched inhabitants had no longer bread to eat; the horse-
flesh also now failed them, and they were fain to devour skins and
hides toasted at the fire, and to assuage the hunger of their children
with vine-leaves cut up and fried in oil.  Many perished of famine or
of the unwholesome food with which they endeavored to relieve it,
and many took refuge in the Christian camp, preferring captivity to
the horrors which surrounded them.

At length the sufferings of the inhabitants became so great as to
conquer even their fears of Hamet and his Gomeres.  They assembled
before the house of Ali Dordux, the wealthy merchant, whose stately
mansion was at the foot of the hill of the Alcazaba, and they urged
him to stand forth as their leader and to intercede with Hamet for a
surrender.  Ali Dordux was a man of courage as well as policy; he
perceived also that hunger was giving boldness to the citizens,
while he trusted it was subduing the fierceness of the soldiery.  He
armed himself, therefore, cap-a-pie, and undertook this dangerous
parley with the alcayde.  He associated with him an alfaqui named
Abraham Alhariz and an important inhabitant named Amar ben Amar,
and they ascended to the fortress of Gibralfaro, followed by several
of the trembling merchants.

They found Hamet el Zegri, not, as before, surrounded by ferocious
guards and all the implements of war, but in a chamber of one of
the lofty towers, at a table of stone covered with scrolls traced with
strange characters and mystic diagrams, while instruments of singular
and unknown form lay about the room.  Beside Hamet stood the
prophetic dervise, who appeared to have been explaining to him
the mysterious inscriptions of the scrolls.  His presence filled the
citizens with awe, for even Ali Dordux considered him a man inspired.

The alfaqui, Abraham Alhariz, whose sacred character gave him
boldness to speak, now lifted up his voice and addressed Hamet el
Zegri.  "We implore thee," said he, solemnly, "in the name of the
most powerful God, no longer to persist in a vain resistance which
must end in our destruction, but deliver up the city while clemency
is yet to be obtained.  Think how many of our warriors have fallen by

the sword; do not suffer those who survive to perish by famine.  Our
wives and children cry to us for bread, and we have none to give
them.  We see them expire in lingering agony before our eyes, while
the enemy mocks our misery by displaying the abundance of his camp.
Of what avail is our defence?  Are our walls, peradventure, more
strong than the walls of Ronda?  Are our warriors more brave than the
defenders of Loxa?  The walls of Ronda were thrown down and the
warriors of Loxa had to surrender.  Do we hope for succor?--whence
are we to receive it?  The time for hope is gone by.  Granada has lost
its power; it no longer possesses chivalry, commanders, nor a king.
Boabdil sits a vassal in the degraded halls of the Alhambra; El
Zagal is a fugitive, shut up within the walls of Guadix.  The kingdom
is divided against itself--its strength is gone, its pride fallen, its very
existence at an end.  In the name of Allah we conjure thee, who art
our captain, be not our direst enemy, but surrender these ruins of
our once-happy Malaga and deliver us from these overwhelming
horrors."

Such was the supplication forced from the inhabitants by the
extremity of their sufferings.  Hamet listened to the alfaqui without
anger, for he respected the sanctity of his office.  His heart too
was at that moment lifted up with a vain confidence.  "Yet a few
days of patience," said he, "and all these evils will suddenly have
an end.  I have been conferring with this holy man, and find that
the time of our deliverance is at hand.  The decrees of fate are
inevitable; it is written in the book of destiny that we shall sally
forth and destroy the camp of the unbelievers, and banquet upon
those mountains of grain which are piled up in the midst of it.  So
Allah hath promised by the mouth of this his prophet.  Allah Akbar!
God is great!  Let no man oppose the decrees of Heaven!"

The citizens bowed with profound reverence, for no true Moslem
pretends to struggle against whatever is written in the book of
fate.  Ali Dordux, who had come prepared to champion the city and
to brave the ire of Hamet, humbled himself before this holy man
and gave faith to his prophecies as the revelations of Allah.  So the
deputies returned to the citizens, and exhorted them to be of good
cheer.  "A few days longer," said they, "and our sufferings are to
terminate.  When the white banner is removed from the tower, then
look out for deliverance, for the hour of sallying forth will have
arrived."  The people retired to their homes with sorrowful hearts;
they tried in vain to quiet the cries of their famishing children, and
day by day and hour by hour their anxious eyes were turned to
the sacred banner, which still continued to wave on the tower of
Gibralfaro.



CHAPTER LXIII.

HOW HAMET EL ZEGRI SALLIED FORTH WITH THE SACRED BANNER TO
    ATTACK THE CHRISTIAN CAMP.


"The Moorish nigromancer," observes the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida,
"remained shut up in a tower of the Gibralfaro devising devilish means
to work mischief and discomfiture upon the Christians.  He was daily
consulted by Hamet, who had great faith in those black and magic arts
which he had brought with him from the bosom of heathen Africa."

From the account given of this dervise and his incantations by the
worthy father it would appear that he was an astrologer, and was
studying the stars and endeavoring to calculate the day and hour
when a successful attack might be made upon the Christian camp.

Famine had now increased to such a degree as to distress even the
garrison of Gibralfaro, although the Gomeres had seized upon all the
provisions they could find in the city.  Their passions were sharpened
by hunger, and they became restless and turbulent and impatient
for action.

Hamet was one day in council with his captains, perplexed by the
pressure of events, when 