the dervise entered among them.  "The
hour of victory," exclaimed he, "is at hand.  Allah has commanded
that to-morrow morning ye shall sally forth to the fight.  I will bear
before you the sacred banner and deliver your enemies into your
hands.  Remember, however, that ye are but instruments in the
hands of Allah to take vengeance on the enemies of the faith.  Go
into battle, therefore, with pure hearts, forgiving each other all
past offences, for those who are charitable toward each other
will be victorious over the foe."  The words of the dervise were
received with rapture; all Gibralfaro and the Alcazaba resounded
immediately with the din of arms, and Hamet sent throughout the
towers and fortifications of the city and selected the choicest
troops and most distinguished captains for this eventful combat.

In the morning early the rumor went throughout the city that the
sacred banner had disappeared from the tower of Gibralfaro, and
all Malaga was roused to witness the sally that was to destroy the
unbelievers.  Hamet descended from his stronghold, accompanied
by his principal captain, Ibrahim Zenete, and followed by his Gomeres.
The dervise led the way, displaying the white banner, the sacred
pledge of victory.  The multitude shouted "Allah Akbar!" and prostrated
themselves before the banner as it passed.  Even the dreaded Hamet
was hailed with praises, for in their hopes of speedy relief through
the prowess of his arm the populace forgot everything but his bravery.
Every bosom in Malaga was agitated by hope and fear: the old men,
the women, and children, and all who went not forth to battle mounted
on tower and battlement and roof to watch a combat that was to
decide their fate.

Before sallying forth from the city the dervise addressed the troops,
reminding them of the holy nature of this enterprise, and warning
them not to forfeit the protection of the sacred banner by any
unworthy act.  They were not to pause to make spoil nor to take
prisoners: they were to press forward, fighting valiantly, and granting
no quarter.  The gate was then thrown open, and the dervise issued
forth, followed by the army.  They directed their assaults upon the
encampments of the master of Santiago and the master of Alcantara,
and came upon them so suddenly that they killed and wounded
several of the guards.  Ibrahim Zenete made his way into one of the
tents, where he beheld several Christian striplings just starting from
their slumber.  The heart of the Moor was suddenly touched with pity
for their youth, or perhaps he scorned the weakness of the foe.

He smote them with the flat instead of the edge of the sword.  "Away,
imps!" cried he, "away to your mothers!"  The fanatic dervise reproached
him with his clemency.  "I did not kill them," replied Zenete, "because I
saw no beards!"*

*Cura de los Palacios, c. 84.


The alarm was given in the camp, and the Christians rushed from
all quarters to defend the gates of the bulwarks.  Don Pedro Puerto
Carrero, senior of Moguer, and his brother, Don Alonzo Pacheco,
planted themselves with their followers in the gateway of the
encampment of the master of Santiago, and bore the whole brunt of
battle until they were reinforced.  The gate of the encampment of the
master of Calatrava was in like manner defended by Lorenzo Saurez
de Mendoza.  Hamet was furious at being thus checked where he
had expected a miraculous victory.  He led his troops repeatedly to
the attack, hoping to force the gates before succor should arrive: they
fought with vehement ardor, but were as often repulsed, and every
time they returned to the assault they found their enemies doubled
in number.  The Christians opened a cross-fire of all kinds of missiles
from their bulwarks; the Moors could effect but little damage upon a
foe thus protected behind their works, while they themselves were
exposed from head to foot.  The Christians singled out the most
conspicuous cavaliers, the greater part of whom were either slain
or wounded.  Still, the Moors, infatuated by the predictions of the
prophet, fought desperately and devotedly, and they were furious
to revenge the slaughter of their leaders.  They rushed upon certain
death, endeavoring madly to scale the bulwarks or force the gates,
and fell amidst showers of darts and lances, filling the ditches with
their mangled bodies.

Hamet el Zegri raged along the front of the bulwarks seeking an
opening for attack.  He gnashed his teeth with fury as he saw so
many of his chosen warriors slain around him.  He seemed to have
a charmed life, for, though constantly in the hottest of the fight
amidst showers of missiles, he still escaped uninjured.  Blindly
confiding in the prophecy of victory, he continued to urge on his
devoted troops.  The dervise too ran like a maniac through the ranks,
waving his white banner and inciting the Moors by howlings rather
than by shouts.  "Fear not! the victory is ours, for so it is written!"
cried he.  In the midst of his frenzy a stone from a catapult struck
him in the head and dashed out his bewildered brains.*

*Garibay, lib. 18, c. 33.


When the Moors beheld their prophet slain and his banner in the
dust, they were seized with despair and fled in confusion to the
city.  Hamet el Zegri made some effort to rally them, but was himself
confounded by the fall of the dervise.  He covered the flight of his
broken forces, turning repeatedly upon their pursuers and slowly
making his retreat into the city.

The inhabitants of Malaga witnessed from their walls with trembling
anxiety the whole of this disastrous conflict.  At the first onset,
when they beheld the guards of the camp put to flight, they
exclaimed, "Allah has given us the victory!" and they sent up shouts
of triumph.  Their exultation, however, was soon turned into doubt
when they beheld their troops repulsed in repeated attacks.  They
could see from time to time some distinguished warrior laid low and
others brought back bleeding to the city.  When at length the sacred
banner fell and the routed troops came flying to the gates, pursued
and cut down by the foe, horror and despair seized upon the populace.

As Hamet entered the gates he heard nothing but loud lamentations:
mothers whose sons had been slain shrieked curses after him as he
passed; some in the anguish of their hearts threw down their
famishing babes before him, exclaiming, "Trample on them with thy
horse's feet, for we have no food to give them, and we cannot endure
their cries."  All heaped execrations on his head as the cause of the
woes of Malaga.

The warlike part of the citizens also, and many warriors who with
their wives and children had taken refuge in Malaga from the
mountain-fortresses, now joined in the popular clamor, for their
hearts were overcome by the sufferings of their families.

Hamet el Zegri found it impossible to withstand this torrent of
lamentations, curses, and reproaches.  His military ascendancy was
at an end, for most of his officers and the prime warriors of his
African band had fallen in this disastrous sally.  Turning his back,
therefore, upon the city and abandoning it to its own counsels, he
retired with the remnant of his Gomeres to his stronghold in the
Gibralfaro.



CHAPTER LXIV.

HOW THE CITY OF MALAGA CAPITULATED.


The people of Malaga, being no longer overawed by Hamet el Zegri
and his Gomeres, turned to Ali Dordux, the magnanimous merchant,
and put the fate of the city into his hands.  He had already gained
the alcaydes of the castle of the Genoese and of the citadel into his
party, and in the late confusion had gained the sway over those
important fortresses.  He now associated himself with the alfaqui
Abraham Alhariz and four of the principal inhabitants, and, forming
a provisional junta, they sent heralds to the Christian sovereigns
offering to surrender the city on certain terms protecting the
persons and property of the inhabitants, permitting them to reside
as mudexares or tributary vassals either in Malaga or elsewhere.

When the herald arrived at the camp and made known their mission
to King Ferdinand, his anger was kindled.  "Return to your fellow-
citizens," said he, "and tell them that the day of grace is gone by.
They have persisted in a fruitless defence until they are driven by
necessity to capitulate; they must surrender unconditionally and
abide the fate of the vanquished.   Those who merit death shall
suffer death; those who merit captivity shall be made captives."

This stern reply spread consternation among the people of Malaga,
but Ali Dordux comforted them, and undertook to go in person and
pray for favorable terms.  When the people beheld this great and
wealthy merchant, who was so eminent in their city, departing
with his associates on this mission, they plucked up heart, for they
said, "Surely the Christian king will not turn a deaf ear to such a
man as Ali Dordux."

Ferdinand, however, would not even admit the ambassadors to
his presence.  "Send them to the devil!" said he in a great passion
to the commander of Leon; "I'll not see them.  Let them get back
to their city.  They shall all surrender to my mercy as vanquished
enemies."*

*Cura de los Palacios, cap. 84.


To give emphasis to this reply he ordered a general discharge
from all the artillery and batteries, and there was a great shout
throughout the camp, and all the lombards and catapults and
other engines of war thundered furiously upon the city, doing
great damage.

Ali Dordux and his companions returned to the city with downcast
countenances, and could scarce make the reply of the Christian
sovereign be heard for the roaring of the artillery, the tumbling
of the walls, and the cries of women and children.  The citizens
were greatly astonished and dismayed when they found the little
respect paid to their most eminent man; but the warriors who were
in the city exclaimed, "What has this merchant to do with questions
between men of battle?  Let us not address the enemy as abject
suppliants who have no power to injure, but as valiant men who
have weapons in their hands."

So they despatched another message to the Christian sovereigns,
offering to yield up the city and all their effects on condition of
being secured in their personal liberty.  Should this be denied, they
declared they would hang from the battlements fifteen hundred
Christian captives, male and female--that they would put all their
old men, their women, and children into the citadel, set fire to the
city, and sally forth, sword in hand, to fight until the last gasp.  "In
this way," said they, "the Spanish sovereigns shall gain a bloody
victory, and the fall of Malaga be renowned while the world endures."

To this fierce and swelling message Ferdinand replied that if a
single Christian captive were injured, not a Moor in Malaga but
should be put to the edge of the sword.

A great conflict of counsels now arose in Malaga.  The warriors were
for following up their menace by some desperate act of vengeance or
of self-devotion.  Those who had families looked with anguish upon
their wives and daughters, and thought it better to die than live to
see them captives.  By degrees, however, the transports of passion
and despair subsided, the love of life resumed its sway, and they
turned once more to Ali Dordux as the man most prudent in council
and able in negotiation.  By his advice fourteen of the principal
inhabitants were chosen from the fourteen districts of the city, and
sent to the camp bearing a long letter couched in terms of the most
humble supplication.

Various debates now took place in the Christian camp.  Many of the
cavaliers were exasperated against Malaga for its long resistance,
which had caused the death of many of their relatives and favorite
companions.  It had long been a stronghold also for Moorish
depredators and the mart where most of the warriors captured in
the Axarquia had been exposed in triumph and sold to slavery.  They
represented, moreover, that there were many Moorish cities yet to be
besieged, and that an example ought to be made of Malaga to prevent
all obstinate resistance thereafter.  They advised, therefore, that all
the inhabitants should be put to the sword.*

*Pulgar.


The humane heart of Isabella revolted at such sanguinary counsels:
she insisted that their triumph should not be disgraced by cruelty.
Ferdinand, however, was inflexible in refusing to grant any
preliminary terms, insisting on an unconditional surrender.

The people of Malaga now abandoned themselves to paroxysms of
despair; on one side they saw famine and death, on the other slavery
and chains.  The mere men of the sword, who had no families to
protect, were loud for signalizing their fall by some illustrious action.
"Let us sacrifice our Christian captives, and then destroy ourselves,"
cried some.  "Let us put all the women and children to death, set fire
to the city, fall on the Christian camp, and die sword in hand," cried
others.

Ali Dordux gradually made his voice be heard amidst the general
clamor.  He addressed himself to the principal inhabitants and to
those who had children.  "Let those who live by the sword die by
the sword," cried he, "but let us not follow their desperate counsels.
Who knows what sparks of pity may be awakened in the bosoms
of the Christian sovereigns when they behold our unoffending wives
and daughters and our helpless little ones?  The Christian queen,
they say, is full of mercy."

At these words the hearts of the unhappy people of Malaga yearned
over their families, and they empowered Ali Dordux to deliver up their
city to the mercy of the Castilian sovereigns.

The merchant now went to and fro, and had several communications
with Ferdinand and Isabella, and interested several principal
cavaliers in his cause; and he sent rich presents to the king and
queen of Oriental merchandise and silks and stuffs of gold and
jewels and precious stones and spices and perfumes, and many other
sumptuous things, which he had accumulated in his great tradings
with the East; and he gradually found favor in the eyes of the
sovereigns.*  Finding that there was nothing to be obtained for
the city, he now, like a prudent man and able merchant, began to
negotiate for himself and his immediate friends.  He represented
that from the first they had been desirous of yielding up the city,
but had been prevented by warlike and high-handed men, who had
threatened their lives; he entreated, therefore, that mercy might
be extended to them, and that they might not be confounded with
the guilty.

*MS. Chron. of Valera.


The sovereigns had accepted the presents of Ali Dordux--how
could they then turn a deaf ear to his petition?  So they granted a
pardon to him and to forty families which he named, and it was
agreed that they should be protected in their liberties and property,
and permitted to reside in Malaga as mudexares or Moslem vassals,
and to follow their customary pursuits.*  All this being arranged, Ali
Dordux delivered up twenty of the principal inhabitants to remain as
hostages until the whole city should be placed in the possession of
the Christians.

*Cura de los Palacios, cap. 84.


Don Gutierrez de Cardenas, senior commander of Leon, now entered
the city armed cap-a-pie, on horseback, and took possession in the
name of the Castilian sovereigns.  He was followed by his retainers
and by the captains and cavaliers of the army, and in a little while
the standards of the cross and of the blessed Santiago and of the
Catholic sovereigns were elevated on the principal tower of the
Alcazaba.  When these standards were beheld from the camp, the
queen and the princess and the ladies of the court and all the royal
retinue knelt down and gave thanks and praises to the Holy Virgin
and to Santiago for this great triumph of the faith; and the bishops
and other clergy who were present and the choristers of the royal
chapel chanted "Te Deum Laudamus" and "Gloria in Excelsis."



CHAPTER LXV.

FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY OF THE DERVISE.--FATE OF HAMET
    EL ZEGRI.


No sooner was the city delivered up than the wretched inhabitants
implored permission to purchase bread for themselves and their
children from the heaps of grain which they had so often gazed
at wistfully from their walls. Their prayer was granted, and they
issued forth with the famished eagerness of starving men.  It was
piteous to behold the struggles of those unhappy people as they
contended who first should have their necessities relieved.

"Thus," says the pious Fray Antonio Agapida,--"thus are the
predictions of false prophets sometimes permitted to be verified,
but always to the confusion of those who trust in them; for the
words of the Moorish nigromancer came to pass that the people
of Malaga should eat of those heaps of bread, but they ate in
humiliation and defeat and with sorrow and bitterness of heart."

Dark and fierce were the feelings of Hamet el Zegri as he looked
down from the castle of Gibralfaro and beheld the Christian legions
pouring into the city and the standard of the cross supplanting the
crescent on the citadel.  "The people of Malaga," said he, "have
trusted to a man of trade, and he has trafficked them away; but let
us not suffer ourselves to be bound hand and foot and delivered up
as part of his bargain.  We have yet strong walls around us and
trusty weapons in our hands.  Let us fight until buried beneath the
last tumbling tower of Gibralfaro, or, rushing down from among its
ruins, carry havoc among the unbelievers as they throng the streets
of Malaga."

The fierceness of the Gomeres, however, was broken.  They could
have died in the breach had their castle been assailed, but the slow
advances of famine subdued their strength without rousing their
passions, and sapped the force of both soul and body.  They were
almost unanimous for a surrender.

It was a hard struggle for the proud spirit of Hamet to bow itself
to ask for terms.  Still, he trusted that the valor of his defence
would gain him respect in the eyes of a chivalrous foe.  "Ali,"
said he, "has negotiated like a merchant; I will capitulate as a
soldier."  He sent a herald, therefore, to Ferdinand, offering to
yield up his castle, but demanding a separate treaty.[15]  The
Castilian sovereign made a laconic and stern reply: "He shall
receive no terms but such as have been granted to the community
of Malaga."

For two days Hamet el Zegri remained brooding in his castle after
the city was in possession of the Christians; at length the clamors
of his followers compelled him to surrender.  When the remnant of
this fierce African garrison descended from their cragged fortress,
they were so worn by watchfulness, famine, and battle, yet carried
such a lurking fury in their eyes, that they looked more like fiends
than men.  They were all condemned to slavery, excepting Ibrahim
Zenete.  The instance of clemency which he had shown in refraining
to harm the Spanish striplings on the last sally from Malaga won him
favorable terms.  It was cited as a magnanimous act by the Spanish
cavaliers, and all admitted that, though a Moor in blood, he
possessed the Christian heart of a Castilian hidalgo.*

*Cura de los Palacios, cap. 84.


As to Hamet el Zegri, on being asked what moved him to such hardened
obstinacy, he replied, "When I undertook my command, I pledged
myself to fight in defence of my faith, my city, and my sovereign
until slain or made prisoner; and, depend upon it, had I had men
to stand by me, I should have died fighting, instead of thus tamely
surrendering myself without a weapon in my hand."

"Such," says the pious Fray Antonio Agapida, "was the diabolical
hatred and stiff-necked opposition of this infidel to our holy cause.
But he was justly served by our most Catholic and high-minded
sovereign for his pertinacious defence of the city, for Ferdinand
ordered that he should be loaded with chains and thrown into a
dungeon."  He was subsequently retained in rigorous confinement
at Carmona.*

*Pulgar, part 3, cap. 93; Pietro Martyr, lib. 1, cap. 69; Alcantara,
 Hist. Granada, vol. 4, c. 18.



CHAPTER LXVI.

HOW THE CASTILIAN SOVEREIGNS TOOK POSSESION OF THE CITY OF
    MALAGA, AND HOW KING FERDINAND SIGNALIZED HIMSELF BY HIS
    SKILL IN BARGAINING WITH THE INHABITANTS FOR THEIR RANSOM.


One of the first cares of the conquerors on entering Malaga was to
search for Christian captives.  Nearly sixteen hundred men and women
were found, and among them were persons of distinction.  Some of them
had been ten, fifteen, and twenty years in captivity.  Many had been
servants to the Moors or laborers on public works, and some had
passed their time in chains and dungeons.  Preparations were made
to celebrate their deliverance as a Christian triumph.  A tent was
erected not far from the city, and furnished with an altar and all
the solemn decorations of a chapel.  Here the king and queen waited
to receive the Christian captives.  They were assembled in the city
and marshalled forth in piteous procession.  Many of them had still
the chains and shackles on their legs; they were wasted with famine,
their hair and beards overgrown and matted, and their faces pale and
haggard from long confinement.  When they found themselves restored
to liberty and surrounded by their countrymen, some stared wildly
about as if in a dream, others gave way to frantic transports, but
most of them wept for joy.  All present were moved to tears by so
touching a spectacle.  When the procession arrived at what is called
the Gate of Granada, it was met by a great concourse from the camp
with crosses and pennons, who turned and followed the captives,
singing hymns of praise and thanksgiving.  When they came in presence
of the king and queen, they threw themselves on their knees, and
would have kissed their feet as their saviors and deliverers, but the
sovereigns prevented such humiliation and graciously extended to
them their hands.  They then prostrated themselves before the altar,
and all present joined them in giving thanks to God for their liberation
from this cruel bondage.  By orders of the king and queen their chains
were then taken off, and they were clad in decent raiment and food
was set before them.  After they had ate and drunk, and were
refreshed and invigorated, they were provided with money and all
things necessary for their journey, and sent joyfully to their homes.

While the old chroniclers dwell with becoming enthusiasm on this
pure and affecting triumph of humanity, they go on in a strain of
equal eulogy to describe a spectacle of a far different nature.  It
so happened that there were found in the city twelve of those
renegado Christians who had deserted to the Moors and conveyed
false intelligence during the siege: a barbarous species of punishment
was inflicted upon them, borrowed, it is said, from the Moors and
peculiar to these wars.  They were tied to stakes in a public place,
and horsemen exercised their skill in transpiercing them with
pointed reeds, hurled at them while careering at full speed, until
the miserable victims expired beneath their wounds.  Several
apostate Moors also, who, having embraced Christianity, had
afterward relapsed into their early faith, and had taken refuge in
Malaga from the vengeance of the Inquisition, were publicly burnt.
"These," says an old Jesuit historian exultingly,--"these were the
tilts of reeds and the illuminations most pleasing for this victorious
festival and for the Catholic piety of our sovereigns."*

*"Los renegados fuernon acanavareados: y los conversos quemados;
 y estos fueron las canas, y luminarias mas alegres, por la fiesta
 de la vitoria, para la piedad Catholica de nuestros Reyes."--Abarca,
 "Anales de Aragon," tom. 2, Rey xxx. c. 3.


When the city was cleansed from the impurities and offensive
odors which had collected during the siege, the bishops and other
clergy who accompanied the court, and the choir of the royal chapel,
walked in procession to the principal mosque, which was consecrated
and entitled Santa Maria de la Incarnacion.  This done, the king and
queen entered the city, accompanied by the grand cardinal of Spain
and the principal nobles and cavaliers of the army, and heard a
solemn mass.  The church was then elevated into a cathedral, and
Malaga was made a bishopric, and many of the neighboring towns were
comprehended in its diocese.  The queen took up her residence in the
Alcazaba, in the apartments of her valiant treasurer, Ruy Lopez,
whence she had a view of the whole city, but the king established
his quarters in the warrior castle of Gibralfaro.

And now came to be considered the disposition of the Moorish
prisoners.  All those who were strangers in the city, and had either
taken refuge there or had entered to defend it, were at once
considered slaves.  They were divided into three lots: one was set
apart for the service of God in redeeming Christian captives from
bondage, either in the kingdom of Granada or in Africa; the second
lot was divided among those who had aided either in field or cabinet
in the present siege, according to their rank; the third was
appropriated to defray by their sale the great expenses incurred in
the reduction of the place.  A hundred of the Gomeres were sent as
presents to Pope Innocent VIII., and were led in triumph through the
streets of Rome, and afterward converted to Christianity.  Fifty
Moorish maidens were sent to the queen Joanna of Naples, sister to
King Ferdinand, and thirty to the queen of Portugal.  Isabella made
presents of others to the ladies of her household and of the noble
families of Spain.

Among the inhabitants of Malaga were four hundred and fifty Moorish
Jews, for the most part women, speaking the Arabic language and
dressed in the Moresco fashion.  These were ransomed by a
wealthy Jew of Castile, farmer-general of the royal revenues derived
from the Jews of Spain.  He agreed to make up within a certain time
the sum of twenty thousand doblas, or pistoles of gold, all the money
and jewels of the captives being taken in part payment.  They were
sent to Castile in two armed galleys.  As to Ali Dordux, such favors
and honors were heaped upon him by the Spanish sovereigns for
his considerate mediation in the surrender that the disinterestedness
of his conduct has often been called in question.  He was appointed
chief justice and alcayde of the[10]mudexares or Moorish subjects,
and was presented with twenty houses, one public bakery, and
several orchards, vineyards, and tracts of open country.  He retired to
Antiquera, where he died several years afterward, leaving his estate
and name to his son, Mohamed Dordux.  The latter embraced the
Christian faith, as did his wife, the daughter of a Moorish noble.  On
being baptized he received the name of Don Fernando de Malaga,
his wife that of Isabella, after the queen.  They were incorporated
with the nobility of Castile, and their descendants still bear the
name of Malaga.*

*Conversaciones Malaguenas, 26, as cited by Alcantara in his
 History of Granada, vol. 4, c. 18.


As to the great mass of Moorish inhabitants, they implored that
they might not be scattered and sold into captivity, but might be
permitted to ransom themselves by an amount paid within a certain
time.  Upon this King Ferdinand took the advice of certain of his
ablest counsellors.  They said to him: "If you hold out a prospect
of hopeless captivity, the infidels will throw all their gold and
jewels into wells and pits, and you will lose the greater part of
the spoil; but if you fix a general rate of ransom, and receive
their money and jewels in part payment, nothing will be destroyed."
The king relished greatly this advice, and it was arranged that all
the inhabitants should be ransomed at the general rate of thirty
doblas or pistoles in gold for each individual, male or female,
large or small; that all their gold, jewels, and other valuables
should be received immediately in part payment of the general
amount, and that the residue should be paid within eight months--
that if any of the number, actually living, should die in the interim,
their ransom should nevertheless be paid.  If, however, the whole
of the amount were not paid at the expiration of the eight months,
they should all be considered and treated as slaves.

The unfortunate Moors were eager to catch at the least hope of
future liberty, and consented to these hard conditions.  The most
rigorous precautions were taken to exact them to the uttermost.  The
inhabitants were numbered by houses and families, and their names
taken down; their most precious effects were made up into parcels,
and sealed and inscribed with their names, and they were ordered to
repair with them to certain large corrales or enclosures adjoining
the Alcazaba, which were surrounded by high walls and overlooked by
watch-towers, to which places the cavalgadas of Christian captives
had usually been driven to be confined until the time of sale like
cattle in a market.  The Moors were obliged to leave their houses one
by one: all their money, necklaces, bracelets, and anklets of gold,
pearl, coral, and precious stones were taken from them at the
threshold, and their persons so rigorously searched that they
carried off nothing concealed.

Then might be seen old men and helpless women and tender maidens,
some of high birth and gentle condition, passing through the
streets, heavily burdened, toward the Alcazaba.  As they left their
homes they smote their breasts and wrung their hands, and raised
their weeping eyes to heaven in anguish; and this is recorded as
their plaint: "O Malaga! city so renowned and beautiful! where now
is the strength of thy castle, where the grandeur of thy towers?  Of
what avail have been thy mighty walls for the protection of thy
children?  Behold them driven from thy pleasant abodes, doomed
to drag out a life of bondage in a foreign land, and to die far from
the home of their infancy!  What will become of thy old men and
matrons when their gray hairs shall be no longer reverenced?  What
will become of thy maidens, so delicately reared and tenderly
cherished, when reduced to hard and menial servitude?  Behold
thy once happy families scattered asunder, never again to be
united--sons separated from their fathers, husbands from their
wives, and tender children from their mothers: they will bewail each
other in foreign lands, but their lamentations will be the scoff of
the stranger.  O Malaga! city of our birth! who can behold thy
desolation and not shed tears of bitterness?"*

*Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, c. 93.


When Malaga was completely secured a detachment was sent against
two fortresses near the sea, called Mixas and Osuna, which had
frequently harassed the Christian camp.  The inhabitants were
threatened with the sword unless they instantly surrendered.  They
claimed the same terms that had been granted to Malaga, imagining
them to be freedom of person and security of property.  Their claim
was granted: they were transported to Malaga with all their riches,
and on arriving there were overwhelmed with consternation at finding
themselves captives.  "Ferdinand," observes Fray Antonio Agapida,
"was a man of his word; they were shut up in the enclosure at the
Alcazaba with the people of Malaga and shared their fate."

The unhappy captives remained thus crowded in the courtyards of
the Alcazaba, like sheep in a fold, until they could be sent by sea
and land to Seville.  They were then distributed about in city and
country, each Christian family having one or more to feed and
maintain as servants until the term fixed for the payment of the
residue of the ransom should expire.  The captives had obtained
permission that several of their number should go about among 
the Moorish towns of the kingdom of Granada collecting contributions
to aid in the purchase of their liberties, but these towns were too
much impoverished by the war and engrossed by their own distresses
to lend a listening ear; so the time expired without the residue of
the ransom being paid, and all the captives of Malaga, to the
number, as some say, of eleven, and others of fifteen, thousand,
became slaves.  "Never," exclaims the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida in
one of his usual bursts of zeal and loyalty,--"never has there been
recorded a more adroit and sagacious arrangement than this made by
the Catholic monarch, by which he not only secured all the property
and half of the ransom of these infidels, but finally got possession
of their persons into the bargain.  This truly may be considered one
of the greatest triumphs of the pious and politic Ferdinand, and as
raising him above the generality of conquerors, who have merely the
valor to gain victories, but lack the prudence and management
necessary to turn them to account."*

*The detestable policy of Ferdinand in regard to the Moorish
 captives of Malaga is recorded at length by the curate of Los
 Palacios (c. 87), a contemporary, a zealous admirer of the king,
 and one of the most honest of chroniclers, who really thought
 he was recording a notable instance of sagacious piety.



CHAPTER LXVII.

HOW KING FERDINAND PREPARED TO CARRY THE WAR INTO A
    DIFFERENT PART OF THE TERRITORIES OF THE MOORS.


The western part of the kingdom of Granada had now been conquered
by the Christian arms.  The seaport of Malaga was captured; the fierce
and warlike inhabitants of Serrania de Ronda and the other
mountain-holds of the frontier were all disarmed and reduced to
peaceful and laborious vassalage; their haughty fortresses, which
had so long overawed the valleys of Andalusia, now displayed the
standard of Castile and Aragon; the watch-towers which crowned
every height, whence the infidels had kept a vulture eye over the
Christian territories, were now either dismantled or garrisoned with
Catholic troops.  "What signalized and sanctified this great triumph,"
adds the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida, "were the emblems of
ecclesiastical domination which everywhere appeared.  In every
direction rose stately convents and monasteries, those fortresses
of the faith garrisoned by its spiritual soldiery of monks and friars.
The sacred melody of Christian bells was again heard among the
mountains, calling to early matins or sounding the Angelus at the
solemn hour of evening."*

*The worthy curate of Los Palacios intimates in his chronicle that
 this melody, so grateful to the ears of pious Christians, was a
 source of perpetual torment to the ears of infidels.


While this part of the kingdom was thus reduced by the Christian
sword, the central part, round the city of Granada, forming the
heart of the Moorish territory, was held in vassalage of the
Castilian monarch by Boabdil, surnamed El Chico.  That unfortunate
prince lost no occasion to propitiate the conquerors of his country by
acts of homage and by professions that must have been foreign to
his heart.  No sooner had he heard of the capture of Malaga than
he sent congratulations to the Catholic sovereigns, accompanied
with presents of horses richly caparisoned for the king, and precious
cloth of gold and Oriental perfumes for the queen.  His congratulations
and his presents were received with the utmost graciousness, and
the short-sighted prince, lulled by the temporary and politic
forbearance of Ferdinand, flattered himself that he was securing
the lasting friendship of that monarch.

The policy of Boabdil had its transient and superficial advantages.
The portion of Moorish territory under his immediate sway had a
respite from the calamities of war, the husbandmen cultivated their
luxuriant fields in security, and the Vega of Granada once more
blossomed like the rose.  The merchants again carried on a gainful
traffic: the gates of the city were thronged with beasts of burden,
bringing the rich products of every clime.  Yet, while the people of
Granada rejoiced in their teeming fields and crowded marts, they
secretly despised the policy which had procured them these
advantages, and held Boabdil for little better than an apostate and
an unbeliever.  Muley Abdallah el Zagal was now the hope of the
unconquered part of the kingdom, and every Moor whose spirit was not
quite subdued with his fortunes lauded the valor of the old monarch
and his fidelity to the faith, and wished success to his standard.

El Zagal, though he no longer sat enthroned in the Alhambra, yet
reigned over more considerable domains than his nephew.  His
territories extended from the frontier of Jaen along the borders of
Murcia to the Mediterranean, and reached into the centre of the
kingdom.  On the northeast he held the cities of Baza and Guadix,
situated in the midst of fertile regions.  He had the important
seaport of Almeria also, which at one time rivalled Granada itself
in wealth and population.  Besides these, his territories included a
great part of the Alpuxarras mountains, which extend across the
kingdom and shoot out branches toward the sea-coast.  This
mountainous region was a stronghold of wealth and power.  Its stern
and rocky heights, rising to the clouds, seemed to set invasion at
defiance, yet within their rugged embraces were sheltered delightful
valleys of the happiest temperature and richest fertility.  The cool
springs and limpid rills which gushed out in all parts of the
mountains, and the abundant streams which for a great part of the
year were supplied by the Sierra Nevada, spread a perpetual verdure
over the skirts and slopes of the hills, and, collecting in silver
rivers in the valleys, wound along among plantations of mulberry
trees and groves of oranges and citrons, of almonds, figs, and
pomegranates.  Here was produced the finest silk of Spain, which gave
employment to thousands of manufacturers.  The sunburnt sides of the
hills also were covered with vineyards; the abundant herbage of the
mountain-ravines and the rich pasturage of the valleys fed vast
flocks and herds; and even the arid and rocky bosoms of the heights
teemed with wealth from the mines of various metals with which they
were impregnated.  In a word, the Alpuxarras mountains had ever
been the great source of revenue to the monarchs of Granada.  Their
inhabitants also were hardy and warlike, and a sudden summons from
the Moorish king could at any time call forth fifty thousand fighting-
men from their rocky fastnesses.

Such was the rich but rugged fragment of an empire which remained
under the sway of the old warrior-monarch El Zagal.  The mountain-
barriers by which it was locked up had protected it from most of the
ravages of the present war.  El Zagal prepared himself by
strengthening every fortress to battle fiercely for its maintenance.

The Catholic sovereigns saw that fresh troubles and toils awaited
them.  The war had to be carried into a new quarter, demanding
immense expenditure, and new ways and means must be devised
to replenish their exhausted coffers.  "As this was a holy war,
however," says Fray Antonio Agapida, "and peculiarly redounded
to the prosperity of the Church, the clergy were full of zeal, and
contributed vast sums of money and large bodies of troops.  A
pious fund was also produced from the first fruits of that glorious
institution, the Inquisition."

It so happened that about this time there were many families of
wealth and dignity in the kingdoms of Aragon and Valencia and the
principality of Catalonia whose forefathers had been Jews, but had
been converted to Christianity.  Notwithstanding the outward piety
of these families, it was surmised, and soon came to be strongly
suspected, that many of then had a secret hankering after Judaism,
and it was even whispered that some of them practised Jewish rites
in private.

The Catholic monarch (continues Agapida) had a righteous abhorrence
of all kinds of heresy and a fervent zeal for the faith; he ordered,
therefore, a strict investigation of the conduct of these pseudo-
Christians. Inquisitors were sent into the provinces for the purpose,
who proceeded with their accustomed zeal.  The consequence was,
that many families were convicted of apostasy from the Christian
faith and of the private practice of Judaism.  Some, who had grace
and policy sufficient to reform in time, were again received into the
Christian fold after being severely mulcted and condemned to
heavy penance; others were burnt at "auto de fes" for the
edification of the public, and their property was confiscated for
the good of the state.

As these Hebrews were of great wealth and had an hereditary passion
for jewelry, there was found abundant store in their possession of
gold and silver, of rings and necklaces, and strings of pearl and
coral, and precious stones--treasures easy of transportation and
wonderfully adapted for the emergencies of war.  "In this way,"
concludes the pious Agapida, "these backsliders, by the all-seeing
contrivances of Providence, were made to serve the righteous cause
which they had so treacherously deserted; and their apostate wealth
was sanctified by being devoted to the service of Heaven and the
Crown in this holy crusade against the infidels."

It must be added, however, that these pious financial expedients
received some check from the interference of Queen Isabella.  Her
penetrating eyes discovered that many enormities had been committed
under color of religious zeal, and many innocent persons accused by
false witnesses of apostasy, either through malice or a hope of
obtaining their wealth: she caused strict investigation, therefore,
into the proceedings which had been held, many of which were
reversed, and suborners punished in proportion to their guilt.*

*Pulgar, part 3, c. 100.



CHAPTER LXVIII.

HOW KING FERDINAND INVADED THE EASTERN SIDE OF THE
    KINGDOM OF GRANADA, AND HOW HE WAS RECEIVED BY
    EL ZAGAL.


"Muley Abdallah el Zagal," says the venerable Jesuit father Pedro
Abarca, "was the most venomous Mahometan in all Morisma;" and
the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida most devoutly echoes his opinion.
"Certainly," adds the latter, "none ever opposed a more heathenish
and diabolical obstinacy to the holy inroads of the cross and sword."

El Zagal felt that it was necessary to do something to quicken his
popularity with the people, and that nothing was more effectual than
a successful inroad.  The Moors loved the stirring call to arms and a
wild foray among the mountains, and delighted more in a hasty spoil,
wrested with hard fighting from the Christians, than in all the steady
and certain gains secured by peaceful traffic.

There reigned at this time a careless security along the frontier of
Jaen.  The alcaydes of the Christian fortresses were confident of
the friendship of Boabdil el Chico, and they fancied his uncle too
distant and too much engrossed by his own perplexities to think of
molesting them.  On a sudden El Zagal issued out of Guadix with a
chosen band, passed rapidly through the mountains which extend
behind Granada, and fell like a thunderbolt upon the territories in
the neighborhood of Alcala la Real.  Before the alarm could be spread
and the frontier roused he had made a wide career of destruction
through the country, sacking and burning villages, sweeping off
flocks and herds, and carrying away captives.  The warriors of the
frontier assembled, but El Zagal was already far on his return
through the mountains, and he re-entered the gates of Guadix in
triumph, his army laden with Christian spoil and conducting an
immense cavalgada.  Such was one of El Zagal's preparatives for the
expected invasion of the Christian king, exciting the warlike spirit
of his people, and gaining for himself a transient popularity.

King Ferdinand assembled his army at Murcia in the spring of 1488.
He left that city on the fifth of June with a flying camp of four
thousand horse and fourteen thousand foot.  The marques of Cadiz led
the van, followed by the adelantado of Murcia.  The army entered the
Moorish frontier by the sea-coast, spreading terror through the land:
wherever it appeared, the towns surrendered without a blow, so
great was the dread of experiencing the woes which had desolated
the opposite frontier.  In this way Vera, Velez el Rubio, Velez el
Blanco, and many towns of inferior note to the number of sixty
yielded at the first summons.

It was not until it approached Almeria that the army met with
resistance.  This important city was commanded by the prince
Zelim, a relation of El Zagal.  He led forth his Moors bravely to the
encounter, and skirmished fiercely with the advance guard in the
gardens near the city.  King Ferdinand came up with the main body
of the army and called off his troops from the skirmish.  He saw that
to attack the place with his present force was fruitless.  Having
reconnoitred the city and its environs, therefore, against a future
campaign, he retired with his army and marched toward Baza.

The old warrior El Zagal was himself drawn up in the city of Baza
with a powerful garrison.  He felt confidence in the strength of the
place, and rejoiced when he heard that the Christian king was
approaching.  In the valley in front of Baza there extended a great
tract of gardens, like a continued grove, intersected by canals and
water courses.  In this he stationed an ambuscade of arquebusiers
and crossbowmen.  The vanguard of the Christian army came
marching gayly up the valley with great sound of drum and trumpet,
and led on by the marques of Cadiz and the adelantado of Murcia.
As they drew near El Zagal sallied forth with horse and foot and
attacked them for a time with great spirit.  Gradually falling back,
as if pressed by their superior valor, he drew the exulting Christians
among the gardens.  Suddenly the Moors in ambuscade burst
from their concealment, and opened such a fire in flank and rear
that many of the Christians were slain and the rest thrown into
confusion.  King Ferdinand arrived in time to see the disastrous
situation of his troops, and gave signal for the vanguard to retire.

El Zagal did not permit the foe to draw off unmolested.  Ordering out
fresh squadrons, he fell upon the rear of the retreating troops with
triumphant shouts, driving them before him with dreadful havoc.  The
old war-cry of "El Zagal! El Zagal!" was again put up by the Moors,
and echoed with transport from the walls of the city.  The Christians
were in imminent peril of a complete rout, when, fortunately, the
adelantado of Murcia threw himself with a large body of horse and
foot between the pursuers and the pursued, covering the retreat
of the latter and giving them time to rally.  The Moors were now
attacked so vigorously in turn that they gave over the contest and
drew back slowly into the city.  Many valiant cavaliers were slain in
this skirmish; among the number was Don Philip of Aragon, master
of the chivalry of St. George of Montesor: he was illegitimate son of
the king's illegitimate brother Don Carlos, and his death was
greatly bewailed by Ferdinand.  He had formerly been archbishop of
Palermo, but had doffed the cassock for the cuirass, and, according
to Fray Antonio Agapida, had gained a glorious crown of martyrdom
by falling in this holy war.

The warm reception of his advance guard brought King Ferdinand
to a pause: he encamped on the banks of the neighboring river
Guadalquiton, and began to consider whether he had acted wisely in
undertaking this campaign with his present force.  His late successes
had probably rendered him over-confident: El Zagal had again
schooled him into his characteristic caution.  He saw that the old
warrior was too formidably ensconced in Baza to be dislodged by
anything except a powerful army and battering artillery, and he
feared that should he persist in his invasion some disaster might
befall his army, either from the enterprise of the foe or from a
pestilence which prevailed in various parts of the country.  He
retired, therefore, from before Baza, as he had on a former occasion
from before Loxa, all the wiser for a wholesome lesson in warfare,
but by no means grateful to those who had given it, and with a
solemn determination to have his revenge upon his teachers.

He now took measures for the security of the places gained in the
campaign, placing in them strong garrisons, well armed and supplied,
charging their alcaydes to be vigilant on their posts and to give no
rest to the enemy.  The whole of the frontier was under the command
of Luis Fernandez Puerto Carrero.  As it was evident from the warlike
character of El Zagal that there would be abundance of active service
and hard fighting, many hidalgos and young cavaliers eager for
distinction remained with Puerto Carrero.

All these dispositions being made, King Ferdinand closed the dubious
campaign of this year, not, as usual, by returning in triumph at the
head of his army to some important city of his dominions, but by
disbanding the troops and repairing to pray at the cross of Caravaca.


CHAPTER LXIX.

HOW THE MOORS MADE VARIOUS ENTERPRISES AGAINST THE
    CHRISTIANS.


"While the pious king Ferdinand," observes Fray Antonio Agapida,
"was humbling himself before the cross and devoutly praying for the
destruction of his enemies, that fierce pagan, El Zagal, depending
merely on arm of flesh and sword of steel, pursued his diabolical
outrages upon the Christians."  No sooner was the invading army
disbanded than he sallied forth from his stronghold, and carried
fire and sword into all those parts which had submitted to the
Spanish yoke.  The castle of Nixar, being carelessly guarded, was
taken by surprise and its garrison put to the sword.  The old warrior
raged with sanguinary fury about the whole frontier, attacking
convoys, slaying, wounding, and making prisoners, and coming by
surprise upon the Christians wherever they were off their guard.

Carlos de Biedma, alcayde of the fortress of Culla, confiding in the
strength of its walls and towers and in its difficult situation, being
built on the summit of a lofty hill and surrounded by precipices,
ventured to absent himself from his post.  He was engaged to be
married to a fair and noble lady of Baeza, and repaired to that city
to celebrate his nuptials, escorted by a brilliant array of the best
horsemen of his garrison.  Apprised of his absence, the vigilant
El Zagal suddenly appeared before Culla with a powerful force,
stormed the town sword in hand, fought the Christians from
street to street, and drove them with great slaughter to the
citadel.  Here a veteran captain, by the name of Juan de Avalos,
a gray-headed warrior scarred in many a battle, assumed the
command and made an obstinate defence.  Neither the multitude
of the enemy nor the vehemence of their attacks, though led on
by the terrible El Zagal himself, had power to shake the fortitude
of this doughty old soldier.

The Moors undermined the outer walls and one of the towers of the
fortress, and made their way into the exterior court.  The alcayde
manned the tops of his towers, pouring down melted pitch and
showering darts, arrows, stones, and all kinds of missiles upon the
assailants.  The Moors were driven out of the court, but, being
reinforced with fresh troops, returned repeatedly to the assault.
For five days the combat was kept up: the Christians were nearly
exhausted, but were sustained by the cheerings of their stanch old
alcayde and the fear of death from El Zagal should they surrender.
At length the approach of a powerful force under Don Luis Puerto
Carrero relieved them from this fearful peril.  El Zagal abandoned
the assault, but set fire to the town in his rage and disappointment,
and retired to his stronghold of Guadix.

The example of El Zagal roused his adherents to action.  Two bold
Moorish alcaydes, Ali Aliatar and Yzan Aliatar, commanding the
fortresses of Alhenden and Salobrena, laid waste the country of the
subjects of Boabdil and the places which had recently submitted to
the Christians: they swept off the cattle, carried off captives, and
harassed the whole of the newly-conquered frontier.

The Moors also of Almeria and Tavernas and Purchena made inroads
into Murcia, and carried fire and sword into its most fertile regions.
On the opposite frontier also, among the wild valleys and rugged
recesses of the Sierra Bermeja, or Red Mountains, many of the
Moors who had lately submitted again flew to arms.  The marques of
Cadiz suppressed by timely vigilance the rebellion of the mountain-
town of Gausin, situated on a high peak almos