t among the clouds;
but others of the Moors fortified themselves in rock-built towers and
castles, inhabited solely by warriors, whence they carried on a
continual war of forage and depredation, sweeping down into the
valleys and carrying off flocks and herds and all kinds of booty to
these eagle-nests, to which it was perilous and fruitless to pursue
them.

The worthy Fray Antonio Agapida closes his history of this checkered
year in quite a different strain from those triumphant periods with
which he is accustomed to wind up the victorious campaigns of the
sovereigns.  "Great and mighty," says this venerable chronicler,
"were the floods and tempests which prevailed throughout the
kingdoms of Castile and Aragon about this time.  It seemed as though
the windows of heaven were again opened and a second deluge
overwhelming the face of nature.  The clouds burst as it were in
cataracts upon the earth; torrents rushed down from the mountains,
overflowing the valleys; brooks were swelled into raging rivers;
houses were undermined; mills were swept away by their own
streams; the affrighted shepherds saw their flocks drowned in the
midst of the pasture, and were fain to take refuge for their lives in
towers and high places.  The Guadalquivir for a time became a roaring
and tumultuous sea, inundating the immense plain of the Tablada and
filling the fair city of Seville with affright.

"A vast black cloud moved over the land, accompanied by a hurricane
and a trembling of the earth.  Houses were unroofed, the walls and
battlements of fortresses shaken, and lofty towers rocked to their
foundations.  Ships riding at anchor were either stranded or
swallowed up; others, under sail, were tossed to and fro upon
mountain waves and cast upon the land, where the whirlwind rent
them in pieces and scattered them in fragments in the air.  Doleful
was the ruin and great the terror where this baleful cloud passed
by, and it left a long track of desolation over sea and land.  Some of
the faint-hearted," adds Antonio Agapida, "looked upon this torment
of the elements as a prodigious event, out of the course of nature.
In the weakness of their fears they connected it with those troubles
which occurred in various places, considering it a portent of some
great calamity about to be wrought by the violence of the bloody-
handed El Zagal and his fierce adherents."*

*See Cura de los Palacios, cap. 91; Palencia, De Bello Granad.,
 lib. 8.



CHAPTER LXX.

HOW KING FERDINAND PREPARED TO BESIEGE THE CITY OF
    BAZA, AND HOW THE CITY PREPARED FOR DEFENCE.


The stormy winter had passed away, and the spring of 1489 was
advancing, yet the heavy rains had broken up the roads, the
mountain-brooks were swollen to raging torrents, and the late
shallow and peaceful rivers were deep, turbulent, and dangerous.
The Christian troops had been summoned to assemble in early
spring on the frontiers of Jaen, but were slow in arriving at the
appointed place.  They were entangled in the miry defiles of the
mountains or fretted impatiently on the banks of impassable floods.
It was late in the month of May before they assembled in sufficient
force to attempt the proposed invasion, when at length a valiant
army of thirteen thousand horse and forty thousand foot marched
merrily over the border.  The queen remained at the city of Jaen with
the prince-royal and the princesses her children, accompanied and
supported by the venerable cardinal of Spain and those reverend
prelates who assisted in her councils throughout this holy war.

The plan of King Ferdinand was to lay siege to the city of Baza,
the key of the remaining possessions of the Moor.  That important
fortress taken, Guadix and Almeria must soon follow, and then the
power of El Zagal would be at an end.  As the Catholic king advanced
he had first to secure various castles and strongholds in the vicinity
of Baza which might otherwise harass his army.  Some of these made
obstinate resistance, especially the town of Zujar.  The Christians
assailed the walls with various machines to sap them and batter them
down.  The brave alcayde, Hubec Abdilbar, opposed force to force and
engine to engine.  He manned his towers with his bravest warriors,
who rained down an iron shower upon the enemy, and he linked
caldrons together by strong chains and cast fire from them, consuming
the wooden engines of their assailants and those who managed them.

The siege was protracted for several days: the bravery of the
alcayde could not save his fortress from an overwhelming foe, but
it gained him honorable terms.  Ferdinand permitted the garrison
and the inhabitants to repair with their effects to Baza, and the
valiant Hubec marched forth with the remnant of his force and took
he way to that devoted city.

The delays caused to the invading army by these various
circumstances had been diligently improved by El Zagal, who felt
that he was now making his last stand for empire, and that this
campaign would decide whether he should continue a king or sink into
a vassal.  He was but a few leagues from Baza, at the city of Guadix.
This last was the most important point of his remaining territories,
being a kind of bulwark between them and the hostile city of
Granada, the seat of his nephew's power.  Though he heard of the
tide of war, therefore, collecting and rolling toward the city of Baza,
he dared not go in person to its assistance.  He dreaded that should
he leave Guadix, Boabdil would attack him in the rear while the
Christian army was battling with him in front.  El Zagal trusted in
the great strength of Baza to defy any violent assault, and profited
by the delays of the Christian army to supply it with all possible
means of defence.  He sent thither all the troops he could spare from
his garrison of Guadix, and despatched missives throughout his
territories calling upon all true Moslems to hasten to Baza and make
a devoted stand in defence of their homes, their liberties, and their
religion.  The cities of Tavernas and Purchena and the surrounding
heights and valleys responded to his orders and sent forth their
fighting-men to the field.  The rocky fastnesses of the Alpuxarras
resounded with the din of arms: troops of horse and bodies of foot-
soldiers were seen winding down the rugged cliffs and defiles of
those marble mountains and hastening toward Baza.  Many brave
cavaliers of Granada also, spurning the quiet and security of Christian
vassalage, secretly left the city and hastened to join their fighting
countrymen.  The great dependence of El Zagal, however, was upon
the valor and loyalty of his cousin and brother-in-law, Cid Hiaya
Alnagar,* who was alcayde of Almeria--a cavalier experienced in
warfare and redoubtable in the field.  He wrote to him to leave Almeria
and repair with all speed at the head of his troops to Baza.  Cid Hiaya
departed immediately with ten thousand of the bravest Moors in the
kingdom.  These were for the most part hardy mountaineers, tempered
to sun and storm and tried in many a combat.  None equalled them
for a sally or a skirmish.  They were adroit in executing a thousand
stratagems, ambuscadoes, and evolutions.  Impetuous in their assaults,
yet governed in their utmost fury by a word or sign from their commander,
at the sound of a trumpet they would check themselves in the midst of
their career, wheel off and disperse, and at another sound of a trumpet
they would as suddenly reassemble and return to the attack.  They were
upon the enemy when least expected, coming like a rushing blast,
spreading havoc and consternation, and then passing away in an
instant; so that when one recovered from the shock and looked around,
behold, nothing was to be seen or heard of this tempest of war but a
cloud of dust and the clatter of retreating hoofs.**

*This name has generally been written Cidi Yahye.  The present mode
 is adopted on the authority of Alcantara in his History of Granada,
 who appears to have derived it from Arabic manuscripts existing in
 the archives of the marques de Corvera, descendant of Cid Hiaya.
 The latter (Cid Hiaya) was son of Aben Zelim, a deceased prince of
 Almeria, and was a lineal descendant from the celebrated Aben Hud,
 surnamed the Just.  The wife of Cid Hiaya was sister of the two
 Moorish generals, Abul Cacim and Reduan Vanegas, and, like them,
 the fruit of the union of a Christian knight, Don Pedro Vanegas, with
 Cetimerien, a Moorish princess.

**Pulgar, part 3, c. 106.


When Cid Hiaya led his train of ten thousand valiant warriors into
the gates of Baza, the city rang with acclamations and for a time
the inhabitants thought themselves secure.  El Zagal also felt a glow
of confidence, notwithstanding his own absence from the city.  "Cid
Hiaya," said he, "is my cousin and my brother-in-law; related to me
by blood and marriage, he is a second self: happy is that monarch
who has his kindred to command his armies."

With all these reinforcements the garrison of Baza amounted to above
twenty thousand men.  There were at this time three principal leaders
in the city: Mohammed Ibn Hassan, surnamed the Veteran, who was
military governor or alcayde, an old Moor of great experience and
discretion; the second was Hamet Abu Zali, who was captain of the
troops stationed in the place; and the third was Hubec Abdilbar,
late alcayde of Zujar, who had repaired hither with the remains of
his garrison.  Over all these Cid Hiaya exercised a supreme command
in consequence of his being of the blood-royal and in the especial
confidence of Muley Abdallah el Zagal.  He was eloquent and ardent in
council, and fond of striking and splendid achievements, but he was
a little prone to be carried away by the excitement of the moment
and the warmth of his imagination.  The councils of war of these
commanders, therefore, were more frequently controlled by the
opinions of the old alcayde Mohammed Ibn Hassan, for whose
shrewdness, caution, and experience Cid Hiaya himself felt the
greatest deference.

The city of Baza was situated in a great valley, eight leagues in
length and three in breadth, called the Hoya, or Basin, of Baza.
It was surrounded by a range of mountains called the Sierra of
Xabalcohol, the streams of which, collecting themselves into
two rivers, watered and fertilized the country.  The city was built
in the plain, one part of it protected by the rocky precipices of
the mountain and by a powerful citadel, the other by massive walls
studded with immense towers.  It had suburbs toward the plain
imperfectly fortified by earthen walls.  In front of these suburbs
extended a tract of orchards and gardens nearly a league in length,
so thickly planted as to resemble a continued forest.  Here every
citizen who could afford it had his little plantation and his garden
of fruits and flowers and vegetables, watered by canals and rivulets
and dominated by a small tower for recreation or defence.  This
wilderness of groves and gardens, intersected in all parts by canals
and runs of water, and studded by above a thousand small towers,
formed a kind of protection to this side of the city, rendering all
approach extremely difficult and perplexed.

While the Christian army had been detained before the frontier
posts, the city of Baza had been a scene of hurried and unremitting
preparation.  All the grain of the surrounding valley, though yet
unripe, was hastily reaped and borne into the city to prevent it
from yielding sustenance to the enemy.  The country was drained
of all its supplies; flocks and herds were driven, bleating and
bellowing, into the gates: long trains of beasts of burden, some
laden with food, others with lances, darts, and arms of all kinds,
kept pouring into the place.  Already were munitions collected
sufficient for a siege of fifteen months: still, the eager and hasty
preparation was going on when the army of Ferdinand came in sight.

On one side might be seen scattered parties of foot and horse
spurring to the gates, and muleteers hurrying forward their burdened
animals, all anxious to get under shelter before the gathering storm;
on the other side, the cloud of war came sweeping down the valley,
the roll of drum or clang of trumpet resounding occasionally from its
deep bosom, or the bright glance of arms flashing forth like vivid
lightning from its columns.  King Ferdinand pitched his tents in the
valley beyond the green labyrinth of gardens.  He sent his heralds
to summon the city to surrender, promising the most favorable terms
in case of immediate compliance, and avowing in the most solemn
terms his resolution never to abandon the siege until he had
possession of the place.

Upon receiving this summons the Moorish commanders held a council
of war.  The prince Cid Hiaya, indignant at the menaces of the king,
was for retorting by a declaration that the garrison never would
surrender, but would fight until buried under the ruins of the walls.
"Of what avail," said the veteran Mohammed, "is a declaration of the
kind, which we may falsify by our deeds?  Let us threaten what we
know we can perform, and let us endeavor to perform more than
we threaten."

In conformity to his advice, therefore, a laconic reply was sent to
the Christian monarch, thanking him for his offer of favorable terms,
but informing him that they were placed in the city to defend, not to
surrender it.



CHAPTER LXXI.

THE BATTLE OF THE GARDENS BEFORE BAZA.


When the reply of the Moorish commanders was brought to King
Ferdinand, he prepared to press the siege with the utmost vigor.
Finding the camp too far from the city, and that the intervening
orchards afforded shelter for the sallies of the Moors, he determined
to advance it beyond the gardens, in the space between them and
the suburbs, where his batteries would have full play upon the city
walls.  A detachment was sent in advance to take possession of the
gardens and keep a check upon the suburbs, opposing any sally
while the encampment should be formed and fortified.  The various
commanders entered the orchards at different points.  The young
cavaliers marched fearlessly forward, but the experienced veterans
foresaw infinite peril in the mazes of this verdant labyrinth.  The
master of St. Jago, as he led his troops into the centre of the
gardens, exhorted them to keep by one another, and to press
forward in defiance of all difficulty or danger, assuring them that
God would give them the victory if they attacked hardily and
persisted resolutely.

Scarce had they entered the verge of the orchards when a din of
drums and trumpets, mingled with war-cries, was heard from the
suburbs, and a legion of Moorish warriors on foot poured forth.  They
were led on by the prince Cid Hiaya.  He saw the imminent danger of
the city should the Christians gain possession of the orchards.
"Soldiers," he cried, "we fight for life and liberty, for our families, our
country, our religion;* nothing is left for us to depend upon but the
strength of our hands, the courage of our hearts, and the almighty
protection of Allah."  The Moors answered him with shouts of war
and rushed to the encounter.  The two hosts met in the midst of the
gardens.  A chance-medley combat ensued with lances, arquebuses,
crossbows, and scimetars; the perplexed nature of the ground, cut
up and intersected by canals and streams, the closeness of the trees,
the multiplicity of towers and petty edifices, gave greater advantages
to the Moors, who were on foot, than to the Christians, who were on
horseback.  The Moors, too, knew the ground, with all its alleys and
passes, and were thus enabled to lurk, to sally forth, attack, and
retreat almost without injury.

*"Illi (Mauri) pro fortunis, pro libertate, pro laribus patriis, pro
 vita denique certabant."--Pietro Martyr, "Epist. 70."


The Christian commanders, seeing this, ordered many of the horsemen
to dismount and fight on foot.  The battle then became fierce and
deadly, each disregarding his own life, provided he could slay his
enemy.  It was not so much a general battle as a multitude of petty
actions, for every orchard and garden had its distinct contest.  No
one could see farther than the little scene of fury and bloodshed
around him, nor know how the general battle fared.  In vain the
captains exerted their voices, in vain the trumpets brayed forth
signals and commands: all was confounded and unheard in the
universal din and uproar.  No one kept to his standard, but fought as
his own fury or fear dictated.  In some places the Christians had the
advantage, in others the Moors; often a victorious party, pursuing
the vanquished, came upon a superior and triumphant force of the
enemy, and the fugitives turned back upon them in an overwhelming
wave.  Some broken remnants, in their terror and confusion, fled from
their own countrymen and sought refuge among their enemies, not
knowing friend from foe in the obscurity of the groves.  The Moors
were more adroit in these wild skirmishings from their flexibility,
lightness, and agility, and the rapidity with which they would
disperse, rally, and return again to the charge.*

*Mariana, lib. 25, cap. 13.


The hardest fighting was about the small garden-towers and
pavilions, which served as so many petty fortresses.  Each party
by turns gained them, defended them fiercely, and were driven out;
many of the towers were set on fire, and increased the horrors of
the fight by the wreaths of smoke and flame in which they wrapped
the groves and by the shrieks of those who were burning.

Several of the Christian cavaliers, bewildered by the uproar and
confusion and shocked at the carnage which prevailed, would have
led their men out of the action, but they were entangled in a labyrinth
and knew not which way to retreat.  While in this perplexity Juan
Perea, the standard-bearer of one of the squadrons of the grand
cardinal, had his arm carried off by a cannon-ball; the standard was
wellnigh falling into the hands of the enemy, when Rodrigo de
Mendoza, an intrepid youth, natural son of the grand cardinal,
rushed to its rescue through a shower of balls, lances, and arrows,
and, bearing it aloft, dashed forward with it into the hottest of
the combat, followed by his shouting soldiery.

King Ferdinand, who remained in the skirts of the orchard, was in
extreme anxiety.  It was impossible to see much of the action for the
multiplicity of trees and towers and the wreaths of smoke, and those
who were driven out defeated or came out wounded and exhausted
gave different accounts, according to the fate of the partial conflicts
in which they had been engaged.  Ferdinand exerted himself to the
utmost to animate and encourage his troops to this blind encounter,
sending reinforcements of horse and foot to those points where the
battle was most sanguinary and doubtful.

Among those who were brought forth mortally wounded was Don
Juan de Luna, a youth of uncommon merit, greatly prized by the king,
beloved by the army, and recently married to Dona Catalina de Urrea,
a young lady of distinguished beauty.*  They laid him at the foot of
a tree, and endeavored to stanch and bind up his wounds with a
scarf which his bride had wrought for him; but his life-blood flowed
too profusely, and while a holy friar was yet administering to him the
last sacred offices of the Church, he expired, almost at the feet of
his sovereign.

*Mariana, P. Martyr, Zurita.


On the other hand, the veteran alcayde Mohammed Ibn Hassan,
surrounded by a little band of chieftains, kept an anxious eye upon
the scene of combat from the walls of the city.  For nearly twelve
hours the battle raged without intermission.  The thickness of the
foliage hid all the particulars from their sight, but they could see
the flash of swords and glance of helmets among the trees.  Columns
of smoke rose in every direction, while the clash of arms, the
thundering of ribadoquines and arquebuses, the shouts and cries of
the combatants, and the groans and supplications of the wounded
bespoke the deadly conflict waging in the bosom of the groves.  They
were harassed, too, by the shrieks and lamentations of the Moorish
women and children as their wounded relatives were brought bleeding
from the scene of action, and were stunned by a general outcry of
woe on the part of the inhabitants as the body of Reduan Zafarjal,
a renegado Christian and one of the bravest of their generals, was
borne breathless into the city.

At length the din of battle approached nearer to the skirts of the
orchards.  They beheld their warriors driven out from among the
groves by fresh squadrons of the enemy, and, after disputing the
ground inch by inch, obliged to retire to a place between the
orchards and the suburbs which was fortified with palisadoes.

The Christians immediately planted opposing palisadoes, and
established strong outposts near to the retreat of the Moors, while
at the same time King Ferdinand ordered that his encampment
should be pitched within the hard-won orchards.

Mohammed Ibn Hassan sallied forth to the aid of the prince Cid
Hiaya, and made a desperate attempt to dislodge the enemy from
this formidable position, but the night had closed, and the darkness
rendered it impossible to make any impression.  The Moors, however,
kept up constant assaults and alarms throughout the night, and the
weary Christians, exhausted by the toils and sufferings of the day,
were not allowed a moment of repose.*

*Pulgar, part 3, cap. 106, 107; Cura de los Palacios, cap. 92;
 Zurita, lib. 20, cap 31.



CHAPTER LXXII.

SIEGE OF BAZA.--EMBARRASSMENTS OF THE ARMY.


The morning sun rose upon a piteous scene before the walls of Baza.
The Christian outposts, harassed throughout the night, were pale
and haggard, while the multitudes of slain which lay before their
palisadoes showed the fierce attacks they had sustained and the
bravery of their defence.

Beyond them lay the groves and gardens of Baza, once favorite
resorts for recreation and delight, now a scene of horror and
desolation.  The towers and pavilions were smoking ruins; the canals
and water-courses were discolored with blood and choked with the
bodies of the slain.  Here and there the ground, deep dinted with the
tramp of man and steed and plashed and slippery with gore, showed
where had been some fierce and mortal conflict, while the bodies of
Moors and Christians, ghastly in death, lay half concealed among the
matted and trampled shrubs and flowers and herbage.

Amidst these sanguinary scenes rose the Christian tents, hastily
pitched among the gardens in the preceding evening.  The experience
of the night, however, and the forlorn aspect of everything in the
morning convinced King Ferdinand of the perils and hardships to
which his camp must be exposed in its present situation, and after
a consultation with his principal cavaliers he resolved to abandon
the orchards.

It was a dangerous movement, to extricate his army from so entangled
a situation in the face of so alert and daring an enemy.  A bold front
was therefore kept up toward the city; additional troops were ordered
to the advanced posts, and works begun as if for a settled encampment.
Not a tent was struck in the gardens, but in the mean time the most
active and unremitting exertions were made to remove all the baggage
and furniture of the camp back to the original station.

All day the Moors beheld a formidable show of war maintained in
front of the gardens, while in the rear the tops of the Christian
tents and the pennons of the different commanders were seen rising
above the groves.  Suddenly, toward evening the tents sank and
disappeared, the outposts broke up their stations and withdrew,
and the whole shadow of an encampment was fast vanishing from
their eyes.

The Moors saw too late the subtle manoeuvre of King Ferdinand.
Cid Hiaya again sallied forth with a large force of horse and foot,
and pressed furiously upon the Christians.  The latter; however,
experienced in Moorish attack, retired in close order, sometimes
turning upon the enemy and driving them to their barricadoes, and
then pursuing their retreat.  In this way the army was extricated
without much further loss from the perilous labyrinths of the gardens.

The camp was now out of danger, but it was also too distant from
the city to do mischief, while the Moors could sally forth and return
without hindrance.  The king called a council of war to consider in
what manner to proceed.  The marques of Cadiz was for abandoning
the siege for the present, the place being too strong, too well
garrisoned and provided, and too extensive for their limited forces
either to carry it by assault or invest and reduce it by famine,
while in lingering before it the army would be exposed to the usual
maladies and sufferings of besieging armies, and when the rainy
season came on would be shut up by the swelling of the rivers.  He
recommended, instead, that the king should throw garrisons of horse
and foot into all the towns captured in the neighborhood, and leave
them to keep up a predatory war upon Baza, while he should
overrun and ravage all the country, so that in the following year
Almeria and Guadix, having all their subject towns and territories
taken from them, might be starved into submission.

Don Gutierre de Cardenas, senior commander of Leon, on the other
hand, maintained that to abandon the siege would be construed by
the enemy into a sign of weakness and irresolution.  It would give new
spirits to the partisans of El Zagal, and would gain to his standard
many of the wavering subjects of Boabdil, if it did not encourage the
fickle populace of Granada to open rebellion.  He advised, therefore,
that the siege should be prosecuted with vigor.

The pride of Ferdinand pleaded in favor of the last opinion, for it
would be doubly humiliating again to return from a campaign in this
part of the Moorish kingdom without effecting a blow.  But when he
reflected on all that his army had suffered, and on all that it must
suffer should the siege continue--especially from the difficulty of
obtaining a regular supply of provisions for so numerous a host
across a great extent of rugged and mountainous country--he
determined to consult the safety of his people and to adopt the
advice of the marques of Cadiz.

When the soldiery heard that the king was about to raise the siege
in mere consideration of their sufferings, they were filled with
generous enthusiasm, and entreated as with one voice that the
siege might never be abandoned until the city surrendered.

Perplexed by conflicting counsels, the king despatched messengers to
the queen at Jaen, requesting her advice.  Posts had been stationed
between them in such manner that missives from the camp could reach
the queen within ten hours.  Isabella sent instantly her reply.  She left
the policy of raising or continuing the siege to the decision of the king
and his captains, but, should they determine to persevere, she pledged
herself, with the aid of God, to forward them men, money, provisions
and all other supplies until the city should be taken.

The reply of the queen determined Ferdinand to persevere, and when
his determination was made known to the army, it was hailed with as
much joy as if it had been tidings of a victory.



CHAPTER LXXIII.

SIEGE OF BAZA CONTINUED.--HOW KING FERDINAND COMPLETELY
    INVESTED THE CITY.


The Moorish prince Cid Hiaya had received tidings of the doubts and
discussions in the Christian camp, and flattered himself with hopes
that the besieging army would soon retire in despair, though the
veteran Mohammed shook his head with incredulity.  A sudden
movement one morning in the Christian camp seemed to confirm the
sanguine hopes of the prince.  The tents were struck, the artillery
and baggage were conveyed away, and bodies of soldiers began
to march along the valley.  The momentary gleam of triumph was
soon dispelled.  The Catholic king had merely divided his host into
two camps, the more effectually to distress the city.

One, consisting of four thousand horse and eight thousand foot,
with all the artillery and battering engines, took post on the side of
the city toward the mountain.  This was commanded by the marques of
Cadiz, with whom were Don Alonso de Aguilar, Luis Fernandez Puerto
Carrero, and many other distinguished cavaliers.

The other camp was commanded by the king, having six thousand horse
and a great host of foot-soldiers, the hardy mountaineers of Biscay,
Guipuscoa, Galicia, and the Asturias.  Among the cavaliers who were
with the king were the brave count de Tendilla, Don Rodrigo de
Mendoza, and Don Alonso de Cardenas, master of Santiago.

The two camps were wide asunder, on opposite sides of the city, and
between them lay the thick wilderness of orchards.  Both camps were
therefore fortified by great trenches, breastworks, and palisadoes.
The veteran Mohammed, as he saw these two formidable camps
glittering on either side of the city, and noted the well-known
pennons of renowned commanders fluttering above them, still
comforted his companions.  "These camps," said he, "are too far
removed from each other for mutual succor and cooperation, and the
forest of orchards is as a gulf between them."  This consolation
was but of short continuance.  Scarcely were the Christian camps
fortified when the ears of the Moorish garrison were startled by the
sound of innumerable axes and the crash of falling trees.  They
looked with anxiety from their highest towers, and beheld their
favorite groves sinking beneath the blows of the Christian pioneers.
The Moors sallied forth with fiery zeal to protect their beloved
gardens and the orchards in which they so much delighted.  The
Christians, however, were too well supported to be driven from their
work.  Day after day the gardens became the scene of incessant and
bloody skirmishings; yet still the devastation of the groves went
on, for King Ferdinand was too well aware of the necessity of
clearing away this screen of woods not to bend all his forces to the
undertaking.  It was a work, however, of gigantic toil and patience.
The trees were of such magnitude, and so closely set together, and
spread over so wide an extent, that, notwithstanding four thousand
men were employed, they could scarcely clear a strip of land ten
paces broad within a day; and such were the interruptions from the
incessant assaults of the Moors that it was full forty days before
the orchards were completely levelled.

The devoted city of Baza now lay stripped of its beautiful covering
of groves and gardens, at once its ornament, its delight, and its
protection.  The besiegers went on slowly and surely, with almost
incredible labors, to invest and isolate the city.  They connected
their camps by a deep trench across the plain a league in length,
into which they diverted the waters of the mountain-streams.  They
protected this trench by palisadoes, fortified by fifteen castles
at regular distances.  They dug a deep trench also, two leagues
in length, across the mountain in the rear of the city, reaching
from camp to camp, and fortified it on each side with walls of earth
and stone and wood.  Thus the Moors were enclosed on all sides by
trenches, palisadoes, walls, and castles, so that it was impossible
for them to sally beyond this great line of circumvallation, nor
could any force enter to their succor.  Ferdinand made an attempt
likewise to cut off the supply of water from the city; "for water,"
observes the worthy Agapida, "is more necessary to these infidels
than bread, making use of it in repeated daily ablutions enjoined by
their damnable religion, and employing it in baths and in a thousand
other idle and extravagant modes of which we Spaniards and
Christians make but little account."

There was a noble fountain of pure water which gushed out at the
foot of the hill Albohacen just behind the city.  The Moors had
almost a superstitious fondness for this fountain, and chiefly
depended upon it for their supplies.  Receiving intimation from some
deserters of the plan of King Ferdinand to get possession of this
precious fountain, they sallied forth at night and threw up such
powerful works upon the impending hill as to set all attempts of
the Christian assailants at defiance.




CHAPTER LXXIV.

EXPLOIT OF HERNANDO PEREZ DEL PULGAR AND OTHER
    CAVALIERS.


The siege of Baza, while it displayed the skill and science of the
Christian commanders, gave but little scope for the adventurous
spirit and fiery valor of the young Spanish cavaliers.  They repined
at the tedious monotony and dull security of their fortified camp,
and longed for some soul-stirring exploit of difficulty and danger.
Two of the most spirited of these youthful cavaliers were Francisco
de Bazan and Antonio de Cueva, the latter of whom was son to the
duke of Albuquerque.  As they were one day seated on the ramparts
of the camp, and venting their impatience at this life of inaction,
they were overheard by a veteran adalid, one of those scouts or
guides who were acquainted with all parts of the country.  "Seniors,"
said he, "if you wish for a service of peril and profit, if you are
willing to pluck the fiery old Moor by the beard, I can lead you to
where you may put your mettle to the proof.  Hard by the city of
Guadix are certain hamlets rich in booty.  I can conduct you by a way
in which you may come upon them by surprise, and if you are as cool
in the head as you are hot in the spur, you may bear off your spoils
from under the very eyes of old El Zagal."

The idea of thus making booty at the very gates of Guadix pleased
the hot-spirited youths.  These predatory excursions were frequent
about this time, and the Moors of Padul, Alhenden, and other towns
of the Alpuxarras had recently harassed the Christian territories by
expeditions of the kind.  Francisco de Bazan and Antonio de Cueva
soon found other young cavaliers of their age eager to join in the
adventure, and in a little while they had nearly three hundred
horse and two hundred foot ready equipped and eager for the foray.

Keeping their destination secret, they sallied out of the camp on
the edge of an evening, and, guided by the adalid, made their way
by starlight through the most secret roads of the mountains.  In this
way they pressed on rapidly day and night, until early one morning,
before cock-crowing, they fell suddenly upon the hamlets, made
prisoners of the inhabitants, sacked the houses, ravaged the fields,
and, sweeping through the meadows, gathered together all the flocks
and herds.  Without giving themselves time to rest, they set out upon
their return, making with all speed for the mountains before the
alarm should be given and the country roused.

Several of the herdsmen, however, had fled to Guadix, and carried
tidings of the ravage to El Zagal.  The beard of old Muley trembled
with rage: he immediately sent out six hundred of his choicest horse
and foot, with orders to recover the booty and to bring those
insolent marauders captive to Guadix.

The Christian cavaliers were urging their cavalgada of cattle and
sheep up a mountain as fast as their own weariness would permit,
when, looking back, they beheld a great cloud of dust, and presently
descried the turbaned host hot upon their traces.

They saw that the Moors were superior in number; they were fresh
also, both man and steed, whereas both they and their horses were
fatigued by two days and two nights of hard marching.  Several of the
horsemen therefore gathered round the commanders and proposed
that they should relinquish their spoil and save themselves by flight.
The captains, Francisco de Bazan and Antonio de Cueva, spurned at
such craven counsel.  "What?" cried they, "abandon, our prey without
striking a blow?  Leave our foot-soldiers too in the lurch, to be
overwhelmed by the enemy?  If any one gives such counsel through
fear, he mistakes the course of safety, for there is less danger in
presenting a bold front to the foe than in turning a dastard back,
and fewer men are killed in a brave advance than in a cowardly
retreat."

Some of the cavaliers were touched by these words, and declared that
they would stand by the foot-soldiers like true companions-in-arms:
the great mass of the party, however, were volunteers, brought

together by chance, who received no pay nor had any common tie to
keep them together in time of danger.  The pleasure of the expedition
being over, each thought but of his own safety, regardless of his
companions.  As the enemy approached the tumult of opinions increased
and everything was in confusion.  The captains, to put an end to the
dispute, ordered the standard-bearer to advance against the Moors,
well knowing that no true cavalier would hesitate to follow and
defend his banner.  The standard-bearer hesitated: the troops were
on the point of taking to flight.

Upon this a cavalier of the royal guards rode to the front.  It was
Hernan Perez del Pulgar, alcayde of the fortress of Salar, the same
dauntless ambassador who once bore to the turbulent people of Malaga
the king's summons to surrender.  Taking off a handkerchief which he
wore round his head after the Andalusian fashion, he tied it to the
end of a lance and elevated it in the air.  "Cavaliers," cried he, "why
do ye take weapons in your hands if you depend upon your feet for
safety?  This day will determine who is the brave man and who the
coward.  He who is disposed to fight shall not want a standard: let
him follow this handkerchief."  So saying, he waved his banner and
spurred bravely against the Moors.  His example shamed some and
filled others with generous emulation: all turned with one accord,
and, following Pulgar, rushed with shouts upon the enemy.  The Moors
scarcely waited to receive the shock of their encounter.  Seized with
a panic, they took to flight, and were pursued for a considerable
distance with great slaughter.  Three hundred of their dead strewed
the road, and were stripped and despoiled by the conquerors; many
were taken prisoners, and the Christian cavaliers returned in triumph
to the camp with a long cavalgada of sheep and cattle and mules
laden with booty, and bearing before them the singular standard
which had conducted them to victory.

King Ferdinand was so pleased with the gallant action of Hernan
Perez del Pulgar that he immediately conferred on him the honor of
knighthood, using in the ceremony the sword of Diego de Aguero, the
captain of the royal guards; the duke of Esculona girded one of his
own gilt spurs upon his heel, and the grand master of Santiago, the
count de Cabra, and Gonsalvo of Cordova officiated as witnesses.
Furthermore, to perpetuate in his family the memory of his
achievement, the sovereigns authorized him to emblazon on his
escutcheon a golden lion in an azure field, bearing a lance with a
handkerchief at the end of it.  Round the border of the escutcheon
were depicted the eleven alcaydes vanquished in the battle.*  The
foregoing is but one of many hardy and heroic deeds done by this
brave cavalier in the wars against the Moors, by which he gained
great renown and the distinguished appellation of "El de las
hazanas," or "He of the exploits."**

*Alcantara, Hist. de Granada, tomo iv. cap. 18; Pulgar, Cron.,
 part iii.

**Hernan or Hernando del Pulgar, the historian, secretary to Queen
 Isabella, is confounded with this cavalier by some writers.  He was
 also present at the siege of Baza, and has recounted this
 transaction in his Chronicle of the Catholic sovereigns, Ferdinand
 and Isabella.



CHAPTER LXXV.

CONTINUATION OF THE SIEGE OF BAZA.


The Moorish king, El Zagal, mounted a tower and looked out eagerly
to enjoy the sight of the Christian marauders brought captive into
the gates of Guadix, but his spirits fell when he beheld his own
troops stealing back in the dusk of the evening in broken and
dejected parties.

The fortune of war bore hard against the old monarch; his mind was
harassed by disastrous tidings brought each day from Baza, of the
sufferings of the inhabitants, and the numbers of the garrison slain
in the frequent skirmishes.  He dared not go in person to the relief
of the place, for his presence was necessary in Guadix to keep a
check upon his nephew in Granada.  He sent reinforcements and
supplies, but they were intercepted and either captured or driven
back.  Still, his situation was in some respects preferable to that
of his nephew Boabdil.  He was battling like a warrior on the last
step of his throne; El Chico remained a kind of pensioned vassal in
the luxurious abode of the Alhambra.  The chivalrous part of the
inhabitants of Granada could not but compare the generous stand
made by the warriors of Baza for their country and their faith with
their own time-serving submission to the yoke of an unbeliever.
Every account they received of the woes of Baza wrung their hearts
with agony; every account of the exploits of its devoted defenders
brought blushes to their cheeks.  Many stole forth secretly with
their weapons and hastened to join the besieged, and the partisans
of El Zagal wrought upon the patriotism and passions of the
remainder until another of those conspiracies was formed that
were continually menacing the unsteady throne of Granada.  It was
concerted by the conspirators to assail the Alhambra on a sudden,
slay Boabdil, assemble the troops, and march to Guadix, where,
being reinforced by the garrison of that place and led on by the old
warrior monarch, they might fall with overwhelming power upon the
Christian army before Baza.

Fortunately for Boabdil, he discovered the conspiracy in time, and
the heads of the leaders were struck off and placed upon the walls
of the Alhambra--an act of severity unusual with this mild and
wavering monarch, which struck terror into the disaffected, and
produced a kind of mute tranquillity throughout the city.

Ferdinand had full information of all the movements and measures for
the relief of Baza, and took precautions to prevent them.  Bodies of
horsemen held watch in the mountain-passes to prevent supplies and
intercept any generous volunteers from Granada, and watch-towers
were erected or scouts placed on every commanding height to give the
alarm at the least sign of a hostile turban.

The prince Cid Hiaya and his brave companions-in-arms were thus
gradually walled up, as it were, from the rest of the world.  A line
of towers, the battlements of which bristled with troops, girded
their city, and behind the intervening bulwarks and palisadoes
passed and repassed continual squadrons of troops.  Week after week
and month after month passed away, but Ferdinand waited in vain for
the garrison to be either terrified or starved into surrender.  Every
day they sallied forth with the spirit and alacrity of troops high
fed and flushed with confidence.  "The Christian monarch," said the
veteran Mohammed Ibn Hassan, "builds his hopes upon our growing
faint and desponding--we must manifest unusual cheerfulness and
vigor.  What would be rashness in other service becomes prudence
with us."  The prince Cid Hiaya agreed with him in opinion, and sallied
forth with his troops upon all kinds of hare-brained exploits.  They
laid ambushes, concerted surprises, and made the most desperate
assaults.  The great extent of the Christian works rendered them
weak in many parts: against these the Moors directed their attacks,
suddenly breaking into them, making a hasty ravage, and bearing off
their booty in triumph to the city.  Sometimes they would sally forth
by passes and clefts of the mountain in the rear of the city which
it was difficult to guard, and, hurrying down into the plain, sweep
off all cattle and sheep that were grazing near the suburbs and all
stragglers from the camp.

These partisan sallies brought on many sharp and bloody encounters,
in some of which Don Alonso de Aguilar and the alcayde de los
Donceles distinguished themselves greatly.  During one of these hot
skirmishes, which happened on the skirts of the mountain about
twilight, a cavalier named Martin Galindo beheld a powerful Moor
dealing deadly blows about him and making great havoc among the
Christians.  Galindo pressed forward and challenged him to single
combat.  The Moor was not slow in answering the call.

Couching their lances, they rushed furiously upon each other.  At the
first shock the Moor was wounded in the face and borne out of his
saddle.  Before Galindo could check his steed and turn from his
career the Moor sprang upon his feet, recovered his lance, and,
rushing upon him, wounded him in the head and the arm.  Though
Galindo was on horseback and the Moor on foot, yet such was the
prowess and address of the latter that the Christian knight, being
disabled in the arm, was in the utmost peril when his comrades
hastened to his assistance.  At their approach the valiant pagan
retreated slowly up the rocks, keeping them at bay until he found
himself among his companions.

Several of the young Spanish cavaliers, stung by the triumph of this
Moslem knight, would have challenged others of the Moors to single
combat, but King Ferdinand prohibited all vaunting encounters of the
kind.  He forbade his troops also to provoke skirmishes, well knowing
that the Moors were more dextrous than most people in this irregular
mode of fighting, and were better acquainted with the ground.



CHAPTER LXXVI.

HOW TWO FRIARS FROM THE HOLY LAND ARRIVED AT THE CAMP.


While the holy Christian army (says Fray Antonio Agapida) was thus
beleaguering this infidel city of Baza there rode into the camp one
day two reverend friars of the order of St. Francis.  One was of
portly person and authoritative air: he bestrode a goodly steed,
well conditioned and well caparisoned, while his companion rode
beside him upon a humble hack, poorly accoutred, and, as he rode,
he scarcely raised his eyes from the ground, but maintained a meek
and lowly air.

The arrival of two friars in the camp was not a matter of much note,
for in these holy wars the Church militant continually mingled in
the affray, and helmet and cowl were always seen together; but it
was soon discovered that these worthy saints-errant were from a
far country and on a mission of great import.

They were, in truth, just arrived from the Holy Land, being two of
the saintly men who kept vigil over the sepulchre of our Blessed
Lord at Jerusalem.  He of the tall and portly form and commanding
presence was Fray Antonio Millan, prior of the Franciscan convent in
the Holy City.  He had a full and florid countenance, a sonorous
voice, and was round and swelling and copious in his periods, like
one accustomed to harangue and to be listened to with deference.  His
companion was small and spare in form, pale of visage, and soft and
silken and almost whispering in speech.  "He had a humble and lowly
way," says Agapida, "evermore bowing the head, as became one of
his calling."  Yet he was one of the most active, zealous, and effective
brothers of the convent, and when he raised his small black eye from
the earth there was a keen glance out of the corner which showed
that, though harmless as a dove, he was nevertheless as wise as
a serpent.

These holy men had come on a momentous embassy from the grand soldan
of Egypt, or, as Agapida terms him in the language of the day, the
soldan of Babylon.  The league which had been made between that
potentate and his arch-foe the Grand Turk, Bajazet II., to unite in
arms for the salvation of Granada, as has been mentioned in a
previous chapter of this chronicle, had come to naught.  The infidel
princes had again taken up arms against each other, and had relapsed
into their ancient hostility.  Still, the grand soldan, as head of the whole
Moslem religion, considered himself bound to preserve the kingdom of
Granada from the grasp of unbelievers.  He despatched, therefore,
these two holy friars with letters to the Castilian sovereigns, as well
as to the pope and to the king of Naples, remonstrating against the
evils done to the Moors of the kingdom of Granada, who were of his
faith and kindred whereas it was well known that great numbers of
Christians were indulged and protected in the full enjoyment of their
property, their liberty, and their faith in his dominions.  He insisted,
therefore, that this war should cease-- that the Moors of Granada
should be reinstated in the territory of which they had been
dispossessed: otherwise he threatened to put to death all the
Christians beneath his sway, to demolish their convents and temples,
and to destroy the Holy Sepulchre.

This fearful menace had spread consternation among the Christians
of Palestine, and when the intrepid Fray Antonio Millan and his lowly
companion departed on their mission they were accompanied far
from the gates of Jerusalem by an anxious throng of brethren and
disciples, who remained watching them with tearful eyes as long as
they were in sight.  These holy ambassadors were received with
great distinction by King Ferdinand, for men of their cloth had ever
high honor and consideration in his court.  He had long and frequent
conversations with them about the Holy Land, the state of the
Christian Church in the dominions of the grand soldan, and of the
policy and conduct of that arch-infidel toward it.  The portly prior
of the Franciscan convent was full and round and oratorical in his
replies, and the king expressed himself much pleased with the
eloquence of his periods; but the politic monarch was observed to
lend a close and attentive ear to the whispering voice of the lowly
companion, "whose discourse," adds Agapida, "though modest and
low, was clear and fluent and full of subtle wisdom."  These holy friars
had visited Rome in their journeying, where they had delivered the
letter of the soldan to the sovereign pontiff.  His Holiness had
written by them to the Castilian sovereigns, requesting to know what
reply they had to offer to this demand of the Oriental potentate.

The king of Naples also wrote to them on the subject, but in wary
terms.  He inquired into the cause of this war with the Moors of
Granada, and expressed great marvel at its events, as if (says
Agapida) both were not notorious throughout all the Christian world.
"Nay," adds the worthy friar with becoming indignation, "he uttered
opinions savoring of little better than damnable heresy; for he
observed that, although the Moors were of a different sect, they
ought not to be maltreated without just cause; and hinted that if
the Castilian sovereigns did not suffer any crying injury from the
Moors, it would be improper to do anything which might draw great
damage upon the Christians--as if, when once the sword of the
faith was drawn, it ought ever to be sheathed until this scum of
heathendom were utterly destroyed or driven from the land.  But
this monarch," he continues, "was more kindly disposed toward
the infidels than was honest and lawful in a Christian prince, and
was at that very time in league with the soldan against their
common enemy the Grand Turk."

These pious sentiments of the truly Catholic Agapida are echoed
by Padre Mariana in his history;* but the worthy chronicler Pedro
Abarca attributes the interference of the king of Naples not to
lack of orthodoxy in religion, but to an excess of worldly policy, he
being apprehensive that should Ferdinand conquer the Moors of
Granada he might have time and means to assert a claim of the
house of Aragon to the crown of Naples.

*Mariana, lib. 25, cap. 15.


"King Ferdinand," continues the worthy father Pedro Abarca, "was
no less master of dissimulation than his cousin of Naples; so he
replied to him with the utmost suavity of manner, going into a
minute and patient vindication of the war, and taking great apparent
pains to inform him of those things which all the world knew, but of
which the other pretended to be ignorant."*  At the same time he
soothed his solicitude about the fate of the Christians in the empire
of the grand soldan, assuring him that the great revenue extorted
from them in rents and tributes would be a certain protection against
the threatened violence.

*Abarca, Anales de Aragon, Rey xxx. cap. 3.


To the pope he made the usual vindication of the war--that it was
for the recovery of ancient territory usurped by the Moors, for the
punishment of wars and violences inflicted upon the Christians, and,
finally, that it was a holy crusade for the glory and advancement of
the Church.

"It 