was a truly edifying sight," says Agapida, "to behold these
friars, after they had had their audience of the king, moving about
the camp always surrounded by nobles and cavaliers of high and
martial renown.  These were insatiable in their questions about
the Holy Land, the state of the sepulchre of our Lord, and the
sufferings of the devoted brethren who guarded it and the pious
pilgrims who resorted there to pay their vows.  The portly prior of
the convent would stand with lofty and shining countenance in the
midst of these iron warriors and declaim with resounding eloquence
on the history of the sepulchre, but the humbler brother would ever
and anon sigh deeply, and in low tones utter some tale of suffering
and outrage, at which his steel-clad hearers would grasp the hilts
of their swords and mutter between their clenched teeth prayers
for another crusade."

The pious friars, having finished their mission to the king and been
treated with all due distinction, took their leave, and wended their
way to Jaen, to visit the most Catholic of queens.  Isabella, whose
heart was the seat of piety, received them as sacred men invested
with more than human dignity.  During their residence at Jaen they
were continually in the royal presence: the respectable prior of the
convent moved and melted the ladies of the court by his florid
rhetoric, but his lowly companion was observed to have continual
access to the royal ear.  That saintly and soft-spoken messenger
(says Agapida) received the reward of his humility; for the queen,
moved by his frequent representations, made in all modesty and
lowliness of spirit, granted a yearly sum in perpetuity of one
thousand ducats in gold for the support of the monks of the
Convent of the Holy Sepulchre.*

*"La Reyna dio a los Frayles mil ducados de renta cado ano para
 el sustento de los religiosos del santo sepulcro, que es la mejor
 limosna y sustento que hasta nuestros dias ha quedado a estos
 religiosos de Gerusalem: para donde les dio la Reyna un velo
 labrado por sus manos, para poner encima de la santa sepultura
 del Senor."--Garibay, "Compend Hist.," lib. 18, cap. 36.


Moreover, on the departure of these holy ambassadors, the
excellent and most Catholic queen delivered to them a veil devoutly
embroidered with her own royal hands, to he placed over the Holy
Sepulchre;--a precious and inestimable present, which called forth
a most eloquent tribute of thanks from the portly prior, but which
brought tears into the eyes of his lowly companion.*

*It is proper to mention the result of this mission of the two friars,
 and which the worthy Agapida has neglected to record.  At a
 subsequent period the Catholic sovereigns sent the distinguished
 historian, Pietro Martyr of Angleria, as ambassador to the grand
 soldan.  That able man made such representations as were perfectly
 satisfactory to the Oriental potentate.  He also obtained from him
 the remission of many exactions and extortions heretofore practised
 upon Christian pilgrims visiting the Holy Sepulchre; which, it is
 presumed, had been gently but cogently detailed to the monarch
 by the lowly friar.  Pietro Martyr wrote an account of his embassy
 to the grand soldan--a work greatly esteemed by the learned and
 containing much curious information.  It is entitled "De Legatione
 Babylonica."



CHAPTER LXXVII.

HOW QUEEN ISABELLA DEVISED MEANS TO SUPPLY THE ARMY
    WITH PROVISIONS.


It has been the custom to laud the conduct and address of King
Ferdinand in this most arduous and protracted war, but the sage
Agapida is more disposed to give credit to the counsels and measures
of the queen, who, he observes, though less ostensible in action,
was in truth the very soul, the vital principle, of this great
enterprise.  While King Ferdinand was bustling in his camp and making
a glittering display with his gallant chivalry, she, surrounded by
her saintly counsellors in the episcopal palace of Jaen, was
devising ways and means to keep the king and his army in existence.
She had pledged herself to keep up a supply of men and money and
provisions until the city should be taken.  The hardships of the
siege caused a fearful waste of life, but the supply of men was the
least difficult part of her undertaking.  So beloved was the queen by
the chivalry of Spain that on her calling on them for assistance not
a grandee or cavalier that yet lingered at home but either repaired
in person or sent forces to the camp; the ancient and warlike
families vied with each other in marshalling forth their vassals,
and thus the besieged Moors beheld each day fresh troops arriving
before their city, and new ensigns and pennons displayed emblazoned
with arms well known to the veteran warriors.

But the most arduous task was to keep up a regular supply of
provisions.  It was not the army alone that had to be supported, but
also the captured towns and their garrisons; for the whole country
around them had been ravaged, and the conquerors were in danger of
starving in the midst of the land they had desolated.  To transport the
daily supplies for such immense numbers was a gigantic undertaking
in a country where there was neither water conveyance nor roads
for carriages.  Everything had to be borne by beasts of burden over
rugged and broken paths of mountains and through dangerous defiles
exposed to the attacks and plunderings of the Moors.

The wary and calculating merchants accustomed to supply the
army shrank from engaging at their own risk in so hazardous an
undertaking.  The queen therefore hired fourteen thousand beasts
of burden, and ordered all the wheat and barley to be brought up
in Andalusia and in the domains of the knights of Santiago and
Calatrava.  She entrusted the administration of these supplies to
able and confidential persons.  Some were employed to collect the
grain; others to take it to the mills; others to superintend the
grinding and delivery; and others to convey it to the camp.  To every
two hundred animals a muleteer was allotted to take charge of them
on the route.  Thus great lines of convoys were in constant movement,
traversing to and fro, guarded by large bodies of troops to defend
them from hovering parties of the Moors.  Not a single day's
intermission was allowed, for the army depended upon the constant
arrival of the supplies for daily food.  The grain when brought into
the camp was deposited in an immense granary, and sold to the
army at a fixed price, which was never either raised or lowered.

Incredible were the expenses incurred in these supplies, but the
queen had ghostly advisers thoroughly versed in the art of getting
at the resources of the country.  Many worthy prelates opened the
deep purses of the Church, and furnished loans from the revenues
of their dioceses and convents, and their pious contributions were
eventually rewarded by Providence a hundred-fold.  Merchants and
other wealthy individuals, confident of the punctual faith of the
queen, advanced large sums on the security of her word; many
noble families lent their plate without waiting to be asked.  The
queen also sold certain annual rents in inheritance at great
sacrifices, assigning the revenues of towns and cities for the
payment.  Finding all this insufficient to satisfy the enormous
expenditure, she sent her gold and plate and all her jewels to the
cities of Valencia and Barcelona, where they were pledged for a
great amount of money, which was immediately appropriated to
keep up the supplies of the army.

Thus through the wonderful activity, judgment, and enterprise of
this heroic and magnanimous woman a great host, encamped in the
heart of the warlike country accessible only over mountain-roads,
was maintained in continual abundance.  Nor was it supplied merely
with the necessaries and comforts of life.  The powerful escorts
drew merchants and artificers from all parts to repair, as if in
caravans, to this great military market.  In a little while the camp
abounded with tradesmen and artists of all kinds to administer to
the luxury and ostentation of the youthful chivalry.  Here might be
seen cunning artificers in steel and accomplished armorers achieving
those rare and sumptuous helmets and cuirasses, richly gilt, inlaid,
and embossed, in which the Spanish cavaliers delighted.  Saddlers and
harness-makers and horse-milliners also were there, whose tents
glittered with gorgeous housings and caparisons.  The merchants
spread forth their sumptuous silks, cloths, brocades, fine linen,
and tapestry.  The tents of the nobility were prodigally decorated
with all kinds of the richest stuffs and dazzled the eye with their
magnificence, nor could the grave looks and grave speeches of King
Ferdinand prevent his youthful cavaliers from vying with each other
in the splendor of their dresses and caparisons on all occasions of
parade and ceremony.



CHAPTER LXXVIII.

OF THE DISASTERS WHICH BEFELL THE CAMP.


While the Christian camp, thus gay and gorgeous, spread itself out
like a holiday pageant before the walls of Baza, while a long line
of beasts of burden laden with provisions and luxuries were seen
descending the valley from morning till night, and pouring into the
camp a continued stream of abundance, the unfortunate garrison
found their resources rapidly wasting away, and famine already
began to pinch the peaceful part of the community.

Cid Hiaya had acted with great spirit and valor as long as there was
any prospect of success; but he began to lose his usual fire and
animation, and was observed to pace the walls of Baza with a pensive
air, casting many a wistful look toward the Christian camp, and
sinking into profound reveries and cogitations.  The veteran alcayde,
Mohammed Ibn Hassan, noticed these desponding moods, and
endeavored to rally the spirits of the prince.  "The rainy season is
at hand," would he cry; "the floods will soon pour down from the
mountains; the rivers will overflow their banks and inundate the
valleys.  The Christian king already begins to waver; he dare not
linger and encounter such a season in a plain cut up by canals and
rivulets.  A single wintry storm from our mountains would wash away
his canvas city and sweep off those gay pavilions like wreaths of
snow before the blast."

The prince Cid Hiaya took heart at these words, and counted the days
as they passed until the stormy season should commence.  As he
watched the Christian camp he beheld it one morning in universal
commotion: there was an unusual sound of hammers in every part,
as if some new engines of war were constructing.  At length, to his
astonishment, the walls and roofs of houses began to appear above
the bulwarks.  In a little while there were above a thousand edifices
of wood and plaster erected, covered with tiles taken from the
demolished towers of the orchards and bearing the pennons of various
commanders and cavaliers, while the common soldiery constructed huts
of clay and branches of trees thatched with straw.  Thus, to the dismay
of the Moors, within four days the light tents and gay pavilions which
had whitened their hills and plains passed away like summer clouds,
and the unsubstantial camp assumed the solid appearance of a city
laid out into streets and squares.  In the centre rose a large edifice
which overlooked the whole, and the royal standard of Aragon and
Castile, proudly floating above it, showed it to be the palace of
the king.*

*Cura de los Palacios, Pulgar, etc.


Ferdinand had taken the sudden resolution thus to turn his camp into
a city, partly to provide against the approaching season, and partly
to convince the Moors of his fixed determination to continue the
siege.  In their haste to erect their dwellings, however, the Spanish
cavaliers had not properly considered the nature of the climate.  For
the greater part of the year there scarcely falls a drop of rain on
the thirsty soil of Andalusia.  The ramblas, or dry channels of the
torrents, remain deep and arid gashes and clefts in the sides of the
mountains; the perennial streams shrink up to mere threads of water,
which, trickling down the bottoms of the deep barrancas, or ravines,
scarce feed and keep alive the rivers of the valleys.  The rivers,
almost lost in their wide and naked beds, seem like thirsty rills
winding in serpentine mazes through deserts of sand and stones,
and so shallow and tranquil in their course as to be forded in safety
in almost every part.  One autumnal tempest, however, changes the
whole face of nature: the clouds break in deluges among the vast
congregation of mountains; the ramblas are suddenly filled with
raging floods; the tinkling rivulets swell to thundering torrents that
come roaring down from the mountains, tumbling great masses of
rocks in their career.  The late meandering river spreads over its
once-naked bed, lashes its surges against the banks, and rushes
like a wide and foaming inundation through the valley.

Scarcely had the Christians finished their slightly built edifices
when an autumnal tempest of the kind came scouring from the
mountains.  The camp was immediately overflowed.  Many of the
houses, undermined by the floods or beaten by the rain, crumbled
away and fell to the earth, burying man and beast beneath their ruins.
Several valuable lives were lost, and great numbers of horses and
other animals perished.  To add to the distress and confusion of the
camp, the daily supply of provisions suddenly ceased, for the rain
had broken up the roads and rendered the rivers impassable.  A
panic seized upon the army, for the cessation of a single day's
supply produced a scarcity of bread and provender.  Fortunately,
the rain was but transient: the torrents rushed by and ceased;
the rivers shrank back again to their narrow channels, and the
convoys which had been detained upon their banks arrived safely
in the camp.

No sooner did Queen Isabella hear of this interruption of her
supplies than, with her usual vigilance and activity, she provided
against its recurrence.  She despatched six thousand foot-soldiers,
under the command of experienced officers, to repair the roads and
to make causeways and bridges for the distance of seven Spanish
leagues.  The troops also who had been stationed in the mountains
by the king to guard the defiles made two paths, one for the convoys
going to the camp, and the other for those returning, that they might
not meet and impede each other.  The edifices which had been
demolished by the late floods were rebuilt in a firmer manner, and
precautions were taken to protect the camp from future inundations.



CHAPTER LXXIX.

ENCOUNTERS BETWEEN THE CHRISTIANS AND MOORS BEFORE
    BAZA, AND THE DEVOTION OF THE INHABITANTS TO THE
    DEFENCE OF THEIR CITY.


When King Ferdinand beheld the ravage and confusion produced by
a single autumnal storm, and bethought him of all the maladies to
which a besieging camp is exposed in inclement seasons, he began
to feel his compassion kindling for the suffering people of Baza, and
an inclination to grant them more favorable terms.  He sent, therefore,
several messages to the alcayde Mohammed Ibn Hassan offering
liberty of person and security of property for the inhabitants and
large rewards for himself if he would surrender the city.

The veteran was not to be dazzled by the splendid offers of the
monarch: he had received exaggerated accounts of the damage done
to the Christian camp by the late storm, and of the sufferings and
discontents of the army in consequence of the transient interruption
of supplies: he considered the overtures of Ferdinand as proofs of
the desperate state of his affairs.  "A little more patience, a little
more patience," said the shrewd old warrior, "and we shall see
this cloud of Christian locusts driven away before the winter
storms.  When they once turn their backs, it will be our turn to
strike; and, with the help of Allah, the blow shall be decisive."  He
sent a firm though courteous refusal to the Castilian monarch, and
in the mean time animated his companions to sally forth with more
spirit than ever to attack the Spanish outposts and those laboring
in the trenches.  The consequence was a daily occurrence of daring
and bloody skirmishes that cost the lives of many of the bravest
and most adventurous cavaliers of either army.

In one of these sallies nearly three hundred horse and two thousand
foot mounted the heights behind the city to capture the Christians who
were employed upon the works.  They came by surprise upon a body
of guards, esquires of the count de Urena, killed some, put the rest
to flight, and pursued them down the mountain until they came in
sight of a small force under the count de Tendilla and Gonsalvo of
Cordova.  The Moors came rushing down with such fury that many of
the men of the count de Tendilla took to flight.  The count braced his
buckler, grasped his trusty weapon, and stood his ground with his
accustomed prowess.  Gonsalvo of Cordova ranged himself by his side,
and, marshalling the troops which remained with them, they made a
valiant front to the Moors.

The infidels pressed them hard, and were gaining the advantage when
Alonso de Aguilar, hearing of the danger of his brother Gonsalvo, flew
to his assistance, accompanied by the count of Urena and a body of
their troops.  A fight ensued from cliff to cliff and glen to glen.  The
Moors were fewer in number, but excelled in the dexterity and
lightness requisite for scrambling skirmishes.  They were at length
driven from their vantage-ground, and pursued by Alonso de Aguilar
and his brother Gonsalvo to the very suburbs of the city, leaving
many of their bravest men upon the field.

Such was one of innumerable rough encounters daily taking place, in
which many brave cavaliers were slain without apparent benefit to
either party.  The Moors, notwithstanding repeated defeats and
losses, continued to sally forth daily with astonishing spirit and
vigor, and the obstinacy of their defence seemed to increase with
their sufferings.

The prince Cid Hiaya was ever foremost in these sallies, but
grew daily more despairing of success.  All the money in the
military chest was expended, and there was no longer wherewithal
to pay the hired troops.  Still, the veteran Mohammed undertook to
provide for this emergency.  Summoning the principal inhabitants,
he represented the necessity of some exertion and sacrifice on their
part to maintain the defence of the city.  "The enemy," said he,
"dreads the approach of winter, and our perseverance drives him
to despair.  A little longer, and he will leave you in quiet enjoyment
of your homes and families.  But our troops must be paid to keep
them in good heart.  Our money is exhausted and all our supplies
are cut off.  It is impossible to continue our defence without your aid."

Upon this the citizens consulted together, and collected all their
vessels of gold and silver and brought them to Mohammed.  "Take
these," said they, "and coin or sell or pledge them for money
wherewith to pay the troops."  The women of Baza also were seized
with generous emulation.  "Shall we deck ourselves with gorgeous
apparel," said they, "when our country is desolate and its defenders
in want of bread?"  So they took their collars and bracelets and
anklets and other ornaments of gold, and all their jewels, and put
them in the hands of the veteran alcayde.  "Take these spoils of our
vanity," said they, "and let them contribute to the defence of our
homes and families.  If Baza be delivered, we need no jewels to
grace our rejoicing; and if Baza fall, of what avail are ornaments
to the captive?"

By these contributions was Mohammed enabled to pay the soldiery
and carry on the defence of the city with unabated spirit.

Tidings were speedily conveyed to King Ferdinand of this generous
devotion on the part of the people of Baza, and the hopes which the
Moorish commanders gave them that the Christian army would soon
abandon the siege in despair.  "They shall have a convincing proof
of the fallacy of such hopes," said the politic monarch: so he wrote
forthwith to Queen Isabella praying her to come to the camp in
state, with all her train and retinue, and publicly to take up her
residence there for the winter.  By this means the Moors would be
convinced of the settled determination of the sovereigns to persist
in the siege until the city should surrender, and he trusted they
would be brought to speedy capitulation.



CHAPTER LXXX.

HOW QUEEN ISABELLA ARRIVED AT THE CAMP, AND THE
    CONSEQUENCES OF HER ARRIVAL.


Mohammed Ibn Hassan still encouraged his companions with hopes that
the royal army would soon relinquish the siege, when they heard one
day shouts of joy from the Christian camp and thundering salvos of
artillery.  Word was brought at the same time, from the sentinels on
the watch-towers, that a Christian army was approaching down the
valley.  Mohammed and his fellow-commanders ascended one of the
highest towers of the walls, and beheld in truth a numerous force in
shining array descending the hills, and heard the distant clangor of
the trumpet and the faint swell of triumphant music.

As the host drew nearer they descried a stately dame magnificently
attired, whom they soon discovered to be the queen.  She was riding
on a mule the sumptuous trappings of which were resplendent with
gold and reached to the ground.  On her right hand rode her daughter,
the princess Isabella, equally splendid in her array, and on her left
the venerable grand cardinal of Spain.  A noble train of ladies and
cavaliers followed, together with pages and esquires, and a
numerous guard of hidalgos of high rank arrayed in superb armor.
When the veteran Mohammed beheld the queen thus arriving in state
to take up her residence in the camp, he shook his head mournfully,
and, turning to his captains, "Cavaliers," said he, "the fate of Baza
is decided."

The Moorish commanders remained gazing with a mingled feeling of
grief and admiration at this magnificent pageant, which foreboded
the fall of their city.  Some of the troops would have sallied forth on
one of their desperate skirmishes to attack the royal guard, but the
prince Cid Hiaya forbade them; nor would he allow any artillery to
be discharged or any molestation or insult offered; for the character
of Isabella was venerated even by the Moors, and most of the
commanders possessed that high and chivalrous courtesy which
belongs to heroic spirits, for they were among the noblest and
bravest of the Moorish cavaliers.

The inhabitants of Baza eagerly sought every eminence that could
command a view of the plain, and every battlement and tower and
mosque was covered with turbaned heads gazing at the glorious
spectacle.  They beheld King Ferdinand issue forth in royal state,
attended by the marques of Cadiz, the master of Santiago, the duke
of Alva, the admiral of Castile, and many other nobles of renown,
while the whole chivalry of the camp, sumptuously arrayed, followed
in his train, and the populace rent the air with acclamations at the
sight of the patriotic queen.

When the sovereigns had met and embraced, the two hosts mingled
together and entered the camp in martial pomp, and the eyes of the
infidel beholders were dazzled by the flash of armor, the splendor
of golden caparisons, the gorgeous display of silks, brocades, and
velvets, of tossing plumes and fluttering banners.  There was at the
same time a triumphant sound of drums and trumpets, clarions and
sackbuts, mingled with the sweet melody of the dulcimer, which came
swelling in bursts of harmony that seemed to rise up to the heavens.*

*Cura de los Palacios, c. 92.


On the arrival of the queen (says the historian Hernando del Pulgar,
who was present at the time) it was marvellous to behold how all at
once the rigor and turbulence of war were softened and the storm of
passion sank into a calm.  The sword was sheathed, the crossbow
no longer launched its deadly shafts, and the artillery, which had
hitherto kept up an incessant uproar, now ceased its thundering.
On both sides there was still a vigilant guard kept up; the sentinels
bristled the walls of Baza with their lances, and the guards patrolled
the Christian camp, but there was no sallying forth to skirmish nor
any wanton violence or carnage.*

*Many particulars of the scenes and occurrences at the siege of
 Baza are also furnished in the letters of the learned Peter Martyr,
 who was present and an admiring eye-witness.


Prince Cid Hiaya saw by the arrival of the queen that the Christians
were determined to continue the siege, and he knew that the city
would have to capitulate.  He had been prodigal of the lives of his
soldiers as long as he thought a military good was to be gained
by the sacrifice; but he was sparing of their blood in a hopeless
cause, and weary of exasperating the enemy by an obstinate yet
hopeless defence.

At the request of the prince a parley was granted, and the master
commander of Leon, Don Gutierrez de Cardenas, was appointed to
confer with the veteran alcayde Mohammed.  They met at an appointed
place, within view of both camp and city, attended by cavaliers of
either army.  Their meeting was highly courteous, for they had learnt,
from rough encounters in the field, to admire each other's prowess.
The commander of Leon in an earnest speech pointed out the
hopelessness of any further defence, and warned Mohammed of the
ills which Malaga had incurred by its obstinacy.  "I promise in the name
of my sovereigns," said he, "that if you surrender immediately the
inhabitants shall be treated as subjects and protected in property,
liberty, and religion.  If you refuse, you, who are now renowned
as an able and judicious commander, will be chargeable with the
confiscations, captivities, and deaths which may be suffered by the
people of Baza."

The commander ceased, and Mohammed returned to the city to consult
with his companions.  It was evident that all further resistance was
hopeless, but the Moorish commanders felt that a cloud might rest
upon their names should they, of their own discretion, surrender
so important a place without its having sustained an assault.  Prince
Cid Hiaya requested permission, therefore, to send an envoy to
Guadix, with a letter to the old monarch, El Zagal, treating of the
surrender: the request was granted, a safe conduct assured to
the envoy, and Mohammed Ibn Hassan departed upon this
momentous mission.



CHAPTER LXXXI.

THE SURRENDER OF BAZA.


The old warrior-king was seated in an inner chamber of the castle
of Guadix, much cast down in spirit and ruminating on his gloomy
fortunes, when an envoy from Baza was announced, and the veteran
alcayde Mohammed stood before him.  El Zagal saw disastrous tidings
written in his countenance.  "How fares it with Baza ," said he,
summoning up his spirits to the question.  "Let this inform thee,"
replied Mohammed, and he delivered into his hands the letter from
the prince Cid Hiaya.

This letter spoke of the desperate situation of Baza, the
impossibility of holding out longer without assistance from El
Zagal, and the favorable terms held out by the Castilian sovereigns.
Had it been written by any other person, El Zagal might have
received it with distrust and indignation; but he confided in Cid
Hiaya as in a second self, and the words of his letter sank deep in
his heart.  When he had finished reading it, he sighed deeply, and
remained for some time lost in thought, with his head drooping upon
his bosom.  Recovering himself at length, he called together the
alfaquis and the old men of Guadix and solicited their advice.  It
was sign of sore trouble of mind and dejection of heart when El
Zagal sought the advice of others, but his fierce courage was tamed,
for he saw the end of his power approaching.  The alfaquis and the
old men did but increase the distraction of his mind by a variety of
counsel, none of which appeared of any avail, for unless Baza were
succored it was impossible that it should hold out; and every
attempt to succor it had proved ineffectual.  El Zagal dismissed
his council in despair, and summoned the veteran Mohammed before
him.  "God is great," exclaimed he; "there is but one God, and
Mahomet is his prophet!  Return to my cousin, Cid Hiaya; tell him it
is out of my power to aid him; he must do as seems to him for the
best.  The people of Baza have performed deeds worthy of immortal
fame; I cannot ask them to encounter further ills and perils in
maintaining a hopeless defence."

The reply of El Zagal determined the fate of the city.  Cid Hiaya and
his fellow-commanders capitulated, and were granted the most
favorable terms.  The cavaliers and soldiers who had come from other
parts to the defence of the place were permitted to depart with
their arms, horses, and effects.  The inhabitants had their choice
either to depart with their property or dwell in the suburbs in the
enjoyment of their religion and laws, taking an oath of fealty to
the sovereigns and paying the same tribute they had paid to the
Moorish kings.  The city and citadel were to be delivered up in six
days, within which period the inhabitants were to remove all their
effects; and in the mean time they were to place as hostages fifteen
Moorish youths, sons of the principal inhabitants, in the hands of the
commander of Leon.  When Cid Hiaya and the alcayde Mohammed came
to deliver up the hostages, among whom were the sons of the latter,
they paid homage to the king and queen, who received them with the
utmost courtesy and kindness, and ordered magnificent presents to be
given to them, and likewise to the other Moorish cavaliers, consisting
of money, robes, horses, and other things of great value.

The prince Cid Hiaya was so captivated by the grace, the dignity,
and generosity of Isabella and the princely courtesy of Ferdinand that
he vowed never again to draw his sword against such magnanimous
sovereigns.  The queen, charmed with his gallant bearing and his
animated professions of devotion, assured him that, having him on
her side, she already considered the war terminated which had
desolated the kingdom of Granada.

Mighty and irresistible are words of praise from the lips of
sovereigns.  Cid Hiaya was entirely subdued by this fair speech from
the illustrious Isabella.  His heart burned with a sudden flame of
loyalty toward the sovereigns.  He begged to be enrolled amongst the
most devoted of their subjects, and in the fervor of his sudden zeal
engaged not merely to dedicate his sword to their service, but to
exert all his influence, which was great, in persuading his cousin,
Muley Abdallah el Zagal, to surrender the cities of Guadix and
Almeria and to give up all further hostilities.  Nay, so powerful was
the effect produced upon his mind by his conversation with the
sovereigns that it extended even to his religion; for he became
immediately enlightened as to the heathenish abominations of the
vile sect of Mahomet, and struck with the truths of Christianity as
illustrated by such powerful monarchs.  He consented, therefore, to
be baptized and to be gathered into the fold of the Church.  The
pious Agapida indulges in a triumphant strain of exultation on
the sudden and surprising conversion of this princely infidel: he
considers it one of the greatest achievements of the Catholic
sovereigns, and indeed one of the marvellous occurrences of this
holy war.  "But it is given to saints and pious monarchs," says he,
"to work miracles in the cause of the faith; and such did the most
Catholic Ferdinand in the conversion of the prince Cid Hiaya."

Some of the Arabian writers have sought to lessen the wonder of
this miracle by alluding to great revenues granted to the prince and
his heirs by the Castilian monarchs, together with a territory in
Marchena, with towns, lands, and vassals; but in this (says Agapida)
we only see a wise precaution of King Ferdinand to clinch and secure
the conversion of his proselyte.  The policy of the Catholic monarch
was at all times equal to his piety.  Instead also of vaunting of this
great conversion and making a public parade of the entry of the
prince into the Church, King Ferdinand ordered that the baptism
should be performed in private and kept a profound secret.  He
feared that Cid Hiaya might otherwise be denounced as an
apostate and abhorred and abandoned by the Moors, and thus
his influence destroyed in bringing the war to a speedy termination.*

*Conde, tom. 3, cap. 40.


The veteran Mohammed Ibn Hassan was likewise won by the magnanimity
and munificence of the Castilian sovereigns, and entreated to be
received into their service; and his example was followed by many
other Moorish cavaliers, whose services were generously accepted
and magnificently rewarded.

Thus; after a siege of six months and twenty days, the city of Baza
surrendered on the 4th of December, 1489, the festival of the
glorious Santa Barbara, who is said in the Catholic calendar to
preside over thunder and lightning, fire and gunpowder, and all
kinds of combustious explosions.  The king and queen made their
solemn and triumphant entry on the following day, and the public joy
was heightened by the sight of upward of five hundred Christian
captives, men, women, and children, delivered from the Moorish
dungeons.

The loss of the Christians in this siege amounted to twenty thousand
men, of whom seventeen thousand died of disease, and not a few of
mere cold--a kind of death (says the historian Mariana) peculiarly
uncomfortable; but (adds the venerable Jesuit) as these latter were
chiefly people of ignoble rank, baggage-carriers and such-like, the
loss was not of great importance.

The surrender of Baza was followed by that of Almunecar, Tavernas,
and most of the fortresses of the Alpuxarras mountains; the
inhabitants hoped by prompt and voluntary submission to secure
equally favorable terms with those granted to the captured city,
and the alcaydes to receive similar rewards to those lavished on
its commanders; nor were either of them disappointed.  The
inhabitants were permitted to remain as mudexares in the quiet
enjoyment of their property and religion; and as to the alcaydes,
when they came to the camp to render up their charges they were
received by Ferdinand with distinguished favor, and rewarded with
presents of money in proportion to the importance of the places they
had commanded.  Care was taken by the politic monarch, however,
not to wound their pride nor shock their delicacy; so these sums
were paid under color of arrears due to them for their services to
the former government.  Ferdinand had conquered by dint of sword
in the earlier part of the war, but he found gold as potent as steel
in this campaign of Baza.

With several of these mercenary chieftains came one named Ali Aben
Fahar, a seasoned warrior who had held many important commands.
He was a Moor of a lofty, stern, and melancholy aspect, and stood
silent and apart while his companions surrendered their several
fortresses and retired laden with treasure.  When it came to his
turn to speak, he addressed the sovereigns with the frankness
of a soldier, but with the tone of dejection and despair.

"I am a Moor," said he, "and of Moorish lineage, and am alcayde of
the fair towns and castles of Purchena and Paterna.  These were
entrusted to me to defend, but those who should have stood by me
have lost all strength and courage and seek only for security.  These
fortresses, therefore, most potent sovereigns, are yours whenever
you will send to take possession of them."

Large sums of gold were immediately ordered by Ferdinand to be
delivered to the alcayde as a recompense for so important a
surrender.  The Moor, however, put back the gift with a firm and
dignified demeanor.  "I came not," said he, "to sell what is not
mine, but to yield what fortune has made yours; and Your Majesties
may rest assured that had I been properly seconded death would
have been the price at which I would have sold my fortresses, and
not the gold you offer me."

The Castilian monarchs were struck with the lofty and loyal spirit
of the Moor, and desired to engage a man of such fidelity in their
service; but the proud Moslem could not be induced to serve the
enemies of his nation and his faith.

"Is there nothing, then," said Queen Isabella, "that we can do to
gratify thee, and to prove to thee our regard?"--"Yes," replied the
Moor; "I have left behind me, in the towns and valleys which I have
surrendered, many of my unhappy countrymen, with their wives and
children, who cannot tear themselves from their native abodes.  Give
me your royal word that they shall be protected in the peaceable
enjoyment of their religion and their homes."--"We promise it," said
Isabella; "they shall dwell in peace and security.  But for thyself--
what dost thou ask for thyself?"--"Nothing," replied Ali, "but
permission to pass unmolested with my horses and effects into Africa."

The Castilian monarchs would fain have forced upon him gold and
silver and superb horses richly caparisoned, not as rewards, but as
marks of personal esteem; but Ali Aben Fahar declined all presents
and distinctions, as if he thought it criminal to flourish individually
during a time of public distress, and disdained all prosperity that
seemed to grow out of the ruins of his country.

Having received a royal passport, he gathered together his horses
and servants, his armor and weapons, and all his warlike effects,
bade adieu to his weeping countrymen with a brow stamped with
anguish, but without shedding a tear, and, mounting his Barbary
steed, turned his back upon the delightful valleys of his conquered
country, departing on his lonely way to seek a soldier's fortune
amidst the burning sands of Africa.*

*Pulgar, part 3, cap. 124; Garibay, lib. 40, cap. 40; Cura de
 los Palacios.



CHAPTER LXXXII.

SUBMISSION OF EL ZAGAL TO THE CASTILIAN SOVEREIGNS.


Evil tidings never fail by the way through lack of messengers: they
are wafted on the wings of the wind, and it is as if the very birds
of the air would bear them to the ear of the unfortunate.  The old
king El Zagal buried himself in the recesses of his castle to hide
himself from the light of day, which no longer shone prosperously
upon him, but every hour brought missives thundering at the gate
with the tale of some new disaster.  Fortress after fortress had laid
its keys at the feet of the Christian sovereigns: strip after strip
of warrior mountain and green fruitful valleys was torn from his
domains and added to the territories of the conquerors.  Scarcely a
remnant remained to him, except a tract of the Alpuxarras and the
noble cities of Guadix and Almeria.  No one any longer stood in awe
of the fierce old monarch; the terror of his frown had declined with
his power.  He had arrived at that state of adversity when a man's
friends feel emboldened to tell him hard truths and to give him
unpalatable advice, and when his spirit is bowed down to listen
quietly if not meekly.

El Zagal was seated on his divan, his whole spirit absorbed in
rumination on the transitory nature of human glory, when his
kinsman and brother-in-law, the prince Cid Hiaya, was announced.
That illustrious convert to the true faith and the interests of the
conquerors of his country had hastened to Guadix with all the
fervor of a new proselyte, eager to prove his zeal in the service
of Heaven and the Castilian sovereigns by persuading the old
monarch to abjure his faith and surrender his possessions.

Cid Hiaya still bore the guise of a Moslem, for his conversion was
as yet a secret.  The stern heart of El Zagal softened at beholding
the face of a kinsman in this hour of adversity.  He folded his
cousin to his bosom, and gave thanks to Allah that amidst all his
troubles he had still a friend and counsellor on whom he might rely.

Cid Hiaya soon entered upon the real purpose of his mission.  He
represented to El Zagal the desperate state of affairs and the
irretrievable decline of Moorish power in the kingdom of Granada.
"Fate," said he, "is against our arms; our ruin is written in the
heavens.  Remember the prediction of the astrologers at the birth of
your nephew Boabdil.  We hoped that their prediction was accomplished
by his capture at Lucena; but it is now evident that the stars
portended not a temporary and passing reverse of the kingdom, but
a final overthrow.  The constant succession of disasters which have
attended our efforts show that the sceptre of Granada is doomed to
pass into the hands of the Christian monarchs.  Such," concluded the
prince emphatically, and with a profound and pious reverence,--"such
is the almighty will of God."

El Zagal listened to these words in mute attention, without so much
as moving a muscle of his face or winking an eyelid.  When the prince
had concluded he remained for a long time silent and pensive; at
length, heaving a profound sigh from the very bottom of his heart,
"Alahuma subahana hu!" exclaimed he--"the will of God be done!
Yes, my cousin, it is but too evident that such is the will of Allah; and
what he wills he fails not to accomplish.  Had not he decreed the
fall of Granada, this arm and this scimetar would have maintained it."*

*Conde, tom. 3, c. 40.


"What then remains," said Cid Hiaya, "but to draw the most advantage
from the wreck of empire left to you?  To persist in a war is to bring
complete desolation upon the land and ruin and death upon its
faithful inhabitants.  Are you disposed to yield up your remaining
towns to your nephew El Chico, that they may augment his power
and derive protection from his alliance with the Christian sovereigns?"

The eye of El Zagal flashed fire at this suggestion.  He grasped the
hilt of his scimetar and gnashed his teeth in fury.  "Never," cried
he, "will I make terms with that recreant and slave.  Sooner would I
see the banners of the Christian monarchs floating above my walls
than they should add to the possessions of the vassal Boabdil!"

Cid Hiaya immediately seized upon this idea, and urged El Zagal
to make a frank and entire surrender.  "Trust," said he, "to the
magnanimity of the Castilian sovereigns; they will doubtless grant
you high and honorable terms.  It is better to yield to them as
friends what they must infallibly and before long wrest from you
as enemies; for such, my cousin, is the almighty will of God."

''Alahuma subahana hu!" repeated El Zagal--"the will of God be
done!"  So the old monarch bowed his haughty neck and agreed
to surrender his territories to the enemies of his faith, rather than
suffer them to augment the Moslem power under the sway of his
nephew.

Cid Hiaya now returned to Baza, empowered by El Zagal to treat on
his behalf with the Christian sovereigns.  The prince felt a species
of exultation as he expatiated on the rich relics of empire which
he was authorized to cede.  There was a great part of that line of
mountains extending from the metropolis to the Mediterranean Sea,
with their series of beautiful green valleys like precious emeralds
set in a golden chain.  Above all, there were Guadix and Almeria,
two of the most inestimable jewels in the crown of Granada.

In return for these possessions and for the claim of El Zagal to
the rest of the kingdom the sovereigns received him into their
friendship and alliance, and gave him in perpetual inheritance
the territory of Andarax and the valley of Alhaurin in the
Alpuxarras, with the fourth part of the salinas or salt-pits of
Malaha.  He was to enjoy the title of king of Andarax, with two
thousand mudexares, or conquered Moors, for subjects, and
his revenues were to be made up to the sum of four millions of
maravedis.  All these he was to hold as a vassal of the Castilian
Crown.

These arrangements being made, Cid Hiaya returned with them to
Muley Abdallah, and it was concerted that the ceremony of surrender
and homage should take place at the city of Almeria.

On the 17th of December, King Ferdinand departed for that city.
Cid Hiaya and his principal officers, incorporated with a division
commanded by the count de Tendilla, marched in the van-guard.
The king was with the centre of the army, and the queen with the
rear-guard.  In this martial state Ferdinand passed by several of the
newly-acquired towns, exulting in these trophies of his policy rather
than his valor.  In traversing the mountainous region which extends
toward the Mediterranean the army suffered exceedingly from raging
vandavales, or south-west gales, accompanied by snow-storms.
Several of the soldiers and many horses and beasts perished with
the cold.  One of the divisions under the marques of Cadiz found it
impossible to traverse in one day the frozen summits of Filabres,
and had to pass the night in those inclement regions.  The marques
caused two immense fires to be kindled in the vicinity of his
encampment to guide and enlighten those lost and wandering
among the defiles, and to warm those who were benumbed and
almost frozen.

The king halted at Tavernas, to collect his scattered troops and give
them time to breathe after the hardships of the mountains.  The
queen was travelling a day's march in the rear.

On the 21st of December the king arrived and encamped in the
vicinity of Almeria.  Understanding that El Zagal was sallying forth
to pay him homage according to appointment, he mounted on
horseback and rode forth to receive him, attended by Don Alonso de
Cardenas, master of Santiago, on his right hand, and the marques of
Cadiz on his left, and despatched in the advance Don Gutierrez de
Cardenas, commander of Leon, and other cavaliers to meet and form
an honorable escort to the Moorish monarch.  With this escort went
that curious eye-witness, Peter Martyr, from whom we have many of
these particulars.

El Zagal was accompanied by twelve cavaliers on horseback, among
whom was his cousin, the prince Cid Hiaya (who had no doubt joined
him from the Spanish camp), and the brave Reduan Vanegas.  Peter
Martyr declares that the appearance of El Zagal touched him with
compassion, for, though a "lawless barbarian, he was a king and
had given signal proofs of heroism."  The historian Palencia gives
us a particular description of his appearance.  He was, says he, of
elevated stature and well proportioned, neither robust nor meagre;
the natural fairness of his countenance was increased by an extreme
paleness which gave it a melancholy expression.  His aspect was
grave; his movements were quiet, noble, and dignified.  He was
modestly attired in a garb of mourning--a sayo, or loose surcoat,
of dark cloth, a simple albornoz or Moorish mantle, and a turban
of dazzling whiteness.

On being met by the commander, Gutierrez de Cardenas, El Zagal
saluted him courteously, as well as the cavaliers who accompanied
him, and rode on, conversing with him through the medium of
interpreters.  Beholding King Ferdinand and his splendid train at
a distance, he alighted and advanced toward him on foot.  The
punctilious Ferdinand, supposing this voluntary act of humiliation
had been imposed by Don Gutierrez, told that cavalier, with some
asperity, that it was an act of great discourtesy to cause a
vanquished king to alight before another king who was victorious.
At the same time he made him signs to remount his horse and place
himself by his side.  El Zagal, persisting in his act of homage,
offered to kiss the king's hand, but, being prevented by that
monarch, he kissed his own hand, as the Moorish cavaliers were
accustomed to do in presence of their sovereigns, and accompanied
the gesture by a few words expressive of obedience and fealty.
Ferdinand replied in a gracious and amiable manner, and, causing
him to remount and place himself on his left hand, they proceeded,
followed by the whole train, to the royal pavilion pitched in the
most conspicuous part of the camp.

There a banquet was served up to the two kings according to the
rigorous style and etiquette of the Spanish court.  They were seated
in two chairs of state under the same canopy, El Zagal on the left
hand of Ferdinand.  The cavaliers and courtiers admitted to the royal
pavilion remained standing.  The count de Tendilla served the viands
to King Ferdinand in golden dishes, and the count Cifuentes gave him
to drink out of cups of the same precious metal; Don Alvaro Bazan
and Garcilasso de la Vega performed the same offices, in similar
style and with vessels of equal richness, to the Moorish monarch.

The banquet ended, El Zagal took courteous leave of Ferdinand, and
sallied from the pavilion attended by the cavaliers who had been
present.  Each of these now made himself known to the old monarch
by his name, title, or dignity, and each received an affable gesture in
reply.  They would all have escorted the old king back to the gates
of Almeria, but he insisted on their remaining in the camp, and with
difficulty could be persuaded upon to accept the honorable attendance
of the marques of Villena, the commander, Don Gutierrez de Cardenas,
the count de Cifuentes, and Don Luis Puerto Carrero.

On the following morning (22d December) the troops were all drawn
out in splendid array in front of the camp, awaiting the signal of the
formal surrender of the city.  This was given at mid-day, when
the gates were thrown open and a corps marched in, led by Don
Gutierrez de Cardenas, who had been appointed governor.  In a little
while the gleam of Christian warriors was seen on the walls and
bulwarks; the blessed cross was planted in place of the standard of
Mahomet, and the banner of the sovereigns floated triumphantly above
the Alcazar.  At the same time a numerous deputation of alfaquis and
the noblest and wealthiest inhabitants of the place sallied forth to
pay homage to King Ferdinand.

On the 23d of December the king himself entered the city with grand
military and religious pomp, and repaired to the mosque of the castle,
which had previously been purified and sanctified and converted into
a Christian temple: here grand mass was performed in solemn
celebration of this great triumph of the faith.

These ceremonies were scarcely completed when joyful notice was
given of the approach of the queen Isabella with the rear-guard of
the army.  She came accompanied by the princess Isabella, and
attended by her ghostly counsellor the cardinal Mendoza and her
confessor Talavera.  The king sallied forth to meet her, accompanied
by El Zagal, and it is said the reception of the latter by the queen
was characterized by the deference and considerate delicacy which
belonged to her magnanimous nature.

The surrender of Almeria was followed by that of Almunecar,
Salobrena, and other fortified places of the coast and the interior,
and detachments of Christian troops took quiet possession of the
Alpuxarras mountains and their secluded and fertile valleys.*

*Cura de los Palacios, cap. 93, 94; Pulgar, Cron., part 3, cap. 124;
 Garibay, Comp. Hist., lib. 18, cap. 37, etc. etc.



CHAPTER LXXXIII.

EVENTS AT GRANADA SUBSEQUENT TO THE SUBMISSION OF
    EL ZAGAL.


Who can tell when to rejoice in this fluctuating world?  Every wave
of prosperity has its reacting surge, and we are often overwhelmed
by the very billow on which we thought to be wafted into the haven
of our hopes.  When Yusef Aben Comixa, the vizier of Boabdil,
surnamed El Chico, entered the royal saloon of the Alhambra and
announced the capitulation of El Zagal, the heart of the youthful
monarch leaped for joy.  His great wish was accomplished; his uncle
was defeated and dethroned, and he reigned without a rival, sole
monarch of Granada.  At length he was about to enjoy the fruits of
his humiliation and vassalage.  He beheld his throne fortified by the
friendship and alliance of the Castilian monarchs; there could be no
question, therefore, of its stability.  "Allah Akbar! God is great!"
exclaimed he.  "Rejoice with me, O Yusef; the stars have ceased
their persecution.  Henceforth let no man call me El Zogoybi."

In the first moment of his exultation Boabdil would have ordered
public rejoicings, but the shrewd Yusef shook his head.  "The tempest
has ceased from one point of the heavens," said he, "but it may
begin to rage from another.  A troubled sea is beneath us, and we
are surrounded by rocks and quicksands: let my lord the king defer
rejoicings until all has settled into a calm."  El Chico, however,
could not remain tranquil in this day of exultation: he ordered his
steed to 