be sumptuously caparisoned, and, issuing out of the gate of
the Alhambra, descended, with glittering retinue, along the avenue
of trees and fountains, into the city to receive the acclamations of
the populace.  As he entered the great square of the Vivarrambla he
beheld crowds of people in violent agitation, but as he approached
what was his surprise to hear groans and murmurs and bursts of
execration!  The tidings had spread through Granada that Muley
Abdallah el Zagal had been driven to capitulate, and that all his
territories had fallen into the hands of the Christians.  No one
had inquired into the particulars, but all Granada had been thrown
into a ferment of grief and indignation.  In the heat of the moment
old Muley was extolled to the skies as a patriot prince who had
fought to the last for the salvation of his country--as a mirror of
monarchs, scorning to compromise the dignity of his crown by any
act of vassalage.  Boabdil, on the contrary, had looked on exultingly
at the hopeless yet heroic struggle of his uncle; he had rejoiced in
the defeat of the faithful and the triumph of unbelievers; he had
aided in the dismemberment and downfall of the empire.  When they
beheld him riding forth in gorgeous state on what they considered a
day of humiliation for all true Moslems, they could not contain their
rage, and amidst the clamors that met his ears Boabdil more than
once heard his name coupled with the epithets of traitor and renegado.

Shocked and discomfited, the youthful monarch returned in confusion
to the Alhambra, shut himself up within its innermost courts, and
remained a kind of voluntary prisoner until the first burst of popular
feeling should subside.  He trusted that it would soon pass away--
that the people would be too sensible of the sweets of peace to
repine at the price at which it was obtained; at any rate, he trusted
to the strong friendship of the Christian sovereigns to secure him
even against the factions of his subjects.

The first missives from the politic Ferdinand showed Boabdil the
value of his friendship.  The Christian monarch reminded him of a
treaty which he had made when captured in the city of Loxa.  By
this he had engaged that in case the Catholic sovereigns should
capture the cities of Guadix, Baza, and Almeria he would surrender
Granada into their hands within a limited time, and accept in
exchange certain Moorish towns to be held by him as their vassal.
Guadix, Baza, and Almeria had now fallen; Ferdinand called upon
him, therefore, to fulfil his engagement.

If the unfortunate Boabdil had possessed the will, he had not the
power to comply with this demand.  He was shut up in the Alhambra,
while a tempest of popular fury raged without.  Granada was thronged
by refugees from the captured towns, many of them disbanded
soldiers, and others broken-down citizens rendered fierce and
desperate by ruin.  All railed at him as the real cause of their
misfortunes.  How was he to venture forth in such a storm?  Above
all, how was he to talk to such men of surrender?  In his reply to
Ferdinand he represented the difficulties of his situation, and that,
so far from having control over his subjects, his very life was in
danger from their turbulence.  He entreated the king, therefore, to
rest satisfied for the present with his recent conquests, promising
that should he be able to regain full empire over his capital and
its inhabitants, it would be but to rule over them as vassal to the
Castilian Crown.

Ferdinand was not to be satisfied with such a reply.  The time was
come to bring his game of policy to a close, and to consummate
his conquest by seating himself on the throne of the Alhambra.
Professing to consider Boabdil as a faithless ally who had broken
his plighted word, he discarded him from his friendship, and
addressed a second letter, not to him, but to the commanders and
council of the city.  He demanded a complete surrender of the place,
with all the arms in the possession either of the citizens or of others
who had recently taken refuge within its walls.  If the inhabitants
should comply with this summons, he promised them the indulgent
terms granted to Baza, Guadix, and Almeria; if they should refuse,
he threatened them with the fate of Malaga.*

*Cura de los Palacios, cap. 96.


This message produced the greatest commotion in the city.  The
inhabitants of the Alcaiceria, that busy hive of traffic, and all others
who had tasted the sweets of gainful commerce during the late
cessation of hostilities, were for securing their golden advantages
by timely submission: others, who had wives and children, looked
on them with tenderness and solicitude, and dreaded by resistance
to bring upon them the horrors of slavery.

On the other hand, Granada was crowded with men from all parts,
ruined by the war, exasperated by their sufferings, and eager only
for revenge--with others who had been reared amidst hostilities, who
had lived by the sword, and whom a return of peace would leave
without home or hope.  Besides these, there were others no less fiery
and warlike in disposition, but animated by a loftier spirit.  These
were valiant and haughty cavaliers of the old chivalrous lineages,
who had inherited a deadly hatred to the Christians from a long line
of warrior ancestors, and to whom the idea was worse than death
that Granada--illustrious Granada, for ages the seat of Moorish
grandeur and delight--should become the abode of unbelievers.

Among these cavaliers the most eminent was Muza Abul Gazan.  He
was of royal lineage, of a proud and generous nature, and a form
combining manly strength and beauty.  None could excel him in the
management of the horse and dextrous use of all kinds of weapons:
his gracefulness and skill in the tourney were the theme of praise
among the Moorish dames, and his prowess in the field had made him
the terror of the enemy.  He had long repined at the timid policy of
Boabdil, and endeavored to counteract its enervating effects and
keep alive the martial spirit of Granada.  For this reason he had
promoted jousts and tiltings with the reed, and all those other
public games which bear the semblance of war.  He endeavored
also to inculcate into his companions-in-arms those high chivalrous
sentiments which lead to valiant and magnanimous deeds, but which
are apt to decline with the independence of a nation.  The generous
efforts of Muza had been in a great measure successful: he was the
idol of the youthful cavaliers; they regarded him as a mirror of
chivalry and endeavored to imitate his lofty and heroic virtues.

When Muza heard the demand of Ferdinand that they should deliver
up their arms, his eye flashed fire.  "Does the Christian king think
that we are old men," said he, "and that staffs will suffice us? or
that we are women, and can be contented with distaffs?  Let him know
that a Moor is born to the spear and scimetar--to career the steed,
bend the bow, and launch the javelin: deprive him of these, and you
deprive him of his nature.  If the Christian king desires our arms,
let him come and win them, but let him win them dearly.  For my part,
sweeter were a grave beneath the walls of Granada, on the spot I had
died to defend, than the richest couch within her palaces earned by
submission to the unbeliever."

The words of Muza were received with enthusiastic shouts by the
warlike part of the populace.  Granada once more awoke, as a warrior
shaking off a disgraceful lethargy.  The commanders and council
partook of the public excitement, and despatched a reply to the
Christian sovereigns, declaring that they would suffer death rather
than surrender their city.



CHAPTER LXXXIV.

HOW FERDINAND TURNED HIS HOSTLITIES AGAINST THE CITY
    OF GRANADA.


When King Ferdinand received the defiance of the Moors, he made
preparations for bitter hostilities.  The winter season did not admit
of an immediate campaign; he contented himself, therefore, with
throwing strong garrisons into all his towns and fortresses in the
neighborhood of Granada, and gave the command of all the frontier
of Jaen to Inigo Lopez de Mendoza, count of Tendilla, who had shown
such consummate vigilance and address in maintaining the dangerous
post of Alhama.  This renowned veteran established his head-quarters
in the mountain-city of Alcala la Real, within eight leagues of the
city of Granada and commanding the most important passes of that
rugged frontier.

In the mean time, Granada resounded with the stir of war.  The
chivalry of the nation had again control of its councils, and the
populace, having once more resumed their weapons, were anxious to
wipe out the disgrace of their late passive submission by signal and
daring exploits.

Muza Abul Gazan was the soul of action.  He commanded the cavalry,
which he had disciplined with uncommon skill; he was surrounded by
the noblest youths of Granada, who had caught his own generous
and martial fire and panted for the field, while the common soldiers,
devoted to his person, were ready to follow him in the most
desperate enterprises.  He did not allow their courage to cool for
want of action.  The gates of Granada once more poured forth legions
of light scouring cavalry, which skirred the country up to the very
gates of the Christian fortresses, sweeping off flocks and herds.
The name of Muza became formidable throughout the frontier;
he had many encounters with the enemy in the rough passes of
the mountains, in which the superior lightness and dexterity of his
cavalry gave him the advantage.  The sight of his glistening legion
returning across the Vega with long cavalgadas of booty was hailed
by the Moors as a revival of their ancient triumphs; but when they
beheld Christian banners borne into their gates as trophies, the
exultation of the light-minded populace was beyond all bounds.

The winter passed away, the spring advanced, yet Ferdinand delayed
to take the field.  He knew the city of Granada to be too strong and
populous to be taken by assault, and too full of provisions to be
speedily reduced by siege.  "We must have patience and perseverance,"
said the politic monarch; "by ravaging the country this year we
shall produce a scarcity the next, and then the city may be invested
with effect."

An interval of peace, aided by the quick vegetation of a prolific
soil and happy climate, had restored the Vega to all its luxuriance
and beauty; the green pastures on the borders of the Xenil were
covered with flocks and herds; the blooming orchards gave promise
of abundant fruit, and the open plain was waving with ripening corn.
The time was at hand to put in the sickle and reap the golden harvest,
when suddenly a torrent of war came sweeping down from the
mountains, and Ferdinand, with an army of five thousand horse and
twenty thousand foot, appeared before the walls of Granada.  He
had left the queen and princess at the fortress of Moclin, and came
attended by the duke of Medina Sidonia, the marques of Cadiz, the
marques de Villena, the counts of Urena and Cabra, Don Alonso de
Aguilar, and other renowned cavaliers.  On this occasion he for the
first time led his son, Prince Juan, into the field, and bestowed
upon him the dignity of knighthood.  As if to stimulate him to grand
achievements, the ceremony took place on the banks of the grand
canal almost beneath the embattled walls of that warlike city, the
object of such daring enterprises, and in the midst of that famous
Vega, the field of so many chivalrous exploits.  Above them shone
resplendent the red towers of the Alhambra, rising from amidst
delicious groves, with the standard of Mahomet waving defiance
to the Christian arms.

The duke of Medina Sidonia and Roderigo Ponce de Leon, marques of
Cadiz, were sponsors, and all the chivalry of the camp was assembled
on the occasion.  The prince, after he was knighted, bestowed the
same honor on several youthful cavaliers of high rank, just entering,
like himself, on the career of arms.

Ferdinand did not loiter in carrying his desolating plans into
execution.  He detached parties in every direction to lay waste the
country: villages were sacked, burnt, and destroyed, and the lovely
Vega was once more laid waste with fire and sword.  The ravage was
carried so close to Granada that the city was wrapped in the smoke
of its gardens and hamlets.  The dismal cloud rolled up the hill and
hung about the towers of the Alhambra, where the unfortunate
Boabdil still remained shut up from the indignation of his subjects.
The hapless monarch smote his breast as he looked down from
his mountain-palace on the desolation effected by his late ally.
He dared not even show himself in arms among the populace, for
they cursed him as the cause of the miseries once more brought to
their doors.

The Moors, however, did not suffer the Christians to carry on their
ravages unmolested, as in former years.  Muza incited them to
incessant sallies.  He divided his cavalry into small squadrons, each
led by a daring commander.  They were taught to hover round the
Christian camp; to harass it from various and opposite quarters,
cutting off convoys and straggling detachments; to waylay the
army in its ravaging expeditions, lurking among rocks and passes
of the mountains or in hollows and thickets of the plain, and
practising a thousand stratagems and surprises.

The Christian army had one day spread itself out rather unguardedly
in its foraging about the Vega.  As the troops commanded by the
marques of Villena approached the skirts of the mountains, they
beheld a number of Moorish peasants hastily driving a herd of cattle
into a narrow glen.  The soldiers, eager for booty, pressed in
pursuit of them.  Scarcely had they entered the glen when shouts
arose from every side, and they were furiously attacked by an
ambuscade of horse and foot.  Some of the Christians took to flight;
others stood their ground and fought valiantly.  The Moors had the
vantage-ground; some showered darts and arrows from the cliffs
of the rocks, others fought hand to hand on the plain, while their
cavalry carried havoc and confusion into the midst of the Christian
forces.

The marques de Villena, with his brother, Don Alonso de Pacheco,
at the first onset of the Moors spurred into the hottest of the fight.
They had scarce entered when Don Alonso was struck lifeless from
his horse before the eyes of his brother.  Estevan Luzon, a gallant
captain, fell fighting bravely by the side of the marques, who
remained, with his chamberlain Soler and a handful of knights,
surrounded by the enemy.  Several cavaliers from other parts of the
army hastened to their assistance, when King Ferdinand, seeing that
the Moors had the vantage-ground and that the Christians were
suffering severely, gave signal for retreat.  The marques obeyed
slowly and reluctantly, for his heart was full of grief and rage at
the death of his brother.  As he was retiring he beheld his faithful
chamberlain Soler defending himself valiantly against six Moors.
The marques turned and rushed to his rescue; he killed two of the
enemy with his own hand and put the rest to flight.  One of the
Moors, however, in retreating, rose in his stirrups, and, hurling
his lance at the marques, wounded him in the right arm and
crippled him for life.*

*In consequence of this wound the marques was ever after obliged
 to write his signature with his left hand, though capable of managing
 his lance with his right.  The queen one day demanded of him why
 he had adventured his life for that of a domestic?  "Does not Your
 Majesty think," replied he, "that I ought to risk one life for him who
 would have adventured three for me had he possessed them?"  The
 queen was charmed with the magnanimity of the reply, and often
 quoted the marques as setting an heroic example to the chivalry of
 the age.--Mariana, lib. 25, c. 15.


Such was one of the many ambuscadoes concerted by Muza; nor did
he hesitate at times to present a bold front to the Christian forces
and defy them in the open field.  Ferdinand soon perceived, however,
that the Moors seldom provoked a battle without having the advantage
of the ground, and that, though the Christians generally appeared to
have the victory, they suffered the greatest loss; for retreating was
a part of the Moorish system by which they would draw their pursuers
into confusion, and then turn upon them with a more violent and fatal
attack.  He commanded his captains, therefore, to decline all challenges
to skirmish, and pursue a secure system of destruction, ravaging the
country and doing all possible injury to the enemy with slight risk to
themselves.



CHAPTER LXXXV.

THE FATE OF THE CASTLE OF ROMA.


About two leagues from Granada, on an eminence commanding an
extensive view of the Vega, stood the strong Moorish castle of Roma.
Hither the neighboring peasantry drove their flocks and herds and
hurried with their most precious effects on the irruption of a
Christian force, and any foraging or skirmishing party from Granada,
on being intercepted in their return, threw themselves into Roma,
manned its embattled towers, and set the enemy at defiance.  The
garrison were accustomed to have parties of Moors clattering up to
their gates so hotly pursued that there was barely time to throw
open the portal, receive them within, and shut out their pursuers;
while the Christian cavaliers had many a time reined up their
panting steeds at the very entrance of the barbican, and retired,
cursing the strong walls of Roma that robbed them of their prey.

The late ravages of Ferdinand and the continual skirmishings in the
Vega had roused the vigilance of the castle.  One morning early, as
the sentinels kept watch upon the battlements, they beheld a cloud
of dust advancing rapidly from a distance: turbans and Moorish
weapons soon caught their eyes, and as the whole approached they
descried a drove of cattle urged on in great haste and convoyed by
one hundred and fifty Moors, who led with them two Christian
captives in chains.

When the cavalgada arrived near the castle, a Moorish cavalier
of noble and commanding mien and splendid attire rode up to the
foot of the tower and entreated admittance.  He stated that they
were returning with rich booty from a foray into the lands of the
Christians, but that the enemy was on their traces, and they feared
to be overtaken before they could reach Granada.  The sentinels
descended in all haste and flung open the gates.  The long cavalgada
defiled into the courts of the castle, which were soon filled with
bleating and lowing flocks and herds, with neighing and stamping
steeds, and with fierce-looking Moors from the mountains.  The
cavalier who had asked admission was the chief of the party; he
was somewhat advanced in life, of a lofty and gallant bearing, and
had with him a son, a young man of great spirit and fire.  Close by
them followed the two Christian captives, with looks cast down
and disconsolate.

The soldiers of the garrison had roused themselves from their sleep,
and were busily occupied attending to the cattle which crowded the
courts, while the foraging party distributed themselves about the
castle to seek refreshment or repose.  Suddenly a shout arose that
was echoed from courtyard and hall and battlement.  The garrison,
astonished and bewildered, would have rushed to their arms, but
found themselves, almost before they could make resistance,
completely in the power of an enemy.

The pretended foraging party consisted of mudexares, or Moors
tributary to the Christians, and the commanders were the prince Cid
Hiaya and his son Alnayar.  They had hastened from the mountains with
this small force to aid the Catholic sovereigns during the summer's
campaign, and had concerted to surprise this important castle and
present it to King Ferdinand as a gage of their faith and the first
fruits of their devotion.

The politic monarch overwhelmed his new converts and allies with
favors and distinctions in return for this important acquisition,
but he took care to despatch a strong force of veteran and genuine
Christian troops to man the fortress.

As to the Moors who had composed the garrison, Cid Hiaya
remembered that they were his countrymen, and could not prevail
upon himself to deliver them into Christian bondage.  He set them
at liberty, and permitted them to repair to Granada--"a proof," says
the pious Agapida, "that his conversion was not entirely consummated,
but that there were still some lingerings of the infidel in his heart."
His lenity was far from procuring him indulgence in the opinions of
his countrymen; on the contrary, the inhabitants of Granada, when
they learnt from the liberated garrison the stratagem by which Roma
had been captured, cursed Cid Hiaya for a traitor, and the garrison
joined in the malediction.*

*Pulgar, Cron., part 3, cap. 130; Cura de los Palacios, cap. 90.


But the indignation of the people of Granada was destined to be
roused to tenfold violence.  The old warrior Muley Abdallah el Zagal
had retired to his little mountain-territory, and for a short time
endeavored to console himself with his petty title of king of
Andarax.  He soon grew impatient, however, of the quiet and inaction
of his mimic kingdom.  His fierce spirit was exasperated by being
shut up within such narrow limits, and his hatred rose to downright
fury against Boabdil, whom he considered as the cause of his
downfall.  When tidings were brought him that King Ferdinand was
laying waste the Vega, he took a sudden resolution.  Assembling the
whole disposable force of his kingdom, which amounted but to two
hundred men, he descended from the Alpuxarras and sought the
Christian camp, content to serve as a vassal the enemy of his faith
and his nation, so that he might see Granada wrested from the sway
of his nephew.

In his blind passion the old wrathful monarch injured his cause and
strengthened the cause of his adversary.  The Moors of Granada
had been clamorous in his praise, extolling him as a victim to his
patriotism, and had refused to believe all reports of his treaty
with the Christians; but when they beheld from the walls of the
city his banner mingling with the banners of the unbelievers and
arrayed against his late people and the capital he had commanded,
they broke forth into revilings and heaped curses upon his name.

Their next emotion, of course, was in favor of Boabdil.  They
gathered under the walls of the Alhambra and hailed him as their
only hope, as the sole dependence of the country.  Boabdil could
scarcely believe his senses when he heard his name mingled with
praises and greeted with acclamations.  Encouraged by this unexpected
gleam of popularity, he ventured forth from his retreat and was
received with rapture.  All his past errors were attributed to the
hardships of his fortune and the usurpation of his tyrant uncle, and
whatever breath the populace could spare from uttering curses on
El Zagal was expended in shouts in honor of El Chico.



CHAPTER LXXXVI.

HOW BOABDIL EL CHICO TOOK THE FIELD, AND HIS EXPEDITION
    AGAINST ALHENDIN.


For thirty days had the Vega been overrun by the Christian forces,
and that vast plain, late so luxuriant and beautiful, was one wide
scene of desolation.  The destroying army, having accomplished
its task, passed over the bridge of Pinos and wound up into the
mountains on the way to Cordova, bearing away the spoils of towns
and villages and driving off flocks and herds in long dusty columns.
The sound of the last Christian trumpet died away along the side
of the mountain of Elvira, and not a hostile squadron was seen
glistening on the mournful fields of the Vega.

The eyes of Boabdil el Chico were at length opened to the real
policy of King Ferdinand, and he saw that he had no longer anything
to depend upon but the valor of his arm.  No time was to be lost in
hastening to counteract the effect of the late Christian ravage and

in opening the channel for distant supplies to Granada.

Scarcely had the retiring squadrons of Ferdinand disappeared among
the mountains when Boabdil buckled on his armor, sallied forth from
the Alhambra, and prepared to take the field.  When the populace
beheld him actually in arms against his late ally, both parties
thronged with zeal to his standard.  The hardy inhabitants also of
the Sierra Nevada, or chain of snow-capped mountains which rise
above Granada, descended from their heights and hastened into
the city gates to proffer their devotion to their youthful king.  The
great square of the Vivarrambla shone with legions of cavalry decked
with the colors and devices of the most ancient Moorish families, and
marshalled forth by the patriot Muza to follow the king to battle.

It was on the 15th of June that Boabdil once more issued forth from
the gates of Granada on martial enterprise.  A few leagues from the
city, within full view of it, and at the entrance of the Alpuxarras
mountains, stood the powerful castle of Alhendin.  It was built on an
eminence rising from the midst of a small town, and commanding a
great part of the Vega and the main road to the rich valleys of the
Alpuxarras.  The castle was commanded by a valiant Christian cavalier
named Mendo de Quexada, and garrisoned by two hundred and fifty
men, all seasoned and experienced warriors.  It was a continual thorn
in the side of Granada: the laborers of the Vega were swept off from
their fields by its hardy soldiers; convoys were cut off in the passes
of the mountains; and, as the garrison commanded a full view of the
gates of the city, no band of merchants could venture forth on their
needful journeys without being swooped up by the war-hawks
of Alhendin.

It was against this important fortress that Boabdil first led his
troops, and for six days and nights it was closely besieged.  The
alcayde and his veteran garrison defended themselves valiantly, but
were exhausted by fatigue and constant watchfulness; for the Moors,
being continually relieved by fresh troops from Granada, kept up an
unremitted and vigorous attack.  Twice the barbican was forced, and
twice the assailants were driven forth headlong with excessive loss.
The garrison, however, was diminished in number by the killed and
wounded; there were no longer soldiers sufficient to man the walls
and gateway; and the brave alcayde was compelled to retire with his
surviving force to the keep of the castle, in which he continued to
make a desperate resistance.

The Moors now approached the foot of the tower under shelter of
wooden screens covered with wet hides to ward off missiles and
combustibles.  They went to work vigorously to undermine the tower,
placing props of wood under the foundations, to be afterward set on
fire, so as to give the besiegers time to escape before the edifice
should fall.  Some of the Moors plied their crossbows and arquebuses
to defend the workmen and drive the Christians from the walls, while
the latter showered down stones and darts and melted pitch and
flaming combustibles on the miners.

The brave Mendo de Quexada had cast many an anxious eye across
the Vega in hopes of seeing some Christian force hastening to his
assistance.  Not a gleam of spear or helm was to be descried, for no
one had dreamt of this sudden irruption of the Moors.  The alcayde
beheld his bravest men dead or wounded around him, while the
remainder were sinking with watchfulness and fatigue.  In defiance of
all opposition, the Moors had accomplished their mine; the fire was
brought before the walls that was to be applied to the stanchions in
case the garrison persisted in defence.  In a little while the tower
would crumble beneath him, and be rent and hurled a ruin to the
plain.  At the very last moment the brave alcayde made the signal
of surrender.  He marched forth with the remnant of his veteran
garrison, who were all made prisoners.  Boabdil immediately ordered
the walls of the fortress to be razed and fire to be applied to the
stanchions, that the place might never again become a stronghold
to the Christians and a scourge to Granada.  The alcayde and his
fellow-captives were led in dejected convoy across the Vega, when
they heard a tremendous crash behind them.  They turned to look
upon their late fortress, but beheld nothing but a heap of tumbling
ruins and a vast column of smoke and dust where once had stood
the lofty tower of Alhendin.



CHAPTER LXXXVII.

EXPLOIT OF THE COUNT DE TENDILLA.


Boabdil el Chico followed up his success by capturing the two
fortresses of Marchena and Albolodny, belonging to Cid Hiaya; he
also sent his alfaquis in every direction to proclaim a holy war and
to summon all true Moslems of town or castle, mountain or valley,
to saddle steed and buckle on armor and hasten to the standard of
the faith.  The tidings spread far and wide that Boabdil el Chico was
once more in the field and was victorious.  The Moors of various
places, dazzled by this gleam of success, hastened to throw off
their sworn allegiance to the Castilian Crown and to elevate the
standard of Boabdil, and the youthful monarch flattered himself that
the whole kingdom was on the point of returning to its allegiance.

The fiery cavaliers of Granada, eager to renew those forays into
the Christian lands in which they had formerly delighted, concerted
an irruption to the north, into the territory of Jaen, to harass the
country about Quezada.  They had heard of a rich convoy of
merchants and wealthy travellers on the way to the city of Baza,
and anticipated a glorious conclusion to their foray in capturing
this convoy.

Assembling a number of horsemen, lightly armed and fleetly mounted,
and one hundred foot-soldiers, they issued forth by night from
Granada, made their way in silence through the defiles of the
mountains, crossed the frontier without opposition, and suddenly
appeared, as if fallen from the clouds, in the very heart of the
Christian country.

The mountainous frontier which separates Granada from Jaen was
at this time under the command of the count de Tendilla, the same
veteran who had distinguished himself by his vigilance and sagacity
when commanding the fortress of Alhama.  He held his head-quarters
at the city of Alcala la Real, in its impregnable fortress perched high
among the mountains, about six leagues from Granada, and dominating
all the frontier.  From this cloud-capt hold he kept an eagle eye
upon Granada, and had his scouts and spies in all directions, so
that a crow could not fly over the border without his knowledge.
His fortress was a place of refuge for the Christian captives who
escaped by night from the Moorish dungeons of Granada.  Often,
however, they missed their way in the defiles of the mountains, and,
wandering about bewildered, either repaired by mistake to some
Moorish town or were discovered and retaken at daylight by the
enemy.  To prevent these accidents, the count had a tower built at
his own expense on the top of one of the heights near Alcala, which
commanded a view of the Vega and the surrounding country.  Here
he kept a light blazing throughout the night as a beacon for all
Christian fugitives to guide them to a place of safety.

The count was aroused one night from his repose by shouts and cries
which came up from the town and approached the castle walls.  "To
arms! to arms! the Moor is over the border!" was the cry.  A Christian
soldier, pale and emaciated, who still bore traces of Moorish chains,
was brought before the count.  He had been taken as guide by the
Moorish cavaliers who had sallied from Granada, but had escaped
from them among the mountains, and after much wandering had
found his way to Alcala by the signal-fire.

Notwithstanding the bustle and agitation of the moment, the count
de Tendilla listened calmly and attentively to the account of the
fugitive, and questioned him minutely as to the time of departure
of the Moors and the rapidity and direction of their march.  He saw
that it was too late to prevent their incursion and ravage, but he
determined to await them and give them a warm reception on
their return.  His soldiers were always on the alert and ready to
take the field at a moment's warning.  Choosing one hundred and
fifty lances, hardy and valiant men, well disciplined and well
seasoned--as indeed were all his troops--he issued forth quietly
before break of day, and, descending through the defiles of the
mountains, stationed his little force in ambush in a deep barranca,
or dry channel of a torrent near Barzina, but three leagues from
Granada, on the road by which the marauders would have to
return.  In the mean time he sent out scouts to post themselves
upon different heights and look out for the approach of the enemy.

All day they remained concealed in the ravine and for a great part
of the following night; not a Moor, however, was to be seen,
excepting now and then a peasant returning from his labor or a
solitary muleteer hastening toward Granada.  The cavaliers of the
count began to grow restless and impatient, fearing that the enemy
might have taken some other route or might have received
intelligence of their ambuscade.  They urged the count to abandon the
enterprise and return to Alcala.  "We are here," said they, "almost
at the gates of the Moorish capital, our movements may have been
descried, and before we are aware Granada may pour forth its legions
of swift cavalry and crush us with an overwhelming force."  The
count, however, persisted in remaining until his scouts should come
in.  About two hours before daybreak there were signal-fires on
certain Moorish watch-towers of the mountains.  While they were
regarding these with anxiety the scouts came hurrying into the
ravine.  "The Moors are approaching," said they; "we have
reconnoitred them near at hand.  They are between one and two
hundred strong, but encumbered with many prisoners and much
booty."  The Christian cavaliers laid their ears to the ground and
heard the distant tramp of horses and the tread of foot-soldiers.
They mounted their horses, braced their shields, couched their
lances, and drew near to the entrance of the ravine where it
opened upon the road.

The Moors had succeeded in waylaying and surprising the Christian
convoy on its way to Baza.  They had captured a great number of
prisoners, male and female, with great store of gold and jewels and
sumpter mules laden with rich merchandise.  With these they had made
a forced march over the dangerous parts of the mountains, but now,
finding themselves so near to Granada, fancied themselves in perfect
security.  They loitered along the road, therefore, irregularly and
slowly, some singing, others laughing and exulting at having eluded
the boasted vigilance of the count de Tendilla, while ever and anon
was heard the plaint of some female captive bewailing the jeopardy
of her honor or the heavy sighing of the merchant at beholding his
property in the grasp of ruthless spoilers.

The count waited until some of the escort had passed the ravine;
then, giving the signal for assault, his cavaliers set up great
shouts and cries and charged into the centre of the foe.  The
obscurity of the place and the hour added to the terrors of the
surprise.  The Moors were thrown into confusion; some rallied, fought
desperately, and fell covered with wounds.  Thirty-six were killed
and fifty-five were made prisoners; the rest under cover of the
darkness made their escape to the rocks and defiles of the mountains.

The good count unbound the prisoners, gladdening the hearts of the
merchants by restoring to them their merchandise.  To the female
captives also he restored the jewels of which they had been
despoiled, excepting such as had been lost beyond recovery.
Forty-five saddle horses of the choice Barbary breed remained as
captured spoils of the Moors, together with costly armor and booty
of various kinds.  Having collected everything in haste and arranged
his cavalgada, the count urged his way with all speed for Alcala la
Real, lest he should be pursued and overtaken by the Moors of
Granada.  As he wound up the steep ascent to his mountain-city the
inhabitants poured forth to meet him with shouts of joy.  His triumph
was doubly enhanced by being received at the gates of the city by
his wife, the daughter of the marques of Villena, a lady of
distinguished merit, whom he had not seen for two years, during
which he had been separated from his home by the arduous duties
of these iron wars.

We have yet another act to relate of this good count de Tendilla,
who was in truth a mirror of knightly virtue.  One day a Christian
soldier, just escaped from captivity in Granada, brought word to the
count that an illustrious damsel named Fatima, niece of the alcayde
Aben Comixa, was to leave the city on a certain day, escorted by a
numerous party of relatives and friends of distinguished rank, on a
journey to Almunecar, there to embark for the African coast to
celebrate her nuptials with the alcayde of Tetuan.  This was too
brilliant a prize to be neglected.  The count accordingly sallied
forth with a light company of cavalry, and, descending the defiles
of the mountains, stationed himself behind the rocky sierra of
Elvira, not far from the eventful bridge of Pinos, within a few short
miles of Granada.  Hence he detached Alonso de Cardenas Ulloa,
with fifty light horsemen, to post himself in ambush by the road the
bridal party had to travel.  After a time the latter came in sight,
proving less numerous than had been expected, for the damsel was
escorted merely by four armed domestics and accompanied by a few
relatives and two female attendants.  The whole party was surrounded
and captured almost without resistance, and carried off to the count
at the bridge of Pinos.  The good count conveyed his beautiful
captive to his stronghold at Alcala, where he treated her and her
companions with all the delicacy and respect due to their rank and
to his own character as a courteous cavalier.

The tidings of the capture of his niece gave poignant affliction to the
vizier Aben Comixa.  His royal master, Boabdil, of whom he was the
prime favorite and confidential adviser, sympathized in his distress.
With his own hand he wrote a letter to the count, offering in exchange
for the fair Fatima one hundred Christian captives to be chosen from
those detained in Granada.  This royal letter was sent by Don Francisco
de Zuniga, an Aragonese cavalier, whom Aben Comixa held in captivity,
and who was set at liberty for the purpose.

On receiving the letter of Boabdil the count de Tendilla at once gave
freedom to the Moorish maid, making her a magnificent present
of jewels, and sending her and her companions under honorable
escort to the very gates of Granada.

Boabdil, exceeding his promises, immediately set free twenty captive
priests, one hundred and thirty Castilian and Aragonian cavaliers,
and a number of peasant-women.  His favorite and vizier, Aben
Comixa, was so rejoiced at the liberation of his niece, and so struck
with the chivalrous conduct of her captor, that he maintained from
that day a constant and amicable correspondence with the count
de Tendilla, and became in the hands of the latter one of the most
efficacious agents in bringing the war of Granada to a triumphant
close.*

*This interesting anecdote of the count de Tendilla, which is a key
 to the subsequent conduct of the vizier Aben Comixa, and had a
 singular influence on the fortunes of Boabdil and his kingdom, is
 originally given in a manuscript history of the counts of Tendilla,
 written about the middle of the sixteenth century by Gabriel
 Rodriguez de Ardila, a Granadine clergyman.  It has been brought
 to light recently by the researches of Alcantara for his History of
 Granada (vol. 4, cap. 18).



CHAPTER LXXXVIII.

EXEPEDITION OF BOABDIL EL CHICO AGAINST SALOBRENA.--
    EXPLOIT OF HERNAN PEREZ DEL PULGAR.


King Boabdil found that his diminished territory was too closely
dominated by Christian fortresses like Alcala la Real, and too
strictly watched by vigilant alcaydes like the count of Tendilla,
to be able to maintain itself by internal resources.  His foraging
expeditions were liable to be intercepted and defeated, while the
ravage of the Vega had swept off everything on which the city
depended for future sustenance.  He felt the want of a seaport
through which, as formerly, he might keep open a communication
with Africa and obtain reinforcements and supplies from beyond
the sea.  All the ports and harbors were in the hands of the
Christians, and Granada and its remnant of dependent territory
were completely landlocked.

In this emergency the attention of Boabdil was called by
circumstances to the seaport of Salobrena.  This redoubtable town
has already been mentioned in this chronicle as a place deemed
impregnable by the Moors, insomuch that their kings were accustomed
in time of peril to keep their treasures in its citadel.  It was situated
on a high rocky hill dividing one of those rich little vegas or plains
which lie open to the Mediterranean, but run like deep green bays
into the stern bosoms of the mountains.  The vega was covered
with beautiful vegetation, with rice and cotton, with groves of
oranges, citrons, figs, and mulberries, and with gardens enclosed
by hedges of reeds, of aloes, and the Indian fig.  Running streams of
cool water from the springs and snows of the Sierra Nevada kept this
delightful valley continually fresh and verdant, while it was almost
locked up by mountain-barriers and lofty promontories stretching far
into the sea.

Through the centre of this rich vega the rock of Salobrena reared
its rugged back, nearly dividing the plain and advancing to the
margin of the sea, with just a strip of sandy beach at its foot
laved by the blue waves of the Mediterranean.

The town covered the ridge and sides of the rocky hill, and was
fortified by strong walls and towers, while on the highest and most
precipitate part stood the citadel, a huge castle that seemed to
form a part of the living rock, the massive ruins of which at the
present day attract the gaze of the traveller as he winds his way
far below along the road through the vega.

This important fortress had been entrusted to the command of Don
Francisco Ramirez de Madrid, captain-general of the artillery and
the most scientific of all the Spanish leaders.  That experienced
veteran, however, was with the king at Cordova, having left a
valiant cavalier as alcayde of the place.

Boabdil had full information of the state of the garrison and the
absence of its commander.  Putting himself at the head of a powerful
force, therefore, he departed from Granada, and made a rapid march
through the mountains, hoping to seize upon Salobrena before King
Ferdinand could come to its assistance.

The inhabitants of Salobrena were mudexares, or Moors who had
sworn allegiance to the Christians.  Still, when they heard the sound
of the Moorish drums and trumpets, and beheld the squadrons of their
countrymen advancing across the vega, their hearts yearned toward
the standard of their nation and their faith.  A tumult arose in the
place; the populace shouted the name of Boabdil el Chico and,
throwing open the gates, admitted him within the walls.

The Christian garrison was too few in number to contend for the
possession of the town: they retreated to the citadel and shut
themselves within its massive walls, which were considered
impregnable.  Here they maintained a desperate defence, hoping to
hold out until succor should arrive from the neighboring fortresses.

The tidings that Salobrena was invested by the Moorish king spread
along the sea-coast and filled the Christians with alarm.  Don
Francisco Enriquez, uncle of the king, commanded the city of Velez
Malaga, about twelve leagues distant, but separated by ranges of
those vast rocky mountains which are piled along the Mediterranean
and tower in steep promontories and precipices above its waves.

Don Francisco summoned the alcaydes of his district to hasten with
him to the relief of this important fortress.  A number of cavaliers
and their retainers answered to his call, among whom was Hernan
Perez del Pulgar, surnamed "El de las hazanas" (He of the exploits)--
the same who had signalized himself in a foray by elevating a
handkerchief on a lance for a banner and leading on his disheartened
comrades to victory.  As soon as Don Francisco beheld a little band
collected round him, he set out with all speed for Salobrena.  The
march was rugged and severe, climbing and descending immense
mountains, and sometimes winding along the edge of giddy
precipices, with the surges of the sea raging far below.  When Don
Francisco arrived with his followers at the lofty promontory that
stretches along one side of the little vega of Salobrena, he looked
down with sorrow and anxiety upon a Moorish army of great force
encamped at the foot of the fortress, while Moorish banners on
various parts of the walls proved that the town was already in
possession of the infidels.  A solitary Christian standard alone
floated on the top of the castle-keep, showing that the brave
garrison were hemmed up in their rock-built citadel.  They were,
in fact, reduced to great extremity through want of water and
provisions.

Don Francisco found it impossible, with his small force, to make any
impression on the camp of the Moors or to get to the relief of the
castle.  He stationed his little band upon a rocky height near the
sea, where they were safe from the assaults of the enemy.  The
sight of his friendly banner waving in their neighborhood cheered
the heart of the garrison, and gave them assurance of speedy succor
from the king, while the hostile menaces of Don Francisco served to
check the attacks of the Moors upon the citadel.

In the mean time, Hernan Perez del Pulgar, who always burned to
distinguish himself by bold and striking exploits, had discovered in
the course of his prowlings a postern gate of the castle opening
upon the steep part of the rocky hill looking toward the mountains.
The thought occurred to him that by a bold dash at a favorable
moment this postern might be attained and succor thrown into the
castle.  He pointed the place out to his comrades.  "Who will follow
my banner," said he, "and make a dash for yonder postern?"  A
bold proposition in time of warfare never wants for bold spirits to
accept it.  Seventy resolute men stepped forward to second him.
Pulgar chose the early daybreak for his enterprise, when the Moors,
just aroused from sleep, were changing guard and making the various
arrangements of the morning.  Favored by these movements and the
drowsiness of the hour, Pulgar approached the Moorish line silently
and steadily, most of his followers armed with crossbows and
espingardas, or muskets.  Then, suddenly making an onset, they
broke through a weak part of the camp before the alarm had spread
through the army, and succeeded in fighting their way up to the gate,
which was eagerly thrown open to receive them.

The garrison, roused to new spirit by this unlooked-for reinforcement,
was enabled to make a more vigorous resistance.  The Moors, however,
who knew there was a great scarcity of water in the castle, exulted
in the idea that this additional number of warriors would soon exhaust
the cisterns and compel a surrender.  Pulgar, hearing of this hope,
caused a bucket of water to be lowered from the battlements and
threw a silver cup in bravado to the Moors.

The garrison, in truth, suffered intensely from thirst, while, to
tantalize them in their sufferings, they beheld limpid streams
winding in abundance through the green plain below them.  They
began to fear that all succor would arrive too late, when one day
they beheld a little squadron of vessels far at sea, but standing
toward the shore.  There was some doubt at first whether it might
not be a hostile armament from Africa, but as it approached they
descried, to their great joy, the banner of Castile.

It was a reinforcement, brought in all haste by the governor of the
fortress, Don Francisco Ramirez.  The squadron anchored at a steep
rocky island which rises from the very margin of the smooth sandy
beach directly in front of the rock of Salobrena and stretches out
into the sea.  On this island Ramirez landed his men, and was as
strongly posted as if in a fortress.  His force was too scanty to
attempt a battle, but he assisted to harass and distract the
besiegers.  Whenever King Boabdil made an attack upon the fortress
his camp was assailed on one side by the troops of Ramirez, who
landed from their island, and on another by those of Don Francisco
Enriquez, who swept down from their rock, while Hernan del Pulgar
kept up a brave defence from every tower and battlement of the
castle.

The attention of the Moorish king was diverted also, for a time, by
an ineffectual attempt to relieve the little port of Adra, which had
recently declared in his favor, but which had been recaptured for
the Christians by Cid Hiaya and his son Alnayar.  Thus, the unlucky
Boabdil, bewildered on every hand, lost all the advantage that he
had gained by his rapid march from Granada.  While he was yet
besieging the obstinate citadel, tidings were brought him that King
Ferdinand was in full march with a powerful host to its assistance.
There was no time for further delay: he made a furious attack with
all his forces upon the castle, but was again repulsed by Pulgar and
his coadjutors, when, abandoning the siege in despair, he retreated
with his army, lest King Ferdinand should get between him and his
capital.  On his way back to Granada, however, he in some sort
consoled himself for his late disappointment by overrunning a part
of the territories and possessions lately assigned to his uncle El
Zagal and to Cid Hiaya.  He defeated their alcaydes, destroyed
several of their fortresses, burnt their villages, and, leaving the
country behind him reeking and smoking with his vengeance,
returned with considerable booty to repose himself within the
walls of the Alhambra.*

*Pulgar, Cron., p. 3, c .131; Cura de los Palacios, cap. 97.



CHAPTER LXXXIX.

HOW KING FERDINAND TREATED THE PEOPLE OF GUADIX, AND HOW
    EL ZAGAL FINISHED HIS REGAL CAREER.


Scarcely had Boabdil[11]ensconced himself in his capital when King
Ferdinand, at the head of seven thousand horse and twenty thousand
foot, again appeared in the Vega.  He had set out in all haste from
Cordova to the relief of Salobrena, but hearing on his march that
the siege was raised, he turned to make a second ravage round the
walls of devoted Granada.  His present forage lasted fifteen days, in
the course of which almost everything that had escaped his former
desolating visit was destroyed, and scarce a green thing or a living
animal was left on the face of the land.  The Moors sallied frequently
and fought desperately in defence of their fields, but the work of
destruction was accomplished, and Granada, once the queen of
gardens, was left surrounded by a desert.

Ferdinand next hastened to crush a conspiracy in the cities of
Guadix, Baza, and Almeria.  These recently conquered places had
entered into secret correspondence with Boabdil, inviting him to
march to their gates, promising to rise upon the Christian
garrisons, seize upon the citadels, and surrender them into his
power.  The marques of Villena had received notice of the conspiracy,
and suddenly thrown himself with a large force into Guadix.  Under
pretence of a review of the inhabitants he made them sally forth
into the fields before the city.  When the whole Moorish population
capable of bearing arms was thus without the walls, he ordered the
gates to be closed.  He then permitted them to enter two by two and
three by three, and take forth their wives, children, and effects.  The
houseless Moors were fain to make themselves temporary hovels in
the gardens and orchards about the city; they were clamorous in
their complaints at being thus excluded from their homes, but were
told they must wait with patience until the charges against them
could be investigated and the pleasure of the king be known.*

*Zurita, lib.--, c. 85; Cura de los Palacios, c. 97.


When Ferdinand arrived at Guadix, he found the unhappy Moors in
their cabins among the orchards.  They complained bitterly of the
deception practised upon them, and implored permission to return
into the city and live peaceably in their dwellings, as had 