been
promised them in their articles of capitulation.

King Ferdinand listened graciously to their complaints.  "My friends,"
said he in reply, "I have been informed that there has been a
conspiracy among you to kill my alcayde and garrison and to
take part with my enemy, the king of Granada.  I shall make a
thorough investigation of this conspiracy.  Those among you who
shall be proved innocent shall be restored to their dwellings, but
the guilty shall incur the penalty of their offences.  As I wish,
however, to proceed with mercy as well as justice, I now give you
your choice--either to depart at once without further question,
going wherever you please, and taking with you your families and
effects under an assurance of safety, or to deliver up those who
are guilty, not one of whom, I give you my royal word, shall
escape punishment."

When the people of Guadix heard these words they communed among
themselves; and, as most of them (says the worthy Agapida) were
either culpable or feared to be considered so, they accepted the
alternative and departed sorrowfully, they and their wives and their
little ones.  "Thus," in the words of that excellent and contemporary
historian Andres Bernaldez, commonly called the curate of Los
Palacios,--"thus did the king deliver Guadix from the hands of the
enemies of our holy faith after seven hundred and seventy years
that it had been in their possession, ever since the time of Roderick
the Goth; and this was one of the mysteries of our Lord, who would
not consent that the city should remain longer in the power of the
Moors"--a pious and sage remark which is quoted with peculiar
approbation by the worthy Agapida.

King Ferdinand offered similar alternatives to the Moors of Baza,
Almeria, and other cities accused of participation in this conspiracy,
who generally preferred to abandon their homes rather than incur
the risk of an investigation.  Most of them relinquished Spain as a
country where they could no longer live in security and independence,
and departed with their families for Africa; such as remained were
suffered to live in villages and hamlets and other unwalled places.*

*Garibay, lib. 13, cap. 39; Pulgar, part 3, cap. 132.


While Ferdinand was thus occupied at Guadix, dispensing justice
and mercy and receiving cities in exchange, the old monarch, Muley
Abdallah, surnamed El Zagal, appeared before him.  He was haggard
with care and almost crazed with passion.  He had found his little
territory of Andarax and his two thousand subjects as difficult to
govern as had been the distracted kingdom of Granada.  The charm
which had bound the Moors to him was broken when he appeared
in arms under the banner of Ferdinand.  He had returned from his
inglorious campaign with his petty army of two hundred men, followed
by the execrations of the people of Granada and the secret repining of
those he had led into the field.  No sooner had his subjects heard of
the successes of Boabdil el Chico than they had seized their arms,
assembled tumultuously, declared for the young monarch, and
threatened the life of El Zagal.*  The unfortunate old king had with
difficulty evaded their fury; and this last lesson seemed entirely
to have cured him of his passion for sovereignty.  He now entreated
Ferdinand to purchase the towns and castles and other possessions
which had been granted to him, offering them at a low rate, and
begging safe passage for himself and his followers to Africa.  King
Ferdinand graciously complied with his wishes.  He purchased of him
three-and-twenty towns and villages in the valleys of Andarax and
Alhaurin, for which he gave him five millions of maravedis.  El Zagal
relinquished his right to one-half of the salinas or salt-pits of Malaha
in favor of his brother-in-law, Cid Hiaya.  Having thus disposed of
his petty empire and possessions, he packed up all his treasure, of
which he had a great amount, and, followed by many Moorish families,
passed over to Africa.**

*Cura de los Palacios, cap. 97.

**Conde, part 4, cap. 41.


And here let us cast an eye beyond the present period of our
chronicle, and trace the remaining career of El Zagal.  His short and
turbulent reign and disastrous end would afford a wholesome lesson
to unprincipled ambition, were not all ambition of the kind fated to
be blind to precept and example.  When he arrived in Africa, instead
of meeting with kindness and sympathy, he was seized and thrown into
prison by the caliph of Fez, Benimerin, as though he had been his
vassal.  He was accused of being the cause of the dissensions and
downfall of the kingdom of Granada, and, the accusation being proved
to the satisfaction of the king of Fez, he condemned the unhappy El
Zagal to perpetual darkness.  A basin of glowing copper was passed
before his eyes, which effectually destroyed his sight.  His wealth,
which had probably been the secret cause of these cruel measures,
was confiscated and seized upon by his oppressor, and El Zagal was
thrust forth, blind, helpless, and destitute, upon the world.  In
this wretched condition the late Moorish monarch groped his way
through the regions of Tingitania until he reached the city of Velez
de la Gomera.  The emir of Velez had formerly been his ally, and
felt some movement of compassion at his present altered and abject
state.  He gave him food and raiment and suffered him to remain
unmolested in his dominions.  Death, which so often hurries off the
prosperous and happy from the midst of untasted pleasures, spares,
on the other hand, the miserable to drain the last drop of his cup
of bitterness.  El Zagal dragged out a wretched existence of many
years in the city of Velez.  He wandered about blind and disconsolate,
an object of mingled scorn and pity, and bearing above his raiment
a parchment on which was written in Arabic, "This is the unfortunate
king of Andalusia."*

*Marmol, De Rebelione Maur., lib. 1, cap. 16; Padraza, Hist.
 Granad., part 3, c. 4; Suarez, Hist. Obisp. de Guadix y Baza,
 cap. 10.



CHAPTER XC.

PREPARATIONS OF GRANADA FOR A DESPERATE DEFENCE.


How is thy strength departed, O Granada! how is thy beauty withered
and despoiled, O city of groves and fountains!  The commerce that
once thronged thy streets is at an end; the merchant no longer
hastens to thy gates with the luxuries of foreign lands.  The cities
which once paid thee tribute are wrested from thy sway; the chivalry
which filled thy Vivarrambla with sumptuous pageantry have fallen
in many battles.  The Alhambra still rears its ruddy towers from the
midst of groves, but melancholy reigns in its marble halls, and the
monarch looks down from his lofty balconies upon a naked waste
where once extended the blooming glories of the Vega!

Such is the lament of the Moorish writers over the lamentable state
of Granada, now a mere phantom of former greatness.  The two ravages
of the Vega, following so closely upon each other, had swept off all
the produce of the year, and the husbandman had no longer the heart
to till the field, seeing the ripening harvest only brought the spoiler to
his door.

During the winter season Ferdinand made diligent preparations for
the campaign that was to decide the fate of Granada.  As this war
was waged purely for the promotion of the Christian faith, he thought
it meet that its enemies should bear the expenses.  He levied,
therefore, a general contribution upon the Jews throughout his
kingdom by synagogues and districts, and obliged them to render
in the proceeds at the city of Seville.*

*Garibay, lib. 18, c. 39.


On the 11th of April, Ferdinand and Isabella departed for the
Moorish frontier, with the solemn determination to lay close siege
to Granada and never quit its walls until they had planted the
standard of the faith on the towers of the Alhambra.  Many of the
nobles of the kingdom, particularly those from parts remote from
the scene of action, wearied by the toils of war and foreseeing
that this would be a tedious siege, requiring patience and vigilance
rather than hardy deeds of arms, contented themselves with sending
their vassals, while they stayed at home to attend to their domains.
Many cities furnished soldiers at their cost, and the king took the
field with an army of forty thousand infantry and ten thousand
horse.  The principal captains who followed him in this campaign
were Roderigo Ponce de Leon, the marques of Cadiz, the master of
Santiago, the marques of Villena, the counts of Tendilla, Cifuentes,
Cabra, and Urena, and Don Alonso de Aguilar.

Queen Isabella, accompanied by her son the prince Juan and the
princesses Juana, Maria, and Cathalina, her daughters, proceeded
to Alcala la Real, the mountain-fortress and stronghold of the count
de Tendilla.  Here she remained to forward supplies to the army,
and to be ready to repair to the camp whenever her presence might
be required.

The army of Ferdinand poured into the Vega by various defiles of the
mountains, and on the 23d of April the royal tent was pitched at a
village called Los Ojos de Huescar, about a league and a half from
Granada.  At the approach of this formidable force the harassed
inhabitants turned pale, and even many of the warriors trembled,
for they felt that the last desperate struggle was at hand.

Boabdil el Chico assembled his council in the Alhambra, from the
windows of which they could behold the Christian squadrons
glistening through clouds of dust as they poured along the Vega.
The utmost confusion and consternation reigned in the council.  Many
of the members, terrified with the horrors impending over their
families, advised Boabdil to throw himself upon the generosity of
the Christian monarch: even several of the bravest suggested
the possibility of obtaining honorable terms.

The wazir of the city, Abul Casim Abdel Melic was called upon to
report the state of the public means for sustenance and defence.
There were sufficient provisions, he said, for a few months' supply,
independent of what might exist in the possession of merchants
and other rich inhabitants.  "But of what avail," said he, "is a supply
for a few months against the sieges of the Castilian monarch, which
are interminable?"

He produced also the lists of men capable of bearing arms.  "The
number," said he, "is great, but what can be expected from mere
citizen soldiers?  They vaunt and menace in time of safety; none are
so arrogant when the enemy is at a distance; but when the din of
war thunders at the gates they hide themselves in terror."

When Muza heard these words he rose with generous warmth.
"What reason have we," said he, "to despair?  The blood of those
illustrious Moors, the conquerors of Spain, still flows in our veins.
Let us be true to ourselves, and fortune will again be with us.
We have a veteran force, both horse and foot, the flower of our
chivalry, seasoned in war and scarred in a thousand battles.  As to
the multitude of our citizens, spoken of so slightly, why should we
doubt their valor?  There are twenty thousand young men, in the fire
of youth, whom I will engage that in the defence of their homes they
will rival the most valiant veterans.  Do we want provisions?  Our
horses are fleet and our horsemen daring in the foray.  Let them
scour and scourge the country of those apostate Moslems who have
surrendered to the Christians.  Let them make inroads into the lands
of our enemies.  We shall soon see them returning with cavalgadas
to our gates, and to a soldier there is no morsel so sweet as that
wrested with hard fighting from the foe."

Boabdil, though he wanted firm and durable courage, was readily
excited to sudden emotions of bravery.  He caught a glow of
resolution from the noble ardor of Muza.  "Do what is needful," said
he to his commanders; "into your hands I confide the common safety.
You are the protectors of the kingdom, and, with the aid of Allah,
will revenge the insults of our religion, the deaths of our friends
and relations, and the sorrows and sufferings heaped upon our
land."*

*Conde.


To every one was now assigned his separate duty.  The wazir had
charge of the arms and provisions and the enrolling of the people.
Muza was to command the cavalry, to defend the gates, and to take
the lead in all sallies and skirmishings.  Naim Reduan and Muhammed
Aben Zayde were his adjutants.  Abdel Kerim Zegri and the other
captains were to guard the walls, and the alcaydes of the Alcazaba
and of the Red Towers had command of the fortresses.

Nothing now was heard but the din of arms and the bustle of
preparation.  The Moorish spirit, quick to catch fire, was immediately
in a flame, and the populace in the excitement of the moment set
at naught the power of the Christians.  Muza was in all parts of the
city, infusing his own generous zeal into the bosoms of the soldiery.
The young cavaliers rallied round him as their model; the veteran
warriors regarded him with a soldier's admiration; the vulgar throng
followed him with shouts; and the helpless part of the inhabitants,
the old men and the women, hailed him with blessings as their
protector.

On the first appearance of the Christian army the principal gates of
the city had been closed and secured with bars and bolts and heavy
chains: Muza now ordered them to be thrown open.  "To me and my
cavaliers," said he, "is entrusted the defence of the gates; our
bodies shall be their barriers."  He stationed at each gate a strong
guard chosen from his bravest men.  His horsemen were always
completely armed and ready to mount at a moment's warning:
their steeds stood saddled and caparisoned in the stables, with
lance and buckler beside them.  On the least approach of the enemy
a squadron of horse gathered within the gate, ready to launch forth
like the bolt from the thunder-cloud.  Muza made no empty bravado
nor haughty threat; he was more terrible in deeds than in words, and
executed daring exploits beyond even the vaunt of the vainglorious.
Such was the present champion of the Moors.  Had they possessed
many such warriors, or had Muza risen to power at an earlier period
of the war, the fate of Granada might have been deferred, and the
Moor for a long time have maintained his throne within the walls of
the Alhambra.



CHAPTER XCI.

HOW KING FERDINAND CONDUCTED THE SIEGE  CAUTIOUSLY,
    AND HOW QUEEN ISABELLA ARRIVED AT THE CAMP.


Though Granada was shorn of its glories and nearly cut off from all
external aid, still its mighty castles and massive bulwarks seemed
to set all attack at defiance.  Being the last retreat of Moorish power,
it had assembled within its walls the remnants of the armies which
had contended, step by step, with the invaders in their gradual
conquest of the land.  All that remained of high-born and high-bred
chivalry was here; all that was loyal and patriotic was roused to
activity by the common danger; and Granada, so long lulled into
inaction by vain hopes of security, now assumed a formidable
aspect in the hour of its despair.

Ferdinand saw that any attempt to subdue the city by main force
would be perilous and bloody.  Cautious in his policy, and fond of
conquests gained by art rather than valor, he resorted to the plan
so successful with Baza, and determined to reduce the place by
famine.  For this purpose his armies penetrated into the very heart
of the Alpuxarras, and ravaged the valleys and sacked and burnt
the towns upon which the city depended for its supplies.  Scouting
parties also ranged the mountains behind Granada and captured every
casual convoy of provisions.  The Moors became more daring as their
situation became more hopeless.  Never had Ferdinand experienced
such vigorous sallies and assaults.  Muza at the head of his cavalry
harassed the borders of the camp, and even penetrated into the
interior, making sudden spoil and ravage, and leaving his course
to be traced by the slain and wounded.  To protect his camp from
these assaults, Ferdinand fortified it with deep trenches and strong
bulwarks.  It was of a quadrangular form, divided into streets like a
city, the troops being quartered in tents and in booths constructed
of bushes and branches of trees.  When it was completed Queen
Isabella came in state, with all her court and the prince and
princesses, to be present at the siege.  This was intended, as on
former occasions, to reduce the besieged to despair by showing the
determination of the sovereigns to reside in the camp until the city
should surrender.  Immediately after her arrival the queen rode forth
to survey the camp and its environs: wherever she went she was
attended by a splendid retinue, and all the commanders vied with
each other in the pomp and ceremony with which they received her.
Nothing was heard from morning until night but shouts and
acclamations and bursts of martial music; so that it appeared to
the Moors as if a continual festival and triumph reigned in the
Christian camp.

The arrival of the queen, however and the menaced obstinacy of
the siege, had no effect in damping the fire of the Moorish chivalry.
Muza inspired the youthful warriors with the most devoted heroism.
"We have nothing left to fight for," said he, "but the ground we
stand on; when this is lost we cease to have a country and a name."

Finding the Christian king forbore to make an attack, Muza incited
his cavaliers to challenge the youthful chivalry of the Christian
army to single combat or partial skirmishes.  Scarce a day passed
without gallant conflicts of the kind in sight of the city and the
camp.  The combatants rivalled each other in the splendor of their
armor and array, as well as in the prowess of their deeds.  Their
contests were more like the stately ceremonials of tilts and
tournaments than the rude conflicts of the field.  Ferdinand soon
perceived that they animated the fiery Moors with fresh zeal and
courage, while they cost the lives of many of his bravest cavaliers:
he again, therefore, forbade the acceptance of any individual
challenges, and ordered that all partial encounters should be
avoided.  The cool and stern policy of the Catholic sovereign bore
hard upon the generous spirits of either army, but roused the
indignation of the Moors when they found that they were to be
subdued in this inglorious manner: "Of what avail," said they, "are
chivalry and heroic valor?  The crafty monarch of the Christians
has no magnanimity in warfare; he seeks to subdue us through
the weakness of our bodies, but shuns to encounter the courage
of our souls."



CHAPTER XCII.

OF THE INSOLENT DEFIANCE OF TARFE THE MOOR, AND THE
    DARING EXPLOIT OF HERNAN PEREZ DEL PULGAR.


When the Moorish knights beheld that all courteous challenges were
unavailing, they sought various means to provoke the Christian
warriors to the field.  Sometimes a body of them, fleetly mounted,
would gallop up to the skirts of the camp and try who should hurl
his lance farthest within the barriers, having his name inscribed
upon it or a label affixed containing some taunting defiance.  These
bravadoes caused great irritation; still, the Spanish warriors were
restrained by the prohibition of the king.

Among the Moorish cavaliers was one named Tarfe, renowned for
strength and daring spirit, but whose courage partook of fierce
audacity rather than chivalric heroism.  In one of these sallies,
when skirting the Christian camp, this arrogant Moor outstripped his
companions, overleaped the barriers, and, galloping close to the
royal quarters, launched his lance so far within that it remained
quivering in the earth close by the pavilions of the sovereigns.  The
royal guards rushed forth in pursuit, but the Moorish horsemen were
already beyond the camp and scouring in a cloud of dust for the
city.  Upon wresting the lance from the earth a label was found upon
it importing that it was intended for the queen.

Nothing could equal the indignation of the Christian warriors at the
insolence of the bravado and the discourteous insult offered to the
queen.  Hernan Perez del Pulgar, surnamed "He of the exploits," was
present, and resolved not to be outbraved by this daring infidel.
"Who will stand by me," said he, "in an enterprise of desperate
peril?"  The Christian cavaliers well knew the harebrained valor of
Hernan, yet not one hesitated to step forward.  He chose fifteen
companions, all of powerful arm and dauntless heart.

His project was to penetrate Granada in the dead of the night by a
secret pass made known to him by a Moorish renegade of the city,
whom he had christened Pedro Pulgar, and who was to act as
guide.  They were to set fire to the Alcaiceria and other principal
edifices, and then effect their retreat as best they might.  At the
hour appointed the adventurous troops set forth provided with
combustibles.  The renegade led them silently to a drain or channel
of the river Darro, up which they proceeded cautiously, single file,
until they halted under a bridge near the royal gate.  Here
dismounting, Pulgar stationed six of his companions to remain silent
and motionless and keep guard, while, followed by the rest and still
guided by the renegade, he continued up the drain or channel of the
Darro, which passes under a part of the city, and was thus enabled
to make his way undiscovered into the streets.  All was dark and
silent.  At the command of Pulgar the renegade led him to the
principal mosque.  Here the cavalier, pious as brave, threw himself
on his knees, and, drawing forth a parchment scroll on which was
inscribed in large letters "AVE MARIA," nailed it to the door of the
mosque, thus converting the heathen edifice into a Christian chapel
and dedicating it to the Blessed Virgin.  This done, he hastened to
the Alcaiceria to set it in a blaze.  The combustibles were all placed,
but Tristan de Montemayor, who had charge of the firebrand, had
carelessly left it at the door of the mosque.  It was too late to
return there.  Pulgar was endeavoring to strike fire with flint and
steel into the ravelled end of a cord when he was startled by the
approach of the Moorish guards going the rounds.  His hand was on his
sword in an instant.  Seconded by his brave companions, he assailed
the astonished Moors and put them to flight.  In a little while the whole
city resounded with alarms, soldiers were hurrying through the streets
in every direction; but Pulgar, guided by the renegade, made good
his retreat by the channel of the Darro to his companions at the
bridge, and all, mounting their horses, spurred back to the camp.
The Moors were at a loss to imagine the meaning of this wild and
apparently fruitless assault, but great was their exasperation on
the following day when the trophy of hardihood and prowess, the
"AVE MARIA," was discovered thus elevated in bravado in the very
centre of the city.  The mosque thus boldly sanctified by Hernan del
Pulgar was actually consecrated into a cathedral after the capture
of Granada.*

*The account here given of the exploit of Hernan del Pulgar differs
 from that given in the first edition, and is conformable to the
 record of the fact in a manuscript called "The House of Salar,"
 existing in the library of Salazar and cited by Alcantara in his
 History of  Granada.

In commemoration of this daring feat of Pulgar, the emperor Charles
V. in after years conferred on that cavalier and on his descendants,
the marqueses of Salar, the privilege of sitting in the choir during
high mass, and assigned as the place of sepulture of Pulgar himself
the identical spot where he kneeled to affix the sacred scroll; and
his tomb is still held in great veneration.  This Hernan Perez del
Pulgar was a man of letters, as well as art, and inscribed to
Charles V. a summary of the achievements of Gonsalvo of Cordova,
surnamed the Great Captain, who had been one of his comrades-
in-arms.  He is often confounded with Hernando del Pulgar,
historian and secretary to Queen Isabella.  (See note to Pulgar's
Chron. of the Catholic Sovereigns, part 3, c. iii., edit. Valencia, 1780.)



CHAPTER XCIII.

HOW QUEEN ISABELLA TOOK A VIEW OF THE CITY OF GRANADA,
    AND HOW HER CURIOSITY COST THE LIVES OF MANY
    CHRISTIANS AND MOORS.


The royal encampment lay so distant from Granada that the general
aspect of the city only could be seen as it rose gracefully from the
Vega, covering the sides of the hills with palaces and towers.  Queen
Isabella had expressed an earnest desire to behold nearer at hand a
city whose beauty was so renowned throughout the world; and the
marques of Cadiz, with his accustomed courtesy, prepared a great
military escort and guard to protect her and the ladies of the court
while they enjoyed this perilous gratification.

On the morning of June the 18th a magnificent and powerful train
issued from the Christian camp.  The advanced guard was composed
of legions of cavalry, heavily armed, looking like moving masses of
polished steel.  Then came the king and queen, with the prince and
princess and the ladies of the court, surrounded by the royal body-
guard, sumptuously arrayed, composed of the sons of the most
illustrious houses of Spain; after these was the rear-guard, a
powerful force of horse and foot, for the flower of the army sallied
forth that day.  The Moors gazed with fearful admiration at this
glorious pageant, wherein the pomp of the court was mingled with the
terrors of the camp.  It moved along in radiant line across the Vega
to the melodious thunders of martial music, while banner and plume
and silken scarf and rich brocade gave a gay and gorgeous relief to
the grim visage of iron war that lurked beneath.

The army moved toward the hamlet of Zubia, built on the skirts of
the mountain to the left of Granada, and commanding a view of
the Alhambra and the most beautiful quarter of the city.  As they
approached the hamlet the marques of Villena, the count Urena, and
Don Alonso de Aguilar fled off with their battalions, and were soon
seen glittering along the side of the mountain above the village.  In
the mean time, the marques of Cadiz, the count de Tendilla, the
count de Cabra, and Don Alonso Fernandez, senior of Alcaudrete and
Montemayor, drew up their forces in battle array on the plain below
the hamlet, presenting a living barrier of loyal chivalry between the
sovereigns and the city.

Thus securely guarded, the royal party alighted, and, entering one
of the houses of the hamlet which had been prepared for their
reception, enjoyed a full view of the city from its terraced roof.
The ladies of the court gazed with delight at the red towers of the
Alhambra rising from amid shady groves, anticipating the time when
the Catholic sovereigns should be enthroned within its walls and its
courts shine with the splendor of Spanish chivalry.  "The reverend
prelates and holy friars who always surrounded the queen looked
with serene satisfaction," says Fray Antonio Agapida, "at this modern
Babylon, enjoying the triumph that awaited them when those mosques
and minarets should be converted into churches, and goodly priests
and bishops should succeed to the infidel alfaquis."

When the Moors beheld the Christians thus drawn forth in full array
in the plain, they supposed it was to offer battle, and hesitated
not to accept it.  In a little while the queen beheld a body of
Moorish cavalry pouring into the Vega, the riders managing their
fleet and fiery steeds with admirable address.  They were richly
armed and clothed in the most brilliant colors, and the caparisons
of their steeds flamed with gold and embroidery.  This was the
favorite squadron of Muza, composed of the flower of the youthful
cavaliers of Granada.  Others succeeded, some heavily armed,
others "a la gineta" with lance and buckler, and lastly came the
legions of foot-soldiers with arquebuse and crossbow and spear
and scimetar.

When the queen saw this army issuing from the city she sent to the
marques of Cadiz, and forbade any attack upon the enemy or the
acceptance of any challenge to a skirmish, for she was loth that her
curiosity should cost the life of a single human being.

The marques promised to obey, though sorely against his will, and
it grieved the spirit of the Spanish cavaliers to be obliged to remain
with sheathed sword's while bearded by the foe.  The Moors could
not comprehend the meaning of this inaction of the Christians after
having apparently invited a battle.  They sallied several times from
their ranks, and approached near enough to discharge their arrows,
but the Christians were immovable.  Many of the Moorish horsemen
galloped close to the Christian ranks, brandishing their lances and
scimetars and defying various cavaliers to single combat; but
Ferdinand had rigorously prohibited all duels of the kind, and they
dared not transgress his orders under his very eye.

Here, however, the worthy Fray Antonio Agapida, in his enthusiasm
for the triumphs of the faith, records the following incident, which
we fear is not sustained by any grave chronicler of the times, but
rests merely on tradition or the authority of certain poets and
dramatic writers who have perpetuated the tradition in their works:
While this grim and reluctant tranquillity prevailed along the
Christian line, says Agapida, there rose a mingled shout and sound
of laughter near the gate of the city.  A Moorish horseman, armed at
all points, issued forth, followed by a rabble who drew back as he
approached the scene of danger.  The Moor was more robust and brawny
than was common with his countrymen.  His visor was closed; he bore a
huge buckler and a ponderous lance; his scimetar was of a Damascus
blade, and his richly ornamented dagger was wrought by an artificer
of Fez.  He was known by his device to be Tarfe, the most insolent yet
valiant of the Moslem warriors--the same who had hurled into the
royal camp his lance inscribed to the queen.  As he rode slowly along
in front of the army his very steed, prancing with fiery eye and
distended nostril, seemed to breathe defiance to the Christians.

But what were the feelings of the Spanish cavaliers when they
beheld, tied to the tail of his steed and dragged in the dust, the
very inscription--" AVE MARIA"--which Hernan Perez del Pulgar had
affixed to the door of the mosque!  A burst of horror and indignation
broke forth from the army.  Hernan was not at hand to maintain his
previous achievement, but one of his young companions-in-arms,
Garcilasso de la Vega by name, putting spurs to his horse, galloped
to the hamlet of Zubia, threw himself on his knees before the king,
and besought permission to accept the defiance of this insolent
infidel and to revenge the insult offered to our Blessed Lady.  The
request was too pious to be refused.  Garcilasso remounted his steed,
closed his helmet, graced by four sable plumes, grasped his buckler
of Flemish workmanship and his lance of matchless temper, and defied
the haughty Moor in the midst of his career.  A combat took place in
view of the two armies and of the Castilian court.  The Moor was
powerful in wielding his weapons and dextrous in managing his steed.
He was of larger frame than Garcilasso, and more completely armed,
and the Christians trembled for their champion.  The shock of their
encounter was dreadful; their lances were shivered, and sent up
splinters in the air.  Garcilasso was thrown back in his saddle: his
horse made a wide career before he could recover, gather up the
reins, and return to the conflict.  They now encountered each other
with swords.  The Moor circled round his opponent as a hawk circles
where about to make a swoop; his steed obeyed his rider with
matchless quickness; at every attack of the infidel it seemed
as if the Christian knight must sink beneath his flashing scimetar.
But if Garcilasso was inferior to him in power, he was superior in
agility: many of his blows he parried; others he received upon his
Flemish shield, which was proof against the Damascus blade.  The
blood streamed from numerous wounds received by either warrior.
The Moor, seeing his antagonist exhausted, availed himself of his
superior force, and, grappling, endeavored to wrest him from his
saddle.  They both fell to earth: the Moor placed his knee upon the
breast of his victim, and, brandishing his dagger, aimed a blow at
his throat.  A cry of despair was uttered by the Christian warriors,
when suddenly they beheld the Moor rolling lifeless in the dust.
Garcilasso had shortened his sword, and as his adversary raised his
arm to strike had pierced him to the heart.  "It was a singular and
miraculous victory," says Fray Antonio Agapida; "but the Christian
knight was armed by the sacred nature of his cause, and the Holy
Virgin gave him strength, like another David, to slay this gigantic
champion of the Gentiles."

The laws of chivalry were observed throughout the combat--no one
interfered on either side.  Garcilasso now despoiled his adversary;
then, rescuing the holy inscription of "AVE MARIA" from its degrading
situation, he elevated it on the point of his sword, and bore it on
as a signal of triumph amid the rapturous shouts of the Christian
army.*

*The above incident has been commemorated in old Spanish ballads,
 and made the subject of a scene in an old Spanish drama ascribed by
 some to Lope de Vega.


The sun had now reached the meridian, and the hot blood of the Moors
was inflamed by its rays and by the sight of the defeat of their
champion.  Muza ordered two pieces of ordnance to open a fire upon
the Christians.  A confusion was produced in one part of their ranks:
Muza called to the chiefs of the army, "Let us waste no more time in
empty challenges--let us charge upon the enemy: he who assaults
has always an advantage in the combat."  So saying, he rushed
forward, followed by a large body of horse and foot, and charged so
furiously upon the advance guard of the Christians that he drove it
in upon the battalion of the marques of Cadiz.

The gallant marques now considered himself absolved from all further
obedience to the queen's commands.  He gave the signal to attack,
"Santiago!" was shouted along the line, and he pressed forward to
the encounter with his battalion of twelve hundred lances.  The other
cavaliers followed his example, and the battle instantly became general.

When the king and queen beheld the armies thus rushing to the
combat, they threw themselves on their knees and implored the
Holy Virgin to protect her faithful warriors.  The prince and princess,
the ladies of the court, and the prelates and friars who were
present did the same, and the effect of the prayers of these
illustrious and saintly persons was immediately apparent.  The
fierceness with which the Moors had rushed to the attack was
suddenly cooled; they were bold and adroit for a skirmish, but
unequal to the veteran Spaniards in the open field.  A panic seized
upon the foot-soldiers; they turned and took to flight.  Muza and his
cavaliers in vain endeavored to rally them.  Some took refuge in the
mountains, but the greater part fled to the city in such confusion
that they overturned and trampled upon each other.  The Christians
pursued them to the very gates.  Upward of two thousand were either
killed, wounded, or taken prisoners, and the two pieces of ordnance
were brought off as trophies of the victory.  Not a Christian lance
but was bathed that day in the blood of an infidel.*

*Cura de los Palacios, cap. 101; Zurita, lib. 20, c. 88.


Such was the brief but bloody action which was known among the
Christian warriors by the name of "the Queen's Skirmish;" for when
the marques of Cadiz waited upon Her Majesty to apologize for
breaking her commands, he attributed the victory entirely to her
presence.  The queen, however, insisted that it was all owing to her
troops being led on by so valiant a commander.  Her Majesty had not
yet recovered from her agitation at beholding so terrible a scene of
bloodshed, though certain veterans present pronounced it as gay
and gentle a skirmish as they had ever witnessed.

The gayety of this gentle pass at arms, however, was somewhat marred
by a rough reverse in the evening.  Certain of the Christian cavaliers,
among whom were the count de Urena, Don Alonso Aguilar, his brother
Gonsalvo of Cordova, Diego Castrillo, commander of Calatrava, and
others to the number of fifty, remained in ambush near Armilla,
expecting the Moors would sally forth at night to visit the scene of
battle and to bury their dead.  They were discovered by a Moor who
had climbed an elm tree to reconnoitre, and who hastened into the
city to give notice of their ambush.  Scarce had night fallen when the
cavaliers found themselves surrounded by a host which in the darkness
seemed innumerable.  The Moors attacked them with sanguinary fury
to revenge the disgrace of the morning.  The cavaliers fought to every
disadvantage, overwhelmed by numbers, ignorant of the ground,
perplexed by thickets and by the water-courses of the gardens, the
sluices of which were all thrown open.  Even retreat was difficult.
The count de Urena was surrounded and in imminent peril, from which
he was saved by two of his faithful followers at the sacrifice of their
lives.  Several cavaliers lost their horses, and were themselves put
to death in the water-courses.  Gonsalvo of Cordova came near having
his own illustrious career cut short in this obscure skirmish.  He had
fallen into a water-course, whence he extricated himself, covered
with mud and so encumbered with his armor that he could not retreat.
Inigo de Mendoza, a relative of his brother Alonso, seeing his peril,
offered him his horse.  "Take it, senor," said he, "for you cannot save
yourself on foot, and I can; but should I fall take care of my wife
and daughters."

Gonsalvo accepted the devoted offer, mounted the horse, and had
made but few paces when a lamentable cry caused him to turn his
head, and he beheld the faithful Mendoza transfixed by Moorish lances.
The four principal cavaliers already named, with several of their
followers, effected their retreat and reached the camp in safety; but
this nocturnal reverse obscured the morning's triumph.  Gonsalvo
remembered the last words of the devoted Mendoza, and bestowed
a pension on his widow and marriage portions on his daughters.*

*The account of this nocturnal affair is from Peter Martyr, lib. 4,
 Epist. 90, and Pulgar, Hazanas del Gran Capitan, page 188, as
 cited by Alcantara, Hist. Granada, tom. 4, cap. 18.


To commemorate the victory of which she had been an eye-witness,
Queen Isabella afterward erected a monastery in the village of Zubia
dedicated to St. Francisco, which still exists, and in its garden is
a laurel planted by her hands.*

*The house whence the king and queen contemplated the battle is
 likewise to be seen at the present day.  It is in the first street to
 the right on entering the village from the Vega, and the royal arms
 are painted on the ceilings.  It is inhabited by a worthy farmer,
 Francisco Garcia, who in showing the house to the writer refused
 all compensation with true Spanish pride, offering, on the contrary,
 the hospitalities of his mansion.  His children are versed in the old
 Spanish ballads about the exploits of Hernan Perez del Pulgar and
 Garcilasso de la Vega.



CHAPTER XCIV.

THE LAST RAVAGE BEFORE GRANADA.


The ravages of war had as yet spared a little portion of the Vega of
Granada.  A green belt of gardens and orchards still flourished round
the city, extending along the banks of the Xenil and the Darro.  They
had been the solace and delight of the inhabitants in their happier
days, and contributed to their sustenance in this time of scarcity.
Ferdinand determined to make a final and exterminating ravage to
the very walls of the city, so that there should not remain a single
green thing for the sustenance of man or beast.  The eighth of July
was the day appointed for this act of desolation.  Boabdil was
informed by his spies of the intention of the Christian king, and
prepared to make a desperate defence.  Hernando de Baeza, a
Christian who resided with the royal family in the Alhambra as
interpreter, gives in a manuscript memoir an account of the
parting of Boabdil from his family as he went forth to battle.  At an
early hour on the appointed day, the eighth of July, he bathed and
perfumed himself, as the Moors of high rank were accustomed to
do when they went forth to peril their lives.  Arrayed in complete
armor, he took leave of his mother, his wife, and his sister in the
antechamber of the Tower of Comares.  Ayxa la Horra, with her
usual dignity, bestowed on him her benediction and gave him her
hand to kiss.  It was a harder parting with his son and his daughter,
who hung round him with sobs and tears: the duenas and doncellas
too of the royal household made the halls of the Alhambra resound
with their lamentations.  He then mounted his horse and put himself
in front of his squadrons.*

*Hernando de Baeza, as cited by Alcantara, Hist. Gran., t. 4, c. 18.


The Christian army approached close to the city, and were laying
waste the gardens and orchards when Boabdil sallied forth,
surrounded by all that was left of the flower and chivalry of
Granada.  There is one place where even the coward becomes
brave--that sacred spot called home.  What, then, must have been
the valor of the Moors, a people always of chivalrous spirit, when the
war was thus brought to their thresholds!  They fought among the
scenes of their loves and pleasures, the scenes of their infancy,
and the haunts of their domestic life.  They fought under the eyes
of their wives and children, their old men and their maidens--of all
that was helpless and all that was dear to them; for all Granada,
crowded on tower and battlement, watched with trembling heart
the fate of this eventful day.

There was not so much one battle as a variety of battles: every
garden and orchard became a scene of deadly contest; every inch of
ground was disputed with an agony of grief and valor by the Moors;
every inch of ground that the Christians advanced they valiantly
maintained, but never did they advance with severer fighting or
greater loss of blood.

The cavalry of Muza was in every part of the field; wherever it came
it gave fresh ardor to the fight.  The Moorish soldier, fainting with
heat, fatigue, and wounds, was roused to new life at the approach of
Muza; and even he who lay gasping in the agonies of death turned his
face toward him and faintly uttered cheers and blessings as he passed.

The Christians had by this time gained possession of various towers
near the city, whence they had been annoyed by crossbows and
arquebuses.  The Moors, scattered in various actions, were severely
pressed.  Boabdil, at the head of the cavaliers of his guard,
mingling in the fight in various parts of the field, endeavored to
inspirit the foot-soldiers to the combat.  But the Moorish infantry
was never to be depended upon.  In the heat of the action a panic
seized upon them; they fled, leaving their sovereign exposed with
his handful of cavaliers to an overwhelming force.  Boabdil was on
the point of falling into the hands of the Christians, when, wheeling
round, he and his followers threw the reins on the necks of their
steeds and took refuge by dint of hoof within the walls of the city.*

*Zurita, lib. 20, c. 88.


Muza endeavored to retrieve the fortune of the field.  He threw
himself before the retreating infantry, calling upon them to turn
and fight for their homes, their families, for everything sacred and
dear to them.  All in vain: totally broken and dismayed, they fled
tumultuously for the gates.  Muza would fain have kept the field
with his cavalry; but this devoted band, having stood the brunt of
war throughout this desperate campaign, was fearfully reduced in
numbers, and many of the survivors were crippled and enfeebled by
their wounds.  Slowly and reluctantly, therefore, he retreated to the
city, his bosom swelling with indignation and despair.  Entering the
gates, he ordered them to be closed and secured with bolts and
bars; for he refused to place any further confidence in the archers
and arquebusiers stationed to defend them, and vowed never
more to sally with foot-soldiers to the field.

In the mean time, the artillery thundered from the walls and checked
all further advance of the Christians.  King Ferdinand therefore
called off his troops, and returned in triumph to his camp, leaving
the beautiful city of Granada wrapped in the smoke of her fields and
gardens and surrounded by the bodies of her slaughtered children.

Such was the last sally of the Moors in defence of their favorite
city.  The French ambassador, who witnessed it, was filled with
wonder at the prowess, the dexterity, and the daring of the
Moslems.

In truth, this whole war was an instance, memorable in history,
of the most persevering resolution.  For nearly ten years had the
war endured--an almost uninterrupted series of disasters to the
Moorish arms.  Their towns had been taken, one after another, and
their brethren slain or led into captivity.  Yet they disputed every
city and town and fortress and castle, nay, every rock itself, as if
they had been inspirited by victories.  Wherever they could plant
foot to fight, or find wall or cliff whence to launch an arrow, they
disputed their beloved country; and now, when their capital was
cut off from all relief and a whole nation thundered at its gates,
they still maintained defence, as if they hoped some miracle to
interpose in their behalf.  Their obstinate resistance (says an
ancient chronicler) shows the grief with which they yielded up
the Vega, which was to them a paradise and heaven.  Exerting all
the strength of their arms, they embraced, as it were, that most
beloved soil, from which neither wounds nor defeats, nor death
itself, could part them.  They stood firm, battling for it with the
united force of love and grief, never drawing back the foot while
they had hands to fight or fortune to befriend them.*

*Abarca, Reyes de Aragon, R. 30, c. 3.



CHAPTER XCV.

CONFLAGRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN CAMP.--BUILDING OF
    SANTA FE.


The moors now shut themselves up gloomily within their walls; there
were no longer any daring sallies from their gates, and even the
martial clangor of the drum and trumpet, which had continually
resounded within the warrior city, was now seldom heard from its
battlements.  In the midst of this deep despondency a single disaster
in the Christian camp for a moment lit up a ray of hope in the bosom
of the Moors.

The setting sun of a hot summer's day, on the 10th of July, shone
splendidly upon the Christian camp, which was in a bustle of
preparation for the next day's service, when an attack was meditated
on the city.  The camp made a glorious appearance.  The various
tents of the royal family and the attendant nobles were adorned
with rich hangings and sumptuous devices and costly furniture,
forming, as it were, a little city of silk and brocade, where the
pinnacles of pavilions of various gay colors, surmounted with
waving standards and fluttering pennons, might vie with the
domes and minarets of the capital they were besieging.

In the midst of this little gaudy metropolis the lofty tent of the
queen domineered over the rest like a stately palace.  The marques of
Cadiz had courteously surrendered his own tent to the queen: it was
the most complete and sumptuous in Christendom, and had been
carried about with him throughout the war.  In the centre rose a
stately alfaneque, or pavilion, in Oriental taste, the rich hangings
being supported by columns of lances and ornamented with martial
devices.  This central pavilion, or silken tower, was surrounded by
other compartments, some of painted linen lined with silk, and all
separated from each other by curtains.  It was one of those camp
palaces which are raised and demolished in an instant like the city
of canvas which surrounds them.

As the evening advanced the bustle in the camp subsided.  Every one
sought repose, preparatory to the next day's trial.  The king retired
early, that he might be up with the crowing of the cock to head the
destroying army in person.  All stir of military preparation was hushed
in the royal quarters: the very sound of minstrelsy was mute, and
not the tinkling of a guitar was to be heard from the tents of the
fair ladies of the court.

The queen had retired to the innermost part of her pavilion, where
she was performing her orisons before a private altar: perhaps the
peril to which the king might be exposed in the next day's foray
inspired her with more than usual devotion.  While thus at her
prayers she was suddenly aroused by a glare of light and wreaths
of suffocating smoke.  In an instant the whole tent was in a blaze:
there was a high gusty wind, which whirled the light flames from
tent to tent and wrapped the whole in one conflagration.

Isabella had barely time to save herself by instant flight.  Her
first thought on being extricated from her tent was for the safety
of the king.  She rushed to his tent, but the vigilant Ferdinand was
already at the entrance of it.  Starting from bed on the first alarm
and fancying it an assault of the enemy, he had seized his sword
and buckler and sallied forth undressed with his cuirass upon
his arm.

The late gorgeous camp was now a scene of wild confusion.  The
flames kept spreading from one pavilion to another, glaring upon
the rich armor and golden and silver vessels, which seemed melting
in the fervent heat.  Many of the soldiers had erected booths and
bowers of branches, which, being dry, crackled and blazed and added
to the rapid conflagration.  The ladies of the court fled, shrieking
and half dressed, from their tents.  There was an alarm of drum and
trumpet, and a distracted hurry about the camp of men half armed.
The prince Juan had been snatched out of bed by an attendant and
conveyed to the quarters of the count de Cabra, which were at the
entrance of the camp.  The loyal count immediately summoned his
people and those of his cousin Don Alonso de Montemayor, and
formed a guard round the tent in which the prince was sheltered.

The idea that this was a stratagem of the Moors soon subsided, but
it was feared they might take advantage of it to assault the camp.
The marques of Cadiz, therefore, sallied forth with three thousand
horse to check any advance from the city.  As they passed along the
whole camp was a scene of hurry and consternation--some hastening
to their posts at the call of drum and trumpet; some attempting to
save rich effects and glittering armor from the tents; others dragging
along terrified and restive horses.

When they emerged from the camp they found the whole firmament
illuminated.  The flames whirled up in long light spires, and the air
was filled with sparks and cinders.  A bright glare was thrown upon
the city, revealing every battlement and tower.  Turbaned heads were
seen gazing from every roof, and armor gleamed along the walls, yet
not a single warrior sallied from the gates: the Moors suspected
some stratagem on the part of the Christians and kept quietly within
their walls.  By degrees the flames expired; the city faded from sight;
all again became dark and quiet, and the marques of Cadiz returned
with his cavalry to the camp.

When the day dawned on the Christian camp nothing remained of that
beautiful assemblage of stately pavilions but heaps of smouldering
rubbish, with helms and corselets and other furniture of war, and
masses of melted gold and silver glittering among the ashes.  The
wardrobe of the queen was entirely destroyed, and there was an
immense loss in plate, jewels, costly stuffs, and sumptuous armor
of the luxurious nobles.  The fire at first had been attributed to
treachery, but on investigation it proved to be entirely accidental.
The queen on retiring to her prayers had ordered her lady in
attendance to remove a light burning near her couch, lest it should
prevent her sleeping.  Through heedlessness, the taper was placed
in another part of the tent near the hangings, which, being blown
against it by a gust of wind, immediately took fire.

The wary Ferdinand knew the sanguine temperament of the Moors,
and hastened to prevent their deriving confidence from the night's
disaster.  At break of day the drums and trumpets sounded to arms,
and the Christian army issued forth from among the smoking ruins of
their camp in shining squadrons, with flaunting banners and