 bursts
of martial melody, as though the preceding night had been a time of
high festivity instead of terror.

The Moors had beheld the conflagration with wonder and perplexity.
When the day broke and they looked toward the Christian camp, they
saw nothing but a dark smoking mass.  Their scouts came in with the
joyful intelligence that the whole camp was a scene of ruin.  In the
exultation of the moment they flattered themselves with hopes that
the catastrophe would discourage the besiegers--that, as in former
years, their invasion would end with the summer and they would
withdraw before the autumnal rains.

The measures of Ferdinand and Isabella soon crushed these hopes.
They gave orders to build a regular city upon the site of their camp,
to convince the Moors that the siege was to endure until the
surrender of Granada.  Nine of the principal cities of Spain were
charged with the stupendous undertaking, and they emulated each
other with a zeal worthy of the cause.  "It verily seems," says Fray
Antonio Agapida, "as though some miracle operated to aid this pious
work, so rapidly did arise a formidable city, with solid edifices and
powerful walls and mighty towers, where lately had been seen
nothing but tents and light pavilions.  The city was traversed by
two principal streets in form of a cross, terminating in four gates
facing the four winds, and in the centre was a vast square where
the whole army might be assembled.  To this city it was proposed
to give the name of Isabella, so dear to the army and the nation,
but that pious princess," adds Antonio Agapida, "calling to mind
the holy cause in which it was erected, gave it the name of Santa
Fe (or the City of the Holy Faith), and it remains to this day a
monument of the piety and glory of the Catholic sovereigns."

Hither the merchants soon resorted from all points.  Long trains of
mules were seen every day entering and departing from its gates;
the streets were crowded with magazines filled with all kinds of
costly and luxurious merchandise; a scene of bustling commerce
and prosperity took place, while unhappy Granada remained shut
up and desolate.



CHAPTER XCVI.

FAMINE AND DISCORD IN THE CITY.


The besieged city now began to suffer the distress of famine.  Its
supplies were all cut off; a cavalgada of flocks and herds and mules
laden with money, coming to the relief of the city from the mountains
of the Alpuxarras, was taken by the marques of Cadiz and led in
triumph to the camp in sight of the suffering Moors.  Autumn
arrived, but the harvests had been swept from the face of the
country; a rigorous winter was approaching and the city was almost
destitute of provisions.  The people sank into deep despondency.
They called to mind all that had been predicted by astrologers at the
birth of their ill-starred sovereign, and all that had been foretold
of the fate of Granada at the time of the capture of Zahara.

Boabdil was alarmed by the gathering dangers from without and by
the clamors of his starving people.  He summoned a council, composed
of the principal officers of the army, the alcaydes of the fortresses,
the xequis or sages of the city, and the alfaquis or doctors of the
faith.  They assembled in the great Hall of Audience of the Alhambra,
and despair was painted in their countenances.  Boabdil demanded of
them what was to be done in the present extremity, and their answer
was, "Surrender."  The venerable Abul Casim, governor of the city,
represented its unhappy state: "Our granaries are nearly exhausted,
and no further supplies are to be expected.  The provender for the
war-horses is required as sustenance for the soldiery; the very
horses themselves are killed for food; of seven thousand steeds
which once could be sent into the field, three hundred only remain.
Our city contains two hundred thousand inhabitants, old and young,
with each a mouth that calls piteously for bread."

The xequis and principal citizens declared that the people could no
longer sustain the labors and sufferings of a defence.  "And of what
avail is our defence," said they, "when the enemy is determined to
persist in the siege?  What alternative remains but to surrender or
to die?"

The heart of Boabdil was touched by this appeal, and he maintained
a gloomy silence.  He had cherished some faint hope of relief from the
soldan of Egypt or the Barbary powers, but it was now at an end;
even if such assistance were to be sent, he had no longer a seaport
where it might debark.  The counsellors saw that the resolution of
the king was shaken, and they united their voices in urging him to
capitulate.

Muza alone rose in opposition.  "It is yet too early," said he, "to
talk of surrender.  Our means are not exhausted; we have yet one
source of strength remaining, terrible in its effects, and which often
has achieved the most signal victories--it is our despair.  Let us
rouse the mass of the people--let us put weapons in their hands--
let us fight the enemy to the very utmost until we rush upon the
points of their lances.  I am ready to lead the way into the thickest
of their squadrons; and much rather would I be numbered among
those who fell in the defence of Granada than of those who
survived to capitulate for her surrender."

The words of Muza were without effect, for they were addressed to
broken-spirited and heartless men, or men, perhaps, to whom sad
experience had taught discretion.  They were arrived at that state of
public depression when heroes and heroism are no longer regarded,
and when old men and their counsels rise into importance.  Boabdil el
Chico yielded to the general voice: it was determined to capitulate
with the Christian sovereigns, and the venerable Abul Casim was
sent forth to the camp empowered to treat for terms.



CHAPTER XCVII.

CAPITULATION OF GRANADA.


The old governor Abul Casim was received with great courtesy by
Ferdinand and Isabella, who, being informed of the purport of his
embassy, granted the besieged a truce of sixty days from the 5th of
October, and appointed Gonsalvo of Cordova and Hernando de Zafra,
the secretary of the king, to treat about the terms of surrender with
such commissioners as might be named by Boabdil.  The latter on his
part named Abul Casim, Aben Comixa the vizier, and the grand cadi. 
As a pledge of good faith Boabdil gave his son in hostage, who was
taken to Moclin, where he was treated with the greatest respect
and attention by the good count de Tendilla as general of the frontier.

The commissioners on both parts held repeated conferences in secret
in the dead of the night at the village of Churriana, those who first
arrived at the place of meeting giving notice to the others by signal-
fires or by means of spies.   After many debates and much difficulty
the capitulation was signed on the 25th of November.   According to
this, the city was to be delivered up, with all its gates, towers and
fortresses, within sixty days.

All Christian captives should be liberated without ransom.

Boabdil and his principal cavaliers should perform the act of homage
and take an oath of fealty to the Castilian Crown.

The Moors of Granada should become subjects of the Spanish
sovereigns, retaining their possessions, their arms and horses, and
yielding up nothing but their artillery.  They should be protected in
the exercise of their religion, and governed by their own laws,
administered by cadis of their own faith under governors appointed
by the sovereigns.  They should be exempted from tribute for three
years, after which term they should pay the same that they had been
accustomed to render to their native monarchs.

Those who chose to depart for Africa within three years should be
provided with a passage for themselves and their effects, free of
charge, from whatever port they should prefer.

For the fulfilment of these articles five hundred hostages from the
principal families were required previous to the surrender, who
should be treated with great respect and distinction by the
Christians, and subsequently restored.  The son of the king of
Granada and all other hostages in possession of the Castilian
sovereigns were to be restored at the same time.

Such are the main articles affecting the public weal which were
agreed upon, after much discussion, by the mixed commission.  There
were other articles, however, secretly arranged, which concerned the
royal family.  These secured to Boabdil, to his wife Morayma, his
mother Ayza, his brothers, and to Zoraya, the widow of Muley Abul
Hassan, all the landed possessions, houses, mills, baths, and other
hereditaments which formed the royal patrimony, with the power
of selling them, personally or by agent, at any and all times.  To
Boabdil was secured, moreover, his wealthy estates both in and
out of Granada, and to him and his descendants in perpetuity the
lordships of various town and lands and fertile valleys in the
Alpuxarras, forming a petty sovereignty.  In addition to all which it
was stipulated that on the day of surrender he should receive thirty
thousand castelanos of gold.*

*Alcantara, t. 4, c. 18.


The conditions of surrender being finally agreed upon by the
commissioners, Abul Casim proceeded to the royal camp at Santa
Fe, where they were signed by Ferdinand and Isabella; he then
returned to Granada, accompanied by Hernando de Zafra, the
royal secretary, to have the same ratified also by the Moorish king.
Boabdil assembled his council, and with a dejected countenance
laid before it the articles of capitulation as the best that could be
obtained from the besieging foe.

When the members of the council found the awful moment arrived
when they were to sign and seal the perdition of their empire and
blot themselves out as a nation, all firmness deserted them, and
many gave way to tears.  Muza alone retained an unaltered mien.
"Leave, seniors," cried he, "this idle lamentation to helpless women
and children: we are men--we have hearts, not to shed tender tears,
but drops of blood.  I see the spirit of the people so cast down that
it is impossible to save the kingdom.  Yet there still remains an
alternative for noble minds--a glorious death!  Let us die defending
our liberty and avenging the woes of Granada.  Our mother earth
will receive her children into her bosom, safe from the chains and
oppressions of the conqueror, or, should any fail a sepulchre to
hide his remains, he will not want a sky to cover him.  Allah forbid
it should be said the nobles of Granada feared to die in her defence!"

Muza ceased to speak, and a dead silence reigned in the assembly.
Boabdil looked anxiously round and scanned every face, but he read
in all the anxiety of careworn men, in whose hearts enthusiasm was
dead and who had grown callous to every chivalrous appeal.  "Allah
Akbar!" exclaimed he; "there is no God but God, and Mahomet is his
prophet!  We have no longer forces in the city and the kingdom to
resist our powerful enemies.  It is in vain to struggle against the
will of Heaven.  Too surely was it written in the book of fate that I
should be unfortunate and the kingdom expire under my rule."

"Allah Akbar!" echoed the viziers and alfaquis; "the will of God be
done!"  So they all agreed with the king that these evils were
preordained, that it was hopeless to contend with them, and that
the terms offered by the Castilian monarchs were as favorable as
could be expected.

When Muza heard them assent to the treaty of surrender he rose
in violent indignation.  "Do not deceive yourselves," cried he, "nor
think the Christians will be faithful to their promises, or their king
as magnanimous in conquest as he has been victorious in war.
Death is the least we have to fear.  It is the plundering and sacking
of our city, the profanation of our mosques, the ruin of our homes,
the violation of our wives and daughters, cruel oppression, bigoted
intolerance, whips and chains, the dungeon, the fagot, and the
stake: such are the miseries and indignities we shall see and
suffer; at least those grovelling souls will see and suffer them who
now shrink from an honorable death.  For my part, by Allah, I will
never witness them!"

With these words he left the council-chamber, and passed gloomily
through the Court of Lions and the outer halls of the Alhambra
without deigning to speak to the obsequious courtiers who attended
in them.  He repaired to his dwelling, armed himself at all points,
mounted his favorite warhorse, and, issuing from the city by the
gate of Elvira, was never seen or heard of more.*

*Conde, part 4.



CHAPTER XCVIII.

COMMOTIONS IN GRANADA.


The capitulation for the surrender of Granada was signed on the
25th of November, 1481, and produced a sudden cessation of those
hostilities which had raged for so many years.  Christian and Moor
might now be seen mingling courteously on the banks of the Xenil and
the Darro, where to have met a few days previous would have produced
a scene of sanguinary contest.  Still, as the Moors might be suddenly
roused to the defence if within the allotted term of sixty days
succors should arrive from abroad, and as they were at all times a
rash, inflammable people, the wary Ferdinand maintained a vigilant
watch upon the city and permitted no supplies of any kind to enter.
His garrisons in the seaports and his cruisers in the Straits of
Gibraltar were ordered likewise to guard against any relief from the
grand soldan of Egypt or the princes of Barbary.  There was no need
of such precautions.  Those powers were either too much engrossed
by their own wars or too much daunted by the success of the Spanish
arms to interfere in a desperate cause, and the unfortunate Moors of
Granada were abandoned to their fate.

The month of December had nearly passed away: the famine became
extreme, and there was no hope of any favorable event within the
term specified in the capitulation.  Boabdil saw that to hold out to
the end of the allotted time would but be to protract the miseries
of his people.  With the consent of his council he determined to
surrender the city on the sixth of January.  He accordingly sent his
grand vizier, Yusef Aben Comixa, to King Ferdinand to make known his
intention, bearing him, at the same time, a present of a magnificent
scimetar and two Arabian steeds superbly caparisoned.

The unfortunate Boabdil was doomed to meet with trouble to the end
of his career.  The very next day the santon or dervise, Hamet Aben
Zarrax, the same who had uttered prophecies and excited commotions
on former occasions, suddenly made his appearance.  Whence he came
no one knew: it was rumored that he had been in the mountains of the
Alpuxarras and on the coast of Barbary endeavoring to rouse the
Moslems to the relief of Granada.  He was reduced to a skeleton; his
eyes glowed like coals in their sockets, and his speech was little
better than frantic raving.  He harangued the populace in the streets
and squares, inveighed against the capitulation, denounced the king
and nobles as Moslems only in name, and called upon the people to
sally forth against the unbelievers, for that Allah had decreed them
a signal victory.

Upward of twenty thousand of the populace seized their arms and
paraded the streets with shouts and outcries.  The shops and houses
were shut up; the king himself did not dare to venture forth, but
remained a kind of prisoner in the Alhambra.

The turbulent multitude continued roaming and shouting and howling
about the city during the day and a part of the night.  Hunger and a
wintry tempest tamed their frenzy, and when morning came the
enthusiast who had led them on had disappeared.  Whether he had
been disposed of by the emissaries of the king or by the leading men
of the city is not known: his disappearance remains a mystery.*

*Mariana.


Boabdil now issued from the Alhambra, attended by his principal
nobles, and harangued the populace.  He set forth the necessity of
complying with the capitulation, from the famine that reigned in the
city, the futility of defence, and from the hostages having already
been delivered into the hands of the besiegers.

In the dejection of his spirits the unfortunate Boabdil attributed
to himself the miseries of the country.  "It was my crime in
ascending the throne in rebellion against my father," said he,
mournfully, "which has brought these woes upon the kingdom; but
Allah has grievously visited my sins upon my head.  For your sake, my
people, I have now made this treaty, to protect you from the sword,
your little ones from famine, your wives and daughters from outrage,
and to secure you in the enjoyment of your properties, your liberties,
your laws, and your religion under a sovereign of happier destinies
than the ill-starred Boabdil."

The versatile population were touched by the humility of their
sovereign: they agreed to adhere to the capitulation, and there was
even a faint shout of "Long live Boabdil the Unfortunate!" and they
all returned to their homes in perfect tranquillity.

Boabdil immediately sent missives to King Ferdinand apprising him of
these events, and of his fears lest further delay should produce new
tumults.  The vizier, Yusef Aben Comixa, was again the agent between
the monarchs.  He was received with unusual courtesy and attention by
Ferdinand and Isabella, and it was arranged between them that the
surrender should take place on the second day of January, instead of
the sixth.  A new difficulty now arose in regard to the ceremonial of
surrender.  The haughty Ayxa la Horra, whose pride rose with the
decline of her fortunes, declared that as sultana-mother she would
never consent that her son should stoop to the humiliation of kissing
the hand of his conquerors, and unless this part of the ceremonial
were modified she would find means to resist a surrender
accompanied by such indignities.

Aben Comixa was sorely troubled by this opposition.  He knew the
high spirit of the indomitable Ayxa and her influence over her less
heroic son, and wrote an urgent letter on the subject to his friend,
the count de Tendilla.  The latter imparted the circumstance to the
Christian sovereigns; a council was called on the matter.  Spanish
pride and etiquette were obliged to bend in some degree to the
haughty spirit of a woman.  It was agreed that Boabdil should sally
forth on horseback--that on approaching the Spanish sovereigns
he should make a slight movement, as if about to draw his foot from
the stirrup and dismount, but would be prevented from doing so by
Ferdinand, who should treat him with a respect due to his dignity
and elevated birth.  The count de Tendilla despatched a messenger
with this arrangement, and the haughty scruples of Ayxa la Horra
were satisfied.*

*Salazar de Mendoza, Chron. del Gran Cardinal, lib. 1, c. 69, p. 1;
 Mondajar, His. MS., as cited by Alcantara, t. 4, c. 18.



CHAPTER XCIX.

SURRENDER OF GRANADA.


The night preceding the surrender was a night of doleful lamentings
within the walls of the Alhambra, for the household of Boabdil were
preparing to take a last farewell of that delightful abode.  All the
royal treasures and most precious effects were hastily packed upon
mules; the beautiful apartments were despoiled, with tears and
wailings, by their own inhabitants.  Before the dawn of day a
mournful cavalcade moved obscurely out of a postern gate of the
Alhambra and departed through one of the most retired quarters of
the city.  It was composed of the family of the unfortunate Boabdil,
which he sent off thus privately, that they might not be exposed to
the eyes of scoffers or the exultation of the enemy.  The mother of
Boabdil, the sultana Ayxa la Horra, rode on in silence, with dejected
yet dignified demeanor; but his wife Morayma and all the females
of his household gave way to loud lamentations as they looked
back upon their favorite abode, now a mass of gloomy towers
behind them.  They were attended by the ancient domestics of the
household, and by a small guard of veteran Moors loyally attached
to the fallen monarch, and who would have sold their lives dearly
in defence of his family.  The city was yet buried in sleep as they
passed through its silent streets.  The guards at the gate shed
tears as they opened it for their departure.  They paused not, but
proceeded along the banks of the Xenil on the road that leads to
the Alpuxarras, until they arrived at a hamlet at some distance from
the city, where they halted and waited until they should be joined
by King Boabdil.  The night which had passed so gloomily in the
sumptuous halls of the Alhambra had been one of joyful anticipation
in the Christian camp.  In the evening proclamation had been made
that Granada was to be surrendered on the following day, and the
troops were all ordered to assemble at an early hour under their
several banners.  The cavaliers, pages, and esquires were all
charged to array themselves in their richest and most splendid style
for the occasion, and even the royal family determined to lay by the
mourning they had recently assumed for the sudden death of the
prince of Portugal, the husband of the princess Isabella.  In a
clause of the capitulation it had been stipulated that the troops
destined to take possession should not traverse the city, but should
ascend to the Alhambra by a road opened for the purpose outside
of the walls.  This was to spare the feelings of the afflicted
inhabitants, and to prevent any angry collision between them and
their conquerors.  So rigorous was Ferdinand in enforcing this
precaution that the soldiers were prohibited under pain of death
from leaving the ranks to enter into the city.

The rising sun had scarce shed his rosy beams upon the snowy
summits of the Sierra Nevada when three signal guns boomed
heavily from the lofty fortress of the Alhambra.  It was the
concerted sign that all was ready for the surrender.  The Christian
army forthwith poured out of the city, or rather camp, of Santa Fe,
and advanced across the Vega.  The king and queen, with the prince
and princess, the dignitaries and ladies of the court, took the lead,
accompanied by the different orders of monks and friars, and
surrounded by the royal guards splendidly arrayed.  The procession
moved slowly forward, and paused at the village of Armilla, at the
distance of half a league from the city.

In the mean time, the grand cardinal of Spain, Don Pedro Gonzalez de
Mendoza, escorted by three thousand foot and a troop of cavalry, and
accompanied by the commander Don Gutierrez de Cardenas and a
number of prelates and hidalgos, crossed the Xenil and proceeded in
the advance to ascend to the Alhambra and take possession of that
royal palace and fortress.  The road which had been opened for the
purpose led by the Puerta de los Molinos, or Gate of Mills, up a
defile to the esplanade on the summit of the Hill of Martyrs.  At the
approach of this detachment the Moorish king sallied forth from a
postern gate of the Alhambra, having left his vizier, Yusef Aben
Comixa, to deliver up the palace.  The gate by which he sallied
passed through a lofty tower of the outer wall, called the Tower of
the Seven Floors (de los siete suelos).  He was accompanied by fifty
cavaliers, and approached the grand cardinal on foot.  The latter
immediately alighted, and advanced to meet him with the utmost
respect.  They stepped aside a few paces, and held a brief
conversation in an under tone, when Boabdil, raising his voice,
exclaimed, "Go, senor, and take possession of those fortresses in
the name of the powerful sovereigns to whom God has been pleased
to deliver them in reward of their great merits and in punishment of
the sins of the Moors."  The grand cardinal sought to console him in
his reverses, and offered him the use of his own tent during any
time he might sojourn in the camp.  Boabdil thanked him for the
courteous offer, adding some words of melancholy import, and then,
taking leave of him gracefully, passed mournfully on to meet the
Catholic sovereigns, descending to the Vega by the same road by
which the cardinal had come.  The latter, with the prelates and
cavaliers who attended him, entered the Alhambra, the gates of
which were thrown wide open by the alcayde Aben Comixa.  At the
same time the Moorish guards yielded up their arms, and the towers
and battlements were taken possession of by the Christian troops.

While these transactions were passing in the Alhambra and its
vicinity the sovereigns remained with their retinue and guards near
the village of Armilla, their eyes fixed on the towers of the royal
fortress, watching for the appointed signal of possession.  The time
that had elapsed since the departure of the detachment seemed to
them more than necessary for the purpose, and the anxious mind of
Ferdinand began to entertain doubts of some commotion in the city.
At length they saw the silver cross, the great standard of this
crusade, elevated on the Torre de la Vela, or Great Watch-tower, and
sparkling in the sunbeams.  This was done by Hernando de Talavera,
bishop of Avila.  Beside it was planted the pennon of the glorious
apostle St. James, and a great shout of "Santiago! Santiago!" rose
throughout the army.  Lastly was reared the royal standard by the
king-at-arms, with the shout of "Castile! Castile! for King Ferdinand
and Queen Isabella!"  The words were echoed by the whole army,
with acclamations that resounded across the Vega.  At sight of
these signals of possession the sovereigns sank upon their knees,
giving thanks to God for this great triumph; the whole assembled
host followed their example, and the choristers of the royal chapel
broke forth into the solemn anthem of ''Te Deum laudamus."

The king now advanced with a splendid escort of cavalry and the
sound of trumpets, until he came to a small mosque near the banks
of the Xenil, and not far from the foot of the Hill of Martyrs, which
edifice remains to the present day consecrated as the hermitage of
St. Sebastian.  Here he beheld the unfortunate king of Granada
approaching on horseback at the head of his slender retinue.  Boabdil
as he drew near made a movement to dismount, but, as had previously
been concerted, Ferdinand prevented him.  He then offered to kiss the
king's hand, which according to arrangement was likewise declined,
whereupon he leaned forward and kissed the king's right arm; at the
same time he delivered the keys of the city with an air of mingled
melancholy and resignation.  "These keys," said he, "are the last
relics of the Arabian empire in Spain: thine, O king, are our trophies,
our kingdom, and our person.  Such is the will of God!  Receive them
with the clemency thou hast promised, and which we look for at thy
hands."*

*Abarca, Anales de Aragon, Rey 30, c. 3.


King Ferdinand restrained his exultation into an air of serene
magnanimity.  "Doubt not our promises," replied he, "nor that thou
shalt regain from our friendship the prosperity of which the fortune
of war has deprived thee."

Being informed that Don Inigo Lopez de Mendoza, the good count
of Tendilla, was to be governor of the city, Boabdil drew from his
finger a gold ring set with a precious stone and presented it to the
count.  "With this ring," said he, "Granada has been governed; take
it and govern with it, and God make you more fortunate than I!"*

*This ring remained in the possession of the descendants of the
 count until the death of the marques Don Inigo, the last male heir,
 who died in Malaga, without children, in 1656.  The ring was then
 lost through inadvertence and ignorance of its value, Dona Maria,
 the sister of the marques, being absent in Madrid--"Alcantara," 1.
 4, c.18.


He then proceeded to the village of Armilla, where the queen
Isabella remained with her escort and attendants.  The queen, like
her husband, declined all acts of homage, and received him with her
accustomed grace and benignity.  She at the same time delivered to
him his son, who had been held as a hostage for the fulfilment of
the capitulation.  Boabdil pressed his child to his bosom with tender
emotion, and they seemed mutually endeared to each other by their
misfortunes.*

*Zurita, Anales de Aragon, lib. 20, cap. 92.


Having rejoined his family, the unfortunate Boabdil continued on
toward the Alpuxarras, that he might not behold the entrance of the
Christians into his capital.  His devoted band of cavaliers followed
him in gloomy silence,  but heavy sighs burst from their bosoms as
shouts of joy and strains of triumphant music were borne on the
breeze from the victorious army.

Having rejoined his family, Boabdil set forth with a heavy heart for
his allotted residence in the valley of Purchena.  At two leagues'
distance the cavalcade, winding into the skirts of the Alpuxarras,
ascended an eminence commanding the last view of Granada.  As
they arrived at this spot the Moors paused involuntarily to take a
farewell gaze at their beloved city, which a few steps more would
shut from their sight for ever.  Never had it appeared so lovely in
their eyes.  The sunshine, so bright in that transparent climate, lit
up each tower and minaret, and rested gloriously upon the crowning
battlements of the Alhambra, while the Vega spread its enamelled
bosom of verdure below, glistening with the silver windings of the
Xenil.  The Moorish cavaliers gazed with a silent agony of tenderness
and grief upon that delicious abode, the scene of their loves and
pleasures.  While they yet looked a light cloud of smoke burst forth
from the citadel, and presently a peal of artillery, faintly heard,
told that the city was taken possession of, and the throne of the
Moslem kings was lost for ever.  The heart of Boabdil, softened by
misfortunes and overcharged with grief, could no longer contain
itself.  "Allah Akbar! God is great!" said he but the words of
resignation died upon his lips and he burst into tears.

The mother, the intrepid Ayxa, was indignant at his weakness.
"You do well," said she, "to weep like a woman for what you
failed to defend like a man."

The vizier Aben Comixa endeavored to console his royal master.
"Consider, senor," said he, "that the most signal misfortunes often
render men as renowned as the most prosperous achievements,
provided they sustain them with magnanimity."

The unhappy monarch, however, was not to be consoled; his tears
continued to flow.  "Allah Akbar!" exclaimed he, "when did misfortune
ever equal mine?"

From this circumstance the hill, which is not far from Padul, took
the name of Feg Allah Akbar, but the point of view commanding the
last prospect of Granada is known among Spaniards by the name
of "El ultimo suspiro del Moro," or "The last sigh of the Moor."



CHAPTER C.

HOW THE CASTILIAN SOVEREIGNS TOOK POSSESSION
    OF GRANADA.


Queen Isabella having joined the king, the royal pair, followed by
a triumphant host, passed up the road by the Hill of Martyrs, and
thence to the main entrance of the Alhambra.  The grand cardinal
awaited them under the lofty arch of the great Gate of Justice,
accompanied by Don Gutierrez de Cardenas and Aben Comixa.  Here
King Ferdinand gave the keys which had been delivered up to him
into the hands of the queen; they were passed successively into
the hands of the prince Juan, the grand cardinal, and finally into
those of the count de Tendilla, in whose custody they remained,
that brave cavalier having been named alcayde of the Alhambra
and captain-general of Granada.

The sovereigns did not remain long in the Alhambra on this first
visit, but, leaving a strong garrison there under the count de
Tendilla to maintain tranquillity in the palace and the subjacent
city, returned to the camp at Santa Fe.

We must not omit to mention a circumstance attending the surrender
of the city which spoke eloquently to the hearts of the victors.  As
the royal army had advanced in all the pomp of courtly and chivalrous
array, a procession of a different kind came forth to meet it.  This was
composed of more than five hundred Christian captives, many of whom
had languished for years in Moorish dungeons.  Pale and emaciated,
they came clanking their chains in triumph and shedding tears of joy.
They were received with tenderness by the sovereigns.  The king hailed
them as good Spaniards, as men loyal and brave, as martyrs to the holy
cause; the queen distributed liberal relief among them with her own
hands, and they passed on before the squadrons of the army singing
hymns of jubilee.

*Abarca, lib. sup.; Zurita, etc.


The sovereigns forebore to enter the city until it should be fully
occupied by their troops and public tranquillity ensured.  All this
was done under the vigilant superintendence of the count de
Tendilla, assisted by the marques of Villena, and the glistening of
Christian helms and lances along the walls and bulwarks, and the
standards of the faith and of the realm daunting from the towers,
told that the subjugation of the city was complete.  The proselyte
prince, Cid Hiaya, now known by the Christian appellation of Don
Pedro de Granada Vanegas,* was appointed chief alguazil of the city,
and had charge of the Moorish inhabitants, and his son, lately the
prince Alnayar, now Alonso de Granada Vanegas, was appointed
admiral of the fleet.

*Cid Hiaya was made cavalier of the order of Santiago.  He and his
 son intermarried with the Spanish nobility, and the marqueses of
 Compotejar are among their descendants.  Their portraits and the
 portraits of their grandsons are to be seen in one of the rooms of
 the Generalife at Granada.


It was on the sixth of January, the Day of Kings and festival of the
Epiphany, that the sovereigns made their triumphant entry with grand
military parade.  First advanced, we are told, a splendid escort of
cavaliers in burnished armor and superbly mounted.  Then followed
the prince Juan, glittering with jewels and diamonds; on each side of
him, mounted on mules, rode the grand cardinal, clothed in purple,
Fray Hernando de Talavera, bishop of Airla and the archbishop-elect
of Granada.  To these succeeded the queen and her ladies, and the
king, managing in galliard style, say the Spanish chroniclers, a proud
and mettlesome steed (un caballo arrogante).  Then followed the
army in shining columns, with flaunting banners and the inspiring
clamor of military music.  The king and queen (says the worthy Fray
Antonio Agapida) looked on this occasion as more than mortal: the
venerable ecclesiastics, to whose advice and zeal this glorious
conquest ought in a great measure be attributed, moved along with
hearts swelling with holy exultation, but with chastened and downcast
looks of edifying humility; while the hardy warriors, in tossing plumes
and shining steel, seemed elevated with a stern joy at finding
themselves in possession of this object of so many toils and perils.
As the streets resounded with the tramp of steeds and swelling
peals of music the Moors buried themselves in the deepest recesses
of their dwellings.  There they bewailed in secret the fallen glory of
their race, but suppressed their groans, lest they should be heard
by their enemies and increase their triumph.

The royal procession advanced to the principal mosque, which had
been consecrated as a cathedral.  Here the sovereigns offered up
prayers and thanksgivings, and the choir of the royal chapel chanted
a triumphant anthem, in which they were joined by all the courtiers
and cavaliers.  Nothing (says Fray Antonio Agapida) could exceed the
thankfulness to God of the pious king Ferdinand for having enabled
him to eradicate from Spain the empire and name of that accursed
heathen race, and for the elevation of the cross in that city wherein
the impious doctrines of Mahomet had so long been cherished.  In
the fervor of his spirit he supplicated from heaven a continuance
of its grace and that this glorious triumph might be perpetuated.*
The prayer of the pious monarch was responded to by the people,
and even his enemies were for once convinced of his sincerity.

*The words of Fray Antonio Agapida are little more than an echo
 of those of the worthy Jesuit father Mariana (1. 25, c. 18).


When the religious ceremonies were concluded the court ascended to
the stately palace of the Alhambra and entered by the great Gate of
Justice.  The halls lately occupied by turbaned infidels now rustled
with stately dames and Christian courtiers, who wandered with eager
curiosity over this far-famed palace, admiring its verdant courts and
gushing fountains, its halls decorated with elegant arabesques and
storied with inscriptions, and the splendor of its gilded and brilliantly
painted ceilings.

It had been a last request of the unfortunate Boabdil--and one which
showed how deeply he felt the transition of his fate--that no person
might be permitted to enter or depart by the gate of the Alhambra
through which he had sallied forth to surrender his capital.  His
request was granted; the portal was closed up, and remains so to
the present day--a mute memorial of that event.*

*Garibay, Compend. Hist., lib. 40, c. 42.  The existence of this
 gateway and the story connected with it are perhaps known to few,
 but were identified in the researches made to verify this history.
 The gateway is at the bottom of a tower at some distance from the
 main body of the Alhambra.  The tower had been rent and ruined by
 gunpowder at the time when the fortress was evacuated by the French.
 Great masses lie around half covered by vines and fig trees.  A poor
 man, by the name of Mateo Ximenes, who lives in one of the halls
 among the ruins of the Alhambra, where his family has resided for
 many generations, pointed out to the author the gateway, still
 closed up with stones.  He remembered to have heard his father and
 grandfather say that it had always been stopped up, and that out of
 it King Boabdil had gone when he surrendered Granada.  The route of
 the unfortunate king may be traced thence across the garden of the
 convent of Los Martyros, and down a ravine beyond, through a street
 of gypsy caves and hovels, by the gate of Los Molinos, and so on to
 the Hermitage of St. Sebastian.  None but an antiquarian, however,
 will be able to trace it unless aided by the humble historian of the
 place,  Mateo Ximenes.


The Spanish sovereigns fixed their throne in the presence-chamber of
the palace, so long the seat of Moorish royalty.  Hither the principal
inhabitants of Granada repaired to pay them homage and kiss their
hands in token of vassalage, and their example was followed by
deputies from all the towns and fortresses of the Alpuxarras which
had not hitherto submitted.

Thus terminated the war of Granada, after ten years of incessant
fighting, equalling (says Fray Antonio Agapida) the far-famed siege
of Troy in duration, and ending, like that, in the capture of the
city.  Thus ended also the dominion of the Moors in Spain, having
endured seven hundred and seventy-eight years from the memorable
defeat of Roderick, the last of the Goths, on the banks of the
Guadalete.  The authentic Agapida is uncommonly particular in fixing
the epoch of this event.  This great triumph of our holy Catholic
faith, according to his computation, took place in the beginning of
January in the year of our Lord 1492, being 3655 years from the
population of Spain by the patriarch Tubal, 3797 from the general
deluge, 5453 from the creation of the world, according to Hebrew
calculation, and in the month Rabic, in the eight hundred and
ninety-seventh year of the Hegira, or flight of Mahomet, whom
may God confound! saith the pious Agapida.




APPENDIX.


The Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada is finished, but the reader
may be desirous of knowing the subsequent fortunes of some of the
principal personages.

The unfortunate Boabdil retired with his mother, his wife, his son,
his sister, his vizier and bosom-counsellor Aben Comixa, and many
other relatives and friends, to the valley of Purchena, where a
small but fertile territory had been allotted him, comprising several
towns of the Alpuxarras, with all their rights and revenues.  Here,
surrounded by obedient vassals, devoted friends, and a loving
family, and possessed of wealth sufficient to enable him to indulge
in his habitual luxury and magnificence, he for a time led a tranquil
life, and may have looked back upon his regal career as a troubled
dream from which he had happily awaked.  Still, he appears to have
pleased himself with a shadow of royalty, making occasionally
progresses about his little domains, visiting the different towns,
receiving the homage of the inhabitants, and bestowing largesses
with a princely hand.  His great delight, however, was in sylvan
sports and exercises, with horses, hawks, and hounds, being
passionately fond of hunting and falconry, so as to pass weeks
together in sporting campaigns among the mountains.  The jealous
suspicions of Ferdinand followed him into his retreat.  No exertions
were spared by the politically pious monarch to induce him to embrace
the Christian religion as a means of severing him in feelings and
sympathies from his late subjects; but he remained true to the faith
of his fathers, and it must have added not a little to his humiliation
to live a vassal under Christian sovereigns.

His obstinacy in this respect aggravated the distrust of Ferdinand,
who, looking back upon the past inconstancy of the Moors, could not
feel perfectly secure in his newly-conquered territories while there
was one within their bounds who might revive pretensions to the
throne and rear the standard of an opposite faith in their behalf.
He caused, therefore, a vigilant watch to be kept upon the dethroned
monarch in his retirement, and beset him with spies who were to
report all his words and actions.  The reader will probably be
surprised to learn that the foremost of these spies was Aben Comixa!
Ever since the capture and release of the niece of the vizier by the
count de Tendilla, Aben Comixa had kept up a friendly correspondence
with that nobleman, and through this channel had gradually been
brought over to the views of Ferdinand.  Documents which have
gradually come to light leave little doubt that the vizier had been
corrupted by the bribes and promises of the Spanish king, and had
greatly promoted his views in the capitulation of Granada.  It is
certain that he subsequently received great estates from the
Christian sovereigns.  While residing in confidential friendship with
Boabdil in his retirement Aben Comixa communicated secretly with
Hernando de Zafra, the secretary of Ferdinand, who resided at
Granada, giving him information of all Boabdil's movements, which
the secretary reported by letter to the king.  Some of the letters of
the secretary still exist in the archives of Samancas, and have been
recently published in the collection of unedited documents.*

*El rey Muley Babdali (Boabdil) y sus criados andan continuamente
 a casa con glagos y azores, y alla esta agora en al campo de Dalias
 y en Verja, aunque su casa tiene en Andarax, y dican que estara
 alla por todo este mes.--"Carta Secreta de Hernando de Zafra,"
 Decembre, 1492


The jealous doubts of Ferdinand were quickened by the letters of his
spies.  He saw in the hunting campaigns and royal progresses of the
ex-king a mode of keeping up a military spirit and a concerted
intelligence among the Moors of the Alpuxarras that might prepare
them for future rebellion.  By degrees the very residence of Boabdil
within the kingdom became incompatible with Ferdinand's ideas of
security.  He gave his agents, therefore, secret instructions to work
upon the mind of the deposed monarch, and induce him, like El Zagal,
to relinquish his Spanish estates for valuable considerations and
retire to Africa.  Boabdil, however, was not to be persuaded: to the
urgent suggestions of these perfidious counsellors he replied that
he had given up a kingdom to live in peace, and had no idea of
going to a foreign land to encounter new troubles and to be under
the control of alarabes.*

*Letter of Hernando de Zafra to the sovereigns, Dec. 9, 1493.


Ferdinand persisted in his endeavors, and found means more effectual
of operating on the mind of Boabdil and gradually disposing him to
enter into negotiations.  It would appear that Aben Comixa was
secretly active in this matter in the interests of the Spanish
monarch, and was with him at Barcelona as the vizier and agent
of Boabdil.  The latter, however, finding that his residence in the
Alpuxarras was a cause of suspicion and uneasiness to Ferdinand,
determined to go himself to Barcelona, have a conference with the
sovereigns, and conduct all his negotiations with them in person.
Zafra, the secretary of Ferdinand, who was ever on the alert, wrote
a letter from Granada apprising the king of Boabdil's intention, and
that he was making preparations for the journey.  He received a
letter in reply, charging him by subtle management to prevent, or
at least delay, the coming of Boabdil to court.*  The crafty monarch
trusted to effect through Aben Comixa as vizier and agent of Boabdil
an arrangement which it might be impossible to obtain from Boabdil
himself.  The politic plan was carried into effect.  Boabdil was
detained at Andarax by the management of Zafra.  In the mean time
a scandalous bargain was made on the 17th March, 1493, between
Ferdinand and Aben Comixa, in which the latter, as vizier and agent
of Boabdil, though without any license or authority from him, made
a sale of his territory and the patrimonial property of the princesses
for eighty thousand ducats of gold, and engaged that he should
depart for Africa, taking care, at the same time, to make conditions
highly advantageous for himself.**

*Letter of the sovereigns to Hernando de Zafra from Barcelona,
 Feb., 1493.

**Alcantara, Hist. Granad., iv. c. 18.


This bargain being hastily concluded, Yusef Aben Comixa loaded the
treasure upon mules and departed for the Alpuxarras.  Here, spreading
the money before Boabdil, "Senior," said he, "I have observed that
as long as you live here you are exposed to constant peril.  The
Moors are rash and irritable; they may make some sudden insurrection,
elevate your standard as a pretext, and thus overwhelm you and
your friends with utter ruin.  I have observed also that you pine
away with grief, being continually reminded in this country that you
were once its sovereign, but never more must hope to reign.  I have
put an end to these evils.  Your territory is sold--behold the price
of it!  With this gold you may buy far greater possessions in Africa,
where you may live in honor and security."

When Boabdil heard these words he burst into a sudden transport of
rage, and, drawing his scimetar, would have sacrificed the officious
Yusef on the spot had not the attendants interfered and hurried the
vizier from his presence.*

*Marmol, Rebel. 1. 1, c. 22.


The rage of Boabdil gradually subsided: he saw that he had been
duped and betrayed, but he knew the spirit of Ferdinand too well
to hope that he would retract the bargain, however illegitimately
effected.  He contented himself, therefore, with obtaining certain
advantageous modifications, and then prepared to bid a final adieu
to his late kingdom and his native land.

It took some months to make the necessary arrangements, or, rather,
his departure was delayed by a severe domestic affliction.  Morayma,
his gentle and affectionate wife, worn out by agitations and alarms,
was gradually sinking into the grave, a prey to devouring melancholy.
Her death took place toward the end of August.  Hernando de Zafra
apprised King Ferdinand of the event as one propitious to his purposes,
removing an obstacle to the embarkation, which was now fixed for the
month of September.  Zafra was instructed to accompany the exiles
until he saw them landed on the African coast.

The embarkation, however, did not take place until some time in the
month of October.  A caracca had been prepared at the port of Adra
for Boabdil and his immediate family and friends.  Another caracca
and two galliots received a number of faithful adherents, amounting,
it is said, to eleven hundred and thirty, who followed their prince
into exile.

A crowd of his former subjects witnessed his embarkation.  As the
sails were unfurled and swelled to the breeze, and the vessel
bearing Boabdil parted from the land, the spectators would fain have
given him a farewell cheering; but the humbled state of their once
proud sovereign forced itself upon their minds, and the ominous
surname of his youth rose involuntarily to their tongues: "Farewell,
Boabdil!  Allah preserve thee, 'El Zogoybi!'" burst spontaneously
from their lips.  The unlucky appellation sank into the heart of the
expatriated monarch, and tears dimmed his eyes as the snowy
summits of the mountains of Granada gradually faded from his view.

He was received with welcome at the court of his relative, Muley
Ahmed, caliph of Fez, the same who had treated El Zagal with such
cruelty in his exile.  For thirty-four years he resided in this court,
treated with great consideration, and built a palace or alcazar at
Fez, in which, it is said, he endeavored to emulate the beauties and
delights of the Alhambra.

The last we find recorded of him is in the year 1536, when he
followed the caliph to the field to repel the invasion of two
brothers of the famous line of the Xerifes, who at the head of
Berber troops had taken the city of Morocco and threatened Fez.
The armies came in sight of each other on the banks of the Guadal
Hawit, or river of slaves, at the ford of Balcuba.  The river was deep,
the banks were high and broken, and the ford could only be passed
in single file; for three days the armies remained firing at each other
across the stream, neither venturing to attempt the dangerous ford.
At length the caliph divided his army into three battalions: the
command of the first he gave to his brother-in-law and to Aliatar,
son of the old alcayde of Loxa; another division he commanded
himself; and the third, composed of his best marksmen, he put
under the command of his son, the prince of Fez, and Boabdil, now
a gray-haired veteran.  The last mentioned column took the lead,
dashed boldly across the ford, scrambled up the opposite bank, and
attempted to keep the enemy employed until the other battalions
should have time to cross.  The rebel army, however, attacked them
with such fury that the son of the king of Fez and several of the
bravest alcaydes were slain upon the spot; multitudes were driven
back into the river, which was already crowded with passing troops.
A dreadful confusion took place; the horse trampled upon the foot;
the enemy pressed on them with fearful slaughter; those who escaped
the sword perished by the stream; the river was choked by the dead
bodies of men and horses and by the scattered baggage of the army.
In this scene of horrible carnage fell Boabdil, truly called El Zogoybi,
or the Unlucky--an instance, says the ancient chronicler, of the
scornful caprice of fortune, dying in defence of the kingdom of
another after wanting spirit to die in defence of his own.*

*Marmol, Descrip. de Africa, p. 1, 1. 2, c. 40; idem, Hist. Reb. de
 los Moros, lib. 1, c. 21.


The aspersion of the chronicler is more caustic than correct.  Boabdil
never showed a want of courage in the defence of Granada, but he
wanted firmness and decision: he was beset from the first by
perplexities, and ultimately by the artifices of Ferdinand and the
treachery of those in whom he most confided.*

*In revising this account of the ultimate fortunes of Boabdil the
 author has availed himself of facts recently brought out in
 Alcantara's History of Granada, which throw strong lights on
 certain parts of the subject hitherto covered with obscurity.


ZORAYA, THE STAR OF THE MORNING.

Notwithstanding the deadly rivalship of this youthful sultana with
Ayxa la Horra, the virtuous mother of Boabdil, and the disasters
to which her ambitious intrigues gave rise, the placable spirit of
Boabdil bore her no lasting enmity.  After the death of his father
he treated her with respect and kindness, and evinced a brotherly
feeling toward her sons Cad and Nazar.  In the capitulations for
the surrender of Granada he took care of her interests, and the
possessions which he obtained for her were in his neighborhood in
the valleys of the Alpuxarras.  Zoraya, however, under the influence
of Queen I