sabella, returned to the Christian faith, the religion of
her infancy, and resumed her Spanish name of Isabella.  Her two sons,
Cad and Nazar, were baptized under the names of Don Fernando and
Don Juan de Granada, and were permitted to take the titles of infantas
or princes.  They intermarried with noble Spanish families, and the
dukes of Granada, resident in Valladolid, are descendants of Don
Juan (once Nazar), and preserve to the present day the blazon of
their royal ancestor, Muley Abul Hassan, and his motto, Le Galib ile
Ala, God alone is conqueror.


FATE OF ABEN COMIXA.

An ancient chronicle which has long remained in manuscript, but has
been published of late years in the collection of Spanish historical
documents,* informs us of the subsequent fortunes of the perfidious
Aben Comixa.  Discarded and despised by Boabdil for his treachery,
he repaired to the Spanish court, and obtained favor in the eyes of
the devout queen Isabella by embracing the Christian religion, being
baptized under her auspices with the name of Don Juan de Granada.
He even carried his zeal for his newly-adopted creed so far as to
become a Franciscan friar.  By degrees his affected piety grew cool
and the friar's garb became irksome.  Taking occasion of the sailing
of some Venetian galleys from Almeria, he threw off his religious habit,
embarked on board of one of them, and crossed to Africa, where he
landed in the dress of a Spanish cavalier.

*Padilla, Cronica de Felipe el Hermosa, cap. 18, y 19, as cited
 by Alcantara.


In a private interview with Abderraman, the Moorish king of Bujia,
he related his whole history, and declared that he had always been
and still was at heart a true Mahometan.  Such skill had he in
inspiring confidence that the Moorish king took him into favor and
appointed him governor of Algiers.  While enjoying his new dignity a
Spanish squadron of four galleys, under the celebrated count Pedro
de Navarro, anchored in the harbor in 1509.  Aben Comixa paid the
squadron a visit of ceremony in his capacity of governor, gave the
count repeated fetes, and in secret conversations with him laid open
all the affairs of the king of Bujia, and offered, if the count should
return with sufficient force, to deliver the city into his hands and
aid him in conquering the whole territory.  The count hastened back
to Spain and made known the proposed treachery to the Cardinal
Ximenes, then prime minister of Spain.  In the following month of
January he was sent with thirty vessels and four thousand soldiers
to achieve the enterprise.  The expedition of Navarro was successful.
He made himself master of Bujia and seized in triumph on the royal
palace, but he found there the base Aben Comixa weltering in his
blood and expiring under numerous wounds.  His treachery had
been discovered, and the vengeance of the king of Bujia had closed
his perfidious career.


DEATH OF THE MARQUES OF CADIZ.

The renowned Roderigo Ponce de Leon, marques-duke of Cadiz, was
unquestionably the most distinguished among the cavaliers of Spain
for his zeal, enterprise, and heroism in the great crusade of Granada.
He began the war by the capture of Alhama; he was engaged in
almost every inroad and siege of importance during its continuance;
and was present at the surrender of the capital, the closing scene
of the conquest.  The renown thus acquired was sealed by his

death, which happened in the forty-eighth year of his age, almost
immediately at the close of his triumphs and before a leaf of his
laurels had time to wither.  He died at his palace in the city of
Seville on the 27th day of August, 1492, but a few months after
the surrender of Granada, and of an illness caused by exposures and
fatigues undergone in this memorable war.  That honest chronicler,
Andres Bernaldez, the curate of Los Palacios, who was a contemporary
of the marques, draws his portrait from actual knowledge and
observation.  He was universally cited (says he) as the most perfect
model of chivalrous virtue of the age.  He was temperate, chaste, and
rigidly devout, a benignant commander, a valiant defender of his
vassals, a great lover of justice, and an enemy to all flatterers,
liars, robbers, traitors, and poltroons.

His ambition was of a lofty kind: he sought to distinguish himself
and his family by heroic and resounding deeds, and to increase the
patrimony of his ancestors by the acquisition of castles, domains,
vassals, and other princely possessions.  His recreations were
all of a warlike nature; he delighted in geometry as applied to
fortifications, and spent much time and treasure in erecting and
repairing fortresses.  He relished music, but of a military kind--the
sound of clarions and sackbuts, of drums and trumpets. Like a true
cavalier, he was a protector of the sex on all occasions, and an
injured woman never applied to him in vain for redress.  His prowess
was so well known, and his courtesy to the fair, that the ladies of
the court, when they accompanied the queen to the wars, rejoiced to
find themselves under his protection; for wherever his banner was
displayed the Moors dreaded to adventure.  He was a faithful and
devoted friend, but a formidable enemy; for he was slow to forgive,
and his vengeance was persevering and terrible.

The death of this good and well-beloved cavalier spread grief and
lamentation throughout all ranks.  His relations, dependants, and
companions-in-arms put on mourning for his loss, and so numerous
were they that half of Seville was clad in black.  None, however,
deplored his death more deeply and sincerely than his friend and
chosen companion Don Alonso de Aguilar.

The funeral ceremonies were of the most solemn and sumptuous kind.
The body of the marques was arrayed in a costly shirt, a doublet of
brocade, a sayo or long robe of black velvet, a marlota or Moorish
tunic of brocade reaching to the feet, and scarlet stockings.  His
sword, superbly gilt, was girded to his side, as he used to wear it
when in the field.  Thus magnificently attired, the body was enclosed
in a coffin which was covered with black velvet and decorated with a
cross of white damask.  It was then placed on a sumptuous bier in the
centre of the great hall of the palace.  Here the duchess made great
lamentation over the body of her lord, in which she was joined by
her train of damsels and attendants, as well as by the pages and
esquires and innumerable vassals.

In the close of the evening, just before the Ave Maria, the funeral
train issued from the palace.  Ten banners were borne around the
bier, the particular trophies of the marques won from the Moors
by his valor in individual enterprises before King Ferdinand had
commenced the war of Granada.  The procession was swelled by
an immense train of bishops, priests, and friars of different orders,
together with the civil and military authorities and all the chivalry
of Seville, headed by the count of Cifuentes, at that time intendente
or commander of the city.  It moved slowly and solemnly through the
streets, stopping occasionally and chanting litanies and responses.
Two hundred and forty waxen tapers shed a light like the day about
the bier.  The balconies and windows were crowded with ladies, who
shed tears as the funeral train passed by, while the women of the
lower classes were loud in their lamentations, as if bewailing the
loss of a father or a brother.  On approaching the convent of St.
Augustine the monks came forth with the cross and tapers and
eight censers and conducted the body into the church, where it lay
in state until all the vigils were performed by the different orders,
after which it was deposited in the family tomb of the Ponces in the
same church, and the ten banners were suspended over the sepulchre.*

*Cura de los Palacios, c.104.


The tomb of the valiant Roderigo Ponce de Leon, with his banners
mouldering above it, remained for ages an object of veneration with
all who had read or heard of his virtues and achievements.  In the
year 1810, however, the chapel was sacked by the French, its altars
were overturned, and the sepulchres of the family of the Ponces
shattered to pieces.  The present duchess of Benevente, the worthy
descendant of this illustrious and heroic line, has since piously
collected the ashes of her ancestors, restored the altar, and
repaired the chapel.  The sepulchres, however, were utterly
destroyed: an inscription in gold letters on the wall of the chapel
to the right of the altar is all that denotes the place of sepulture
of the brave Ponce de Leon.


THE LEGEND OF THE DEATH OF DON ALONSO DE AGUILAR.

To such as feel an interest in the fortune of the valiant Don Alonso
de Aguilar, the chosen friend and companion-in-arms of Ponce de
Leon, marques of Cadiz, and one of the most distinguished heroes
of the war of Granada, a few particulars of his remarkable fate will
not be unacceptable.

For several years after the conquest of Granada the country remained
feverish and unquiet.  The zealous efforts of the Catholic clergy to
effect the conversion of the infidels, and the coercion used for that
purpose by government, exasperated the stubborn Moors of the
mountains.  Several missionaries were maltreated, and in the town
of Dayrin two of them were seized and exhorted, with many menaces,
to embrace the Moslem faith; on their resolutely refusing they were
killed with staves and stones by the Moorish women and children, and
their bodies burnt to ashes.*

*Cura de los Palacios, c. 165.


Upon this event a body of Christian cavaliers assembled in Andalusia
to the number of eight hundred, and, without waiting for orders from
the king, revenged the death of these martyrs by plundering and
laying waste the Moorish towns and villages.  The Moors fled to the
mountains, and their cause was espoused by many of their nation
who inhabited those rugged regions.  The storm of rebellion began to
gather and mutter its thunders in the Alpuxarras.  They were echoed
from the Serrania of Ronda, ever ready for rebellion, but the strongest
hold of the insurgents was in the Sierra[12]Bermeja, or chain of Red
Mountains, which lie near the sea, the savage rocks and precipices
of which may be seen from Gibraltar.

When King Ferdinand heard of these tumults he issued a proclamation
ordering all the Moors of the insurgent regions to leave them within
ten days and repair to Castile; giving secret instructions, however,
that those who should voluntarily embrace the Christian faith might
be permitted to remain.  At the same time he ordered Don Alonso de
Aguilar and the counts of Urena and Cifuentes to march against the
rebels.

Don Alonso de Aguilar was at Cordova when he received the commands
of the king.  "What force is allotted us for this expedition?" said he.
On being told, he perceived that the number of troops was far from
adequate.  "When a man is dead," said he, "we send four men into
his house to bring forth the body.  We are now sent to chastise these
Moors, who are alive, vigorous, in open rebellion, and ensconced in
their castles; yet they do not give us man to man."  These words of
the brave Alonso de Aguilar were afterward frequently repeated, but,
though he saw the desperate nature of the enterprise, he did not
hesitate to undertake it.

Don Alonso was at that time in the fifty-first year of his age --a
warrior in whom the fire of youth was yet unquenched, though
tempered by experience.  The greater part of his life had been spent
in camp and field until danger was as his habitual element.  His
muscular frame had acquired the firmness of iron without the rigidity
of age.  His armor and weapons seemed to have become a part
of his nature, and he sat like a man of steel on his powerful
war-horse.

He took with him on this expedition his son, Don Pedro de Cordova, a
youth of bold and generous spirit, in the freshness of his days, and
armed and arrayed with the bravery of a young Spanish cavalier.  When
the populace of Cordova beheld the veteran father, the warrior of a
thousand battles, leading forth his son to the field, they bethought
themselves of the family appellation.  "Behold," cried they, "the eagle
teaching his young to fly!  Long live the valiant line of Aguilar!"*

*"Aguilar," the Spanish for eagle.


The prowess of Don Alonso and of his companions-in-arms was
renowned throughout the Moorish towns.  At their approach,
therefore, numbers of the Moors submitted, and hastened to
Ronda to embrace Christianity.  Among the mountaineers, however,
were many of the Gandules, a tribe from Africa, too proud of spirit
to bend their necks to the yoke.  At their head was a Moor named
El Feri of Ben Estepar, renowned for strength and courage.  At his
instigation his followers gathered together their families and most
precious effects, placed them on mules, and, driving before them
their flocks and herds, abandoned their valleys and retired up the
craggy passes of the Sierra[13]Bermeja.  On the summit was a fertile
plain surrounded by rocks and precipices, which formed a natural
fortress.  Here El Feri placed all the women and children and all the
property.  By his orders his followers piled great stones on the rocks
and cliffs which commanded the defiles and the steep sides of the
mountain, and prepared to defend every pass that led to his place
of refuge.

The Christian commanders arrived, and pitched their camp before the
town of Monarda, a strong place, curiously fortified, and situated
at the foot of the highest part of the Sierra [14]Bermeja.  Here they
remained for several days, unable to compel a surrender. They were
separated from the skirt of the mountain by a deep barranca, or
ravine, at the bottom of which flowed a small stream.  The Moors
commanded by El Feri drew down from their mountain-height, and
remained on the opposite side of the brook to defend a pass which
led up to their stronghold.

One afternoon a number of Christian soldiers in mere bravado seized
a banner, crossed the brook, and, scrambling up the opposite bank,
attacked the Moors.  They were followed by numbers of their
companions, some in aid, some in emulation, but most in hope of
booty.  A sharp action ensued on the mountain-side.  The Moors were
greatly superior in number, and had the vantage-ground. When the
counts of Urena and Cifuentes beheld the skirmish, they asked Don
Alonso de Aguilar his opinion.  "My opinion," said he, "was given at
Cordova, and remains the same: this is a desperate enterprise.
However, the Moors are at hand, and if they suspect weakness in
us it will increase their courage and our peril.  Forward then to the
attack, and I trust in God we shall gain a victory."  So saying, he
led his troops into the battle.*

*Bleda, 1. 5, c. 26.


On the skirts of the mountain were several level places, like
terraces; here the Christians pressed valiantly upon the Moors, and
had the advantage; but the latter retreated to the steep and craggy
heights, whence they hurled darts and rocks upon their assailants.
They defended their passes and defiles with valor, but were driven
from height to height until they reached the plain on the summit of
the mountain where their wives and children were sheltered.  Here
they would have made a stand, but Alonso de Aguilar, with his son
Don Pedro, charged upon them at the head of three hundred men
and put them to flight with great carnage.  While they were pursuing
the flying enemy the rest of the army, thinking the victory achieved,
dispersed themselves over the little plain in search of plunder.
They pursued the shrieking females, tearing off their necklaces,
bracelets, and anklets of gold, and they found so much treasure of
various kinds collected in this spot that they threw by their armor
and weapons to load themselves with booty.

Evening was closing.  The Christians, intent upon spoil, had ceased
to pursue the Moors, and the latter were arrested in their flight by
the cries of their wives and children.  Their leader, El Feri, threw
himself before them.  "Friends, soldiers," cried he, "whither do you
fly? Whither can you seek refuge where the enemy cannot follow
you?  Your wives, your children, are behind you--turn and defend
them; you have no chance for safety but from the weapons in your
hands."

The Moors turned at his words.  They beheld the Christians scattered
about the plain, many of them without armor, and all encumbered with
spoil.  "Now is the time!" shouted El Feri: "charge upon them while
laden with your plunder.  I will open a path for you."  He rushed to
the attack, followed by his Moors, with shouts and cries that echoed
through the mountains.  The scattered Christians were seized with
panic, and, throwing down their booty, began to fly in all directions.
Don Alonso de Aguilar advanced his banner and endeavored to rally
them.  Finding his horse of no avail in these rocky heights, he
dismounted, and caused his men to do the same: he had a small
band of tried followers, with which he opposed a bold front to the
Moors, calling on the scattered troops to rally in the rear.

Night had completely closed.  It prevented the Moors from seeing the
smallness of the force with which they were contending, and Don
Alonso and his cavaliers dealt their blows so vigorously that, aided
by the darkness, they seemed multiplied to ten times their number.
Unfortunately, a small cask of gunpowder blew up near to the scene
of action.  It shed a momentary but brilliant light over all the plain
and on every rock and cliff.  The Moors beheld, with surprise, that
they were opposed by a mere handful of men, and that the greater
part of the Christians were flying from the field.  They put up loud
shouts of triumph.  While some continued the conflict with redoubled
ardor, others pursued the fugitives, hurling after them stones and
darts and discharging showers of arrows.  Many of the Christians in
their terror and their ignorance of the mountains, rushed headlong
from the brinks of precipices and were dashed in pieces.

Don Alonso still maintained his ground, but, while some of the Moors
assailed him in front, others galled him with all kinds of missiles
from the impending cliffs.  Some of the cavaliers, seeing the
hopeless nature of the conflict, proposed to abandon the height and
retreat down the mountain.  "No," said Don Alonso proudly; "never
did the banner of the house of Aguilar retreat one foot in the field of
battle."  He had scarcely uttered these words when his son Pedro
was stretched at his feet.  A stone hurled from a cliff had struck out
two of his teeth, and a lance passed quivering through his thigh.
The youth attempted to rise, and, with one knee on the ground, to
fight by the side of his father.  Don Alonso, finding him wounded,
urged him to quit the field.  "Fly, my son," said he; "let us not put
everything at venture upon one hazard.  Conduct thyself as a good
Christian, and live to comfort and honor thy mother."

Don Pedro still refused to leave his side.  Whereupon Don Alonso
ordered several of his followers to bear him off by force.  His friend
Don Francisco Alvarez of Cordova, taking him in his arms, conveyed
him to the quarters of the count of Urena, who had halted on the
height at some distance from the scene of battle for the purpose of
rallying and succoring the fugitives.  Almost at the same moment the
count beheld his own son, Don Pedro Giron, brought in grievously
wounded.

In the mean time, Don Alonso, with two hundred cavaliers, maintained
the unequal contest.  Surrounded by foes, they fell, one after another,
like so many stags encircled by the hunters.  Don Alonso was the last
survivor, without horse and almost without armor, his corselet unlaced
and his bosom gashed with wounds.  Still, he kept a brave front to the
enemy, and, retiring between two rocks, defended himself with such
valor that the slain lay in a heap before him.

He was assailed in this retreat by a Moor of surpassing strength and
fierceness.  The contest was for some time doubtful, but Don Alonso
received a wound in the head, and another in the breast, which
made him stagger.  Closing and grappling with his foe, they had a
desperate struggle, until the Christian cavalier, exhausted by his
wounds, fell upon his back.  He still retained his grasp upon his
enemy.  "Think not," cried he, "thou hast an easy prize; know that
I am Don Alonso, he of Aguilar!"--"If thou art Don Alonso," replied
the Moor, "know that I am El Feri of Ben Estepar."  They continued
their deadly struggle, and both drew their daggers, but Don Alonso
was exhausted by seven ghastly wounds: while he was yet struggling
his heroic soul departed from his body, and he expired in the grasp
of the Moor.

Thus fell Alonso de Aguilar, the mirror of Andalusian chivalry--one
of the most powerful grandees of Spain for person, blood, estate,
and office.  For forty years he had made successful war upon the
Moors--in childhood by his household and retainers, in manhood by
the prowess of his arm and in the wisdom and valor of his spirit.
His pennon had always been foremost in danger; he had been
general of armies, viceroy of Andalusia, and the author of glorious
enterprises in which kings were vanquished and mighty alcaydes and
warriors laid low.  He had slain many Moslem chiefs with his own arm,
and among others the renowned Ali Atar of Loxa, fighting foot to foot,
on the banks of the Xenil.  His judgment, discretion, magnanimity,
and justice vied with his prowess.  He was the fifth lord of his
warlike house that fell in battle with the Moors.

"His soul," observes the worthy Padre Abarca, "it is believed,
ascended to heaven to receive the reward of so Christian a captain;
for that very day he had armed himself with the sacraments of
confession and communion."*

*Abarca, Anales de Aragon, Rey xxx. cap. ii.


The Moors, elated with their success, pursued the fugitive
Christians down the defiles and sides of the mountains.  It was
with the utmost difficulty that the count de Urena could bring off a
remnant of his forces from that disastrous height.  Fortunately, on
the lower slope of the mountain they found the rear-guard of the
army, led by the count de Cifuentes, who had crossed the brook and
the ravine to come to their assistance.  As the fugitives came flying
in headlong terror down the mountain it was with difficulty the count
kept his own troops from giving way in panic and retreating in
confusion across the brook.  He succeeded, however, in maintaining
order, in rallying the fugitives, and checking the fury of the Moors;
then, taking his station on a rocky eminence, he maintained his post
until morning, sometimes sustaining violent attacks, at other times
rushing forth and making assaults upon the enemy.  When morning
dawned the Moors ceased to combat, and drew up to the summit
of the mountain.

It was then that the Christians had time to breathe and to ascertain
the sad loss they had sustained.  Among the many valiant cavaliers
who had fallen was Don Francisco Ramirez of Madrid, who had been
captain-general of artillery throughout the war of Granada, and
contributed greatly by his valor and ingenuity to that renowned
conquest.  But all other griefs and cares were forgotten in anxiety
for the fate of Don Alonso de Aguilar.  His son, Don Pedro de
Cordova, had been brought off with great difficulty from the battle,
and afterward lived to be marques of Priego; but of Don Alonso
nothing was known, except that he was left with a handful of
cavaliers fighting valiantly against an overwhelming force.

As the rising sun lighted up the red cliffs of the mountains the
soldiers watched with anxious eyes if perchance his pennon might
be descried fluttering from any precipice or defile, but nothing of
the kind was to be seen.  The trumpet-call was repeatedly sounded,
but empty echoes alone replied.  A silence reigned about the
mountain-summit which showed that the deadly strife was over.
Now and then a wounded warrior came dragging his feeble steps
from among the cliffs and rocks, but on being questioned he shook
his head mournfully and could tell nothing of the fate of his
commander.

The tidings of this disastrous defeat and of the perilous situation
of the survivors reached King Ferdinand at Granada: he immediately
marched at the head of all the chivalry of his court to the mountains
of Ronda.  His presence with a powerful force soon put an end to
the rebellion.  A part of the Moors were suffered to ransom
themselves and embark for Africa; others were made to embrace
Christianity; and those of the town where the Christian missionaries
had been massacred were sold as slaves.  From the conquered Moors
the mournful but heroic end of Alonso de Aguilar was ascertained.

On the morning after the battle, when the Moors came to strip and
bury the dead, the body of Don Alonso was found among those of
more than two hundred of his followers, many of them alcaydes and
cavaliers of distinction.  Though the person of Don Alonso was well
known to the Moors, being so distinguished among them both in peace
and war, yet it was so covered and disfigured with wounds that it
could with difficulty be recognized.  They preserved it with great
care, and on making their submission delivered it up to King
Ferdinand.  It was conveyed with great state to Cordova, amidst
the tears and lamentations of all Andalusia.  When the funeral train
entered Cordova, and the inhabitants saw the coffin containing the
remains of their favorite hero, and the war-horse led in mournful
trappings on which they had so lately seen him sally forth from
their gates, there was a general burst of grief throughout the city.
The body was interred with great pomp and solemnity in the church
of St. Hypolito.

Many years afterward his granddaughter, Dona Catalina of Aguilar
and Cordova, marchioness of Priego, caused his tomb to be altered.
On examining the body the head of a lance was found among the
bones, received without doubt among the wounds of his last mortal
combat.  The name of this accomplished and Christian cavalier has
ever remained a popular theme of the chronicler and poet, and is
endeared to the public memory by many of the historical ballads and
songs of his country.  For a long time the people of Cordova were
indignant at the brave count de Urena, who they thought had
abandoned Don Alonso in his extremity; but the Castilian monarch
acquitted him of all charge of the kind and continued him in honor
and office.  It was proved that neither he nor his people could
succor Don Alonso, or even know his peril, from the darkness of the
night.  There is a mournful little Spanish ballad or romance which
breathes the public grief on this occasion, and the populace on the
return of the count de Urena to Cordova assailed him with one of its
plaintive and reproachful verses:

                          Count Urena! Count Urena!
                          Tell us, where is Don Alonso!

                          (Dezid conde Urena!
                          Don Alonso, donde queda?)

*Bleda, 1. 5, c. 26.










This etext was produced from the 1915 Longmans, Green and Company edition
by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





CHANTS FOR SOCIALISTS

by William Morris




Contents:

Chants for Socialists
   The Day is Coming
   The Voice of Toil
   No Master
   All for the Cause
   The March of the Workers
   Down Among the Dead Men
A Death Song
May Day [1892]
May Day, 1894
The Message of the March Wind



THE DAY IS COMING



Come hither, lads, and hearken, for a tale there is to tell,
Of the wonderful days a-coming, when all shall be better than well.

And the tale shall be told of a country, a land in the midst of the sea,
And folk shall call it England in the days that are going to be.

There more than one in a thousand in the days that are yet to come
Shall have some hope of the morrow, some joy of the ancient home.

For then--laugh not, but listen to this strange tale of mine -
All folk that are in England shall be better lodged than swine.

Then a man shall work and bethink him, and rejoice in the deeds of his
hand,
Nor yet come home in the even too faint and weary to stand.

Men in that time a-coming shall work and have no fear
For to-morrow's lack of earning and the hunger-wolf anear.

I tell you this for a wonder, that no man then shall be glad
Of his fellow's fall and mishap to snatch at the work he had.

For that which the worker winneth shall then be his indeed,
Nor shall half be reaped for nothing by him that sowed no seed.

O strange new wonderful justice!  But for whom shall we gather the gain?
For ourselves and for each of our fellows, and no hand shall labour in
vain.

Then all Mine and all Thine shall be Ours, and no more shall any man
crave
For riches that serve for nothing but to fetter a friend for a slave.

And what wealth then shall be left us when none shall gather gold
To buy his friend in the market, and pinch and pine the sold?

Nay, what save the lovely city, and the little house on the hill,
And the wastes and the woodland beauty, and the happy fields we till;

And the homes of ancient stories, the tombs of the mighty dead;
And the wise men seeking out marvels, and the poet's teeming head;

And the painter's hand of wonder; and the marvellous fiddle-bow,
And the banded choirs of music:  all those that do and know.

For all these shall be ours and all men's, nor shall any lack a share
Of the toil and the gain of living in the days when the world grows fair.


Ah! such are the days that shall be!  But what are the deeds of to-day,
In the days of the years we dwell in, that wear our lives away?

Why, then, and for what are we waiting?  There are three words to speak:
WE WILL IT, and what is the foeman but the dream-strong wakened and weak?

O why and for what are we waiting?  While our brothers droop and die,
And on every wind of the heavens a wasted life goes by.

How long shall they reproach us where crowd on crowd they dwell,
Poor ghosts of the wicked city, the gold-crushed hungry hell?

Through squalid life they laboured, in sordid grief they died,
Those sons of a mighty mother, those props of England's pride.

They are gone; there is none can undo it, nor save our souls from the
curse;
But many a million cometh, and shall they be better or worse?

It is we must answer and hasten, and open wide the door
For the rich man's hurrying terror, and the slow-foot hope of the poor.

Yea, the voiceless wrath of the wretched, and their unlearned discontent,
We must give it voice and wisdom till the waiting-tide be spent.

Come, then, since all things call us, the living and the dead,
And o'er the weltering tangle a glimmering light is shed.


Come, then, let us cast off fooling, and put by ease and rest,
For the CAUSE alone is worthy till the good days bring the best.

Come, join in the only battle wherein no man can fail,
Where whoso fadeth and dieth, yet his deed shall still prevail.

Ah! come, cast off all fooling, for this, at least, we know:
That the Dawn and the Day is coming, and forth the Banners go.



THE VOICE OF TOIL



I heard men saying, Leave hope and praying,
   All days shall be as all have been;
To-day and to-morrow bring fear and sorrow,
   The never-ending toil between.

When Earth was younger mid toil and hunger,
   In hope we strove, and our hands were strong;
Then great men led us, with words they fed us,
   And bade us right the earthly wrong.

Go read in story their deeds and glory,
   Their names amidst the nameless dead;
Turn then from lying to us slow-dying
   In that good world to which they led;

Where fast and faster our iron master,
   The thing we made, for ever drives,
Bids us grind treasure and fashion pleasure
   For other hopes and other lives.

Where home is a hovel and dull we grovel,
   Forgetting that the world is fair;
Where no babe we cherish, lest its very soul perish;
   Where our mirth is crime, our love a snare.

Who now shall lead us, what god shall heed us
   As we lie in the hell our hands have won?
For us are no rulers but fools and befoolers,
   The great are fallen, the wise men gone.


I heard men saying, Leave tears and praying,
   The sharp knife heedeth not the sheep;
Are we not stronger than the rich and the wronger,
   When day breaks over dreams and sleep?

Come, shoulder to shoulder ere the world grows older!
   Help lies in nought but thee and me;
Hope is before us, the long years that bore us
   Bore leaders more than men may be.

Let dead hearts tarry and trade and marry,
   And trembling nurse their dreams of mirth,
While we the living our lives are giving
   To bring the bright new world to birth.

Come, shoulder to shoulder ere earth grows older
   The Cause spreads over land and sea;
Now the world shaketh, and fear awaketh
   And joy at last for thee and me.



NO MASTER



Saith man to man, We've heard and known
   That we no master need
To live upon this earth, our own,
   In fair and manly deed.
The grief of slaves long passed away
   For us hath forged the chain,
Till now each worker's patient day
   Builds up the House of Pain.

And we, shall we too, crouch and quail,
   Ashamed, afraid of strife,
And lest our lives untimely fail
   Embrace the Death in Life?
Nay, cry aloud, and have no fear,
   We few against the world;
Awake, arise! the hope we bear
   Against the curse is hurled.

It grows and grows--are we the same,
   The feeble band, the few?
Or what are these with eyes aflame,
   And hands to deal and do?
This is the host that bears the word,
   No MASTER HIGH OR LOW -
A lightning flame, a shearing sword,
   A storm to overthrow.



ALL FOR THE CAUSE



Hear a word, a word in season, for the day is drawing nigh,
When the Cause shall call upon us, some to live, and some to die!

He that dies shall not die lonely, many an one hath gone before;
He that lives shall bear no burden heavier than the life they bore.

Nothing ancient is their story, e'en but yesterday they bled,
Youngest they of earth's beloved, last of all the valiant dead.

E'en the tidings we are telling was the tale they had to tell,
E'en the hope that our hearts cherish, was the hope for which they fell.

In the grave where tyrants thrust them, lies their labour and their pain,
But undying from their sorrow springeth up the hope again.

Mourn not therefore, nor lament it, that the world outlives their life;
Voice and vision yet they give us, making strong our hands for strife.

Some had name, and fame, and honour, learn'd they were, and wise and
strong;
Some were nameless, poor, unlettered, weak in all but grief and wrong.

Named and nameless all live in us; one and all they lead us yet
Every pain to count for nothing, every sorrow to forget.

Hearken how they cry, "O happy, happy ye that ye were born
In the sad slow night's departing, in the rising of the morn.

"Fair the crown the Cause hath for you, well to die or well to live
Through the battle, through the tangle, peace to gain or peace to give."

Ah, it may be!  Oft meseemeth, in the days that yet shall be,
When no slave of gold abideth 'twixt the breadth of sea to sea,

Oft, when men and maids are merry, ere the sunlight leaves the earth,
And they bless the day beloved, all too short for all their mirth,

Some shall pause awhile and ponder on the bitter days of old,
Ere the toil of strife and battle overthrew the curse of gold;

Then 'twixt lips of loved and lover solemn thoughts of us shall rise;
We who once were fools and dreamers, then shall be the brave and wise.

There amidst the world new-builded shall our earthly deeds abide,
Though our names be all forgotten, and the tale of how we died.

Life or death then, who shall heed it, what we gain or what we lose?
Fair flies life amid the struggle, and the Cause for each shall choose.

Hear a word, a word in season, for the day is drawing nigh,
When the Cause shall call upon us, some to live, and some to die!



THE MARCH OF THE WORKERS



What is this, the sound and rumour?  What is this that all men hear,
Like the wind in hollow valleys when the storm is drawing near,
Like the rolling on of ocean in the eventide of fear?
         'Tis the people marching on.

Whither go they, and whence come they?  What are these of whom ye tell?
In what country are they dwelling 'twixt the gates of heaven and hell?
Are they mine or thine for money?  Will they serve a master well?
         Still the rumour's marching on.

      Hark the rolling of the thunder!
      Lo the sun! and lo thereunder
      Riseth wrath, and hope, and wonder,
         And the host comes marching on.

Forth they come from grief and torment; on they wend toward health and
mirth,
All the wide world is their dwelling, every corner of the earth.
Buy them, sell them for thy service!  Try the bargain what 'tis worth,
         For the days are marching on.

These are they who build thy houses, weave thy raiment, win thy wheat,
Smooth the rugged, fill the barren, turn the bitter into sweet,
All for thee this day--and ever.  What reward for them is meet
         Till the host comes marching on?

      Hark the rolling of the thunder!
      Lo the sun! and lo thereunder
      Riseth wrath, and hope, and wonder,
         And the host comes marching on.

Many a hundred years passed over have they laboured deaf and blind;
Never tidings reached their sorrow, never hope their toil might find.
Now at last they've heard and hear it, and the cry comes down the wind,
         And their feet are marching on.

O ye rich men hear and tremble! for with words the sound is rife:
"Once for you and death we laboured; changed henceforward is the strife.
We are men, and we shall battle for the world of men and life;
         And our host is marching on."

      Hark the rolling of the thunder!
      Lo the sun! and lo thereunder
      Riseth wrath, and hope, and wonder,
         And the host comes marching on.

"Is it war, then?  Will ye perish as the dry wood in the fire?
Is it peace?  Then be ye of us, let your hope be our desire.
Come and live! for life awaketh, and the world shall never tire;
         And hope is marching on.

"On we march then, we the workers, and the rumour that ye hear
Is the blended sound of battle and deliv'rance drawing near;
For the hope of every creature is the banner that we bear,
         And the world is marching on."

      Hark the rolling of the thunder!
      Lo the sun! and lo thereunder
      Riseth wrath, and hope, and wonder,
         And the host comes marching on.



DOWN AMONG THE DEAD MEN



Come, comrades, come, your glasses clink;
Up with your hands a health to drink,
The health of all that workers be,
In every land, on every sea.
   And he that will this health deny,
   Down among the dead men, down among the dead men,
   Down, down, down, down,
   Down among the dead men let him lie!

Well done! now drink another toast,
And pledge the gath'ring of the host,
The people armed in brain and hand,
To claim their rights in every land.
   And he that will this health deny,
   Down among the dead men, down among the dead men,
   Down, down, down, down,
   Down among the dead men let him lie!

There's liquor left; come, let's be kind,
And drink the rich a better mind,
That when we knock upon the door,
They may be off and say no more.
   And he that will this health deny,
   Down among the dead men, down among the dead men,
   Down, down, down, down,
   Down among the dead men let him lie!

Now, comrades, let the glass blush red,
Drink we the unforgotten dead
That did their deeds and went away,
Before the bright sun brought the day.
   And he that will this health deny,
   Down among the dead men, down among the dead men,
   Down, down, down, down,
   Down among the dead men let him lie!

The Day?  Ah, friends, late grows the night;
Drink to the glimmering spark of light,
The herald of the joy to be,
The battle-torch of thee and me!
   And he that will this health deny,
   Down among the dead men, down among the dead men,
   Down, down, down, down,
   Down among the dead men let him lie!

Take yet another cup in hand
And drink in hope our little band;
Drink strife in hope while lasteth breath,
And brotherhood in life and death;
   And he that will this health deny,
   Down among the dead men, down among the dead men,
   Down, down, down, down,
   Down among the dead men let him lie!



A DEATH SONG



What cometh here from west to east awending?
And who are these, the marchers stern and slow?
We bear the message that the rich are sending
Aback to those who bade them wake and know.
Not one, not one, nor thousands must they slay,
But one and all if they would dusk the day.

We asked them for a life of toilsome earning,
They bade us bide their leisure for our bread;
We craved to speak to tell our woeful learning:
We come back speechless, bearing back our dead.
Not one, not one, nor thousands must they slay,
But one and all if they would dusk the day.

They will not learn; they have no ears to hearken.
They turn their faces from the eyes of fate;
Their gay-lit halls shut out the skies that darken.
But, lo! this dead man knocking at the gate.
Not one, not one, nor thousands must they slay,
But one and all if they would dusk the day.

Here lies the sign that we shall break our prison;
Amidst the storm he won a prisoner's rest;
But in the cloudy dawn the sun arisen
Brings us our day of work to win the best.
Not one, not one, nor thousands must they slay,
But one and all if they would dusk the day.



MAY DAY [1892]



THE WORKERS.

O Earth, once again cometh Spring to deliver
   Thy winter-worn heart, O thou friend of the Sun;
Fair blossom the meadows from river to river
   And the birds sing their triumph o'er winter undone.

O Earth, how a-toiling thou singest thy labour
   And upholdest the flower-crowned cup of thy bliss,
As when in the feast-tide drinks neighbour to neighbour
   And all words are gleeful, and nought is amiss.

But we, we, O Mother, through long generations,
   We have toiled and been fruitful, but never with thee
Might we raise up our bowed heads and cry to the nations
   To look on our beauty, and hearken our glee.

Unlovely of aspect, heart-sick and a-weary
   On the season's fair pageant all dim-eyed we gaze;
Of thy fairness we fashion a prison-house dreary
   And in sorrow wear over each day of our days.

THE EARTH.

O children!  O toilers, what foemen beleaguer
   The House I have built you, the Home I have won?
Full great are my gifts, and my hands are all eager
   To fill every heart with the deeds I have done.

THE WORKERS.

The foemen are born of thy body, O Mother,
   In our shape are they shapen, their voice is the same;
And the thought of their hearts is as ours and no other;
   It is they of our own house that bring us to shame.

THE EARTH.

Are ye few?  Are they many?  What words have ye spoken
   To bid your own brethren remember the Earth?
What deeds have ye done that the bonds should be broken,
   And men dwell together in good-will and mirth?

THE WORKERS.

They are few, we are many:  and yet, O our Mother,
   Many years were we wordless and nought was our deed,
But now the word flitteth from brother to brother:
   We have furrowed the acres and scattered the seed.

THE EARTH.

Win on then unyielding, through fair and foul weather,
   And pass not a day that your deed shall avail.
And in hope every spring-tide come gather together
   That unto the Earth ye may tell all your tale.

Then this shall I promise, that I am abiding
   The day of your triumph, the ending of gloom,
And no wealth that ye will then my hand shall be hiding
   And the tears of the spring into roses shall bloom.



MAY DAY, 1894



Clad is the year in all her best,
   The land is sweet and sheen;
Now Spring with Summer at her breast,
   Goes down the meadows green.

Here are we met to welcome in
   The young abounding year,
To praise what she would have us win
   Ere winter draweth near.

For surely all is not in vain,
   This gallant show she brings;
But seal of hope and sign of gain,
   Beareth this Spring of springs.

No longer now the seasons wear
   Dull, without any tale
Of how the chain the toilers bear
   Is growing thin and frail.

But hope of plenty and goodwill
   Flies forth from land to land,
Nor any now the voice can still
   That crieth on the hand.

A little while shall Spring come back
   And find the Ancient Home
Yet marred by foolish waste and lack,
   And most enthralled by some.

A little while, and then at last
   Shall the greetings of the year
Be blent with wonder of the past
   And all the griefs that were.

A little while, and they that meet
   The living year to praise,
Shall be to them as music sweet
   That grief of bye-gone days.

So be we merry to our best,
   Now the land is sweet and sheen,
And Spring with Summer at her breast
   Goes down the meadows green.




THE MESSAGE OF THE MARCH WIND {1}



Fair now is the springtide, now earth lies beholding
   With the eyes of a lover the face of the sun;
Long lasteth the daylight, and hope is enfolding
   The green-growing acres with increase begun.

Now sweet, sweet it is through the land to be straying
   Mid the birds and the blossoms and the beasts of the field;
Love mingles with love, and no evil is weighing
   On thy heart or mine, where all sorrow is healed.

From township to township, o'er down and by tillage
   Far, far have we wandered and long was the day,
But now cometh eve at the end of the village,
   Where over the grey wall the church riseth grey.

There is wind in the twilight; in the white road before us
   The straw from the ox-yard is blowing about;
The moon's rim is rising, a star glitters o'er us,
   And the vane on the spire-top is swinging in doubt.

Down there dips the highway, toward the bridge crossing over
   The brook that runs on to the Thames and the sea.
Draw closer, my sweet, we are lover and lover;
   This eve art thou given to gladness and me.

Shall we be glad always?  Come closer and hearken:
   Three fields further on, as they told me down there,
When the young moon has set, if the March sky should darken,
   We might see from the hill-top the great city's glare.

Hark, the wind in the elm-boughs!  From London it bloweth,
   And telling of gold, and of hope and unrest;
Of power that helps not; of wisdom that knoweth,
   But teacheth not aught of the worst and the best.

Of the rich men it telleth, and strange is the story
   How they have, and they hanker, and grip far and wide;
And they live and they die, and the earth and its glory
   Has been but a burden they scarce might abide.

Hark! the March wind again of a people is telling;
   Of the life that they live there, so haggard and grim,
That if we and our love amidst them had been dwelling
   My fondness had faltered, thy beauty grown dim.

This land we have loved in our love and our leisure
   For them hangs in heaven, high out of their reach;
The wide hills o'er the sea-plain for them have no pleasure,
   The grey homes of their fathers no story to teach.

The singers have sung and the builders have builded,
   The painters have fashioned their tales of delight;
For what and for whom hath the world's book been gilded,
   When all is for these but the blackness of night?

How long and for what is their patience abiding?
   How oft and how oft shall their story be told,
While the hope that none seeketh in darkness is hiding
   And in grief and in sorrow the world groweth old?


Come back to the inn, love, and the lights and the fire,
   And the fiddler's old tune and the shuffling of feet;
For there in a while shall be rest and desire,
   And there shall the morrow's uprising be sweet.

Yet, love, as we wend the wind bloweth behind us
   And beareth the last tale it telleth to-night,
How here in the spring-tide the message shall find us;
   For the hope that none seeketh is coming to light.

Like the seed of midwinter, unheeded, unperished,
   Like the autumn-sown wheat 'neath the snow lying green,
Like the love that o'ertook us, unawares and uncherished,
   Like the babe 'neath thy girdle that groweth unseen,

So the hope of the people now buddeth and groweth -
   Rest fadeth before it, and blindness and fear;
It biddeth us learn all the wisdom it knoweth;
   It hath found us and held us, and biddeth us hear:

For it beareth the message:  "Rise up on the morrow
   And go on your ways toward the doubt and the strife;
Join hope to our hope and blend sorrow with sorrow,
   And seek for men's love in the short days of life."

But lo, the old inn, and the lights and the fire,
   And the fiddler's old tune and the shuffling of feet;
Soon for us shall be quiet and rest and desire,
   And to-morrow's uprising to deeds shall be sweet.



Footnotes

{1}  After consulting various sources it is not clear as to whether "The
Message of the March Wind" was originally published with "Chants for
Socialists".  Chants for Socialists consists of poems that Morris wrote
for various occasions and which were collected together and published by
the Socialist League in 1885.  If any reader has access to the original
Chants I (David Price) would be very glad if you could clear up the
uncertainty on the exact contents.--David Price










This etext was produced by David A. Schwan <davidsch@earthlink.net>





This is a recast of a newspaper article of the same title published in
The Sun April 21, 1906, three days after the Visitation came upon San
Francisco. It is here published by special permission of The Sun. For
the title, I am indebted to Franklin Matthews.	W.I.





The City That Was
A requiem of Old San Francisco

By Will Irwin




"I'd rather be a busted lamp post on Battery Street, San Francisco,
than the Waldorf-Astoria." - Willie Britt.

The old San Francisco is dead. The gayest, lightest hearted, most
pleasure loving city of the western continent, and in many ways the most
interesting and romantic, is a horde of refugees living among ruins. It
may rebuild; it probably will; but those who have known that peculiar
city by the Golden Gate, have caught its flavor of the Arabian Nights,
feel that it can never be the same. It is as though a pretty, frivolous
woman had passed through a great tragedy. She survives, but she is
sobered and different. If it rises out of the ashes it must be a modern
city, much like other cities and without its old atmosphere.

San Francisco lay on a series of hills and the lowlands between. These
hills are really the end of the Coast Range of mountains, which stretch
southward between the interior valleys and the Pacific Ocean. Behind it
is the ocean; but the greater part of the town fronts on two sides on
San Francisco Bay, a body of water always tinged with gold from the
great washings of the mountain, usually overhung with a haze, and of
magnificent color changes. Across the bay to the north lies Mount
Tamalpais, about 3,000 feet high, and so close that ferries from the
waterfront take one in less than half an hour to the little towns of
Sausalito and Belvidere, at its foot.

Tamalpais is a wooded mountain, with ample slopes, and from it on the
north stretch away ridges of forest land, the outposts of the great
Northern woods of Sequoia sempervirens. This mountain and the
mountainous country to the south bring the real forest closer to San
Francisco than to any other American city. Within the last few years men
have killed deer on the slopes of Tamalpais and looked down to see the
cable cars crawling up the hills of San Francisco to the south. In the
suburbs coyotes still stole in and robbed hen roosts by night. The
people lived much out of doors. There is no time of the year, except a
short part of the rainy season, when the weather keeps one from the
fields. The slopes of Tamalpais are crowded with little villas dotted
through the woods, and these minor estates run far up into the redwood
country. The deep coves of Belvidere, sheltered by the wind from
Tamalpais, held a colony of "arks" or houseboats, where people lived in
the rather disagreeable summer months, coming over to business every day
by ferry. Everything there invites out of doors.

The climate of California is peculiar; it is hard to give an impression
of it. In the region about San Francisco, all the forces of nature work
on their own laws. There is no thunder and lightning; there is no snow,
except a flurry once in five or six years; there are perhaps half a
dozen nights in the winter when the thermometer drops lo