w enough so that
in the morning there is a little film of ice on exposed water. Neither
is there any hot weather. Yet most Easterners remaining in San Francisco
for a few days remember that they were always chilly.

For the Gate is a big funnel, drawing in the winds and the mists which
cool off the great, hot interior valleys of the San Joaquin and
Sacramento. So the west wind blows steadily ten months of the year; and
almost all the mornings are foggy. This keeps the temperature steady at
about 55 degrees - a little cool for the comfort of an unacclimated
person, especially indoors. Californians, used to it, hardly ever think
of making fires in their houses except in a few days of the winter
season, and then they rely mainly upon fireplaces. This is like the
custom of the Venetians and the Florentines.

Give an Easterner six months of it, however, and he, too, learns to
exist without chill in a steady temperature a little lower than that to
which he was accustomed at home. After that one goes about with perfect
indifference to the temperature. Summer and winter, San Francisco women
wear light tailor-made clothes, and men wear the same fall-weight suits
all the year around. There is no such thing as a change of clothing for
the seasons. And after becoming acclimated these people find it hard to
bear the changes from hot to cold in the normal regions of the earth.
Perhaps once in two or three years there comes a day when there is no
fog, no wind, and a high temperature in the coast district. Then follows
hot weather, perhaps up in the eighties, and Californians grumble,
swelter and rustle for summer clothes. These rare hot days are the only
times when one sees women in light dresses on the streets of San
Francisco.

Along in early May the rains cease. At that time everything is green and
bright, and the great golden poppies, as large as the saucer of an
after-dinner coffee cup, are blossoming everywhere. Tamalpais is green
to its top; everything is washed and bright. By late May a yellow tinge
is creeping over the hills. This is followed by a golden June and a
brown July and August. The hills are burned and dry. The fog comes in
heavily, too; and normally this is the most disagreeable season of the
year. September brings a day or two of gentle rain; and then a change,
as sweet and mysterious as the breaking of spring in the East, passes
over the hills. The green grows through the brown and the flowers begin
to come out.

As a matter of fact, the unpleasantness of summer is modified by the
certainty that one can go anywhere without fear of rain. And in all the
coast mountains, especially the seaward slopes, the dews and the shelter
of the giant underbrush hold the water, so that these areas are green
and pleasant all summer.

In a normal year the rains begin to fall heavily in November; there will
be three or four days of steady downpour and then a clear and green
week. December is also likely to be rainy; and in this month people
enjoy the sensation of gathering for Christmas the mistletoe which grows
profusely on the live oaks, while the poppies are beginning to blossom
at their feet. By the end of January the gentle rains come lighter. In
the long spaces between these winter storms, there is a temperature and
a feeling in the air much like that of Indian summer in the East.
January is the month when the roses are at their brightest.

So much for the strange climate, which invites out of doors and which
has played its part in making the character of the people. The externals
of the city are - or were, for they are no more - just as curious. One
usually entered San Francisco by way of the Bay. Across its yellow
flood, covered with the fleets from the strange seas of the Pacific, San
Francisco presented itself in a hill panorama. Probably no other city of
the world, excepting perhaps Naples, could be so viewed at first sight.
It rose above the passenger, as he reached dockage, in a succession of
hill terraces. At one side was Telegraph Hill, the end of the peninsula,
a height so abrupt that it had a one hundred and fifty foot sheer cliff
on its seaward frontage. Further along lay Nob Hill, crowned with the
Mark Hopkins mansion, which had the effect of a citadel, and in later
years by the great, white Fairmount. Further along was Russian Hill, the
highest point. Below was the business district, whose low site caused
all the trouble.

Except for the modern buildings, the fruit of the last ten years, the
town presented at first sight a disreputable appearance. Most of the
buildings were low and of wood. In the middle period of the '70's, when,
a great part of San Francisco was building, the newly-rich perpetrated
some atrocious architecture. In that time, too every one put bow windows
on his house to catch all of the morning sunlight that was coming
through the fog; and those little houses, with bow windows and fancy
work all down their fronts, were characteristic of the middle class
residence districts.

Then the Italians, who tumbled over Telegraph Hill, had built as they
listed and with little regard for streets, and their houses hung crazily
on a side hill which was little less than a precipice. The Chinese,
although they occupied an abandoned business district, had remade their
dwellings Chinese fashion, and the Mexicans and Spaniards had added to
their houses those little balconies without which life is not life to a
Spaniard.

Yet the most characteristic thing after all was the coloring. The sea
fog had a trick of painting every exposed object a sea gray which had a
tinge of dull green in it. This, under the leaden sky of a San Francisco
morning, had a depressing effect on first sight and afterward became a
delight to the eye. For the color was soft, gentle and infinitely
attractive in mass.

The hills are steep beyond conception. Where Vallejo street ran up
Russian Hill it progressed for four blocks by regular steps like a
flight of stairs. It is unnecessary to say that no teams ever came up
this street or any other like it, and grass grew long among the paving
stones until the Italians who live thereabouts took advantage of this
herbage to pasture a cow or two. At the end of four blocks, the pavers
had given it up and the last stage to the summit was a winding path. On
the very top, a colony of artists lived in little villas of houses whose
windows got the whole panorama of the bay. Luckily for these people, a
cable car scaled the hill on the other side, so that it was not much of
a climb to home.

With these hills, with the strangeness of the architecture and with the
green-gray tinge over everything, the city fell always into vistas and
pictures, a setting for the romance which hung over everything, which
has always hung over life in San Francisco since the padres came and
gathered the Indians about Mission Dolores.

And it was a city of romance and a gateway to adventure. It opened out
on the mysterious Pacific, the untamed ocean; and through the Golden
Gate entered China, Japan, the South Sea Islands, Lower California, the
west coast of Central America, Australia. There was a sprinkling, too,
of Alaska and Siberia. From his windows on Russian Hill one saw always
something strange and suggestive creeping through the mists of the bay.
It would be a South Sea Island brig, bringing in copra, to take out
cottons and idols; a Chinese junk after sharks' livers; an old whaler,
which seemed to drip oil, home from a year of cruising in the Arctic.
Even the tramp windjammers were deep-chested craft, capable of rounding
the Horn or of circumnavigating the globe; and they came in streaked and
picturesque from their long voyaging.

In the orange colored dawn which always comes through the mists of that
bay, the fishing fleet would crawl in under triangular lateen sails; for
the fishermen of San Francisco Bay are all Neapolitans who have brought
their customs and sail with lateen rigs stained an orange brown and
shaped, when the wind fills them, like the ear of a horse.

Along the waterfront the people of these craft met. "The smelting pot of
the races," Stevenson called it; and this was always the city of his
soul. There were black Gilbert Islanders, almost indistinguishable from
negroes; lighter Kanakas from Hawaii or Samoa; Lascars in turbans;
thickset Russian sailors, wild Chinese with unbraided hair; Italian
fishermen in tam o' shanters, loud shirts and blue sashes; Greeks,
Alaska Indians, little bay Spanish-Americans, together with men of all
the European races. These came in and out from among the queer craft, to
lose themselves in the disreputable, tumble-down, but always mysterious
shanties and small saloons. In the back rooms of these saloons South Sea
Island traders and captains, fresh from the lands of romance, whaling
masters, people who were trying to get up treasure expeditions,
filibusters, Alaskan miners, used to meet and trade adventures.

There was another element, less picturesque and equally characteristic,
along the waterfront. San Francisco was the back eddy of European
civilization - one end of the world. The drifters came there and
stopped, lingered a while to live by their wits in a country where
living after a fashion has always been marvellously cheap. These people
haunted the waterfront and the Barbary Coast by night, and lay by day on
the grass in Portsmouth Square.

The square, the old plaza about which the city was built, Spanish
fashion, had seen many things. There in the first burst of the early
days the vigilance committee used to hold its hangings. There, in the
time of the sand lot troubles, Dennis Kearney, who nearly pulled the
town down about his ears, used to make his orations which set the unruly
to rioting. In later years Chinatown lay on one side of it and the Latin
quarter and the "Barbary Coast" on the other.

On this square the drifters lay all day long and told strange yams.
Stevenson lounged there with them in his time and learned the things
which he wove into "The Wrecker" and his South Sea stories; and now in
the centre of the square there stands the beautiful Stevenson monument.
In later years the authorities put up a municipal building on one side
of this square and prevented the loungers, for decency's sake, from
lying on the grass. Since then some of the peculiar character of the old
plaza has gone.

The Barbary Coast was a loud bit of hell. No one knows who coined the
name. The place was simply three blocks of solid dance halls, there for
the delight of the sailors of the world. On a fine busy night every door
blared loud dance music from orchestras, steam pianos and gramaphones,
and the cumulative effect of the sound which reached the street was
chaos and pandemonium. Almost anything might be happening behind the
swinging doors. For a fine and picturesque bundle of names
characteristic of the place, a police story of three or four years ago
is typical. Hell broke out in the Eye Wink Dance Hall. The trouble was
started by a sailor known as Kanaka Pete, who lived in the What Cheer
House, over a woman known as Iodoform Kate. Kanaka Pete chased the man
he had marked to the Little Silver Dollar, where he halted and punctured
him. The by-product of his gun made some holes in the front of the Eye
Wink, which were proudly kept as souvenirs, and were probably there
until it went out in the fire. This was low life, the lowest of the low.

Until the last decade almost anything except the commonplace and the
expected might happen to a man on the waterfront. The cheerful industry
of shanghaing was reduced to a science. A citizen taking a drink in one
of the saloons which hung out over the water might be dropped through
the floor into a boat, or he might drink with a stranger and wake in the
forecastle of a whaler bound for the Arctic. Such an incident is the
basis of Frank Norris's novel, "Moran of the Lady Letty," and although
the novel draws it pretty strong, it is not exaggerated. Ten years ago
the police, the Sailors' Union, and the foreign consuls, working
together, stopped all this.

Kearney street, a wilder and stranger Bowery, was the main thoroughfare
of these people. An exiled Californian, mourning over the city of his
heart, has said:

"In a half an hour of Kearney street I could raise a dozen men for any
wild adventure, from pulling down a statue to searching for the Cocos
Island treasure." This is hardly an exaggeration. it was the Rialto of
the desperate, Street of the Adventurers.

These are a few of the elements which made the city strange and gave it
the glamour of romance which has so strongly attracted such men as
Stevenson, Frank Norris and Kipling. This life of the floating
population lay apart from the regular life of the city, which was
distinctive in itself.

The Californian is the second generation of a picked and mixed ancestry.
The merry, the adventurous, often the desperate, always the brave,
deserted the South and New England in 1849 to rush around the Horn or to
try the perils of the plains. They found there a land already grown old
in the hands of the Spaniards - younger sons of hidalgo and many of them
of the best blood of Spain. To a great extent the pioneers intermarried
with Spanish women; in fact, except for a proud little colony here and
there, the old, aristocratic Spanish blood is sunk in that of the
conquering race. Then there was an influx of intellectual French people,
largely overlooked in the histories of the early days; and this Latin
leaven has had its influence.

Brought up in a bountiful country, where no one really has to work very
hard to live, nurtured on adventure, scion of a free and merry stock,
the real, native Californian is a distinctive type; as far from the
Easterner in psychology as the extreme Southerner is from the Yankee. He
is easy going, witty, hospitable, lovable, inclined to be unmoral rather
than immoral in his personal habits, and easy to meet and to know.

Above all there is an art sense all through the populace which sets it
off from any other population of the country. This sense is almost Latin
in its strength, and the Californian owes it to the leaven of Latin
blood. The true Californian lingers in the north; for southern
California has been built up by "lungers" from the East and middle West
and is Eastern in character and feeling.

Almost has the Californian developed a racial physiology. He tends to
size, to smooth symmetry of limb and trunk, to an erect, free carriage;
and the beauty of his women is not a myth. The pioneers were all men of
good body, they had to be to live and leave descendants. The bones of
the weaklings who started for El Dorado in 1849 lie on the plains or in
the hill-cemeteries of the mining camps. Heredity began it; climate has
carried it on. All things that grow in California tend to become large,
plump, luscious. Fruit trees, grown from cuttings of Eastern stock,
produce fruit larger and finer, if coarser in flavor, than that of the
parent tree. As the fruits grow, so the children grow. A normal,
healthy, Californian woman plays out-of-doors from babyhood to old age.
The mixed stock has given her that regularity of features which goes
with a blend of bloods; the climate has perfected and rounded her
figure; out-of-doors exercise from earliest youth has given her a deep
bosom; the cosmetic mists have made her complexion soft and brilliant.
At the University of California, where the student body is nearly all
native, the gymnasium measurements show that the girls are a little more
than two inches taller than their sisters of Vassar and Michigan.

The greatest beauty-show on the continent was the Saturday afternoon
matinee parade in San Francisco. Women in so-called "society" took no
part in this function. It belonged to the middle class, but the "upper
classes" have no monopoly of beauty anywhere in the world. It had grown
to be independent of the matinees. From two o'clock to half-past five, a
solid procession of Dianas, Hebes and Junos passed and repassed along
the five blocks between Market and Powell and Sutter and Kearney - the
"line" of San Francisco slang. Along the open-front cigar stores,
characteristic of the town, gilded youth of the cocktail route gathered
in knots to watch them. There was something Latin in the spirit of this
ceremony - it resembled church parade in Buenos Ayres. Latin, too, were
the gay costumes of the women, who dressed brightly in accord with the
city and the climate. This gaiety of costume was the first thing which
the Eastern woman noticed - and disapproved. Give her a year, and she,
too, would be caught by the infection of daring dress.

In this parade of tall, deep bosomed, gleaming women, one caught the
type and longed, sometimes for the sight of a more ethereal beauty - for
the suggestion of soul within which belongs to a New England woman on
whom a hard soil has bestowed a grudged beauty - for the mobility, the
fire, which belongs to the Frenchwoman. The second generation of France
was in this crowd, it is true; but climate and exercise had grown above
their spiritual charm a cover of brilliant flesh. It was the beauty of
Greece.

With such a people, life was always gay. If the fairly Parisian gaiety
did not display itself on the streets, except in the matinee parade, it
was because the winds made open-air cafes disagreeable at all seasons of
the year. The life careless went on indoors or in the hundreds of pretty
estates - "ranches" the Californians called them - which fringe the
city.

San Francisco was famous for its restaurants and cafes. Probably they
were lacking at the top; probably the very best, for people who do not
care how they spend their money, was not to be had. But they gave the
best fare on earth, for the price, at a dollar, seventy-five cents, a
half a dollar, or even fifteen cents.

If one should tell exactly what could be had at Coppa's for fifty cents
or at the Fashion for, say thirty-five, no New Yorker who has not been
there would believe it. The San Francisco French dinner and the San
Francisco free lunch were as the Public Library to Boston or the stock
yards to Chicago. A number of causes contributed to this. The country
all about produced everything that a cook needs and that in abundance -
the bay was an almost untapped fishing pound, the fruit farms came up to
the very edge of the town, and the surrounding country produced in
abundance fine meats, game, all cereals and all vegetables.

But the chefs who came from France in the early days and stayed because
they liked this land of plenty were the head and front of it. They
passed on their art to other Frenchmen or to the clever Chinese. Most of
the French chefs at the biggest restaurants were born in Canton, China.
Later the Italians, learning of this country where good food is
appreciated, came and brought their own style. Householders always dined
out one or two nights of the week, and boarding houses were scarce, for
the unattached preferred the restaurants.

The eating was usually better than the surroundings. Meals that were
marvels were served in tumbledown little hotels. Most famous of all the
restaurants was the Poodle Dog. There have been no less than four
establishments of this name, beginning with a frame shanty where, in the
early days, a prince of French cooks used to exchange ragouts for gold
dust. Each succeeding restaurant of the name has moved further downtown;
and the recent Poodle Dog stands - stands or stood; one mixes his tenses
queerly in writing of this city which is and yet is no more - on the
edge of the Tenderloin in a modern five story building. And it typified
a certain spirit that there was in San Francisco.

For on the ground floor was a public restaurant where there was served
the best dollar dinner on earth. At least, if not the best it ranked
with the best, and the others were in San, Francisco. There, especially
on Sunday night, almost everyone went to vary the monotony of home
cooking. Everyone who was anyone in the town could be seen there off and
on. It was perfectly respectable. A man might take his wife and daughter
to the Poodle Dog.

On the second floor there were private dining rooms, and to dine there,
with one or more of the opposite sex, was risque but not especially
terrible. But the third floor - and the fourth floor - and the fifth!
The elevator man of the Poodle Dog, who had held the job for many years
and who never spoke unless spoken to, wore diamonds and was a heavy
investor in real estate. There were others as famous in their way - the
Zinkand, where, at one time, every one went after the theatre, and
Tate's, which has lately bitten into that trade; the Palace Grill, much
like the grills of Eastern hotels, except for the price; Delmonico's,
which ran the Poodle Dog neck and neck to its own line; and many others,
humbler but great at the price.

Listen! O ye starved amidst plenty, to the tale of the Hotel de France.
This restaurant stood on California street, just east of Old St. Mary's
Church. One could throw a biscuit from its back windows into Chinatown.
It occupied a big ramshackle house, which had been a mansion of the gold
days. Louis, the proprietor, was a Frenchman of the Bas Pyrenees; and
his accent was as thick as his peasant soups. The patrons were Frenchmen
of the poorer class, or young and poor clerks and journalists who had
discovered the delights of his hostelry. The place exhuded a genial
gaiety, of which Louis, throwing out familiar jokes to right and left as
he mixed salads and carried dishes, was the head and front.

First on the bill of fare was the soup mentioned before - thick and
clean and good. Next, one of Louis' three cherubic little sons brought
on a course of fish - sole, rock cod, flounders or smelt - with a good
French sauce. The third course was meat. This came on en bloc; the
waiter dropped in the centre of each table a big roast or boiled joint
together with a mustard pot and two big dishes of vegetables. Each guest
manned the carving knife in turn and helped himself to his satisfaction.
After that, Louis, with an air of ceremony, brought on a big bowl of
excellent salad which he had mixed himself. For beverage, there stood by
each plate a perfectly cylindrical pint glass filled with new, watered
claret. The meal closed with "fruit in season" - all that the guest
cared to eat. I have saved a startling fact to close the paragraph - the
price was fifteen cents!

If one wanted black coffee he paid five cents extra, and Louis brought
on a beer glass full of it. Why he threw in wine and charged extra for
after-dinner coffee was one of Louis' professional secrets.

Adulterated food at that price? Not a bit of it! The olive oil in the
salad was pure, California product - why adulterate when he could get it
so cheaply? The wine, too, was above reproach, for Louis made it
himself. Every autumn, he brought tons and tons of cheap Mission grapes,
set up a wine press in his back yard, and had a little, festival vintage
of his own. The fruit was small, and inferior, but fresh, and Louis
himself, in speaking of his business, said that he wished his guests
would eat nothing but fruit, it came so cheap.

The city never went to bed. There was no closing law, so that the
saloons kept open nights and Sundays at their own sweet will. Most of
the cafes elected to remain open until 2 o'clock in the morning at
least.

This restaurant life, however does not express exactly the careless,
pleasure-loving character of the people. In great part their pleasures
were simple, inexpensive and out of doors. No people were fonder of
expeditions into the country, of picnics - which might be brought off at
almost any season of the year - and of long tours in the great mountains
and forests.

Hospitality was nearly a vice. As in the early mining days, if they
liked the stranger the people took him in. At the first meeting the San
Francisco man had him put up at the club; at the second, he invited him
home to dinner. As long as the stranger stayed he was being invited to
week end parties at ranches, to little dinners in this or that
restaurant and to the houses of his new acquaintances, until his
engagements grew beyond hope of fulfilment. Perhaps there was rather too
much of this kind of thing. At the end of a fortnight a visitor with a
pleasant smile and a good story left the place a wreck. This tendency
ran through all grades of society - except, perhaps, the sporting people
who kept the tracks and the fighting game alive. These also met the
stranger - and also took him in.

Centres of man hospitality were the clubs, especially the famous
Bohemian and the Family. The latter was an offshot of the Bohemian; and
it had been growing fast and vieing with the older organization for the
honor of entertaining pleasing and distinguished visitors.

The Bohemian Club, whose real founder is said to have been the late
Henry George, was formed in the '70s by newspaper writers and men
working in the arts or interested in them. It had grown to a membership
of 750. It still kept for its nucleus painters, writers, musicians and
actors, amateur and professional. They were a gay group of men, and
hospitality was their avocation. Yet the thing which set this club off
from all others in the world was the midsummer High Jinks.

The club owns a fine tract of redwood forest fifty miles north of San
Francisco on the Russian River. There are two varieties of big trees in
California: the Sequoia gigantea and the Sequoia sempervirens. The great
trees of the Mariposa grove belong to the gigantea species. The
sempervirens, however, reaches the diameter of 16 feet, and some of the
greatest trees of this species are in the Bohemian Club grove. It lies
in a cleft of the mountains: and up one hillside there runs a natural
out of doors stage of remarkable acoustic properties.

In August the whole Bohemian Club, or such as could get away from
business, went up to this grove and camped out for two weeks. On the
last night they put on the Jinks proper, a great spectacle in praise of
the forest with poetic words, music and effects done by the club. In
late years this has been practically a masque or an opera. It cost about
$10,000. It took the spare time of scores of men for weeks; yet these
750 business men, professional men, artists, newspaper workers,
struggled for the honor of helping out on the Jinks; and the whole thing
was done naturally and with reverence. It would not be possible anywhere
else in this country; the thing which made it possible was the art
spirit which is in the Californian. It runs in the blood.

"Who's Who in America" is long on the arts and on learning and
comparatively weak in business and the professions. Now some one who has
taken the trouble has found that more persons mentioned in "Who's Who"
by the thousand of the population were born in Massachusetts, than in
any other state; but that Massachusetts is crowded closely by
California, with the rest nowhere. The institutions of learning in
Massachusetts account for her pre-eminence; the art spirit does it for
California. The really big men nurtured on California influence are few,
perhaps; but she has sent out an amazing number of good workers in
painting, in authorship, in music and especially in acting.

"High society" in San Francisco had settled down from the rather wild
spirit of the middle period; it had come to be there a good deal as it
is elsewhere. There was much wealth; and the hills of the western
addition were growing up with fine mansions. Outside of the city, at
Burlingame, there was a fine country club centering a region of country
estates which stretched out to Menlo Park. This club had a good polo
team, which played every year with teams of Englishmen from southern
California and even with teams from Honolulu.

The foreign quarters are worth an article in themselves. Chief of these
was, of course, Chinatown, of which every one has heard who ever heard
of San Francisco. A district six blocks long and two blocks wide, housed
30,000 Chinese when the quarter was full. The dwellings were old
business blocks of the early days; but the Chinese had added to them,
had rebuilt them, had run out their own balconies and entrances, and had
given the quarter that feeling of huddled irregularity which makes all
Chinese built dwellings fall naturally into pictures. Not only this;
they had burrowed to a depth of a story or two under the ground, and
through this ran passages in which the Chinese transacted their dark and
devious affairs - as the smuggling of opium, the traffic in slave girls
and the settlement of their difficulties.

In the last five years there was less of this underground life than
formerly, for the Board of Health had a cleanup some time ago; but it
was still possible to go from one end of Chinatown to the other through
secret underground passages. The tourist, who always included Chinatown
in his itinerary, saw little of the real quarter. The guides gave him a
show by actors hired for his benefit. In reality the place amounted to a
great deal in a financial way. There were clothing and cigar factories
of importance, and much of the Pacific rice, tea and silk importing was
in the hands of the merchants, who numbered several millionaires.
Mainly, however, it was a Tenderloin for the house servants of the city
- for the San Francisco Chinaman was seldom a laundryman; he was too
much in demand at fancy prices as a servant.

The Chinese lived their own lives in their own way and settled their own
quarrels with the revolvers of their highbinders. There were two
theatres in the quarter, a number of rich joss houses, three newspapers
and a Chinese telephone exchange. There is a race feeling against the
Chinese among the working people of San Francisco, and no white man,
except the very lowest outcasts, lived in the quarter.

On the slopes of Telegraph Hill dwelt the Mexicans and Spanish, in low
houses, which they had transformed by balconies into a semblance of
Spain. Above, and streaming over the hill, were the Italians. The
tenement quarter of San Francisco shone by contrast with those of
Chicago and New York, for while these people lived in old and humble
houses they had room to breathe and an eminence for light and air. Their
shanties clung to the side of the hill or hung on the very edge of the
precipice overlooking the bay, on the verge of which a wall kept their
babies from falling. The effect was picturesque, and this hill was the
delight of painters. It was all more like Italy than anything in the
Italian quarter of New York and Chicago - the very climate and
surroundings, the wine country close at hand, the bay for their lateen
boats, helped them.

Over by the ocean and surrounded by cemeteries in which there are no
more burials, there is an eminence which is topped by two peaks and
which the Spanish of the early days named after the breasts of a woman.
The unpoetic Americans had renamed it Twin Peaks. At its foot was
Mission Dolores, the last mission planted by the Spanish padres in their
march up the coast, and from these hills the Spanish looked for the
first time upon the golden bay.

Many years ago some one set up at the summit of this peak a sixty foot
cross of timber. Once a high wind blew it down, and the women of the
Fair family then had it restored so firmly that it would resist
anything. It has risen for fifty years above the gay, careless,
luxuriant and lovable city, in full view from every eminence and from
every valley. It stands tonight, above the desolation of ruins.

The bonny, merry city - the good, gray city - O that one who has mingled
the wine of her bounding life with the wine of his youth should live to
write the obituary of Old San Francisco!









Title: The Cleveland Era, A Chronicle of the New Order in
Politics

Author: Henry Jones Ford

THIS BOOK, VOLUME 44 IN THE CHRONICLES OF AMERICA SERIES, ALLEN
JOHNSON, EDITOR, WAS DONATED TO PROJECT GUTENBERG BY THE JAMES J.
KELLY LIBRARY OF ST. GREGORY'S UNIVERSITY; THANKS TO ALEV AKMAN.


THE CLEVELAND ERA, A CHRONICLE OF THE NEW ORDER IN POLITICS

BY HENRY JONES FORD

NEW HAVEN: YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS
TORONTO: GLASGOW, BROOK & CO.
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

1919

Volume 44 in the Chronicles of America Series. Abraham Lincoln
Edition.


CONTENTS

I. A TRANSITION PERIOD
II. POLITICAL GROPING AND PARTY FLUCTUATION
III. THE ADVENT OF CLEVELAND
IV. A CONSTITUTIONAL CRISIS
V. PARTY POLICY IN CONGRESS
VI. PRESIDENTIAL KNIGHT-ERRANTRY
VII. THE PUBLIC DISCONTENTS
VIII. THE REPUBLICAN OPPORTUNITY
IX. THE FREE SILVER REVOLT
X. LAW AND ORDER UPHELD
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


THE CLEVELAND ERA


CHAPTER I. A TRANSITION PERIOD

Politicians at Washington very generally failed to realize that
the advent of President Hayes marked the dismissal of the issues
of war and reconstruction. They regarded as an episode what
turned out to be the close of an era. They saw, indeed, that
public interest in the old issues had waned, but they were
confident that this lack of interest was transient. They admitted
that the emotional fervor excited by the war and by the issues of
human right involved in its results was somewhat damped, but they
believed that the settlement of those issues was still so
incomplete that public interest would surely rekindle. For many
years the ruling thought of the Republican party leaders was to
be watchful of any opportunity to ply the bellows on the embers.
Besides genuine concern over the way in which the negroes had
been divested of political privileges conferred by national
legislation, the Republicans felt a tingling sense of party
injury.

The most eminent party leaders at this time--both standing high
as presidential possibilities--were James G. Blaine and John
Sherman. In a magazine article published in 1880 Mr. Blaine
wrote: "As the matter stands, all violence in the South inures to
the benefit of one political party.... Our institutions have been
tried by the fiery test of war, and have survived. It remains to
be seen whether the attempt to govern the country by the power of
a 'solid South,' unlawfully consolidated, can be successful....
The republic must be strong enough, and shall be strong enough,
to protect the weakest of its citizens in all their rights." And
so late as 1884, Mr. Sherman earnestly contended for the
principle of national intervention in the conduct of state
elections. "The war," he said, "emancipated and made citizens of
five million people who had been slaves. This was a national act
and whether wisely or imprudently done it must be respected by
the people of all the States. If sought to be reversed in any
degree by the people of any locality it is the duty of the
national government to make their act respected by all its
citizens."

Republican party platforms reiterated such opinions long after
their practical futility had become manifest. Indeed, it was a
matter of common knowledge that negro suffrage had been undone by
force and fraud; hardly more than a perfunctory denial of the
fact was ever made in Congress, and meanwhile it was a source of
jest and anecdote among members of all parties behind the scenes.
Republican members were bantered by Democratic colleagues upon
the way in which provision for Republican party advantage in the
South had actually given to the Democratic party a solid block of
sure electoral votes. The time at last came when a Southern
Senator, Benjamin Tillman of South Carolina, blurted out in the
open what had for years been common talk in private. "We took the
government away," be asserted. "We stuffed ballot boxes. We shot
them. We are not ashamed of it.... With that system--force,
tissue ballots, etc.--we got tired ourselves. So we called a
constitutional convention, and we eliminated, as I said, all of
the colored people we could under the fourteenth and fifteenth
amendments.... The brotherhood of man exists no longer, because
you shoot negroes in Illinois, when they come in competition with
your labor, and we shoot them in South Carolina, when they come
in competition with us in the matter of elections."

Such a miscarriage of Republican policy was long a bitter
grievance to the leaders of the party and incited them to action.
If they could have had their desire, they would have used
stringent means to remedy the situation. Measures to enforce the
political rights of the freedmen were frequently agitated, but
every force bill which was presented had to encounter a deep and
pervasive opposition not confined by party lines but manifested
even within the Republican party itself. Party platforms insisted
upon the issue, but public opinion steadily disregarded it.
Apparently a fine opportunity to redress this grievance was
afforded by the election of President Harrison in 1888 upon a
platform declaring that the national power of the Democratic
party was due to "the suppression of the ballot by a criminal
nullification of the Constitution and laws of the United States,"
and demanding "effective legislation to secure integrity and
purity of elections." But, although they were victorious at the
polls that year, the Republican leaders were unable to embody in
legislation the ideal proposed in their platform. Of the causes
of this failure, George F. Hoar gives an instructive account in
his "Autobiography." As chairman of the Senate committee on
privileges and elections he was in a position to know all the
details of the legislative attempts, the failure of which
compelled the Republican leaders to acquiesce in the decision of
public opinion against the old issues and in favor of new issues.

Senator Hoar relates that he made careful preparation of a bill
for holding, under national authority, separate registrations and
elections for members of Congress. But when he consulted his
party associates in the Senate he found most of them averse to an
arrangement which would double the cost of elections and would
require citizens to register at different times for federal
elections and for state and municipal elections. Senator Hoar
thereupon abandoned that bill and prepared another which provided
that, upon application to court showing reasonable grounds, the
court should appoint officers from both parties to supervise the
election. The bill adopted a feature of electoral procedure which
in England has had a salutary effect. It was provided that in
case of a dispute concerning an election certificate, the circuit
court of the United States in which the district was situated
should hear the case and should award a certificate entitling the
one or other of the contestants to be placed on the clerk's roll
and to serve until the House should act on the case. Mr. Hoar
stated that the bill "deeply excited the whole country," and went
on to say that "some worthy Republican senators became alarmed.
They thought, with a good deal of reason, that it was better to
allow existing evils and conditions to be cured by time, and the
returning conscience and good sense of the people, rather than
have the strife, the result of which must be quite doubtful,
which the enactment and enforcement of this law, however moderate
and just, would inevitably create." The existence of this
attitude of mind made party advocacy of the bill a hopeless
undertaking and, though it was favorably reported on August 7,
1890, no further action was taken during that session. At the
December session it was taken up for consideration, but after a
few days of debate a motion to lay it aside was carried by the
Democrats with the assistance of enough Republicans to give them
a majority. This was the end of force bills, and during President
Cleveland's second term the few remaining statutes giving
authority for federal interference in such matters was repealed
under the lead of Senator Hill of New York. With the passage of
this act, the Republican party leaders for the first time
abandoned all purpose of attempting to secure by national
legislation the political privileges of the negroes. This
determination was announced is the Senate by Mr. Hoar and was
assented to by Senator Chandler of New Hampshire, who had been a
zealous champion of federal action. According to Mr. Hoar, "no
Republican has dissented from it."

The facts upon which the force bill was based were so notorious
and the bill itself was so moderate in its character that the
general indifference of the public seemed to betray moral
insensibility and emotional torpor. Much could be said in favor
of the bill. This latest assertion of national authority in
federal elections involved no new principle. In legalistic
complexion the proposed measure was of the same character as
previous legislation dealing with this subject, instances of
which are the Act of 1842, requiring the election of members of
the House by districts, and the Act of 1866, regulating the
election of United States Senators. Fraudulent returns in
congressional elections have always been a notorious evil, and
the partisan way in which they are passed upon is still a gross
blemish upon the constitutional system of the United States, and
one which is likely never to be removed until the principle of
judicial determination of electoral contests has been adopted in
this country as it has been in England. The truth of the matter
appears to be that the public paid no attention to the merits of
the bill. It was viewed simply as a continuation of the radical
reconstruction policy, the practical results of which had become
intolerable. However great the actual evils of the situation
might be, public opinion held that it would be wiser to leave
them to be dealt with by state authority than by such incompetent
statesmanship as had been common in Washington. Moreover, the man
in the street resented the indifference of politicians to all
issues save those derived from the Civil War.

Viscount Bryce in his "American Commonwealth," the most complete
and penetrating examination of American political conditions
written during this period, gives this account of the party
situation:

"The great parties are the Republicans and the Democrats. What
are their principles, their distinctive tenets, their tendencies?
Which of them is for tariff reform, for the further extension of
civil service reform, a spirited foreign policy, for the
regulation of railroads and telegraphs by legislation, for
changes in the currency, for any other of the twenty issues which
one hears discussed in this country as seriously involving its
welfare? This is what a European is always asking of intelligent
Republicans and intelligent Democrats. He is always asking
because he never gets an answer. The replies leave him deeper in
perplexity. After some months the truth begins to dawn upon him.
Neither party has, as a party, anything definite to say on these
issues; neither party has any clean-cut principles, any
distinctive tenets. Both have traditions. Both claim to have
tendencies. Both certainly have war cries, organizations,
interests, enlisted in their support. But those interests are in
the main the interests of getting or keeping the patronage of the
government. Tenets and policies, points of political doctrine and
points of political practice have all but vanished. They have not
been thrown away, but have been stripped away by time and the
progress of events, fulfilling some policies, blotting out
others. All has been lost, except office or the hope of it."

That such a situation could actually exist in the face of public
disapproval is a demonstration of the defects of Congress as an
organ of national representation. Normally, a representative
assembly is a school of statesmanship which is drawn upon for
filling the great posts of administration. Not only is this the
case under the parliamentary system in vogue in England, but it
is equally the case in Switzerland whose constitution agrees with
that of the United States in forbidding members of Congress to
hold executive office. But somehow the American Congress fails to
produce capable statesmen. It attracts politicians who display
affability, shrewdness, dexterity, and eloquence, but who are
lacking in discernment of public needs and in ability to provide
for them, so that power and opportunity are often associated with
gross political incompetency.* The solutions of the great
political problems of the United States are accomplished by
transferring to Washington men like Hayes and Cleveland whose
political experience has been gained in other fields.

* Of this regrettable fact the whole history of emancipation is a
monument. The contrast between the social consequences of
emancipation in the West Indies, as guided by British
statesmanship, under conditions of meager industrial opportunity,
and the social consequences of emancipation in the United States,
affords an instructive example of the complicated evils which a
nation may experience through the sheer incapacity of its
government.


The system of congressional government was subjected to some
scrutiny in 1880-81 through the efforts of Senator George H.
Pendleton of Ohio, an old statesman who had returned to public
life after long absence. He had been prominent in the Democratic
party before the war and in 1864 he was the party candidate for
Vice-President. In 1868 he was the leading candidate for the
presidential nomination on a number of ballots, but he was
defeated. In 1869 he was a candidate for Governor of Ohio but was
defeated; he then retired from public life until 1879 when he
was elected to the United States Senate. As a member of that
body, he devoted himself to the betterment of political
conditions. His efforts in this direction were facilitated not
only by his wide political experience but also by the tact and
urbanity of his manners, which had gained for him in Ohio
politics the nickname of "Gentleman George."

In agreement with opinions long previously expressed in Story's
"Commentaries," Senator Pendleton attributed the inefficiency of
national government to the sharp separation of Congress from the
Administration--a separation not required by the Constitution but
made by Congress itself and subject to change at its discretion.
He proposed to admit the heads of executive departments to
participation in the proceedings of Congress. "This system," said
he, "will require the selection of the strongest men to be heads
of departments, and will require them to be well equipped with
the knowledge of their offices. It will also require the
strongest men to be the leaders of Congress and participate in
the debate. It will bring those strong men in contact, perhaps
into conflict, to advance the public weal and thus stimulate
their abilities and their efforts, and will thus assuredly result
to the good of the country."* The report--signed by such party
leaders as Allison, Blaine, and Ingalls among the Republicans,
and by Pendleton and Voorhees among the Democrats--reviewed the
history of relations between the executive and legislative
branches and closed with the expression of the unanimous belief
of the committee that the adoption of the measure "will be the
first step towards a sound civil service reform, which will
secure a larger wisdom in the adoption of policies, and a better
system in their execution."

* "Senate Report," No. 837, 46th Congress, 3d session, February
4, 1881.


No action was taken on this proposal, notwithstanding the favor
with which it was regarded by many close students of the
political institutions of the country. Public opinion,
preoccupied with more specific issues, seemed indifferent to a
reform that aimed simply at general improvement in governmental
machinery. The legislative calendars are always so heaped with
projects that to reach and act upon any particular measure is
impossible, except when there is brought to bear such energetic
pressure as to produce special arrangements for the purpose, and
in this case no such pressure was developed. A companion measure
for civil service reform which was proposed by Senator Pendleton
long remained in a worse situation, for it was not merely left
under the congressional midden heap but was deliberately buried
by politicians who were determined that it should never emerge.
That it did emerge is due to a tragedy which aroused public
opinion to an extent that intimidated Congress.

Want of genuine political principles made factional spirit only
the more violent and depraved. So long as power and opportunity
were based not upon public confidence but upon mere advantage of
position, the contention of party leaders turned upon questions
of appointment to office and the control of party machinery. The
Republican national convention of 1880 was the scene of a
factional struggle which left deep marks upon public life and
caused divisions lasting until the party leaders of that period
were removed from the scene. In September 1879, General Grant
landed in San Francisco, after a tour around the world occupying
over two years, and as he passed through the country he was
received with a warmth which showed that popular devotion was
abounding. A movement in favor of renominating him to the
Presidency was started under the direction of Senator Roscoe
Conkling of New York. Grant's renown as the greatest military
leader of the Civil War was not his only asset in the eyes of his
supporters. In his career as President he had shown, on occasion,
independence and steadfastness of character. He stayed the
greenback movement by his veto after eminent party leaders had
yielded to it. He had endeavored to introduce civil service
reform and, although his measures had been frustrated by the
refusal of Congress to vote the necessary appropriations, his
tenacity of purpose was such that it could scarcely be doubted
that with renewed opportunity he would resume his efforts. The
scandals which blemished the conduct of public affairs during his
administration could not be attributed to any lack of personal
honesty on his part. Grant went out of the presidential office
poorer than when he entered it. Since then, his views had been
broadened by travel and by observation, and it was a reasonable
supposition that he was now better qualified than ever before for
the duties of the presidential office. He was only fifty-eight,
an age much below that at which an active career should be
expected to close, and certainly an age at which European
statesmen are commonly thought to possess unabated powers. In
opposition to him was a tradition peculiar to American politics,
though unsupported by any provision of the Constitution
according to which no one should be elected President for more
than two terms. It may be questioned whether this tradition does
not owe its strength more to the ambition of politicians than to
sincere conviction on the part of the people.*

* The reasoning of "The Federalist," in favor of continued
reeligibility, is cogent in itself and is supported by the
experience of other countries, for it shows that custody of power
may remain in the same hands for long periods without detriment
and without occasioning any difficulty in terminating that
custody when public confidence is withdrawn. American
sensitiveness on this point would seem to impute to the
Constitution a frailty that gives it a low rating among forms of
government. As better means are provided for enforcing
administrative responsibility, the popular dislike of third terms
will doubtless disappear.


So strong was the movement in favor of General Grant as President
that the united strength of the other candidates had difficulty
in staying the boom, which, indeed, might have been successful
but for the arrogant methods and tactical blunders of Senator
Conkling. When three of the delegates voted against a resolution
binding all to support the nominee whoever that nominee might be,
he offered a resolution that those who had voted in the negative
"do not deserve and have forfeited their vote in this
convention." The feeling excited by this condemnatory motion was
so strong that Conkling was obliged to withdraw it. He also made
a contest in behalf of the unit rule but was defeated, as the
convention decided that every delegate should have the right to
have his vote counted as he individually desired. Notwithstanding
these defeats of the chief manager of the movement in his favor,
Grant was the leading candidate with 304 votes on the first
ballot, James G