. Blaine standing second with 284. This was the
highest point in the balloting reached by Blaine, while the
Grant vote made slight gains. Besides Grant and Blaine, four
other candidates were in the field, and the convention drifted
into a deadlock which under ordinary circumstances would have
probably been dissolved by shifts of support to Grant. But in the
preliminary disputes a very favorable impression had been made
upon the convention by General Garfield, who was not himself a
candidate but was supporting the candidacy of John Sherman, who
stood third in the poll. On the twenty-eighth ballot, two votes
were cast for Garfield; although he protested that he was not a
candidate and was pledged to Sherman. But it became apparent that
no concentration could be effected on any other candidate to
prevent the nomination of Grant, and votes now turned to Garfield
so rapidly that on the thirty-sixth ballot he received 399, a
clear majority of the whole. The adherents of Grant stuck to him
to the end, polling 306 votes on the last ballot and subsequently
deporting themselves as those who had made a proud record of
constancy.

The Democratic national convention nominated General Hancock,
which was, in effect, an appeal to the memories and sentiments of
the past, as their candidate's public distinction rested upon his
war record. The canvass was marked by listlessness and
indifference on the part of the general public, and by a fury of
calumny on the part of the politicians directed against their
opponents. Forgery was resorted to with marked effect on the
Pacific coast, where a letter--the famous Morey letter--in which
Garfield's handwriting was counterfeited, was circulated
expressing unpopular views an the subject of Chinese immigration.
The forgery was issued in the closing days of the canvass, when
there was not time to expose it. Arrangements had been made for a
wide distribution of facsimiles which exerted a strong influence.
Hancock won five out of the six electoral votes of California and
came near getting the three votes of Oregon also. In the popular
vote of the whole country, Garfield had a plurality of less than
ten thousand in a total vote of over nine million.

The peculiarities of the party system which has been developed in
American politics, forces upon the President the occupation of
employment agent as one of his principal engagements. The
contention over official patronage, always strong and ardent upon
the accession of every new President, was aggravated in
Garfield's case by the factional war of which his own nomination
was a phase. The factions of the Republican party in New York at
this period were known as the "Stalwarts" and the "Half-Breeds,"
the former adhering to the leadership of Senator Conkling, the
latter to the leadership of Mr. Blaine, whom President Garfield
had appointed to be his Secretary of State. Soon after the
inauguration of Garfield it became manifest that he would favor
the "Half-Breeds"; but under the Constitution appointments are
made by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and both
the Senators from New York were "Stalwarts." Although the
Constitution contemplates the action of the entire Senate as the
advisory body in matters of appointment, a practice had been
established by which the Senators from each State were accorded
the right to dictate appointments in their respective States.
According to Senator Hoar, when he entered public life in 1869,
"the Senate claimed almost the entire control of the executive
function of appointment to office.... What was called 'the
courtesy of the Senate' was depended upon to enable a Senator to
dictate to the executive all appointments and removals in his
territory." This practice was at its greatest height when
President Garfield challenged the system, and he let it be
understood that he would insist upon his constitutional right to
make nominations at his own discretion. When Senator Conkling
obtained from a caucus of his Republican colleagues an expression
of sympathy with his position, the President let it be known that
he regarded such action as an affront and he withdrew all New
York nominations except those to which exception had been taken
by the New York Senators, thus confronting the Senate with the
issue whether they would stand by the new Administration or would
follow Conkling's lead.

On the other hand, Senator Conkling and his adherents declared
the issue to be simply whether competent public officials should
be removed to make room for factional favorites. This view of the
case was adopted by Vice-President Arthur and by
Postmaster-General James of Garfield's own Cabinet, who, with New
York Senators Conkling and Platt, signed a remonstrance in which
they declared that in their belief the interests of the public
service would not be promoted by the changes proposed. These
changes were thus described in a letter of May 14,1881, from the
New York Senators to Governor Cornell of New York:

"Some weeks ago, the President sent to the Senate in a group the
nominations of several persons for public offices already filled.
One of these offices is the Collectorship of the Port of New
York, now held by General Merritt; another is the consul
generalship at London, now held by General Badeau; another is
Charge d'Affaires to Denmark, held by Mr. Cramer; another is the
mission to Switzerland, held by Mr. Fish, a son of the former
Secretary of State.... It was proposed to displace them all, not
for any alleged fault of theirs, or for any alleged need or
advantage of the public service, but in order to give the great
offices of Collector of the Port of New York to Mr. William H.
Robertson as a 'reward' for certain acts of his, said to have
aided in making the nomination of General Garfield possible....
We have not attempted to 'dictate,' nor have we asked the
nomination of one person to any office in the State."

Except in the case of their remonstrance against the Robertson
appointment, they had "never even expressed an opinion to the
President in any case unless questioned in regard to it." Along
with this statement the New York Senators transmitted their
resignations, saying "we hold it respectful and becoming to make
room for those who may correct all the errors we have made, and
interpret aright all the duties we have misconceived."

The New York Legislature was then in session. Conkling and Platt
offered themselves as candidates for reelection, and a protracted
factional struggle ensued; in the course of which, the nation was
shocked by the news that President Garfield had been assassinated
by a disappointed once seeker in a Washington railway station on
July 2, 1881. The President died from the effects of the wound on
the 19th of September. Meanwhile, the contest in the New York
Legislature continued until the 22d of July when the deadlock was
broken by the election of Warner Miller and Elbridge G. Lapham to
fill the vacancies.

The deep disgust with which the nation regarded this factional
war, and the horror inspired by the assassination of President
Garfield, produced a revulsion of public opinion in favor of
civil service reform so energetic as to overcome congressional
antipathy. Senator Pendleton's bill to introduce the merit
system, which had been pending for nearly two years, was passed
by the Senate on December 27, 1882, and by the House on January
4, 1883. The importance of the act lay in its recognition of the
principles of the reform and in its provision of means by which
the President could apply those principles. A Civil Service
Commission was created, and the President was authorized to
classify the Civil Service and to provide selection by
competitive examination for all appointments to the service thus
classified. The law was essentially an enabling act, and its
practical efficacy was contingent upon executive discretion.



CHAPTER II. POLITICAL GROPING AND PARTY FLUCTUATION

President Garfield's career was cut short so soon after his
accession to office, that he had no opportunity of showing
whether he had the will and the power to obtain action for the
redress of public grievances, which the congressional factions
were disposed to ignore. His experience and his attainments were
such as should have qualified him for the task, and in his public
life he had shown firmness of character. His courageous
opposition to the greenback movement in Ohio had been of great
service to the nation in maintaining the standard of value. When
a party convention in his district passed resolutions in favor of
paying interest on the bonds with paper instead of coin, he gave
a rare instance of political intrepidity by declaring that he
would not accept the nomination on such a platform. It was the
deliberate opinion of Senator Hoar, who knew Garfield intimately,
that "next to the assassination of Lincoln, his death was the
greatest national misfortune ever caused to this country by the
loss of a single life."

The lingering illness of President Garfield raised a serious
question about presidential authority which is still unsettled.
For over two months before he died he was unable to attend to any
duties of office. The Constitution provides that "in case of the
removal of the President from office, or of his death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of
the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice-President."
What is the practical significance of the term "inability"? If it
should be accepted in its ordinary meaning, a prostrating illness
would be regarded as sufficient reason for allowing the
Vice-President to assume presidential responsibility. Though
there was much quiet discussion of the problem, no attempt was
made to press a decision. After Garfield died, President Arthur,
on succeeding to the office, took up the matter in his first
annual message, putting a number of queries as to the actual
significance of the language of the Constitution--queries which
have yet to be answered. The rights and duties of the
Vice-President in this particular are dangerously vague. The
situation is complicated by a peculiarity of the electoral
system. In theory, by electing a President the nation expresses
its will respecting public policy; but in practice the candidate
for President may be an exponent of one school of opinion and the
candidate for Vice-President may represent another view. It is
impossible for a voter to discriminate between the two; he cannot
vote for the candidate for President without voting for the
candidate for Vice-President, since he does not vote directly for
the candidates themselves but for the party electors who are
pledged to the entire party ticket. Party conventions take
advantage of this disability on the part of the voter to work an
electioneering device known as a "straddle," the aim of which is
to please opposite interests by giving each a place on the
ticket. After Garfield was nominated, the attempt was made to
placate the defeated faction by nominating one of its adherents
for Vice-President, and now that nominee unexpectedly became the
President of the United States, with power to reverse the policy
of his predecessor.

In one important matter there was, in fact, an abrupt reversal of
policy. The independent countries of North and South America had
been invited to participate in a general congress to be held in
Washington, November 24, 1881. James Gillespie Blaine, who was
then Secretary of State, had applied himself with earnestness and
vigor to this undertaking, which might have produced valuable
results. It was a movement towards closer relations between
American countries, a purpose which has since become public
policy and has been steadily promoted by the Government.
With the inauguration of President Arthur, Blaine was succeeded
by Frederick T. Frelinghuysen of New Jersey, who practically
canceled the invitation to the proposed Congress some six weeks
after it had been issued. On February 3, 1889, Blaine protested
in an open letter to the President, and the affair occasioned
sharp discussion. In his regular message to Congress in the
following December, the President offered excuses of an evasive
character, pointing out that Congress had made no appropriation
for expenses and declaring that he had thought it "fitting that
the Executive should consult the representatives of the people
before pursuing a line of policy somewhat novel in its character
and far-reaching in its possible consequences."

In general, President Arthur behaved with a tact and prudence
that improved his position in public esteem. It soon became
manifest that, although he had been Conkling's adherent, he was
not his servitor. He conducted the routine business of the
presidential office with dignity, and he displayed independence
of character in his relations with Congress. But his powers were
so limited by the conditions under which he had to act that to a
large extent public interests had to drift along without
direction and management. In some degree, the situation resembled
that which existed in the Holy Roman Empire when a complicated
legalism kept grinding away and pretentious forms of authority
were maintained, although, meanwhile, there was actual
administrative impotence. Striking evidence of the existence of
such a situation is found in President Arthur's messages to
Congress.

In his message of December 6, 1881, the President mentioned the
fact that in the West "a band of armed desperadoes known as
'Cowboys,' probably numbering fifty to one hundred men, have been
engaged for months in committing acts of lawlessness and
brutality which the local authorities have been unable to
repress." He observed that "with every disposition to meet the
exigencies of the case, I am embarrassed by lack of authority to
deal with them effectually." The center of disturbance was in
Arizona, and the punishment of crime there was ordinarily the
business of the local authorities. But even if they called for
aid, said the President, "this Government would be powerless to
render assistance," for the laws had been altered by Congress so
that States but not Territories could demand the protection of
the national Government against "domestic violence." He
recommended legislation extending to the Territories "the
protection which is accorded the States by the Constitution." On
April 26, 1882, the President sent a special message to Congress
on conditions in Arizona, announcing that "robbery, murder, and
resistance to laws have become so common as to cease causing
surprise, and that the people are greatly intimidated and losing
confidence in the protection of the law." He also advised
Congress that the "Cowboys" were making raids into Mexico, and
again begged for legal authority to act. On the 3rd of May, he
issued a proclamation calling upon the outlaws "to disperse and
retire peaceably to their respective abodes." In his regular
annual message on December 4, 1882, he again called attention "to
the prevalent lawlessness upon the borders, and to the necessity
of legislation for its suppression."

Such vast agitation from the operations of a band of ruffians,
estimated at from fifty to one hundred in number, and such
floundering incapacity for prompt action by public authority seem
more like events from a chronicle of the Middle Ages than from
the public records of a modern nation. Of like tenor, was a
famous career which came to an end in this period. Jesse W.
James, the son of a Baptist minister in Clay County, Missouri,
for some years carried on a bandit business, specializing in the
robbery of banks and railroad trains, with takings computed at
$263,778. As his friends and admirers were numerous, the elective
sheriffs, prosecuting attorneys, and judges in the area of his
activities were unable to stop him by any means within their
reach. Meanwhile, the frightened burghers of the small towns in
his range of operations were clamoring for deliverance from his
raids, and finally Governor Crittenden of Missouri offered a
reward of $10,000 for his capture dead or alive. Two members of
his own band shot him down in his own house, April 3, 1882. They
at once reported the deed and surrendered themselves to the
police, were soon put on trial, pleaded guilty of murder, were
sentenced to death, and were at once pardoned by the Governor.
Meanwhile, the funeral ceremonies over Jesse James's remains drew
a great concourse of people, and there were many indications of
popular sympathy. Stories of his exploits have had an extensive
sale, and his name has become a center of legend and ballad
somewhat after the fashion of the medieval hero Robin Hood.

The legislative blundering which tied the President's hands and
made the Government impotent to protect American citizens from
desperadoes of the type of the "cowboys" and Jesse James, is
characteristic of Congress during this period. Another example of
congressional muddling is found in an act which was passed for
the better protection of ocean travel and which the President
felt constrained to veto. In his veto message of July 1, 1882,
the President said that he was entirely in accord with the
purpose of the bill which related to matters urgently demanding
legislative attention. But the bill was so drawn that in practice
it would have caused great confusion in the clearing of vessels
and would have led to an impossible situation. It was not the
intention of the bill to do what the President found its language
to require, and the defects were due simply to maladroit
phrasing, which frequently occurs in congressional enactments,
thereby giving support to the theory of John Stuart Mill that a
representative assembly is by its very nature unfit to prepare
legislative measures.

The clumsy machinery of legislation kept bungling on,
irresponsive to the principal needs and interests of the times.
An ineffectual start was made on two subjects presenting simple
issues on which there was an energetic pressure of popular
sentiment--Chinese immigration and polygamy among the Mormons.
Anti-Chinese legislation had to contend with a traditional
sentiment in favor of maintaining the United States as an asylum
for all peoples. But the demand from the workers of the Pacific
slope for protection against Asiatic competition in the home
labor market was so fierce and so determined that Congress
yielded. President Arthur vetoed a bill prohibiting Chinese
immigration as "a breach of our national faith," but he admitted
the need of legislation on the subject and finally approved a
bill suspending immigration from China for a term of years. This
was a beginning of legislation which eventually arrived at a
policy of complete exclusion. The Mormon question was dealt with
by the Act of March 22, 1882, imposing penalties upon the
practice of polygamy and placing the conduct of elections in the
Territory of Utah under the supervision of a board of five
persons appointed by the President. Though there were many
prosecutions under this act, it proved so ineffectual in
suppressing polygamy that it was eventually supplemented by
giving the Government power to seize and administer the property
of the Mormon Church. This action, resulting from the Act of
March 3, 1887, created a momentous precedent. The escheated
property was held by the Government until 1896 and meanwhile, the
Mormon Church submitted to the law and made a formal declaration
that it had abandoned polygamy.

Another instance in which a lack of agreement between the
executive and the legislative branches of the Government
manifested itself, arose out of a scheme which President Arthur
recommended to Congress for the improvement of the waterways of
the Mississippi and its tributaries. The response of Congress was
a bill in which there was an appropriation of about $4,000,000
for the general improvements recommended, but about $14,000,000
were added for other special river and harbor schemes which had
obtained congressional favor. President Arthur's veto message of
August 1, 1882, condemned the bill because it contained
provisions designed "entirely for the benefit of the particular
localities in which it is proposed to make the improvements." He
thus described a type of legislation of which the nation had and
is still having bitter experience: "As the citizens of one State
find that money, to raise which they in common with the whole
country are taxed, is to be expended for local improvements in
another State, they demand similar benefits for themselves, and
it is not unnatural that they should seek to indemnify themselves
for such use of the public funds by securing appropriations for
similar improvements in their own neighborhood. Thus as the bill
becomes more objectionable it secures more support." The truth of
this last assertion Congress immediately proved by passing the
bill over the President's veto. Senator Hoar, who defended the
bill, has admitted that "a large number of the members of the
House who voted for it lost their seats" and that in his opinion
the affair "cost the Republican party its majority in the House
of Representatives."

Legislation regarding the tariff was, however, the event of
Arthur's administration which had the deepest effect upon the
political situation. Both national parties were reluctant to face
the issue, but the pressure of conditions became too strong for
them. Revenue arrangements originally planned for war needs were
still amassing funds in the Treasury vaults which were now far
beyond the needs of the Government, and were at the same time
deranging commerce and industry. In times of war, the Treasury
served as a financial conduit; peace had now made it a catch
basin whose excess accumulations embarrassed the Treasury and at
the same time, caused the business world to suffer from a
scarcity of currency. In his annual message on December 6, 1881,
President Arthur cautiously observed that it seemed to him "that
the time has arrived when the people may justly demand some
relief from the present onerous burden." In his message of
December 4, 1882, he was much more emphatic. Calling attention to
the fact that the annual surplus had increased to more than
$145,000,000, he observed that "either the surplus must lie idle
in the Treasury or the Government will be forced to buy at market
rates its bonds not then redeemable, and which under such
circumstances cannot fail to command an enormous premium, or the
swollen revenues will be devoted to extravagant expenditures,
which, as experience has taught, is ever the bane of an
overflowing treasury."

The congressional agents of the protected industries were
confronted by an exacting situation. The country was at peace but
it was still burdened by war taxes, although the Government did
not need the accumulating revenue and was actually embarrassed by
its excess. The President had already made himself the spokesman
of the popular demand for a substantial reduction of taxes. Such
a combination of forces in favor of lightening the popular burden
might seem to be constitutionally irresistible, but by adroit
maneuvering the congressional supporters of protection managed to
have the war rates generally maintained and, in some cases, even
increased. The case is a typical example of the way in which
advantage of strategic position in a governmental system can
prevail against mere numbers.

By the Act of May 15, 1882, a tariff commission was created to
examine the industrial situation and make recommendations as to
rates of duty. The President appointed men who stood high in the
commercial world and who were strongly attached to the protective
system. They applied themselves to their task with such energy
that by December 4, 1882, they had produced a voluminous report
with suggested amendments to customs laws.

But the advocates of high protection in the House were not
satisfied; they opposed the recommendations of the report and
urged that the best and quickest way to reduce taxation was by
abolishing or reducing items on the internal revenue list. This
policy not only commanded support on the Republican side, but
also received the aid of a Democratic faction which avowed
protectionist principles and claimed party sanction for them.
These political elements in the House were strong enough to
prevent action on the customs tariff, but a bill was passed
reducing some of the internal revenue taxes. This action seemed
likely to prevent tariff revision at least during that session.
Formidable obstacles, both constitutional and parliamentary,
stood in the way of action, but they were surmounted by ingenious
management.

The Constitution provides that all revenue bills shall originate
in the House of Representatives, but the Senate has the right to
propose amendments. Under cover of this clause the Senate
originated a voluminous tariff bill and tacked it to the House
bill as an amendment. When the bill, as thus amended, came back
to the House, a two-thirds vote would have been required by the
existing rules to take it up for consideration, but this obstacle
was overcome by adopting a new rule by which a bare majority of
the House could forthwith take up a bill amended by the Senate,
for the purpose of non-concurrence but not for concurrence. The
object of this maneuver was to get the bill into a committee of
conference where the details could be arranged by private
negotiation. The rule was adopted on February 26, 1883, but the
committee of conference was not finally constituted until the 1st
of March, within two days of the close of the session. On the 3rd
of March, when this committee reported a measure on which they
had agreed, both Houses adopted this report and enacted the
measure without further ado.

In some cases, rates were fixed by the committee above the
figures voted in either House and even when there was no
disagreement, changes were made. The tariff commission had
recommended, for example, a duty of fifty cents a ton on iron
ore, and both the Senate and the House voted to put the duty at
that figure; but the conference committee fixed the rate at
seventy-five cents. When a conference committee report comes
before the House, it is adopted or rejected in toto, as it is not
divisible or amendable. In theory, the revision of a report is
feasible by sending it back to conference under instructions
voted by the House, but such a procedure is not really available
in the closing hours of a session, and the only practical course
of action is either to pass the bill as shaped by the conferees
or else to accept the responsibility for inaction. Thus pressed
for time, Congress passed a bill containing features obnoxious to
a majority in both Houses and offensive to public opinion.
Senator Sherman in his "Recollections" expressed regret that he
had voted for the bill and declared that, had the recommendations
of the tariff commission been adopted, "the tariff would have
been settled for many years," but "many persons wishing to
advance their particular industries appeared before the committee
and succeeded in having their views adopted." In his annual
message, December 4, 1883, President Arthur accepted the act as a
response to the demand for a reduction of taxation, which was
sufficiently tolerable to make further effort inexpedient until
its effects could be definitely ascertained; but he remarked that
he had "no doubt that still further reductions may be wisely
made."

In general, President Arthur's administration may therefore be
accurately described as a period of political groping and party
fluctuation. In neither of the great national parties was there a
sincere and definite attitude on the new issues which were
clamorous for attention, and the public discontent was reflected
in abrupt changes of political support. There was a general
feeling of distrust regarding the character and capacity of the
politicians at Washington, and election results were apparently
dictated more by fear than by hope. One party would be raised up
and the other party cast down, not because the one was trusted
more than the other, but because it was for a while less odious.
Thus a party success might well be a prelude to a party disaster
because neither party knew how to improve its political
opportunity. The record of party fluctuation in Congress during
this period is almost unparalleled in sharpness.*

* In 1875, at the opening of the Forty-fourth Congress, the House
stood 110 Republicans and 182 Democrats. In 1881, the House stood
150 Republicans to 131 Democrats, with 12 Independent members. In
1884, the Republican list had declined to 119 and the Democratic
had grown to 201, and there were five Independents. The Senate,
although only a third of its membership is renewed every two
years, displayed extraordinary changes during this period. The
Republican membership of 46 in 1876 had declined to 33 by 1880,
and the Democratic membership had increased to 42. In 1882, the
Senate was evenly balanced in party strength, each party having
37 avowed adherents, but there were two Independents.


In state politics, the polling showed that both parties were
disgusted with their leadership and that there was a public
indifference to issues which kept people away from the polls. A
comparison of the total vote cast in state elections in 1882 with
that cast in the presidential election of 1880, showed a decline
of over eight hundred thousand in the Republican vote and of
nearly four hundred thousand in the Democratic vote. The most
violent of the party changes that took place during this period
occurred in the election of 1882, in New York State, when the
Republican vote showed a decline of over two hundred thousand and
the Democratic candidate for Governor was elected by a plurality
of nearly that amount. It was this election which brought Grover
Cleveland into national prominence.



CHAPTER III. THE ADVENT OF CLEVELAND

Popular dissatisfaction with the behavior of public authority had
not up to this time extended to the formal Constitution. Schemes
of radical rearrangement of the political institutions of the
country had not yet been agitated. New party movements were
devoted to particular measures such as fresh greenback issues or
the prohibition of liquor traffic. Popular reverence for the
Constitution was deep and strong, and it was the habit of the
American people to impute practical defects not to the
governmental system itself but to the character of those acting
in it. Burke, as long ago as 1770, remarked truly that "where
there is a regular scheme of operations carried on, it is the
system and not any individual person who acts in it that is truly
dangerous." But it is an inveterate habit of public opinion to
mistake results for causes and to vent its resentment upon
persons when misgovernment occurs. That disposition was bitterly
intense at this period. "Turn the rascals out" was the ordinary
campaign slogan of an opposition party, and calumny formed the
staple of its argument. Of course no party could establish
exclusive proprietorship to such tactics, and whichever party
might be in power in a particular locality was cast for the
villain's part in the political drama. But as changes of party
control took place, experience taught that the only practical
result was to introduce new players into the same old game. Such
experience spread among the people a despairing feeling that
American politics were hopelessly depraved, and at the same time
it gave them a deep yearning for some strong deliverer. To this
messianic hope of politics may be ascribed what is in some
respects the most remarkable career in the political history of
the United States. The rapid and fortuitous rise of Grover
Cleveland to political eminence is without a parallel in the
records of American statesmanship, notwithstanding many instances
of public distinction attained from humble beginnings.

The antecedents of Cleveland were Americans of the best type. He
was descended from a colonial stock which had settled in the
Connecticut Valley. His earliest ancestor of whom there is any
exact knowledge was Aaron Cleveland, an Episcopal clergyman, who
died at East Haddam, Connecticut, in 1757, after founding a
family which in every generation furnished recruits to the
ministry. It argues a hereditary disposition for independent
judgment that among these there was a marked variation in
denominational choice. Aaron Cleveland was so strong in his
attachment to the Anglican church that to be ordained he went to
England--under the conditions of travel in those days a hard,
serious undertaking. His son, also named Aaron, became a
Congregational minister. Two of the sons of the younger Aaron
became ministers, one of them an Episcopalian like his
grandfather. Another son, William, who became a prosperous
silversmith, was for many years a deacon in the church in which
his father preached. William sent his second son, Richard, to
Yale, where he graduated with honors at the age of nineteen. He
turned to the Presbyterian church, studied theology at Princeton,
and upon receiving ordination began a ministerial career which
like that of many preachers was carried on in many pastorates. He
was settled at Caldwell, New Jersey, in his third pastorate, and
there Stephen Grover Cleveland was born, on March 18, 1837, the
fifth in a family of children that eventually increased to nine.
He was named after the Presbyterian minister who was his father's
predecessor. The first name soon dropped out of use, and from
childhood he went by his middle name, a practice of which the
Clevelands supply so many instances that it seems to be quite a
family trait.

In campaign literature, so much has been made of the humble
circumstances in which Grover made his start in life that the
unwary reader might easily imagine that the future President was
almost a waif. Nothing could be farther from the truth. He really
belonged to the most authentic aristocracy that any state of
society can produce--that which maintains its standards and
principles from generation to generation by the integrity of the
stock without any endowment of wealth. The Clevelands were people
who reared large families and sustained themselves with dignity
and credit on narrow means. It was a settled tradition with such
republican aristocrats that a son destined for a learned
profession--usually the ministry--should be sent to college, and
for that purpose heroic economies were practiced in the family.
The opportunities which wealth can confer are really trivial in
comparison with the advantage of being born and reared in such
bracing conditions as those which surrounded Grover Cleveland. As
a boy he was a clerk in a country store, but his education was
not neglected and at the age of fifteen he was studying, with a
view to entering college. His father's death ended that prospect
and forced him to go to work again to help support the family.
Some two years later, when the family circumstances were
sufficiently eased so that he could strike out for himself, he
set off westward, intending to reach Cleveland. Arriving at
Buffalo, he called upon a married aunt, who, on learning that he
was planning to get work at Cleveland with the idea of becoming a
lawyer, advised him to stay in Buffalo where opportunities were
better. Young Cleveland was taken into her home virtually as
private secretary to her husband, Lewis F. Allen, a man of means,
culture, and public spirit. Allen occupied a large house with
spacious grounds in a suburb of the city, and owned a farm on
which he bred fine cattle. He issued the "American Short-Horn
Herd Book," a standard authority for pedigree stock, and the
fifth edition, published in 1861, made a public acknowledgment of
"the kindness, industry, and ability" with which Grover Cleveland
had assisted the editor "in correcting and arranging the
pedigrees for publication."

With his uncle's friendship to back him, Cleveland had, of
course, no difficulty in getting into a reputable law office as a
student, and thereafter his affairs moved steadily along the road
by which innumerable young Americans of diligence and industry
have advanced to success in the legal profession. Cleveland's
career as a lawyer was marked by those steady, solid gains in
reputation which result from care and thoroughness rather than
from brilliancy, and in these respects it finds many parallels
among lawyers of the trustee type. What is exceptional and
peculiar in Cleveland's career is the way in which political
situations formed about him without any contrivance on his part,
and as it were projected him from office to office until he
arrived in the White House.

At the outset nothing could have seemed more unlikely than such a
career. Cleveland's ambitions were bound up in his profession and
his politics were opposed to those of the powers holding local
control. But the one circumstance did not shut him out of
political vocation and the other became a positive advantage. He
entered public life in 1863 through an unsought appointment as
assistant district attorney for Erie County. The incumbent of the
office was in poor health and needed an assistant on whom he
could rely to do the work. Hence Cleveland was called into
service. His actual occupancy of the position prompted his party
to nominate him to the office; and although he was defeated, he
received a vote so much above the normal voting strength of his
party that, in 1869, he was picked for the nomination to the
office of sheriff to strengthen a party ticket made up in the
interest of a congressional candidate. The expectation was that
while the district might be carried for the Democratic candidate
for Congress, Cleveland would probably fail of election. The
nomination was virtually forced upon him against his wishes. But
he was elected by a small plurality. This success, reenforced by
his able conduct of the office, singled him out as the party's
hope for success in the Buffalo municipal election; and after his
term as sheriff he was nominated for mayor, again without any
effort on his part. Although ordinarily the Democratic party was
in a hopeless minority, Cleveland was elected. It was in this
campaign that he enunciated the principle that public office is a
public trust, which was his rule of action throughout his career.
Both as sheriff and as mayor he acted upon it with a vigor that
brought him into collision with predatory politicians, and the
energy and address with which he defended public interests made
him widely known as the reform mayor of Buffalo. His record and
reputation naturally attracted the attention of the state
managers of the Democratic party, who were casting about for a
candidate strong enough to overthrow the established Republican
control, and Cleveland was just as distinctly drafted for the
nomination to the governorship in 1882 as he had been for his
previous offices.

In his career as governor Cleveland displayed the same stanch
characteristics as before, and he was fearless and aggressive in
maintaining his principles. The most striking characteristic of
his veto messages is the utter absence of partisan or personal
designs. Some of the bills he vetoed purported to benefit labor
interests, and politicians are usually fearful of any appearance
of opposition to such interests: His veto of the bill
establishing a five cent fare for the New York elevated railways
was an action of a kind to make him a target for calumny and
misrepresentation. Examination of the record reveals no instance
in which Cleveland flinched from doing his duty or faltered in
the full performance of it. He acted throughout in his avowed
capacity of a public trustee, and he conducted the office of
governor with the same laborious fidelity which he had displayed
as sheriff and as mayor. And now, as before, he antagonized
elements of his own party who sought only the opportunities of
office and cared little for its responsibilities. He did not
unite suavity of manner with vigor of action, and at times he
allowed himself to reflect upon the motives of opponents and to
use language that was personally offensive. He told the
Legislature in one veto message that "of all the defective and
shabby legislation which has been presented to me, this is the
worst and most inexcusable." He once sent a scolding message to
the State Senate, in which he said that "the money of the State
is apparently expended with no regard to economy," and that
"barefaced jobbery has been permitted." The Senate having refused
to confirm a certain appointee, he declared that the opposition
had "its rise in an overwhelming greed for the patronage which
may attach to the place," and that the practical effect of such
opposition was to perpetuate "the practice of unblushing
peculation." What he said was quite true and it was the kind of
truth that hurt. The brusqueness of his official style and the
censoriousness of his language infused even more personal
bitterness into the opposition which developed within his own
party than in that felt in the ranks of the opposing party. At
the same time, these traits delighted a growing body of reformers
hostile to both the regular parties. These "Mugwumps," as they
were called, were as a class so addicted to personal invective
that it was said of them with as much truth as wit that they
brought malice into politics without even the excuse of
partisanship. But it was probably the enthusiastic support of
this class which turned the scale in New York in the presidential
election of 1884.

In the national conventions of that year, there was an unusually
small amount of factional strife. In the Republican convention,
President Arthur was a candidate, but party sentiment was so
strong for Blaine that he led Arthur on the first ballot and was
nominated on the fourth by a large majority. In the Democratic
convention, Cleveland was nominated on the second ballot.
Meanwhile, his opponents had organized a new party from which
more was expected than it actually accomplished. It assumed the
title Anti-Monopoly and chose the notorious demagogue, General
Benjamin F. Butler, as its candidate for President.

During this campaign, the satirical cartoon attained a power and
an effectiveness difficult to realize now that it has become an
ordinary feature of journalism, equally available for any school
of opinion. But it so happened that the rise of Cleveland in
politics coincided with the artistic career of Joseph Keppler,
who came to this country from Vienna and who for some years
supported himself chiefly as an actor in Western theatrical
companies. He had studied drawing in Vienna and had contributed
cartoons to periodicals in that city. After some unsuccessful
ventures in illustrated journalism, he started a pictorial weekly
in New York in 1875. It was originally printed in German, but in
less than a year it was issued also in English. It was not until
1879 that it sprang into general notice through Keppler's success
in reproducing lithographed designs in color. Meanwhile, the
artist was feeling his way from the old style caricature, crowded
with figures with overhead loops of explanatory text, to designs
possessing an artistic unity expressive of an idea plain enough
to tell its own story. He had matured both his mechanical
resources and his artistic method by the time the campaign of
1884 came on, and he had founded a school which could apply the
style to American politics with aptness superior to his own. It
was Bernhard Gillam, who, working in the new Keppler style,
produced a series of cartoons whose tremendous impressiveness was
universally recognized. Blaine was depicted as the tattooed man
and was exhibited in that character in all sorts of telling
situations. While on the stump during the campaign, Blaine had
sometimes literally to wade through campaign documents assailing
his personal integrity, and phrases culled from them were chanted
in public processions. One of the features of a great parade of
business men of New York was a periodical chorus of "Burn this
letter," suiting the action to the word and thus making a
striking pyrotechnic display.* But the cartoons reached people
who would never have been touched by campaign documents or by
campaign processions.

* The allusion was to the Mulligan letters, which had been made
public by Mr. Blaine himself when it had been charged that they
contained evidence of corrupt business dealings. The disclosure
bad been made four years before and ample opportunity had existed
for instituting proceedings if the case warranted it, but nothing
was done except to nurse the scandal for campaign use.


Notwithstanding the exceptional violence and novel ingenuity of
the attacks made upon him, Blaine met them with such ability and
address that everywhere he augmented the ordinary strength of his
party, and his eventual defeat was generally attributed to an
untoward event among his own adherents at the close of the
campaign. At a political reception in the interest of Blaine
among New York clergymen, the Reverend Dr. Burchard spoke of the
Democratic party as "the party of rum, Romanism, and rebellion."
Unfortunately Blaine did not hear him distinctly enough to
repudiate this slur upon the religious belief of millions of
American citizens, and alienation of sentiment caused by the
tactless and intolerant remark could easily account for Blaine's
defeat by a small margin. He was only 1149 votes behind Cleveland
in New York in a poll of over 1,125,000 votes, and only 23,005
votes behind in a national poll of over 9,700,000 votes for the
leading candidates. Of course Cleveland in his turn was a target
of calumny, and in his case the end of the campaign did not bring
the customary relief. He was pursued to the end of his public
career by active, ingenious, resourceful, personal spite and
steady malignity of political opposition from interests whose
enmity he had incurred while Governor of New York.

The situation which confronted Cleveland when he became President
was so complicated and embarrassing that perhaps even the most
sagacious and resourceful statesman could not have coped with it
successfully, though it is the characteristic of genius to
accomplish the impossible. But Cleveland was no genius; he was
not even a man of marked talent. He was stanch, plodding,
laborious, and dutiful; but he was lacking in ability to
penetrate to the heart of obscure political problems and to deal
with primary causes rather than with effects. The great successes
of his administration were gained in particular problems whose
significance had already been clearly defined. In this field,
Cleveland's resolute and energetic performance of duty had
splendid results.

At the time of Cleveland's inauguration as President, the Senate
claimed an extent of authority which, if allowed to go
unchallenged, would have turned the Presidency into an office
much like that of the doge of Venice, one of ceremonial dignity
without real power. "The Federalist"--that matchless collection
of constitutional essays written by Hamilton, Madison, and
Jay--laid down the doctrine that "against the enterprising
ambition" of the legislative department "the people ought to
indulge all their jealousy and exhaust all their precautions."
But some of the precautions taken in framing the Constitution
proved ineffectual from the start. The right conferred upon the
President to recommend to the consideration of Congress "such
measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient," was emptied
of practical importance by the success of Congress in
interpreting it as meaning no more than that the President may
request Congress to take a subject into consideration. In
practice, Congress considers only such measures as are
recommended by its own committees. The framers of the
Constitution took special pains to fortify the President's
position by the veto power, which is treated at length in the
Constitution. By a special clause, the veto power was extended to
"every order, resolution or vote... except on a question of
adjournment"--a clause which apparently should enable the
President to strike off the "riders" continually put upon
appropriation bills to coerce executive action; but no President
has ventured to exercise this authority. Although the Senate was
joined to the President as an advisory council in appointments to
office, it was explained in "The Federalist" that "there will be
no exertion of choice on the part of Senators." Nevertheless, the
Senate has claimed and exercised the right to dictate
appointments. While thus successfully encroaching upon the
authority of the President, the Senate had also been signally
successful in encroaching upon the authority of the House. The
framers of the Constitution anticipated for the House a masterful
career like that of the House of Commons, and they feared that
the Senate could not protect itself in the discharge of its own
functions; so, although the traditional principle that all
revenue bills should originate in the House was taken over into
the Constitution, it was modified by the proviso that "the Senate
may propose or concur with amendments as on other bills." This
right to propose amendments has been improved by the Senate until
the prerogative of the House has been reduced to an empty form.
Any money bill may be made over by amendment in the Senate, and
when contests have followed, the Senate has been so successful in
imposing its will upon the House that the House has acquired the
habit of submission. Not long before the election of Cleveland,
as has been pointed out, this habitual deference of the House had
enabled the Senate to originate a voluminous tariff act in the
form of an amendment to the Internal Revenue Bill voted by the
House.

In addition to these extensions of power through superior address
in management, the ascendancy of the Senate was fortified by
positive law. In 1867, when President Johnson fell out with the
Republican leaders in Congress, a Tenure of Office Act was passed
over his veto, which took away from the President the power of
making removals except by permission of the Senate. In 1869, when
Johnson's term had expired, a bill for the unconditional repeal
of this law passed the House with only sixteen votes in the
negative, but the Senate was able to force a compromise act which
perpetuated its authority over removals.* President Grant
complained of this act as "being inconsistent with a faithful and
efficient administration of the government," but with all his
great fame and popularity he was unable to induce the Senate to
relinquish the power it had gained.

* The Act of April 5, 1869, required the President, within thirty
days after the opening of the sessions, to nominate persons for
all vacant offices, whether temporarily filled or not, and in
place of all officers who may have been suspended during the
recess of the Senate.


This law was now invoked by Republicans as a means of
counteracting the result of the election. Such was the feeling of
the times that partisanship could easily masquerade as
patriotism. Republicans still believed that as saviors of the
Union they had a prescriptive right to the government. During the
campaign, Eugene Field, the famous Western poet, had given a
typical expression of this sentiment in some scornful verses
concluding with this defiant notice:

These quondam rebels come today
In penitential form,
And hypocritically say
The country needs "Reform!"
Out on reformers such as these;
By Freedom's sacred powers,
We'll run the country as we please;
We saved it, and it's ours.

Although the Democratic party had won the Presidency and the
House, the Republicans still retained control of the Senate, and
they were expected as a matter of course to use their powers for
party advantage. Some memorable struggles, rich in constitutional
precedents, issued from these conditions.



CHAPTER IV. A CONSTITUTIONAL CRISIS

As soon as Cleveland was seated in the presidential chair, he had
to deal with a tremendous onslaught of office seekers. In
ordinary business affairs, a man responsible for general policy
and management would never be expected to fritter away his time
and strength in receiving applicants for employment. The fact
that such servitude is imposed upon the President of the United
States shows that American political arrangements are still
rather barbaric, for such usages are more 