suitable to some
kinglet seated under a tree to receive the petitions of his
tribesmen than they are to a republican magistrate charged with
the welfare of millions of people distributed over a vast
continent. Office seekers apparently regard themselves as a
privileged class with a right of personal access to the
President, and any appearances of aloofness or reserve on his
part gives sharp offense. The exceptional force of such claims of
privilege in the United States may be attributed to the
participation which members of Congress have acquired in the
appointing power. The system thus created imposes upon the
President the duties of an employment agent, and at the same time
engages Congressmen in continual occupation as office brokers.
The President cannot deny himself to Congressmen, since he is
dependent upon their favor for opportunity to get legislative
consideration for his measures.

It was inevitable that numerous changes in office should take
place when the Democratic party came into power, after being
excluded for twenty-four years. It may be admitted that, in a
sound constitutional system, a change of management in the public
business would not vacate all offices any more than in private
business, but would affect only such leading positions as are
responsible for policy and discipline. Such a sensible system,
however, had existed only in the early days of the republic and
at the time of Cleveland's accession to office federal offices
were generally used as party barracks. The situation which
confronted President Cleveland he thus described in later years:

"In numerous instances the post-offices were made headquarters
for local party committees and organizations and the centers of
partisan scheming. Party literature favorable to the postmaster's
party, that never passed regularly through the mails, was
distributed through the post-offices as an item of party service;
and matter of a political character, passing through the mails in
the usual course and addressed to patrons belonging to the
opposite party, was withheld; disgusting and irritating placards
were prominently displayed in many post-offices, and the
attention of Democratic inquirers for mail matter was tauntingly
directed to them by the postmaster; and in various other ways
postmasters and similar officials annoyed and vexed those holding
opposite political opinions, who, in common with all having
business at public offices, were entitled to considerate and
obliging treatment. In some quarters, official incumbents
neglected public duty to do political work and especially in
Southern States, they frequently were not only inordinately
active in questionable political work, but sought to do party
service by secret and sinister manipulation of colored votes, and
by other practices inviting avoidable and dangerous collisions
between the white and colored population."*

*Cleveland, "Presidential Problems," pp. 42-43.


The Administration began its career in March, 1885. The Senate
did not convene until December. Meanwhile, removals and
appointments went on in the public service, the total for ten
months being six hundred and forty-three which was thirty-seven
less than the number of removals made by President Grant in seven
weeks, in 1869.

In obedience to the statute of 1869, President Cleveland sent in
all the recess appointments within thirty days after the opening
of the session. They were referred to various committees
according to the long established custom of the Senate, but the
Senate moved so slowly that three months after the opening of the
session, only seventeen nominations had been considered, fifteen
of which the Senate confirmed.

Meanwhile, the Senate had raised an issue which the President met
with a force and a directness probably unexpected. Among the
recess appointments was one to the office of District Attorney
for the Southern District of Alabama, in place of an officer who
had been suspended in July 1885, but whose term of office
expired by limitation on December 20, 1885. Therefore, at the
time the Senate took up the case, the Tenure of Office Act did
not apply to it, and the only question actually open was whether
the acting officer should be confirmed or rejected. Nevertheless,
the disposition to assert control over executive action was so
strong that the Senate drifted into a constitutional struggle
over a case that did not then involve the question of the
President's discretionary power of removal from office, which was
really the point at issue.

On December 26, 1885, the Judiciary Committee notified the
Attorney-General to transmit "all papers and information in the
possession of the Department" regarding both the nomination and
"the suspension and proposed removal from office" of the former
incumbent. On January 11, 1886, the Attorney-General sent to the
Committee the papers bearing upon the nomination, but withheld
those touching the removal on the ground that he had "received
no direction from the President in relation to their
transmission." The matter was debated by the Senate in executive
session and on January 25, 1886, a resolution was adopted which
was authoritative in its tone and which directed the
Attorney-General to transmit copies of all documents and papers
in relation to the conduct of the office of District Attorney for
the Southern District of Alabama since January 1, 1885. Within
three days, Attorney-General Garland responded that he had
already transmitted all papers relating to the nomination; but
with regard to the demand for papers exclusively relating to the
suspension of the former incumbent he was directed by the
President to say "that it is not considered that the public
interests will be promoted by a compliance."

The response of the Attorney-General was referred to the
Judiciary Committee which, on the 18th of February, made an
elaborate report exhibiting the issue as one which involved the
right of Congress to obtain information. It urged that "the
important question, then, is whether it is within the
constitutional competence of either House of Congress to have
access to the official papers and documents in the various public
offices of the United States, created by laws enacted by
themselves." The report, which was signed only by the Republican
members of the Committee, was an adroit partisan performance,
invoking traditional constitutional principles in behalf of
congressional privilege. A distinct and emphatic assertion of the
prerogative of the Senate was made, however, in resolutions
recommended to the Senate for adoption. Those resolutions
censured the Attorney-General and declared it to be the duty of
the Senate "to refuse its advice and consent to proposed removals
of officers" when papers relating to them "are withheld by the
Executive or any head of a department."

On the 2nd of March, a minority report was submitted, making the
point of which the cogency was obvious, that inasmuch as the
term of the official concerning whose suspension the Senate
undertook to inquire had already expired by legal limitation, the
only object in pressing for the papers in his case must be to
review an act of the President which was no longer within the
jurisdiction of the Senate, even if the constitutionality of the
Tenure of Office Act should be granted. The report also showed
that of the precedents cited in behalf of the majority's
contention, the applicability could be maintained only of those
which were supplied by cases arising since 1867, before which
time the right of the President to remove officers at his own
discretion was fully conceded.

The controversy had so far followed the ordinary lines of
partisan contention in Congress, which public opinion was
accustomed to regard with contemptuous indifference as mere
sparring for points in the electioneering game. President
Cleveland now intervened in a way which riveted the attention of
the nation upon the issue. Ever since the memorable struggle
which began when the Senate censured President Jackson and did
not end until that censure was expunged, the Senate had been
chary of a direct encounter with the President. Although the
response of the Attorney-General stated that he was acting under
the direction of the President, the pending resolutions avoided
any mention of the President but expressed "condemnation of the
refusal of the Attorney-General under whatever influence, to send
to the Senate" the required papers. The logical implication was
that, when the orders of the President and the Senate conflicted,
it was the duty of the Attorney-General to obey the Senate. This
raised an issue which President Cleveland met by sending to the
Senate his message of March 1, 1886, which has taken a high rank
among American constitutional documents. It is strong in its
logic, dignified in its tone, terse, direct, and forceful in its
diction.

Cleveland's message opened with the statement that "ever since
the beginning of the present session of the Senate, the different
heads of the departments attached to the executive branch of the
government have been plied with various requests and documents
from committees of the Senate, from members of such committees,
and at last from the Senate itself, requiring the transmission of
reasons for the suspension of certain officials during the recess
of that body, or for papers touching the conduct of such
officials." The President then observed that "though these
suspensions are my executive acts, based upon considerations
addressed to me alone and for which I am wholly responsible, I
have had no invitation from the Senate to state the position
which I have felt constrained to assume." Further on, he clinched
this admission of full responsibility by declaring that "the
letter of the Attorney-General in response to the resolution of
the Senate... was written at my suggestion and by my direction."

This statement made clear in the sight of the nation that the
true issue was between the President and the Senate. The strength
of the Senate's position lay in its claim to the right of access
to the records of public offices "created by laws enacted by
themselves." The counterstroke of the President was one of the
most effective passages of his message in its effect upon public
opinion. "I do not suppose," he said, "that the public offices of
the United States are regulated or controlled in their relations
to either House of Congress by the fact that they were 'created
by laws enacted by themselves.' It must be that these
instrumentalities were enacted for the benefit of the people and
to answer the general purposes of government under the
Constitution and the laws, and that they are unencumbered by any
lien in favor of either branch of Congress growing out of their
construction, and unembarrassed by any obligation to the Senate
as the price of their creation."

The President asserted that, as a matter of fact, no official
papers on file in the departments had been withheld. "While it is
by no means conceded that the Senate has the right, in any case,
to review the act of the Executive in removing or suspending a
public officer upon official documents or otherwise, it is
considered that documents and papers of that nature should,
because they are official, be freely transmitted to the Senate
upon its demand, trusting the use of the same, for proper and
legitimate purposes, to the good faith of that body; and though
no such paper or document has been especially demanded in any of
the numerous requests and demands made upon the departments, yet
as often as they were found in the public offices they have been
furnished in answer to such applications." The point made by the
President, with sharp emphasis, was that there was nothing in his
action which could be construed as a refusal of access to
official records; what he did refuse to acknowledge was the right
of the Senate to inquire into his motives and to exact from him a
disclosure of the facts, circumstances, and sources of
information that prompted his action. The materials upon which
his judgment was formed were of a varied character. "They consist
of letters and representations addressed to the Executive or
intended for his inspection; they are voluntarily written and
presented by private citizens who are not in the least instigated
thereto by any official invitation or at all subject to official
control. While some of them are entitled to Executive
consideration, many of them are so irrelevant or in the light of
other facts so worthless, that they have not been given the least
weight in determining the question to which they are supposed to
relate." If such matter were to be considered public records and
subject to the inspection of the Senate, the President would
thereby incur "the risk of being charged with making a suspension
from office upon evidence which was not even considered."

Issue as to the status of such documents was joined by the
President in the sharpest possible way by the declaration: "I
consider them in no proper sense as upon the files of the
department but as deposited there for my convenience, remaining
still completely under my control. I suppose if I desired to take
them into my custody I might do so with entire propriety, and if
I saw fit to destroy them no one could complain."

Moreover, there were cases in which action was prompted by oral
communications which did not go on record in any form. As to
this, Cleveland observed, "It will not be denied, I suppose, that
the President may suspend a public officer in the entire absence
of any papers or documents to aid his official judgment and
discretion; and I am quite prepared to avow that the cases are
not few in which suspensions from office have depended more upon
oral representations made to me by citizens of known good repute
and by members of the House of Representatives and Senators of
the United States than upon any letters and documents presented
for my examination." Nor were such representations confined to
members of his own party for, said he, "I recall a few
suspensions which bear the approval of individual members
identified politically with the majority in the Senate." The
message then reviewed the legislative history of the Tenure of
Office Act and questioned its constitutionality. The position
which the President had taken and would maintain was exactly
defined by this vigorous statement in his message:

"The requests and demands which by the score have for nearly
three months been presented to the different Departments of the
government, whatever may be their form, have but one complexion.
They assume the right of the Senate to sit in judgement upon the
exercise of my exclusive discretion and executive function, for
which I am solely responsible to the people from whom I have so
lately received the sacred trust of office. My oath to support
and defend the Constitution, my duty to the people who have
chosen me to execute the powers of their great office and not
relinquish them, and my duty to the chief magistracy which I must
preserve unimpaired in all its dignity and vigor, compel me to
refuse compliance with these demands."

There is a ringing quality in the style of this message not
generally characteristic of President Cleveland's state papers.
It evoked as ringing a response from public opinion, and this
effect was heightened by a tactless allusion to the message made
at this time in the Senate. In moving a reference of the message
to the Judiciary Committee, its chairman, Senator Edmunds of
Vermont, remarked that the presidential message brought vividly
to his mind "the communication of King Charles I to the
Parliament, telling them what, in conducting their affairs, they
ought to do and ought not to do." The historical reference,
however, had an application which Senator Edmunds did not
foresee. It brought vividly to mind what the people of England
had endured from a factional tyranny so relentless that the
nation was delighted when Oliver Cromwell turned Parliament out
of doors. It is an interesting coincidence that the Cleveland era
was marked by what in the book trade was known as the Cromwell
boom. Another unfortunate remark made by Senator Edmunds was that
it was the first time "that any President of the United States
has undertaken to interfere with the deliberations of either
House of Congress on questions pending before them, otherwise
than by message on the state of the Union which the Constitution
commands him to make from time to time." The effect of this
statement, however, was to stir up recollections of President
Jackson's message of protest against the censure of the Senate.
The principle laid down by Jackson in his message of April 15,
1834, was that "the President is the direct representative of the
American people," whereas the Senate is "a body not directly
amenable to the people." However assailable this statement may be
from the standpoint of traditional legal theory, it is
indubitably the principle to which American politics conform in
practice. The people instinctively expect the President to guard
their interests against congressional machinations.

There was a prevalent belief that the Senate's profession of
motives, of constitutional propriety, was insincere and that the
position it had assumed would never have been thought of had the
Republican candidate for President been elected. A feeling that
the Senate was not playing the game fairly to refuse the
Democrats their innings was felt even among Senator Edmunds' own
adherents. A spirit of comity traversing party lines is very
noticeable in the intercourse of professional politicians. Their
willingness to help each other out is often manifested,
particularly in struggles involving control of party machinery.
Indeed, a system of ring rule in a governing party seems to have
for its natural concomitant the formation of a similar ring in
the regular opposition, and the two rings maintain friendly
relations behind the forms of party antagonism. The situation is
very similar to that which exists between opposing counsel in
suits at law, where the contentions at the trial table may seem
to be full of animosity and may indeed at times really develop
personal enmity, but which as a general rule are merely for
effect and do not at all hinder cooperation in matters pertaining
to their common professional interest.

The attitude taken by the Senate in its opposition to President
Cleveland jarred upon this sense of professional comity, and it
was very noticeable that in the midst of the struggle some
questionable nominations of notorious machine politicians were
confirmed by the Senate. It may have been that a desire to
discredit the reform professions of the Administration
contributed to this result, but the effect was disadvantageous to
the Senate. "The Nation" on March 11, 1886, in a powerful article
reviewing the controversy observed: "There is not the smallest
reason for believing that, if the Senate won, it would use its
victory in any way for the maintenance or promotion of reform. In
truth, in the very midst of the controversy, it confirmed the
nomination of one of Baltimore's political scamps." It is
certainly true that the advising power of the Senate has never
exerted a corrective influence upon appointments to office; its
constant tendency is towards a system of apportionment which
concedes the right of the President to certain personal
appointments and asserts the reciprocal right of Congressmen to
their individual quotas.

As a result of these various influences, the position assumed by
the Republicans under the lead of Senator Edmunds was seriously
weakened. When the resolutions of censure were put to the vote on
the 26th of March, that condemning the refusal of the
Attorney-General to produce the papers was adopted by thirty-two
ayes to twenty-six nays--a strict party vote; but the resolution
declaring it to be the duty of the Senate in all such cases to
refuse its consent to removals of suspended officials was adopted
by a majority of only one vote, and two Republican Senators voted
with the Democrats. The result was, in effect, a defeat for the
Republican leaders, and they wisely decided to withdraw from the
position which they had been holding. Shortly after the passage
of the resolutions, the Senate confirmed the nomination over
which the contest started, and thereafter the right of the
President to make removals at his own discretion was not
questioned.

This retreat of the Republican leaders was accompanied, however,
by a new development in political tactics, which from the
standpoint of party advantage, was ingeniously conceived. It was
now held that, inasmuch as the President had avowed attachment to
the principle of tenure of office during good behavior, his
action in suspending officers therefore implied delinquency in
their character or conduct from which they should be exonerated
in case the removal was really on partisan grounds. In reporting
upon nominations, therefore, Senate committees adopted the
practice of noting that there were no charges of misconduct
against the previous incumbents and that the suspension was on
account of "political reasons." As these proceedings took place
in executive session, which is held behind closed doors, reports
of this character would not ordinarily reach the public, but the
Senate now voted to remove the injunction of secrecy, and the
reports were published. The manifest object of these maneuvers
was to exhibit the President as acting upon the "spoils system"
of distributing offices. The President's position was that he was
not accountable to the Senate in such matters. In his message of
the 1st of March he said: "The pledges I have made were made to
the people, and to them I am responsible for the manner in which
they have been redeemed. I am not responsible to the Senate, and
I am unwilling to submit my actions and official conduct to them
for judgement."

While this contest was still going on, President Cleveland had to
encounter another attempt of the Senate to take his authority out
of his hands. The history of American diplomacy during this
period belongs to another volume in this series,* but a
diplomatic question was drawn into the struggle between the
President and the Senate in such a way that it requires mention
here. Shortly after President Cleveland took office, the fishery
articles of the Treaty of Washington had terminated. In his first
annual message to Congress, on December 8, 1885, he recommended
the appointment of a commission to settle with a similar
commission from Great Britain "the entire question of the fishery
rights of the two governments and their respective citizens on
the coasts of the United States and British North America." But
this sensible advice was denounced as weak and cowardly. Oratory
of the kind known as "twisting the lion's tail" resounded in
Congress. Claims were made of natural right to the use of
Canadian waters which would not have been indulged for a moment
in respect of the territorial waters of the United States. For
instance, it was held that a bay over six miles between headlands
gave free ingress so long as vessels kept three miles from shore
--a doctrine which, if applied to Long Island Sound, Delaware
Bay, or Chesapeake Bay, would have impaired our national
jurisdiction over those waters. Senator Frye of Maine took the
lead in a rub-a-dub agitation in the presence of which some
Democratic Senators showed marked timidity. The administration of
public services by congressional committees has the incurable
defect that it reflects the particular interests and attachments
of the committeemen. Presidential administration is so
circumstanced that it tends to be nationally minded; committee
administration, just as naturally, tends to be locally minded.
Hence, Senator Frye was able to report from the committee on
foreign relations a resolution declaring that a commission
"charged with the consideration and settlement of the fishery
rights... ought not to be provided for by Congress." Such was the
attitude of the Senate towards the President on this question,
that on April 13, 1886, this arrogant resolution was adopted by
thirty-five ayes to 10 nays. A group of Eastern Democrats who
were in a position to be affected by the longshore vote, joined
with the Republicans in voting for the resolution, and among them
Senator Gorman of Maryland, national chairman of the Democratic
party.

* See "The Path of Empire," by Carl Russell Fish (in "The
Chronicles of America").


President Cleveland was no more affected by this Senate
resolution than he had been by their other resolutions attacking
his authority. He went ahead with his negotiations and concluded
treaty arrangements which the Senate, of course, rejected; but,
as that result had been anticipated, a modus vivendi which had
been arranged by executive agreements between the two countries
went into effect, regardless of the Senate's attitude. The case
is a signal instance of the substitution of executive
arrangements for treaty engagements which has since then been
such a marked tendency in the conduct of the foreign relations of
the United States.

A consideration which worked steadily against the Senate in its
attacks upon the President, was the prevalent belief that the
Tenure of Office Act was unconstitutional in its nature and
mischievous in its effects. Although Senator Edmunds had been
able to obtain a show of solid party support, it eventually
became known that he stood almost alone in the Judiciary
Committee in his approval of that act. The case is an instructive
revelation of the arbitrary power conferred by the committee
system. Members are loath to antagonize a party chairman to whom
their own bills must go for approval. Finally, Senator Hoar dared
to take the risk, and with such success that on June 21, 1886,
the committee reported a bill for the complete repeal of the
Tenure of Office Act, the chairman--Senator Edmunds--alone
dissenting. When the bill was taken up for consideration, Senator
Hoar remarked that he did not believe there were five members of
the Senate who really believed in the propriety of that act. "It
did not seem to me to be quite becoming," he explained, "to ask
the Senate to deal with this general question, while the question
which arose between the President and the Senate as to the
interpretation and administration of the existing law was
pending. I thought, as a party man, that I had hardly the right
to interfere with the matter which was under the special charge
of my honorable friend from Vermont, by challenging a debate upon
the general subject from a different point of view."

Although delicately put, this statement was in effect a
repudiation of the party leadership of Edmunds and in the debate
which ensued, not a single Senator came to his support. He stood
alone in upholding the propriety of the Tenure of Office Act,
arguing that without its restraint "the whole real power and
patronage of this government was vested solely in the hands of a
President of the United States and his will was the law." He held
that the consent of the Senate to appointments was an
insufficient check if the President were allowed to remove at his
own will and pleasure. He was answered by his own party
colleagues and committee associates, Hoar and Evarts. Senator
Hoar went so far as to say that in his opinion there was not a
single person in this country, in Congress or out of Congress,
with the exception of the Senator from Vermont, who did not
believe that a necessary step towards reform "must be to impose
the responsibility of the Civil Service upon the Executive."
Senator Evarts argued that the existing law was incompatible with
executive responsibility, for "it placed the Executive power in a
strait-jacket." He then pointed out that the President had not
the legal right to remove a member of his own Cabinet and asked,
"Is not the President imprisoned if his Cabinet are to be his
masters by the will of the Senate?" The debate was almost wholly
confined to the Republican side of the Senate, for only one
Democrat took any part in it. Senator Edmunds was the sole
spokesman on his side, but he fought hard against defeat and
delivered several elaborate arguments of the "check and balance"
type. When the final vote took place, only three Republicans
actually voted for the repealing bill, but there were absentees
whose votes would have been cast the same way had they been
needed to pass the bill.*

* The bill was passed by thirty yeas and twenty-two nays, and
among the nays were several Senators who while members of the
House had voted for repeal. The repeal bill passed the House by a
vote of 172 to 67, and became law on March 3, 1887


President Cleveland had achieved a brilliant victory. In the
joust between him and Edmunds, in lists of his adversary's own
contriving, he had held victoriously to his course while his
opponent had been unhorsed. The granite composure of Senator
Edmunds' habitual mien did not permit any sign of disturbance to
break through, but his position in the Senate was never again
what it had been, and eventually he resigned his seat before the
expiration of his term. He retired from public life in 1891, at
the age of sixty-three.

From the standpoint of the public welfare, it is to be noted that
the issue turned on the maintenance of privilege rather than on
the discharge of responsibility. President Cleveland contended
that he was not responsible to the Senate but to the people for
the way in which he exercised his trusteeship. But the phrase
"the people" is an abstraction which has no force save as it
receives concrete form in appropriate institutions. It is the
essential characteristic of a sound constitutional system that it
supplies such institutions, so as to put executive authority on
its good behavior by steady pressure of responsibility through
full publicity and detailed criticism. This result, the Senate
fails to secure because it keeps trying to invade executive
authority, and to seize the appointing power instead of seeking
to enforce executive responsibility. This point was forcibly put
by "The Nation" when it said: "There is only one way of securing
the presentation to the Senate of all the papers and documents
which influence the President in making either removals or
appointments, and that is a simple way, and one wholly within the
reach of the Senators. They have only to alter their rules, and
make executive sessions as public as legislative sessions, in
order to drive the President not only into making no nominations
for which he cannot give creditable reasons, but into furnishing
every creditable reason for the nomination which he may have in
his possession."*

* "The Nation," March 11, 1888.


During the struggle, an effort was made to bring about this very
reform, under the lead of a Republican Senator, Orville H. Platt
of Connecticut. On April 13,1886, he delivered a carefully
prepared speech, based upon much research, in which he showed
that the rule of secrecy in executive sessions could not claim
the sanction of the founders of the government. It is true that
the Senate originally sat with closed doors for all sorts of
business, but it discontinued the practice after a few years. It
was not until 1800, six years after the practice of public
sessions had been adopted, that any rule of secrecy was applied
to business transacted in executive sessions. Senator Platt's
motion to repeal this rule met with determined opposition on both
sides of the chamber, coupled with an indisposition to discuss
the matter. When it came up for consideration on the 15th of
December, Senator Hoar moved to lay it on the table, which was
done by a vote of thirty-three to twenty-one. Such prominent
Democratic leaders as Gorman of Maryland and Vest of Missouri
voted with Republican leaders like Evarts, Edmunds, Allison, and
Harrison, in favor of Hoar's motion, while Hoar's own colleague,
Senator Dawes, together with such eminent Republicans as Frye of
Maine, Hawley of Connecticut, and Sherman of Ohio voted with
Platt. Thus, any party responsibility for the result was
successfully avoided, and an issue of great constitutional
importance was laid away without any apparent stir of popular
sentiment.



CHAPTER V. PARTY POLICY IN CONGRESS

While President Cleveland was successfully asserting his
executive authority, the House of Representatives, too, was
trying to assert its authority; but its choice of means was such
that it was badly beaten and was reduced to a state of humble
subordination from which it has never emerged. Its traditional
procedure was arranged on the theory that Congress ought to
propose as well as to enact legislation, and to receive
recommendations from all quarters without preference or
discrimination. Although the Constitution makes it the right and
duty of the President to "recommend to their consideration such
measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient," measures
proposed by the Administration stand on the same footing under
the rules as those proposed by the humblest citizen of the United
States. In both cases, they are allowed to reach Congress only in
the form of a bill or resolution introduced by a member of
Congress, and they go on the files without any distinction as to
rank and position except such as pertains to them from the time
and order in which they are introduced. Under the rules, all
measures are distributed among numerous committees, each having
charge of a particular class, with power to report favorably or
adversely. Each committee is constituted as a section of the
whole House, with a distribution of party representation
corresponding to that which exists in the House.

Viewed as an ideal polity, the scheme has attractive features. In
practice, however, it is attended with great disadvantages.
Although the system was originally introduced with the idea that
it would give the House of Representatives control over
legislative business, the actual result has been to reduce this
body to an impotence unparalleled among national representative
assemblies in countries having constitutional government. In a
speech delivered on December 10, 1885, William M. Springer of
Illinois complained: "We find ourselves bound hand and foot, the
majority delivering themselves over to the power of the minority
that might oppose any particular measures, so that nothing could
be done in the way of legislation except by unanimous consent or
by a two-thirds vote." As an instance of legislative paralysis,
he related that "during the last Congress a very important bill,
that providing for the presidential succession... was reported
from a committee of which I had the honor to be a member, and was
placed on the calendar of the House on the 21st day of April,
1884; and that bill, which was favored by nearly the entire
House, was permitted to die on the calendar because there never
was a moment, when under the rules as they then existed, the bill
could be reached and passed by the House." During the whole of
that session of Congress, the regular calendar was never reached.
"Owing to the fact that we could not transact business under the
rules, all business was done under unanimous consent or under
propositions to suspend the rules upon the two Mondays in each
month on which suspensions were allowed." As a two-thirds
majority was necessary to suspend the rules, any considerable
minority had a veto power.

The standing committees, whose ostensible purpose was to prepare
business for consideration, were characterized as legislative
cemeteries. Charles B. Lore of Delaware, referring to the
situation during the previous session, said: "The committees were
formed, they met in their respective committee rooms day after
day, week after week, working up the business which was committed
to them by this House, and they reported to this House 8290
bills. They came from the respective committees, and they were
consigned to the calendars of this House, which became for them
the tomb of the Capulets; most of them were never heard of
afterward. From the Senate there were 2700 bills.... Nine tenths
of the time of the committees of the Forty-eighth Congress was
wasted. We met week after week, month after month, and labored
over the cases prepared, and reported bills to the House. They
were put upon the calendars and there were buried, to be brought
in again and again in succeeding Congresses."

William D. Kelley of Pennsylvania bluntly declared: "No
legislation can be effectually originated outside the Committee
on Appropriations, unless it be a bill which will command
unanimous consent or a stray bill that may get a two-thirds vote,
or a pension bill." He explained that he excepted pension bills
"because we have for several years by special order remitted the
whole subject of pensions to a committee who bring in their bills
at sessions held one night in each week, when ten or fifteen
gentlemen decide what soldiers may have pensions and what
soldiers may not."

The Democratic party found this situation extremely irritating
when it came into power in the House. It was unable to do
anything of importance or even to define its own party policy,
and in the session of Congress beginning in December, 1885, it
sought to correct the situation by amending the rules. In this
undertaking it had sympathy and support on the Republican side.
The duress under which the House labored was pungently described
by Thomas B. Reed, who was just about that time revealing the
ability that gained for him the Republican leadership. In a
speech, delivered on December 16, 1885, he declared: "For the
last three Congresses the representatives of the people of the
United States have been in irons. They have been allowed to
transact no public business except at the dictation and by the
permission of a small coterie of gentlemen, who, while they
possessed individually more wisdom than any of the rest of us,
did not possess all the wisdom in the world."

The coterie alluded to by Mr. Reed was that which controlled the
committee on appropriations. Under the system created by the
rules of the House, bills pour in by tens of thousands. A member
of the House, of a statistical turn of mind, once submitted
figures to the House showing that it would take over sixty-six
years to go through the calendars of one session in regular
order, allowing an average of one minute for each member to
debate each bill. To get anything done, the House must proceed by
special order, and as it is essential to pass the appropriations
to keep up the government, a precedence was allowed to business
reported by that committee which in effect gave it a position of
mastery. O. R. Singleton of Mississippi, in the course of the
same debate, declared that there was a "grievance which towers
above all others as the Alps tower above the surrounding hills.
It is the power resting with said committee, and oftentimes
employed by it, to arrest any legislation upon any subject which
does not meet its approval. A motion to go into committee of the
whole to consider appropriation bills is always in order, and
takes precedence of all other motions as to the order of
business." 
The practical effect of the rules was that, instead of remaining
the servant of the House, the committee became its master. Not
only could the committee shut off from any consideration any
measure to which it was opposed, but it could also dictate to the
House the shape in which its own bills should be enacted. While
the form of full consideration and amendment is preserved, the
terms of a bill are really decided by a conference committee
appointed to adjust differences between the House and the Senate.
John H. Reagan of Texas stated that "a conference committee, made
up of three members of the appropriations committee, acting in
conjunction with a similar conference committee on the part of
the Senate, does substantially our legislation upon this subject
of appropriations." In theory, the House was free to accept or
reject the conference committee's report. Practically the choice
lay between the bill as fixed by the conference committee or no
bill at all during that session. Mr. Reagan stated the case
exactly when he said that it meant "letting six men settle what
the terms are to be, beyond our power of control, unless we
consent to a called session of Congress."

To deal with this situation, the House had refused to adopt the
rules of the preceding Congress; and after electing John G.
Carlisle as Speaker and authorizing the appointment of a
committee on rules, it deferred the appointment of the usual
legislative committees until after a new set of rules had been
adopted. The action of the Speaker in constituting the Rules
Committee was scrupulously fair to the contending interests. It
consisted of himself, Samuel J. Randall of Pennsylvania, and
William R. Morrison of Illinois from the Democratic side of the
House; and of Thomas B. Reed of Maine and Frank Hiscock of New
York from the Republican side. On the 14th of December, the
committee made two reports: a majority report presented by Mr.
Morrison and a minority report presented by Mr. Randall and
signed by him alone.

These reports and the debates which followed are most
disappointing. What was needed was a penetrating discussion of
the means by which the House could establish its authority and
perform its constitutional functions. But it is a remarkable
circumstance that at no time was any reference made to the only
way in which the House can regain freedom of action--namely, by
having the Administration submit its budget demands and its
legislative proposals directly to the committee of the whole
House. The preparatory stages could then be completed before the
opening of the legislative session. Congress would thus save the
months of time that are now consumed in committee incubation and
would almost certainly be assured of opportunity of considering
the public business. Discrimination in legislative privilege
among members of the House would then be abolished, for every
member would belong to the committee on appropriations. It is
universally true in constitutional governments that power over
appropriations involves power over legislation, and the only
possibility of a square deal is to open that power to the entire
membership of the assembly, which is the regular practice in
Switzerland and in all English commonwealths. The House could not
have been ignorant of the existence of this alternative, for the
whole subject had been luminously discussed in the Senate Report
of February 4,1881. It was, therein, clearly pointed out that
such an arrangement would prevent paralysis or inaction in
Congress. With the Administration proposing its measures directly
to Congress, discussion of them and decisions upon them could not
be avoided.

But such a public forum could not be established without sweeping
away many intrenchments of factional interest and private
opportunity, and this was not at all the purpose of the committee
on rules. It took its character and direction from an old feud
between Morrison and Randall. Morrison, as chairman of the Ways
and Means Committee in 1876, had reported a tariff reform measure
which was defeated by Randall's influence. Then Randall, who had
succeeded to the Speakership, transferred Morrison from the
chairmanship of the Ways and Means Committee to the chairmanship
of the committee on public lands. But Morrison was a man who
would not submit to defeat. He was a veteran of the Civil War,
and had been severely wounded in leading his regiment at Fort
Donelson. After the war, he figured in Illinois politics and
served as Speaker of the State Legislature. He entered Congress
in 1873 and devoted himself to the study of the tariff with such
intelligence and thoroughness that his speeches are still an
indispensable part of the history of tariff legislation. His
habitual manner was so mild and unassuming that it gave little
indication of the force of his personality, which was full of
energy and perseverance.

Randall was more imperious in his mien. He was a party leader of
established renown which he had gained in the struggles over
force bills at the close of the reconstruction period. His
position on the tariff was that of a Pennsylvania protectionist,
and upon the tariff reform issue in 1883, he was defeated for the
Speakership. At that time, John G. Carlisle of Kentucky was
raised to that post, while Morrison again became chairman of the
Ways and Means Committee. But Randall, now appointed chairman of
the Appropriations Committee, had so great an influence that he
was able to turn about forty Democratic votes against the tariff
bill reported by the Ways and Means Committee, thus enabling the
Republicans to kill the bill by striking out the enacting clause.

Only this practical aim, then, was in view in the reports
presented by the committee on rules. The principal feature of the
majority report was a proposal to curtail the jurisdiction of the
Appropriations Committee by transferring to other committees five
of the eleven regular appropriation bills. What, from the
constitutional point of view, would appear to be the main
question--the recovery by the House of its freedom of action--was
hardly noticed in the report or in the debates which followed.
Heretofore, the rules had allotted certain periods to general
business; now, the majority report somewhat enlarged these
periods and stipulated that no committee should bring more than
one proposal before the House until all other committees had had
their turn. This provision might have been somewhat more
effective had it been accompanied by a revision of the list of
committees such as was proposed by William M. Springer. He
pointed out that there were a number of committees "that have no
business to transact or business so trifling and unimportant as
to make it unnecessary to have standing committees upon such
subjects"; he proposed to abolish twenty-one of these committees
and to create four new ones to take their place; he showed that
"if we allow these twenty useless committees to be again put on
our list, to be called regularly in the morning hour... forty-two
days will be consumed in calling these committees"; and, finally,
he pointed out that the change would effect a saving since it
would "do away with sixteen committee clerkships."

This saving was, in fact, fatal to the success of Springer's
proposal, since it meant the extinction of so many sinecures
bestowed through congressional favor. In the end, Springer
reduced his proposed change to the creation of one general
committee on public expenditures to take the place of eight
committees on departmental expenditures. It was notorious that
such committees did nothing and could do nothing, and their
futility, save as dispensers of patronage, had been demonstrated
in a startling manner by the effect of the Acts of July 12, 1870,
and June 20, 1874, requiring all unused appropriations to be paid
into the Treasury. The amounts thus turned into the Treasury
aggregated $174,000,000 and in a single bureau there was an
unexpended balance of $36,000,000, which had accumulated for a
quarter of a century because Congress had not been advised that
no appropriation was needed. Mr. Springer remarked that, during
the ten years in which he had been a member of Congress, he had
observed with regard to these committees "that in nearly all
cases, after their appointment, organization, and the election of
a clerk, the committee practically ceased to exist, and nothing
further is done." William R. Morrison at once came to the rescue
of the endangered sinecures and argued that even although these
committees had been inactive in the past they "constituted the
eyes, the ears, and the hands of the House." In consequence,
after a short debate Mr. Springer's motion was rejected without a
division.

The arrangements subsequently made to provide time and
opportunity for general legislation, turned out in practice to be
quite futile and indeed they were never more than a mere formal
pretense. It was quite obvious, therefore, that the new rules
tended only to make the situation worse than before. Thomas Ryan
of Kansas told the plain truth when he said: "You do not propose
to remedy any of those things of which you complain by any of the
rules you have brought forward. You propose to clothe eight
committees with the same power, with the same temptation and
capacity to abuse it. You multiply eightfold the very evils of
which you complain." James H. Blount of Georgia sought to
mitigate the evils of the situation by giving a number of other
committees the same privilege as the appropriation committees,
but this proposal at once raised a storm, for appropriation
committees had leave to report at any time, and to extend the
privilege would prevent expeditious handling of appropriation
bills. Mr. Blount's motion was, therefore, voted down without a
division.

While in the debate, the pretense of facilitating routine
business was ordinarily kept up; occasional intimations of actual
ulterior purpose leaked out, as when John B. Storm of
Pennsylvania remarked that it was a valuable feature of the rules
that they did hamper action and "that the country which is least
governed is the best governed, is a maxim in strict accord with
the idea of true civil liberty." William McKinley was also of the
opinion that barriers were needed "against the wild projects and
visionary schemes which will find advocates in this House." Some
years later, when the subject was again up for discussion, Thomas
B. Reed went to the heart of the situation when he declared that
the rules had been devised not to facilitate action but to
obstruct it, for "the whole system of business here for years has
been to seek methods of shirking, not of meeting, the questions
which the people present for the consideration of their
representatives. Peculiar circumstances have caused this. For a
long time, one section of the country largely dominated the
other.  That section of the country was constantly apprehensive
of danger which might happen at any time by reason of an
institution it was maintaining. Very naturally, all the rules of
the House were bent for the obstruction of action on the part of
Congress." It may be added that these observations apply even
more forcibly, to the rules of the Senate. The privilege of
unrestricted debate was not originally granted by those rules but
was introduced as a means of strengthening the power of sectional
resistance to obnoxious legislation.

The revision of the rules in 1885, then, was not designed really
to facilitate action by the House, but rather to effect a
transfer of the power to rule the House. It was at least clear
that under the proposed changes the chairman of the committee on
appropriations would no longer retain such complete mastery as
Randall had wielded, and this was enough to insure the adoption
of the majority report. The minority report opposed this
weakening of control on the ground that it would be destructive
of orderly and responsible management of the public funds.
Everything which Randall said on that point has since been amply
confirmed by much sad experience. Although some leading
Republicans, among whom was Joseph G. Cannon of Illinois, argued
strongly in support of Randall's views, the temper of the House
was such that the majority in favor of the change was
overwhelming, and on December 18, 1885, the Morrison plan was
finally adopted without a roll call.

The hope that the change in organization would expedite action on
appropriation bills, was promptly disappointed. Only one of the
fourteen regular appropriation bills became law before the last
day of the fiscal year. The duress to which the House was subject
became tighter and harder than before, and the Speakership
entered upon a development unparalleled in constitutional
history. The Speaker was practically in a position to determine
what business the House might consider and what it might not, and
the circumstances were such as to breed a belief that it was his
duty to use his discretion where a choice presented itself. It is
obvious that, when on the floor of the House there are a number
of applicants for recognition, the Speaker must choose between
them. All cannot be allowed to spea