k at once. There is no chance
to apply the shop rule, "first come first served," for numerous
applications for the floor come at the same time. Shall the
Speaker choose at random or according to some definite principle
of selection? In view of the Speaker's interest in the welfare of
the party which raised him to the office, he would naturally
inquire in advance the purpose for which the recognition of the
chair was desired. It was a manifest step towards orderly
procedure in session, however, when instead of crowding around
the clerk's desk bawling for recognition, members applied to the
Speaker in advance. In Speaker Blaine's time, this had become a
regular practice and ever since then, a throng of members at the
Speaker's office trying to arrange with him for recognition has
been a daily occurrence during a legislative session. Samuel W.
McCall, in his work on "The Business of Congress," says that the
Speaker "usually scrutinizes the bill and the committee's report
upon it, and in case of doubt he sometimes refers them to a
member in whom he has confidence, for a more careful examination
than he himself has time to give."

Under Speaker Carlisle, this power to censor proposals was made
conspicuous through the factional war in the Democratic party.
For several sessions of Congress, a bill had been pending to
repeal the internal revenue taxes upon tobacco, and it had such
support that it might have passed if it could have been reached
for consideration. On February 5, 1887, a letter was addressed to
Speaker Carlisle by three prominent Democrats: Samuel J.
Randall of Pennsylvania, George D. Wise of Virginia, and John S.
Henderson of North Carolina, saying: "At the instance of many
Democratic members of the House, we appeal to you earnestly to
recognize on Monday next, some Democrat who will move to suspend
the rules for the purpose of giving the House an opportunity of
considering the question of the total repeal of the internal
revenue taxes on tobacco." The letter went on to argue that it
would be bad policy to let a Republican have credit for a
proposal, which it was declared "will command more votes than any
other measure pending before the House looking towards a
reduction in taxation; and favorable action on this proposition
will not interfere with other efforts that are being made to
reduce the burden of the people."

Speaker Carlisle, however, refused to allow the House to consider
the matter on the ground that negotiations with Randall and his
friends for concerted party action had so far been fruitless.
"Among other things," he wrote, "we proposed to submit the entire
subject to a caucus of our political friends, with the
understanding that all parties would abide by the result of its
action.... We have received no response to that communication,
and I consider that it would not be proper under the
circumstances for me to agree to a course of action which would
present to the House a simple proposition for the repeal of the
internal revenue tax on tobacco, snuff and cigars, to the
exclusion of all other measures for the reduction of taxation."
The letter closed by "sincerely hoping that some plan may yet be
devised which will enable the House to consider the whole subject
of revenue reduction."

No one was less of an autocrat in temper and habit of thought
than Speaker Carlisle, and he assumed this position in deference
to a recognized function of his office, supported by a long line
of precedents. The case was, therefore, a signal illustration of
the way in which the House has impaired its ability to consider
legislation by claiming the exclusive privilege of proposing
legislation. If the rules had allowed the President to propose
his measures directly to the House, then the way would have been
opened for a substitute or an amendment. As it was, the House was
able to act only upon matters within the control of a few persons
advantageously posted, and none of the changes of rules that have
been made from time to time have seriously disturbed this
fundamental situation.

Notwithstanding the new rules adopted in December, 1885, nothing
of importance was accomplished by the House. On February 15,
1886, William R. Morrison introduced a tariff bill making a
moderate reduction in rates of duty, which, after considerable
amendment in the committee of ways and means, was reported to the
House on the 12th of April; but no further action was taken until
the 17th of June, when Morrison moved that the House go into
committee of the whole to consider the bill. Thirty-five
Democrats voted with the Republicans against the motion, which
was defeated by 157 nays to 140 yeas. No further attempt was made
to take up the bill during that session, and in the ensuing fall
Morrison was defeated as a candidate for reelection. Before
leaving Congress he tried once more to obtain consideration of
his bill but in vain. Just as that Congress was expiring, John S.
Henderson of North Carolina was at last allowed to move a
suspension of the rules in order to take a vote on a bill to
reduce internal revenue taxes, but he failed to obtain the
two-thirds vote required for suspension of the rules.

That the proceedings of the Forty-ninth Congress were not
entirely fruitless, was mainly due to the initiative and address
of the Senate. Some important measures were thus pushed through,
among them the act regulating the presidential succession and the
act creating the Interstate Commerce Commission. The first of
these provided for the succession of the heads of departments in
turn, in case of the removal, death, resignation, or inability of
both the President and the Vice-President.

The most marked legislative achievement of the House was an act
regulating the manufacture and sale of oleomargarine, to which
the Senate assented with some amendment, and which was signed
with reluctance by the President, after a special message to the
House sharply criticizing some of the provisions of the act. A
bill providing for arbitration of differences between common
carriers and their employees was passed by the Senate without a
division, but it did not reach the President until the closing
days of the session and failed of enactment because he did not
sign it before the final adjournment. Taken as a whole, then, the
record of the Congress elected in 1884 showed that while the
Democratic party had the Presidency and the House of
Representatives, the Republican party, although defeated at the
polls, still controlled public policy through the agency of the
Senate.



CHAPTER VI. PRESIDENTIAL KNIGHT-ERRANTRY

Although President Cleveland decisively repelled the Senate's
attempted invasion of the power of removal belonging to his
office, he was still left in a deplorable state of servitude
through the operation of old laws based upon the principle of
rotation in office. The Acts of 1820 and 1836, limiting
commissions to the term of four years, forced him to make
numerous appointments which provoked controversy and made large
demands upon his time and thought. In the first year of his
administration, he sent about two thousand nominations to the
Senate, an average of over six a day, assuming that he was
allowed to rest on Sunday. His freedom of action was further
curtailed by an Act of 1863, prohibiting the payment of a salary
to any person appointed to fill a vacancy existing while the
Senate was in session, until the appointment had been confirmed
by the Senate. The President was thus placed under a strict
compulsion to act as a party employment agent.

If it is the prime duty of a President to act in the spirit of a
reformer, Cleveland is entitled to high praise for the stanchness
with which he adhered to his principles under most trying
circumstances. Upon November 27, 1885, he approved rules
confirming and extending the civil service regulations. Charges
that Collector Hedden of the New York Customs House was violating
the spirit of the Civil Service Act, and was making a party
machine of his office, caused the Civil Service Commission to
make an investigation which resulted in his resignation in July,
1886. On the 10th of August, Daniel Magone of Ogdensburg, New
York, a widely known lawyer, was personally chosen by the
President with a view to enforcing the civil service law in the
New York Customs House. Before making this appointment, President
Cleveland issued an order to all heads of departments warning all
officeholders against the use of their positions to control
political movements in their localities. "Officeholders," he
declared, "are the agents of the people, not their masters. They
have no right, as officeholders, to dictate the political action
of their associates, or to throttle freedom of action within
party lines by methods and practices which prevent every useful
and justifiable purpose of party organization." In August,
President Cleveland gave signal evidence of his devotion to civil
service reform by appointing a Republican, because of his special
qualifications, to be chief examiner for the Civil Service
Commission.

Democratic party workers were so angered and disgusted by the
President's policy that any mention of his name was enough to
start a flow of coarse denunciation. Strong hostility to his
course of action was manifested in Congress. Chairman Randall, of
the committee on appropriations, threatened to cut off the
appropriation for office room for the commission. A "rider" to
the legislative appropriation bill, striking at the civil service
law, caused a vigorous debate in the House in which leading
Democrats assailed the Administration, but eventually the "rider"
was ruled out on a point of order. In the Senate, such party
leaders as Vance of North Carolina, Saulsbury of Delaware, and
Voorhees of Indiana, openly ridiculed the civil service law, and
various attempts to cripple it were made but were defeated.
Senator Vance introduced a bill to repeal the law, but it was
indefinitely postponed by a vote of 33 to 6, the affirmative vote
being cast mainly by Republicans; and in general the strongest
support for the law now came from the Republican side. Early in
June, 1887, an estimate was made that nine thousand civil offices
outside the scope of the civil service rules were still held by
Republicans. The Republican party press gloated over the
situation and was fond of dwelling upon the way in which old-line
Democrats were being snubbed while the Mugwumps were favored. At
the same time, civil service reformers found much to condemn in
the character of Cleveland's appointments. A special committee of
the National Civil Service Reform League, on March 30, 1887,
published a report in which they asserted that, "tried by the
standard of absolute fidelity to the reform as it is understood
by this League, it is not to be denied that t this Administration
has left much to be desired." At a subsequent session of the
League, its President, George William Curtis, proclaimed that the
League did not regard the Administration as "in any strict sense
of the words a civil service reform administration." Thus while
President Cleveland was alienating his regular party support, he
was not getting in return any dependable support from the
reformers. He seemed to be sitting down between two stools, both
tilting to let him fall.

Meanwhile, he went on imperturbably doing his duty as he saw it.
Like many of his predecessors, he would rise early to get some
time to attend to public business before the rush of office
seekers began, but the bulk of his day's work lay in the
discharge of his compulsory duties as an employment agent. Many
difficult situations were created by contentions among
Congressmen over appointments. It was Cleveland's habit to deal
with these cases by homely expostulation and by pleas for mutual
concessions. Such incidents do not of course go upon record, and
it is only as memoirs and reminiscences of public men are
published that this personal side of history becomes known.
Senator Cullom of Illinois in his "Fifty Years of Public Service"
gives an account that doubtless fairly displays Cleveland's way
of handling his vexatious problems. "I happened to be at the
White House one day, and Mr. Cleveland said to me, 'I wish you
would take up Lamar's nomination and dispose of it. I am between
hay and grass with reference to the Interior Department. Nothing
is being done there; I ought to have some one on duty, and I
cannot do anything until you dispose of Lamar.'" Mr. Lamar, who
had entered the Cabinet as Secretary of the Interior, was
nominated for associate justice of the Supreme Court on December
6, 1887. He had been an eminent member of the Senate, with
previous distinguished service in the House, so that the Senate
must have had abundant knowledge of his character and
attainments. It is impossible to assign the delay that ensued to
reasonable need of time for inquiry as to his qualifications, but
Senator Cullom relates that "the nomination pended before the
Judiciary Committee for a long time." Soon after the personal
appeal, which was made by the President to every Senator he could
reach, action was finally taken and the appointment was confirmed
January 16, 1888.

Senator Cullom's reminiscences also throw light upon the process
by which judges are appointed. President Cleveland had selected
Melville W. Fuller of Illinois for the office of chief justice of
the Supreme Court. According to Senator Cullom, Senator Edmunds
"was very much out of humor with the President because he had
fully expected that Judge Phelps, of his own State, was to
receive the honor.... The result was that Senator Edmunds held
the nomination, without any action, in the Judiciary Committee
for some three months." Senator Cullom, although a party
associate of Edmunds, was pleased that the President had selected
an Illinois jurist and he was determined that, if he could help
it, Edmunds should not have the New Hampshire candidate
appointed. He therefore appealed to the committee to do something
about the nomination, either one way or the other. The committee
finally reported the nomination to the Senate without
recommendation. When the matter came up in executive session,
"Senator Edmunds at once took the floor and attacked Judge Fuller
most viciously as having sympathized with the rebellion." But
Cullom was primed to meet that argument. He had been furnished
with a copy of a speech attacking President Lincoln which Phelps
had delivered during the war, and he now read it to the Senate,
"much to the chagrin and mortification of Senator Edmunds."
Cullom relates that the Democrats in the Senate enjoyed the
scene. "Naturally, it appeared to them a very funny performance,
two Republicans quarreling over the confirmation of a Democrat.
They sat silent, however, and took no part at all in the debate,
leaving us Republicans to settle it among ourselves." The result
of the Republican split was that the nomination of Fuller was
confirmed "by a substantial majority."

Another nomination which caused much agitation at the time was
that of James C. Matthews of New York, to be Recorder of Deeds in
the District of Columbia. The office had been previously held by
Frederick Douglass, a distinguished leader of the colored race;
and in filling the vacancy the President believed it would be an
exercise of wise and kindly consideration to choose a member of
the same race. But in the Washington community, there was such a
strong antipathy to the importation of a negro politician from
New York to fill a local office that a great clamor was raised,
in which Democrats joined. The Senate rejected the nomination,
but meanwhile Mr. Matthews had entered upon the duties of his
office and he showed such tact and ability as gradually to soften
the opposition. On December 21,1886, President Cleveland
renominated him, pointing out that he had been in actual
occupation of the office for four months, managing its affairs
with such ability as to remove "much of the opposition to his
appointment which has heretofore existed." In conclusion, the
President confessed "a desire to cooperate in tendering to our
colored fellow-citizens just recognition." This was a shrewd
argument. The Republican majority in the Senate shrank from what
might seem to be drawing the color line, and the appointment was
eventually confirmed; but this did not remove the sense of
grievance in Washington over the use of local offices for
national party purposes. Local sentiment in the District of
Columbia is, however, politically unimportant, as the community
has no means of positive action.*

* It is a singular fact, which contains matter for deep
consideration, that the District of Columbia, the national
capital, is the only populated area in the civilized world
without any sort of suffrage rights.


In the same month in which President Cleveland issued his
memorable special message to the Senate on the Tenure of Office
Act, he began another struggle against congressional practice in
which he was not so fortunate. On March 10, 1886, he sent to
Congress the first of his pension vetoes. Although liberal
provision for granting pensions had been made by general laws,
numerous special applications were made directly to Congress, and
congressmen were solicited to secure favorable consideration for
them. That it was the duty of a representative to support an
application from a resident of his district, was a doctrine
enforced by claim agents with a pertinacity from which there was
no escape. To attempt to assume a judicial attitude in the matter
was politically dangerous, and to yield assent was a matter of
practical convenience. Senator Cullom relates that when he first
became a member of the committee on pensions he was "a little
uneasy" lest he "might be too liberal." But he was guided by the
advice of an old, experienced Congressman, Senator Sawyer of
Wisconsin, who told him: "You need not worry, you cannot very
well make a mistake allowing liberal pensions to the soldier
boys. The money will get back into the Treasury very soon."

The feeling that anything that the old soldiers wanted should be
granted was even stronger in the House, where about the only
opportunity of distinction allowed by the procedure was to
champion these local demands upon the public treasury. It was
indeed this privilege of passing pension bills which partially
reconciled members of the House to the actual control of
legislative opportunity by the Speaker and the chairmen of a few
dominating committees. It was a congressional perquisite to be
allowed to move the passage of so many bills; enactment followed
as a matter, of course. President Cleveland made a pointed
reference to this process in a veto message of June 21, 1886. He
observed that the pension bills had only "an apparent
Congressional sanction" for the fact was that "a large proportion
of these bills have never been submitted to a majority of either
branch of Congress, but are the results of nominal sessions held
for the express purpose of their consideration and attended by a
small minority of the members of the respective houses of the
legislative branch of government."

Obviously, the whole system of pension legislation was faulty.
Mere individual effort on the part of the President to screen the
output of the system was scarcely practicable, even if it were
congruous with the nature of the President's own duties; but
nevertheless Cleveland attempted it, and kept at it with stout
perseverance. One of his veto messages remarks that in a single
day nearly 240 special pension bills were presented to him. He
referred them to the Pension Bureau for examination and the labor
involved was so great that they could not be returned to him
until within a few hours of the limit fixed by the Constitution
for the President's assent.

There could be no more signal proof of President Cleveland's
constancy of soul than the fact that he was working hard at his
veto forge, with the sparks falling thickly around, right in his
honeymoon. He married Miss Frances Folsom of Buffalo on June 2,
1886. The ceremony took place in the White House, and immediately
thereafter, the President and his charming bride went to Deer
Park, Maryland, a mountain resort. The respite from official
cares was brief; on June 8th, the couple returned to Washington
and some of the most pugnacious of the pension vetoes were sent
to Congress soon after. The rest of his public life was passed
under continual storm, but the peace and happiness of his
domestic life provided a secure refuge.

On the other hand, the rebuffs which Democratic Congressmen
received in the matter of pension legislation were, it must be
admitted, peculiarly exasperating. Reviewing the work of the
Forty-ninth Congress, "The Nation" mentioned three enactments
which it characterized as great achievements that should be
placed to the credit of Congress. Those were the act regulating
the presidential succession, approved January 18, 1886; the act
regulating the counting of the electoral votes, approved February
3, 1887; and the repeal of the Tenure of Office Act, approved
March 3, 1887. But all three measures originated in the Senate,
and the main credit for their enactment might be claimed by the
Republican party. There was some ground for the statement that
they would have been enacted sooner but for the disturbance of
legislative routine by political upheavals in the House; and
certainly no one could pretend that it was to get these
particular measures passed that the Democratic party was raised
to power. The main cause of the political revolution of 1884 had
been the continuance of war taxes, producing revenues that were
not only not needed but were positively embarrassing to the
Government. Popular feeling over the matter was so strong that
even the Republican party had felt bound to put into its national
platform, in 1884, a pledge "to correct the irregularities of the
tariff and to reduce the surplus." The people, however, believed
that the Republican party had already been given sufficient
opportunity, and they now turned to the Democratic party for
relief. The rank and file of this party felt acutely, therefore,
that they were not accomplishing what the people expected.
Members arrived in Washington full of good intentions. They found
themselves subject to a system which allowed them to introduce
all the bills they wanted, but not to obtain action upon them.
Action was the prerogative of a group of old hands who managed
the important committees and who were divided among themselves on
tariff policy. And now, the little bills which, by dint of
persuasion and bargaining, they had first put through the
committees, and then through both Houses of Congress, were cut
down by executive veto, turning to their injury what they had
counted upon to help them in their districts.

During the campaign, Democratic candidates had everywhere
contended that they were just as good friends of the old soldiers
as the Republicans. Now, they felt that to make good this
position they must do something to offset the effect of President
Cleveland's vetoes. In his messages, he had favored "the most
generous treatment to the disabled, aged and needy among our
veterans"; but he had argued that it should be done by general
laws, and not by special acts for the benefit of particular
claimants. The Pension Committee of the House responded by
reporting a bill "for the relief of dependent parents and
honorably discharged soldiers and sailors who are now disabled
and dependent upon their own labor for support." It passed the
House by a vote of 180 to 76, with 63 not voting, and it passed
the Senate without a division. On the 11th of February, President
Cleveland sent in his veto, accompanied by a message pointing out
in the language of the act defects and ambiguities which he
believed would "but put a further premium on dishonesty and
mendacity." He reiterated his desire that provision should be
made "for those who, having served their country long and well,
are reduced to destitution and dependence," but he did not think
that the bill was a proper means of attaining that object. On the
19th of February, the House committee on pensions submitted an
elaborate report on the veto in which they recited the history of
the bill and the reasons actuating the committee. Extracts from
Cleveland's messages were quoted, and the committee declared
that, in "hearty accord with these views of the President and
largely in accordance with his suggestions, they framed a bill
which they then thought, and still continue to think, will best
accomplish the ends proposed." A motion to pass the bill over the
veto on the 24th of February received 175 votes to 125, but
two-thirds not having voted in the affirmative the bill failed to
pass. The Republicans voted solidly in support of the bill,
together with a large group of Democrats. The negative vote came
wholly from the Democratic side. Such a fiasco amounted to a
demonstration of the lack of intelligent leadership. If the
President and his party in Congress were cooperating for the
furtherance of the same objects, as both averred, it was
discreditable all around that there should have been such a
complete misunderstanding as to the procedure.

Meanwhile, the President was making a unique record by his
vetoes. During the period of ninety-six years, from the
foundation of the Government down to the beginning of Cleveland's
administration, the entire number of veto messages was 132. In
four years, Cleveland sent in 301 veto messages, and in addition
he practically vetoed 109 bills by inaction. Of 2042 private
pension bills passed by Congress, 1518 were approved and 284
became laws by lapse of time without approval. The positive
results of the President's activity were thus inconsiderable,
unless incidentally he had managed to correct the system which he
had opposed. That claim, indeed, was made in his behalf when "The
Nation" mentioned "the arrest of the pension craze" as a
"positive achievement of the first order.'" But far from being
arrested, "the pension craze" was made the more furious, and it
soon advanced to extremes unknown before.*

* March 19, 1887.


The Democratic politicians naturally viewed with dismay the
approach of the national election of 1888. Any one could see that
the party was drifting on to the rocks and nobody deemed to be at
the helm. According to William R. Morrison, who certainly had
been in a position to know, President Cleveland had "up to this
time taken no decided ground one way or the other on the question
of tariff." He had included the subject in the long dissertation
on the state of the Union, which ever since Jefferson's time the
President has been wont to send to Congress at the opening of a
session, but he had not singled it out as having precedence. He
now surprised the country, roused his party, and gave fresh
animation to national politics on December 6, 1887, by devoting
his third annual message wholly to the subject of taxation and
revenue. He pointed out that the treasury surplus was mounting up
to $140,000,000; that the redemption of bonds which had afforded
a means for disbursement of excess revenues had stopped because
there were no more bonds that the Government had a right to
redeem; and that, hence, the Treasury "idly holds money uselessly
subtracted from the channels of trade," a situation from which
monetary derangement and business distress would naturally ensue.
He strongly urged that the "present tariff laws, the vicious,
inequitable and illogical source of unnecessary taxation, ought
to be at once revised and amended." Cleveland gave a detailed
analysis of the injurious effects which the existing tariff had
upon trade and industry, and went on to remark that "progress
toward a wise conclusion will not be improved by dwelling upon
the theories of protection and free trade. This savors too much
of bandying epithets. It is a condition which confronts us, not a
theory." The effect of the message was very marked both upon
public opinion and party activity. Mr. Morrison correctly summed
up the party effect in saying that "Mr. Mills, obtaining the
substantial support of the Administration, was enabled to press
through the House a bill differing in a very few essential
measures from, and combining the general details and purposes of,
the several measures of which I have been the author, and which
had been voted against by many of those who contributed to the
success of the Mills Bill."

An incident which attracted great notice because it was thought
to have a bearing on the President's policy of tariff revision,
was the veto of the Allentown Public Building Bill. This bill was
of a type which is one of the rankest growths of the
Congressional system--the grant of money not for the needs of
public service but as a district favor. It appropriated $100,000
to put up a post-office building at Allentown, Pennsylvania,
where adequate quarters were being occupied by the post-office at
an annual rent of $1300. President Cleveland vetoed the bill
simply on the ground that it proposed an unnecessary expenditure,
but the fact was at once noted that the bill had been fathered by
Congressman Snowden, an active adherent of Randall in opposition
to the tariff reform policy of the Administration. The word went
through Congress and reverberated through the press that "there
is an Allentown for every Snowden." Mr. Morrison said in more
polite phrase what came to the same thing when he observed that
"when Mr. Cleveland took decided ground in favor of revision and
reduction, he represented the patronage of the Administration, in
consequence of which he was enabled to enforce party discipline,
so that a man could no longer be a good Democrat and favor
anything but reform of the tariff."

After the Mills Bill had passed the House* and had been sent to
the Senate, it was held in committee until October 3, 1888. When
it emerged it carried an amendment which was in effect a complete
substitute, but it was not taken up for consideration until after
the presidential election, and it was meant simply as a
Republican alternative to the Mills Bill for campaign use.
Consideration of the bill began on the 5th of December and lasted
until the 22nd of January, when the bill was returned to the
House transformed into a new measure. It was referred to the Ways
and Means Committee, and Chairman Mills reported it back with a
resolution setting forth that "the substitution by the Senate
under the form of an amendment.... of another and different
bill," is in conflict with the section of the Constitution which
"vests in the House of Representatives the sole power to
originate such a measure." The House refused to consider the
resolution, a number of Democrats led by Mr. Randall voting with
the Republicans in the negative. No further action was taken on
the bill and since that day the House has never ventured to
question the right of the Senate to amend tax bills in any way
and to any extent. As Senator Cullom remarks in his memoirs, the
Democrats, although they had long held the House and had also
gained, the Presidency, "were just as powerless to enact
legislation as they had been before."

 * The Mills Bill was passed July 21, 1888, yeas 162, nays 149,
not voting 14. Randall, Snowden, and two other Democrats joined
the Republicans in voting against the bill.



CHAPTER VII. THE PUBLIC DISCONTENTS

While President and Congress were passing the time in mutual
obstruction, the public discontents were becoming hot and bitter
to a degree unknown before. A marked feature of the situation was
the disturbance of public convenience involving loss, trouble,
and distress which were vast in extent but not easily expressed
in statistical form. The first three months of 1886 saw an
outbreak of labor troubles far beyond any previous record in
their variety and extent. In 1885, the number of strikes reported
was 645 affecting 2284 establishments, a marked increase over
preceding years. In 1886, the number of strikes rose to 1411,
affecting 9861 establishments and directly involving 499,489
persons. The most numerous strikes were in the building trades,
but there were severe struggles in many other industries. There
was, for example, an interruption of business on the New York
elevated railway and on the street railways of New York,
Brooklyn, and other cities.

But the greatest public anxiety was caused by the behavior of the
Knights of Labor, an organization then growing so rapidly that it
gave promise of uniting under one control the active and
energetic elements of the working classes of the country. It
started in a humble way, in December, 1869, among certain garment
cutters in Philadelphia, and for some years spread slowly from
that center. The organization remained strictly secret until
1878, in which year it held a national convention of its fifteen
district assemblies at Reading, Pennsylvania. The object and
principles of the order were now made public and, thereafter, it
spread with startling rapidity, so that in 1886 it pitted its
strength against public authority with a membership estimated at
from, 500,000 to 800,000. Had this body been an army obedient to
its leaders, it would have wielded great power; but it turned out
to be only a mob. Its members took part in demonstrations which
were as much mutinies against the authority of their own
executive board as they were strikes against their employers. The
result of lack of organization soon began to be evident. In
March 1886, the receiver of the Texas Pacific Railroad
discharged an employee prominent in the Knights of Labor and thus
precipitated a strike which was promptly extended to the Missouri
Pacific. There were riots at various points in Missouri and
Kansas, and railroad traffic at St. Louis was completely
suspended for some days, but the strike was eventually broken.
The Knights of Labor, however, had received a blow from which it
never recovered, and as a result its membership declined. The
order has since been almost wholly superseded by the American
Federation of Labor, established in 1886 through shrewd
management by an association of labor unions which had been
maintained since 1881. The Knights had been organized by
localities with the aim of merging all classes of working men
into one body. The Federation, on the other hand, is composed of
trades unions retaining their autonomy--a principle of
organization which has proved to be more solid and durable.

To these signs of popular discontent the Government could not be
blind. A congressional committee investigated the railroad
strikes, and both parties in Congress busied themselves with
labor legislation. But in spite of this apparent willingness to
cope with the situation, there now followed another display of
those cross purposes which occurred so often during the Cleveland
administration. The House had already passed a bill providing
means of submitting to arbitration controversies between
railroads engaged in interstate commerce and their employees.
President Cleveland now sent a special message recommending that
"instead of arbitrators chosen in the heat of conflicting claims
and after each dispute shall arise, there be created a Commission
of Labor, consisting of three members, who shall be regular
officers of the government, charged among other duties with the
consideration and settlement when possible, of all controversies
between labor and capital." In spite of the urgency of the
situation, the Senate seized this occasion for a new display of
party tactics, and it Allowed the bill already passed by the
House to lie without action while it proceeded to consider
various labor measures of its own. For example, by June 1, 1886,
the Senate had passed a bill providing that eight hours should be
a day's work for letter-carriers; soon afterwards, it passed a
bill legalizing the incorporation of national trades unions, to
which the House promptly assented without a division; and the
House then continued its labor record by passing on the 15th of
July a bill against the importation of contract labor. This last
bill was not passed by the Senate until after the fall elections.
It was approved by the President on February 23, 1887.

The Senate also delayed action on the House bill, which proposed
arbitration in labor disputes, until the close of the session;
and then the President, in view of his disregarded suggestion,
withheld his assent. It was not until the following year that the
legislation recommended by the President was enacted. By the Act
of June 13, 1888, the Department of Labor was established, and by
the Act of October 1, 1888, in addition to provision for
voluntary arbitration between railroad corporations and their
employees, the President was authorized to appoint a commission
to investigate labor conflicts, with power to act as a board of
conciliation. During the ten years in which the act remained on
the statute books, it was actually put to use only in 1894, when
a commission was appointed to investigate the Pullman strike at
Chicago, but this body took no action towards settling the
dispute.

Thus far, then, the efforts of the Government to deal with the
labor problem had not been entirely successful. It is true that
the labor conflicts arose over differences which only indirectly
involved constitutional questions. The aims of both the Knights
of Labor and of the American Federation were primarily economic
and both organizations were opposed to agitation of a
distinctively political character. But parallel with the labor
agitation, and in communication with it, there were radical
reform movements of a type unknown before. There was now to arise
a socialistic movement opposed to traditional constitutionalism,
and therefore viewed with alarm in many parts of the country.
Veneration of the Constitution of 1787 was practically a national
sentiment which had lasted from the time the Union was
successfully established until the Cleveland era. However violent
political differences in regard to public policy might be, it was
the invariable rule that proposals must claim a constitutional
sanction. In the Civil War, both sides felt themselves to be
fighting in defense of the traditional Constitution.

The appeal to antiquity--even such a moderate degree of antiquity
as may be claimed for American institutions--has always been the
staple argument in American political controversy. The views and
intentions of the Fathers of the Constitution are exhibited not
so much for instruction as for imitation, and by means of glosses
and interpretations conclusions may be reached which would have
surprised the Fathers to whom they are imputed. Those who examine
the records of the formative period of American institutions, not
to obtain material for a case but simply to ascertain the facts,
will readily observe that what is known as the principle of
strict construction dates only from the organization of national
parties under the Constitution. It was an invention of the
opposition to Federalist rule and was not held by the makers of
the Constitution themselves. The main concern of the framers was
to get power for the National Government, and they went as far as
they could with such success that striking instances may be
culled from the writings of the Fathers showing that the scope
they contemplated has yet to be attained. Strict construction
affords a short and easy way of avoiding troublesome
issues--always involved in unforeseen national developments--by
substituting the question of constitutional power for a question
of public propriety. But this method has the disadvantage, that
it belittles the Constitution by making it an obstacle to
progress. Running through much political controversy in the
United States is the argument that, even granting that a proposal
has all the merit claimed for it, nevertheless it cannot be
adopted because the Constitution is against it. By strict logical
inference the rejoinder then comes that, if so, the Constitution
is no longer an instrument of national advantage. The traditional
attachment of the American people to the Constitution has indeed
been so strong that they have been loath to accept the inference
that the Constitution is out of date, although the quality of
legislation at Washington kept persistently suggesting that view
of the case.

The failures and disappointments resulting from the series of
national elections from 1874 to 1884, at last, made an opening
for party movements voicing the popular discontent and openly
antagonistic to the traditional Constitution. The Socialist Labor
party held its first national convention in 1877. Its membership
was mostly foreign; of twenty-four periodical publications then
carried on in the party interest, only eight were in the English
language; and this polyglot press gave justification to the
remark that the movement was in the hands of people who proposed
to remodel the institutions of the country before they had
acquired its language. The alien origin of the movement was
emphasized by the appearance of two Socialist members of the
German Reichstag, who made a tour of this country in 1881 to stir
up interest in the cause. It was soon apparent that the growth of
the Socialist party organization was hindered by the fact that
its methods were too studious and its discussions too abstract to
suit the energetic temper of the times. Many Socialists broke
away to join revolutionary clubs which were now organized in a
number of cities without any clearly defined principle save to
fight the existing system of government.

At this critical moment in the process of social disorganization,
the influence of foreign destructive thought made itself felt.
The arrival of Johann Most from Europe, in the fall of 1882,
supplied this revolutionary movement with a leader who made
anarchy its principle. Originally a German Socialist aiming to
make the State the sole landlord and capitalist, he had gone over
to anarchism and proposed to dissolve the State altogether,
trusting to voluntary association to supply all genuine social
needs. Driven from Germany, he had taken refuge in England, but
even the habitual British tolerance had given way under his
praise of the assassination of the Czar Alexander in 1881 and his
proposal to treat other rulers in the same way. He had just
completed a term of imprisonment before coming to the United
States. Here, he was received as a hero; a great mass meeting in
his honor was held in Cooper Union, New York, in December, 1882;
and when he toured the country he everywhere addressed large
meetings.

In October 1883, a convention of social revolutionists and
anarchists was held in Chicago, at which a national organization
was formed called the International Working People's Association.
The new organization grew much faster than the Socialist party
itself, which now almost disappeared. Two years later, the
International had a party press consisting of seven German, two
Bohemian, and only two English papers. Like the Socialist party,
it was, therefore, mainly foreign in its membership. It was
strongest in and about Chicago, where it included twenty groups
with three thousand enrolled members. The anarchist papers
exhorted their adherents to provide themselves with arms and even
published instructions for the use of dynamite.

Political and industrial conditions thus supplied material for an
explosion which came with shocking violence. On May 4, 1885,
towards the close of an anarchist meeting held in Chicago, a
dynamite bomb thrown among a force of policemen killed one and
wounded many. Fire was at once opened on both sides, and,
although the battle lasted only a few minutes, seven policemen
were killed and about sixty wounded; while on the side of the
anarchists, four were killed and about fifty were wounded. Ten of
the anarchist leaders were promptly indicted, of whom one made
his escape and another turned State's evidence. The trial of the
remaining eight began on June 21, 1886, and two months later the
death sentence was imposed upon seven and a penitentiary term of
fifteen years upon one. The sentences of two of the seven were
commuted to life imprisonment; one committed suicide in his cell
by exploding a cartridge in his mouth; and four met death on the
scaffold. While awaiting their fate they were to a startling
extent regarded as heroes and bore themselves as martyrs to a
noble cause. Six years later, Illinois elected as governor John
P. Altgeld, one of whose first steps was to issue a pardon to the
three who were serving terms of imprisonment and to criticize
sharply the conduct of the trial which had resulted in the
conviction of the anarchists.

The Chicago outbreak and its result stopped the open spread of
anarchism. Organized labor now withdrew from any sort of
association with it. This cleared the field for a revival of the
Socialist movement as the agency of social and political
reconstruction. So rapidly did it gain in membership and
influence that by 1892 it was able to present itself as an
organized national party appealing to public opinion for
confidence and support, submitting its claims to public
discussion, and stating its case upon reasonable grounds.
Although its membership was small in comparison with that of the
old parties, the disparity was not so great as it seemed,
since the Socialists represented active intelligence while the
other parties represented political inertia. From this time on,
Socialist views spread among college students, artists, and men
of letters, and the academic Socialist became a familiar figure
in American society.

Probably more significant than the Socialist movement, as an
indication of the popular demand for radical reform in the
government of the country, was the New York campaign of Henry
George in 1886. He was a San Francisco printer and journalist
when he published the work on "Progress and Poverty" which made
him famous. Upon the petition of over thirty thousand citizens,
he became the Labor candidate for mayor of New York City. The
movement in support of George developed so much strength that the
regular parties felt compelled to put forward exceptionally
strong candidates. The Democrats nominated Abram S. Hewitt, a man
of the highest type of character, a fact which was not perhaps so
influential in getting him the nomination as that he was the
son-in-law of Peter Cooper, a philanthropist justly beloved by
the working classes. The Republicans nominated Theodore
Roosevelt, who had already distinguished himself by his energy of
character and zeal for reform. Hewitt was elected, but George
received 68,110 votes out of a total of 219,679, and stood second
in the poll. His supporters contended that he had really been
elected but had been counted out, and this belief turned their
attention to the subject of ballot reform. To the agitation which
Henry George began, may be fairly ascribed the general adoption
of the Australian ballot in the United States.

The Socialist propaganda carried on in large cities and in
factory towns hardly touched the great mass of the people of the
United States, who belonged to the farm rather than to the
workshop. The great agricultural class, which had more weight at
the polls than any other class of citizens, was much interested
in the redress of particular grievances and very little in any
general reform of the governmental system. It is a class that is
conservative in disposition but distrustful of authority,
impatient of what is theoretical and abstract, and bent upon the
quick practical solution of problems by the nearest and simplest
means. While the Socialists in the towns were interested in labor
questions, the farmers more than any other class were affected by
the defective system of currency supply. The national banking
system had not been devised to meet industrial needs but as a war
measure to provide a market for government bonds, deposits of
which had to be made as the basis of note issues. As holdings of
government bonds were amassed in the East, financial operations
tended to confine themselves to that part of the country, and
banking facilities seemed to be in danger of becoming a sectional
monopoly, and such, indeed, was the case to a marked extent. This
situation inspired among the farmers, especially in the
agricultural West, a hatred of Wall Street and a belief in the
existence of a malign money power which provided an inexhaustible
fund of sectional feeling for demagogic exploitation.

For lack of proper machinery of credit for carrying on the
process of exchange, there seemed to be an absolute shortage in
the amount of money in circulation, and it was this circumstance
that had given such force to the Greenback Movement. Although
that movement was defeated, its supporters urged that, if the
Government could not supply additional note issues, it should at
least permit an increase in the stock of coined money. This
feeling was so strong that as early as 1877 the House had passed
a bill for the free coinage of silver. For this, the Senate
substituted a measure requiring the purchase and coinage by the
Government of from two to four million dollars' worth of silver
monthly, and this compromise was accepted by the House. As a
result, in February, 1878, it was passed over President Hayes's
veto.

The operation of this act naturally tended to cause the hoarding
of gold as the cheaper silver was equally a legal tender, and
meanwhile the silver dollars did not tend to pass into
circulation. In 1885, in his first annual message to Congress,
President Cleveland mentioned the fact that, although 215,759,431
silver dollars had been coined, only about fifty million had
found their way into circulation, and that "every month two
millions of gold in the public Treasury are paid out for two
millions or more of silver dollars to be added to the idle mass
already accumulated." The process was draining the stock of gold
in the Treasury and forcing the country to a silver basis without
really increasing the amount of money in actual circulation or
removing any of the difficulties in the way of obtaining supplies
of currency for business transactions. President Cleveland
recommended the repeal of the Silver Coinage Act, but he had no
plan to offer by which the genuine complaints of the people
against the existing monetary system could be removed. Free
silver thus was allowed to stand before the people as the only
practical proposal for their relief, and upon this issue a
conflict soon began between Congress and the Administration.

At a convention of the American Bankers' Association in
September, 1885, a New York bank president described the methods
by which the Treasury Department was restricting the operation of
the Silver Coinage Act so as to avoid a displacement of the gold
standard. On February 3, 1886, Chairman Bland of the House
committee on coinage reported a resolution reciting statements
made in that address, and calling upon the Secretary of the
Treasury for a detailed account of his administration of the
Silver Coinage Act. Secretary Manning's reply was a long and
weighty argument against continuing the coinage of silver. He
contended that there was no hope of maintaining a fixed ratio
between gold and silver except by international concert of
action, but "the step is one which no European nation... will
consent to take while the direct or indirect substitution of
European silver for United States gold seems a possibility."
While strong as to what not to do, his reply, like most of the
state papers of this period, was weak as to what to do and how to
do it. The outlook of the Secretary of the Treasury was so narrow
that he was led to remark that "a delusion has spread that the
Government has authority to fix the amount of the people's
currency, and the power, and the duty." The Government certainly
has the power and the duty of providing adequate currency supply
through a sound banking system. The instinct of the people on
that point was sounder than the view of their rulers.

Secretary Manning's plea had so little effect that the House
promptly voted to suspend the rules in order to make a free
coinage bill the special order of business until it was disposed
of. But the influence of the Administration was strong enough to
defeat the bill when it came to a vote. Th