ough for a time, the
legislative advance of the silver movement was successfully
resisted, the Treasury Department was left in a difficult
situation, and the expedients to which it resorted to guard the
gold supply added to the troubles of the people in the matter of
obtaining currency. The quick way of getting gold from the
Treasury was to present legal tender notes for redemption. To
keep this process in check, legal tender notes were impounded as
they came in, and silver certificates were substituted in
disbursements. But under the law of 1878, silver certificates
could not be issued in denominations of less than ten dollars. A
scarcity of small notes resulted, which oppressed retail trade
until, in August, 1886, Congress authorized the issue of silver
certificates in one and two and five dollar bills.

A more difficult problem was presented by the Treasury surplus
which, by old regulations savoring more of barbarism than of
civilized polity, had to be kept idle in the Treasury vaults. The
only apparent means by which the Secretary of the Treasury could
return his surplus funds to the channels of trade was by
redeeming government bonds; but as these were the basis of bank
note issues, the effect of any such action was to produce a sharp
contraction in this class of currency. Between 1882 and 1889,
national bank notes declined in amount from $356,060,348 to
$199,779,011. In the same period, the issue of silver
certificates increased from $63,204,780 to $276,619,715, and the
total amount of currency of all sorts nominally increased from
$1,188,752,363 to $1,405,018,000; but of this, $375,947,715 was
in gold coin which was being hoarded, and national bank notes
were almost equally scarce since they were virtually government
bonds in a liquid form.

As the inefficiency of the monetary system came home to the
people in practical experience, it seemed as if they were being
plagued and inconvenienced in every possible way. The conditions
were just such as would spread disaffection among the farmers,
and their discontent sought an outlet. The growth of political
agitation in the agricultural class, accompanied by a thorough-
going disapproval of existing party leadership, gave rise to
numerous new party movements. Delegates from the Agricultural
Wheel, the Corn-Planters, the Anti-Monopolists, Farmers'
Alliance, and Grangers, attended a convention in February, 1887,
and joined the Knights of Labor and the Greenbackers to form the
United Labor party. In the country, at this time, there were
numerous other labor parties of local origin and composition,
with trade unionists predominating in some places and Socialists
in others. Very early, however, these parties showed a tendency
to division that indicated a clash of incompatible elements.
Single taxers, greenbackers, labor leaders, grangers, and
socialists were agreed only in condemning existing public policy.
When they came to consider the question of what new policy should
be adopted, they immediately manifested irreconcilable
differences. In 1888, rival national conventions were held in
Cincinnati, one designating itself as the Union Labor party, the
other as the United Labor party. One made a schedule of
particular demands; the other insisted on the single tax as the
consummation of their purpose in seeking reform. Both put
presidential tickets in the field, but of the two, the Union
Labor party made by far the better showing at the polls though,
even so, it polled fewer votes than did the National Prohibition
party. Although making no very considerable showing at the polls,
these new movements were very significant as evidences of popular
unrest. The fact that the heaviest vote of the Union Labor party
was polled in the agricultural States of Kansas, Missouri, and
Texas, was a portent of the sweep of the populist movement which
virtually captured the Democratic party organization during
President Cleveland's second term.

The withdrawal of Blaine from the list of presidential candidates
in 1888 left the Republican Convention at Chicago to choose from
a score of "favorite sons." Even his repeated statement that he
would not accept the nomination did not prevent his enthusiastic
followers from hoping that the convention might be "stampeded."
But on the first ballot, Blaine received only thirty-five votes
while John Sherman led with 229. It was anybody's race until the
eighth ballot, when General Benjamin Harrison, grandson of
"Tippecanoe," suddenly forged ahead and received the nomination.

The defeat of the Democratic party at the polls in the
presidential election of 1888 was less emphatic than might have
been expected from its sorry record. Indeed, it is quite possible
that an indiscretion in which Lord Sackville-West, the British
Ambassador, was caught may have turned the scale. An adroitly
worded letter was sent to him, purporting to come from Charles
Murchison, a California voter of English birth, asking
confidential advice which might enable the writer "to assure many
of our countrymen that they would do England a service by voting
for Cleveland and against the Republican system of tariff." With
an astonishing lack of astuteness, the British minister fell into
the trap and sent a reply which, while noncommittal on
particulars, exhibited friendly interest in the reelection of
President Cleveland. This correspondence, when published late in
the campaign, caused the Administration to demand his recall. A
spirited statement of the case was laid before the public by
Thomas Francis Bayard, Secretary of State, a few days before the
election, but this was not enough to undo the harm that had been
done, and the Murchison letter takes rank with the Morey letter
attributed to General Garfield as specimens of the value of the
campaign lie as a weapon in American party politics.

President Cleveland received a slight plurality in the total
popular vote; but by small pluralities Harrison carried the big
States, thus obtaining a heavy majority in the electoral vote. At
the same time, the Republicans obtained nearly as large a
majority in the House as the Democrats had had before.



CHAPTER VIII. THE REPUBLICAN OPPORTUNITY

The Republican party had the inestimable advantage in the year
1889 of being able to act. It controlled the Senate which had
become the seat of legislative authority; it controlled the
House; and it had placed its candidate in the presidential chair.
All branches of the Government were now in party accord. The
leaders in both Houses were able men, experienced in the
diplomacy which, far more than argument or conviction, produces
congressional action. Benjamin Harrison himself had been a member
of the ruling group of Senators, and as he was fully imbued with
their ideas as to the proper place of the President he was
careful to avoid interference with legislative procedure. Such
was the party harmony that an extensive program of legislation
was put through without serious difficulty, after obstruction had
been overcome in the House by an amendment of the rules.

In the House of Representatives, the quorum is a majority of the
whole membership. This rule enabled the minority to stop business
at any time when the majority party was not present in sufficient
strength to maintain the quorum by its own vote. On several
occasions, the Democrats left the House nominally without a
quorum
by the subterfuge of refusing to answer to their names on the
roll call. Speaker Reed determined to end this practice by
counting as present any members actually in the chamber. To the
wrath of the minority, he assumed this authority while a revision
of the rules was pending. The absurdity of the Democratic
position was naively exposed when a member arose with a law book
in his hand and said, "I deny your right, Mr. Speaker, to count
me as present, and I desire to read from the parliamentary law on
the subject." Speaker Reed, with the nasal drawl that was his
habit, replied, "The Chair is making a statement of fact that the
gentleman from Kentucky is present? Does he deny it?" The
rejoinder was so apposite that the House broke into a roar of
laughter, and the Speaker carried his point.

Undoubtedly, Speaker Reed was violating all precedents.
Facilities of obstruction had been cherished by both parties, and
nothing short of Reed's earnestness and determination could have
effected this salutary reform. The fact has since been disclosed
that he had made up his mind to resign the Speakership and retire
from public life had his party failed to support him. For three
days, the House was a bedlam, but the Speaker bore himself
throughout with unflinching courage and unruffled composure.
Eventually he had his way. New rules were adopted, and the power
to count a quorum was established.* When in later Congresses a
Democratic majority returned to the former practice, Reed gave
them such a dose of their own medicine that for weeks the House
was unable to keep a quorum. Finally, the House was forced to
return to the "Reed rules" which have since then been permanently
retained. As a result of congressional example, they have been
generally adopted by American legislative bodies, with a marked
improvement in their capacity to do business.

* The rule that "no dilatory motion shall be entertained by the
Speaker" was also adopted at this time.


With the facilities of action which they now possessed, the
Republican leaders had no difficulty in getting rid of the
surplus in the Treasury. Indeed, in this particular they could
count on Democratic aid. The main conduit which they used was an
increase of pension expenditures. President Harrison encouraged a
spirit of broad liberality toward veterans of the Civil War.
During the campaign he said that it "was no time to be weighing
the claims of old soldiers with apothecary's scales," and he put
this principle of generous recognition into effect by appointing
as commissioner of pensions a robust partisan known as "Corporal"
Tanner. The report went abroad that on taking office he had
gleefully declared, "God help the surplus," and upon that maxim
he acted with unflinching vigor. It seemed, indeed, as if any
claim could count upon being allowed so long as it purported to
come from an old soldier. But Tanner's ambition was not satisfied
with an indulgent consideration of applications pending during
his time; he reopened old cases, rerated a large number of
pensioners, and increased the amount of their allowance. In some
cases, large sums were granted as arrears due on the basis of the
new rate. A number of officers of the pension bureau were thus
favored, for a man might receive a pension on the score of
disability though still able to hold office and draw its salary
and emoluments. For example, the sum of $4300 in arrears was
declared to be due to a member of the United States Senate,
Charles F. Manderson of Nebraska. Finally, "Corporal" Tanner's
extravagant management became so intolerable to the Secretary of
the Interior that he confronted President Harrison with the
choice of accepting his resignation or dismissing Tanner. Tanner
therefore had to go, and with him his system of reratings.

A pension bill for dependents, such as Cleveland had vetoed, now
went triumphantly through Congress.* It granted pensions of from
six to twelve dollars a month to all persons who had served for
ninety days in the Civil War and had thereby been incapacitated
for manual labor to such a degree as to be unable to support
themselves. Pensions were also granted to widows, minor children,
and dependent parents. This law brought in an enormous flood of
claims in passing, upon which it was the policy of the Pension
Bureau to practice great indulgence. In one instance, a pension
was granted to a claimant who had enlisted but never really
served in the army as he had deserted soon after entering the
camp. He thereupon had been sentenced to hard labor for one year
and made to forfeit all pay and allowances. After the war, he had
been convicted of horse stealing and sent to the state
penitentiary in Wisconsin. While serving his term, he presented a
pension claim supported by forged testimony to the effect that he
had been wounded in the battle of Franklin. The fraud was
discovered by a special examiner of the pension office, and the
claimant and some of his witnesses were tried for perjury,
convicted, and sent to the state penitentiary at Joliet,
Illinois. After serving his time there, he posed as a neglected
old soldier and succeeded in obtaining letters from sympathetic
Congressmen commending his case to the attention of the pension
office, but without avail until the Act of 1890 was passed. He
then put in a claim which was twice rejected by the pension
office examiners, but each time the decision was overruled, and
in the end he was put upon the pension roll. This case is only
one of many made possible by lax methods of investigating pension
claims. Senator Gallinger of New Hampshire eventually said of the
effect of pension policy, as shaped by his own party with his own
aid:

"If there was any soldier on the Union side during the Civil War
who was not a good soldier, who has not received a pension, I do
not know who he is. He can always find men of his own type,
equally poor soldiers who would swear that they knew he had been
in a hospital at a certain time, whether he was or not--the
records did not state it, but they knew it was so--and who would
also swear that they knew he had received a shock which affected
his hearing during a certain battle, or that something else had
happened to him; and so all those pension claims, many of which
are worthless, have been allowed by the Government, because they
were 'proved.'"

* June 27, 1890.


The increase in the expenditure for pensions, which rose from
$88,000,000 in 1889 to $159,000,000 in 1893, swept away much of
the surplus in the Treasury. Further inroads were made by the
enactment of the largest river and harbor appropriation bill in
the history of the country up to this time. Moreover, a new
tariff bill was contrived in such a way as to impose protective
duties without producing so much revenue that it would cause
popular complaint about unnecessary taxation. A large source of
revenue was cut off by abolishing the sugar duties and by
substituting a system of bounties to encourage home production.
Upon this bill as a whole, Senator Cullom remarks in his memoirs
that "it was a high protective tariff, dictated by the
manufacturers of the country" who have "insisted upon higher
duties than they really ought to have." The bill was, indeed,
made up wholly with the view of protecting American manufactures
from any foreign competition in the home market.

As passed by the House, not only did the bill ignore American
commerce with other countries but it left American consumers
exposed to the manipulation of prices on the part of other
countries. Practically all the products of tropical America,
except tobacco, had been placed upon the free list without any
precaution lest the revenue thus surrendered might not be
appropriated by other countries by means of export taxes. Blaine,
who was once more Secretary of State, began a vigorous agitation
in favor of adding reciprocity provisions to the bill. When the
Senate showed a disposition to resent his interference, Blaine
addressed to Senator Frye of Maine a letter which was in effect
an appeal to the people, and which greatly stirred the farmers by
its statement that "there is not a section or a line in the
entire bill that will open the market for another bushel of wheat
or another barrel of pork." The effect was so marked that the
Senate yielded, and the Tariff Bill, as finally enacted, gave the
President power to impose certain duties on sugar, molasses,
coffee, tea, and hides imported from any country imposing on
American goods duties, which, in the opinion of the President,
were "reciprocally unequal and unreasonable." This more equitable
result is to be ascribed wholly to Blaine's energetic and capable
leadership.

Pending the passage of the Tariff Bill, the Senate had been
wrestling with the trust problem which was making a mockery of a
favorite theory of the Republicans. They had held that tariff
protection benefited the consumer by the stimulus which it gave
to home production and by ensuring a supply of articles on as
cheap terms as American labor could afford. There were, however,
notorious facts showing that certain corporations had taken
advantage of the situation to impose high prices, especially upon
the American consumer. It was a campaign taunt that the tariff
held the people down while the trusts went through their pockets,
and to this charge the Republicans found it difficult to make a
satisfactory reply.

The existence of such economic injustice was continually urged in
support of popular demands for the control of corporations by the
Government. Though the Republican leaders were much averse to
providing such control, they found inaction so dangerous that on
January 14, 1890, Senator John Sherman reported from the Finance
Committee a vague but peremptory statute to make trade
competition compulsory. This was the origin of the AntiTrust Law
which has since gone by his name, although the law actually
passed was framed by the Senate judiciary committee. The first
section declared that "every contract, combination in the form of
trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or
commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, is
hereby declared to be illegal." The law made no attempt to define
the offenses it penalized and created no machinery for enforcing
its provisions, but it gave jurisdiction over alleged violations
to the courts--a favorite congressional mode of getting rid of
troublesome responsibilities. As a result, the courts have been
struggling with the application of the law ever since, without
being able to develop a clear or consistent rule for
discriminating between legal and illegal combinations in trade
and commerce. Even upon the financial question, the Republicans
succeeded in maintaining party harmony, notwithstanding a sharp
conflict between factions. William Windom, the Secretary of the
Treasury, had prepared a bill of the type known as a "straddle."
It offered the advocates of free coinage the right to send to the
mint silver bullion in any quantity and to receive in return the
net market value of the bullion in treasury notes redeemable in
gold or silver coin at the option of the Government. The monthly
purchase of not less than $2,000,000 worth of bullion was,
however, no longer to be required by law. When the advocates of
silver insisted that the provision for bullion purchase was too
vague, a substitute was prepared which definitely required the
Secretary of the Treasury to purchase 4,500,000 ounces of silver
bullion in one month. The bill, as thus amended, was put through
the House under special rule by a strict party vote. But when
the bill reached the Senate, the former party agreement could no
longer be maintained, and the Republican leaders lost control of
the situation. The free silver Republicans combined with most of
the Democrats to substitute a free coinage bill, which passed the
Senate by forty-three yeas to twenty-four nays, all the negative
votes save three coming from the Republican side.

It took all the influence the party leaders could exert to
prevent a silver stampede in the House when the Senate substitute
bill was brought forward; but by dexterous management, a vote of
non-concurrence was passed and a committee of conference was
appointed. The Republican leaders now found themselves in a
situation in which presidential non-interference ceased to be
desirable, but president Harrison could not be stirred to action.
He would not even state his views. As Senator Sherman remarked in
his "Recollections," "The situation at that time was critical. A
large majority of the Senate favored free silver, and it was
feared that the small majority against it in the other House
might yield and agree to it. The silence of the President on the
matter gave rise to an apprehension that if a free coinage bill
should pass both Houses, he would not feel at liberty to veto
it."

In this emergency, the Republican leaders appealed to their free
silver party associates to be content with compelling the
Treasury to purchase 4,500,000 ounces of silver per month, which
it was wrongly calculated would cover the entire output of
American mines. The force of party discipline eventually
prevailed, and the Republican party got together on this
compromise. The bill was adopted in both Houses by a strict party
vote, with the Democrats solidly opposed, and was finally enacted
on July 14, 1890.

Thus by relying upon political tactics, the managers of the
Republican party were able to reconcile conflicting interests,
maintain party harmony, and present a record of achievement which
they hoped to make available in the fall elections. But while
they had placated the party factions, they had done nothing to
satisfy the people as a whole or to redress their grievances. The
slowness of congressional procedure in matters of legislative
reform allowed the amplest opportunity to unscrupulous business
men to engage, in the meantime, in profiteering at the public
expense. They were able to lay in stocks of goods at the old
rates so that an increase of customs rates, for example, became
an enormous tax upon consumers without a corresponding gain to
the Treasury; for the yield was largely intercepted on private
accounts by an advance in prices. The Tariff Bill, which William
McKinley reported on April 16, 1890, became law only on the 1st
of October, so there were over five months during which
profiteers could stock at old rates for sales at the new rates
and thus reap a rich harvest. The public, however, was
infuriated, and popular sentiment was so stirred by the methods
of retail trade that the politicians were both angered and
dismayed. Whenever purchasers complained of an increase of price,
they received the apparently plausible explanation, "Oh, the
McKinley Bill did it." To silence this popular discontent, the
customary arts and cajoleries of the politicians proved for once
quite ineffectual.

At the next election, the Republicans carried only eighty-eight
seats in the House out of 332--the most crushing defeat they had
yet sustained. By their new lease of power in the House, however,
the Democratic party could not accomplish any legislation, as the
Republicans still controlled the Senate. The Democratic leaders,
therefore, adopted the policy of passing a series of bills
attacking the tariff at what were supposed to be particularly
vulnerable points. These measures, the Republicans derided as
"pop-gun bills," and in the Senate they turned them over to the
committee on finance for burial. Both parties were rent by the
silver issue, but it was noticeable that in the House which was
closest to the people the opposition to the silver movement was
stronger and more effective than in the Senate.

Notwithstanding the popular revolt against the Republican policy
which was disclosed by the fall elections of 1890, President
Harrison's annual message of December 9, 1891, was marked by
extreme complacency. Great things, he assured the people, were
being accomplished under his administration. The results of the
McKinley Bill "have disappointed the evil prophecies of its
opponents and in large measure realized the hopeful predictions
of its friends." Rarely had the country been so prosperous. The
foreign commerce of the United States had reached the largest
total in the history of the country. The prophecies made by the
antisilver men regarding disasters to result from the Silver
Bullion Purchase Act, had not been realized. The President
remarked "that the increased volume of currency thus supplied for
the use of the people was needed and that beneficial results upon
trade and prices have followed this legislation I think must be
clear to every one." He held that the free coinage of silver
would be disastrous, as it would contract the currency by the
withdrawal of gold, whereas "the business of the world requires
the use of both metals." While "the producers of silver are
entitled to just consideration," it should be remembered that
"bimetallism is the desired end, and the true friends of silver
will be careful not to overrun the goal." In conclusion, the
President expressed his great joy over "many evidences of the
increased unification of the people and of the revived national
spirit. The vista that now opens to us is wider and more glorious
than before. Gratification and amazement struggle for supremacy
as we contemplate the population, wealth, and moral strength of
our country."

Though the course of events has yet to be fully explained,
President Harrison's dull pomposity may have been the underlying
reason of the aversion which Blaine now began to manifest.
Although on Harrison's side and against Blaine, Senator Cullom
remarks in his memoirs that Harrison had "a very cold, distant
temperament," and that "he was probably the most unsatisfactory
President we ever had in the White House to those who must
necessarily come into personal contact with him." Cullom is of
the opinion that "jealousy was probably at the bottom of their
disaffection," but it appears to be certain that at this time
Blaine had renounced all ambition to be President and
energetically discouraged any movement in favor of his candidacy.
On February 6, 1892, he wrote to the chairman of the Republican
National Committee that he was not a candidate and that his name
would not go before the convention. President Harrison went ahead
with his arrangements for renomination, with no sign of
opposition from Blaine. Then suddenly, on the eve of the
convention, something happened--exactly what has yet to be
discovered--which caused Blaine to resign the office of Secretary
of State. It soon became known that Blaine's name would be
presented, although he had not announced himself as a candidate.
Blaine's health was then broken, and it was impossible that he
could have imagined that his action would defeat Harrison. It
could not have been meant for more than a protest. Harrison was
renominated on the first ballot with Blaine a poor second in the
poll.

In the Democratic convention, Cleveland, too, was renominated on
the first ballot, in the face of a bitter and outspoken
opposition. The solid vote of his own State, New York, was polled
against him under the unit rule, and went in favor of David B.
Hill. But even with this large block of votes to stand upon, Hill
was able to get only 113 votes in all, while Cleveland received
616. Genuine acceptance of his leadership, however, did not at
all correspond with this vote. Cleveland had come out squarely
against free silver, and at least eight of the Democratic state
conventions--in Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Kansas,
Nevada, South Carolina, and Texas--came out just as definitely in
favor of free silver. But even delegates who were opposed to
Cleveland, and who listened with glee to excoriating speeches
against him forthwith, voted for him as the candidate of greatest
popular strength. They then solaced their feelings by nominating
a free silver man for Vice-President, who was made the more
acceptable by his opposition to civil service reform. The ticket
thus straddled the main issue; and the platform was similarly
ambiguous. It denounced the Silver Purchase Act as "a cowardly
makeshift" which should be repealed, and it declared in favor of
"the coinage of both gold and silver without discrimination,"
with the provision that "the dollar unit of coinage of both
metals must be of equal intrinsic and exchangeable value." The
Prohibition party in that year came out for the "free and
unlimited coinage of silver and gold." A more significant sign of
the times was the organization of the "People's party," which
held its first convention and nominated the old Greenback leader,
James B. Weaver of Iowa, on a free silver platform.

The campaign was accompanied by labor disturbances of unusual
extent and violence. Shortly after the meeting of the national
conventions, a contest began between the powerful Amalgamated
Association of Steel and Iron Workers, the strongest of the
trade-unions, and the Carnegie Company over a new wage scale
introduced in the Homestead mills. The strike began on June 29,
1892, and local authority at once succumbed to the strikers. In
anticipation of this eventuality, the company had arranged to
have three hundred Pinkerton men act as guards. They arrived in
Pittsburgh during the night of the 5th of July and embarked on
barges which were towed up the river to Homestead. As they
approached, the strikers turned out to meet them, and an
engagement ensued in which men were killed or wounded on both
sides and the Pinkerton men were defeated and driven away. For a
short time, the strikers were in complete possession of the town
and of the company's property. They preserved order fairly well
but kept a strict watch that no strike breakers should approach
or attempt to resume work. The government of Pennsylvania was,
for a time, completely superseded in that region by the power of
the Amalgamated Association, until a large force of troops
entered Homestead on the 12th of July and remained in possession
of the place for several months. The contest between the strikers
and the company caused great excitement throughout the country,
and a foreign anarchist from New York attempted to assassinate
Mr. Frick, the managing director of the company. Though this
strike was caused by narrow differences concerning only the most
highly paid classes of workers, it continued for some months and
then ended in the complete defeat of the union.

On the same day that the militia arrived at Homestead, a more
bloody and destructive conflict occurred in the Coeur d'Alene
district of Idaho, where the workers in the silver mines were on
strike. Nonunion men were imported and put into some of the
mines. The strikers, armed with rifles and dynamite, thereupon
attacked the nonunion men and drove them off, but many lives were
lost in the struggle and much property was destroyed. The
strikers proved too strong for any force which state authority
could muster, but upon the call of the Governor, President
Harrison ordered federal troops to the scene and under martial
law order was soon restored.

Further evidence of popular unrest was given in August by a
strike of the switchmen in the Buffalo railway yards, which
paralyzed traffic until several thousand state troops were put on
guard. About the same time, there were outbreaks in the Tennessee
coal districts in protest against the employment of convict labor
in the mines. Bands of strikers seized the mines, and in some
places turned loose the convicts and in other places escorted
them back to prison. As a result of this disturbance, during 1892
state troops were permanently stationed in the mining districts,
and eventually the convicts were put back at labor in the mines.

Such occurrences infused bitterness into the campaign of 1892 and
strongly affected the election returns. Weaver carried Colorado,
Idaho, Kansas, and Nevada, and he got one electoral vote in
Oregon and in North Dakota; but even if these twenty-two
electoral votes had gone to Harrison, he would still have been
far behind Cleveland, who received 277 electoral votes out of a
total of 444. Harrison ran only about 381,000 behind Cleveland in
the popular vote, but in four States, the Democrats had nominated
no electors and their votes had contributed to the poll of over a
million for Weaver. The Democratic victory was so sweeping that
it gained the Senate as well as the House, and now for the first
time a Democratic President was in accord with both branches of
Congress. It was soon to appear, however, that this party accord
was merely nominal.



CHAPTER IX. THE FREE SILVER REVOLT

The avenging consequences of the Silver Purchase Act moved so
rapidly that when John Griffin Carlisle took office as Secretary
of the Treasury in 1893, the gold reserve had fallen to
$100,982,410--only $982,410 above the limit indicated by the Act
of 1882--and the public credit was shaken by the fact that it was
an open question whether the government obligation to pay a
dollar was worth so much or only one half so much. The latter
interpretation, indeed, seemed impending. The new Secretary's
first step was to adopt the makeshift expedient of his
predecessors. He appealed to the banks for gold and backed up by
patriotic exhortation from the press, he did obtain almost
twenty-five millions in gold in exchange for notes. But as even
more notes drawing out the gold were presented for redemption,
the Secretary's efforts were no more successful than carrying
water in a sieve.

Of the notes presented for redemption during March and April,
nearly one-half were treasury notes of 1890, which by law the
Secretary might redeem "in gold or silver coin at his
discretion." The public was now alarmed by a rumor that Secretary
Carlisle, who while in Congress had voted for free silver, would
resort to silver payments on this class of notes, and regarded
his statements as being noncommittal on the point. Popular alarm
was, to some extent, dispelled by a statement from President
Cleveland, on the 23rd of April, declaring flatly and
unmistakably that redemption in gold would be maintained. But the
financial situation throughout the country was such that nothing
could stave off the impending panic. Failures were increasing in
number, some large firms broke under the strain, and the final
stroke came on the 5th of May when the National Cordage Company
went into bankruptcy. As often happens in the history of panics,
the event was trivial in comparison with the consequences. This
company was of a type that is the reproach of American
jurisprudence--the marauding corporation. In the very month in
which it failed, it declared a large cash dividend. Its stock,
which had sold at 147 in January, fell in May to below ten
dollars a share. Though the Philadelphia and Reading Railway
Company, which failed in February, had a capital of $40,000,000
and a debt of more than $125,000,000, the market did not
break completely under that strain. The National Cordage had a
capital of $20,000,000 and liabilities of only $10,000,000, but
its collapse brought down with it the whole structure of credit.
A general movement of liquidation set in, which throughout the
West was so violent as to threaten general bankruptcy. Nearly all
of the national bank failures were in the West and South, and
still more extensive was the wreck of state banks and private
banks. It had been the practice of country banks, while firmly
maintaining local rates, to keep the bulk of their resources on
deposit with city banks at two per cent. This practice now proved
to be a fatal entanglement to many institutions. There were
instances in which country banks were forced to suspend, though
cash resources were actually on the way to them from depository
centers.*

* Out of 158 national bank failures during the year, 153 were in
the West and South. In addition there went down 172 state banks,
177 private banks, 47 savings banks, 13 loan and trust companies,
and 6 mortgage companies.

Even worse than the effect of these numerous failures on the
business situation was the derangement which occurred in the
currency supply. The circulating medium was almost wholly
composed of bank notes, treasury notes, and treasury certificates
issued against gold and silver in the Treasury, coin being little
in use except as fractional currency. Bank notes were essentially
treasury certificates issued upon deposits of government bonds.
In effect, the circulating medium was composed of government
securities reduced to handy bits. Usually, a bank panic tends to
bring note issues into rapid circulation for what they will
fetch, but in this new situation, people preferred to impound the
notes, which they knew to be good whatever happened so long as
the Government held out. Private hoarding became so general that
currency tended to disappear. Between September 30, 1892 and
October 31, 1893, the amount of deposits in the national banks
shrank over $496,000,000. Trade was reduced to making use of the
methods of primitive barter, though the emergency was met to some
extent by the use of checks and clearinghouse certificates. In
many New England manufacturing towns, for example, checks for use
in trade were drawn in denominations from one dollar up to
twenty. In some cases, corporations paid off their employees in
checks drawn on their own treasurers which served as local
currency. In some Southern cities, clearing-house certificates in
small denominations were issued for general circulation--in
Birmingham, Alabama, for sums as small as twenty-five cents. It
is worth noting that a premium was paid as readily for notes as
for gold; indeed, the New York "Financial Chronicle" reported
that the premium on currency was from two to three per cent,
while the premium on gold was only one and one half per cent.
Before the panic had ended, the extraordinary spectacle was
presented of gold coins serving as a medium of trade because
treasury notes and bank notes were still hoarded. These
peculiarities of the situation had a deep effect upon the popular
attitude towards the measures recommended by the Administration.

While this devastating panic was raging over all the country,
President Cleveland was beset by troubles that were both public
and personal. He was under heavy pressure from the office
seekers. They came singly or in groups and under the escort of
Congressmen, some of whom performed such service several times a
day. The situation became so intolerable that on the 8th of May
President Cleveland issued an executive order setting forth that
"a due regard for public duty, which must be neglected if present
conditions continue, and an observance of the limitations placed
upon human endurance, oblige me to decline, from and after this
date, all personal interviews with those seeking office."

According to the Washington papers, this sensible decision was
received with a tremendous outburst of indignation. The President
was denounced for shutting his doors upon the people who had
elected him, and he was especially severely criticized for the
closing sentence of his order stating that "applicants for office
will only prejudice their prospects by repeated importunity and
by remaining at Washington to await results." This order was
branded as an arbitrary exercise of power compelling free
American citizens to choose exile or punishment, and was featured
in the newspapers all over the country. The hubbub became
sufficient to extract from Cleveland's private secretary an
explanatory statement pointing out that in the President's day a
regular allotment of time was made for congressional and business
callers other than the office seekers, for whom a personal
interview was of no value since the details of their cases could
not be remembered. "What was said in behalf of one man was driven
out of mind by the remarks of the next man in line," whereas
testimonials sent through the mails went on file and received due
consideration. "So many hours a day having been given up to the
reception of visitors, it has been necessary, in order to keep up
with the current work, for the President to keep at his desk from
early in the morning into the small hours of the next morning.
Now that may do for a week or for a month, but there is a limit
to human physical endurance, and it has about been reached."

Such were the distracting conditions under which President
Cleveland had to deal with the tremendous difficulties of
national import which beset him. There were allusions in his
inaugural address which showed how keenly he felt the weight of
his many responsibilities, and there is a touch of pathos in his
remark that he took "much comfort in remembering that my
countrymen are just and generous, and in the assurance that they
will not condemn those who by sincere devotion to their service
deserve their forbearance and approval." This hope of Cleveland's
was eventually justified, but not until after his public career
had ended; meanwhile he had to undergo a storm of censure so
blasting that it was more like a volcanic rain of fire and lava
than any ordinary tempest, however violent.

On the 30th of June, President Cleveland called an extra session
of Congress for the 7th of August "to the end that the people may
be relieved through legislation from present and impending danger
and distress." In recent years, the fact has come to light that
his health was at that time in a condition so precarious that it
would have caused wild excitement had the truth become known, for
only his life stood in the way of a free silver President. On the
same day on which he issued his call for the extra session,
President Cleveland left for New York ostensibly for a yachting
trip, but while the yacht was steaming slowly up the East River,
he was in the hands of surgeons who removed the entire left upper
jaw. On the 5th of July they performed another operation in the
same region for the removal of any tissues which might possibly
have been infected. These operations were so completely
successful that the President was fitted with an artificial jaw
of vulcanized rubber which enabled him to speak without any
impairment of the strength and clearness of his voice.*
Immediately after this severe trial, which he bore with calm
fortitude, Cleveland had to battle with the raging silver
faction, strong in its legislative position through its control
of the Senate.

* For details, see New York "Times," Sept. 21, 1917.


When Congress met, the only legislation which the President had
to propose was the repeal of the Silver Purchase Act, although he
remarked that "tariff reform has lost nothing of its immediate
and permanent importance and must in the near future engage the
attention of Congress." It was a natural inference, therefore,
that the Administration had no financial policy beyond putting a
stop to treasury purchases of silver, and there was a vehement
outcry against an action which seemed to strike against the only
visible source of additional currency. President Cleveland was
even denounced as a tool of Wall Street, and the panic was
declared to be the result of a plot of British and American
bankers against silver.

Nevertheless, on the 28th of August, the House passed a repeal
bill by a vote of 240 to 110. There was a long and violent
struggle in the Senate, where such representative anomalies
existed that Nevada with a population of 45,761 had the same
voting power as New York with 5,997,853. Hence, at first, it
looked as if the passage of a repeal bill might be impossible.
Finally, the habit of compromise prevailed and a majority
agreement was reached postponing the date of repeal for twelve or
eighteen months during which the treasury stock of silver bullion
was to be turned into coin. Cleveland made it known that he would
not consent to such an arrangement, and the issue was thereafter
narrowed to that of unconditional repeal of the Silver Purchase
Act. The Senators from the silver-mining States carried on an
obstinate filibuster and refused to allow the question to come to
a vote, until their arrogance was gradually toned down by the
discovery that the liberty to dump silver on the Treasury had
become a precarious mining asset. The law provided for the
purchase of 4,500,000 ounces a month, "or, so much thereof as may
be offered at the market price." Secretary Carlisle found that
offers were frequently higher in price than New York and London
quotations, and by rejecting them he made a considerable
reduction in the amount purchased. Moreover, the silver ranks
began to divide on the question of policy. The Democratic silver
Senators wished to enlarge the circulating medium by increasing
the amount of coinage, and they did not feel the same interest in
the mere stacking of bullion in the Treasury that possessed the
mining camp Senators on the Republican side. When these two
elements separated on the question of policy, the representatives
of the mining interests recognized the hopelessness of preventing
a vote upon the proposed repeal of the silver purchase act. On
the 30th of October, the Senate passed the repeal with no
essential difference from the House bill, and the bill became law
on November 1, 1893.

But although the repeal bill stopped the silver drain upon the
Treasury, it did not relieve the empty condition to which the
Treasury had been reduced. It was manifest that, if the gold
standard was to be maintained, the Treasury stock of gold would
have to be replenished. The Specie Resumption Act of 1875
authorized the sale of bonds "to prepare and provide for"
redemption of notes in coin, but the only classes of bonds which
it authorized were those at four per cent payable after thirty
years, four and a half per cent payable after fifteen years, and
five per cent payable after ten years from date. For many years,
the Government had been able to borrow at lower rates but had in
vain besought Congress to grant the necessary authority. The
Government now appealed once more to Congress for authority to
issue bonds at a lower rate of interest. Carlisle, the Secretary
of the Treasury, addressed a letter to the Senate committee of
finance, setting forth the great saving that would be thus
effected. Then ensued what must be acknowledged to be a breakdown
in constitutional government. Immediately after a committee
meeting on January 16, 1894, the Chairman, Senator Voorhees,
issued a public statement in which he said that "it would be
trifling with a very grave affair to pretend that new legislation
concerning the issue of bonds can be accomplished at this time,
and in the midst of present elements and parties in public life,
with elaborate, extensive, and practically indefinite debate."
Therefore, he held that "it will be wiser, safer and better for
the financial and business interests of the country to rely upon
existing law." This plainly amounted to a public confession.that
Congress was so organized as to be incapable of providing for the
public welfare.

Carlisle decided to sell the ten-year class of bonds,
compensating for their high interest rate by exacting such a
premium as would reduce to three per cent the actual yield to
holders. On January 17, 1894, he offered bonds to the amount of
fifty millions, but bids came in so slowly that he found it
necessary to visit New York to make a personal appeal to a number
of leading bankers to exert themselves to prevent the failure of
the sale. As a result of these efforts, the entire issue was sold
at a premium of $8,660,917, and the treasury stock of gold was
brought up to $107,440,802.

Then followed what is probably the most curious chapter in the
financial history of modern times. Only gold was accepted by the
Treasury in payment of bonds; but gold could be obtained by
offering treasury notes for redemption. The Act of 1878 expressly
provided that, when redeemed, these notes "shall not be retired,
canceled, or destroyed, but they shall be reissued and paid out
again and kept in circulation." The Government, as President
Cleveland pointed out, was "forced to redeem without redemption
and pay without acquittance." These conditions set up against the
Treasury an endless chain by which note redemptions drained out
the gold as fast as bond sales poured it in. In a message to
Congress on January 28, 1895, President Cleveland pointed out
that the Treasury had redeemed more than $300,000,000 of its
notes in gold, and yet these notes were all still outstanding.
Appeals to Congress to remedy the situation proved absolutely
fruitless, and the only choice left to the President was to
continue pumping operations or abandon the gold standard, as the
silver faction in Congress desired. By February 8, 1895, the
stock of gold in the Treasury was down to $41,340,181. The
Administration met this sharp emergency by a contract with a New
York banking syndicate which agreed to deliver 3,500,000 ounces
of standard gold coin, at least one half to be obtained in
Europe. The syndicate was, moreover, to "exert all financial
influence and make all legitimate efforts to protect the Treasury
of the United States against the withdrawals of gold pending the
complete performance of the contract."

The replenishing of the Treasury by this contract was, however,
only a temporary relief. By January 6, 1896, the gold reserve was
down to $61,251,710. The Treasury now offered $100,000,000 of the
four per cent bonds for sale and put forth special efforts to
make subscription popular. Blanks for bids were displayed in all
post-offices, a circular letter was sent to all national banks,
the movement was featured in the newspapers, and the result was
that 4635 bids were received coming from forty-seven States and
Territories, and amounting to $526,970,000. This great
oversubscription powerfully upheld the public credit and,
thereafter, the position of the Treasury remained secure; but
altogether, $262,000,000 in bonds had been sold to maintain its
solvency.

Consideration of the management of American foreign relations
during this period does not enter into the scope of this book,
but the fact should be noted that the anxieties of public finance
were aggravated by the menace of war.* In the boundary dispute
between British Guiana and Venezuela, President Cleveland
proposed arbitration, but this was refused by the British
Government. President Cleveland, whose foreign policy was always
vigorous and decisive, then sent a message to Congress on
December 17, 1895, describing the British position as an
infringement of the Monroe Doctrine and recommending that a
commission should be appointed by the United States to conduct an
independent inquiry to determine the boundary line in dispute. He
significantly remarked that "in making these recommendations I am
fully alive to the responsibility incurred and keenly realize all
the consequences that may follow." The possibility of conflict,
thus hinted, was averted when Great Britain agreed to
arbitration, but meanwhile, American securities in great numbers
were thrown upon the market through sales of European account and
added to the financial strain.

* See "The Path of Empire," by Carl Russell Fish (in "The
Chronicles of America").


The invincible determination which President Cleveland showed in
this memorable struggle to maintain the gold standard will always
remain his securest title to renown, but the admiration due to
his constancy of soul cannot be extended to his handling of the
financial problem. It appears, from his own account, that he was
not well advised as to the extent and nature of his financial
resources. He did not know until February 7, 1895, when Mr. J. P.
Morgan called his attention to the fact, that among the general
powers of the Secretary of the Treasury is the provision that he
"may purchase coin with any of the bonds or notes of the United
States authorized by law, at such rates and upon such terms as he
may deem most advantageous to the public interest." The President
was urged to proceed under this law to buy $100,000,000 in gold
at a fixed price, paying for it in bonds. This advice Cleveland
did not accept at the time, but in later years he said that it
was "a wise suggestion," and that he had "always regretted that
it was not adopted."

But apart from any particular error in the management of the
Treasury, the general policy of the Administration was much below
the requirements of the situation. The panic came to an end in
the fall of 1893, much as a great conflagration expires through
having reached all the material on which it can feed, but leaving
a scene of desolation behind it. Thirteen commercial houses out
of every thousand doing business had failed. Within two years,
nearly one fourth of the total railway capitalization of the
country had gone into bankruptcy, involving an exposure of
falsified accounts sufficient to shatter public confidence in the
methods of corporations. Industrial stagnation and unemployment
were prevalent throughout the land. Mea