wa, but I came out here to
college. After I'd graduated I made up my mind to go into business here.
And now I feel that all my interests are in California. Of course it
isn't quite the same as being born here. But sometimes I feel as though
I really were a native son. Everybody is so kind. They do everything in
their power to make you forget -"

"Good heavens," I interrupted, "are you apologizing to me for being born
in Iowa? I've never been in Iowa, but nothing could convince me that it
isn't just as good a place as any other place, including California. The
trouble with you is that you've let these Californiacs buffalo you. What
you want to do is to throw out your chest and insist that God made Iowa
first and the rest of the world out of the leavings."

If you mention the eastern winter to a Californiac, he tells you with
great particularity of the dreadful storms he encountered there. Nothing
whatever about the beauty of the snow. To a Californiac, snow and ice
are more to be dreaded than hell-fire and brimstone. If you mention the
eastern summer, he refers in scathing terms to the puny trees we
produce, the inadequate fruits and vegetables. Nothing at all about
their delicious flavor. To a Californiac, beauty is measured only by
size. Nothing that England or France has to offer makes any impression
on the Californiac because it's different from California. As for the
glory that was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome, he simply never
sees it. The Netherlands are dismissed with one adjective - flat. For a
country to be flat is, in the opinion of the Californiac, to relinquish
its final claim to beauty. A Californiac once made the statement to me
that Californians considered themselves a little better than the rest of
the country. I considered that the prize Californiacism until I heard
the following from a woman-Californiac in Europe: "I saw nothing in all
Italy," she said, "to compare with the Italian quarter of San
Francisco."

Now I am by no means a rabid New Englander. I love the New England scene
and I have the feeling for it that we all have for the place in which we
played as children. Most New Englanders have a kind of temperamental
shyness. They are still like the English from whom they are descended.
It is difficult for them to talk about the things on which they feel
most deeply. The typical New Englander would discuss his native place
with no more ease than he would discuss his father and mother. In
California I often had the impulse to break through that inhibiting
silence - to talk about Massachusetts; the lovely, tender, tamed,
domesticated country; its rolling, softly-contoured, maternal-looking
hills; its forests like great green cathedral chapels; its broad, placid
rivers, its little turbulent ones; its springs and runnels and
waterfalls and rivulets all silver-shining and silver-sounding; the
myriads of lakes and countless ponds that make the world look as though
the blue sky had broken and fallen in pieces over the landscape; the
spring when first the arbutus comes up pink and delicate through the
snow and later the fields begin to glimmer with the white of white
violets, to flash with the purple of purple ones, and the children hang
May baskets at your door; the summer when the fields are buried
knee-deep under a white drift of daisies or sealed by the gold planes of
buttercups, and the old lichened stone walls are smothered in blackberry
vines; the autumn with the goldenrod and blue asters; the woods like
conflagrations burning gold and orange, flaming crimson and scarlet; and
especially that fifth season, the Indian summer, when the vistas are
tunnels of blue haze and the air tastes of honey and wine; then winter
and the first snow (does anybody, brought up in snow country, ever
outgrow the thrill of the first fluttering flakes?) the marvel of the
fairy frost world into which the whole country turns.

Do you suppose I ever talked about Massachusetts? Not once. And so I
have one criticism to bring against the Californiac. He is a person to
whom you cannot talk about home. He grows restive the instant you get
off the subject of California. Praise of any other place to his mind
implies a criticism of California.

On the other hand, that frenzied patriotism has its wonderful and its
beautiful side. It is a result partly of the startling beauty and
fecundity of California and partly of a geographical remoteness and
sequestration which turned the Californians in on themselves for
everything. To it is due much of the extraordinary development of
California. For to the average Californian, the best is not only none
too good for California, but she can have nothing else. Californians
even those not suffering from an offensive case of Californoia - speak
of their State in reverential terms. To hear Maud Younger - known
everywhere as the "millionaire waitress" and the most devoted labor-fan
in the country - pronounce the word California, should be a lesson to
any actor in emotional sound values. The thing that struck me most on my
first visit to California was that boosting instinct. In store windows
everywhere, I saw signs begging the passer-by to root for this
development project or that. Several years ago, passing down Market
street, I ran into a huge crowd gathered at the Lotta Fountain. I
stopped to investigate. Moving steadily from a top to a lower window of
one of the newspaper offices, as though unwound from a reel, ran a long
strip of paper covered with a list of figures. To this list, new figures
were constantly added. They were the sums of money being subscribed at
that very moment for the Exposition. Applause and cheers greeted each
additional sum. That was the financial germ from which grew the
wonderful Arabian Nights city by the bay. It was typically Californian -
that scene - and typically Californian the spirit back of it. And four
years later, when the outbreak of the war brought temporary panic, there
was no diminution in that spirit. Whether it was a "Buying-Day," a
"Beach Day," an "Automomobile Parade," a "Prosperity Dinner," San
Francisco was always ready to insist that everything was going well. It
was the same spirit which inspired a whole city, the day the Exposition
opened, to rise early to walk to the grounds, and to stand, an avalanche
of humanity, waiting for the gates to part. It was the same spirit which
inspired the whole city, the night the Exposition ended, to stay for the
closing ceremonies until midnight, and then, without even picking a
flower from the abundance they were abandoning, silently and sorrowfully
to walk home.

Let's look into the claims of these Californiacs.

I can unfortunately say little about the State of California. For with
the exception of a few short trips away from San Francisco, and one
meager few days' trip into the South, I have never explored it. Nobody
warned me of the danger of such a proceeding, and so I innocently went
straight to San Francisco the first time I visited the coast. Stranger,
let me warn you now. If ever you start for California with the intention
of seeing anything of the State, do that before you enter San Francisco.
If you must land in San Francisco first, jump into a taxi, pull down the
curtains, drive through the city, breaking every speed law, to "Third
and Townsend," sit in the station until a train, - some train, any train
- pulls out, and go with it. If in crossing Market street, you raise
that taxi-curtain as much as an inch, believe me, stranger, it's all
off; you're lost. You'll never leave San Francisco. Myself, both times I
have gone to California, I have vowed to see Yosemite, the big trees,
the string of beautiful old missions which dot the state, some of the
quaint, languid, semi-tropical towns of the south, some of the brisk,
brilliant, bustling towns of the north. But I have never really done it
because I saw San Francisco first.

I treasure my few impressions of the state, however. Towns and cities,
comparatively new, might be three centuries old, so beautifully have
they sunk into the colorful, deeply configurated background that the
country provides. Even a city as thriving and wide-awake as Stockton has
about its plaza an air so venerable that it is a little like the ancient
hill-cities of Italy; more like, I have no doubt, the ancient
plain-cities of Spain. And San Juan Bautista - with its history-haunted
old Inn, its ghost-haunted old Mission and its rose-filled old Mission
garden where everything, even the sundial, seems to sleep - is as old as
Babylon or Tyre.

You will be constantly reminded of Italy, although California is not
quite so vividly colored, and perhaps of Japan, for you are always
coming on places that are startlingly like scenes in Japanese prints.
Certain aspects from the bay of the town of Sausalito, with strangely
shaped and softly tinted houses tumbling down the hillside, certain
aspects of the bay from the heights of Berkeley, with the expanses of
hills and water and the inevitable fog smudging a smoky streak here and
there, are more like the picture-country of the Japanese masters than
any American reality.

If I were to pick the time when I should travel in California, it would
be in the early summer. All the rest of the world at that moment is
green. California alone is sheer gold. One composite picture remains in
my memory-the residuum of that single trip into the south. On one side
the Pacific - tigerish, calm, powerfully palpitant, stretching into
eternity in enormous bronze-gold, foam-laced planes. On the other side,
great, bare, voluptuously - contoured hills, running parallel with the
train and winding serpentinely on for hours and hours of express speed;
hills that look, not as though they were covered with yellow grass, but
as though they were carved from massy gold. At intervals come ravines
filled with a heavy green growth. Occasionally on those golden
hill-surfaces appear trees.

Oh, the trees of California!

If they be live-oaks - and on the hills they are most likely to be
live-oaks - they are semi-globular in shape like our apple trees, only
huge, of a clamant, virile, poisonous green. They grow alone, and each
one of them seems to be standing knee-deep in shadow so thick and moist
that it is like a deep pool of purple paint.

Occasionally, on the flat stretches, eucalyptus hedges film the
distance. And the eucalyptus - tall, straight, of a uniform slender
size, the baby leaves of one shape and color, misted with a strange
bluish fog-powder, the mature leaves of another shape and color,
deep-green on one side, purple on the other, curved and carved like a
scimitar of Damascus steel, the blossoms hanging in great soft bunches,
white or shell-pink, delicate as frost-stars - the eucalyptus is the
most beautiful tree in the world. Standing in groups, they seem to color
the atmosphere. Under them the air is like a green bubble. Standing
alone, the long trailing scarfs of bark blowing away from their
bodies - they are like ragged, tragic gypsy queens.

Then there is the madrone. The wonder of the madrone is its bole. Of a
tawny red-gold - glossy - it contributes an arresting coppery note to
green forest vistas. Somebody has said that in the distance they look
like naked Indians slipping through the woods.

Last, there is the redwood tree! And the redwood is more beautiful even
than the stone-pine of Italy. Gray lavender in color, hard as though cut
from stone, swelling at the base to an incredible bulk, shooting
straight to an incredible height and tapering exquisitely as it soars,
it drops not foliage but plumage. To walk in a redwood forest at night
and to look up at the stars tangled in the tree-tops, to watch the
moonlight sift through the masses of soft black-green feathers, down,
down, until strained to a diaphanous tenuity it lies a faint silver
gossamer at your feet, is to feel that you are living in one of the old
woodcuts which illustrate Shakespeare's "Midsummer Night's Dream."

Most people in first visiting California are obsessed with the flowers,
the abundant callas, the monstrous roses, the giant geraniums. But I
never ceased to wonder at the beauty of the trees. And remember, I have
not as yet seen what they call the "big" trees.

Yes, California is quite as beautiful as her poets insist and her
painters prove. It turns everybody who goes there into a poet, at least
temporarily. Babes lisp in numbers and those of the native population
who don't actually write poetry, talk it - no matter what the subject
is. Take the case of Sam Berger. Sam Berger - I will explain for the
benefit of my women readers - was first a distinguished amateur
heavyweight boxer who later became sparring partner for Bob Fitzimmons
and manager to Jim Jeffries. In an interview on the subject of boxing,
Mr. Berger said, "Boxing is an art - just as much so as music. To excel
in it you must have a conception of time, of balance, of distance. The
man who attempts to box without such a conception is like a person who
tries to be a musician without having an ear for music."

Is it not evident from this that Mr. Berger would have become a poet if
a more valiant art had not claimed him?

In that ideal future state in which all the world-parts are assembled
and perfectly coordinated into one vast self-governing machine, I hope
that California will be turned into a great international reservation,
given over entirely to poets, lovers and honeymoon couples. It is too
beautiful to waste on mere bromidic residential or business interests.

So much for the State of California. I confess with shame that that is
all I know about it, although I reiterate that that ignorance is not my
fault. So now for San Francisco.

San Francisco!

San Francisco!

Many people do not realize that San Francisco tips a peninsula
projecting west and north from the coast of California. Between that
peninsula and the mainland lies a blue arm of the blue San Francisco
bay. So that when you have bisected the continent and come to what
appears to be the edge of the western world, you must take a ferry to
get to the city itself.

I hope you will cross that bay first at night, for there is no more
romantic hour in which to enter San Francisco; the bay spreading out
back of you a-plash with all kinds of illuminated water craft and the
city lifting up before you ablaze with thousands of pin point lights;
for San Francisco's site is a hilly one and the city lies like a
jewelled mantle thrown carelessly over many peaks. You land at the Ferry
building - surely the most welcoming station in the world - walk through
it, come out at the other side on a circular place which is one end of
Market street, the main artery of the city. If this is by day, you can
see that the other end of Market street is Twin Peaks - a pair of hills
that imprint bare, exquisitely shaped contours of gold on a blue sky -
with the effect somehow of a stage-drop. If you come by night, you will
find Market street crowded with people, lighted with a display of
electric signs second only in size, number, brilliancy and ingenuity to
those on Broadway. But whether you come by day or by night, the instant
you emerge from the Ferry building, San Francisco gets you. Market
street is one of the most entertaining main-traveled urban roads in the
world. Newspaper offices in a cluster, store windows flooded with light,
filled with advertising devices of the most amusing originality, cars,
taxis, crowds, it has all the earmarks of the main street of any big
American city, with the addition, at intervals, of the pretty "islands"
so typical of the boulevards of Paris and with, last of all, a zip and a
zest, a pep and a punch, a go and a ginger that is distinctively
Californian. I repeat that California throws her first tentacle into
your heart as you stand there wondering whether you'll go to your hotel
or, plunging headforemost into the crowds, swim with the current.

Imagine a city built not on seven but a hundred hills. I am sure there
are no less than a hundred and probably there are more. Certainly I
climbed a hundred. On three sides the sea laps the very hem of this city
and on one side the forest reaches down to its very toes. That is, when
all is said, the most marvelous thing about San Francisco  -  that the
sea and forest come straight to its borders. And as, because of its
peninsula situation they form the only roads out, sea and forest are
integral parts of the city life. It accounts for the fact that you see
no city pallor in the faces on the streets and perhaps for the fact that
you see so little unhappiness on them. On Sundays and holidays, crowds
pour across the bay all day long and then, loaded with flowers and
greens, pour back all the evening long. As for flowers and greens, the
hotels, shops, cafes, the little hole-in-the-wall restaurants are full
of them. They are so cheap on the streets that everybody wears them.
Everybody seems to play as much as possible out of doors. Everybody
seems to sleep out of doors. Everybody has just come from a hike or is
just going off on one. Imagine a climate rainless three-quarters of the
year, which permits the workingman to tramp all through his vacation
with the impedimenta only of a blanket, moneyless if he will, but with
the certainty always that the orchards and gardens will provide-him with
food.

Through the city runs one central hill-spine. From this crest, by day,
you look on one side across the bay with its three beautiful islands,
bare Yerba Buena, jeweled Alcatraz and softly-fluted Angel Island, all
seemingly adrift in the blue waters, to Marin county. The waters of the
bay are as smooth as satin, as blue as the sky, and they are slashed in
every direction with the silver wakes left by numberless ferryboats.
Those ferryboats, by the way, are extremely graceful; they look like
white peacocks dragging enormous white-feather tails. By night the bay
view from the central hill-spine shows the cities of Berkeley and
Oakland like enormous planes of crystal tilted against the distance, the
ferryboats illuminated but still peacock-shaped, floating on the black
waters like monster toys of Venetian glass. In the background, rising
from low hills, peaks the blue triangle of Mt. Diablo. In the foreground
reposes Tamalpais - a mountain shaped in the figure of a woman-lying
prone. The wooded slopes of Tamalpais form the nearest big playground
for San Franciscans - and Tamalpais is to the San Franciscan what
Fujiyama is to the Japanese. Would that I had space to tell here of the
time when their mountain caught fire and thousands - men, women and
children - turned out to save it! Everybody helped who could. Even the
bakers of San Francisco worked all night and without pay to make bread
for the fire-fighters.

By day, on the city side of the crest, you catch glimpses of other
hills, covered for the most part with buildings, like lustrous pearl
cubes; for San Francisco is a pearl-gray city. At night you can look
straight down the side streets to Market street on a series of
illuminated restaurant signs which project over the sidewalk at right
angles to the buildings. It is as though a colossal golden stairway
tempted your foot.

Perhaps after all the most breath taking quality about San Francisco is
these unexpected glimpses that you are always getting of beautiful
hill-heights and beautiful valley-depths. Sunset skies like aerial
banners flare gold and crimson on the tops of those hills. City lights,
like nests of diamonds, glitter and glisten in the depths of those
valleys. Then the fogs! I have stood at my window at night and watched
the ragged armies of the air drift in from the bay and take possession
of the whole city. Such fogs. Not distilled from pea soup like the
London fogs; moist air-gauzes rather, pearl-touched and glimmering; so
thick sometimes that it is as though the world had veiled herself in
mourning, so thin often that the stars shine through with a delicate
muffled lustre. By day, even in the full golden sunshine of California,
the view from the hills shows a scene touched here and there with fog.

As for the hills themselves, steep as they are, street cars go up and
down them. What is more extraordinary, so do automobiles. The hill
streets are cobbled commonly; but often, for the better convenience of
vehicles, there is a central path of asphalt, smoothly finished. I have
seen those asphalt planes by day when a flood, first of rain and then of
sun, turned them to rivers of molten silver; I have seen them by night
when an automobile, standing at the hilltop and pouring its light over
them, turned them to rivers of molten gold.

Within walking distance of the ferry is the heart of the city. Here are
the newspaper buildings, many big and little hotels, numberless
restaurants, the theatres and the shopping district. The region about
Union Square, Geary street, Grant Avenue, Post and Sutter streets, is a
busy and attractive area. You could live in San Francisco for a month
and ask no greater entertainment than walking through it. Beyond are
various foreign quarters and districts inevitably growing colder and
more residential in aspect as they get farther away from the city heart.
Beyond the heights where one catches glimpses of the ocean, the city
slopes to abrupt cliffs along the outer harbor, and here are mansions
whose windy gardens overhang the surf. Beyond Market street is the area
described in the phrase, "south of the slot". Superficially drab and
gray in aspect, it has been celebrated again and again in song and
story. From this region have come the majority of San Francisco's
champion athletes. Near here beats the red heart of the labor world. And
not far off still stands that exquisite gem of Spanish catholicism -
Mission Dolores.

Here and there - and it is a little like meeting a ghost in a crowded
street - through all the beauty and freshness of the new city project
the bones of the old: the lofty ruins, ivy-hung, of a huge Nob Hill
Palace here; the mere foundation, bush-encircled, of a big old family
mansion there; elaborate rusty fences of Mid-Victorian iron which
enclose nothing; wide low steps of Mid-Victorian marble which lead
nowhere. The San Franciscan speaks always with a tender, regretful
affection of that dead city, but, as is natural, he speaks of it less
and less. For myself, I am glad now that I never saw the city that was;
for I can love the city that is with no arriere pensee.

They serve, however - those bones of a dead past - to remind the
stranger of a marvelous rebuilding feat, to accent the virility and
vitality, the courage and enterprise of a people who, before a half
decade had passed, had eliminated almost every trace of the greatest
disaster of modern time.

Perhaps, after the beauty of its situation, the stranger is most struck
with the picturesqueness given to the city by its cosmopolitan
atmosphere. For San Francisco, serving as one of the two main great
gateways to an enormous country, a front entrance to America from the
Orient, a back entrance from Europe and a side entrance from South
America, standing halfway between tropics and polar regions, a great
port of the greatest ocean in the world, becomes naturally one of the
world's main caravanseries, a meeting place of nations.

Chinatown is not far off from the heart of the city. And Chinatown
pervades San Francisco. It is as though it distilled some faint oriental
perfume with which constantly it suffuses the air. You meet the Chinese
everywhere. The men differ in no wise from the men with whom the smaller
Chinatowns of the East have acquainted us. The women make the streets
exotic. Little, slim-limbed creatures, amber-skinned, jewel-eyed,
dressed in silk of black or pastel colors, loosely coated and
comfortably trousered, their jet-black shining hair filled with
ornaments, they go about in groups which include old women and young
matrons, half-grown girls slender as forsythia branches, babies arrayed
like princes. You are likely to meet groups of Hindus, picturesquely
turbaned, coffee-brown in color, slight-figured, straight-featured,
black-bearded. You see Japanese and Filipinos. And as for Latins -
French, Italians and Spanish flood the city. There are eight thousand
Montenegrins alone in California. I never suspected there were eight
thousand in Montenegro. And our own continent contributes Canadians,
Mexicans, citizens from every State in the Union. In addition, you run
everywhere into soldiers and sailors. The bits of talk you overhear in
the street are so exciting that you become a professional eavesdropper,
strong-languaged, picturesquely slangy, pungent narrative. Sometimes the
speaker has come up from Arizona, or New Mexico or Texas, sometimes down
from Alaska, Washington or Oregon, sometimes across from Nevada or
Montana or Wyoming. And with many of them - at least with those that
live west of the rocky mountains - San Francisco is always (and I never
failed to respond to the thrill of it) "the city". Not a city or any
city, but the city - as though there were no other city on the face of
the earth.

All this alien picturesqueness adds enormously of course to the San
Franciscan's native picturesqueness. Not that the Californian needs
adventitious aid in this matter. Indeed this cosmopolitanism of
atmosphere serves best as a background, these alien types as a foil, for
the native-born. For the Californians are a comely people. No traveler
has failed - at least no man has failed - to pay tribute in passing to
the Californian women. And they are beautiful. In that climate which
produces bigness in everything, they grow to heroic size. And as a
result of a life, inevitably open-air in an atmosphere always
fog-touched, they have eyes of a notable limpidity and complexions of a
striking vividness. To walk through that limited area which is the
city's heart - especially when the theatres are letting out - is to come
on beauty not in one pretty girl at a time, nor in pairs and trios, nor
by scores and dozens; it is to see it in battalias and acres, and all of
them meeting your eyes with the frank open gaze of the West. San
Francisco is, I fancy, the only city on the globe where any musical
comedy audience is always more beautiful than any musical comedy chorus.
They are not only beautiful - they are magnificent.

Watch in the Admission Day parade for the Native Daughters of the Golden
West - stalwart, stunning young giantesses marching with a splendid
carriage and a superb poise - they seem like a new race of women.

And the climate being of such kind that, for three-quarters of the year
you can count on unvarying sunny weather, the women dress on the streets
with nothing short of gorgeousness. All the colors that the rainbow
knows and a few that it has never seen, appear here. And worn with such
chic, such verve! Not even in Paris, where may appear a more
conventional smartness, is sartorial picturesqueness carried off with
such an air of authority. Polaire, who was advertised as the ugliest
woman in the world, should have made a fortune in California. For the
Californian does not really know what female ugliness is. I have a
theory that the California men cannot quite appreciate the beauty of
their women. They take beauty for granted; they have never seen anything
else. Nevertheless, that beauty and that dash constitute a menace. A
city ordinance compels traffic policemen to wear smoked glasses, and car
conductors and chauffeurs, blinders. Go West, young man!

But everybody celebrates the beauty of the Californian woman. Probably
that is because heretofore "everybody" has been masculine. He has been
so busy looking at the California woman that he hasn't realized yet that
there's a male of the species. The California man, I sing.

It is curious what a difference of opinion there is in regard to him. I
have heard Californiacs say in their one moment of humility, "Why is it,
when we turn out such magnificent women, that our men are so
undersized?" Now I know nothing about average male heights and weights.
I have never seen any comparative statistics. I can say only that the
average Californian seems bigger than the average man. And often in
walking through the San Francisco streets the eye, ranging along the
crowd of pedestrians of average California stature, will strike on a man
who bulks a whale, a leviathan, a dread-naught, beside the others, and
rises a column, a monolith, a tower above them.

He is certainly upstanding, this average California male - running to
bulk and a little to flesh. Often the line of feature is so regular that
it suggests the Greek. He has eyes like mountain lakes and a smile like
a break of sun. He generally flashes a dimple or two or three or more
(Californians are speckled with dimples). He manufactures his own slang.
And he joshes and jollies all day long. In fact, he's -

Oh, well, go West, young woman!

Beyond its high average of male beauty California has, in its labor-man,
produced a new physical type. It is different from the standardized
American type, of which Abraham Lincoln of a past and the Wright
brothers of a present generation are perfect specimens - the
ugly-beautiful face, long and lean, with its harshly contoured strength
of feature and its subtly softening melancholy of expression. The look
of labor in California is not so much of strength as of force, an
indomitable, unconquerable force. Melancholy is not there, but spirit;
that fire and light which means hope. It is as though they were molded
of iron - those faces - but illuminated from within. And with that
strength goes the California comeliness.

Pulchritude begins in childhood with the Californian, grows and
strengthens through youth to middle age. Even the old - but there are no
old people in California.  Nobody ever gets a chance to grow old there.
The climate won't let you. The scenery won't let you. The life won't let
you.

All this picturesqueness, beauty and charm form the raw materials of the
most entertaining city life in the country. For whatever San Francisco
is or is not, it is never dull. Life there is in a perpetual ferment. It
is as though the city kettle had been set on the stove to boil half a
century ago and had never been taken off. The steam is pouring out of
the nose. The cover is dancing up and down. The very kettle is rocking
and jumping. But by some miracle the destructive explosion never
happens. The Californian is easy-going in a sense and yet he works hard
and plays hard. Athletics are feverish there, suffrage rampant, politics
frenzied, labor militant. Would that I had space here to dilate on the
athletic game as it is played in California - played with the charm and
spirit and humor with which Californians play every game. Would that I
had space to narrate, as Maud Younger tells it - the moving story of how
the women won the vote in California. Would that I had space to describe
the whirlwind political campaigns when there are at least four
candidates in the field for every office, and when you are besought by
postal, by letter, by dodgers, by advertisements in the papers and on
the billboards to vote for all of them. Would that I had space - but
here I must take the space -to tell how the Californian plays.

Remember always that California has virtually no weather to contend
with. For three months of the year rain appears; for the remaining nine
months it is eliminated entirely. And so, with a country of rare
picture-esqueness for a background, a people of rare beauty for actors,
everybody more or less permeated with the artistic instinct and
everybody more or less writing poetry - California has a pageant for
breakfast, a fiesta for luncheon and a carnival for dinner. They are
always electing queens. In fact any girl in California, who hasn't been
a queen of something before she's twenty-one, is a poor prune.

In the country, especially in the wine districts where the merrymaking
sometimes lasts for days, these festivals are beautiful. In the city it
depends largely, of course, on how much the commercial spirit enters
into it; but whether they are beautiful or the reverse, they are always
entertaining. Single streets, for instance, in San Francisco, are always
having carnivals. The street elects a king and queen, plasters itself
with bunting, arches itself with electric lights, lines its curbs with
temporary booths, fills its corners with shows, sells confetti until the
pedestrian swims in it -and then whoops it up for a week. All around,
north, south, east, west, every other street is jet-black, sleeping
decorously, ignoring utterly that blare of color, that blaze of light,
that boom of noise around the corner. They should worry - they're going
to have a carnival themselves next week. Apropos, a San Francisco paper
opened its story of one of these affairs with the following sentence:
"Last night (shall we call him Hans Schmidt?) was crowned with great
pomp and ceremony king of the - Street Carnival, and fifteen minutes
later, with no pomp and ceremony whatever, he was arrested for petty
larceny." Billy Jordan was made King of the Fillmore Street Carnival.
Now Billy Jordan, who was over eighty years of age, had served as
announcer for every big boxing contest in San Francisco since - well,
let's say, since San Francisco was born. He always ends his ring
announcement with the words, "Let her go!" The reporters say that in the
crown and sceptre, the velvet and ermine of a king, he opened the
Fillmore Street Carnival with "Let her go!". And for myself, I choose to
believe that story. The queen of this carnival - her first name was
Manila, by the way - a pretty girl of course, was a picturesque detail
in the city life for a week. In velvet, ermine and brilliant crown, she
was always flashing from place to place in an automobile, surrounded by
a group, equally pretty, of ladies in waiting. When the deep,
cylindrical cistern-like reservoir on Twin Peaks was finished, they
opened it with a dance; when the Stockton street tunnel was finished,
they opened it with a dance; when the morgue was completed they opened
that with a reception.

The San Francisco papers reflect all this activity, and they certainly
make entertaining reading. For one thing, the annual crop of pretty
girls being ten times as large there as anywhere else, and photography
being universally a fine art, the papers are filled with pictures of
beautiful women. They are the only papers I have ever seen in which the
faces that appear on the theatrical page pale beside those that
accompany the news stories. The last three months of my stay in San
Francisco I cut out all the pictures of pretty girls from three
newspapers. They included all kinds of women - society, club, athletic,
college, highbrow, low-brow; highway-women, burglaresses, forgeresses
and murderesses. I have just counted those pictures three hundred and
fifty-four - and all beautiful. When I received my paper in the morning
- until the war made that function, even in California, a melancholy one
- I used to look first at the pictures of the women. Then always I
turned to the sporting page to see what record had been broken since
yesterday and, if it were Saturday morning (I confess it without shame),
to read the joyous account of Friday night's boxing contest. And, always
before I settled to the important news of the day, I read the last
"stunt".

Picturesque "stunts" are always being pulled off in San Francisco. Was
it the late lamented Beachey flying with a pretty girl around the
half-completed Tower of Jewels, was it a pretty actress selling roses at
the Lotta Fountain for the benefit of the Belgians, it was something
amusing, stirring and characteristic. Always the "stunt" involved a lot
of pretty girls and often it demanded the services of the mayor. I shall
regret to the end of my days that I did not keep a scrapbook devoted to
Mayor Rolph's activities. For being mayor of San Francisco is no
sinecure. But as most of his public duties seemed to involve floods of
pretty girls - well, if I were a man it would be my ambition to be mayor
of San Francisco for the rest of my life.

The year I spent in California they were building the Exposition. They
made of that task, as they make of every task, a game and a play and a
lark - a joy and a delight - even though they were building under the
most discouraging conditions that an exposition ever encountered. But
nothing daunts the Californian, and so wood and iron, mortar and paint,
grew steadily into the dream city that later fronted the bay.

As I think it over, I am very glad that I did not tell the Californiacs
how beautiful Massachusetts is. Because it would only have bewildered
them. I am glad that I did not mention to them that I shall always
cherish a kind of feeling for Massachusetts that I can develop for no
other spot. Because it would only have hurt them. You must not tell a
Californiac that you love any place but California or that you have
found beauty elsewhere. It's like breaking an engagement of marriage
with a girl. It's like telling a child that there's no such person as
Santa Claus. There's no tactful way of wording it. It simply can't be
done. And I am very glad that I told the Californiacs all the time how
much I love California, how much I love San Francisco. For beauty,
California is like the fresh, glowing, golden crescent moon; it is
waxing steadily to a noble fullness of development; and San Francisco is
like the glittering evening-star; it fills the Pacific night with the
happy radiance of its light and life. I think of California always -
with its unabated fighting strength - as a champion among States. It
takes the stranger - that champion State - under its mighty protection
and gives him of its strength and happiness. It is more fun to be sick
in California than to be well anywhere else. And I think of San
Francisco always - the spirit of Tamalpais in the air - as an Amazon
among cities. Its people love "the city" because, within the memory of
man it was built, and within the memory of child, rebuilt. They
themselves helped to build and rebuild it. They have worked and fought
for it through every inch and instant of its history. It takes the
stranger - that Amazon city - into its great, warm, beating
mother-heart. If you are sick it makes you well. If you are sad it makes
you glad. It infuses you with its working spirit. It inspires you with
its fighting spirit. It asks you to work and fight with it.
Massachusetts never permitted me to work or fight for it. Woman is as
yet, in no real sense, a citizen there. And the result is that I love
California as I love no other State, and San Francisco as I love no
other city. I have no real criticism to bring against the Californiac.
In fact, reader  -  ah, I see you've guessed it. I'm a Californiac
myself.










A note from the digitizer

This digitized version preserves the original page breaks.
It is the English translation portion of the CONFUCIAN ANALECTS,
which is one part of Legge's THE CHINESE CLASSICS.  The Prolegomena,
The Great Learning, and The Doctrine of the Mean can be found in other
Project Gutenberg files.

The original Chinese of the CONFUCIAN ANALECTS and Legge's notes are presented
along with this English translation in other Project Gutenberg files.




THE CHINESE CLASSICS

with a translation, critical and exegetical
notes, prolegomena, and copious indexes

by James Legge


IN FIVE VOLUMES

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS
THE GREAT LEARNING
THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN




CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.
BOOK I.  HSIO R.

	CHAPTER I. 1. The Master said, 'Is it not pleasant to learn with 
a constant perseverance and application?
	2. 'Is it not delightful to have friends coming from distant 
quarters?'
	3. 'Is he not a man of complete virtue, who feels no 
discomposure though men may take no note of him?'

	CHAP. II. 1. The philosopher Yu said, 'They are few who, being 
filial and fraternal, are fond of offending against their superiors. 
There have been none, who, not liking to offend against their 
superiors, have been fond of stirring up confusion.
	2. 'The superior man bends his attention to what is radical.

That being established, all practical courses naturally grow up. Filial 
piety and fraternal submission!-- are they not the root of all 
benevolent actions?'
	CHAP. III. The Master said, 'Fine words and an insinuating 
appearance are seldom associated with true virtue.'
	CHAP. IV. The philosopher Tsang said, 'I daily examine myself 
on three points:-- whether, in transacting business for others, I may 
have been not faithful;-- whether, in intercourse with friends, I 
may have been not sincere;-- whether I may have not mastered 
and practised the instructions of my teacher.'

	CHAP. V. The Master said, To rule a country of a thousand 
chariots, there must be reverent attention to business, and 
sincerity; economy in expenditure, and love for men; and the 
employment of the people at the proper seasons.'
	CHAP. VI. The Master said, 'A youth, when at home, should be 
filial, and, abroad, respectful to his elders. He should be earnest and 
truthful. He should overflow in love to all, and cultivate the 
friendship of the good. When he has time and opportunity, after the 
performance of these things, he should employ them in polite 
studies.'
	CHAP. VII. Tsze-hsia said, 'If a man withdraws his mind from 
the love of beauty, and applies it as sincerely to the love of the 
virtuous; if, in serving his parents, he can exert his utmost strength;

if, in serving his prince, he can devote his life; if, in his intercourse 
with his friends, his words are sincere:-- although men say that he 
has not learned, I will certainly say that he has.'
	CHAP. VIII. 1. The Master said, 'If the scholar be not grave, he 
will not call forth any veneration, and his learning will not be solid.
	2. 'Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles.
	3. 'Have no friends not equal to yourself.
	4. 'When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them.'
	CHAP. IX. The philosopher Tsang said, 'Let there be a careful 
attention to perform the funeral rites to parents, and let them be 
followed when long gone with the ceremonies of sacrifice;-- then 
the virtue of the people will resume its proper excellence.' 

CHAP. X. 1. Tsze-ch'in asked Tsze-kung, saying, 'When our master 
comes to any country, he does not fail to learn all about its 
government. Does he ask his information? or is it given to him?'
	2. Tsze-kung said, 'Our master is benign, upright, courteous, 
temperate, and complaisant, and thus he gets his information. The 
master's mode of asking information!-- is it not different from that 
of other men?'
	CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'While a man's father is alive, look 
at the bent of his will; when his father is dead, look at his conduct. 
If for three years he does not alter from the way of his father, he 
may be called filial.'

CHAP. XII. 1. The philosopher Yu said, 'In practising the rules of 
propriety, a natural ease is to be prized. In the ways prescribed by 
the ancient kings, this is the excellent quality, and in things small 
and great we follow them.
	2. 'Yet it is not to be observed in all cases. If one, knowing 
how such ease should be prized, manifests it, without regulating it 
by the rules of propriety, this likewise is not to be done.'
	CHAP. XIII. The philosopher Yu said, 'When agreements are 
made according to what is right, what is spoken can be made good. 
When respect is shown according to what is proper, one keeps far 
from shame and disgrace. When the parties upon whom a man 
leans are proper persons to be intimate with, he can make them his 
guides and masters.'
	CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'He who aims to be a man of 
complete virtue in his food does not seek to gratify his appetite, nor

in his dwelling place does he seek the appliances of ease; he is 
earnest in what he is doing, and careful in his speech; he frequents 
the company of men of principle that he may be rectified:-- such a 
person may be said indeed to love to learn.'
	CHAP. XV. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'What do you pronounce 
concerning the poor man who yet does not flatter, and the rich man 
who is not proud?' The Master replied, 'They will do; but they are 
not equal to him, who, though poor, is yet cheerful, and to him, who, 
though rich, loves the rules of propriety.'
	2. Tsze-kung replied, 'It is said in the Book of Poetry, "As you 
cut and then file, as you carve and then polish."-- The meaning is 
the same, I apprehend, as that which you have just expressed.'
	3. The Master said, 'With one like Ts'ze, I can begin to talk

about the odes. I told him one point, and he knew its proper 
sequence.'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'I will not be afflicted at men's 
not knowing me; I will be afflicted that I do not know men.'


BOOK II. WEI CHANG.

	CHAP. I. The Master said, 'He who exercises government by 
means of his virtue may be compared to the north polar star, which 
keeps its place and all the stars turn towards it.'
	CHAP. II. The Master said, 'In the Book of Poetry are three 
hundred pieces, but the design of them all may be embraced in one 
sentence-- "Having no depraved thoughts."'
	CHAP. III. 1. The Master said, 'If the people be led by laws, 
and uniformity sought to be given them by punishments, they will 
try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame.
	2. 'If they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought to be given 
them by the rules of propriety, they will have the sense of shame, 
and moreover will become good.'
	CHAP. IV. 1. The Master said, 'At fifteen, I had my mind bent 
on learning.
	2. 'At thirty, I stood firm.
	3. 'At forty, I had no doubts.
	4. 'At fifty, I knew the decrees of Heaven.

	5. 'At sixty, my ear was an obedient organ for the reception of 
truth.
	6. 'At seventy, I could follow what my heart desired, without 
transgressing what was right.'
	CHAP. V. 1. Mang I asked what filial piety was. The Master 
said, 'It is not being disobedient.'
	2. Soon after, as Fan Ch'ih was driving him, the Master told 
him, saying, 'Mang-sun asked me what filial piety was, and I 
answered him,-- "not being disobedient."'
	3. Fan Ch'ih said, 'What did you mean?' The Master replied, 
'That parents, when alive, be served according to propriety; that, 
when dead, they should be buried according to propriety; and that 
they should be sacrificed to according to propriety.'

	CHAP. VI. Mang Wu asked what filial piety was. The Master 
said, 'Parents are anxious lest their children should be sick.'
	CHAP. VII. Tsze-yu asked what filial piety was. The Master 
said, 'The filial piety of now-a-days means the support of one's 
parents. But dogs and horses likewise are able to do something in 
the way of support;-- without reverence, what is there to 
distinguish the one support given from the other?'
	CHAP. VIII. Tsze-hsia asked what filial piety was. The Master 
said, 'The difficulty is with the countenance. If, when their elders 
have any troublesome affairs, the young take the toil of them, and 
if, when the young have wine and food, they set them before their 
elders, is THIS to be considered filial piety?'

	CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'I have talked with Hui for a whole 
day, and he has not made any objection to anything I said;-- as if 
he were stupid. He has retired, and I have examined his conduct 
when away from me, and found him able to illustrate my teachings. 
Hui!-- He is not stupid.'
	CHAP. X. 1. The Master said, 'See what a man does.
	2. 'Mark his motives.
	3. 'Examine in what things he rests.
	4. 'How can a man conceal his character?
	5. How can a man conceal his character?'
	CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'If a man keeps cherishing his old 
knowledge, so as continually to be acquiring new, he may be a 
teacher of others.'

	CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'The accomplished scholar is not a 
utensil.'
	CHAP. XIII. Tsze-kung asked what constituted the superior 
man. The Master said, 'He acts before he speaks, and afterwards 
speaks according to his actions.'
	CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'The superior man is catholic and 
no partisan. The mean man is partisan and not catholic.'
	CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Learning without thought is 
labour lost; thought without learning is perilous.'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The study of strange doctrines is 
injurious indeed!'

	CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Yu, shall I teach you what 
knowledge is? When you know a thing, to hold that you know it; 
and when you do not know a thing, to allow that you do not know 
it;-- this is knowledge.'
	CHAP. XVII. 1. Tsze-chang was learning with a view to official 
emolument.
	2. The Master said, 'Hear much and put aside the points of 
which you stand in doubt, while you speak cautiously at the same 
time of the others:-- then you will afford few occasions for blame. 
See much and put aside the things which seem perilous, while you 
are cautious at the same time in carrying the others into practice:-- 
then you will have few occasions for repentance. When one gives 
few occasions for blame in his words, and few occasions for 
repentance in his conduct, he is in the way to get emolument.'

	CHAP. XIX. The Duke Ai asked, saying, 'What should be done 
in order to secure the submission of the people?' Confucius replied, 
'Advance the upright and set aside the crooked, then the people 
will submit. Advance the crooked and set aside the upright, then 
the people will not submit.'
	CHAP. XX. Chi K'ang asked how to cause the people to 
reverence their ruler, to be faithful to him, and to go on to nerve 
themselves to virtue. The Master said, 'Let him preside over them 
with gravity;-- then they will reverence him. Let him be filial and 
kind to all;-- then they will be faithful to him. Let him advance the 
good and teach the incompetent;-- then they will eagerly seek to be 
virtuous.'
	CHAP. XXI. 1. Some one addressed Confucius, saying, 'Sir, why 
are you not engaged in the government?'

	2. The Master said, 'What does the Shu-ching say of filial 
piety?-- "You are filial, you discharge your brotherly duties. These 
qualities are displayed in government." This then also constitutes 
the exercise of government. Why must there be THAT-- making one 
be in the government?'
	CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'I do not know how a man 
without truthfulness is to get on. How can a large carriage be made 
to go without the cross-bar for yoking the oxen to, or a small 
carriage without the arrangement for yoking the horses?'
	CHAP. XXIII. 1. Tsze-chang asked whether the affairs of ten 
ages after could be known.
	2. Confucius said, 'The Yin dynasty followed the regulations of 
the Hsia: wherein it took from or added to them may be known. The 
Chau dynasty has followed the regulations of Yin: wherein it took 
from or added to them may be known. Some other may follow the 
Chau, but though it should be at the distance of a hundred ages, its 
affairs may be known.'

	CHAP. XXIV. 1. The Master said, 'For a man to sacrifice to a 
spirit which does not belong to him is flattery.
	2. 'To see what is right and not to do it is want of courage.'

BOOK III. PA YIH.

	CHAP. I. Confucius said of the head of the Chi family, who had 
eight rows of pantomimes in his area, 'If he can bear to do this, 
what may he not bear to do?'

	CHAP. II. The three families used the YUNG ode, while the 
vessels were being removed, at the conclusion of the sacrifice. The 
Master said, '"Assisting are the princes;-- the son of heaven looks 
profound and grave:"-- what application can these words have in 
the hall of the three families?'
	CHAP. III. The Master said, 'If a man be without the virtues 
proper to humanity, what has he to do with the rites of propriety? 
If a man be without the virtues proper to humanity, what has he to 
do with music?'
	CHAP. IV. 1. Lin Fang asked what was the first thing to be 
attended to in ceremonies.
	2. The Master said, 'A great question indeed!
	3. 'In festive ceremonies, it is better to be sparing than 
extravagant.

In the ceremonies of mourning, it is better that there be deep 
sorrow than a minute attention to observances.'
	CHAP. V. The Master said, 'The rude tribes of the east and 
north have their princes, and are not like the States of our great 
land which are without them.'
	CHAP. VI. The chief of the Chi family was about to sacrifice to 
the T'ai mountain. The Master said to Zan Yu, '