Can you not save him 
from this?' He answered, 'I cannot.' Confucius said, 'Alas! will you 
say that the T'ai mountain is not so discerning as Lin Fang?'

	CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The student of virtue has no 
contentions. If it be said he cannot avoid them, shall this be in 
archery? But he bows complaisantly to his competitors; thus he 
ascends the hall, descends, and exacts the forfeit of drinking. In his 
contention, he is still the Chun-tsze.'
	CHAP. VIII. 1. Tsze-hsia asked, saying, 'What is the meaning 
of the passage-- "The pretty dimples of her artful smile! The well-
defined black and white of her eye! The plain ground for the 
colours?"'
	2. The Master said, 'The business of laying on the colours 
follows (the preparation of) the plain ground.'
	3. 'Ceremonies then are a subsequent thing?' The Master said, 
'It is Shang who can bring out my meaning. Now I can begin to talk 
about the odes with him.'

	CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'I could describe the ceremonies of 
the Hsia dynasty, but Chi cannot sufficiently attest my words. I 
could describe the ceremonies of the Yin dynasty, but Sung cannot 
sufficiently attest my words. (They cannot do so) because of the 
insufficiency of their records and wise men. If those were 
sufficient, I could adduce them in support of my words.'
	CHAP. X. The Master said, 'At the great sacrifice, after the 
pouring out of the libation, I have no wish to look on.'
	CHAP. XI. Some one asked the meaning of the great sacrifice. 
The Master said, 'I do not know. He who knew its meaning would 
find it as easy to govern the kingdom as to look on this;-- pointing 
to his palm.

	CHAP. XII. 1. He sacrificed to the dead, as if they were 
present. He sacrificed to the spirits, as if the spirits were present.
	2. The Master said, 'I consider my not being present at the 
sacrifice, as if I did not sacrifice.'
	CHAP. XIII. 1. Wang-sun Chia asked, saying, 'What is the 
meaning of the saying, "It is better to pay court to the furnace than 
to the south-west corner?"'
	2. The Master said, 'Not so. He who offends against Heaven 
has none to whom he can pray.'

	CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'Chau had the advantage of 
viewing the two past dynasties. How complete and elegant are its 
regulations! I follow Chau.'
	CHAP. XV. The Master, when he entered the grand temple, 
asked about everything. Some one said, 'Who will say that the son 
of the man of Tsau knows the rules of propriety! He has entered the 
grand temple and asks about everything.' The Master heard the 
remark, and said, 'This is a rule of propriety.'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'In archery it is not going 
through the leather which is the principal thing;-- because people's 
strength is not equal. This was the old way.'

	CHAP. XVII. 1. Tsze-kung wished to do away with the offering 
of a sheep connected with the inauguration of the first day of each 
month.
	2. The Master said, 'Ts'ze, you love the sheep; I love the 
ceremony.'
	CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'The full observance of the rules 
of propriety in serving one's prince is accounted by people to be 
flattery.'
	CHAP. XIX. The Duke Ting asked how a prince should employ 
his ministers, and how ministers should serve their prince. 
Confucius replied, 'A prince should employ his minister according to 
according to the rules of propriety; ministers should serve their 
prince with faithfulness.'
	CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'The Kwan Tsu is expressive of 
enjoyment without being licentious, and of grief without being 
hurtfully excessive.'

	CHAP. XXI. 1. The Duke Ai asked Tsai Wo about the altars of 
the spirits of the land. Tsai Wo replied, 'The Hsia sovereign planted 
the pine tree about them; the men of the Yin planted the cypress; 
and the men of the Chau planted the chestnut tree, meaning 
thereby to cause the people to be in awe.'
	2. When the Master heard it, he said, 'Things that are done, it 
is needless to speak about; things that have had their course, it is 
needless to remonstrate about; things that are past, it is needless to 
blame.'
	CHAP. XXII. 1. The Master said, 'Small indeed was the capacity 
of Kwan Chung!'
	2. Some one said, 'Was Kwan Chung parsimonious?' 'Kwan,' 
was the reply, 'had the San Kwei, and his officers performed no 
double duties; how can he be considered parsimonious?'
	3. 'Then, did Kwan Chung know the rules of propriety?' The

Master said, 'The princes of States have a screen intercepting the 
view at their gates. Kwan had likewise a screen at his gate. The 
princes of States on any friendly meeting between two of them, had 
a stand on which to place their inverted cups. Kwan had also such a 
stand. If Kwan knew the rules of propriety, who does not know 
them?'
	CHAP. XXXII. The Master instructing the grand music-master 
of Lu said, 'How to play music may be known. At the 
commencement of the piece, all the parts should sound together. As 
it proceeds, they should be in harmony while severally distinct and 
flowing without break, and thus on to the conclusion.'

	CHAP. XXIV. The border warden at Yi requested to be 
introduced to the Master, saying, 'When men of superior virtue 
have come to this, I have never been denied the privilege of seeing 
them.' The followers of the sage introduced him, and when he came 
out from the interview, he said, 'My friends, why are you distressed 
by your master's loss of office? The kingdom has long been without 
the principles of truth and right; Heaven is going to use your master 
as a bell with its wooden tongue.'
	CHAP. XXV. The Master said of the Shao that it was perfectly 
beautiful and also perfectly good. He said of the Wu that it was 
perfectly beautiful but not perfectly good.
	CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'High station filled without 
indulgent generosity; ceremonies performed without reverence; 
mourning conducted without sorrow;-- wherewith should I 
contemplate such ways?'

BOOK IV. LE JIN.

	CHAP. I. The Master said, 'It is virtuous manners which 
constitute the excellence of a neighborhood. If a man in selecting a 
residence, do not fix on one where such prevail, how can he be 
wise?'
	CHAP. II. The Master said, 'Those who are without virtue 
cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty and hardship, or 
in a condition of enjoyment. The virtuous rest in virtue; the wise 
desire virtue.'

	CHAP. III. The Master said, 'It is only the (truly) virtuous 
man, who can love, or who can hate, others.'
	CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'If the will be set on virtue, there 
will be no practice of wickedness.'
	CHAP. V. 1. The Master said, 'Riches and honours are what 
men desire. If it cannot be obtained in the proper way, they should 
not be held. Poverty and meanness are what men dislike. If it 
cannot be avoided in the proper way, they should not be avoided.
	2. 'If a superior man abandon virtue, how can he fulfil the 
requirements of that name?
	3. 'The superior man does not, even for the space of a single 
meal, act contrary to virtue. In moments of haste, he cleaves to it. 
In seasons of danger, he cleaves to it.'

	CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'I have not seen a person who 
loved virtue, or one who hated what was not virtuous. He who 
loved virtue, would esteem nothing above it. He who hated what is 
not virtuous, would practise virtue in such a way that he would not 
allow anything that is not virtuous to approach his person.
	2. 'Is any one able for one day to apply his strength to virtue? 
I have not seen the case in which his strength would be insufficient.
	3. 'Should there possibly be any such case, I have not seen it.'
	CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The faults of men are 
characteristic of the class to which they belong. By observing a 
man's faults, it may be known that he is virtuous.'

	CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'If a man in the morning hear 
the right way, he may die in the evening without regret.'
	CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'A scholar, whose mind is set on 
truth, and who is ashamed of bad clothes and bad food, is not fit to 
be discoursed with.'
	CHAP. X. The Master said, 'The superior man, in the world, 
does not set his mind either for anything, or against anything; what 
is right he will follow.'
	CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'The superior man thinks of virtue; 
the small man thinks of comfort. The superior man thinks of the 
sanctions of law; the small man thinks of favours which he may 
receive.'

	CHAP. XII. The Master said: 'He who acts with a constant view 
to his own advantage will be much murmured against.'
	CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Is a prince is able to govern his 
kingdom with the complaisance proper to the rules of propriety, 
what difficulty will he have? If he cannot govern it with that 
complaisance, what has he to do with the rules of propriety?'
	CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'A man should say, I am not 
concerned that I have no place, I am concerned how I may fit 
myself for one. I am not concerned that I am not known, I seek to 
be worthy to be known.'
	CHAP. XV. 1. The Master said, 'Shan, my doctrine is that of an 
all-pervading unity.' The disciple Tsang replied, 'Yes.'
	2. The Master went out, and the other disciples asked, saying,

'What do his words mean?' Tsang said, 'The doctrine of our master 
is to be true to the principles of our nature and the benevolent 
exercise of them to others,-- this and nothing more.'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The mind of the superior man is 
conversant with righteousness; the mind of the mean man is 
conversant with gain.'
	CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'When we see men of worth, we 
should think of equalling them; when we see men of a contrary 
character, we should turn inwards and examine ourselves.'
	CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'In serving his parents, a son 
may remonstrate with them, but gently; when he sees that they do 
not incline to follow his advice, he shows an increased degree of 
reverence, but does not abandon his purpose; and should they 
punish him, he does not allow himself to murmur.'

	CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'While his parents are alive, the 
son may not go abroad to a distance. If he does go abroad, he must 
have a fixed place to which he goes.'
	CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'If the son for three years does not 
alter from the way of his father, he may be called filial.'
	CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The years of parents may by no 
means not be kept in the memory, as an occasion at once for joy 
and for fear.'
	CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'The reason why the ancients did 
not readily give utterance to their words, was that they feared lest 
their actions should not come up to them.'
	CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'The cautious seldom err.'

	CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'The superior man wishes to be 
slow in his speech and earnest in his conduct.'
	CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Virtue is not left to stand alone. 
He who practises it will have neighbors.'
	CHAP. XXVI. Tsze-yu said, 'In serving a prince, frequent 
remonstrances lead to disgrace. Between friends, frequent reproofs 
make the friendship distant.'

BOOK V. KUNG-YE CH'ANG.

	CHAP. I. 1. The Master said of Kung-ye Ch'ang that he might 
be wived; although he was put in bonds, he had not been guilty of 
any crime. Accordingly, he gave him his own daughter to wife.
	2. Of Nan Yung he said that if the country were well governed

he would not be out of office, and if it were ill-governed, he would 
escape punishment and disgrace. He gave him the daughter of his 
own elder brother to wife.
	CHAP. II. The Master said of Tsze-chien, 'Of superior virtue 
indeed is such a man! If there were not virtuous men in Lu, how 
could this man have acquired this character?'
	CHAP. III. Tsze-kung asked, 'What do you say of me, Ts'ze? 
The Master said, 'You are a utensil.' 'What utensil?' 'A gemmed 
sacrificial utensil.'

	CHAP. IV. 1. Some one said, 'Yung is truly virtuous, but he is 
not ready with his tongue.'
	2. The Master said, 'What is the good of being ready with the 
tongue? They who encounter men with smartnesses of speech for 
the most part procure themselves hatred. I know not whether he 
be truly virtuous, but why should he show readiness of the 
tongue?'
	CHAP. V. The Master was wishing Ch'i-tiao K'ai to enter on 
official employment. He replied, 'I am not yet able to rest in the 
assurance of THIS.' The Master was pleased.
	CHAP. VI. The Master said, 'My doctrines make no way. I will 
get upon a raft, and float about on the sea. He that will accompany 
me will be Yu, I dare say.' Tsze-lu hearing this was glad,

upon which the Master said, 'Yu is fonder of daring than I am. He 
does not exercise his judgment upon matters.'
	CHAP. VII. 1. Mang Wu asked about Tsze-lu, whether he was 
perfectly virtuous. The Master said, 'I do not know.'
	2. He asked again, when the Master replied, 'In a kingdom of 
a thousand chariots, Yu might be employed to manage the military 
levies, but I do not know whether he be perfectly virtuous.'
	3. 'And what do you say of Ch'iu?' The Master replied, 'In a 
city of a thousand families, or a clan of a hundred chariots, Ch'iu 
might be employed as governor, but I do not know whether he is 
perfectly virtuous.'
	4. 'What do you say of Ch'ih?' The Master replied, 'With his 
sash girt and standing in a court, Ch'ih might be employed to 
converse with the visitors and guests, but I do not know whether 
he is perfectly virtuous.'

	CHAP. VII. 1. The Master said to Tsze-kung, 'Which do you 
consider superior, yourself or Hui?'
	2. Tsze-kung replied, 'How dare I compare myself with Hui? 
Hui hears one point and knows all about a subject; I hear one point, 
and know a second.'
	3. The Master said, 'You are not equal to him. I grant you, you 
are not equal to him.'
	CHAP. IX. 1. Tsai Yu being asleep during the daytime, the 
Master said, 'Rotten wood cannot be carved; a wall of dirty earth 
will not receive the trowel. This Yu!-- what is the use of my 
reproving him?'
	2. The Master said, 'At first, my way with men was to hear 
their words, and give them credit for their conduct. Now my way is 
to hear their words, and look at their conduct. It is from Yu that I 
have learned to make this change.'

	CHAP. X. The Master said, 'I have not seen a firm and 
unbending man.' Some one replied, 'There is Shan Ch'ang.' 'Ch'ang,' 
said the Master, 'is under the influence of his passions; how can he 
be pronounced firm and unbending?'
	CHAP. XI. Tsze-kung said, 'What I do not wish men to do to 
me, I also wish not to do to men.' The Master said, 'Ts'ze, you have 
not attained to that.'
	CHAP. XII. Tsze-kung said, 'The Master's personal displays of 
his principles and ordinary descriptions of them may be heard. His 
discourses about man's nature, and the way of Heaven, cannot be 
heard.'

	CHAP. XIII. When Tsze-lu heard anything, if he had not yet 
succeeded in carrying it into practice, he was only afraid lest he 
should hear something else.
	CHAP. XIV. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'On what ground did 
Kung-wan get that title of Wan?' The Master said, 'He was of an 
active nature and yet fond of learning, and he was not ashamed to 
ask and learn of his inferiors!-- On these grounds he has been 
styled Wan.'
	CHAP. XV. The Master said of Tsze-ch'an that he had four of 
the characteristics of a superior man:-- in his conduct of himself, he 
was humble; in serving his superiors, he was respectful; in 
nourishing the people, he was kind; in ordering the people, he was 
just.'

	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'Yen P'ing knew well how to 
maintain friendly intercourse. The acquaintance might be long, but 
he showed the same respect as at first.'
	CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Tsang Wan kept a large tortoise 
in a house, on the capitals of the pillars of which he had hills made, 
and with representations of duckweed on the small pillars above 
the beams supporting the rafters.-- Of what sort was his wisdom?'
	CHAP. XVIII. 1. Tsze-chang asked, saying, 'The minister Tsze-
wan thrice took office, and manifested no joy in his countenance. 
Thrice he retired from office, and manifested no displeasure. He 
made it a point to inform the new minister of the way in which he 
had conducted the government;-- what do you say of him?' The 
Master replied. 'He was loyal.' 'Was he perfectly virtuous?' 'I do not 
know. How can he be pronounced perfectly virtuous?'
	2. Tsze-chang proceeded, 'When the officer Ch'ui killed the 
prince of Ch'i, Ch'an Wan, though he was the owner of forty horses, 
abandoned them and left the country. Coming to another State, he 
said, "They are here like our great officer, Ch'ui," and left it. He 
came to a second State, and with the same observation left it also;-- 
what do you say of him?' The Master replied, 'He was pure.' 'Was he 
perfectly virtuous?' 'I do not know. How can he be pronounced 
perfectly virtuous?'
	CHAP. XIX. Chi Wan thought thrice, and then acted. When the 
Master was informed of it, he said, 'Twice may do.'
	CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'When good order prevailed in his 
country, Ning Wu acted the part of a wise man. When his country 
was in disorder, he acted the part of a stupid man. Others may 
equal his wisdom, but they cannot equal his stupidity.'

	CHAP. XXI. When the Master was in Ch'an, he said, 'Let me 
return! Let me return! The little children of my school are 
ambitious and too hasty. They are accomplished and complete so 
far, but they do not know how to restrict and shape themselves.'
	CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Po-i and Shu-ch'i did not keep 
the former wickednesses of men in mind, and hence the 
resentments directed towards them were few.'
	CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'Who says of Wei-shang Kao

that he is upright? One begged some vinegar of him, and he begged 
it of a neighbor and gave it to the man.'
	CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'Fine words, an insinuating 
appearance, and excessive respect;-- Tso Ch'iu-ming was ashamed 
of them. I also am ashamed of them. To conceal resentment against 
a person, and appear friendly with him;-- Tso Ch'iu-ming was 
ashamed of such conduct. I also am ashamed of it.'
	CHAP. XXV. 1. Yen Yuan and Chi Lu being by his side, the 
Master said to them, 'Come, let each of you tell his wishes.'
	2. Tsze-lu said, 'I should like, having chariots and horses, and 
light fur dresses, to share them with my friends, and though they 
should spoil them, I would not be displeased.'
	3. Yen Yuan said, 'I should like not to boast of my excellence, 
nor to make a display of my meritorious deeds.'
	4. Tsze-lu then said, 'I should like, sir, to hear your wishes.' 
The Master said, 'They are, in regard to the aged, to give them rest; 
in regard to friends, to show them sincerity; in regard to the young, 
to treat them tenderly.'
	CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'It is all over! I have not yet 
seen one who could perceive his faults, and inwardly accuse 
himself.'
	CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'In a hamlet of ten families, 
there may be found one honourable and sincere as I am, but not so 
fond of learning.'

BOOK VI. YUNG YEY.

	CHAP. I. 1. The Master said, 'There is Yung!-- He might occupy 
the place of a prince.'
	2. Chung-kung asked about Tsze-sang Po-tsze. The Master 
said, 'He may pass. He does not mind small matters.'
	3. Chung-kung said, 'If a man cherish in himself a reverential 
feeling of the necessity of attention to business, though he may be 
easy in small matters in his government of the people, that may be 
allowed. But if he cherish in himself that easy feeling, and also 
carry it out in his practice, is not such an easy mode of procedure 
excessive?'
	4. The Master said, 'Yung's words are right.'

	CHAP. II. The Duke Ai asked which of the disciples loved to 
learn. Confucius replied to him, 'There was Yen Hui; HE loved to 
learn. He did not transfer his anger; he did not repeat a fault. 
Unfortunately, his appointed time was short and he died; and now 
there is not such another. I have not yet heard of any one who 
loves to learn as he did.'
	CHAP. III. 1. Tsze-hwa being employed on a mission to Ch'i, 
the disciple Zan requested grain for his mother. The Master said, 
'Give her a fu.' Yen requested more. 'Give her an yu,' said the 
Master. Yen gave her five ping.
	2. The Master said, 'When Ch'ih was proceeding to Ch'i, he had 
fat horses to his carriage, and wore light furs. I have heard that

a superior man helps the distressed, but does not add to the wealth 
of the rich.'
	3. Yuan Sze being made governor of his town by the Master, 
he gave him nine hundred measures of grain, but Sze declined 
them.
	4.  The Master said, 'Do not decline them. May you not give 
them away in the neighborhoods, hamlets, towns, and villages?'
	CHAP. IV. The Master, speaking of Chung-kung, said, 'If the 
calf of a brindled cow be red and horned, although men may not 
wish to use it, would the spirits of the mountains and rivers put it 
aside?'
	CHAP. V. The Master said, 'Such was Hui that for three months 
there would be nothing in his mind contrary to perfect virtue. The 
others may attain to this on some days or in some months, but 
nothing more.'

	CHAP. VI. Chi K'ang asked about Chung-yu, whether he was fit 
to be employed as an officer of government. The Master said, 'Yu is 
a man of decision; what difficulty would he find in being an officer 
of government?' K'ang asked, 'Is Ts'ze fit to be employed as an 
officer of government?' and was answered, 'Ts'ze is a man of 
intelligence; what difficulty would he find in being an officer of 
government?' And to the same question about Ch'iu the Master 
gave the same reply, saying, 'Ch'iu is a man of various ability.'
	CHAP. VII. The chief of the Chi family sent to ask Min Tsze-
ch'ien to be governor of Pi. Min Tsze-ch'ien said, 'Decline the offer 
for me politely. If any one come again to me with a second 
invitation, I shall be obliged to go and live on the banks of the 
Wan.'

	CHAP. VIII. Po-niu being ill, the Master went to ask for him. 
He took hold of his hand through the window, and said, 'It is killing 
him. It is the appointment of Heaven, alas! That such a man should 
have such a sickness! That such a man should have such a sickness!'
		CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'Admirable indeed was the 
virtue of Hui! With a single bamboo dish of rice, a single gourd dish 
of drink, and living in his mean narrow lane, while others could not 
have endured the distress, he did not allow his joy to be affected by 
it. Admirable indeed was the virtue of Hui!'
	CHAP. X. Yen Ch'iu said, 'It is not that I do not delight in your 
doctrines, but my strength is insufficient.' The Master said, 'Those 
whose strength is insufficient give over in the middle of the way 
but now you limit yourself.'

	CHAP. XI. The Master said to Tsze-hsia, 'Do you be a scholar 
after the style of the superior man, and not after that of the mean 
man.'
	CHAP. XII. Tsze-yu being governor of Wu-ch'ang, the Master 
said to him, 'Have you got good men there?' He answered, 'There is 
Tan-t'ai Mieh-ming, who never in walking takes a short cut, and 
never comes to my office, excepting on public business.'
	CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Mang Chih-fan does not boast of 
his merit. Being in the rear on an occasion of flight, when they were 
about to enter the gate, he whipped up his horse, saying, "It is not 
that I dare to be last. My horse would not advance."'

	CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'Without the specious speech of 
the litanist T'o and the beauty of the prince Chao of Sung, it is 
difficult to escape in the present age.'
	CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Who can go out but by the door? 
How is it that men will not walk according to these ways?'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'Where the solid qualities are in 
excess of accomplishments, we have rusticity; where the 
accomplishments are in excess of the solid qualities, we have the 
manners of a clerk. When the accomplishments and solid qualities 
are equally blended, we then have the man of virtue.'
	CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Man is born for uprightness. If 
a man lose his uprightness, and yet live, his escape from death is 
the effect of mere good fortune.'

	CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'They who know the truth are 
not equal to those who love it, and they who love it are not equal to 
those who delight in it.'
	CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'To those whose talents are above 
mediocrity, the highest subjects may be announced. To those who 
are below mediocrity, the highest subjects may not be announced.'
	CHAP. XX. Fan Ch'ih asked what constituted wisdom. The 
Master said, 'To give one's self earnestly to the duties due to men, 
and, while respecting spiritual beings, to keep aloof from them, may 
be called wisdom.' He asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, 
'The man of virtue makes the difficulty to be overcome his first 
business, and success only a subsequent consideration;-- this may 
be called perfect virtue.'

	CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The wise find pleasure in water; 
the virtuous find pleasure in hills. The wise are active; the virtuous 
are tranquil. The wise are joyful; the virtuous are long-lived.'
	CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Ch'i, by one change, would come 
to the State of Lu. Lu, by one change, would come to a State where 
true principles predominated.'
	CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'A cornered vessel without 
corners.-- A strange cornered vessel! A strange cornered vessel!'
	CHAP. XXIV. Tsai Wo asked, saying, 'A benevolent man, 
though it be told him,-- 'There is a man in the well' will go in after 
him, I suppose.' Confucius said, 'Why should he do so?' A superior

man may be made to go to the well, but he cannot be made to go 
down into it. He may be imposed upon, but he cannot be fooled.'
	CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'The superior man, extensively 
studying all learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of 
the rules of propriety, may thus likewise not overstep what is 
right.'
	CHAP. XXVI. The Master having visited Nan-tsze, Tsze-lu was 
displeased, on which the Master swore, saying, 'Wherein I have 
done improperly, may Heaven reject me, may Heaven reject me!'
	CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'Perfect is the virtue which is

according to the Constant Mean! Rare for a long time has been its 
practise among the people.'
	CHAP. XXVIII. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'Suppose the case of a man 
extensively conferring benefits on the people, and able to assist all, 
what would you say of him? Might he be called perfectly virtuous?' 
The Master said, 'Why speak only of virtue in connexion with him? 
Must he not have the qualities of a sage? Even Yao and Shun were 
still solicitous about this.
	2. 'Now the man of perfect virtue, wishing to be established 
himself, seeks also to establish others; wishing to be enlarged 
himself, he seeks also to enlarge others.
	3. 'To be able to judge of others by what is nigh in ourselves;-- 
this may be called the art of virtue.'

BOOK VII. SHU R.

	CHAP. I. The Master said, 'A transmitter and not a maker, 
believing in and loving the ancients, I venture to compare myself 
with our old P'ang.'
	CHAP. II. The Master said, 'The silent treasuring up of 
knowledge; learning without satiety; and instructing others without 
being wearied:-- which one of these things belongs to me?'
	CHAP. III. The Master said, 'The leaving virtue without proper 
cultivation; the not thoroughly discussing what is learned; not being 
able to move towards righteousness of which a knowledge is 
gained; and not being able to change what is not good:-- these are 
the things which occasion me solicitude.'

	CHAP. IV. When the Master was unoccupied with business, his 
manner was easy, and he looked pleased.
	CHAP. V. The Master said, 'Extreme is my decay. For a long 
time, I have not dreamed, as I was wont to do, that I saw the duke 
of Chau.'
	CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'Let the will be set on the path 
of duty.
	2. 'Let every attainment in what is good be firmly grasped.
	3. 'Let perfect virtue be accorded with.
	4. 'Let relaxation and enjoyment be found in the polite arts.'

	CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'From the man bringing his 
bundle of dried flesh for my teaching upwards, I have never 
refused instruction to any one.'
	CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'I do not open up the truth to 
one who is not eager to get knowledge, nor help out any one who is 
not anxious to explain himself. When I have presented one corner 
of a subject to any one, and he cannot from it learn the other three, 
I do not repeat my lesson.'
	CHAP. IX. 1. When the Master was eating by the side of a 
mourner, he never ate to the full.
	2. He did not sing on the same day in which he had been 
weeping.
	CHAP. X. 1. The Master said to Yen Yuan, 'When called to 
office, to undertake its duties; when not so called, to lie retired;-- it 
is only I and you who have attained to this.'
	2. Tsze-lu said, 'If you had the conduct of the armies of a 
great State, whom would you have to act with you?'
	3. The Master said, 'I would not have him to act with me, who 
will unarmed attack a tiger, or cross a river without a boat, dying 
without any regret. My associate must be the man who proceeds to 
action full of solicitude, who is fond of adjusting his plans, and then 
carries them into execution.'
	CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'If the search for riches is sure to 
be successful, though I should become a groom with whip in hand 
to get them, I will do so. As the search may not be successful, I will 
follow after that which I love.'
	CHAP. XII. The things in reference to which the Master 
exercised the greatest caution were -- fasting, war, and sickness.

	CHAP. XIII. When the Master was in Ch'i, he heard the Shao, 
and for three months did not know the taste of flesh. 'I did not 
think'' he said, 'that music could have been made so excellent as 
this.'
	CHAP. XIV. 1. Yen Yu said, 'Is our Master for the ruler of 
Wei?' Tsze-kung said, 'Oh! I will ask him.'
	2. He went in accordingly, and said, 'What sort of men were 
Po-i and Shu-ch'i?' 'They were ancient worthies,' said the Master. 
'Did they have any repinings because of their course?' The Master 
again replied, 'They sought to act virtuously, and they did so; what 
was there for them to repine about?' On this, Tsze-kung went out 
and said, 'Our Master is not for him.'

	CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'With coarse rice to eat, with 
water to drink, and my bended arm for a pillow;-- I have still joy in 
the midst of these things. Riches and honours acquired by 
unrighteousness, are to me as a floating cloud.'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'If some years were added to my 
life, I would give fifty to the study of the Yi, and then I might come 
to be without great faults.'
	CHAP. XVII The Master's frequent themes of discourse were-- 
the Odes, the History, and the maintenance of the Rules of 
Propriety. On all these he frequently discoursed.

	CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Duke of Sheh asked Tsze-lu about 
Confucius, and Tsze-lu did not answer him.
	2. The Master said, 'Why did you not say to him,-- He is 
simply a man, who in his eager pursuit (of knowledge) forgets his 
food, who in the joy of its attainment forgets his sorrows, and who 
does not perceive that old age is coming on?'
	CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'I am not one who was born in 
the possession of knowledge; I am one who is fond of antiquity, and 
earnest in seeking it there.'
	CHAP. XX. The subjects on which the Master did not talk, 
were-- extraordinary things, feats of strength, disorder, and 
spiritual beings.

	CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'When I walk along with two 
others, they may serve me as my teachers. I will select their good 
qualities and follow them, their bad qualities and avoid them.'
	CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Heaven produced the virtue 
that is in me. Hwan T'ui-- what can he do to me?'
	CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'Do you think, my disciples, that 
I have any concealments? I conceal nothing from you. There is 
nothing which I do that is not shown to you, my disciples;-- that is 
my way.'
	CHAP. XXIV. There were four things which the Master 
taught,-- letters, ethics, devotion of soul, and truthfulness.

	CHAP. XXV. 1. The Master said, 'A sage it is not mine to see; 
could I see a man of real talent and virtue, that would satisfy me.'
	2. The Master said, 'A good man it is not mine to see; could I 
see a man possessed of constancy, that would satisfy me.
	3. 'Having not and yet affecting to have, empty and yet 
affecting to be full, straitened and yet affecting to be at ease:-- it is 
difficult with such characteristics to have constancy.'
	CHAP. XXVI. The Master angled,-- but did not use a net. He 
shot,-- but not at birds perching.
	CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'There may be those who act 
without knowing why. I do not do so. Hearing much and selecting 
what is good and following it; seeing much and keeping it in 
memory:-- this is the second style of knowledge.'

	CHAP. XXVIII. 1. It was difficult to talk (profitably and 
reputably) with the people of Hu-hsiang, and a lad of that place 
having had an interview with the Master, the disciples doubted.
	2. The Master said, 'I admit people's approach to me without 
committing myself as to what they may do when they have retired. 
Why must one be so severe? If a man purify himself to wait upon 
me, I receive him so purified, without guaranteeing his past 
conduct.'
	CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'Is virtue a thing remote? I wish 
to be virtuous, and lo! virtue is at hand.'
	CHAP. XXX. 1. The minister of crime of Ch'an asked whether 
the duke Chao knew propriety, and Confucius said, 'He knew 
propriety.'
	2. Confucius having retired, the minister bowed to Wu-ma Ch'i

to come forward, and said, 'I have heard that the superior man is 
not a partisan. May the superior man be a partisan also? The prince 
married a daughter of the house of Wu, of the same surname with 
himself, and called her,-- "The elder Tsze of Wu." If the prince 
knew propriety, who does not know it?'
	3. Wu-ma Ch'i reported these remarks, and the Master said, 'I 
am fortunate! If I have any errors, people are sure to know them.'
	CHAP. XXXI. When the Master was in company with a person 
who was singing, if he sang well, he would make him repeat the 
song, while he accompanied it with his own voice.
	CHAP. XXXII. The Master said, 'In letters I am perhaps equal 
to other men, but the character of the superior man, carrying out in 
his conduct what he professes, is what I have not yet attained to.'

	CHAP. XXXIII. The Master said, 'The sage and the man of 
perfect virtue;-- how dare I rank myself with them? It may simply 
be said of me, that I strive to become such without satiety, and 
teach others without weariness.' Kung-hsi Hwa said, 'This is just 
what we, the disciples, cannot imitate you in.'
	CHAP. XXXIV. The Master being very sick, Tsze-lu asked leave 
to pray for him. He said, 'May such a thing be done?' Tsze-lu 
replied, 'It may. In the Eulogies it is said, "Prayer has been made 
for thee to the spirits of the upper and lower worlds."' The Master 
said, 'My praying has been for a long time.'

	CHAP. XXXV. The Master said, 'Extravagance leads to 
insubordination, and parsimony to meanness. It is better to be 
mean than to be insubordinate.'
	CHAP. XXXVI. The Master said, 'The superior man is satisfied 
and composed; the mean man is always full of distress.'
	CHAP. XXXVII. The Master was mild, and yet dignified; 
majestic, and yet not fierce; respectful, and yet easy.

BOOK VIII. T'AI-PO.

	CHAP. I. The Master said, 'T'ai-po may be said to have 
reached the highest point of virtuous action. Thrice he declined the 
kingdom, and the people in ignorance of his motives could not 
express their approbation of his conduct.'

	CHAP. II. 1. The Master said, 'Respectfulness, without the 
rules of propriety, becomes laborious bustle; carefulness, without 
the rules of propriety, becomes timidity; boldness, without the rules 
of propriety, becomes insubordination; straightforwardness, 
without the rules of propriety, becomes rudeness.
	2. 'When those who are in high stations perform well all their 
duties to their relations, the people are aroused to virtue. When old 
friends are not neglected by them, the people are preserved from 
meanness.'
	CHAP. III. The philosopher Tsang being ill, he called to him 
the disciples of his school, and said, 'Uncover my feet, uncover my 
hands. It is said in the Book of Poetry, "We should be apprehensive 
and cautious, as if on the brink of a deep gulf, as if treading on thin 
ice," and so have I been. Now and hereafter, I know my escape 
from all injury to my person, O ye, my little children.'

	CHAP. IV. 1. The philosopher Tsang being ill, Meng Chang 
went to ask how he was.
	2. Tsang said to him, 'When a bird is about to die, its notes are 
mournful; when a man is about to die, his words are good.
	3. 'There are three principles of conduct which the man of 
high rank should consider specially important:-- that in his 
deportment and manner he keep from violence and heedlessness; 
that in regulating his countenance he keep near to sincerity; and 
that in his words and tones he keep far from lowness and 
impropriety. As to such matters as attending to the sacrificial 
vessels, there are the proper officers for them.'

	CHAP. V. The philosopher Tsang said, 'Gifted with ability, and 
yet putting questions to those who were not so; possessed of much, 
and yet putting questions to those possessed of little; having, as 
though he had not; full, and yet counting himself as empty; 
offended against, and yet entering into no altercation; formerly I 
had a friend who pursued this style of conduct.'
	CHAP. VI. The philosopher Tsang said, 'Suppose that there is 
an individual who can be entrusted with the charge of a young 
orphan prince, and can be commissioned with authority over a state 
of a hundred li, and whom no emergency however great can drive 
from his principles:-- is such a man a superior man? He is a 
superior man indeed.'
	CHAP. VII. 1. The philosopher Tsang said, 'The officer may not 
be without breadth of mind and vigorous endurance. His burden is 
heavy and his course is long.

	2. 'Perfect virtue is the burden which he considers it is his to 
sustain;-- is it not heavy? Only with death does his course stop;-- is 
it not long?
	CHAP. VIII. 1. The Master said, 'It is by the Odes that the 
mind is aroused.
	2. 'It is by the Rules of Propriety that the character is 
established.
	3. 'It is from Music that the finish is received.'
	CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'The people may be made to follow 
a path of action, but they may not be made to understand it.'
	CHAP. X. The Master said, 'The man who is fond of daring and 
is dissatisfied with poverty, will proceed to insubordination. So will 
the man who is not virtuous, when you carry your dislike of him to 
an extreme.'

	CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'Though a man have abilities as 
admirable as those of the Duke of Chau, yet if he be proud and 
niggardly, those other things are really not worth being looked at.'
	CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'It is not easy to find a man who 
has learned for three years without coming to be good.'
	CHAP. XIII. 1. The Master said, 'With sincere faith he unites 
the love of learning; holding firm to death, he is perfecting the 
excellence of his course.
	2. 'Such an one will not enter a tottering State, nor dwell in a 
disorganized one. When right principles of government prevail in 
the kingdom, he will show himself; when they are prostrated, he 
will keep concealed.
	3. 'When a country is well-governed, poverty and a mean 
condition are things to be ashamed of. When a country is ill-
governed, riches and honour are things to be ashamed of.'

	CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'He who is not in any particular 
office, has nothing to do with plans for the administration of its 
duties.'
	CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'When the music master Chih first 
entered on his office, the finish of the Kwan Tsu was magnificent;-- 
how it filled the ears!'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'Ardent and yet not upright; 
stupid and yet not attentive; simple and yet not sincere:-- such 
persons I do not understand.'
	CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Learn as if you could not reach 
your object, and were always fearing also lest you should lose it.'
	CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'How majestic was the manner 
in which Shun and Yu held possession of the empire, as if it were 
nothing to them!'

	CHAP. XIX. 1. The Master said, 'Great indeed was Yao as a 
sovereign! How majestic was he! It is only Heaven that is grand, 
and only Yao corresponded to it. How vast was his virtue! The 
people could find no name for it.
	2. 'How majestic was he in the works which he accomplished! 
How glorious in the elegant regulations which he instituted!'
	CHAP. XX. 1. Shun had five ministers, and the empire was 
well-governed.
	2. King Wu said, 'I have ten able ministers.'
	3. Confucius said, 'Is not the saying that talents are difficult to 
find, true? Only when the dynasties of T'ang and Yu met, were they 
more abundant than in this of Chau, yet there was a woman among 
them. The able ministers were no more than nine men.

	4. 'King Wan possessed two of the three parts of the empire, 
and with those he served the dynasty of Yin. The virtue of the 
house of Chau may be said to have reached the highest point 
indeed.'
	CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'I can find no flaw in the 
character of Yu. He used himself coarse food and drink, but 
displayed the utmost filial piety towards the spirits. His ordinary 
garments were poor, but he displayed the utmost elegance in his 
sacrificial cap and apron. He lived in a low mean house, but 
expended all his strength on the ditches and water-channels. I can 
find nothing like a flaw in Yu.'

BOOK IX. TSZE HAN.

	CHAP. I. The subjects of which the Master seldom spoke 
were-- profitableness, and also the appointments of Heaven, and 
perfect virtue.
	CHAP. II. 1. A man of the village of Ta-hsiang said, 'Great 
indeed is the philosopher K'ung! His learning is extensive, and yet 
he does not render his name famous by any particular thing.'
	2. The Master heard the observation, and said to his disciples, 
'What shall I practise? Shall I practise charioteering, or shall I 
practise archery? I will practise charioteering.'

	CHAP. III. 1. The Master said, 'The linen cap is that prescribed 
by the rules of ceremony, but now a silk one is worn. It is 
economical, and I follow the common practice.
	2. 'The rules of ceremony prescribe the bowing below the hall, 
but now the practice is to bow only after ascending it. That is 
arrogant. I continue to bow below the hall, though I oppose the 
common practice.'
	CHAP. IV. There were four things from which the Master was 
entirely free. He had no foregone conclusions, no arbitrary 
predeterminations, no obstinacy, and no egoism.
	CHAP. V. 1. The Master was put in fear in K'wang.
	2. He said, 'After the death of King Wan, was not the cause of 
truth lodged here in me?

	3. 'If Heaven had wished to let this cause of truth perish, then 
I, a future mortal, should not have got such a relation to that cause. 
While Heaven does not let the cause of truth perish, what can the 
people of K'wang do to me?'
	CHAP. VI. 1. A high officer asked Tsze-kung, saying, 'May we 
not say that your Master is a sage? How various is his ability!'
	2. Tsze-kung said, 'Certainly Heaven has endowed him 
unlimitedly. He is about a sage. And, moreover, his ability is 
various.'
	3. The Master heard of the conversation and said, 'Does the 
high officer know me? When I was young, my condition was low, 
and therefore I acquired my ability in many things, but they were 
mean matters. Must the superior man have such variety of ability? 
He does not need variety of ability.'
	4. Lao said, 'The Master said, "Having no official employment, 
I acquired many arts."'

	CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'Am I indeed possessed of 
knowledge? I am not knowing. But if a mean person, who appears 
quite empty-like, ask anything of me, I set it forth from one end to 
the other, and exhaust it.'
	CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'The FANG bird does not come; 
the river sends forth no map:-- it is all over with me!'
	CHAP. IX. When the Master saw a person in a mourning dress, 
or any one with the cap and upper and lower garments of full 
dress, or a blind person, on observing them approaching, though 
they were younger than himself, he would rise up, and if he had to 
pass by them, he would do so hastily.

	CHAP. X. 1. Yen Yuan, in admiration of the Master's doctrines, 
sighed and said, 'I looked up to them, and they seemed to become 
more high; I tried to penetrate them, and they seemed to become 
more firm; I looked at them before me, and suddenly they seemed 
to be behind.
	2. 'The Master, by orderly method, skilfully leads men on. He 
enlarged my mind with learning, and taught me the restraints of 
propriety.
	3. 'When I wish to give over the study of his doctrines, I 
cannot do so, and having exerted all my ability, there seems 
something to stand right up before me; but though I wish to follow 
and lay hold of it, I really find no way to do so.'
	CHAP. XI. 1. The Master being very ill, Tsze-lu wished the 
disciples to act as ministers to him.
	2. During a remission of his illness, he said, 'Long has the 
conduct of Yu been deceitful! By pretending to have ministers when 
I have them not, whom should I impose upon? Should I impose 
upon Heaven?

	3. 'Moreover, than that I should die in the hands of ministers, 
is it not better that I should die in the hands of you, my disciples? 
And though I may not get a great burial, shall I die upon the road?'
	CHAP. XII. Tsze-kung said, 'There is a beautiful gem here. 
Should I lay it up in a case and keep it? or should I seek for a good 
price and sell it?' The Master said, 'Sell it! Sell it! But I would wait 
for one to offer the price.'
	CHAP. XIII. 1. The Master was wishing to go and live among 
the nine wild tribes of the east.
	2. Some one said, 'They are rude. How can you do such a 
thing?' The Master said, 'If a superior man dwelt among them, what 
rudeness would there be?'
	CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'I returned from Wei to Lu, and 
then the music was reformed, and the pieces in the Royal songs and 
Praise songs all found their proper places.'

	CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Abroad, to serve the high 
ministers and nobles; at home, to serve one's father and elder 
brothers; in all duties to the dead, not to dare not to exert one's self; 
and not to be overcome of wine:-- which one of these things do I 
attain to?'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master standing by a stream, said, 'It passes 
on just like this, not ceasing day or night!'
	CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'I have not seen one who loves 
virtue as he loves beauty.'
	CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'The prosecution of learning 
may be compared to what may happen in raising a mound. If there 
want but one basket of earth to complete the work, and I stop, the

stopping is my own work. It may be compared to throwing down 
the earth on the level ground. Though but one basketful is thrown 
at a time, the advancing with it is my own going forward.'
	CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'Never flagging when I set forth 
anything to him;-- ah! that is Hui.'
	CHAP. XX. The Master said of Yen Yuan, 'Alas! I saw his 
constant advance. I never saw him stop in his progress.'
	CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'There are cases in which the 
blade springs, but the plant does not go on to flower! There are 
cases where it flowers, but no fruit is subsequently produced!'
	CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'A youth is to be regarded with 
respect. How do we know that his future will not be equal to our 
present? If he reach the age of forty or fifty, and has not made 
himself heard of, then indeed he will not be worth being regarded 
with respect.'

	CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Can men refuse to assent to the 
words of strict admonition? But it is reforming the conduct because 
of them which is valuable. Can men refuse to be pleased with words 
of gentle advice? But it is unfolding their aim which is valuable. If a 
man be pleased with these words, but does not unfold their aim, 
and assents to those, but does not reform his conduct, I can really 
do nothing with him.'
	CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'Hold faithfulness and sincerity 
as first principles. Have no friends not equal to yourself. When you 
have faults, do not fear to abandon them.'
	CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'The commander of the forces of 
a large state may be carried off, but the will of even a common man 
cannot be taken from him.'

	CHAP. XXVI. 1. The Master said, 'Dressed himself in a tattered 
robe quilted with hemp, yet standing by the side of men dressed in 
furs, and not ashamed;-- ah! it is Yu who is equal to this!
	2. '"He dislikes none, he covets nothing;-- what can he do but 
what is good!"'
	3. Tsze-lu kept continually repeating these words of the ode, 
when the Master said, 'Those things are by no means sufficient to 
constitute (perfect) excellence.'
	CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'When the year becomes cold, 
then we know how the pine and the cypress are the last to lose 
their leaves.'
	CHAP. XXVIII. The Master said, 'The wise are free from 
perplexities; the virtuous from anxiety; and the bold from fear.'
	CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'There are some with whom we 
may study in common, but we shall find them unable to go along

with us to principles. Perhaps we may go on with them to 
principles, but we shall find them unable to get established in those 
along with us. Or if we may get so established along with them, we 
shall find them unable to weigh occurring events along with us.'
	CHAP. XXX. 1. How the flowers of the aspen-plum flutter and 
turn! Do I not think of you? But your house is distant.
	2. The Master said, 'It is the want of thought about it. How is 
it distant?'

BOOK X. HEANG TANG.

	CHAP. I. 1. Confucius, in his village, looked simple and sincere, 
and as if he were not able to speak.
	2. When he was in the prince's ancestorial temple, or in the 
court, he spoke minutely on every point, but cautiously.
	CHAP II. 1. When he was waiting at court, in speaking with 
the great officers of the lower grade, he spake freely, but in a 
straightforward manner; in speaking with those of the higher grade, 
he did so blandly, but precisely.
	2. When the ruler was present, his manner displayed 
respectful uneasiness; it was grave, but self-possessed.

	CHAP. III. 1. When the prince called him to employ him in the 
reception of a visitor, his countenance appeared to change, and his 
legs to move forward with difficulty.
	2. He inclined himself to the other officers among whom he 
stood, moving his left or right arm, as their position required, but 
keeping the skirts of his robe before and behind evenly adjusted.
	3. He hastened forward, with his arms like the wings of a 
bird.
	4. When the guest had retired, he would report to the prince, 
'The visitor is not turning round any more.'
	CHAP. IV. 1. When he entered the palace gate, he seemed to 
bend his body, as if it were not sufficient to admit him.
	2. When he was standing, he did not occupy the middle of the 
gate-way; when he passed in or out, he did not tread upon the 
threshold.
	3. When he was passing the vacant place of the prince, his 
countenance appeared to change, and his legs to bend under him, 
and his words came as if he hardly had breath to utter them.
	4. He ascended the reception hall, holding up his robe with 
both his hands, and his body bent; holding in his breath also, as if 
he dared not breathe.
	5. When he came out from the audience, as soon as he had 
descended one step, he began to relax his countenance, and had a 
satisfied look. When he had got to the bottom of the steps, he 
advanced rapidly to his place, with his arms like wings, and on 
occupying it, his manner still showed respectful uneasiness.
	CHAP. V. 1. When he was carrying the scepter of his ruler, he 
seemed to bend his body, as if he were not able to bear its weight. 
He did not hold it higher than the position of the hands in making

a bow, nor lower than their position in giving anything to another. 
His countenance seemed to change, and look apprehensive, and he 
dragged his feet along as if they were held by something to the 
ground.
	2. In presenting the presen