ts with which he was charged, he 
wore a placid appearance.
	3. At his private audience, he looked highly pleased.
	CHAP. VI. 1. The superior man did not use a deep purple, or a 
puce colour, in the ornaments of his dress.
	2. Even in his undress, he did not wear anything of a red or 
reddish colour.
	3. In warm weather, he had a single garment either of coarse 
or fine texture, but he wore it displayed over an inner garment.
	4. Over lamb's fur he wore a garment of black; over fawn's fur 
one of white; and over fox's fur one of yellow.

	5. The fur robe of his undress was long, with the right sleeve 
short.
	6. He required his sleeping dress to be half as long again as 
his body.
	7. When staying at home, he used thick furs of the fox or the 
badger.
	8. When he put off mourning, he wore all the appendages of 
the girdle.
	9. His under-garment, except when it was required to be of 
the curtain shape, was made of silk cut narrow above and wide 
below.
	10. He did not wear lamb's fur or a black cap, on a visit of 
condolence.
	11. On the first day of the month he put on his court robes, 
and presented himself at court.

	CHAP. VII. 1. When fasting, he thought it necessary to have 
his clothes brightly clean and made of linen cloth.
	2. When fasting, he thought it necessary to change his food, 
and also to change the place where he commonly sat in the 
apartment.
	CHAP. VIII. 1. He did not dislike to have his rice finely 
cleaned, nor to have his minced meat cut quite small.
	2. He did not eat rice which had been injured by heat or damp 
and turned sour, nor fish or flesh which was gone. He did not eat 
what was discoloured, or what was of a bad flavour, nor anything 
which was ill-cooked, or was not in season.
	3. He did not eat meat which was not cut properly, nor what 
was served without its proper sauce.
	4. Though there might be a large quantity of meat, he would 
not allow what he took to exceed the due proportion for the rice. It 
was only in wine that he laid down no limit for himself, but he did 
not allow himself to be confused by it.
	5. He did not partake of wine and dried meat bought in the 
market.
	6. He was never without ginger when he ate.
	7. He did not eat much.
	8. When he had been assisting at the prince's sacrifice, he did 
not keep the flesh which he received overnight. The flesh of his 
family sacrifice he did not keep over three days. If kept over three 
days, people could not eat it.
	9. When eating, he did not converse. When in bed, he did not 
speak.
	10. Although his food might be coarse rice and vegetable 
soup, he would offer a little of it in sacrifice with a grave, respectful 
air.
	CHAP. IX. If his mat was not straight, he did not sit on it.
	CHAP. X. 1. When the villagers were drinking together, on 
those who carried staffs going out, he went out immediately after.
	2. When the villagers were going through their ceremonies to 
drive away pestilential influences, he put on his court robes and 
stood on the eastern steps.

	CHAP. XI. 1. When he was sending complimentary inquiries to 
any one in another State, he bowed twice as he escorted the 
messenger away.
	2. Chi K'ang having sent him a present of physic, he bowed 
and received it, saying, 'I do not know it. I dare not taste it.'
	CHAP. XII. The stable being burned down, when he was at 
court, on his return he said, 'Has any man been hurt?' He did not 
ask about the horses.
	CHAP. XIII. 1. When the prince sent him a gift of cooked meat, 
he would adjust his mat, first taste it, and then give it away to 
others. When the prince sent him a gift of undressed meat, he 
would have it cooked, and offer it to the spirits of his ancestors. 
When the prince sent him a gift of a living animal, he would keep it 
alive.
	2. When he was in attendance on the prince and joining in the 
entertainment, the prince only sacrificed. He first tasted everything.

	3. When he was ill and the prince came to visit him, he had 
his head to the east, made his court robes be spread over him, and 
drew his girdle across them.
	4. When the prince's order called him, without waiting for his 
carriage to be yoked, he went at once.
	CHAP. XIV. When he entered the ancestral temple of the 
State, he asked about everything.
	CHAP. XV. 1. When any of his friends died, if he had no 
relations who could be depended on for the necessary offices, he 
would say, 'I will bury him.'
	2. When a friend sent him a present, though it might be a 
carriage and horses, he did not bow.
	3. The only present for which he bowed was that of the flesh 
of sacrifice.
	CHAP. XVI. 1. In bed, he did not lie like a corpse. At home, he 
did not put on any formal deportment.
	2. When he saw any one in a mourning dress, though it might 
be an acquaintance, he would change countenance; when he saw 
any one wearing the cap of full dress, or a blind person, though he 
might be in his undress, he would salute them in a ceremonious 
manner.
	3. To any person in mourning he bowed forward to the 
crossbar of his carriage; he bowed in the same way to any one 
bearing the tables of population.
	4. When he was at an entertainment where there was an 
abundance of provisions set before him, he would change 
countenance and rise up.
	5. On a sudden clap of thunder, or a violent wind, he would 
change countenance.
	CHAP. XVII. 1. When he was about to mount his carriage, he 
would stand straight, holding the cord.
	2. When he was in the carriage, he did not turn his head quite 
round, he did not talk hastily, he did not point with his hands.
	CHAP. XVIII. 1. Seeing the countenance, it instantly rises. It 
flies round, and by and by settles.
	2. The Master said, 'There is the hen-pheasant on the hill 
bridge. At its season! At its season!' Tsze-lu made a motion to it. 
Thrice it smelt him and then rose.

BOOK XI. HSIEN TSIN.

	CHAP. I. 1. The Master said, 'The men of former times, in the 
matters of ceremonies and music were rustics, it is said, while the 
men of these latter times, in ceremonies and music, are 
accomplished gentlemen.
	2. 'If I have occasion to use those things, I follow the men of 
former times.'
	CHAP. II. 1. The Master said, 'Of those who were with me in 
Ch'an and Ts'ai, there are none to be found to enter my door.'
	2. Distinguished for their virtuous principles and practice, 
there were Yen Yuan, Min Tsze-ch'ien, Zan Po-niu, and Chung-kung; 
for their ability in speech, Tsai Wo and Tsze-kung; for their 
adminis-

trative talents, Zan Yu and Chi Lu; for their literary acquirements, 
Tsze-yu and Tsze-hsia.
	CHAP. III. The Master said, 'Hui gives me no assistance. There 
is nothing that I say in which he does not delight.'
	CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'Filial indeed is Min Tsze-ch'ien! 
Other people say nothing of him different from the report of his 
parents and brothers.'
	CHAP. V. Nan Yung was frequently repeating the lines about a 
white scepter stone. Confucius gave him the daughter of his elder 
brother to wife.

	CHAP. VI. Chi K'ang asked which of the disciples loved to 
learn. Confucius replied to him, 'There was Yen Hui; he loved to 
learn. Unfortunately his appointed time was short, and he died. 
Now there is no one who loves to learn, as he did.'
	CHAP. VII. 1. When Yen Yuan died, Yen Lu begged the 
carriage of the Master to sell and get an outer shell for his son's 
coffin.
	2. The Master said, 'Every one calls his son his son, whether 
he has talents or has not talents. There was Li; when he died, he 
had a coffin but no outer shell. I would not walk on foot to get a 
shell for him, because, having followed in the rear of the great 
officers, it was not proper that I should walk on foot.'
	CHAP. VIII. When Yen Yuan died, the Master said, 'Alas! 
Heaven is destroying me! Heaven is destroying me!'

	CHAP. IX. 1. When Yen Yuan died, the Master bewailed him 
exceedingly, and the disciples who were with him said, 'Master, 
your grief is excessive?'
	2. 'Is it excessive?' said he.
	3. 'If I am not to mourn bitterly for this man, for whom 
should I mourn?'
	CHAP. X. 1. When Yen Yuan died, the disciples wished to give 
him a great funeral, and the Master said, 'You may not do so.'
	2. The disciples did bury him in great style.
	3. The Master said, 'Hui behaved towards me as his father. I 
have not been able to treat him as my son. The fault is not mine; it 
belongs to you, O disciples.'
	CHAP. XI. Chi Lu asked about serving the spirits of the dead. 
The Master said, 'While you are not able to serve men, how can you 
serve their spirits?' Chi Lu added, 'I venture to ask about

death?' He was answered, 'While you do not know life, how can you 
know about death?'
	CHAP. XII. 1. The disciple Min was standing by his side, 
looking bland and precise; Tsze-lu, looking bold and soldierly; Zan 
Yu and Tsze-kung, with a free and straightforward manner. The 
Master was pleased.
	2. He said, 'Yu, there!-- he will not die a natural death.'
	CHAP. XIII. 1. Some parties in Lu were going to take down 
and rebuild the Long Treasury.
	2. Min Tsze-ch'ien said, 'Suppose it were to be repaired after 
its old style;-- why must it be altered and made anew?'
	3. The Master said, 'This man seldom speaks; when he does, 
he is sure to hit the point.'

	CHAP. XIV. 1. The Master said, 'What has the lute of Yu to do 
in my door?'
	2. The other disciples began not to respect Tsze-lu. The 
Master said, 'Yu has ascended to the hall, though he has not yet 
passed into the inner apartments.'
	CHAP. XV. 1. Tsze-kung asked which of the two, Shih or 
Shang, was the superior. The Master said, 'Shih goes beyond the due 
mean, and Shang does not come up to it.'
	2. 'Then,' said Tsze-kung, 'the superiority is with Shih, I 
suppose.'
	3. The Master said, 'To go beyond is as wrong as to fall short.'
	CHAP. XVI. 1. The head of the Chi family was richer than the 
duke of Chau had been, and yet Ch'iu collected his imposts for him, 
and increased his wealth.

	2. The Master said, 'He is no disciple of mine. My little 
children, beat the drum and assail him.'
	CHAP. XVII. 1. Ch'ai is simple.
	2. Shan is dull.
	3. Shih is specious.
	4. Yu is coarse.
	CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Master said, 'There is Hui! He has nearly 
attained to perfect virtue. He is often in want.
	2. 'Ts'ze does not acquiesce in the appointments of Heaven, 
and his goods are increased by him. Yet his judgments are often 
correct.'
	CHAP. XIX. Tsze-chang asked what were the characteristics of

the GOOD man. The Master said, 'He does not tread in the footsteps 
of others, but moreover, he does not enter the chamber of the sage.'
	CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'If, because a man's discourse 
appears solid and sincere, we allow him to be a good man, is he 
really a superior man? or is his gravity only in appearance?'
	CHAP. XXI. Tsze-lu asked whether he should immediately 
carry into practice what he heard. The Master said, 'There are your 
father and elder brothers to be consulted;-- why should you act on 
that principle of immediately carrying into practice what you hear?' 
Zan Yu asked the same, whether he should immediately carry into 
practice what he heard, and the Master answered, 'Immediately 
carry into practice what you hear.' Kung-hsi Hwa said, 'Yu asked 
whether he should carry immediately into practice what he heard, 
and you said, "There are your father and elder brothers to be 
consulted." Ch'iu asked whether he should immediately carry into 
practice what he heard, and you said, "Carry it immediately into 
practice." I, Ch'ih, am perplexed, and venture to ask you for an 
explanation.' The Master said, 'Ch'iu is retiring and slow; therefore,

I urged him forward. Yu has more than his own share of energy; 
therefore I kept him back.'
	CHAP. XXII. The Master was put in fear in K'wang and Yen 
Yuan fell behind. The Master, on his rejoining him, said, 'I thought 
you had died.' Hui replied, 'While you were alive, how should I 
presume to die?'
	CHAP. XXIII. 1. Chi Tsze-zan asked whether Chung Yu and Zan 
Ch'iu could be called great ministers.
	2. The Master said, 'I thought you would ask about some 
extraordinary individuals, and you only ask about Yu and Ch'iu!
	3. 'What is called a great minister, is one who serves his 
prince according to what is right, and when he finds he cannot do 
so, retires.

	4. 'Now, as to Yu and Ch'iu, they may be called ordinary 
ministers.'
	5. Tsze-zan said, 'Then they will always follow their chief;-- 
will they?'
	6. The Master said, 'In an act of parricide or regicide, they 
would not follow him.'
	CHAP. XXIV. 1. Tsze-lu got Tsze-kao appointed governor of Pi.
	2. The Master said, 'You are injuring a man's son.'
	3. Tsze-lu said, 'There are (there) common people and officers; 
there are the altars of the spirits of the land and grain. Why must 
one read books before he can be considered to have learned?'
	4. The Master said, 'It is on this account that I hate your 
glib-tongued people.'
	CHAP. XXV. 1. Tsze-lu, Tsang Hsi, Zan Yu, and Kung-hsi Hwa 
were sitting by the Master.
	2. He said to them, 'Though I am a day or so older than you, 
do not think of that.

	3. 'From day to day you are saying, "We are not known." If 
some ruler were to know you, what would you like to do?'
	4. Tsze-lu hastily and lightly replied, 'Suppose the case of a 
State of ten thousand chariots; let it be straitened between other 
large States; let it be suffering from invading armies; and to this let 
there be added a famine in corn and in all vegetables:-- if I were 
intrusted with the government of it, in three years' time I could 
make the people to be bold, and to recognise the rules of righteous 
conduct.' The Master smiled at him.
	5. Turning to Yen Yu, he said, 'Ch'iu, what are your wishes?' 
Ch'iu replied, 'Suppose a state of sixty or seventy li square, or one 
of fifty or sixty, and let me have the government of it;-- in three 
years' time, I could make plenty to abound among the people. As to 
teaching them the principles of propriety, and music, I must wait 
for the rise of a superior man to do that.'

	6. 'What are your wishes, Ch'ih,' said the Master next to Kung-
hsi Hwa. Ch'ih replied, 'I do not say that my ability extends to these 
things, but I should wish to learn them. At the services of the 
ancestral temple, and at the audiences of the princes with the 
sovereign, I should like, dressed in the dark square-made robe and 
the black linen cap, to act as a small assistant.'
	7. Last of all, the Master asked Tsang Hsi, 'Tien, what are your 
wishes?' Tien, pausing as he was playing on his lute, while it was 
yet twanging, laid the instrument aside, and rose. 'My wishes,' he 
said, 'are different from the cherished purposes of these three 
gentlemen.' 'What harm is there in that?' said the Master; 'do you 
also, as well as they, speak out your wishes.' Tien then said, 'In this, 
the last month of spring, with the dress of the season all complete, 
along with five or six young men who have assumed the cap, and 
six or seven boys, I would wash in the I, enjoy the breeze among 
the rain altars, and return home singing.' The Master heaved a sigh 
and said, 'I give my approval to Tien.'

	8. The three others having gone out, Tsang Hsi remained 
behind, and said, 'What do you think of the words of these three 
friends?' The Master replied, 'They simply told each one his wishes.'
	9. Hsi pursued, 'Master, why did you smile at Yu?'
	10. He was answered, 'The management of a State demands 
the rules of propriety. His words were not humble; therefore I 
smiled at him.'
	11. Hsi again said, 'But was it not a State which Ch'iu proposed 
for himself?' The reply was, 'Yes; did you ever see a territory of 
sixty or seventy li or one of fifty or sixty, which was not a State?'
	12. Once more, Hsi inquired, 'And was it not a State which 
Ch'ih proposed for himself?' The Master again replied, 'Yes; who but 
princes have to do with ancestral temples, and with audiences but 
the sovereign? If Ch'ih were to be a small assistant in these 
services, who could be a great one?

BOOK XII. YEN YUAN.

	CHAP. I. 1. Yen Yuan asked about perfect virtue. The Master 
said, 'To subdue one's self and return to propriety, is perfect virtue. 
If a man can for one day subdue himself and return to propriety, 
all under heaven will ascribe perfect virtue to him. Is the practice 
of perfect virtue from a man himself, or is it from others?'
	2. Yen Yuan said, 'I beg to ask the steps of that process.' The 
Master replied, 'Look not at what is contrary to propriety; listen not 
to what is contrary to propriety; speak not what is contrary to 
propriety; make no movement which is contrary to propriety.' Yen 
Yuan then said, 'Though I am deficient in intelligence and vigour, I 
will make it my business to practise this lesson.'

	CHAP. II. Chung-kung asked about perfect virtue. The Master 
said, 'It is, when you go abroad, to behave to every one as if you 
were receiving a great guest; to employ the people as if you were 
assisting at a great sacrifice; not to do to others as you would not 
wish done to yourself; to have no murmuring against you in the 
country, and none in the family.' Chung-kung said, 'Though I am 
deficient in intelligence and vigour, I will make it my business to 
practise this lesson.'
	CHAP. III. 1. Sze-ma Niu asked about perfect virtue.
	2. The Master said, 'The man of perfect virtue is cautious and 
slow in his speech.'

	3. 'Cautious and slow in his speech!' said Niu;-- 'is this what is 
meant by perfect virtue?' The Master said, 'When a man feels the 
difficulty of doing, can he be other than cautious and slow in 
speaking?'
	CHAP. IV. 1. Sze-ma Niu asked about the superior man. The 
Master said, 'The superior man has neither anxiety nor fear.'
	2. 'Being without anxiety or fear!' said Nui;-- 'does this 
constitute what we call the superior man?'
	3. The Master said, 'When internal examination discovers 
nothing wrong, what is there to be anxious about, what is there to 
fear?'
	CHAP. V. 1. Sze-ma Niu, full of anxiety, said, 'Other men all 
have their brothers, I only have not.'
	2. Tsze-hsia said to him, 'There is the following saying which I 
have heard:--

	3. '"Death and life have their determined appointment; riches 
and honours depend upon Heaven."
	4. 'Let the superior man never fail reverentially to order his 
own conduct, and let him be respectful to others and observant of 
propriety:-- then all within the four seas will be his brothers. What 
has the superior man to do with being distressed because he has no 
brothers?'
	CHAP. VI. Tsze-chang asked what constituted intelligence. The 
Master said, 'He with whom neither slander that gradually soaks 
into the mind, nor statements that startle like a wound in the flesh, 
are successful, may be called intelligent indeed. Yea, he with whom 
neither soaking slander, nor startling statements, are successful, 
may be called farseeing.'

	CHAP. VII. 1. Tsze-kung asked about government. The Master 
said, 'The requisites of government are that there be sufficiency of 
food, sufficiency of military equipment, and the confidence of the 
people in their ruler.'
	2. Tsze-kung said, 'If it cannot be helped, and one of these 
must be dispensed with, which of the three should be foregone 
first?' 'The military equipment,' said the Master.
	3. Tsze-kung again asked, 'If it cannot be helped, and one of 
the remaining two must be dispensed with, which of them should 
be foregone?' The Master answered, 'Part with the food. From of 
old, death has been the lot of all men; but if the people have no 
faith in their rulers, there is no standing for the state.'
	CHAP. VIII. 1. Chi Tsze-ch'ang said, 'In a superior man it is 
only the substantial qualities which are wanted;-- why should we 
seek for ornamental accomplishments?'

	2. Tsze-kung said, 'Alas! Your words, sir, show you to be a 
superior man, but four horses cannot overtake the tongue.
	3. Ornament is as substance; substance is as ornament. The 
hide of a tiger or a leopard stripped of its hair, is like the hide of a 
dog or a goat stripped of its hair.'
	CHAP. IX. 1. The Duke Ai inquired of Yu Zo, saying, 'The year 
is one of scarcity, and the returns for expenditure are not 
sufficient;-- what is to be done?'
	2. Yu Zo replied to him, 'Why not simply tithe the people?'
	3. 'With two tenths, said the duke, 'I find it not enough;-- how 
could I do with that system of one tenth?'
	4. Yu Zo answered, 'If the people have plenty, their prince will 
not be left to want alone. If the people are in want, their prince 
cannot enjoy plenty alone.'

	CHAP. X. 1. Tsze-chang having asked how virtue was to be 
exalted, and delusions to be discovered, the Master said, 'Hold 
faithfulness and sincerity as first principles, and be moving 
continually to what is right;-- this is the way to exalt one's virtue.
	2. 'You love a man and wish him to live; you hate him and 
wish him to die. Having wished him to live, you also wish him to 
die. This is a case of delusion.
	3. '"It may not be on account of her being rich, yet you come 
to make a difference."'
	CHAP. XI. 1. The Duke Ching, of Ch'i, asked Confucius about 
government.
	2. Confucius replied, 'There is government, when the prince is 
prince, and the minister is minister; when the father is father, and 
the son is son.'
	3. 'Good!' said the duke; 'if, indeed; the prince be not prince, 
the minister not minister, the father not father, and the son not son, 
although I have my revenue, can I enjoy it?'

	CHAP. XII. 1. The Master said, 'Ah! it is Yu, who could with 
half a word settle litigations!'
	2. Tsze-lu never slept over a promise.
	CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'In hearing litigations, I am like 
any other body. What is necessary, however, is to cause the people 
to have no litigations.'
	CHAP. XIV. Tsze-chang asked about government. The Master 
said, 'The art of governing is to keep its affairs before the mind 
without weariness, and to practise them with undeviating 
consistency.'
	CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'By extensively studying all 
learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of the rules of 
propriety, one may thus likewise not err from what is right.'

	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The superior man seeks to 
perfect the admirable qualities of men, and does not seek to perfect 
their bad qualities. The mean man does the opposite of this.'
	CHAP. XVII. Chi K'ang asked Confucius about government. 
Confucius replied, 'To govern means to rectify. If you lead on the 
people with correctness, who will dare not to be correct?'
	CHAP. XVIII. Chi K'ang, distressed about the number of 
thieves in the state, inquired of Confucius how to do away with 
them. Confucius said, 'If you, sir, were not covetous, although you 
should reward them to do it, they would not steal.'
	CHAP. XIX. Chi K'ang asked Confucius about government, 
saying, 'What do you say to killing the unprincipled for the good of 
the principled?' Confucius replied, 'Sir, in carrying on your 
government, why should you use killing at all? Let your evinced 
desires be for what is good, and the people will be good. The 
relation

between superiors and inferiors, is like that between the wind and 
the grass. The grass must bend, when the wind blows across it.'
	CHAP. XX. 1. Tsze-chang asked, 'What must the officer be, who 
may be said to be distinguished?'
	2. The Master said, 'What is it you call being distinguished?'
	3. Tsze-chang replied, 'It is to be heard of through the State, 
to be heard of throughout his clan.'
	4. The Master said, 'That is notoriety, not distinction.
	5. 'Now the man of distinction is solid and straightforward, 
and loves righteousness. He examines people's words, and looks at 
their countenances. He is anxious to humble himself to others. Such 
a man will be distinguished in the country; he will be distinguished 
in his clan.
	6. 'As to the man of notoriety, he assumes the appearance of

virtue, but his actions are opposed to it, and he rests in this 
character without any doubts about himself. Such a man will be 
heard of in the country; he will be heard of in the clan.'
	CHAP. XXI. 1. Fan Ch'ih rambling with the Master under the 
trees about the rain altars, said, 'I venture to ask how to exalt 
virtue, to correct cherished evil, and to discover delusions.'
	2. The Master said, 'Truly a good question!
	3. 'If doing what is to be done be made the first business, and 
success a secondary consideration;-- is not this the way to exalt 
virtue? To assail one's own wickedness and not assail that of 
others;-- is not this the way to correct cherished evil? For a 
morning's anger to disregard one's own life, and involve that of his 
parents;-- is not this a case of delusion?'
	CHAP. XXII. 1. Fan Ch'ih asked about benevolence. The Master 
said, 'It is to love all men.' He asked about knowledge. The Master 
said, 'It is to know all men.'

	2. Fan Ch'ih did not immediately understand these answers.
	3. The Master said, 'Employ the upright and put aside all the 
crooked;-- in this way the crooked can be made to be upright.'
	4. Fan Ch'ih retired, and, seeing Tsze-hsia, he said to him, 'A 
Little while ago, I had an interview with our Master, and asked him 
about knowledge. He said, 'Employ the upright, and put aside all the 
crooked;-- in this way, the crooked will be made to be upright.' 
What did he mean?'
	5. Tsze-hsia said, 'Truly rich is his saying!
	6. 'Shun, being in possession of the kingdom, selected from 
among all the people, and employed Kao-yao, on which all who 
were devoid of virtue disappeared. T'ang, being in possession of the 
kingdom, selected from among all the people, and employed I Yin, 
and all who were devoid of virtue disappeared.'
	CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-kung asked about friendship. The Master 
said, 'Faithfully admonish your friend, and skillfully lead him on. If 
you find him impracticable, stop. Do not disgrace yourself.'

	CHAP. XXIV. The philosopher Tsang said, 'The superior man 
on grounds of culture meets with his friends, and by their 
friendship helps his virtue.'

BOOK XIII. TSZE-LU.

	CHAP. I. 1. Tsze-lu asked about government. The Master said, 
'Go before the people with your example, and be laborious in their 
affairs.'
	2. He requested further instruction, and was answered, 'Be 
not weary (in these things).'
	CHAP. II. 1. Chung-kung, being chief minister to the Head of 
the Chi family, asked about government. The Master said, 'Employ

first the services of your various officers, pardon small faults, and 
raise to office men of virtue and talents.'
	2. Chung-kung said, 'How shall I know the men of virtue and 
talent, so that I may raise them to office?' He was answered, 'Raise 
to office those whom you know. As to those whom you do not know, 
will others neglect them?'
	CHAP. III. 1. Tsze-lu said, 'The ruler of Wei has been waiting 
for you, in order with you to administer the government. What will 
you consider the first thing to be done?'
	2. The Master replied, 'What is necessary is to rectify names.'
	3. 'So, indeed!' said Tsze-lu. 'You are wide of the mark! Why 
must there be such rectification?'
	4. The Master said, 'How uncultivated you are, Yu! A superior 
man, in regard to what he does not know, shows a cautious reserve.
	5. 'If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with

the truth of things. If language be not in accordance with the truth 
of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.
	6. 'When affairs cannot be carried on to success, proprieties 
and music will not flourish. When proprieties and music do not 
flourish, punishments will not be properly awarded. When 
punishments are not properly awarded, the people do not know 
how to move hand or foot.
	7. 'Therefore a superior man considers it necessary that the 
names he uses may be spoken appropriately, and also that what he 
speaks may be carried out appropriately. What the superior man 
requires, is just that in his words there may be nothing incorrect.'
	CHAP. IV. 1. Fan Ch'ih requested to be taught husbandry. The 
Master said, 'I am not so good for that as an old husbandman.' He

requested also to be taught gardening, and was answered, 'I am not 
so good for that as an old gardener.'
	2. Fan Ch'ih having gone out, the Master said, 'A small man, 
indeed, is Fan Hsu!
	3. If a superior love propriety, the people will not dare not to 
be reverent. If he love righteousness, the people will not dare not 
to submit to his example. If he love good faith, the people will not 
dare not to be sincere. Now, when these things obtain, the people 
from all quarters will come to him, bearing their children on their 
backs;-- what need has he of a knowledge of husbandry?'
	CHAP. V. The Master said, 'Though a man may be able to 
recite the three hundred odes, yet if, when intrusted with a 
governmental charge, he knows not how to act, or if, when sent to 
any quarter on a mission, he cannot give his replies unassisted, 
notwithstanding the extent of his learning, of what practical use is 
it?'

	CHAP. VI. The Master said, 'When a prince's personal conduct 
is correct, his government is effective without the issuing of orders. 
If his personal conduct is not correct, he may issue orders, but they 
will not be followed.'
	CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The governments of Lu and Wei 
are brothers.'
	CHAP. VIII. The Master said of Ching, a scion of the ducal 
family of Wei, that he knew the economy of a family well. When he 
began to have means, he said, 'Ha! here is a collection!' When they 
were a little increased, he said, 'Ha! this is complete!' When he had 
become rich, he said, 'Ha! this is admirable!'
	CHAP. IX. 1. When the Master went to Wei, Zan Yu acted as 
driver of his carriage.
	2. The Master observed, 'How numerous are the people!'
	3. Yu said, 'Since they are thus numerous, what more shall be 
done for them?' 'Enrich them,' was the reply.

	4. 'And when they have been enriched, what more shall be 
done?' The Master said, 'Teach them.'
	CHAP. X. The Master said, 'If there were (any of the princes) 
who would employ me, in the course of twelve months, I should 
have done something considerable. In three years, the government 
would be perfected.'
	CHAP. XI. The Master said, '"If good men were to govern a 
country in succession for a hundred years, they would be able to 
transform the violently bad, and dispense with capital 
punishments." True indeed is this saying!'
	CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'If a truly royal ruler were to 
arise, it would still require a generation, and then virtue would 
prevail.'

	CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'If a minister make his own 
conduct correct, what difficulty will he have in assisting in 
government? If he cannot rectify himself, what has he to do with 
rectifying others?'
	CHAP. XIV. The disciple Zan returning from the court, the 
Master said to him, 'How are you so late?' He replied, 'We had 
government business.' The Master said, 'It must have been family 
affairs. If there had been government business, though I am not 
now in office, I should have been consulted about it.'
	CHAP. XV. 1. The Duke Ting asked whether there was a single 
sentence which could make a country prosperous. Confucius replied, 
'Such an effect cannot be expected from one sentence.
	2. 'There is a saying, however, which people have-- "To be a 
prince is difficult; to be a minister is not easy."
	3. 'If a ruler knows this,-- the difficulty of being a prince,-- 
may there not be expected from this one sentence the prosperity of 
his country?'
	4. The duke then said, 'Is there a single sentence which can 
ruin a country?' Confucius replied, 'Such an effect as that cannot be 
expected from one sentence. There is, however, the saying which 
people have-- "I have no pleasure in being a prince, but only in 
that no one can offer any opposition to what I say!"
	5. 'If a ruler's words be good, is it not also good that no one 
oppose them? But if they are not good, and no one opposes them, 
may there not be expected from this one sentence the ruin of his 
country?'
	CHAP. XVI. 1. The Duke of Sheh asked about government.
	2. The Master said, 'Good government obtains, when those 
who are near are made happy, and those who are far off are 
attracted.'

	CHAP. XVII. Tsze-hsia, being governor of Chu-fu, asked about 
government. The Master said, 'Do not be desirous to have things 
done quickly; do not look at small advantages. Desire to have things 
done quickly prevents their being done thoroughly. Looking at 
small advantages prevents great affairs from being accomplished.'
	CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Duke of Sheh informed Confucius, saying, 
'Among us here there are those who may be styled upright in their 
conduct. If their father have stolen a sheep, they will bear witness 
to the fact.'
	2. Confucius said, 'Among us, in our part of the country, those 
who are upright are different from this. The father conceals the 
misconduct of the son, and the son conceals the misconduct of the 
father. Uprightness is to be found in this.'

	CHAP. XIX. Fan Ch'ih asked about perfect virtue. The Master 
said, 'It is, in retirement, to be sedately grave; in the management 
of business, to be reverently attentive; in intercourse with others, 
to be strictly sincere. Though a man go among rude, uncultivated 
tribes, these qualities may not be neglected.'
	CHAP. XX. 1. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'What qualities must a 
man possess to entitle him to be called an officer? The Master said, 
'He who in his conduct of himself maintains a sense of shame, and 
when sent to any quarter will not disgrace his prince's commission, 
deserves to be called an officer.'
	3. Tsze-kung pursued, 'I venture to ask who may be placed in 
the next lower rank?' And he was told, 'He whom the circle of his 
relatives pronounce to be filial, whom his fellow-villagers and 
neighbours pronounce to be fraternal.'
	3. Again the disciple asked, 'I venture to ask about the class 
still next in order.' The Master said, 'They are determined to be 
sincere in what they say, and to carry out what they do. They are 
obstinate little men. Yet perhaps they may make the next class.'

	4. Tsze-kung finally inquired, 'Of what sort are those of the 
present day, who engage in government?' The Master said 'Pooh! 
they are so many pecks and hampers, not worth being taken into 
account.'
	CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'Since I cannot get men pursuing 
the due medium, to whom I might communicate my instructions, I 
must find the ardent and the cautiously-decided. The ardent will 
advance and lay hold of truth; the cautiously-decided will keep 
themselves from what is wrong.'
	CHAP. XXII. 1. The Master said, 'The people of the south have 
a saying-- "A man without constancy cannot be either a wizard or a 
doctor." Good!
	2. 'Inconstant in his virtue, he will be visited with disgrace.'

	3. The Master said, 'This arises simply from not attending to 
the prognostication.'
	CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'The superior man is affable, 
but not adulatory; the mean man is adulatory, but not affable.'
	CHAP. XXIV. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'What do you say of a 
man who is loved by all the people of his neighborhood?' The 
Master replied, 'We may not for that accord our approval of him.' 
'And what do you say of him who is hated by all the people of his 
neighborhood?' The Master said, 'We may not for that conclude that 
he is bad. It is better than either of these cases that the good in the 
neighborhood love him, and the bad hate him.'
	CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'The superior man is easy to 
serve and difficult to please. If you try to please him in any way 
which is not accordant with right, he will not be pleased. But in his

employment of men, he uses them according to their capacity. The 
mean man is difficult to serve, and easy to please. If you try to 
please him, though it be in a way which is not accordant with right, 
he may be pleased. But in his employment of men, he wishes them 
to be equal to everything.'
	CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'The superior man has a 
dignified ease without pride. The mean man has pride without a 
dignified ease.'
	CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'The firm, the enduring, the 
simple, and the modest are near to virtue.'
	CHAP. XXVIII. Tsze-lu asked, saying, 'What qualities must a 
man possess to entitle him to be called a scholar?' The Master said, 
'He must be thus,-- earnest, urgent, and bland:-- among his friends, 
earnest and urgent; among his brethren, bland.'

	CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'Let a good man teach the 
people seven years, and they may then likewise be employed in 
war.'
	CHAP. XXX. The Master said, 'To lead an uninstructed people 
to war, is to throw them away.'

BOOK XIV. HSIEN WAN.

	CHAP. I. Hsien asked what was shameful. The Master said, 
'When good government prevails in a state, to be thinking only of 
salary; and, when bad government prevails, to be thinking, in the 
same way, only of salary;-- this is shameful.'

	CHAP. II. 1. 'When the love of superiority, boasting, 
resentments, and covetousness are repressed, this may be deemed 
perfect virtue.'
	2. The Master said, 'This may be regarded as the achievement 
of what is difficult. But I do not know that it is to be deemed 
perfect virtue.'
	CHAP. III. The Master said, 'The scholar who cherishes the 
love of comfort is not fit to be deemed a scholar.'
	CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'When good government prevails 
in a state, language may be lofty and bold, and actions the same. 
When bad government prevails, the actions may be lofty and bold, 
but the language may be with some reserve.'
	CHAP. V. The Master said, 'The virtuous will be sure to speak 
correctly, but those whose speech is good may not always be 
virtuous. Men of principle are sure to be bold, but those who are 
bold may not always be men of principle.'

	CHAP. VI. Nan-kung Kwo, submitting an inquiry to Confucius, 
said, 'I was skillful at archery, and Ao could move a boat along 
upon the land, but neither of them died a natural death. Yu and Chi 
personally wrought at the toils of husbandry, and they became 
possessors of the kingdom.' The Master made no reply; but when 
Nan-kung Kwo went out, he said, 'A superior man indeed is this! An 
esteemer of virtue indeed is this!'
	CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'Superior men, and yet not 
always virtuous, there have been, alas! But there never has been a 
mean man, and, at the same time, virtuous.'

	CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'Can there be love which does 
not lead to strictness with its object? Can there be loyalty which 
does not lead to the instruction of its object?'
	CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'In preparing the governmental 
notifications, P'i Shan first made the rough draught; Shi-shu 
examined and discussed its contents; Tsze-yu, the manager of 
Foreign intercourse, then polished the style; and, finally, Tsze-ch'an 
of Tung-li gave it the proper elegance and finish.'
	CHAP. X. 1. Some one asked about Tsze-ch'an. The Master said, 
'He was a kind man.'
	2. He asked about Tsze-hsi. The Master said, 'That man! That 
man!'
	3. He asked about Kwan Chung. 'For him,' said the Master, 'the 
city of Pien, with three hundred families, was taken from the chief 
of the Po family, who did not utter a murmuring word, though, to 
the end of his life, he had only coarse rice to eat.'

	CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'To be poor without murmuring is 
difficult. To be rich without being proud is easy.'
	CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'Mang Kung-ch'o is more than fit 
to be chief officer in the families of Chao and Wei, but he is not fit 
to be great officer to either of the States Tang or Hsieh.'
	CHAP. XIII. 1. Tsze-lu asked what constituted a COMPLETE 
man. The Master said, 'Suppose a man with the knowledge of Tsang 
Wu-chung, the freedom from covetousness of Kung-ch'o, the 
bravery of Chwang of Pien, and the varied talents of Zan Ch'iu; add 
to these the accomplishments of the rules of propriety and music:-- 
such a one might be reckoned a COMPLETE man.'
	2. He then added, 'But what is the necessity for a complete 
man of the present day to have all these things? The man, who in 
the

view of gain, thinks of righteousness; who in the view of danger is 
prepared to give up his life; and who does not forget an old 
agreement however far back it extends:-- such a man may be 
reckoned a COMPLETE man.'
	CHAP. XIV. 1. The Master asked Kung-ming Chia about Kung-
shu Wan, saying, 'Is it true that your master speaks not, laughs not, 
and takes not?'
	2. Kung-ming Chia replied, 'This has arisen from the reporters 
going beyond the truth.-- My master speaks when it is the time to 
speak, and so men do not get tired of his speaking. He laughs when 
there is occasion to be joyful, and so men do not get tired of his 
laughing. He takes when it is consistent with righteousness to do so, 
and so men do not get tired of his taking.' The Master said, 'So! But 
is it so with him?'

	CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Tsang Wu-chung, keeping 
possession of Fang, asked of the duke of Lu to appoint a successor 
to him in his family. Although it may be said that he was not using 
force with his sovereign, I believe he was.'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The duke Wan of Tsin was crafty 
and not upright. The duke Hwan of Ch'i was upright and not crafty.'
	CHAP. XVII. 1. Tsze-lu said, 'The Duke Hwan caused his 
brother Chiu to be killed, when Shao Hu died with his master, but 
Kwan Chung did not die. May not I say that he was wanting in 
virtue?'

	2. The Master said, 'The Duke Hwan assembled all the princes 
together, and that not with weapons of war and chariots:-- it was 
all through the influence of Kwan Chung. Whose beneficence was 
like his? Whose beneficence was like his?'
	CHAP. XVIII. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'Kwan Chung, I apprehend, 
was wanting in virtue. When the Duke Hwan caused his brother 
Chiu to be killed, Kwan Chung was not able to die with him. 
Moreover, he became prime minister to Hwan.'
	2. The Master said, 'Kwan Chung acted as prime minister to 
the Duke Hwan, made him leader of all the princes, and united and 
rectified the whole kingdom. Down to the present day, the people 
enjoy the gifts which he conferred. But for Kwan Chung, we should 
now be wearing our hair unbound, and the lappets of our coats 
buttoning on the left side.
	3. 'Will you require from him the small fidelity of common

men and common women, who would commit suicide in a stream or 
ditch, no one knowing anything about them?'
	CHAP. XIX. 1. The great officer, Hsien, who had been family-
minister to Kung-shu Wan, ascended to the prince's court in 
company with Wan.
	2. The Master, having heard of it, said, 'He deserved to be 
considered WAN (the accomplished).'
	CHAP. XX. 1. The Master was speaking about the unprincipled 
course of the duke Ling of Wei, when Ch'i K'ang said, 'Since he is of 
such a character, how is it he does not lose his State?'
	2. Confucius said, 'The Chung-shu Yu has the superintendence 
of his guests and of strangers; the litanist, T'o, has the management

of his ancestral temple; and Wang-sun Chia has the direction of the 
army and forces:-- with such officers as these, how should he lose 
his State?'
	CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'He who speaks without modesty 
will find it difficult to make his words good.'
	CHAP. XXII. 1. Chan Ch'ang murdered the Duke Chien of Ch'i.
	2. Confucius bathed, went to court, and informed the duke Ai, 
saying, 'Chan Hang has slain his sovereign. I beg that you will 
undertake to punish him.'
	3. The duke said, 'Inform the chiefs of the three families of it.'
	4. Confucius retired, and said, 'Following in the rear of the 
great officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter, and my 
prince says, "Inform the chiefs of the three families of it."'
	5. He went to the chiefs, and informed them, but they would 
not act. Confucius then said, 'Following in the rear of the great 
officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter.'
	CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-lu asked how a ruler should be served. The 
Master said, 'Do not impose on him, and, moreover, withstand him 
to his face.'
	CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'The progress of the superior 
man is upwards; the progress of the mean man is downwards.'
	CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'In ancient times, men learned 
with a view to their own improvement. Now-a-days, men learn 
with a view to the approbation of others.'
	CHAP. XXVI. 1. Chu Po-yu sent a messenger with friendly 
inquiries to Confucius.
	2. Confucius sat with him, and questioned him. 'What,' said he, 
'is your master engaged in?' The messenger replied, 'My master is

anxious to make his faults few, but he has not yet succeeded.' He 
then went out, and the Master said, 'A messenger indeed! A 
messenger indeed!'
	CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'He who is not in any particular 
office, has nothing to do with plans for the administration of its 
duties.'
	CHAP. XXVIII. The philosopher Tsang said, 'The superior man, 
in his thoughts, does not go out of his place.'
	CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'The superior man is modest in 
his speech, but exceeds in his actions.'
	CHAP. XXX. 1. The Master said, 'The way of the superior man 
is threefold, but I am not equal to it. Virtuous, he is free from 
anxieties; wise, he is free from perplexities; bold, he is free from 
fear.
	2. Tsze-kung said, 'Master, that is what you yourself say.'

	CHAP. XXXI. Tsze-kung was in the habit of comparing men 
together. The Master said, 'Tsze must have reached a high pitch of 
excellence! Now, I have not leisure for this.'
	CHAP. XXXII. The Master said, 'I will not be concerned at 
men's not knowing me; I will be concerned at my own want of 
ability.'
	CHAP. XXXIII. The Master said, 'He who does not anticipate 
attempts to deceive him, nor think beforehand of his not being 
believed, and yet apprehends these things readily (when they 
occur);-- is he not a man of superior worth?'
	CHAP. XXXIV. 1. Wei-shang Mau said to Confucius, 'Ch'iu, how 
is it that you keep roosting about? Is it not that you are an 
insinuating talker?'
	2. Confucius said, 'I do not dare to play the part of such a 
talker, but I hate obstinacy.'

	CHAP. XXXV. The Master said, 'A horse is called a ch'i, not 
because of its strength, but because of its other good qualities.'
	CHAP. XXXVI. 1. Some one said, 'What do you say concerning 
the principle that injury should be recompensed with kindness?'
	2. The Master said, 'With what then will you recompense 
kindness?
	3. 'Recompense injury with justice, and recompense kindness 
with kindness.'
	CHAP. XXXVII. 1. The Master said, 'Alas! there is no one that 
knows me.'
	2. Tsze-kung said, 'What do you mean by thus saying-- that 
no one knows you?' The Master replied, 'I do not murmur against

Heaven. I do not grumble against men. My studies lie low, and my 
penetration rises high. But there is Heaven;-- that knows me!'
	CHAP. XXXVIII. 1. The Kung-po Liao, having slandered Tsze-lu 
to Chi-sun, Tsze-fu Ching-po informed Confucius of it, saying, 'Our 
master is certainly being led astray by the Kung-po Liao, but I have 
still power enough left to cut Liao off, and expose his corpse in the 
market and in the court.'
	2. The Master said, 'If my principles are to advance, it is so 
ordered. If they are to fall to the ground, it is so ordered. What can 
the Kung-po Liao do where such ordering is concerned?'

	CHAP. XXXIX. 1. The Master said, 'Some men of worth retire 
from the world.
	2. Some retire from particular states.
	3. Some retire because of disrespectful looks.
	4. Some retire because of contradictory language.'
	CHAP. XL.  The Master said, 'Those who have done this are 
seven men.'
	CHAP. XLI. Tsze-lu happening to pass the night in Shih-man, 
the gatekeeper said to him, 'Whom do you come from?' Tsze-lu said, 
'From Mr. K'ung.' 'It is he,-- is it not?'-- said the other, 'who knows 
the impracticable nature of the times and yet will be doing in 
them.'
	CHAP. XLII. 1. The Master was playing, one day, on a musical 
stone in Wei, when a man, carrying a straw basket, passed the door

of the house where Confucius was, and said, 'His heart is full who so 
beats the musical stone.'
	2. A little while after, he added, 'How contemptible is the 
one-ideaed obstinacy those sounds display! When one is taken no 
notice of, he has simply at once to give over his wish for public 
employment. "Deep water must be crossed with the clothes on; 
shallow water may be crossed with the clothes held up."'
	3. The Master said, 'How determined is he in his purpose! But 
this is not difficult!'
	CHAP. XLIII. 1. Tsze-chang said, 'What is meant when the Shu 
says that Kao-tsung, while observing the usual imperial mourning, 
was for three years without speaking?'
	2. The Master said, 'Why must Kao-tsung be referred to as an 
example of this? The ancients all did so. When the sovereign died, 
the officers all attended to their several duties, taking instructions 
from the prime minister for three years.'

	CHAP. XLIV. The Master said, 'When rulers love to observe 
the rules of propriety, the people respond readily to the calls on 
them for service.'
	CHAP. XLV. Tsze-lu asked what constituted the superior man. 
The Master said, 'The cultivation of himself in reverential 
carefulness.' 'And is this all?' said Tsze-lu. 'He cultivates himself so 
as to give rest to others,' was the reply. 'And is this all?' again 
asked Tsze-lu. The Master said, 'He cultivates himself so as to give 
rest to all the people. He cultivates himself so as to give rest to all 
the people:-- even Yao and Shun were still solicitous about this.'
	CHAP. XLVI. Yuan Zang was squatting on his heels, and

so waited the approach of the Master, who said to him, 'In youth 
not humble as befits a junior; in manhood, doing nothing worthy of 
being handed down; and living on to old age:-- this is to be a pest.' 
With this he hit him on the shank with his staff.
	CHAP. XLVI. 1. A youth of the village of Ch'ueh was employed 
by Confucius to carry the messages between him and his visitors. 
Some one asked about him, saying, 'I suppose he has made great 
progress.'
	2. The Master said, 'I observe that he is fond of occupying the 
seat of a full-grown man; I observe that he walks shoulder to 
shoulder with his elders. He is not one who is seeking to make 
progress in learning. He wishes quickly to become a man.'

BOOK XV. WEI LING KUNG.

	CHAP. I. 1. The Duke Ling of Wei asked Confucius about 
tactics. Confucius replied, 'I have heard all about sacrificial vessels, 
but I have not learned military matters.' On this, he took his 
departure the next day.
	2. When he was in Chan, their provisions were exhausted, and 
his followers became so ill that they were unable to rise.
	3. Tsze-lu, with evident dissatisfaction, said, 'Has the superior 
man likewise to endure in this way?' The Master said, 'The superior 
man may indeed have to endure want, but the mean man, when he 
is in want, gives way to unbridled license.'

	CHAP. II. 1. The Master said, 'Ts'ze, you think, I suppose, that 
I am one who learns many things and keeps them in memory?'
	2. Tsze-kung replied, 'Yes,-- but perhaps it is not so?'
	3. 'No,' was the answer; 'I seek a unity all-pervading.'
	CHAP. III. The Master said, 'Yu, those who know virtue are 
few.'
	CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'May not Shun be instanced as 
having governed efficiently without exertion? What did he do? He 
did nothing but gravely and reverently occupy his royal seat.'
	CHAP. V. 1. Tsze-chang asked how a man should conduct 
himself, so as to be everywhere appreciated.
	2. The Master said, 'Let his words be sincere and truthful, and 
his actions honourable and careful;-- such conduct may be practised 
among the rude tribes of the South or the North. If his words be

not sincere and truthful and his actions not honourable and careful, 
will he, with such conduct, be appreciated, even in his 
neighborhood?
	3. 'When he is standing, let him see those two things, as it 
were, fronting him. When he is in a carriage, let him see them 
attached to the yoke. Then may he subsequently carry them into 
practice.'
	4. Tsze-chang wrote these counsels on the end of his sash.
	CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'Truly straightforward was the 
historiographer Yu. When good government prevailed in his State, 
he was like an arrow. When bad government prevailed, he was like 
an arrow.
	2. A supe