rior man indeed is Chu Po-yu! When good 
government prevails in his state, he is to be found in office. When 
bad government prevails, he can roll his principles up, and keep 
them in his breast.'

	CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'When a man may be spoken 
with, not to speak to him is to err in reference to the man. When a 
man may not be spoken with, to speak to him is to err in reference 
to our words. The wise err neither in regard to their man nor to 
their words.'
	CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'The determined scholar and the 
man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense of injuring their 
virtue. They will even sacrifice their lives to preserve their virtue 
complete.'
	CHAP. IX. Tsze-kung asked about the practice of virtue. The 
Master said, 'The mechanic, who wishes to do his work well, must 
first sharpen his tools. When you are living in any state, take 
service with the most worthy among its great officers, and make 
friends of the most virtuous among its scholars.'
	CHAP. X. 1. Yen Yuan asked how the government of a country 
should be administered.
	2. The Master said, 'Follow the seasons of Hsia.

	3. 'Ride in the state carriage of Yin.
	4. 'Wear the ceremonial cap of Chau.
	5. 'Let the music be the Shao with its pantomimes.
	6. Banish the songs of Chang, and keep far from specious 
talkers. The songs of Chang are licentious; specious talkers are 
dangerous.'
	CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'If a man take no thought about 
what is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand.'
	CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'It is all over! I have not seen one 
who loves virtue as he loves beauty.'
	CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Was not Tsang Wan like one 
who had stolen his situation? He knew the virtue and the talents

of Hui of Liu-hsia, and yet did not procure that he should stand 
with him in court.'
	CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'He who requires much from 
himself and little from others, will keep himself from being the 
object of resentment.'
	CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'When a man is not in the habit of 
saying-- "What shall I think of this? What shall I think of this?" I 
can indeed do nothing with him!'
	CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'When a number of people are 
together, for a whole day, without their conversation turning on 
righteousness, and when they are fond of carrying out the 
suggestions of a small shrewdness;-- theirs is indeed a hard case.'
	CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'The superior man in everything 
considers righteousness to be essential. He performs it according to 
the rules of propriety. He brings it forth in humility. He completes it 
with sincerity. This is indeed a superior man.'

	CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'The superior man is distressed 
by his want of ability. He is not distressed by men's not knowing 
him.'
	CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'The superior man dislikes the 
thought of his name not being mentioned after his death.'
	CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'What the superior man seeks, is 
in himself. What the mean man seeks, is in others.'
	CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The superior man is dignified, 
but does not wrangle. He is sociable, but not a partizan.'
	CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'The superior man does not 
promote a man simply on account of his words, nor does he put 
aside good words because of the man.'

	CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'Is there one word 
which may serve as a rule of practice for all one's life?' The Master 
said, 'Is not RECIPROCITY such a word? What you do not want done 
to yourself, do not do to others.'
	CHAP. XXIV. 1. The Master said, 'In my dealings with men, 
whose evil do I blame, whose goodness do I praise, beyond what is 
proper? If I do sometimes exceed in praise, there must be ground 
for it in my examination of the individual.
	2. 'This people supplied the ground why the three dynasties 
pursued the path of straightforwardness.'
	CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Even in my early days, a 
historiographer would leave a blank in his text, and he who had a 
horse would lend him to another to ride. Now, alas! there are no 
such things.'

	CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'Specious words confound 
virtue. Want of forbearance in small matters confounds great plans.'
	CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'When the multitude hate a 
man, it is necessary to examine into the case. When the multitude 
like a man, it is necessary to examine into the case.'
	CHAP. XXVIII. The Master said, 'A man can enlarge the 
principles which he follows; those principles do not enlarge the 
man.'
	CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'To have faults and not to 
reform them,-- this, indeed, should be pronounced having faults.'
	CHAP. XXX. The Master said, 'I have been the whole day

without eating, and the whole night without sleeping:-- occupied 
with thinking. It was of no use. The better plan is to learn.'
	CHAP. XXXI. The Master said, 'The object of the superior man 
is truth. Food is not his object. There is plowing;-- even in that 
there is sometimes want. So with learning;-- emolument may be 
found in it. The superior man is anxious lest he should not get truth; 
he is not anxious lest poverty should come upon him.'
	CHAP. XXXII. 1. The Master said, 'When a man's knowledge is 
sufficient to attain, and his virtue is not sufficient to enable him to 
hold, whatever he may have gained, he will lose again.
	2. 'When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and he has 
virtue enough to hold fast, if he cannot govern with dignity, the 
people will not respect him.
	3. 'When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and he has 
virtue enough to hold fast; when he governs also with dignity, yet if 
he try to move the people contrary to the rules of propriety:-- full 
excellence is not reached.'

	CHAP. XXXIII. The Master said, 'The superior man cannot be 
known in little matters; but he may be intrusted with great 
concerns. The small man may not be intrusted with great concerns, 
but he may be known in little matters.'
	CHAP. XXXIV. The Master said, 'Virtue is more to man than 
either water or fire. I have seen men die from treading on water 
and fire, but I have never seen a man die from treading the course 
of virtue.'
	CHAP. XXXV. The Master said, 'Let every man consider virtue 
as what devolves on himself. He may not yield the performance of 
it even to his teacher.'

	CHAP. XXXVI. The Master said, 'The superior man is correctly 
firm, and not firm merely.'
	CHAP. XXXVII. The Master said, 'A minister, in serving his 
prince, reverently discharges his duties, and makes his emolument 
a secondary consideration.'
	CHAP. XXXVIII. The Master said, 'In teaching there should be 
no distinction of classes.'
	CHAP. XXXIX. The Master said, 'Those whose courses are 
different cannot lay plans for one another.'
	CHAP. XL. The Master said, 'In language it is simply required 
that it convey the meaning.'
	CHAP. XLI. 1. The Music-master, Mien, having called upon 
him, when they came to the steps, the Master said, 'Here are the 
steps.' When they came to the mat for the guest to sit upon, he

said, 'Here is the mat.' When all were seated, the Master informed 
him, saying, 'So and so is here; so and so is here.'
	2. The Music-master, Mien, having gone out, Tsze-chang 
asked, saying. 'Is it the rule to tell those things to the Music-
master?' 
	3. The Master said, 'Yes. This is certainly the rule for those 
who lead the blind.'

BOOK XVI. KE SHE.

	CHAP. I. 1. The head of the Chi family was going to attack 
Chwan-yu.
	2. Zan Yu and Chi-lu had an interview with Confucius, and 
said, 'Our chief, Chi, is going to commence operations against 
Chwan-yu.'
	3. Confucius said, 'Ch'iu, is it not you who are in fault here?
	4. 'Now, in regard to Chwan-yu, long ago, a former king 
appointed its ruler to preside over the sacrifices to the eastern 
Mang; moreover, it is in the midst of the territory of our State; and 
its ruler is a minister in direct connexion with the sovereign:-- 
What has your chief to do with attacking it?'
	5. Zan Yu said, 'Our master wishes the thing; neither of us two 
ministers wishes it.'
	6. Confucius said, 'Ch'iu, there are the words of Chau Zan,-- 
"When he can put forth his ability, he takes his place in the ranks of 
office; when he finds himself unable to do so, he retires from it. 
How can he be used as a guide to a blind man, who does not 
support him when tottering, nor raise him up when fallen?"
	7. 'And further, you speak wrongly. When a tiger or 
rhinoceros escapes from his cage; when a tortoise or piece of jade is 
injured in its repository:-- whose is the fault?'
	8. Zan Yu said, 'But at present, Chwan-yu is strong and near to 
Pi; if our chief do not now take it, it will hereafter be a sorrow to 
his descendants.'
	9. Confucius said. 'Ch'iu, the superior man hates that declining 
to say-- "I want such and such a thing," and framing explanations 
for the conduct.
	10. 'I have heard that rulers of States and chiefs of families 
are not troubled lest their people should be few, but are troubled 
lest they should not keep their several places; that they are not 
troubled with fears of poverty, but are troubled with fears of a 
want of contented repose among the people in their several places. 
For when the people keep their several places, there will be no 
poverty; when harmony prevails, there will be no scarcity of 
people; and when there is such a contented repose, there will be no 
rebellious upsettings.
	11. 'So it is.-- Therefore, if remoter people are not submissive, 
all

the influences of civil culture and virtue are to be cultivated to 
attract them to be so; and when they have been so attracted, they 
must be made contented and tranquil.
	12. 'Now, here are you, Yu and Ch'iu, assisting your chief. 
Remoter people are not submissive, and, with your help, he cannot 
attract them to him. In his own territory there are divisions and 
downfalls, leavings and separations, and, with your help, he cannot 
preserve it.
	13. 'And yet he is planning these hostile movements within 
the State.-- I am afraid that the sorrow of the Chi-sun family will 
not be on account of Chwan-yu, but will be found within the screen 
of their own court.'

	CHAP. II. 1. Confucius said, 'When good government prevails 
in the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive military expeditions 
proceed from the son of Heaven. When bad government prevails in 
the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive military expeditions 
proceed from the princes. When these things proceed from the 
princes, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they do not lose 
their power in ten generations. When they proceed from the Great 
officers of the princes, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they 
do not lose their power in five generations. When the subsidiary 
ministers of the great officers hold in their grasp the orders of the 
state, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they do not lose their 
power in three generations.
	2. 'When right principles prevail in the kingdom, government 
will not be in the hands of the Great officers.
	3. 'When right principles prevail in the kingdom, there will be 
no discussions among the common people.'

	CHAP. III. Confucius said, 'The revenue of the state has left 
the ducal House now for five generations. The government has been 
in the hands of the Great officers for four generations. On this 
account, the descendants of the three Hwan are much reduced.'
	CHAP. IV. Confucius said, 'There are three friendships which 
are advantageous, and three which are injurious. Friendship with 
the upright; friendship with the sincere; and friendship with the 
man of much observation:-- these are advantageous. Friendship 
with the man of specious airs; friendship with the insinuatingly 
soft; and friendship with the glib-tongued:-- these are injurious.'
	CHAP. V. Confucius said, 'There are three things men find 
enjoyment in which are advantageous, and three things they find 
enjoyment in which are injurious. To find enjoyment in the 
discriminating study of ceremonies and music; to find enjoyment in

speaking of the goodness of others; to find enjoyment in having 
many worthy friends:-- these are advantageous. To find enjoyment 
in extravagant pleasures; to find enjoyment in idleness and 
sauntering; to find enjoyment in the pleasures of feasting:-- these 
are injurious.'
	CHAP. VI. Confucius said, 'There are three errors to which 
they who stand in the presence of a man of virtue and station are 
liable. They may speak when it does not come to them to speak;-- 
this is called rashness. They may not speak when it comes to them 
to speak;-- this is called concealment. They may speak without 
looking at the countenance of their superior;-- this is called 
blindness.'
	CHAP. VII. Confucius said, 'There are three things which the 
superior man guards against. In youth, when the physical powers

are not yet settled, he guards against lust. When he is strong and 
the physical powers are full of vigor, he guards against 
quarrelsomeness. When he is old, and the animal powers are 
decayed, he guards against covetousness.'
	CHAP. VIII. 1. Confucius said, 'There are three things of which 
the superior man stands in awe. He stands in awe of the ordinances 
of Heaven. He stands in awe of great men. He stands in awe of the 
words of sages.
	2. 'The mean man does not know the ordinances of Heaven, 
and consequently does not stand in awe of them. He is disrespectful 
to great men. He makes sport of the words of sages.'
	CHAP. IX. Confucius said, 'Those who are born with the 
possession of knowledge are the highest class of men. Those who 
learn, and so, readily, get possession of knowledge, are the next.

Those who are dull and stupid, and yet compass the learning, are 
another class next to these. As to those who are dull and stupid and 
yet do not learn;-- they are the lowest of the people.'
	CHAP. X. Confucius said, 'The superior man has nine things 
which are subjects with him of thoughtful consideration. In regard 
to the use of his eyes, he is anxious to see clearly. In regard to the 
use of his ears, he is anxious to hear distinctly. In regard to his 
countenance, he is anxious that it should be benign. In regard to his 
demeanor, he is anxious that it should be respectful. In regard to 
his speech, he is anxious that it should be sincere. In regard to his 
doing of business, he is anxious that it should be reverently careful. 
In regard to what he doubts about, he is anxious to question others. 
When he is angry, he thinks of the difficulties (his anger may 
involve him in). When he sees gain to be got, he thinks of 
righteousness.'
	CHAP. XI. 1. Confucius said, 'Contemplating good, and pursuing 
it, as if they could not reach it; contemplating evil, and shrinking 
from it, as they would from thrusting the hand into boiling water:-- 
I have seen such men, as I have heard such words.
	2. 'Living in retirement to study their aims, and practising

righteousness to carry out their principles:-- I have heard these 
words, but I have not seen such men.'
	CHAP. XII. 1. The duke Ching of Ch'i had a thousand teams, 
each of four horses, but on the day of his death, the people did not 
praise him for a single virtue. Po-i and Shu-ch'i died of hunger at 
the foot of the Shau-yang mountain, and the people, down to the 
present time, praise them.
	2. 'Is not that saying illustrated by this?'

	CHAP. XIII. 1. Ch'an K'ang asked Po-yu, saying, 'Have you 
heard any lessons from your father different from what we have all 
heard?'
	2. Po-yu replied, 'No. He was standing alone once, when I 
passed below the hall with hasty steps, and said to me, "Have you 
learned the Odes?" On my replying "Not yet," he added, "If you do 
not learn the Odes, you will not be fit to converse with." I retired 
and studied the Odes.

	3. 'Another day, he was in the same way standing alone, when 
I passed by below the hall with hasty steps, and said to me, 'Have 
you learned the rules of Propriety?' On my replying 'Not yet,' he 
added, 'If you do not learn the rules of Propriety, your character 
cannot be established.' I then retired, and learned the rules of 
Propriety.
	4. 'I have heard only these two things from him.'
	5. Ch'ang K'ang retired, and, quite delighted, said, 'I asked one 
thing, and I have got three things. I have heard about the Odes. I 
have heard about the rules of Propriety. I have also heard that the 
superior man maintains a distant reserve towards his son.'
	CHAP. XIV. The wife of the prince of a state is called by him 
FU ZAN. She calls herself HSIAO T'UNG. The people of the State call

her CHUN FU ZAN, and, to the people of other States, they call her 
K'WA HSIAO CHUN. The people of other states also call her CHUN FU 
ZAN.

BOOK XVII. YANG HO.

	CHAP. I. 1. Yang Ho wished to see Confucius, but Confucius 
would not go to see him. On this, he sent a present of a pig to 
Confucius, who, having chosen a time when Ho was not at home, 
went to pay his respects for the gift. He met him, however, on the 
way.
	2. Ho said to Confucius, 'Come, let me speak with you.' He then 
asked, 'Can he be called benevolent who keeps his jewel in his

bosom, and leaves his country to confusion?' Confucius replied, 'No.' 
'Can he be called wise, who is anxious to be engaged in public 
employment, and yet is constantly losing the opportunity of being 
so?' Confucius again said, 'No.' 'The days and months are passing 
away; the years do not wait for us.' Confucius said, 'Right; I will go 
into office.'
	CHAP. II. The Master said, 'By nature, men are nearly alike; 
by practice, they get to be wide apart.'
	CHAP. III. The Master said, 'There are only the wise of the 
highest class, and the stupid of the lowest class, who cannot be 
changed.'

	CHAP. IV. 1. The Master, having come to Wu-ch'ang, heard 
there the sound of stringed instruments and singing.
	2. Well pleased and smiling, he said, 'Why use an ox knife to 
kill a fowl?'
	3. Tsze-yu replied, 'Formerly, Master, I heard you say,-- 
"When the man of high station is well instructed, he loves men; 
when the man of low station is well instructed, he is easily ruled."'
	4. The Master said, 'My disciples, Yen's words are right. What 
I said was only in sport.'
	CHAP. V. Kung-shan Fu-zao, when he was holding Pi, and in 
an attitude of rebellion, invited the Master to visit him, who was 
rather inclined to go.
	2. Tsze-lu was displeased, and said, 'Indeed, you cannot go! 
Why must you think of going to see Kung-shan?'

	3. The Master said, 'Can it be without some reason that he has 
invited ME? If any one employ me, may I not make an eastern 
Chau?'
	CHAP. VI. Tsze-chang asked Confucius about perfect virtue. 
Confucius said, 'To be able to practise five things everywhere under 
heaven constitutes perfect virtue.' He begged to ask what they 
were, and was told, 'Gravity, generosity of soul, sincerity, 
earnestness, and kindness. If you are grave, you will not be treated 
with disrespect. If you are generous, you will win all. If you are 
sincere, people will repose trust in you. If you are earnest, you will 
accomplish much. If you are kind, this will enable you to employ 
the services of others.

	CHAP. VII. 1. Pi Hsi inviting him to visit him, the Master was 
inclined to go.
	2. Tsze-lu said, 'Master, formerly I have heard you say, 
"When a man in his own person is guilty of doing evil, a superior 
man will not associate with him." Pi Hsi is in rebellion, holding 
possession of Chung-mau; if you go to him, what shall be said?'
	3. The Master said, 'Yes, I did use these words. But is it not 
said, that, if a thing be really hard, it may be ground without being 
made thin? Is it not said, that, if a thing be really white, it may be 
steeped in a dark fluid without being made black?
	4. 'Am I a bitter gourd! How can I be hung up out of the way 
of being eaten?'

	CHAP. VIII. 1. The Master said, 'Yu, have you heard the six 
words to which are attached six becloudings?' Yu replied, 'I have 
not.'
	2. 'Sit down, and I will tell them to you.
	3. 'There is the love of being benevolent without the love of 
learning;-- the beclouding here leads to a foolish simplicity. There is 
the love of knowing without the love of learning;-- the beclouding 
here leads to dissipation of mind. There is the love of being sincere 
without the love of learning;-- the beclouding here leads to an 
injurious disregard of consequences. There is the love of 
straightforwardness without the love of learning;-- the beclouding 
here leads to rudeness. There is the love of boldness without the 
love of learning;-- the beclouding here leads to insubordination. 
There is the love of firmness without the love of learning;-- the 
beclouding here leads to extravagant conduct.'

	CHAP. IX. 1. The Master said, 'My children, why do you not 
study the Book of Poetry?
	2. 'The Odes serve to stimulate the mind.
	3. 'They may be used for purposes of self-contemplation.
	4. 'They teach the art of sociability.
	5. 'They show how to regulate feelings of resentment.
	6. 'From them you learn the more immediate duty of serving 
one's father, and the remoter one of serving one's prince.
	7. 'From them we become largely acquainted with the names 
of birds, beasts, and plants.'
	CHAP. X. The Master said to Po-yu, 'Do you give yourself to 
the Chau-nan and the Shao-nan. The man who has not studied the 
Chau-nan and the Shao-nan, is like one who stands with his face 
right against a wall. Is he not so?'

	CHAP. XI. The Master said, '"It is according to the rules of 
propriety," they say.-- "It is according to the rules of propriety," 
they say. Are gems and silk all that is meant by propriety? "It is 
music," they say.-- "It is music," they say. Are bells and drums all 
that is meant by music?'
	CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'He who puts on an appearance of 
stern firmness, while inwardly he is weak, is like one of the small, 
mean people;-- yea, is he not like the thief who breaks through, or 
climbs over, a wall?'
	CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Your good, careful people of the 
villages are the thieves of virtue.'
	CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'To tell, as we go along, what we 
have heard on the way, is to cast away our virtue.'

	CHAP. XV. 1. The Master said, 'There are those mean 
creatures! How impossible it is along with them to serve one's 
prince!
	2. 'While they have not got their aims, their anxiety is how to 
get them. When they have got them, their anxiety is lest they 
should lose them.
	3. 'When they are anxious lest such things should be lost, 
there is nothing to which they will not proceed.'
	CHAP. XVI. 1. The Master said, 'Anciently, men had three 
failings, which now perhaps are not to be found.
	2. 'The high-mindedness of antiquity showed itself in a 
disregard of small things; the high-mindedness of the present day 
shows itself in wild license. The stern dignity of antiquity showed 
itself in grave reserve; the stern dignity of the present day shows 
itself in quarrelsome perverseness. The stupidity of antiquity 
showed itself in straightforwardness; the stupidity of the present 
day shows itself in sheer deceit.'

	CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Fine words and an insinuating 
appearance are seldom associated with virtue.'
	CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'I hate the manner in which 
purple takes away the luster of vermilion. I hate the way in which 
the songs of Chang confound the music of the Ya. I hate those who 
with their sharp mouths overthrow kingdoms and families.'
	CHAP. XIX. 1. The Master said, 'I would prefer not speaking.'
	2. Tsze-kung said, 'If you, Master, do not speak, what shall 
we, your disciples, have to record?'
	3. The Master said, 'Does Heaven speak? The four seasons 
pursue their courses, and all things are continually being produced, 
but does Heaven say anything?'

	CHAP. XX. Zu Pei wished to see Confucius, but Confucius 
declined, on the ground of being sick, to see him. When the bearer 
of this message went out at the door, (the Master) took his lute and 
sang to it, in order that Pei might hear him.
	CHAP. XXI. 1. Tsai Wo asked about the three years' mourning 
for parents, saying that one year was long enough.
	2. 'If the superior man,' said he, 'abstains for three years from 
the observances of propriety, those observances will be quite lost. 
If for three years he abstains from music, music will be ruined.
	3. 'Within a year the old grain is exhausted, and the new grain 
has sprung up, and, in procuring fire by friction, we go through all 
the changes of wood for that purpose. After a complete year, the 
mourning may stop.'
	4. The Master said, 'If you were, after a year, to eat good rice, 
and wear embroidered clothes, would you feel at ease?' 'I should,' 
replied Wo.

	5. The Master said, 'If you can feel at ease, do it. But a 
superior man, during the whole period of mourning, does not enjoy 
pleasant food which he may eat, nor derive pleasure from music 
which he may hear. He also does not feel at ease, if he is 
comfortably lodged. Therefore he does not do what you propose. 
But now you feel at ease and may do it.'
	6. Tsai Wo then went out, and the Master said, 'This shows 
Yu's want of virtue. It is not till a child is three years old that it is 
allowed to leave the arms of its parents. And the three years' 
mourning is universally observed throughout the empire. Did Yu 
enjoy the three years' love of his parents?'

	CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Hard is it to deal with him, who 
will stuff himself with food the whole day, without applying his 
mind to anything good! Are there not gamesters and chess players? 
To be one of these would still be better than doing nothing at all.'
	CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-lu said, 'Does the superior man esteem 
valour?' The Master said, 'The superior man holds righteousness to 
be of highest importance. A man in a superior situation, having 
valour without righteousness, will be guilty of insubordination; one 
of the lower people having valour without righteousness, will 
commit robbery.'
	CHAP. XXIV. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'Has the superior man his 
hatreds also?' The Master said, 'He has his hatreds. He hates those 
who proclaim the evil of others. He hates the man who,

being in a low station, slanders his superiors. He hates those who 
have valour merely, and are unobservant of propriety. He hates 
those who are forward and determined, and, at the same time, of 
contracted understanding.'
	2. The Master then inquired, 'Ts'ze, have you also your 
hatreds?' Tsze-kung replied, 'I hate those who pry out matters, and 
ascribe the knowledge to their wisdom. I hate those who are only 
not modest, and think that they are valourous. I hate those who 
make known secrets, and think that they are straightforward.'
	CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Of all people, girls and servants 
are the most difficult to behave to. If you are familiar with them, 
they lose their humility. If you maintain a reserve towards them, 
they are discontented.'
	CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'When a man at forty is the 
object of dislike, he will always continue what he is.'

BOOK XVIII. WEI TSZE.

	CHAP. I. 1. The Viscount of Wei withdrew from the court. The 
Viscount of Chi became a slave to Chau. Pi-kan remonstrated with 
him and died.
	2. Confucius said, 'The Yin dynasty possessed these three men 
of virtue.'
	CHAP. II. Hui of Liu-hsia being chief criminal judge, was 
thrice dismissed from his office. Some one said to him, 'Is it not yet 
time for you, sir, to leave this?' He replied, 'Serving men in an 
upright way, where shall I go to, and not experience such a thrice-
repeated

dismissal? If I choose to serve men in a crooked way, what 
necessity is there for me to leave the country of my parents?'
	CHAP. III. The duke Ching of Ch'i, with reference to the 
manner in which he should treat Confucius, said, 'I cannot treat him 
as I would the chief of the Chi family. I will treat him in a manner 
between that accorded to the chief of the Chi, and that given to the 
chief of the Mang family.' He also said, 'I am old; I cannot use his 
doctrines.' Confucius took his departure.
	CHAP. IV. The people of Ch'i sent to Lu a present of female 
musicians, which Chi Hwan received, and for three days no court 
was held. Confucius took his departure.
	CHAP. V. 1. The madman of Ch'u, Chieh-yu, passed by 
Confucius, singing and saying, 'O FANG! O FANG! How is your

virtue degenerated! As to the past, reproof is useless; but the future 
may still be provided against. Give up your vain pursuit. Give up 
your vain pursuit. Peril awaits those who now engage in affairs of 
government.'
	2. Confucius alighted and wished to converse with him, but 
Chieh-yu hastened away, so that he could not talk with him.
	CHAP. VI. 1. Ch'ang-tsu and Chieh-ni were at work in the field 
together, when Confucius passed by them, and sent Tsze-lu to 
inquire for the ford.
	2. Ch'ang-tsu said, 'Who is he that holds the reins in the 
carriage there?' Tsze-lu told him, 'It is K'ung Ch'iu.' 'Is it not K'ung 
Ch'iu of Lu?' asked he. 'Yes,' was the reply, to which the other 
rejoined, 'He knows the ford.'
	3. Tsze-lu then inquired of Chieh-ni, who said to him, 'Who

are you, sir?' He answered, 'I am Chung Yu.' 'Are you not the 
disciple of K'ung Ch'iu of Lu?' asked the other. 'I am,' replied he, 
and then Chieh-ni said to him, 'Disorder, like a swelling flood, 
spreads over the whole empire, and who is he that will change its 
state for you? Than follow one who merely withdraws from this 
one and that one, had you not better follow those who have 
withdrawn from the world altogether?' With this he fell to covering 
up the seed, and proceeded with his work, without stopping.
	4. Tsze-lu went and reported their remarks, when the Master 
observed with a sigh, 'It is impossible to associate with birds and 
beasts, as if they were the same with us. If I associate not with 
these people,-- with mankind,-- with whom shall I associate? If 
right principles prevailed through the empire, there would be no 
use for me to change its state.'

	CHAP. VII. 1. Tsze-lu, following the Master, happened to fall 
behind, when he met an old man, carrying across his shoulder on a 
staff a basket for weeds. Tsze-lu said to him, 'Have you seen my 
master, sir!' The old man replied, 'Your four limbs are 
unaccustomed to toil; you cannot distinguish the five kinds of 
grain:-- who is your master?' With this, he planted his staff in the 
ground, and proceeded to weed.
	2. Tsze-lu joined his hands across his breast, and stood before 
him.
	3. The old man kept Tsze-lu to pass the night in his house, 
killed a fowl, prepared millet, and feasted him. He also introduced 
to him his two sons.
	4. Next day, Tsze-lu went on his way, and reported his 
adventure. The Master said, 'He is a recluse,' and sent Tsze-lu back 
to see him again, but when he got to the place, the old man was 
gone.
	5. Tsze-lu then said to the family, 'Not to take office is not

righteous. If the relations between old and young may not be 
neglected, how is it that he sets aside the duties that should be 
observed between sovereign and minister? Wishing to maintain his 
personal purity, he allows that great relation to come to confusion. 
A superior man takes office, and performs the righteous duties 
belonging to it. As to the failure of right principles to make 
progress, he is aware of that.'
	CHAP. VIII. 1. The men who have retired to privacy from the 
world have been Po-i, Shu-ch'i, Yu-chung, I-yi, Chu-chang, Hui of 
Liu-hsia, and Shao-lien.
	2. The Master said, 'Refusing to surrender their wills, or to 
submit to any taint in their persons;-- such, I think, were Po-i and 
Shu-ch'i.
	3. 'It may be said of Hui of Liu-hsia, and of Shao-lien, that 
they surrendered their wills, and submitted to taint in their 
persons,

but their words corresponded with reason, and their actions were 
such as men are anxious to see. This is all that is to be remarked in 
them.
	4. 'It may be said of Yu-chung and I-yi, that, while they hid 
themselves in their seclusion, they gave a license to their words; 
but, in their persons, they succeeded in preserving their purity, 
and, in their retirement, they acted according to the exigency of the 
times.
	5. 'I am different from all these. I have no course for which I 
am predetermined, and no course against which I am 
predetermined.'
	CHAP. IX. 1. The grand music master, Chih, went to Ch'i.
	2. Kan, the master of the band at the second meal, went to 
Ch'u. Liao, the band master at the third meal, went to Ts'ai. Chueh, 
the band master at the fourth meal, went to Ch'in.
	3. Fang-shu, the drum master, withdrew to the north of the 
river.

	4. Wu, the master of the hand drum, withdrew to the Han.
	5. Yang, the assistant music master, and Hsiang, master of the 
musical stone, withdrew to an island in the sea.
	CHAP. X. The duke of Chau addressed his son, the duke of Lu, 
saying, 'The virtuous prince does not neglect his relations. He does 
not cause the great ministers to repine at his not employing them. 
Without some great cause, he does not dismiss from their offices 
the members of old families. He does not seek in one man talents 
for every employment.'
	CHAP. XI. To Chau belonged the eight officers, Po-ta, Po-

kwo, Chung-tu, Chung-hwu, Shu-ya, Shu-hsia, Chi-sui, and Chi-kwa.

BOOK XIX. TSZE-CHANG.

	CHAP. I. Tsze-chang said, 'The scholar, trained for public duty, 
seeing threatening danger, is prepared to sacrifice his life. When 
the opportunity of gain is presented to him, he thinks of 
righteousness. In sacrificing, his thoughts are reverential. In 
mourning, his thoughts are about the grief which he should feel. 
Such a man commands our approbation indeed.'
	CHAP. II. Tsze-chang said, 'When a man holds fast to virtue, 
but without seeking to enlarge it, and believes right principles, but 
without firm sincerity, what account can be made of his existence 
or non-existence?'

	CHAP. III. The disciples of Tsze-hsia asked Tsze-chang about 
the principles that should characterize mutual intercourse. Tsze-
chang asked, 'What does Tsze-hsia say on the subject?' They 
replied, 'Tsze-hsia says:-- "Associate with those who can advantage 
you. Put away from you those who cannot do so."' Tsze-chang 
observed, 'This is different from what I have learned. The superior 
man honours the talented and virtuous, and bears with all. He 
praises the good, and pities the incompetent. Am I possessed of 
great talents and virtue?-- who is there among men whom I will 
not bear with? Am I devoid of talents and virtue?-- men will put 
me away from them. What have we to do with the putting away of 
others?'
	CHAP. IV. Tsze-hsia said, 'Even in inferior studies and 
employments there is something worth being looked at; but if it be

attempted to carry them out to what is remote, there is a danger of 
their proving inapplicable. Therefore, the superior man does not 
practise them.'
	CHAP. V. Tsze-hsia said, 'He, who from day to day recognises 
what he has not yet, and from month to month does not forget what 
he has attained to, may be said indeed to love to learn.'
	CHAP. VI. Tsze-hsia said, 'There are learning extensively, and 
having a firm and sincere aim; inquiring with earnestness, and 
reflecting with self-application:-- virtue is in such a course.'
	CHAP. VII. Tsze-hsia said, 'Mechanics have their shops to 
dwell in, in order to accomplish their works. The superior man 
learns, in order to reach to the utmost of his principles.'

	CHAP. VIII. Tsze-hsia said, 'The mean man is sure to gloss his 
faults.'
	CHAP. IX. Tsze-hsia said, 'The superior man undergoes three 
changes. Looked at from a distance, he appears stern; when 
approached, he is mild; when he is heard to speak, his language is 
firm and decided.'
	CHAP. X. Tsze-hsia said, 'The superior man, having obtained 
their confidence, may then impose labours on his people. If he have 
not gained their confidence, they will think that he is oppressing 
them. Having obtained the confidence of his prince, one may then 
remonstrate with him. If he have not gained his confidence, the 
prince will think that he is vilifying him.'
	CHAP. XI. Tsze-hsia said, 'When a person does not transgress 
the boundary line in the great virtues, he may pass and repass it in 
the small virtues.'

	CHAP. XII. 1. Tsze-yu said, 'The disciples and followers of 
Tsze-hsia, in sprinkling and sweeping the ground, in answering and 
replying, in advancing and receding, are sufficiently accomplished. 
But these are only the branches of learning, and they are left 
ignorant of what is essential.-- How can they be acknowledged as 
sufficiently taught?'
	2. Tsze-hsia heard of the remark and said, 'Alas! Yen Yu is 
wrong. According to the way of the superior man in teaching, what 
departments are there which he considers of prime importance, and 
delivers? what are there which he considers of secondary 
importance, and allows himself to be idle about? But as in the case 
of plants, which are assorted according to their classes, so he deals 
with his disciples. How can the way of a superior man be such as to 
make fools of any of them? Is it not the sage alone, who can unite 
in one the beginning and the consummation of learning?'

	CHAP. XIII. Tsze-hsia said, 'The officer, having discharged all 
his duties, should devote his leisure to learning. The student, having 
completed his learning, should apply himself to be an officer.'
	CHAP. XIV. Tsze-hsia said, 'Mourning, having been carried to 
the utmost degree of grief, should stop with that.'
	CHAP. XV. Tsze-hsia said, 'My friend Chang can do things 
which are hard to be done, but yet he is not perfectly virtuous.'
	CHAP. XVI. The philosopher Tsang said, 'How imposing is the 
manner of Chang! It is difficult along with him to practise virtue.'
	CHAP. XVII. The philosopher Tsang said, 'I heard this from 
our Master:-- "Men may not have shown what is in them to the full 
extent, and yet they will be found to do so, on occasion of mourning 
for their parents."'

	CHAP. XVIII. The philosopher Tsang said, 'I have heard this 
from our Master:-- "The filial piety of Mang Chwang, in other 
matters, was what other men are competent to, but, as seen in his 
not changing the ministers of his father, nor his father's mode of 
government, it is difficult to be attained to."'
	CHAP. XIX. The chief of the Mang family having appointed 
Yang Fu to be chief criminal judge, the latter consulted the 
philosopher Tsang. Tsang said, 'The rulers have failed in their 
duties, and the people consequently have been disorganised, for a 
long time. When you have found out the truth of any accusation, be 
grieved for and pity them, and do not feel joy at your own ability.'
	CHAP. XX. Tsze-kung said, 'Chau's wickedness was not so great 
as that name implies. Therefore, the superior man hates to dwell

in a low-lying situation, where all the evil of the world will flow in 
upon him.'
	CHAP. XXI. Tsze-kung said, 'The faults of the superior man are 
like the eclipses of the sun and moon. He has his faults, and all men 
see them; he changes again, and all men look up to him.'
	CHAP. XXII. 1. Kung-sun Ch'ao of Wei asked Tsze-kung, 
saying, 'From whom did Chung-ni get his learning?'
	2. Tsze-kung replied, 'The doctrines of Wan and Wu have not 
yet fallen to the ground. They are to be found among men. Men of 
talents and virtue remember the greater principles of them, and 
others, not possessing such talents and virtue, remember the 
smaller. Thus, all possess the doctrines of Wan and Wu. Where 
could our Master go that he should not have an opportunity of 
learning them? And yet what necessity was there for his having a 
regular master?'

	CHAP. XXIII. 1. Shu-sun Wu-shu observed to the great 
officers in the court, saying, 'Tsze-kung is superior to Chung-ni.'
	2. Tsze-fu Ching-po reported the observation to Tsze-kung, 
who said, 'Let me use the comparison of a house and its 
encompassing wall. My wall only reaches to the shoulders. One may 
peep over it, and see whatever is valuable in the apartments.
	3. 'The wall of my Master is several fathoms high. If one do 
not find the door and enter by it, he cannot see the ancestral 
temple with its beauties, nor all the officers in their rich array.
	4. 'But I may assume that they are few who find the door. 
Was not the observation of the chief only what might have been 
expected?'

	CHAP. XXIV. Shu-sun Wu-shu having spoken revilingly of 
Chung-ni, Tsze-kung said, 'It is of no use doing so. Chung-ni cannot 
be reviled. The talents and virtue of other men are hillocks and 
mounds which may be stepped over. Chung-ni is the sun or moon, 
which it is not possible to step over. Although a man may wish to 
cut himself off from the sage, what harm can he do to the sun or 
moon? He only shows that he does not know his own capacity.
	CHAP. XXV. 1. Ch'an Tsze-ch'in, addressing Tsze-kung, said, 
'You are too modest. How can Chung-ni be said to be superior to 
you?'
	2. Tsze-kung said to him, 'For one word a man is often 
deemed to be wise, and for one word he is often deemed to be 
foolish. We ought to be careful indeed in what we say.
	3. 'Our Master cannot be attained to, just in the same way as 
the heavens cannot be gone up to by the steps of a stair.

	4. 'Were our Master in the position of the ruler of a State or 
the chief of a Family, we should find verified the description which 
has been given of a sage's rule:-- he would plant the people, and 
forthwith they would be established; he would lead them on, and 
forthwith they would follow him; he would make them happy, and 
forthwith multitudes would resort to his dominions; he would 
stimulate them, and forthwith they would be harmonious. While he 
lived, he would be glorious. When he died, he would be bitterly 
lamented. How is it possible for him to be attained to?'

BOOK XX. YAO YUEH.

	CHAP. I. 1. Yao said, 'Oh! you, Shun, the Heaven-determined 
order of succession now rests in your person. Sincerely hold fast the 
due Mean. If there shall be distress and want within the four seas, 
the Heavenly revenue will come to a perpetual end.'
	2. Shun also used the same language in giving charge to Yu.
	3. T'ang said, 'I the child Li, presume to use a dark-coloured 
victim, and presume to announce to Thee, O most great and 
sovereign God, that the sinner I dare not pardon, and thy ministers, 
O God, I do not keep in obscurity. The examination of them is by 
thy mind, O God. If, in my person, I commit offences, they are not to 
be attributed to you, the people of the myriad regions. If you in the 
myriad regions commit offences, these offences must rest on my 
person.'

	4. Chau conferred great gifts, and the good were enriched.
	5. 'Although he has his near relatives, they are not equal to 
my virtuous men. The people are throwing blame upon me, the One 
man.'
	6. He carefully attended to the weights and measures, 
examined the body of the laws, restored the discarded officers, and 
the good government of the kingdom took its course.
	7. He revived States that had been extinguished, restored 
families whose line of succession had been broken, and called to 
office those who had retired into obscurity, so that throughout the 
kingdom the hearts of the people turned towards him.
	8. What he attached chief importance to, were the food of the 
people, the duties of mourning, and sacrifices.
	9. By his generosity, he won all. By his sincerity, he made the 
people repose trust in him. By his earnest activity, his 
achievements were great. By his justice, all were delighted.

	CHAP. II. 1. Tsze-chang asked Confucius, saying, 'In what way 
should a person in authority act in order that he may conduct 
government properly?' The Master replied, 'Let him honour the five 
excellent, and banish away the four bad, things;-- then may he 
conduct government properly.' Tsze-chang said, 'What are meant by 
the five excellent things?' The Master said, 'When the person in 
authority is beneficent without great expenditure; when he lays 
tasks on the people without their repining; when he pursues what 
he desires without being covetous; when he maintains a dignified 
ease without being proud; when he is majestic without being fierce.'
	2. Tsze-chang said, 'What is meant by being beneficent 
without great expenditure?' The Master replied, 'When the person 
in authority makes more beneficial to the people the things from 
which

they naturally derive benefit;-- is not this being beneficent without 
great expenditure? When he chooses the labours which are proper, 
and makes them labour on them, who will repine? When his desires 
are set on benevolent government, and he secures it, who will 
accuse him of covetousness? Whether he has to do with many 
people or few, or with things great or small, he does not dare to 
indicate any disrespect;-- is not this to maintain a dignified ease 
without any pride? He adjusts his clothes and cap, and throws a 
dignity into his looks, so that, thus dignified, he is looked at with 
awe;-- is not this to be majestic without being fierce?'
	3. Tsze-chang then asked, 'What are meant by the four bad 
things?' The Master said, 'To put the people to death without having 
instructed them;-- this is called cruelty. To require from them, 
suddenly, the full tale of work, without having given them 
warning;-- this is called oppression. To issue orders as if without 
urgency, at first, and, when the time comes, to insist on them with 
severity;-- this is called injury. And, generally, in the giving pay

or rewards to men, to do it in a stingy way;-- this is called acting 
the part of a mere official.'
	CHAP III. 1. The Master said, 'Without recognising the 
ordinances of Heaven, it is impossible to be a superior man.
	2. 'Without an acquaintance with the rules of Propriety, it is 
impossible for the character to be established.
	3. 'Without knowing the force of words, it is impossible to 
know men.'










This etext was produced from the 1902 Macmillan and Co. edition by
David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





COUNTESS KATE

by Charlotte M. Yonge




CHAPTER I.



"There, I've done every bit I can do!  I'm going to see what o'clock
it is."

"I heard it strike eleven just now."

"Sylvia, you'll tip up!  What a tremendous stretch!"

"Wha-ooh!  Oh dear!  We sha'n't get one moment before dinner!  Oh,
horrible! oh, horrible! most horrible!"

"Sylvia, you know I hate hearing Hamlet profaned."

"You can't hate it more than having no one to hear our lessons."

"That makes you do it.  What on earth can Mary be about?"

"Some tiresome woman to speak to her, I suppose."

"I'm sure it can't be as much her business as it is to mind her poor
little sisters.  Oh dear! if Papa could only afford us a governess!"

"I am sure I should not like it at all; besides, it is wrong to wish
to be richer than one is."

"I don't wish; I am only thinking how nice it would be, if some one
would give us a famous quantity of money.  Then Papa should have a
pretty parsonage, like the one at Shagton; and we would make the
church beautiful, and get another pony or two, to ride with Charlie."

"Yes, and have a garden with a hothouse like Mr. Brown's."

"Oh yes; and a governess to teach us to draw.  But best of all--O
Sylvia! wouldn't it be nice not to have to mind one's clothes always?
Yes, you laugh; but it comes easier to you; and, oh dear! oh dear! it
is so horrid to be always having to see one does not tear oneself."

"I don't think you do see," said Sylvia, laughing.

"My frocks always WILL get upon the thorns.  It is very odd."

"Only do please, Katie dear, let me finish this sum; and then if Mary
is not come, she can't scold if we are amusing ourselves."

"I know!" cried Kate.  "I'll draw such a picture, and tell you all
about it when your sum is over."

Thereon ensued silence in the little room, half parlour, half study,
nearly filled with books and piano; and the furniture, though
carefully protected with brown holland, looking the worse for wear,
and as if danced over by a good many young folks.

The two little girls, who sat on the opposite sides of a little
square table in the bay-window, were both between ten and eleven
years old, but could not have been taken for twins, nor even for
sisters, so unlike were their features and complexion; though their
dress, very dark grey linsey, and brown holland aprons, was exactly
the same, except that Sylvia's was enlivened by scarlet braid, Kate's
darkened by black--and moreover, Kate's apron was soiled, and the
frock bore traces of a great darn.  In fact, new frocks for the pair
were generally made necessary by Kate's tattered state, when Sylvia's
garments were still available for little Lily, or for some school
child.

Sylvia's brown hair was smooth as satin; Kate's net did not succeed
in confining the loose rough waves of dark chestnut, on the road to
blackness.  Sylvia was the shorter, firmer, and stronger, with round
white well-cushioned limbs; Kate was tall, skinny, and brown, though
perfectly healthful.  The face of the one was round and rosy, of the
other thin and dark; and one pair of eyes were of honest grey, while
the others were large and hazel, with blue whites.  Kate's little
hand was so slight, that Sylvia's strong fingers could almost crush
it together, but it was far less effective in any sort of handiwork;
and her slim neatly-made foot always was a reproach to her for making
such boisterous steps, and wearing out her shoes so much faster than
the quieter movements of her companion did--her sister, as the
children would have said, for nothing but the difference of surname
reminded Katharine Umfraville that she was not the sister of Sylvia
Wardour.

Her father, a young clergyman, had died before she could remember
anything, and her mother had not survived him three months.  Little
Kate had then become the charge of her mother's sister, Mrs. Wardour,
and had grown up in the little parsonage belonging to the district
church of St. James's, Oldburgh, amongst her cousins, calling Mr. and
Mrs. Wardour Papa and Mamma, and feeling no difference between their
love to their own five children and to her.

Mrs. Wardour had been dead for about four years, and the little girls
were taught by the eldest sister, Mary, who had been at a boarding-
school to fit her for educating them.  Mr. Wardour too taught them a
good deal himself, and had the more time for them since Charlie, the
youngest boy, had gone every day to the grammar-school in the town.

Armyn, the eldest of the family, was with Mr. Brown, a very good old
solicitor, who, besides his office in Oldburgh, had a very pretty
house and grounds two miles beyond St. James's, where the parsonage
children were delighted to spend an afternoon now and then.

Little did they know that it was the taking the little niece as a
daughter that had made it needful to make Armyn enter on a profession
at once, instead of going to the university and becoming a clergyman
like his father; nor how cheerfully Armyn had agreed to do whatever
would best lighten his father's cares and troubles.  They were a very
happy family; above all, on the Saturday evenings and Sundays that
the good-natured elder brother spent at home.

"There!" cried Sylvia, laying down her slate pencil, and indulging in
another tremendous yawn; "we can't do a thing more till Mary comes!
What can she be about?"

"Oh, but look, Sylvia!" cried Kate, quite forgetting everything in
the interest of her drawing on a large sheet of straw-paper.  "Do you
see what it is?"

"I don't know," said Sylvia, "unless--let me see--That's a very rich
little girl, isn't it?" pointing to an outline of a young lady whose
wealth was denoted by the flounces (or rather scallops) on her frock,
the bracelets on her sausage-shaped arms, and the necklace on her
neck.

"Yes; she is a very rich and grand--Lady Ethelinda; isn't that a
pretty name?  I do wish I was Lady Katharine."

"And what is she giving?  I wish you would not do men and boys, Kate;
their legs always look so funny as you do them."

"They never will come right; but never mind, I must have them.  That
is Lady Ethelinda's dear good cousin, Maximilian; he is a lawyer--
don't you see the parchment sticking out of his pocket?"

"Just like Armyn."

"And she is giving him a box with a beautiful new microscope in it;
don't yo