 there; but the day never came, though whenever Kate had been in
no particular scrape for a little while, she hoped it was coming.
Though certainly days without scrapes were not many:  the loud tones,
the screams of laughing that betrayed her undignified play with
Josephine, the attitudes, the skipping and jumping like the gambols
of a calf, the wonderful tendency of her clothes to get into
mischief--all were continually bringing trouble upon her.

If a splash of mud was in the street, it always came on her
stockings; her meals left reminiscences on all her newest dresses;
her hat was always blowing off; and her skirts curiously entangled
themselves in rails and balusters, caught upon nails, and tore into
ribbons; and though all the repairs fell to Josephine's lot, and the
purchase of new garments was no such difficulty as of old, Aunt
Barbara was even more severe on such mishaps than Mary, who had all
the trouble and expense of them.

After the walk, Kate had lessons to learn for the next day--poetry,
dates, grammar, and the like; and after them came her tea; and then
her evening toilette, when, as the aunts were out of hearing, she
refreshed herself with play and chatter with Josephine.  She was
supposed to talk French to her; but it was very odd sort of French,
and Josephine did not insist on its being better.  She was very good-
natured, and thought "Miladi" had a dull life; so she allowed a good
many things that a more thoughtful person would have known to be
inconsistent with obedience to Lady Barbara.

When dressed, Kate had to descend to the drawing-room, and there
await her aunts coming up from dinner.  She generally had a book of
her own, or else she read bits of those lying on the tables, till
Lady Barbara caught her, and in spite of her protest that at home she
might always read any book on the table ordered her never to touch
any without express permission.

Sometimes the aunts worked; sometimes Lady Barbara played and sang.
They wanted Kate to sit up as they did with fancy work, and she had a
bunch of flowers in Berlin wool which she was supposed to be
grounding; but she much disliked it, and seldom set three stitches
when her aunts' eyes were not upon her.  Lady Jane was a great
worker, and tried to teach her some pretty stitches; but though she
began by liking to sit by the soft gentle aunt, she was so clumsy a
pupil, that Lady Barbara declared that her sister must not be
worried, and put a stop to the lessons.  So Kate sometimes read, or
dawdled over her grounding; or when Aunt Barbara was singing, she
would nestle up to her other aunt, and go off into some dreamy fancy
of growing up, getting home to the Wardours, or having them to live
with her at her own home; or even of a great revolution, in which,
after the pattern of the French nobility, she should have to maintain
Aunt Jane by the labour of her hands!  What was to become of Aunt
Barbara was uncertain; perhaps she was to be in prison, and Kate to
bring food to her in a little basket every day; or else she was to
run away:  but Aunt Jane was to live in a nice little lodging, with
no one to wait on her but her dear little niece, who was to paint
beautiful screens for her livelihood, and make her coffee with her
own hands.  Poor Lady Jane!

Bed-time came at last--horrible bed-time, with all its terrors!  At
first Kate persuaded Josephine and her light to stay till sleep came
to put an end to them; but Lady Barbara came up one evening, declared
that a girl of eleven years old must not be permitted in such
childish nonsense, and ordered Josephine to go down at once, and
always to put out the candle as soon as Lady Caergwent was in bed.

Lady Barbara would hardly have done so if she had known how much
suffering she caused; but she had always been too sensible to know
what the misery of fancies could be, nor how the silly little brain
imagined everything possible and impossible; sometimes that thieves
were breaking in--sometimes that the house was on fire--sometimes
that she should be smothered with pillows, like the princes in the
Tower, for the sake of her title--sometimes that the Gunpowder Plot
would be acted under the house!

Most often of all it was a thought that was not foolish and unreal
like the rest.  It was the thought that the Last Judgment might be
about to begin.  But Kate did not use that thought as it was meant to
be used when we are bidden to "watch."  If she had done so, she would
have striven every morning to "live this day as if the last."  But
she never thought of it in the morning, nor made it a guide to her
actions; or else she would have dreaded it less.  And at night it did
not make her particular about obedience.  It only made her want to
keep Josephine; as if Josephine and a candle could protect her from
that Day and Hour!  And if the moment had come, would she not have
been safer trying to endure hardness for the sake of obedience--with
the holy verses Mr. Wardour had taught her on her lips, alone with
her God and her good angel--than trying to forget all in idle chatter
with her maid, and contrary to known commands, detaining her by
foolish excuses?

It is true that Kate did not feel as if obedience to Lady Barbara was
the same duty as obedience to "Papa."  Perhaps it was not in the
nature of things that she should; but no one can habitually practise
petty disobedience to one "placed in authority over" her, without
hurting the whole disposition.



CHAPTER IV.



"Thursday morning!  Bother--calisthenic day!--I'll go to sleep again,
to put it off as long as I can.  If I was only a little countess in
her own feudal keep, I would get up in the dawn, and gather flowers
in the May dew--primroses and eglantine!--Charlie says it is affected
to call sweet-briar eglantine.--Sylvia!  Sylvia! that thorn has got
hold of me; and there's Aunt Barbara coming down the lane in the
baker's jiggeting cart.--Oh dear! was it only dreaming?  I thought I
was gathering dog-roses with Charlie and Sylvia in the lane; and now
it is only Thursday, and horrid calisthenic day!  I suppose I must
wake up.


'Awake, my soul, and with the sun
Thy daily stage of duty run.'


I'm sure it's a very tiresome sort of stage!  We used to say, 'As
happy as a queen:' I am sure if the Queen is as much less happy than
a countess as I am than a common little girl, she must be miserable
indeed!  It is like a rule-of-three sum.  Let me see--if a common
little girl has one hundred happinesses a day, and a countess only--
only five--how many has the Queen?  No--but how much higher is a
queen than a countess?  If I were Queen, I would put an end to aunts
and to calisthenic exercises; and I would send for all my orphan
nobility, and let them choose their own governesses and playfellows,
and always live with country clergymen!  I am sure nobody ought to be
oppressed as Aunt Barbara oppresses me:  it is just like James V. of
Scotland when the Douglases got hold of him!  I wonder what is the
use of being a countess, if one never is to do anything to please
oneself, and one is to live with a cross old aunt!"

Most likely everyone is of Lady Caergwent's morning opinion--that
Lady Barbara Umfraville was cross, and that it was a hard lot to live
in subjection to her.  But there are two sides to a question; and
there were other hardships in that house besides those of the
Countess of Caergwent.

Forty years ago, two little sisters had been growing up together, so
fond of each other that they were like one; and though the youngest,
Barbara, was always brighter, stronger, braver, and cleverer, than
gentle Jane, she never enjoyed what her sister could not do; and
neither of them ever wanted any amusement beyond quiet play with
their dolls and puzzles, contrivances in pretty fancy works, and
walks with their governess in trim gravel paths.  They had two elder
brothers and one younger; but they had never played out of doors with
them, and had not run about or romped since they were almost babies;
they would not have known how; and Jane was always sickly and feeble,
and would have been very unhappy with loud or active ways.

As time passed on, Jane became more weakly and delicate while Barbara
grew up very handsome, and full of life and spirit, but fonder of her
sister than ever, and always coming home from her parties and
gaieties, as if telling Jane about them was the best part of all.

At last, Lady Barbara was engaged to be married to a brother officer
of her second brother, James; but just then poor Jane fell so ill,
that the doctors said she could not live through the year.  Barbara
loved her sister far too well to think of marrying at such a time,
and said she must attend to no one else.  All that winter and spring
she was nursing her sister day and night, watching over her, and
quite keeping up the little spark of life, the doctors said, by her
tender care.  And though Lady Jane lived on day after day, she never
grew so much better as to be fit to hear of the engagement and that
if she recovered her sister would be separated from her; and so weeks
went on, and still nothing could be done about the marriage.

As it turned out, this was the best thing that could have happened to
Lady Barbara; for in the course of this time, it came to her father's
knowledge that her brother and her lover had both behaved
disgracefully, and that, if she had married, she must have led a very
unhappy life.  He caused the engagement to be broken off.  She knew
it was right, and made no complaint to anybody; but she always
believed that it was her brother James who had been the tempter, who
had led his friend astray; and from that time, though she was more
devoted than ever to her sick sister, she was soft and bright to
nobody else.  She did not complain, but she thought that things had
been very hard with her; and when people repine their troubles do not
make them kinder, but the brave grow stern and the soft grow fretful.

All this had been over for nearly thirty years, and the brother and
the friend had both been long dead.  Lady Barbara was very anxious to
do all that she thought right; and she was so wise and sensible, and
so careful of her sister Jane, that all the family respected her and
looked up to her.  She thought she had quite forgiven all that had
passed:  she did not know why it was so hard to her to take any
notice of her brother James's only son.  Perhaps, if she had, she
would have forced herself to try to be more warm and kind to him, and
not have inflamed Lord Caergwent's displeasure when he married
imprudently.  Her sister Jane had never known all that had passed:
she had been too ill to hear of it at the time; and it was not Lady
Barbara's way to talk to other people of her own troubles.  But Jane
was always led by her sister, and never thought of people, or judged
events, otherwise than as Barbara told her; so that, kind and gentle
as she was by nature, she was like a double of her sister, instead of
by her mildness telling on the family counsels.  The other brother,
Giles, had been aware of all, and saw how it was; but he was so much
younger than the rest, that he was looked on by them like a boy long
after he was grown up, and had not felt entitled to break through his
sister Barbara's reserve, so as to venture on opening out the sorrows
so long past, and pleading for his brother James's family, though he
had done all he could for them himself.  He had indeed been almost
constantly on foreign service, and had seen very little of his
sisters.

Since their father's death, the two sisters had lived their quiet
life together.  They were just rich enough to live in the way they
thought the duty of persons in their rank, keeping their carriage for
Lady Jane's daily drive, and spending two months every year by the
sea, and one at Caergwent Castle with their eldest brother.  They
always had a spare room for any old friend who wanted to come up to
town; and they did many acts of kindness, and gave a great deal to be
spent on the poor of their parish.  They did the same quiet things
every day:  one liked what the other liked; and Lady Barbara thought,
morning, noon, and night, what would be good for her sister's health;
while Lady Jane rested on Barbara's care, and was always pleased with
whatever came in her way.

And so the two sisters had gone on year after year, and were very
happy in their own way, till the great grief came of losing their
eldest brother; and not long after him, his son, the nephew who had
been their great pride and delight, and for whom they had so many
plans and hopes.

And with his death, there came what they felt to be the duty and
necessity of trying to fit the poor little heiress for her station.
They were not fond of any children; and it upset all their ways very
much to have to make room for a little girl, her maid, and her
governess; but still, if she had been such a little girl as they had
been, and always like the well-behaved children whom they saw in
drawing-rooms, they would have known what kind of creature had come
into their hands.

But was it not very hard on them that their niece should turn out a
little wild harum-scarum creature, such as they had never dreamt of--
really unable to move without noises that startled Lady Jane's
nerves, and threw Lady Barbara into despair at the harm they would
do--a child whose untutored movements were a constant eye-sore and
distress to them; and though she could sometimes be bright and fairy-
like if unconstrained, always grew abrupt and uncouth when under
restraint--a child very far from silly, but apt to say the silliest
things--learning quickly all that was mere head-work, but hopelessly
or obstinately dull at what was to be done by the fingers--a child
whose ways could not be called vulgar, but would have been completely
tom-boyish, except for a certain timidity that deprived them of the
one merit of courage, and a certain frightened consciousness that was
in truth modesty, though it did not look like it?  To have such a
being to endure, and more than that, to break into the habits of
civilized life, and the dignity of a lady of rank, was no small
burden for them; but they thought it right, and made up their minds
to bear it.

Of course it would have been better if they had taken home the little
orphan when she was destitute and an additional weight to Mr.
Wardour; and had she been actually in poverty or distress, with no
one to take care of her, Lady Barbara would have thought it a duty to
provide for her:  but knowing her to be in good hands, it had not
then seemed needful to inflict the child on her sister, or to conquer
her own distaste to all connected with her unhappy brother James.  No
one had ever thought of the little Katharine Aileve Umfraville
becoming the head of the family; for then young Lord Umfraville was
in his full health and strength.

And why DID Lady Barbara only now feel the charge of the child a
duty?  Perhaps it was because, without knowing it, she had been
brought up to make an idol of the state and consequence of the
earldom, since she thought breeding up the girl for a countess
incumbent on her, when she had not felt tender compassion for the
brother's orphan grandchild.  So somewhat of the pomps of this world
may have come in to blind her eyes; but whatever she did was because
she thought it right to do, and when Kate thought of her as cross, it
was a great mistake.  Lady Barbara had great control of temper, and
did everything by rule, keeping herself as strictly as she did
everyone else except Lady Jane; and though she could not like such a
troublesome little incomprehensible wild cat as Katharine, she was
always trying to do her strict justice, and give her whatever in her
view was good or useful.

But Kate esteemed it a great holiday, when, as sometimes happened,
Aunt Barbara went out to spend the evening with some friends; and
she, under promise of being very good, used to be Aunt Jane's
companion.

Those were the times when her tongue took a holiday, and it must be
confessed, rather to the astonishment and confusion of Lady Jane.

"Aunt Jane, do tell me about yourself when you were a little girl?"

"Ah! my dear, that does not seem so very long ago.  Time passes very
quickly.  To think of such a great girl as you being poor James's
grandchild!"

"Was my grandpapa much older than you, Aunt Jane?"

"Only three years older, my dear."

"Then do tell me how you played with him?"

"I never did, my dear; I played with your Aunt Barbara."

"Dear me how stupid!  One can't do things without boys."

"No, my dear; boys always spoil girls' play, they are so rough."

"Oh! no, no, Aunt Jane; there's no fun unless one is rough--I mean,
not rough exactly; but it's no use playing unless one makes a jolly
good noise."

"My dear," said Lady Jane, greatly shocked, "I can't bear to hear you
talk so, nor to use such words."

"Dear me, Aunt Jane, we say 'Jolly' twenty times a day at St.
James's, and nobody minds."

"Ah! yes, you see you played with boys."

"But our boys are not rough, Aunt Jane," persisted Kate, who liked
hearing herself talk much better than anyone else.  "Mary says
Charlie is a great deal less riotous than I am, especially since he
went to school; and Armyn is too big to be riotous.  Oh dear, I wish
Mr. Brown would send Armyn to London; he said he would be sure to
come and see me, and he is the jolliest, most delightful fellow in
the world!"

"My dear child," said Lady Jane in her soft, distressed voice,
"indeed that is not the way young ladies talk of--of--boys."

"Armyn is not a boy, Aunt Jane; he's a man.  He is a clerk, you know,
and will get a salary in another year."

"A clerk!"

"Yes; in Mr. Brown's office, you know.  Aunt Jane, did you ever go
out to tea?"

"Yes, my dear; sometimes we drank tea with our little friends in the
dolls' tea-cups."

"Oh! you can't think what fun we have when Mrs. Brown asks us to tea.
She has got the nicest garden in the world, and a greenhouse, and a
great squirt-syringe, I mean, to water it; and we always used to get
it, till once, without meaning it, I squirted right through the
drawing-room window, and made such a puddle; and Mrs. Brown thought
it was Charlie, only I ran in and told of myself, and Mrs. Brown said
it was very generous, and gave me a Venetian weight with a little
hermit in a snow-storm; only it is worn out now, and won't snow, so I
gave it to little Lily when we had the whooping-cough."

By this time Lady Jane was utterly ignorant what the gabble was
about, except that Katharine had been in very odd company, and done
very strange things with those boys, and she gave a melancholy little
sound in the pause; but Kate, taking breath, ran on again -

"It is because Mrs. Brown is not used to educating children, you
know, that she fancies one wants a reward for telling the truth; I
told her so, but Mary thought it would vex her, and stopped my mouth.
Well, then we young ones--that is, Charlie, and Sylvia, and Armyn,
and I--drank tea out on the lawn.  Mary had to sit up and be company;
but we had such fun!  There was a great old laurel tree, and Armyn
put Sylvia and me up into the fork; and that was our nest, and we
were birds, and he fed us with strawberries; and we pretended to be
learning to fly, and stood up flapping our frocks and squeaking, and
Charlie came under and danced the branches about.  We didn't like
that; and Armyn said it was a shame, and hunted him away, racing all
round the garden; and we scrambled down by ourselves, and came down
on the slope.  It is a long green slope, right down to the river, all
smooth and turfy, you know; and I was standing at the top, when
Charlie comes slyly, and saying he would help the little bird to fly,
gave me one push, and down I went, roll, roll, tumble, tumble, till
Sylvia REALLY thought she heard my neck crack!  Wasn't it fun?"

"But the river, my dear!" said Lady Jane, shuddering.

"Oh! there was a good flat place before we came to the river, and I
stopped long before that!  So then, as we had been the birds of the
air, we thought we would be the fishes of the sea; and it was nice
and shallow, with dear little caddises and river cray-fish, and great
British pearl-shells at the bottom.  So we took off our shoes and
stockings, and Charlie and Armyn turned up their trousers, and we had
such a nice paddling.  I really thought I should have got a British
pearl then; and you know there were some in the breast-plate of
Venus."

"In the river!  Did your cousin allow that?"

"Oh yes; we had on our old blue checks; and Mary never minds anything
when Armyn is there to take care of us.  When they heard in the
drawing-room what we had been doing, they made Mary sing 'Auld Lang
Syne,' because of 'We twa hae paidlit in the burn frae morning sun
till dine;' and whenever in future times I meet Armyn, I mean to say,


'We twa hae paidlit in the burn
   Frae morning sun till dine;
We've wandered many a weary foot
   Sin auld lang syne.'


Or perhaps I shall be able to sing it, and that will be still
prettier."

And Kate sat still, thinking of the prettiness of the scene of the
stranger, alone in the midst of numbers, in the splendid drawing-
rooms, hearing the sweet voice of the lovely young countess at the
piano, singing this touching memorial of the simple days of
childhood.

Lady Jane meanwhile worked her embroidery, and thought what wonderful
disadvantages the poor child had had, and that Barbara really must
not be too severe on her, after she had lived with such odd people,
and that it was very fortunate that she had been taken away from them
before she had grown any older, or more used to them.

Soon after, Kate gave a specimen of her manners with boys.  When she
went into the dining-room at luncheon time one wet afternoon, she
heard steps on the stairs behind her aunt's, and there appeared a
very pleasant-looking gentleman, followed by a boy of about her own
age.

"Here is our niece," said Lady Barbara.  "Katharine, come and speak
to Lord de la Poer."

Kate liked his looks, and the way in which he held out his hand to
her; but she knew she should be scolded for her awkward greeting:  so
she put out her hand as if she had no use of her arm above the elbow,
hung down her head, and said "--do;" at least no more was audible.

But there was something comfortable and encouraging in the grasp of
the strong large hand over the foolish little fingers; and he quite
gave them to his son, whose shake was a real treat; the contact with
anything young was like meeting a follow-countryman in a foreign
land, though neither as yet spoke.

She found out that the boy's name was Ernest, and that his father was
taking him to school, but had come to arrange some business matters
for her aunts upon the way.  She listened with interest to Lord de la
Poer's voice, for she liked it, and was sure he was a greater friend
there than any she had before seen.  He was talking about Giles--that
was her uncle, the Colonel in India; and she first gathered from what
was passing that her uncle's eldest and only surviving son, an
officer in his own regiment, had never recovered a wound he had
received at the relief of Lucknow, and that if he did not get better
at Simlah, where his mother had just taken him, his father thought of
retiring and bringing him home, though all agreed that it would be a
very unfortunate thing that the Colonel should be obliged to resign
his command before getting promoted; but they fully thought he would
do so, for this was the last of his children; another son had been
killed in the Mutiny, and two or three little girls had been born and
died in India.

Kate had never known this.  Her aunts never told her anything, nor
talked over family affairs before her; and she was opening her ears
most eagerly, and turning her quick bright eyes from one speaker to
the other with such earnest attention, that the guest turned kindly
to her, and said, "Do you remember your uncle?"

"Oh dear no!  I was a little baby when he went away."

Kate never used DEAR as an adjective except at the beginning of a
letter, but always, and very unnecessarily, as an interjection; and
this time it was so emphatic as to bring Lady Barbara's eyes on her.

"Did you see either Giles or poor Frank before they went out to him?"

"Oh dear no!"

This time the DEAR was from the confusion that made her always do the
very thing she ought not to do.

"No; my niece has been too much separated from her own relations,"
said Lady Barbara, putting this as an excuse for the "Oh dears."

"I hope Mr. Wardour is quite well," said Lord de la Poer, turning
again to Kate.

"Oh yes, quite, thank you;" and then with brightening eyes, she
ventured on "Do you know him?"

"I saw him two or three times," he answered with increased kindness
of manner.  "Will you remember me to him when you write?"

"Very well," said Kate promptly; "but he says all those sort of
things are nonsense."

The horror of the two aunts was only kept in check by the good
manners that hindered a public scolding; but Lord de la Poer only
laughed heartily, and said, "Indeed!  What sort of things, may I ask,
Lady Caergwent?"

"Why--love, and regards, and remembrances.  Mary used to get letters
from her school-fellows, all filled with dearest loves, and we always
laughed at her; and Armyn used to say them by heart beforehand," said
Kate.

"I beg to observe," was the answer, in the grave tone which, however,
Kate understood as fun, "that I did not presume to send my love to
Mr. Wardour.  May not that make the case different?"

"Yes," said Kate meditatively; "only I don't know that your
remembrance would be of more use than your love."

"And are we never to send any messages unless they are of use?"  This
was a puzzling question, and Kate did not immediately reply.

"None for pleasure--eh?"

"Well, but I don't see what would be the pleasure."

"What, do you consider it pleasurable to be universally forgotten?"

"Nobody ever could forget Pa--my Uncle Wardour," cried Kate, with
eager vehemence flashing in her eyes.

"Certainly not," said Lord de la Poer, in a voice as if he were much
pleased with her; "he is not a man to be forgotten.  It is a
privilege to have been brought up by him.  But come, Lady Caergwent,
since you are so critical, will you be pleased to devise some message
for me, that may combine use, pleasure, and my deep respect for him?"
and as she sat beside him at the table, he laid his hand on hers, so
that she felt that he really meant what he said.

She sat fixed in deep thought; and her aunts, who had been miserable
all through the conversation, began to speak of other things; but in
the midst the shrill little voice broke in, "I know what!" and good-
natured Lord de la Poer turned at once, smiling, and saying, "Well,
what?"

"If you would help in the new aisle!  You know the church is not big
enough; there are so many people come into the district, with the new
ironworks, you know; and we have not got half room enough, and can't
make more, though we have three services; and we want to build a new
aisle, and it will cost 250 pounds, but we have only got 139 pounds
15s. 6d.  And if you would but be so kind as to give one sovereign
for it--that would be better than remembrances and respects, and all
that sort of thing."

"I rather think it would," said Lord de la Poer; and though Lady
Barbara eagerly exclaimed, "Oh! do not think of it; the child does
not know what she is talking of.  Pray excuse her--" he took out his
purse, and from it came a crackling smooth five-pound note, which he
put into the hand, saying, "There, my dear, cut that in two, and send
the two halves on different days to Mr. Wardour, with my best wishes
for his success in his good works.  Will that do?"

Kate turned quite red, and only perpetrated a choked sound of her
favourite -q.  For the whole world she could not have said more:  but
though she knew perfectly well that anger and wrath were hanging over
her, she felt happier than for many a long week.

Presently the aunts rose, and Lady Barbara said to her in the low
ceremonious voice that was a sure sign of warning and displeasure,
"You had better come up stairs with us, Katharine, and amuse Lord
Ernest in the back drawing-room while his father is engaged with us."

Kate's heart leapt up at the sound "amuse."  She popped her precious
note into her pocket, bounded up-stairs, and opened the back drawing-
room door for her playfellow, as he brought up the rear of the
procession.

Lord de la Poer and Lady Barbara spread the table with papers; Lady
Jane sat by; the children were behind the heavy red curtains that
parted off the second room.  There was a great silence at first, then
began a little tittering, then a little chattering, then presently a
stifled explosion.  Lady Barbara began to betray some restlessness;
she really must see what that child was about.

"No, no," said Lord de la Poer; "leave them in peace.  That poor girl
will never thrive unless you let her use her voice and limbs.  I
shall make her come over and enjoy herself with my flock when we come
up en masse."

The explosions were less carefully stifled, and there were some
sounds of rushing about, some small shrieks, and then the door shut,
and there was a silence again.

By this it may be perceived that Kate and Ernest had become tolerably
intimate friends.  They had informed each other of what games were
their favourites; Kate had told him the Wardour names and ages; and
required from him in return those of his brothers and sisters.  She
had been greatly delighted by learning that Adelaide was no end of a
hand at climbing trees; and that whenever she should come and stay at
their house, Ernest would teach her to ride.  And then they began to
consider what play was possible under the present circumstances--
beginning they hardly knew how, by dodging one another round and
round the table, making snatches at one another, gradually assuming
the characters of hunter and Red Indian.  Only when the hunter had
snatched up Aunt Jane's tortoise-shell paper-cutter to stab with,
complaining direfully that it was a stupid place, with nothing for a
gun, and the Red Indian's crinoline had knocked down two chairs, she
recollected the consequences in time to strangle her own war-whoop,
and suggested that they should be safer on the stairs; to which
Ernest readily responded, adding that there was a great gallery at
home all full of pillars and statues, the jolliest place in the world
for making a row.

"Oh dear! oh dear! how I hope I shall go there!" cried Kate, swinging
between the rails of the landing-place.  "I do want of all things to
see a statue."

"A statue! why, don't you see lots every day?"

"Oh!  I don't mean great equestrian things like the Trafalgar Square
ones, or the Duke--or anything big and horrid, like Achilles in the
Park, holding up a shield like a green umbrella.  I want to see the
work of the great sculptor Julio Romano."

"He wasn't a sculptor."

"Yes, he was; didn't he sculp--no, what is the word--Hermione.  No; I
mean they pretended he had done her."

"Hermione!  What, have you seen the 'Winter's Tale?'"

"Papa--Uncle Wardour, that is--read it to us last Christmas."

"Well, I've seen it.  Alfred and I went to it last spring with our
tutor."

"Oh! then do, pray, let us play at it.  Look, there's a little stand
up there, where I have always so wanted to get up and be Hermione,
and descend to the sound of slow music.  There's a musical-box in the
back drawing-room that will make the music.

"Very well; but I must be the lion and bear killing the courtier."

"O yes--very well, and I'll be courtier; only I must get a sofa-
cushion to be Perdita."

"And where's Bohemia?"

"Oh! the hall must be Bohemia, and the stair-carpet the sea, because
then the aunts won't hear the lion and bear roaring."

With these precautions, the characteristic roaring and growling of
lion and bear, and the shrieks of the courtier, though not absolutely
unheard in the drawing-room, produced no immediate results.  But in
the very midst of Lady Jane's signing her name to some paper, she
gave a violent start, and dropped the pen, for they were no stage
shrieks--"Ah! ah!  It is coming down!  Help me down!  Ernest, Ernest!
help me down!  Ah!"--and then a great fall.

The little mahogany bracket on the wall had been mounted by the help
of a chair, but it was only fixed into the plaster, being intended to
hold a small lamp, and not for young ladies to stand on; so no sooner
was the chair removed by which Kate had mounted, than she felt not
only giddy in her elevation, but found her pedestal loosening!  There
was no room to jump; and Ernest, perhaps enjoying what he regarded as
a girl's foolish fright, was a good way off, endeavouring to wind up
the musical-box, when the bracket gave way, and Hermione descended
precipitately with anything but the sound of soft music; and as the
inhabitants of the drawing-room rushed out to the rescue, her legs
were seen kicking in the air upon the landing-place; Ernest looking
on, not knowing whether to laugh or be dismayed.

Lord de la Poer picked her up, and sat down on the stairs with her
between his knees to look her over and see whether she were hurt, or
what was the matter, while she stood half sobbing with the fright and
shock.  He asked his son rather severely what he had been doing to
her.

"He did nothing," gasped Kate; "I was only Hermione."

"Yes, that's all, Papa," repeated Ernest; "it is all the fault of the
plaster."

And a sort of explanation was performed between the two children, at
which Lord de la Poer could hardly keep his gravity, though he was
somewhat vexed at the turn affairs had taken.  He was not entirely
devoid of awe of the Lady Barbara, and would have liked his children
to be on their best behaviour before her.

"Well," he said, "I am glad there is no worse harm done.  You had
better defer your statueship till we can find you a sounder pedestal,
Lady Caergwent."

"Oh! call me Kate," whispered she in his ear, turning redder than the
fright had made her.

He smiled, and patted her hand; then added, "We must go and beg
pardon, I suppose; I should not wonder if the catastrophe had damaged
Aunt Jane the most; and if so, I don't know what will be done to us!"

He was right; Lady Barbara had only satisfied herself that no bones
had been broken, and then turned back to reassure her sister; but
Lady Jane could not be frightened without suffering for it, and was
lying back on the sofa, almost faint with palpitation, when Lord de
la Poer, with Kate's hand in his, came to the door, looking much more
consciously guilty than his son, who on the whole was more diverted
than penitent at the commotion they had made.

Lady Barbara looked very grand and very dignified, but Lord de la
Poer was so grieved for Lady Jane's indisposition, that she was
somewhat softened; and then he began asking pardon, blending himself
with the children so comically, that in all her fright and anxiety,
Kate wondered how her aunt could help laughing.

It never was Lady Barbara's way to reprove before a guest; but this
good gentleman was determined that she should not reserve her
displeasure for his departure, and he would not go away till he had
absolutely made her promise that his little friend, as he called
Kate, should hear nothing more about anything that had that day taken
place.

Lady Barbara kept her promise.  She uttered no reproof either on her
niece's awkward greeting, her abrupt conversation and its tendency to
pertness, nor on the loudness of the unlucky game and the impropriety
of climbing; nor even on what had greatly annoyed her, the asking for
the subscription to the church.  There was neither blame nor
punishment; but she could not help a certain cold restraint of
manner, by which Kate knew that she was greatly displeased, and
regarded her as the most hopeless little saucy romp that ever maiden
aunt was afflicted with.

And certainly it was hard on her.  She had a great regard for Lord de
la Poer, and thought his a particularly well trained family; and she
was especially desirous that her little niece should appear to
advantage before him.  Nothing, she was sure, but Katharine's innate
naughtiness could have made that well-behaved little Ernest break out
into rudeness; and though his father had shown such good nature, he
must have been very much shocked.  What was to be done to tame this
terrible little savage, was poor Lady Barbara's haunting thought,
morning, noon, and night!

And what was it that Kate did want?  I believe nothing could have
made her perfectly happy, or suited to her aunt; but that she would
have been infinitely happier and better off had she had the spirit of
obedience, of humility, or of unselfishness.



CHAPTER V.



The one hour of play with Ernest de la Poer had the effect of making
Kate long more and more for a return of "fun," and of intercourse
with beings of her own age and of high spirits.

She wove to herself dreams of possible delights with Sylvia and
Charlie, if the summer visit could be paid to them; and at other
times she imagined her Uncle Giles's two daughters still alive, and
sent home for education, arranging in her busy brain wonderful
scenes, in which she, with their assistance, should be happy in spite
of Aunt Barbara.

These fancies, however, would be checked by the recollection, that it
was shocking to lower two happy spirits in Heaven into playful little
girls upon earth; and she took refuge in the thought of the coming
chance of playfellows, when Lord de la Poer was to bring his family
to London.  She had learnt the names and ages of all the ten; and
even had her own theories as to what her contemporaries were to be
like--Mary and Fanny, Ernest's elders, and Adelaide and Grace, who
came next below him; she had a vision for each of them, and felt as
if she already knew them.

Meanwhile, the want of the amount of air and running about to which
she had been used, did really tell upon her; she had giddy feelings
in the morning, tired limbs, and a weary listless air, and fretted
over her lessons at times.  So they showed her to the doctor, who
came to see Lady Jane every alternate day; and when he said she
wanted more exercise, her morning walk was made an hour longer, and a
shuttlecock and battledores were bought, with which it was decreed
that Mrs. Lacy should play with her for exactly half an hour every
afternoon, or an hour when it was too wet to go out.

It must be confessed that this was a harder task to both than the
music lessons.  Whether it were from the difference of height, or
from Kate's innate unhandiness, they never could keep that unhappy
shuttlecock up more than three times; and Mrs. Lacy looked as grave
and melancholy all the time as if she played it for a punishment,
making little efforts to be cheerful that were sad to see.  Kate
hated it, and was always cross; and willingly would they have given
it up by mutual consent, but the instant the tap of the cork against
the parchment ceased, if it were not half-past five, down sailed Lady
Barbara to inquire after her prescription.

She had been a famous battledore-player in the galleries of Caergwent
Castle; and once when she took up the battledore to give a lesson, it
seemed as if, between her and Mrs. Lacy, the shuttlecock would not
come down--they kept up five hundred and eighty-one, and then only
stopped because it was necessary for her to go to dinner.

She could not conceive anyone being unable to play at battledore, and
thought Kate's failures and dislike pure perverseness.  Once Kate by
accident knocked her shuttlecock through the window, and hoped she
had got rid of it; but she was treated as if she had done it out of
naughtiness, and a new instrument of torture, as she called it, was
bought for her.

It was no wonder she did not see the real care for her welfare, and
thought this intensely cruel and unkind; but it was a great pity that
she visited her vexation on poor Mrs. Lacy, to whom the game was even
a greater penance than to herself, especially on a warm day, with a
bad headache.

Even in her best days at home, Kate had resisted learning to take
thought for others.  She had not been considerate of Mary's toil, nor
of Mr. Wardour's peace, except when Armyn or Sylvia reminded her; and
now that she had neither of them to put it into her mind, she never
once thought of her governess as one who ought to be spared and
pitied.  Yet if she had been sorry for Mrs. Lacy, and tried to spare
her trouble and annoyance, how much irritability and peevishness, and
sense of constant naughtiness, would have been prevented!  And it was
that feeling of being always naughty that was what had become the
real dreariness of Kate's present home, and was far worse than the
music, the battledore, or even the absence of fun.

At last came a message that Lady Caergwent was to be dressed for
going out to make a call with Lady Barbara as soon as luncheon was
over.

It could be on no one but the De la Poers; and Kate was so delighted,
that she executed all manner of little happy hops, skips, and
fidgets, all the time of her toilette, and caused many an
expostulation of "Mais, Miladi!" from Josephine, before the pretty
delicate blue and white muslin, worked white jacket, and white
ribboned and feathered hat, were adjusted.  Lady Barbara kept her
little countess very prettily and quietly dressed; but it was at the
cost of infinite worry of herself, Kate, and Josephine, for there
never was a child whom it was so hard to keep in decent trim.
Armyn's old saying, that she ought to be always kept dressed in
sacking, as the only thing she could not spoil, was a true one; for
the sharp hasty movements, and entire disregard of where she stepped,
were so ruinous, that it was on the records of the Bruton Street
household, that she had gone far to demolish eight frocks in ten
days.

However, on this occasion she did get safe down to the carriage--
clothes, gloves, and all, without detriment or scolding; and jumped
in first.  She was a long way yet from knowing that, though her aunts
gave the first place to her rank, it would have been proper in her to
yield it to their years, and make way for them.

She was too childish to have learnt this as a matter of good
breeding, but she might have learnt it of a certain parable, which
she could say from beginning to end, that she should "sit not down in
the highest room."

Her aunt sat down beside her, and spent the first ten minutes of the
drive in enjoining on her proper behaviour at Lady de la Poer's.  The
children there were exceedingly well brought up, she said, and she
was very desirous they should be her niece's friends; but she was
certain that Lady de la Poer would allow no one to associate with
them who did not behave properly.

"Lord de la Poer was very kind to me just as I was," said Kate, in
her spirit of contradiction, which was always reckless of
consequences.

"Gentlemen are no judges of what is becoming to a little girl," said
Lady Barbara severely.  "Unless you make a very different impression
upon Lady de la Poer, she will never permit you to be the friend of
her daughters."

"I wonder how I am to make an impression," meditated Kate, as they
drove on; "I suppose it would make an impression if I stood up and
repeated, 'Ruin seize thee, ruthless king!' or something of that
sort, as soon as I got in.  But one couldn't do that; and I am afraid
nothing will happen.  If the horses would only upset us at the door,
and Aunt Barbara be nicely insensible, and the young countess show
the utmost presence of mind!  But nothing nice and like a book ever
does happen.  And after all, I believe that it is all nonsense about
making impressions.  Thinking of them is all affectation; and one
ought to be as simple and unconscious as one can."  A conclusion
which did honour to the countess's sense.  In fact, she had plenty of
sense, if only she had ever used it for herself, instead of for the
little ladies she drew on her quires of paper.

Lady Barbara had started early, as she really wished to find her
friends at home; and accordingly, when the stairs were mounted, and
the aunt and niece were ushered into a pretty bright-looking drawing-
room, there they found all that were not at school enjoying their
after-dinner hour of liberty with their father and mother.

Lord de la Poer himself had the youngest in his arms, and looked very
much as if he had only just scrambled up from the floor; his wife was
really sitting on the ground, helping two little ones to put up a
puzzle of wild beasts; and there was a little herd of girls at the
farther corner, all very busy over something, towards which Kate's
longing eyes at once turned--even in the midst of Lord de la Poer's
very kind greeting, and his wife's no less friendly welcome.

It was true that, as Lady Barbara had said, they were all exceedingly
well-bred children.  Even the little fellow in his father's arms,
though but eighteen months old, made no objection to hold out his fat
hand graciously, and showed no shyness when Lady Barbara kissed him!
and the others all waited quietly over their several occupations,
neither shrinking foolishly from notice, nor putting themselves
forward to claim it.  Only the four sisters came up, and took their
own special visitor into the midst of them as their own property; the
elder of them, however, at a sign from her mamma, taking the baby in
her arms, and carrying him off, followed by the other two small ones-
-only pausing at the door for him to kiss his little hand, and wave
it in the prettiest fashion of baby stateliness.

The other sisters drew Kate back with them into the room, where they
had been busy.  Generally, however much she and Sylvia might wish it,
they had found acquaintance with other children absolutely impossible
in the presence of grown-up people, whose eyes and voices seemed to
strike all parties dumb.  But these children seemed in no wise
constrained:  one of them said at once, "We are so glad you are come.
Mamma said she thought you would before we went out, one of those
days."

"Isn't it horrid going out in London?" asked Kate, at once set at
ease.

"It is not so nice as it is at home," said one of the girls;
laughing; "except when it is our turn to go out with Mamma."

"She takes us all out in turn," explained another, "from Fanny, down
to little Cecil the baby--and that is our great time for talking to
her, when one has her all alone."

"And does she never take you out in the country?"

"Oh yes! but there are people staying with us then, or else she goes
out with Papa.  It is not a regular drive every day, as it is here."

Kate would not have had a drive with Aunt Barbara every day, for more
than she could well say.  However, she was discreet enough not to say
so, and asked what they did on other days.

"Oh, we walk with Miss Oswald in the park, and she tells us stories,
or we make them.  We don't tell stories in the country, unless we
have to walk straight along the drives, that, as Papa says, we may
have some solace."

Then it was explained that Miss Oswald was their governess, and that
they were very busy preparing for her birth-day.  They were making a
paper-case for her, all themselves, and this hour was their only time
for doing it out of her sight in secret.

"But why do you make it yourselves?" said Kate; "one can buy such
beauties at the bazaars."

"Yes; but Mamma says a present one has taken pains to make, is worth
a great deal more than what is only bought; for trouble goes for more
than money."

"But one can make nothing but nasty tumble-to-pieces things,"
objected Kate.

"That depends," said Lady Mary, in a very odd merry voice; and the
other two, Adelaide and Grace, who were far too much alike for Kate
to guess which was which, began in a rather offended manner to assure
her that THEIR paper-case was to be anything but tumble-to-pieces.
Fanny was to bind it, and Papa had promised to paste its back and
press it.

"And Mamma drove with me to Richmond, on purpose to get leaves to
spatter," added the other sister.

Then they showed Kate--whose eyes brightened at anything approaching
to a mess--that they had a piece of coloured cardboard, on which
leaves, chiefly fern, were pinned tightly down, and that the entire
sheet was then covered with a spattering of ink from a tooth-brush
drawn along the tooth of a comb.  When the process was completed, the
form of the loaf remained in the primitive colour of the card, thrown
out by the cloud of ink-spots, and only requiring a tracing of its
veins by a pen.

A space had been cleared for these operations on a side-table; and in
spite of the newspaper, on which the appliances were laid, and even
the comb and brush, there was no look of disarrangement or
untidiness.

"Oh, do--do show me how you do it!" cried Kate, who had had nothing
to do for months, with the dear delight of making a mess, except what
she could contrive with her paints.

And Lady Grace resumed a brown-holland apron and bib, and opening her
hands with a laugh, showed their black insides, then took up her
implements.

"Oh, do--do let me try," was Kate's next cry; "one little bit to show
Sylvia Wardour."

With one voice the three sisters protested that she had better not;
she was not properly equipped, and would ink herself all over.  If
she would pin down a leaf upon the scrap she held up, Grace should
spatter it for her, and they would make it up into anything she
liked.

But this did not satisfy Kate at all; the pinning out of the leaf was
stupid work compared with the glory of making the ink fly.  In vain
did Adelaide represent that all the taste and skill was in the laying
out the leaves, and pinning them down, and that anyone could put on
the ink; in vain did Mary represent the dirtiness of the work:  this
was the beauty of it in her eyes; and the sight of the black dashes
sputtering through the comb filled her with emulation; so that she
entreated, almost piteously, to be allowed to "do" an ivy loaf, which
she had hastily, and not very carefully, pinned out with Mary's
assistance--that is, she had feebly and unsteadily stuck every pin,
and Mary had steadied them.

The new friends consented, seeing how much she was set on it; but
Fanny, who had returned from the nursery, insisted on precautions--
took off the jacket, turned up the frock sleeves, and tied on an
apron; though Kate fidgeted all the time, as if a great injury were
being inflicted on her; and really, in her little frantic spirit,
thought Lady Fanny a great torment, determined to delay her delight
till her aunt should go away and put a stop to it.

When once she had the brush, she was full of fun and merriment, and
kept her friends much amused by her droll talk, half to them, half to
her work.

"There's a portentous cloud, isn't there?  An inky cloud, if ever
there was one!  Take care, inhabitants below; growl, growl, there's
the thunder; now comes the rain; hail, hail, all hail, like the
beginning of Macbeth."

"Which the Frenchman said was in compliment to the climate," said
Fanny; at which the whole company fell into convulsions of laughing;
and neither Kate nor Grace exactly knew what hands or brush or comb
were about; but whereas the little De La Poers had from their infancy
laughed almost noiselessly, and without making faces, Kate for her
misfortune had never been broken of a very queer contortion of her
lips, and a cackle like a bantam hen's.

When this unlucky cackle had been several times repeated, it caused
Lady Barbara, who had been sitting with her back to the inner room,
to turn round.

Poor Lady Barbara!  It would not be easy to describe her feelings
when she saw the young lady, whom she had brought delicately blue and
white, like a speedwell flower, nearly as black as a sweep.

Lord de la Poer broke out into an uncontrollable laugh, half at the
aunt, half at the niece.  "Why, she has grown a moustache!" he
exclaimed.  "Girls, what have you been doing to her?" and walking up
to them, he turned Kate round to a mirror, where she beheld her own
brown eyes looking out of a face dashed over with black specks,
thicker about the mouth, giving her altogether much the colouring of
a very dark man closely shaved.  It was so exceedingly comical, that
she went off into fits of laughing, in which she was heartily joined
by all the merry party.

"There," said Lord de la Poer, "do you wa