 I assure you!  She was a very nice little companion, and
we quite enjoyed her readiness and intelligent interest; but she was
a little too much excited to remember what she was about when she was
startled."

"And no wonder," said Lady Jane.  "It was a most tremendous storm,
and I feel quite shaken by it still.  You can't be angry with her for
being terrified by it, Barbara dear, or I shall know what you think
of me;--half drowned too--poor child!"

And Aunt Jane put her soft arm round Kate, and put her cheek to hers.
Perhaps the night of Kate's tears had really made Jane resolved to
try to soften even Barbara's displeasure; and the little girl felt it
very kind, though her love of truth made her cry out roughly, "Not
half drowned!  Mary held me fast, and Lord de la Poer pulled me out!"

"I am sure you ought to be extremely thankful to them," said Lady
Barbara, "and overcome with shame at all the trouble and annoyance
you have given!"

Lady de la Poer quite understood what the little girl meant by her
aunt being dreadful.  She would gladly have protected her; but it was
not what could be begged off like punishment, nor would truth allow
her to say there had been no trouble nor annoyance.  So what she did
say was, "When one has ten children, one reckons upon such things!"
and smiled as if they were quite pleasant changes to her.

"Not, I am sure, with your particularly quiet little girls," said
Aunt Barbara.  "I am always hoping that Katharine may take example by
them."

"Take care what you hope, Barbara," said Lady de la Poer, smiling:
"and at any rate forgive this poor little maiden for our disaster, or
my husband will be in despair."

"I have nothing to forgive," said Lady Barbara gravely.  "Katharine
cannot have seriously expected punishment for what is not a moral
fault.  The only difference will be the natural consequences to
herself of her folly.--You had better go down to the schoolroom,
Katharine, have your tea, and then go to bed; it is nearly the usual
time."

Lady de la Poer warmly kissed the child, and then remained a little
while with the aunts, trying to remove what she saw was the
impression, that Kate had been complaining of severe treatment, and
taking the opportunity of telling them what she herself thought of
the little girl.  But though Aunt Barbara listened politely, she
could not think that Lady de la Poer knew anything about the
perverseness, heedlessness, ill-temper, disobedience, and rude
ungainly ways, that were so tormenting.  She said no word about them
herself, because she would not expose her niece's faults; but when
her friend talked Kate's bright candid conscientious character, her
readiness, sense, and intelligence, she said to herself, and perhaps
justly, that here was all the difference between at home and abroad,
an authority and a stranger.

Meantime, Kate wondered what would be the natural consequences of her
folly.  Would she have a rheumatic fever or consumption, like a child
in a book?--and she tried breathing deep, and getting up a little
cough, to see if it was coming!  Or would the Lord Chancellor hear of
it?  He was new bugbear recently set up, and more haunting than even
a gunpowder treason in the cellars!  What did he do with the seals?
Did he seal up mischievous heiresses in closets, as she had seen a
door fastened by two seals and a bit of string?  Perhaps the Court of
Chancery was full of such prisons!  And was the woolsack to smother
them with, like the princes in the Tower?

It must be owned that it was only when half asleep at night that Kate
was so absurd.  By day she knew very well that the Lord Chancellor
was only a great lawyer; but she also knew that whenever there was
any puzzle or difficulty about her or her affairs, she always heard
something mysteriously said about applying to the Lord Chancellor,
till she began to really suspect that it was by his commands that
Aunt Barbara was so stern with her; and that if he knew of her fall
into the pond, something terrible would come of it.  Perhaps that was
why the De la Poers kept her name so secret!

She trembled as she thought of it; and here was another added to her
many terrors.  Poor little girl!  If she had rightly feared and loved
One, she would have had no room for the many alarms that kept her
heart fluttering!



CHAPTER IX.



It may be doubted whether Countess Kate ever did in her childhood
discover what her Aunt Barbara meant by the natural consequences of
her folly, but she suffered from them nevertheless.  When the summer
was getting past its height of beauty, and the streets were all sun
and misty heat, and the grass in the parks looked brown, and the
rooms were so close that even Aunt Jane had one window open, Kate
grew giddy in the head almost every morning, and so weary and dull
all day that she had hardly spirit to do anything but read story-
books.  And Mrs. Lacy was quite poorly too, though not saying much
about it; was never quite without a head-ache, and was several times
obliged to send Kate out for her evening walk with Josephine.

It was high time to be going out of town; and Mrs. Lacy was to go and
be with her son in his vacation.

This was the time when Kate and the Wardours had hoped to be
together.  But "the natural consequence" of the nonsense Kate had
talked, about being "always allowed" to do rude and careless things,
and her wild rhodomontade about romping games with the boys, had
persuaded her aunts that they were very improper people for her to be
with, and that it would be wrong to consent to her going to Oldburgh.

That was one natural consequence of her folly.  Another was that when
the De la Poers begged that she might spend the holidays with them,
and from father and mother downwards were full of kind schemes for
her happiness and good, Lady Barbara said to her sister that it was
quite impossible; these good friends did not know what they were
asking, and that the child would again expose herself in some way
that would never be forgotten, unless she were kept in their own
sight till she had been properly tamed and reduced to order.

It was self-denying in Lady Barbara to refuse that invitation, for
she and her sister would have been infinitely more comfortable
together without their troublesome countess--above all when they had
no governess to relieve them of her.  The going out of town was sad
enough to them, for they had always paid a long visit at Caergwent
Castle, which had felt like their home through the lifetime of their
brother and nephew; but now it was shut up, and their grief for their
young nephew came back all the more freshly at the time of year when
they were used to be kindly entertained by him in their native home.

But as they could not go there, they went to Bournemouth and the
first run Kate took upon the sands took away all the giddiness from
her head, and put an end to the tired feeling in her limbs!  It
really was a run!  Aunt Barbara gave her leave to go out with
Josephine; and though Josephine said it was very sombre and savage,
between the pine-woods and the sea, Kate had not felt her heart leap
with such fulness of enjoyment since she had made snow-balls last
winter at home.  She ran down to the waves, and watched them sweep in
and curl over and break, as if she could never have enough of them;
and she gazed at the grey outline of the Isle of Wight opposite,
feeling as if there was something very great in really seeing an
island.

When she came in, there was so much glow on her brown check, and her
eyelids looked so much less heavy, that both the aunts gazed at her
with pleasure, smiled to one another, and Lady Jane kissed her, while
Lady Barbara said, "This was the right thing."

She was to be out as much as possible, so her aunt made a set of new
rules for the day.  There was to be a walk before breakfast; then
breakfast; then Lady Barbara heard her read her chapter in the Bible,
and go through her music.  And really the music was not half as bad
as might have been expected with Aunt Barbara.  Kate was too much
afraid of her to give the half attention she had paid to poor Mrs.
Lacy--fright and her aunt's decision of manner forced her to mind
what she was about; and though Aunt Barbara found her really very
dull and unmusical, she did get on better than before, and learnt
something, though more like a machine than a musician.

Then she went out again till the hottest part of the day, during
which a bit of French and of English reading was expected from her,
and half an hour of needle-work; then her dinner; and then out again-
-with her aunts this time, Aunt Jane in a wheeled-chair, and Aunt
Barbara walking with her--this was rather dreary; but when they went
in she was allowed to stay out with Josephine, with only one interval
in the house for tea, till it grew dark, and she was so sleepy with
the salt wind, that she was ready for bed, and had no time to think
of the Lord Chancellor.

At first, watching those wonderful and beautiful waves was pleasure
enough; and then she was allowed, to her wonder and delight, to have
a holland dress, and dig in the sand, making castles and moats, or
rocks and shipwrecks, with beautiful stories about them; and
sometimes she hunted for the few shells and sea-weeds there, or she
sat down and read some of her favourite books, especially poetry--it
suited the sea so well; and she was trying to make Ellen's Isle and
all the places of the "Lady of the Lake" in sand, only she never had
time to finish them, and they always were either thrown down or
washed away before she could return to them.

But among all these amusements, she was watching the families of
children who played together, happy creatures!  The little sturdy
boys, that dabbled about so merrily, and minded so little the "Now
Masters" of their indignant nurses; the little girls in brown hats,
with their baskets full; the big boys, that even took off shoes, and
dabbled in the shallow water; the great sieges of large castles,
where whole parties attacked and defended--it was a sort of
melancholy glimpse of fairy-land to her, for she had only been
allowed to walk on the beach with Josephine on condition she never
spoke to the other children.

Would the Lord Chancellor be after her if she did?  Her heart quite
yearned for those games, or even to be able to talk to one of those
little damsels; and one day when a bright-faced girl ran after her
with a piece of weed that she had dropped, she could hardly say
"thank you" for her longing to say more; and many were the harangues
she composed within herself to warn the others not to wish to change
places with her, for to be a countess was very poor fun indeed.

However, one morning at the end of the first week, Kate looked up
from a letter from Sylvia, and said with great glee, "Aunt Barbara!
O Aunt Barbara!  Alice and the other Sylvia--Sylvia Joanna--are
coming!  I may play with them, mayn't I?"

"Who are they?" said her aunt gravely.

"Uncle Wardour's nieces," said Kate; "Sylvia's cousins, you know,
only we never saw them; but they are just my age; and it will be such
fun--only Alice is ill, I believe.  Pray--please--let me play with
them!" and Kate had tears in her eyes.

"I shall see about it when they come."

"Oh, but--but I can't have them there--Sylvia's own, own cousins--and
not play with them!  Please, Aunt Barbara!"

"You ought to know that this impetuosity never disposes me
favourably, Katharine; I will inquire and consider."

Kate had learnt wisdom enough not to say any more just then; but the
thought of sociability, the notion of chattering freely to young
companions, and of a real game at play, and the terror of having all
this withheld, and of being thought too proud and haughty for the
Wardours, put her into such an agony, that she did not know what she
was about, made mistakes even in reading, and blundered her music
more than she had over done under Lady Barbara's teaching; and then,
when her aunt reproved her, she could not help laying down her head
and bursting into a fit of crying.  However, she had not forgotten
the terrible tea-drinking, and was resolved not to be as bad as at
that time, and she tried to stop herself, exclaiming between her
sobs, "O Aunt Bar--bar--a,--I--can--not--help it!"  And Lady Barbara
did not scold or look stern.  Perhaps she saw that the little girl
was really trying to chock herself, for she said quite kindly,
"Don't, my dear."

And just then, to Kate's great wonder, in came Lady Jane, though it
was full half an hour earlier than she usually left her room; and
Lady Barbara looked up to her, and said, quite as if excusing
herself, "Indeed, Jane, I have not been angry with her."

And Kate, somehow, understanding that she might, flung herself down
by Aunt Jane, and hid her face in her lap, not crying any more,
though the sobs were not over, and feeling the fondling hands on her
hair very tender and comforting, though she wondered to hear them
talk as if she were asleep or deaf--or perhaps they thought their
voices too low, or their words too long and fine for her to
understand; nor perhaps did she, though she gathered their drift well
enough, and that kind Aunt Jane was quite pleading for herself in
having come to the rescue.

"I could not help it, indeed--you remember Lady de la Poer, Dr.
Woodman, both--excitable, nervous temperament--almost hysterical."

"This unfortunate intelligence--untoward coincidence--" said Lady
Barbara.  "But I have been trying to make her feel I am not in anger,
and I hope there really was a struggle for self-control."

Kate took her head up again at this, a little encouraged; and Lady
Jane kissed her forehead, and repeated, "Aunt Barbara was not angry
with you, my dear."

"No, for I think you have tried to conquer yourself," said Lady
Barbara.  She did not think it wise to tell Kate that she thought she
could not help it, though oddly enough, the very thing had just been
said over the child's head, and Kate ventured on it to get up, and
say quietly, "Yes, it was not Aunt Barbara's speaking to me that made
me cry, but I am so unhappy about Alice and Sylvia Joanna;" and a
soft caress from Aunt Jane made her venture to go on.  "It is not
only the playing with them, though I do wish for that very very much
indeed; but it would be so unkind, and so proud and ungrateful, to
despise my own cousin's cousins!"

This was more like the speeches Kate made in her own head than
anything she had ever said to her aunts; and it was quite just
besides, and not spoken in naughtiness, and Lady Barbara did not
think it wrong to show that she attended to it.  "You are right,
Katharine," she said; "no one wishes you to be either proud or
ungrateful.  I would not wish entirely to prevent you from seeing the
children of the family, but it must not be till there is some
acquaintance between myself and their mother, and I cannot tell
whether you can be intimate with them till I know what sort of
children they are.  Much, too, must depend on yourself, and whether
you will behave well with them."

Kate gave a long sigh, and looked up relieved; and for some time she
and her aunt were not nearly so much at war as hitherto, but seemed
to be coming to a somewhat better understanding.

Yet it rather puzzled Kate.  She seemed to herself to have got this
favour for crying for it; and it was a belief at home, not only that
nothing was got by crying, but that if by some strange chance it
were, it never came to good; and she began the more to fear some
disappointment about the expected Wardours.

For two or three days she was scanning every group on the sands with
all her might, in hopes of some likeness to Sylvia, but at last she
was taken by surprise:  just as she was dressed, and Aunt Barbara was
waiting in the drawing-room for Aunt Jane, there came a knock at the
door, and "Mrs. Wardour" was announced.

In came a small, quiet-looking lady in mourning, and with her a girl
of about Kate's own age; there was some curtseying and greeting
between the two ladies, and her aunt said, "Here is my niece.--Come
and speak to Mrs. Wardour, my dear," and motioned her forwards.

Now to be motioned forwards by Aunt Barbara always made Kate shrink
back into herself, and the presence of a little girl before elders
likewise rendered her shy and bashful, so she came forth as if
intensely disgusted, put out her hand as if she were going to poke,
and muttered her favourite "--do" so awkwardly and coldly, that Lady
Barbara felt how proud and ungracious it looked, and to make up said,
"My niece has been very eager for your coming."  And then the two
little girls drew off into the window, and looked at each other under
their eyelashes in silence.

Sylvia Joanna Wardour was not like her namesake at home, Sylvia
Katharine.  She was a thin, slight, quiet-looking child, with so
little to note about her face, that Kate was soon wondering at her
dress being so much smarter than her own was at present.  She herself
had on a holland suit with a deep cape, which, except that they were
adorned with labyrinths of white braid, were much what she had worn
at home, also a round brown hat, shading her face from the sun;
whereas Sylvia's face was exposed by a little turban hat so deeply
edged with blue velvet, that the white straw was hardly seen; had a
little watered-silk jacket, and a little flounced frock of a dark
silk figured with blue, that looked slightly fuzzed out; and perhaps
she was not at ease in this fine dress, for she stood with her head
down, and one hand on the window-sill, pretending to look out of
window, but really looking at Kate.

Meanwhile the two grown-up ladies were almost as stiff and shy,
though they could not keep dead silence like the children.  Mrs.
Wardour had heard before that Lady Barbara Umfraville was a
formidable person, and was very much afraid of her; and Lady Barbara
was not a person to set anyone at ease.

So there was a little said about taking the liberty of calling, for
her brother-in-law was so anxious to hear of Lady Caergwent:  and
Lady Barbara said her niece was very well and healthy, and had only
needed change of air.

And then came something in return about Mrs. Wardour's other little
girl, a sad invalid, she said, on whose account they were come to
Bournemouth; and there was a little more said of bathing, and
walking, and whether the place was full; and then Mrs. Wardour jumped
up and said she was detaining Lady Barbara, and took leave; Kate,
though she had not spoken a word to Sylvia Wardour, looking at her
wistfully with all her eyes, and feeling more than usually silly.

And when the guests were gone her aunt told her how foolish her want
of manner was, and how she had taken the very means to make them
think she was not glad to see them.  She hung down her head, and
pinched the ends of her gloves; she knew it very well, but that did
not make it a bit more possible to find a word to say to a stranger
before the elders, unless the beginning were made for her as by the
De la Poers.

However, she knew it would be very different out of doors, and her
heart bounded when her aunt added, "They seem to be quiet, lady-like,
inoffensive people, and I have no objection to your associating with
the little girl in your walks, as long as I do not see that it makes
you thoughtless and ungovernable."

"Oh, thank you, thank you, Aunt Barbara!" cried Kate, with a bouncing
bound that did not promise much for her thought or her
governableness; but perhaps Lady Barbara recollected what her own
childhood would have been without Jane, for she was not much
discomposed, only she said,

"It is very odd you should be so uncivil to the child in her
presence, and so ecstatic now!  However, take care you do not get too
familiar.  Remember, these Wardours are no relations, and I will not
have you letting them call you by your Christian name."

Kate's bright looks sank.  That old married-woman sound, Lady
Caergwent, seemed as if it would be a bar between her and the free
childish fun she hoped for.  Yet when so much had been granted, she
must not call her aunt cross and unkind, though she did think it hard
and proud.

Perhaps she was partly right; but after all, little people cannot
judge what is right in matters of familiarity.  They have only to do
as they are told, and they may be sure of this, that friendship and
respect depend much more on what people are in themselves than on
what they call one another.

This lady was the widow of Mr. Wardour's brother, and lived among a
great clan of his family in a distant county, where Mary and her
father had sometimes made visits, but the younger ones never.  Kate
was not likely to have been asked there, for it was thought very hard
that she should be left on the hands of her aunt's husband:  and much
had been said of the duty of making her grand relations provide for
her, or of putting her into the "Clergy Orphan Asylum."  And there
had been much displeasure when Mr. Wardour answered that he did not
think it right that a child who had friends should live on the
charity intended for those who had none able to help them; and soon
after the decision he had placed his son Armyn in Mr. Brown's office,
instead of sending him to the University.  All the Wardours were much
vexed then; but they were not much better pleased when the little
orphan had come to her preferment, and he made no attempt to keep her
in his hands, and obtain the large sum allowed for her board--only
saying that his motherless household was no place for her, and that
he could not at once do his duty by her and by his parish.  They
could not understand the real love and uprightness that made him
prefer her advantage to his own--what was right to what was
convenient.

Mrs. George Wardour had not scolded her brother-in-law for his want
of prudence and care for his own children's interests; but she had
agreed with those who did; and this, perhaps, made her feel all the
more awkward and shy when she was told that she MUST go and call upon
the Lady Umfravilles, whom the whole family regarded as first so
neglectful and then so ungrateful, and make acquaintance with the
little girl who had once been held so cheap.  She was a kind, gentle
person, and a careful, anxious mother, but not wishing to make great
acquaintance, nor used to fine people, large or small, and above all,
wrapped up in her poor little delicate Alice.

The next time Kate saw her she was walking by the side of Alice's
wheeled-chair, and Sylvia by her side, in a more plain and suitable
dress.  Kate set off running to greet them; but at a few paces from
them was seized by a shy fit, and stood looking and feeling like a
goose, drawing great C's with the point of her parasol in the sand;
Josephine looking on, and thinking how "bete" English children were.
Mrs. Wardour was not much less shy; but she knew she must make a
beginning, and so spoke in the middle of Kate's second C:  and there
was a shaking of hands, and walking together.

They did not get on very well:  nobody talked but Mrs. Wardour, and
she asked little frightened questions about the Oldburgh party, as
she called them, which Kate answered as shortly and shyly--the more
so from the uncomfortable recollection that her aunt had told her
that this was the very way to seem proud and unkind; but what could
she do?  She felt as if she were frozen up stiff, and could neither
move nor look up like herself.  At last Mrs. Wardour said that Alice
would be tired, and must go in; and then Kate managed to blurt out a
request that Sylvia might stay with her.  Poor Sylvia looked a good
deal scared, and as if she longed to follow her mamma and sister; but
the door was shut upon her, and she was left alone with those two
strange people--the Countess and the Frenchwoman!

However, Kate recovered the use of her limbs and tongue in a moment,
and instantly took her prisoner's hand, and ran off with her to the
corner where the scenery of Loch Katrine had so often been begun, and
began with great animation to explain.  This--a hole that looked as
if an old hen had been grubbing in it--was Loch Katrine.

"Loch Katharine--that's yours!  And which is to be Loch Sylvia?" said
the child, recovering, as she began to feel by touch, motion, and
voice, that she had only to do with a little girl after all.

"Loch nonsense!" said Kate, rather bluntly.  "Did you never hear of
the Lochs, the Lakes, in Scotland?"

"Loch Lomond, Loch Katrine, Loch Awe, Loch Ness?--But I don't do my
geography out of doors!"

"'Tisn't geography; 'tis the 'The Lady of the Lake.'"

"Is that a new game?"

"Dear me! did you never read 'The Lady of the Lake?'--Sir Walter
Scott's poem -


'The summer dawn's reflected hue--'"


"Oh!  I've learnt that in my extracts; but I never did my poetry task
out of doors!"

"'Tisn't a task--'tis beautiful poetry!  Don't you like poetry better
than anything?"

"I like it better than all my other lessons, when it is not very long
and hard."

Kate felt that her last speech would have brought Armyn and Charlie
down on her for affectation, and that it was not strictly true that
she liked poetry better than anything, for a game at romps, and a
very amusing story, were still better things; so she did not exclaim
at the other Sylvia's misunderstanding, but only said, "'The Lady of
the Lake' is story and poetry too, and we will play at it."

"And how?"

"I'll tell you as we go on.  I'm the King--that is, the Knight of
Snowdon--James Fitzjames, for I'm in disguise, you know; and you're
Ellen."

"Must I be Ellen?  We had a horrid nurse once, who used to slap us,
and was called Ellen."

"But it was her name.  She was Ellen Douglas, and was in banishment
on an island with her father.  You are Ellen, and Josephine is your
old harper--Allan Bane; she talks French, you know, and that will do
for Highland:  Gallic and Gaelic sound alike, you know.  There!  Then
I'm going out hunting, and my dear gallant grey will drop down dead
with fatigue, and I shall lose my way; and when you hear me wind my
horn too-too, you get upon your hoop--that will be your boat, you
know--and answer 'Father!' and when I too-too again, answer
'Malcolm!' and then put up your hand behind your ear, and stand
listening


"With locks thrown back and lips apart,
Like monument of Grecian art;"


and then I'll tell you what to do."

Away scudded the delighted Kate; and after having lamented her
gallant grey, and admired the Trosachs, came up too-tooing through
her hand with all her might, but found poor Ellen, very unlike a
monument of Grecian art, absolutely crying, and Allan Bane using his
best English and kindest tones to console her.

"Miladi l'a stupefaite--la pauvre petite!" began Josephine; and Kate
in consternation asking what was the matter, and Josephine
encouraging her, it was all sobbed out.  She did not like to be
called Ellen--and she thought it unkind to send her into banishment--
and she had fancied she was to get astride on her hoop, which she
justly thought highly improper--and above all, she could not bear to
say 'Father'--because -

"I never thought you would mind that," said Kate, rather abashed.  "I
never did; and I never saw my papa or mamma either."

"No--so you didn't care."

"Well then," said Kate gravely, "we won't play at that.  Let's have
'Marmion' instead; and I'll be killed."

"But I don't like you to be killed."

"It is only in play."

"Please--please, let us have a nice play!"

"Well, what do you call a nice play?"

"Alice and I used to drive hoops."

"That's tiresome!  My hoop always tumbles down:  think of something
else."

"Alice and I used to play at ball; but there's no ball here!"

"Then I'll stuff my pocket-handkerchief with seaweed, and make one;"
and Kate spread out her delicate cambric one--not quite so fit for
such a purpose as the little cheap cotton ones at home, that Mary
tried in vain to save from cruel misuse.

"Here's a famous piece!  Look, it is all wriggled; it is a mermaid's
old stay-lace that she has used and thrown away.  Perhaps she broke
it in a passion because her grandmother made her wear so many oyster-
shells on her tail!"

"There are no such creatures as mermaids," said Sylvia, looking at
her solemnly.

This was not a promising beginning; Sylvia Joanna was not a bit like
Sylvia Katharine, nor like Adelaide and Grace de la Poer; yet by
seeing each other every day, she and Kate began to shake together,
and become friends.

There was no fear of her exciting Kate to run wild; she was a little
pussy-cat in her dread of wet, and guarded her clothes as if they
could feel--indeed, her happiest moments were spent in the public
walks by Alice's chair, studying how the people were dressed; but
still she thought it a fine thing to be the only child in Bournemouth
who might play with the little Countess, and was so silly as to think
the others envied her when she was dragged and ordered about,
bewildered by Kate's loud rapid talk about all kinds of odd things in
books, and distressed at being called on to tear through the pine-
woods, or grub in wet sand.  But it was not all silly vanity:  she
was a gentle, loving little girl, very good-natured, and sure to get
fond of all who were kind to her; and she liked Kate's bright ways
and amusing manner--perhaps really liking her more than if she had
understood her better; and Kate liked her, and rushed after her on
every occasion, as the one creature with whom it was possible to play
and to chatter.

No, not quite the one; for poor sick Alice was better for talk and
quiet play than her sister.  She read a great deal; and there was an
exchange of story-books, and much conversation over them, between her
and Kate--indeed, the spirit and animation of this new friend quite
made her light up, and brighten out of her languor whenever the
shrill laughing voice came near.  And Kate, after having got over her
first awe at coming near a child so unlike herself, grew very fond of
her, and felt how good and sweet and patient she was.  She never ran
off to play till Alice was taken in-doors; and spent all her spare
time in-doors in drawing picture stories, which were daily explained
to the two sisters at some seat in the pine-woods.

There was one very grand one, that lasted all the latter part of the
stay at Bournemouth--as the evenings grew longer, and Kate had more
time for preparing it, at the rate of four or five scenes a day,
drawn and painted--being the career of a very good little girl, whose
parents were killed in a railway accident, (a most fearful picture
was that--all blunders being filled up by spots of vermilion blood
and orange-coloured flame!) and then came all the wonderful exertions
by which she maintained her brothers and sisters, taught them, and
kept them in order.

They all had names; and there was a naughty little Alexander, whose
monkey tricks made even Sylvia laugh.  Sylvia was very anxious that
the admirable heroine, Hilda, should be rewarded by turning into a
countess; and could not enter into Kate's first objection--founded on
fact--that it could not be without killing all the brothers.  "Why
couldn't it be done in play, like so many other things?"  To which
Kate answered, "There is a sort of true in play;" but as Sylvia could
not understand her, nor she herself get at her own idea, she went on
to her other objection, a still more startling one--that "She
couldn't wish Hilda anything so nasty!"

And this very ignoble word was long a puzzle to Alice and Sylvia.

Thus the time at the sea-side was very happy--quite the happiest
since Kate's change of fortune.  The one flaw in those times on the
sands was when she was alone with Sylvia and Josephine; not in
Sylvia's dulness--that she had ceased to care about--but in a little
want of plain dealing.  Sylvia was never wild or rude, but she was
not strictly obedient when out of sight; and when Kate was shocked
would call it very unkind, and caress and beseech her not to tell.

They were such tiny things, that they would hardly bear mention; but
one will do as a specimen.  Sylvia was one of those very caressing
children who can never be happy without clinging to their friends,
kissing them constantly, and always calling them dear, love, and
darling.

Now, Mrs. Wardour knew it was not becoming to see all this embracing
in public, and was sure besides that Lady Barbara would not like to
see the Countess hung upon in Sylvia's favourite way; so she forbade
all such demonstrations except the parting and meeting kiss.  It was
a terrible grievance to Sylvia--it seemed as if her heart could not
love without her touch; but instead of training herself in a little
self-control and obedience, she thought it "cross;" and Mamma was no
sooner out of sight than her arm was around Kate's waist.  Kate
struggled at first--it did not suit her honourable conscientiousness;
but then Sylvia would begin to cry at the unkindness, say Kate did
not love her, that she would not be proud if she was a countess:  and
Kate gave in, liked the love--of which, poor child! she got so
little--and let Sylvia do as she pleased, but never without a sense
of disobedience and dread of being caught.

So, too, about her title.  Sylvia called her darling, duck, and love,
and she called Sylvia by plenty of such names; but she had been
obliged to tell of her aunt's desire--that Katharine and Kate should
never be used.

Sylvia's ready tears fell; but the next day she came back cheerful,
with the great discovery that darling Lady Caergwent might be called
K, her initial, and the first syllable of her title.  It was the
cleverest invention Sylvia had ever made; and she was vexed when Kate
demurred, honestly thinking that her aunts would like it worse than
even Kate, and that therefore she ought not to consent.

But when Sylvia coaxingly uttered, "My own dear duck of a K," and the
soft warm arm squeezed her, and the eyes would have been weeping, and
the tongue reproaching in another moment, she allowed it to go on--it
was so precious and sweet to be loved; and she told Sylvia she was a
star in the dark night.

No one ever found out those, and one or two other, instances of small
disobedience.  They were not mischievous, Josephine willingly
overlooked them, and there was nothing to bring them to light.  It
would have been better for Sylvia if her faults had been of a sort
that brought attention on them more easily!

Meanwhile, Lady Barbara had almost found in her a model child--except
for her foolish shy silence before her elders, before whom she always
whispered--and freely let the girls be constantly together.  The aunt
little knew that this meek well-behaved maiden was giving the first
warp to that upright truth that had been the one sterling point of
Kate's character!



CHAPTER X.



It had been intended that Mrs. Lacy should rejoin her pupil at
Bournemouth at the end of six weeks; but in her stead came a letter
saying that she was unwell, and begging for a fortnight's grace.  At
the fortnight's end came another letter; to which Lady Barbara
answered that all was going on so well, that there was no need to
think of returning till they should all meet in London on the 1st of
October.

But before that 1st, poor Mrs. Lacy wrote again, with great regret
and many excuses for the inconvenience she was causing.  Her son and
her doctor had insisted on her resigning her situation at once; and
they would not even allow her to go back until her place could be
supplied.

"Poor thing!" said Lady Jane.  "I always thought it was too much for
her.  I wish we could have made her more comfortable:  it would have
been such a thing for her!"

"So it would," answered Lady Barbara, "if she had had to do with any
other child.  A little consideration or discretion, such as might
have been expected from a girl of eleven years old towards a person
in her circumstances, would have made her happy, and enabled her to
assist her son.  But I have given up expecting feeling from
Katharine."

That speech made Kate swell with anger at her aunt's tone and in her
anger she forgot to repent of having been really thoughtless and
almost unkind, or to recollect how differently her own gentle Sylvia
at home would have behaved to the poor lady.  She liked the notion of
novelty, and hoped for a new governess as kind and bright as Miss
Oswald.

Moreover, she was delighted to find that Mrs. George Wardour was
going to live in London for the present, that Alice might be under
doctors, and Sylvia under masters.  Kate cared little for the why,
but was excessively delighted with plans for meeting, hopes of walks,
talks, and tea-drinkings together; promises that the other dear
Sylvia should come to meet her; and above all, an invitation to spend
Sylvia Joanna's birthday with her on the 21st of October, and go all
together either to the Zoological Gardens or to the British Museum,
according to the weather.

With these hopes, Kate was only moderately sorry to leave the sea and
pine-trees behind her, and find herself once more steaming back to
London, carrying in her hand a fine blue and white travelling-bag,
worked for her by her two little friends, but at which Lady Barbara
had coughed rather dryly.  In the bag were a great many small white
shells done up in twists of paper, that pretty story "The Blue
Ribbons," and a small blank book, in which, whenever the train
stopped, Kate wrote with all her might.  For Kate had a desire to
convince Sylvia Joanna that one was much happier without being a
countess, and she thought this could be done very touchingly and
poetically by a fable in verse; so she thought she had a very good
idea by changing the old daisy that pined for transplantation and
found it very unpleasant, into a harebell.


A harebell blue on a tuft of moss
In the wind her bells did toss.


That was her beginning; and the poor harebell was to get into a hot-
house, where they wanted to turn her into a tall stately campanula,
and she went through a great deal from the gardeners.  There was to
be a pretty fairy picture to every verse; and it would make a
charming birthday present, much nicer than anything that could be
bought; and Kate kept on smiling to herself as the drawings came
before her mind's eye, and the rhymes to her mind's ear.

So they came home; but it was odd, the old temper of the former
months seemed to lay hold of Kate as soon as she set foot in the
house in Bruton Street, as if the cross feelings were lurking in the
old corners.

She began by missing Mrs. Lacy very much.  The kind soft governess
had made herself more loved than the wayward child knew; and when
Kate had run into the schoolroom and found nobody sitting by the
fire, no sad sweet smile to greet her, no one to hear her adventures,
and remembered that she had worried the poor widow, and that she
would never come back again, she could have cried, and really had a
great mind to write to her, ask her pardon, and say she was sorry.
It would perhaps have been the beginning of better things if she had;
but of all things in the world, what prevented her?  Just this--that
she had an idea that her aunt expected it of her!  O Kate!  Kate!

So she went back to the harebell, and presently began rummaging among
her books for a picture of one to copy; and just then Lady Barbara
came in, found half a dozen strewn on the floor, and ordered her to
put them tidy, and then be dressed.  That put her out, and after her
old bouncing fashion she flew upstairs, caught her frock in the old
hitch at the turn, and half tore off a flounce.

No wonder Lady Barbara was displeased; and that was the beginning of
things going wrong--nay, worse than before the going to Bournemouth.
Lady Barbara was seeking for a governess, but such a lady as she
wished for was not to be found in a day; and in the meantime she was
resolved to do her duty by her niece, and watched over her behaviour,
and gave her all the lessons that she did not have from masters.

Whether it was that Lady Barbara did not know exactly what was to be
expected of a little girl, or whether Kate was more fond of praise
than was good for her, those daily lessons were more trying than ever
they had been.  Generally she had liked them; but with Aunt Barbara,
the being told to sit upright, hold her book straight, or pronounce
her words rightly, always teased her, and put her out of humour at
the beginning.  Or she was reminded of some failure of yesterday, and
it always seemed to her unjust that bygones should not be bygones; or
even when she knew she had been doing her best, her aunt always
thought she could have done better, so that she had no heart or
spirit to try another time, but went on in a dull, save-trouble way,
hardly caring to exert herself to avoid a scolding, it was so certain
to come.

It was not right--a really diligent girl would have won for herself
the peaceful sense of having done her best, and her aunt would have
owned it in time; whereas poor Kate's resistance only made herself
and her aunt worse to each other every day, and destroyed her sense
of duty and obedience more and more.

Lady Barbara could not be always with her, and when once out of sight
there was a change.  If she were doing a lesson with one of her
masters, she fell into a careless attitude in an instant, and would
often chatter so that there was no calling her to order, except by
showing great determination to tell her aunt.  It made her feel both
sly and guilty to behave so differently out of sight, and yet now
that she had once begun she seemed unable to help going on and she
was sure, foolish child, that Aunt Barbara's strictness made her
naughty!

Then there were her walks.  She was sent out with Josephine in the
morning and desired to walk nowhere but in the Square; and in the
afternoon she and Josephine were usually set down by the carriage
together in one of the parks, and appointed where to meet it again
after Lady Jane had taken her airing when she was well enough, for
she soon became more ailing than usual.  They were to keep in the
quiet paths, and not speak to anyone.

But neither Josephine nor her young lady had any turn for what was
"triste."  One morning, when Kate was in great want of a bit of
India-rubber, and had been sighing because of the displeasure she
should meet for having lost her own through using it in play-hours,
Josephine offered to take her--only a little out of her way--to buy a
new piece.

Kate knew this was not plain dealing, and hated herself for it, but
she was tired of being scolded, and consented!  And then how
miserable she was; how afraid of being asked where she had been; how
terrified lest her aunt should observe that it was a new, not an old,
piece; how humiliated by knowing she was acting untruth!

And then Josephine took more liberties.  When Kate was walking along
the path, thinking how to rhyme to "pride," she saw Josephine talking
over the iron rail to a man with a beard; and she told her maid
afterwards that it was wrong; but Josephine said, "Miladi had too
good a heart to betray her," and the man came again and again, and
once even walked home part of the way with Josephine, a little behind
the young lady.

Kate was desperately affronted, and had a great mind to complain to
her aunts.  But then Josephine could have told that they had not been
in the Square garden at all that morning, but in much more
entertaining streets!  Poor Kate, these daily disobediences did not
weigh on her nearly as much as the first one did; it was all one
general sense of naughtiness!

Working at her harebell was the pleasantest thing she did, but her
eagerness about it often made her neglectful and brought her into
scrapes.  She had filled one blank book with her verses and pictures,
some rather good, some very bad; and for want of help and correction
she was greatly delighted with her own performance, and thought it
quite worthy of a little ornamental album, where she could write out
the verses and gum in the drawings.

"Please, Aunt Barbara, let me go to the Soho Bazaar to-day?"

"I cannot take you there, I have an engagement."

"But may I not go with Josephine?"

"Certainly not.  I would not trust you there with her.  Besides, you
spend too much upon trumpery, as it is."

"I don't want it for myself; I want something to get ready for
Sylvia's birthday--the Sylvia that is come to London, I mean."

"I do not approve of a habit of making presents."

"Oh! but, Aunt Barbara, I am to drink tea with her on her birthday,
and spend the day, and go to the Zoological Gardens, and I have all
ready but my presents! and it will not be in time if you won't let me
go to-day."

"I never grant anything to pertinacity," answered Lady Barbara.  "I
have told you that I cannot go with you to-day, and you ought to
submit."

"But the birthday, Aunt Barbara!"

"I have answered you once, Katharine; you ought to know better than
to persist."

Kate pouted, and the tears swelled in her eyes at the cruelty of
depriving her of the pleasure of making her purchase, and at having
her beautiful fanciful production thus ruined by her aunt's
unkindness.  As she sat over her geography lesson, out of sight of
her own bad writing, her broken-backed illuminated capitals, her
lumpy campanulas, crooked-winged fairies, queer perspective, and dabs
of blue paint, she saw her performance not as it was, but as it was
meant to be, heard her own lines without their awkward rhymes and
bits like prose, and thought of the wonder and admiration of all the
Wardour family, and of the charms of having it secretly lent about as
a dear simple sweet effusion of the talented young countess, who
longed for rural retirement.  And down came a great tear into the red
trimming of British North America, and Kate unadvisedly trying to
wipe it up with her handkerchief, made a red smear all across to Cape
Verd!  Formerly she would have exclaimed at once; now she only held
up the other side of the book that her aunt might not see, and felt
very shabby all the time.  But Lady Barbara was reading over a
letter, and did not look.  If Kate had not been wrapt up in herself,
she would have seen that anxious distressed face.

There came a knock to the schoolroom door.  It was Mr. Mercer, the
doctor, who always came to see Lady Jane twice a week, and startled
and alarmed, Lady Barbara sprang up.  "Do you want me, Mr. Mercer?
I'll come."

"No, thank you," said the doctor, coming in.  "It was only that I
promised I would look at this little lady, just to satisfy Lady Jane,
who does not think her quite well."

Kate's love of being important always made her ready to be looked at
by Mr. Mercer, who was a kind, fatherly old gentleman, not greatly
apt to give physic, very good-natured, and from his long attendance
more intimate with the two sisters than perhaps any other person was.
Lady Barbara gave an odd sort of smile, and said, "Oh! very well!"
and the old gentleman laughed as the two bright clear eyes met his,
and said, "No great weight there, I think!  Only a geography fever,
eh?  Any more giddy heads lately, eh?  Or only when you make
cheeses?"

"I can't make cheeses now, my frocks are so short," said Kate, whose
spirits always recovered with the least change.

"No more dreams?"

"Not since I went to Bournemouth."

"Your tongue."  And as Kate, who had a certain queer pleasure in the
operation, put out the long pinky member with its ruddier tip,
quivering like an animal, he laughed again, and said, "Thank you,
Lady Caergwent; it is a satisfaction once in a way to see something
perfectly healthy!  You would not particularly wish for a spoonful of
cod-liver oil, would you?"

Kate laughed, made a face, and shook her head.

"Well," said the doctor as he released her, "I may set Lady Jane's
mind at rest.  Nothing the matter there with the health."

"Nothing the matter but perverseness, I am afraid," said Lady
Barbara, as Kate stole back to her place, and shut her face in with
the board of her atlas.  "It is my sister who is the victim, and I
cannot have it go on.  She is so dreadfully distressed whenever the
child is in disgrace that it is doing her serious injury.  Do you not
see it, Mr. Mercer?"

"She is very fond of the child," said Mr. Mercer.

"That is the very thing!  She is constantly worrying herself about
her, takes all her naughtiness for illness, and then cannot bear to
see her reproved.  I assure you I am forced for my sister's sake to
overlook many things which I know I ought not to pass by."  (Kate
shuddered.)  "But the very anxiety about her is doing great harm."

"I thought Lady Jane nervous and excited this morning," said Mr.
Mercer:  "but that seemed to me to be chiefly about the Colonel's
return."

"Yes," said Lady Barbara, "of course in some ways it will be a great
pleasure; but it is very unlucky, after staying till the war was
over, that he has had to sell out without getting his promotion.  It
will make a great difference!"

"On account of his son's health, is it not?"

"Yes; of course everything must give way to that, but it is most
unfortunate.  The boy has never recovered from his wound at Lucknow,
and they could not bear to part, or they ought to have sent him home
with his mother long ago; and now my brother has remained at his post
till he thought he could be spared; but he has not got his promotion,
which he must have had in a few months."

"When do you expect him?"

"They were to set off in a fortnight from the time he wrote, but it
all depended on how Giles might be.  I wish we knew; I wish there
could be any certainty, this is so bad for my sister.  And just at
this very time, without a governess, when some children would be
especially thoughtful and considerate, that we should have this
strange fit of idleness and perverseness!  It is very trying; I feel
quite hopeless sometimes!"

Some children, as Lady Barbara said, would have been rendered
thoughtful and considerate by hearing such a conversation as this,
and have tried to make themselves as little troublesome to their
elders as possible; but there are others who, unless they are
directly addressed, only take in, in a strange dreamy way, that which
belongs to the grown-up world, though quick enough to catch what
concerns themselves.  Thus Kate, though aware that Aunt Barbara
thought her naughtiness made Aunt Jane ill, and that there was a
fresh threat of the Lord Chancellor upon the return of her great-
uncle from India, did not in the least perceive that her Aunt Barbara
was greatly perplexed and harassed, divided between her care for her
sister and for her niece, grieved for her brother's anxiety, and
disappointed that he had been obliged to leave the army, instead of
being made a General.  The upshot of all that she carried away with
her was, that it was very cross of Aunt Barbara to think she made
Aunt Jane ill, and very very hard that she could not go to the
bazaar.

Lady Jane did not go out that afternoon, and Lady Barbara set her
niece and Josephine down in the Park, saying that she was going into
Belgravia, and desiring them to meet her near Apsley House.  They
began to walk, and Kate began to lament.  "If she could only have
gone to the bazaar for her album!  It was very hard!"

"Eh," Josephine said, "why should they not go?  There was plenty of
time.  Miladi Barbe had given them till four.  She would take la
petite."

Kate hung back.  She knew it was wrong.  She should never dare
produce the book if she had it.

But Josephine did not attend to the faltered English words, or
disposed of them with a "Bah!  Miladi will guess nothing!" and she
had turned decidedly out of the Park, and was making a sign to a cab.
Kate was greatly frightened, but was more afraid of checking
Josephine in the open street, and making her dismiss the cab, than of
getting into it.  Besides, there was a very strong desire in her for
the red and gold square book that had imprinted itself on her
imagination.  She could not but be glad to do something in spite of
Aunt Barbara.  So they were shut in, and went off along Piccadilly,
Kate's feelings in a strange whirl of fright and triumph, amid the
clattering of the glasses.  Just suppose she saw anyone she knew!

But they got to Soho Square at last; and through the glass door, in
among the stalls--that fairy land in general to Kate; but now she was
too much frightened and bewildered to do more than hurry along the
passages, staring so wildly for her albums, that Josephine touched
her, and said, "Tenez, Miladi, they will think you farou