d ever taken hold of Kate's tuneless ear, and
that seemed to come home to her.  At least, to-night it came home as
it had never done before; it seemed to touch some tender spot in her
heart, and when she thought how dear it was, and how little she had
cared about it, and how glad she had been to go away, she found the
candles dancing in a green mist, and great drops came down upon the
Prayer-book in her hand.

Then it could not be true that she had no feeling.  She was crying--
the first time she had ever known herself cry except for pain or at
reproof; and she was really so far pleased, that she made no attempt
to stop the great tears that came trickling down at each familiar
note, at each thought how long it had been since she had heard them.
She cried all church time; for whenever she tried to attend to the
prayers, the very sound of the voice she loved so well set her off
again; and Sylvia, tenderly laying a hand on her by way of sympathy,
made her weep the more, though still so softly and gently that it was
like a strange sort of happiness--almost better than joy and
merriment.  And then the sermon--upon the text, "Peace, be still,"--
was on the same thought on which her uncle had talked to the
children:  not that she followed it much; the very words "peace" and
"be still," seemed to be enough to touch, soften, and dissolve her
into those sweet comfortable tears.

Perhaps they partly came from the weakening of the morning's
indisposition; at any rate, when she moved, after the Blessing,
holding the pitying Sylvia's hand, she found that she was very much
tired, her eyelids were swollen and aching, and in fact she was fit
for nothing but bed, where Mary and Sylvia laid her; and she slept,
and slept in dreamless soundness, till she was waked by Mary's
getting up in the morning, and found herself perfectly well.

"And now, Sylvia," she said, as they went downstairs hand-in-hand,
"let us put it all out of our heads, and try and think all day that
it is just one of our old times, and that I am your old Kate.  Let me
do my lessons and go into school, and have some fun, and quite forget
all that is horrid."

But there was something to come before this happy return to old
times.  As soon as breakfast was over Mr Wardour said, "Now, Kate, I
want you."  And then she knew what was coming; and somehow, she did
not feel exactly the same about her exploit and its causes by broad
daylight, now that she was cool.  Perhaps she would have been glad to
hang back; yet on the whole, she had a great deal to say to "Papa,"
and it was a relief, though rather terrific, to find herself alone
with him in the study.

"Now, Kate," said he again, with his arm round her, as she stood by
him, "will you tell me what led you to this very sad and strange
proceeding?"

Kate hung her head, and ran her fingers along the mouldings of his
chair.

"Why was it, my dear?" asked Mr. Wardour.

"It was--" and she grew bolder at the sound of her own voice, and
more confident in the goodness of her cause--"it was because Aunt
Barbara said I must write what was not true, and--and I'll never tell
a falsehood--never, for no one!" and her eyes flashed.

"Gently, Kate," he said, laying his hand upon hers; "I don't want to
know what you never WILL do, only what you have done.  What was this
falsehood?"

"Why, Papa, the other Sylvia--Sylvia Joanna, you know--has her
birthday to-day, and we settled at Bournemouth that I should spend
the day with her; and on Saturday, when Aunt Barbara heard of it, she
said she did not want me to be intimate there, and that I must not
go, and told me to write a note to say she had made a previous
engagement for me."

"And do you know that she had not done so?"

"O Papa! she could not; for when I said I would not write a lie, she
never said it was true."

"Was that what you said to your aunt?"

"Yes,"--and Kate hung her head--"I was in a passion."

"Then, Kate, I do not wonder that Lady Barbara insisted on obedience,
instead of condescending to argue with a child who could be so
insolent."

"But, Papa," said Kate, abashed for a moment, then getting eager,
"she does tell fashionable falsehoods; she says she is not at home
when she is, and--"

"Stay, Kate; it is not for you to judge of grown people's doings.
Neither I nor Mary would like to use that form of denying ourselves;
but it is usually understood to mean only not ready to receive
visitors.  In the same way, this previous engagement was evidently
meant to make the refusal less discourteous, and you were not even
certain it did not exist."

"My Italian mistress did want to come on Monday," faltered Kate, "but
it was not 'previous.'"

"Then, Kate, who was it that went beside the mark in letting us
believe that Lady Barbara locked you up to make you tell falsehoods?"

"Indeed, Papa, I did not say locked--Charlie and Sylvia said that."

"But did you correct them?"

"O Papa, I did not mean it!  But I am naughty now!  I always am
naughty, so much worse than I used to be at home.  Indeed I am, and I
never do get into a good vein now.  O Papa, Papa, can't you get me
out of it all?  If you could only take me home again!  I don't think
my aunts want to keep me--they say I am so bad and horrid, and that I
make Aunt Jane ill.  Oh, take me back, Papa!"

He did take her on his knee, and held her close to him.  "I wish I
could, my dear," he said; "I should like to have you again! but it
cannot be.  It is a different state of life that has been appointed
for you; and you would not be allowed to make your home with me, with
no older a person than Mary to manage for you.  If your aunt had not
been taken from us, then--" and Kate ventured to put her arm round
his neck--"then this would have been your natural home; but as things
are with us, I could not make my house such as would suit the
requirements of those who arrange for you.  And, my poor child, I
fear we let the very faults spring up that are your sorrow now."

"Oh no, no, Papa, you helped me!  Aunt Barbara only makes me--oh! may
I say?--hate her! for indeed there is no helping it!  I can't be good
there."

"What is it?  What do you mean, my dear?  What is your difficulty?
And I will try to help you."

Poor Kate found it not at all easy to explain when she came to
particulars.  "Always cross," was the clearest idea in her mind;
"never pleased with her, never liking anything she did--not
punishing, but much worse."  She had not made out her case, she knew;
but she could only murmur again, "It all went wrong, and I was very
unhappy."

Mr. Wardour sighed from the bottom of his heart; he was very
sorrowful, too, for the child that was as his own.  And then he went
back and thought of his early college friend, and of his own wife who
had so fondled the little orphan--all that was left of her sister.
It was grievous to him to put that child away from him when she came
clinging to him, and saying she was unhappy, and led into faults.

"It will be better when your uncle comes home," he began.

"Oh no, Papa, indeed it will not.  Uncle Giles is more stern than
Aunt Barbara.  Aunt Jane says it used to make her quite unhappy to
see how sharp he was with poor Giles and Frank."

"I never saw him in his own family," said Mr. Wardour thoughtfully;
"but this I know, Kate, that your father looked up to him, young as
he then was, more than to anyone; that he was the only person among
them all who ever concerned himself about you or your mother; and
that on the two occasions when I saw him, I thought him very like
your father."

"I had rather he was like you, Papa," sighed Kate.  "Oh, if I was but
your child!" she added, led on by a little involuntary pressure of
his encircling arm.

"Don't let us talk of what is not, but of what is," said Mr. Wardour;
"let us try to look on things in their right light.  It has been the
will of Heaven to call you, my little girl, to a station where you
will, if you live, have many people's welfare depending on you, and
your example will be of weight with many.  You must go through
training for it, and strict training may be the best for you.
Indeed, it must be the best, or it would not have been permitted to
befall you."

"But it does not make me good, it makes me naughty."

"No, Kate; nothing, nobody can make you naughty; nothing is strong
enough to do that."

Kate knew what he meant, and hung her head.

"My dear, I do believe that you feel forlorn and dreary, and miss the
affection you have had among us; but have you ever thought of the
Friend who is closest of all to us, and who is especially kind to a
fatherless child?"

"I can't--I can't feel it--Papa, I can't.  And then, why was it made
so that I must go away from you and all?"

"You will see some day, though you cannot see now, my dear.  If you
use it rightly, you will feel the benefit.  Meantime, you must take
it on trust, just as you do my love for you, though I am going to
carry you back."

"Yes; but I can feel you loving me."

"My dear child, it only depends on yourself to feel your Heavenly
Father loving you.  If you will set yourself to pray with your heart,
and think of His goodness to you, and ask Him for help and solace in
all your present vexatious and difficulties, never mind how small,
you WILL become conscious of his tender pity and love to you."

"Ah! but I am not good!"

"But He can make you so, Kate.  Your have been wearied by religious
teaching hitherto, have you not?"

"Except when it was pretty and like poetry," whispered Kate.

"Put your heart to your prayers now, Kate.  Look in the Psalms for
verses to suit your loneliness; recollect that you meet us in spirit
when you use the same Prayers, read the same Lessons, and think of
each other.  Or, better still, carry your troubles to Him; and when
you HAVE felt His help, you will know what that is far better than I
can tell you."

Kate only answered with a long breath; not feeling as if she could
understand such comfort, but with a resolve to try.

"And now," said Mr. Wardour, "I must take you home to-morrow, and I
will speak for you to Lady Barbara, and try to obtain her
forgiveness; but, Kate, I do not think you quite understand what a
shocking proceeding this was of yours."

"I know it was wrong to fancy THAT, and say THAT about Aunt Barbara.
I'll tell her so," said Kate, with a trembling voice.

"Yes, that will be right; but it was this--this expedition that I
meant."

"It was coming to you, Papa!"

"Yes, Kate; but did you think what an outrageous act it was?  There
is something particularly grievous in a little girl, or a woman of
any age, casting off restraint, and setting out in the world
unprotected and contrary to authority.  Do you know, it frightened me
so much, that till I saw more of you I did not like you to be left
alone with Sylvia."

The deep red colour flushed all over Kate's face and neck in her
angry shame and confusion, burning darker and more crimson, so that
Mr. Wardour was very sorry for her, and added, "I am obliged to say
this, because you ought to know that it is both very wrong in itself,
and will be regarded by other people as more terrible than what you
are repenting of more.  So, if you do find yourself distrusted and in
disgrace, you must not think it unjust and cruel, but try to submit
patiently, and learn not to be reckless and imprudent.  My poor
child, I wish you could have so come to us that we might have been
happier together.  Perhaps you will some day; and in the meantime, if
you have any troubles, or want to know anything, you may always write
to me."

"Writing is not speaking," said Kate ruefully.

"No; but it comes nearer to it as people get older.  Now go, my dear;
I am busy, and you had better make the most of your time with your
cousins."

Kate's heart was unburthened now; and though there was much alarm,
pain, and grief, in anticipation, yet she felt more comfortable in
herself than she had done for months.  "Papa" had never been so
tender with her, and she knew that he had forgiven her.  She stept
back to the drawing-room, very gentle and subdued, and tried to carry
out her plans of living one of her old days, by beginning with
sharing the lessons as usual, and then going out with her cousins to
visit the school, and see some of the parishioners.  It was very nice
and pleasant; she was as quiet and loving as possible, and threw
herself into all the dear old home matters.  It was as if for a
little while Katharine was driven out of Katharine, and a very sweet
little maiden left instead--thinking about other things and people
instead of herself, and full of affection and warmth.  The
improvement that the half year's discipline had made in her bearing
and manners was visible now; her uncouth abrupt ways were softened,
though still she felt that the naturally gentle and graceful Sylvia
would have made a better countess than she did.

They spent the evening in little tastes of all their favourite
drawing-room games, just for the sake of having tried them once more;
and Papa himself came in and took a share--a very rare treat;--and he
always thought of such admirable things in "Twenty questions," and
made "What's my thought like ?" more full of fun than anyone.

It was a very happy evening--one of the most happy that Kate had ever
passed.  She knew HOW to enjoy her friends now, and how precious they
were to her; and she was just so much tamed by the morning's
conversation, and by the dread of the future, as not to be betrayed
into dangerously high spirits.  That loving, pitying way of Mary's,
and her own Sylvia's exceeding pleasure in having her, were
delightful; and all through she felt the difference between the real
genuine love that she could rest on, and the mere habit of fondling
of the other Sylvia.

"O Sylvia," she said, as they walked upstairs, hand in hand, pausing
on every stop to make it longer, "how could I be so glad to go away
before?"

"We didn't know," said Sylvia.

"No," as they crept up another step; "Sylvia, will you always think
of me just here on this step, as you go up to bed?"

"Yes," said Sylvia, "that I will.  And, Katie, would it be wrong just
to whisper a little prayer then that you might be good and happy?"

"It couldn't be wrong, Sylvia; only couldn't you just ask, too, for
me to come home?"

"I don't know," said Sylvia thoughtfully, pausing a long time on the
step.  "You see we know it is sure to be God's will that you should
be good and happy; but if it was not for you to come home, we might
be like Balaam, you know, if we asked it too much, and it might come
about in some terrible way."

"I didn't think of that," said Kate.  And the two little girls parted
gravely and peacefully; Kate somehow feeling as if, though grievous
things were before her, the good little kind Sylvia's hearty prayers
must obtain some good for her.

There is no use in telling how sad the parting was when Mr. Wardour
and the little Countess set out for London again.  Mary had begged
hard to go too, thinking that she could plead for Kate better than
anyone else; but Mr. Wardour thought Lady Barbara more likely to be
angered than softened by their clinging to their former charge; and
besides, it was too great an expense.

He had no doubt of Lady Barbara's displeasure from the tone of the
note that morning received, coldly thanking him and Miss Wardour for
their intelligence, and his promise to restore Lady Caergwent on
Tuesday.  She was sorry to trouble him to bring the child back; she
would have come herself, but that her sister was exceedingly unwell,
from the alarm coming at a time of great family affliction.  If Lady
Caergwent were not able to return on Tuesday, she would send down her
own maid to bring her home on Wednesday.  The letter was civility
itself; but it was plain that Lady Barbara thought Kate's illness no
better than the "previous engagement," in the note that never was
written.

What was the family affliction?  Kate could not guess, but was
inclined to imagine privately that Aunt Barbara was magnifying Uncle
Giles's return without being a General into a family affliction, on
purpose to aggravate her offence.  However, in the train, Mr.
Wardour, who had been looking at the Supplement of the Times, lent to
him by a fellow-traveller, touched her, and made her read -

"On the 11th, at Alexandria, in his 23rd year, Lieutenant Giles de la
Poer Umfraville, of the 109th regiment; eldest, and last survivor of
the children of the Honourable Giles Umfraville, late Lieutenant-
Colonel of the 109th regiment."

Kate knew she ought to be very sorry, and greatly pity the bereaved
father and mother; but, somehow, she could not help dwelling most
upon the certainty that everyone would be much more hard upon her,
and cast up this trouble to her, as if she had known of it, and run
away on purpose to make it worse.  It must have been this that they
were talking about in Aunt Jane's room, and this must have made them
so slow to detect her flight.

In due time the train arrived, a cab was taken, and Kate, beginning
to tremble with fright, sat by Mr. Wardour, and held his coat as if
clinging to him as long as she could was a comfort.  Sometimes she
wished the cab would go faster, so that it might be over; sometimes--
especially when the streets became only too well known to her--she
wished that they would stretch out and out for ever, that she might
still be sitting by Papa, holding his coat.  It seemed as if that
would be happiness enough for life!

Here was Bruton Street; here the door that on Saturday had shut
behind her!  It was only too soon open, and Kate kept her eyes on the
ground, ashamed that even the butler should see her.  She hung back,
waiting till Mr. Wardour had paid the cabman; but there was no
spinning it out, she had to walk upstairs, her only comfort being
that her hand was in his.

No one was in the drawing-room; but before long Lady Barbara came in.
Kate durst not look up at her, but was sure, from the tone of her
voice, that she must have her very sternest face; and there was
something to make one shiver in the rustle of her silk dress as she
curtsied to Mr. Wardour.

"I have brought home my little niece," he said, drawing Kate forward;
"and I think I may truly say, that she is very sorry for what has
passed."

There was a pause; Kate knew the terrible black eyes were upon her,
but she felt, besides, the longing to speak out the truth, and a
sense that with Papa by her side she had courage to do so.

"I am sorry, Aunt Barbara," she said; "I was very self-willed; I
ought not to have fancied things, nor said you used me ill, and
wanted me to tell stories."

Kate's heart was lighter; though it beat so terribly as she said
those words.  She knew that they pleased ONE of the two who were
present, and she knew they were right.

"It is well you should be so far sensible of your misconduct," said
Lady Barbara; but her voice was as dry and hard as ever, and Mr.
Wardour added, "She is sincerely sorry; it is from her voluntary
confession that I know how much trouble she has given you; and I
think, if you will kindly forgive her, that you will find her less
self-willed in future."

And he shoved Kate a little forward, squeezing her hand, and trying
to withdraw his own.  She perceived that he meant that she ought to
ask pardon; and though it went against her more than her first speech
had done, she contrived to say, "I do beg pardon, Aunt Barbara; I
will try to do better."

"My pardon is one thing, Katharine," said Lady Barbara.  "If your
sorrow is real, of course I forgive you;" and she took Kate's right-
hand--the left was still holding by the fingers' ends to Mr. Wardour.
"But the consequences of such behaviour are another consideration.
My personal pardon cannot, and ought not, to avert them--as I am sure
you must perceive, Mr. Wardour," she added, as the frightened child
retreated upon him.  Those consequences of Aunt Barbara's were
fearful things!  Mr. Wardour said something, to which Kate scarcely
attended in her alarm, and her aunt went on -

"For Lady Caergwent's own sake, I shall endeavour to keep this most
unfortunate step as much a secret as possible.  I believe that
scarcely anyone beyond this house is aware of it; and I hope that
your family will perceive the necessity of being equally cautious."

Mr. Wardour bowed, and assented.

"But," added Lady Barbara, "it has made it quite impossible for my
sister and myself to continue to take the charge of her.  My sister's
health has suffered from the constant noise and restlessness of a
child in the house:  the anxiety and responsibility are far too much
for her; and in addition to this, she had such severe nervous
seizures from the alarm of my niece's elopement, that nothing would
induce me to subject her to a recurrence of such agitation.  We must
receive the child for the present, of course; but as soon as my
brother returns, and can attend to business, the matter must be
referred to the Lord Chancellor, and an establishment formed, with a
lady at the head, who may have authority and experience to deal with
such an ungovernable nature."

"Perhaps," said Mr. Wardour, "under these circumstances it might be
convenient for me to take her home again for the present."

Kate quivered with hope; but that was far too good to be true; Lady
Barbara gave a horrid little cough, and there was a sound almost of
offence in her "Thank you, you are very kind, but that would be quite
out of the question.  I am at present responsible for my niece."

"I thought, perhaps," said Mr. Wardour, as an excuse for the offer,
"that as Lady Jane is so unwell, and Colonel Umfraville in so much
affliction, it might be a relief to part with her at present."

"Thank you," again said Lady Barbara, as stiffly as if her throat
were lined with whalebone; "no inconvenience can interfere with my
duty."

Mr. Wardour knew there was no use in saying any more, and inquired
after Lady Jane.  She had, it appeared, been very ill on Saturday
evening, and had not since left her room.  Mr. Wardour then said that
Kate had not been aware, till a few hours ago, of the death of her
cousin, and inquired anxiously after the father and mother; but Lady
Barbara would not do more than answer direct questions, and only said
that her nephew had been too much weakened to bear the journey, and
had sunk suddenly at Alexandria, and that his father was, she feared,
very unwell.  She could not tell how soon he was likely to be in
England.  Then she thanked Mr. Wardour for having brought Lady
Caergwent home, and offered him some luncheon; but in such a grave
grand way, that it was plain that she did not want him to eat it,
and, feeling that he could do no more good, he kissed poor Kate and
wished Lady Barbara good-bye.

Poor Kate stood, drooping, too much constrained by dismay even to try
to cling to him, or run after him to the foot of the stairs.

"Now, Katharine," said her aunt, "come up with me to your Aunt Jane's
room.  She has been so much distressed about you, that she will not
be easy till she has seen you."

Kate followed meekly; and found Aunt Jane sitting by the fire in her
own room, looking flushed, hot, and trembling.  She held out her
arms, and Kate ran into them; but neither of them dared to speak, and
Lady Barbara stood up, saying, "She says she is very sorry, and thus
we may forgive her; as I know you do all the suffering you have
undergone on her account."

Lady Jane held the child tighter, and Kate returned her kisses with
all her might; but the other aunt said, "That will do.  She must not
be too much for you again."  And they let go as if a cold wind had
blown between them.

"Did Mr. Wardour bring her home?" asked Lady Jane.

"Yes; and was kind enough to propose taking her back again," was the
answer, with a sneer, that made Kate feel desperately angry, though
she did not understand it.

In truth, Lady Barbara was greatly displeased with the Wardours.  She
had always been led to think her niece's faults the effect of their
management; and she now imagined that there had been some
encouragement of the child's discontent to make her run away; and
that if they had been sufficiently shocked and concerned, the truant
would have been brought home much sooner.  It all came of her having
allowed her niece to associate with those children at Bournemouth.
She would be more careful for the future.

Careful, indeed, she was!  She had come to think of her niece as a
sort of small wild beast that must never be let out of sight of some
trustworthy person, lest she should fly away again.

A daily governess, an elderly person, very grave and silent, came in
directly after breakfast, walked with the Countess, and heard the
lessons; and after her departure, Kate was always to be in the room
with her aunts, and never was allowed to sit in the schoolroom and
amuse herself alone; but her tea was brought into the dining-room
while her aunts were at dinner, and morning, noon, and night, she
knew that she was being watched.

It was very bitter to her.  It seemed to take all the spirit away
from her, as if she did not care for books, lessons, or anything
else.  Sometimes her heart burnt with hot indignation, and she would
squeeze her hands together, or wring round her handkerchief in a sort
of misery; but it never got beyond that; she never broke out, for she
was depressed by what was still worse, the sense of shame.  Lady
Barbara had not said many words, but had made her feel, in spite of
having forgiven her, that she had done a thing that would be a
disgrace to her for ever; a thing that would make people think twice
before they allowed their children to associate with her; and that
put her below the level of other girls.  The very pain that Lady
Barbara took to hush it up, her fears lest it should come to the ears
of the De la Poers, her hopes that it MIGHT not be necessary to
reveal it to her brother, assisted to weigh down Kate with a sense of
the heinousness of what she had done, and sunk her so that she had no
inclination to complain of the watchfulness around her.  And Aunt
Jane's sorrowful kindness went to her heart.

"How COULD you do it, my dear?" she said, in such a wonderful wistful
tone, when Kate was alone with her.

Kate hung her head.  She could not think now.

"It is so sad," added Lady Jane; "I hoped we might have gone on so
nicely together.  And now I hope your Uncle Giles will not hear of
it.  He would be so shocked, and never trust you again."

"YOU will trust me, when I have been good a long time, Aunt Jane?"

"My dear, I would trust you any time, you know; but then that's no
use.  I can't judge; and your Aunt Barbara says, after such
lawlessness, you need very experienced training to root out old
associations."

Perhaps the aunts were more shocked than was quite needful and
treated Kate as if she had been older and known better what she was
doing; but they were sincere in their horror at her offence; and once
she even heard Lady Barbara saying to Mr. Mercer that there seemed to
be a doom on the family--in the loss of the promising young man--and-
-The words were not spoken, but Kate knew that she was this greatest
of all misfortunes to the family.

Poor child!  In the midst of all this, there was one comfort.  She
had not put aside what Mr. Wardour had told her about the Comforter
she could always have.  She DID say her prayers as she had never said
them before, and she looked out in the Psalms and Lessons for
comforting verses.  She knew she had done very wrong, and she asked
with all the strength of her heart to be forgiven, and made less
unhappy, and that people might be kinder to her.  Sometimes she
thought no help was coming, and that her prayers did no good, but she
went on; and then, perhaps, she got a kind little caress from Lady
Jane, or Mr. Mercer spoke good-naturedly to her, or Lady Barbara
granted her some little favour, and she felt as if there was hope and
things were getting better; and she took courage all the more to pray
that Uncle Giles might not be very hard upon her, nor the Lord
Chancellor very cruel.



CHAPTER XIV.



A fortnight had passed, and had seemed nearly as long as a year,
since Kate's return from Oldburgh, when one afternoon, when she was
lazily turning over the leaves of a story-book that she knew so well
by heart that she could go over it in the twilight, she began to
gather from her aunt's words that somebody was coming.

They never told her anything direct; but by listening a little more
attentively to what they were saying, she found out that a letter--
no, a telegram--had come while she was at her lessons; that Aunt
Barbara had been taking rooms at a hotel; that she was insisting that
Jane should not imagine they would come to-night--they would not come
till the last train, and then neither of them would be equal -

"Poor dear Emily!  But could we not just drive to the hotel and meet
them?  It will be so dreary for them."

"You go out at night! and for such a meeting! when you ought to be
keeping yourself as quiet as possible!  No, depend upon it they will
prefer getting in quietly, and resting to-night; and Giles, perhaps,
will step in to breakfast in the morning."

"And then you will bring him up to me at once!  I wonder if the boy
is much altered!"

Throb! throb! throb! went Kate's heart!  So the terrible stern uncle
was in England, and this was the time for her to be given up to the
Lord Chancellor and all his myrmidons (a word that always came into
her head when she was in a fright).  She had never loved Aunt Jane so
well; she almost loved Aunt Barbara, and began to think of clinging
to her with an eloquent speech, pleading to be spared from the Lord
Chancellor!

To-morrow morning--that was a respite!

There was a sound of wheels.  Lady Jane started.

"They are giving a party next door," said Lady Barbara.

But the bell rang.

"Only a parcel coming home," said Lady Barbara.  "Pray do not be
nervous, Jane."

But the red colour was higher in Barbara's own cheeks, as there were
steps on the stairs; and in quite a triumphant voice the butler
announced, as he opened the door, "Colonel and Mrs. Umfraville!"

Kate stood up, and backed.  It was Aunt Barbara's straight, handsome,
terrible face, and with a great black moustache to make it worse.
She saw that, and it was all she feared!  She was glad the sofa was
between them!

There was a lady besides all black bonnet and cloak; and there was a
confusion of sounds, a little half sobbing of Aunt Jane's; but the
other sister and the brother were quite steady and grave.  It was his
keen dark eye, sparkling like some wild animal's in the firelight, as
Kate thought, which spied her out; and his deep grave voice said, "My
little niece," as he held out his hand.

"Come and speak to your uncle, Katharine," said Lady Barbara; and not
only had she to put her hand into that great firm one, but her
forehead was scrubbed by his moustache.  She had never been kissed by
a moustache before, and she shuddered as if it had been on a
panther's lip.

But then he said, "There, Emily;" and she found herself folded up in
such arms as had never been round her before, with the very sweetest
of kisses on her cheeks, the very kindest of eyes, full of moisture,
gazing at her as if they had been hungry for her.  Even when the
embrace was over, the hand still held hers; and as she stood by the
new aunt, a thought crossed her that had never come before, "I wonder
if my mamma was like this!"

There was some explanation of how the travellers had come on, &c.,
and it was settled that they were to stay to dinner; after which Mrs.
Umfraville went away with Lady Barbara to take off her bonnet.

Colonel Umfraville came and sat down by his sister on the sofa, and
said, "Well Jane, how have you been?"

"Oh! much as usual:" and then there was a silence, till she moved a
little nearer to him, put her hand on his arm, looked up in his face
with swimming eyes, and said, "O Giles!  Giles!"

He took her hand, and bent over her, saying, in the same grave steady
voice, "Do not grieve for us, Jane.  We have a great deal to be
thankful for, and we shall do very well."

It made that loving tender-hearted Aunt Jane break quite down, cling
to him and sob, "O Giles--those dear noble boys--how little we
thought--and dear Caergwent too--and you away from home!"

She was crying quite violently, so as to be shaken by the sobs; and
her brother stood over her, saying a kind word or two now and then,
to try to soothe her; while Kate remained a little way off, with her
black eyes wide open, thinking her uncle's face was almost
displeased--at any rate, very rigid.  He looked up at Kate, and
signed towards a scent-bottle on the table.  Kate gave it; and then,
as if the movement had filled her with a panic, she darted out of the
room, and flew up to the bedrooms, crying out, "Aunt Barbara, Aunt
Jane is crying so terribly!"

"She will have one of her attacks!  Oh!" began Lady Barbara, catching
up a bottle of salvolatile.

"Had we not better leave her and Giles to one another?" said the
tones that Kate liked so much.

"Oh! my dear, you don't know what these attacks are!" and away
hurried Lady Barbara.

The bonnet was off now, leaving only a little plain net cap under it,
round the calm gentle face.  There was a great look of sadness, and
the eyelids were heavy and drooping; but there was something that put
Kate in mind of a mother dove in the softness of the large tender
embrace, and the full sweet caressing tone.  What a pity that such an
aunt must know that she was an ill-behaved child, a misfortune to her
lineage!  She stood leaning against the door, very awkward and
conscious.  Mrs. Umfraville turned round, after smoothing her hair at
the glass, smiled, and said, "I thought I should find you here, my
little niece.  You are Kate, I think."

"I used to be, but my aunts here call me Katharine."

"Is this your little room?" said Mrs. Umfraville, as they came out.
The fact was, that she thought the sisters might be happier with
their brother if she delayed a little; so she came into Kate's room,
and was beginning to look at her books, when Lady Barbara came
hurrying up again.

"She is composed now, Emily.  Oh! it is all right; I did not know
where Katharine might be."

Kate's colour glowed.  She could not bear that this sweet Aunt Emily
should guess that she was a state prisoner, kept in constant view.

Lady Jane was quiet again, and nothing more that could overthrow her
spirits passed all the evening; there was only a little murmur of
talk, generally going on chiefly between Lady Barbara and Mrs.
Umfraville, though occasionally the others put in a word.  The
Colonel sat most of the time with his set, serious face, and his eye
fixed as if he was not attending, though sometimes Kate found the
quick keen brilliance of his look bent full upon her, so as to
terrify her by its suddenness, and make her hardly know what she was
saying or doing.

The worst moments were at dinner.  She was, in the first place, sure
that those dark questioning eyes had decided that there must be some
sad cause for her not being trusted to drink her tea elsewhere; and
then, in the pause after the first course, the eyes came again, and
he said, and to her, "I hope your good relations the Wardours are
well."

"Quite well--thank you," faltered Kate.

"When did you see them last?"

"A--a fortnight ago--" began Kate.

"Mr. Wardour came up to London for a few hours," said Lady Barbara,
looking at Kate as if she meant to plunge her below the floor; at
least, so the child imagined.

The sense that this was not the whole truth made her especially
miserable; and all the rest of the evening was one misery of
embarrassment, when her limbs did not seem to be her own, but as if
somebody else was sitting at her little table, walking upstairs, and
doing her work.  Even Mrs. Umfraville's kind ways could not restore
her; she only hung her head and mumbled when she was asked to show
her work, and did not so much as know what was to become of her piece
of cross-stitch when it was finished.

There was some inquiry after the De la Poers; and Mrs. Umfraville
asked if she had found some playfellows among their daughters.

"Yes," faintly said Kate; and with another flush of colour, thought
of having been told, that if Lady de la Poer knew what she had done,
she would never be allowed to play with them again, and therefore
that she never durst attempt it.

"They were very nice children," said Mrs. Umfraville.

"Remarkably nice children," returned Lady Barbara, in a tone that
again cut Kate to the heart.

Bed-time came; and she would have been glad of it, but that all the
time she was going to sleep there was the Lord Chancellor to think
of, and the uncle and aunt with the statue faces dragging her before
him.

Sunday was the next day, and the uncle and aunt were not seen till
after the afternoon service, when they came to dinner, and much such
an evening as the former one passed; but towards the end of it Mrs.
Umfraville said, "Now, Barbara, I have a favour to ask.  Will you let
this child spend the day with me to-morrow?  Giles will be out, and I
shall be very glad to have her for my companion."

Kate's eyes glistened, and she thought of stern Proserpine.

"My dear Emily, you do not know what you ask.  She will be far too
much for you."

"I'll take care of that," said Mrs. Umfraville, smiling.

"And I don't know about trusting her.  I cannot go out, and Jane
cannot spare Bartley so early."

"I will come and fetch her," said the Colonel.

"And bring her back too.  I will send the carriage in the evening,
but do not let her come without you," said Lady Barbara earnestly.

Had they told, or would they tell after she was gone to bed?  Kate
thought Aunt Barbara was a woman of her word, but did not quite trust
her.  Consent was given; but would not that stern soldier destroy all
the pleasure?  And people in sorrow too!  Kate thought of Mrs. Lacy,
and had no very bright anticipations of her day; yet a holiday was
something, and to be out of Aunt Barbara's way a great deal more.

She had not been long dressed when there was a ring at the bell, and,
before she had begun to expect him, the tall man with the dark lip
and grey hair stood in her schoolroom.  She gave such a start, that
he asked, "Did you not expect me so soon?"

"I did not think you would come till after breakfast:  but--"

And with an impulse of running away from his dread presence, she
darted off to put on her hat, but was arrested on the way by Lady
Barbara, at her bedroom door.

"Uncle Giles is come for me," she said, and would have rushed on, but
her aunt detained her to say, "Recollect, Katharine, that wildness
and impetuosity, at all times unbecoming, are particularly so where
there is affliction.  If consideration for others will not influence
you, bear in mind that on the impression you make on your uncle and
aunt, it depends whether I shall be obliged to tell all that I would
willingly forget."

Kate's heart swelled, and without speaking she entered her own room,
thinking how hard it was to have even the pleasure of hoping for ease
and enjoyment taken away.

When she came down, she found her aunt--as she believed--warning her
uncle against her being left to herself; and then came, "If she
should be too much for Emily, only send a note, and Bartley or I will
come to fetch her home."

"She wants him to think me a little wild beast!" thought Kate; but
her uncle answered, "Emily always knows how to deal with children.
Good-bye."

"To deal with children!  What did that mean?" thought the Countess,
as she stepped along by the side of her uncle, not venturing to
speak, and feeling almost as shy and bewildered as when she was on
the world alone.

He did not speak, but when they came to a crossing of a main street,
he took her by the hand; and there was something protecting and
comfortable in the feel, so that she did not let go; and presently,
as she walked on, she felt the fingers close on hers with such a
quick tight squeeze, that she looked up in a fright and met the dark
eye turned on her quite soft and glistening.  She did not guess how
he was thinking of little clasping hands that had held there before;
and he only said something rather hurriedly about avoiding some coals
that were being taken in through a round hole in the pavement.

Soon they were at the hotel; and Mrs. Umfraville came out of her room
with that greeting which Kate liked so much, helped her to take off
her cloak and smooth her hair, and then set her down to breakfast.

It was a silent meal to Kate.  Her uncle and aunt had letters to
read, and things to consult about that she did not understand; but
all the time there was a kind watch kept up that she had what she
liked; and Aunt Emily's voice was so much like the deep notes of the
wood-pigeons round Oldburgh, that she did not care how long she
listened to it, even if it had been talking Hindostanee!

As soon as breakfast was over, the Colonel took up his hat and went
out; and Mrs. Umfraville said, turning to Kate, "Now, my dear, I have
something for you to help me in; I want to unpack some things that I
have brought home."

"Oh, I shall like that!" said Kate, feeling as if a weight was gone
with the grave uncle.

Mrs. Umfraville rang, and asked to have a certain box brought in.
Such a box, all smelling of choice Indian wood; the very shavings
that stuffed it were delightful!  And what an unpacking!  It was like
nothing but the Indian stall at the Baker Street Bazaar!  There were
two beautiful large ivory work-boxes, inlaid with stripes and circles
of tiny mosaic; and there were even more delicious little boxes of
soft fragrant sandal wood, and a set of chessmen in ivory.  The kings
were riding on elephants, with canopies over their heads, and ladders
to climb up by; and each elephant had a tiger in his trunk.  Then the
queens were not queens, but grand viziers, because the queen is
nobody in the East:  and each had a lesser elephant; the bishops were
men riding on still smaller elephants; the castles had camels, the
knights horses; and the pawns were little foot-soldiers, the white
ones with guns, as being European troops, the red ones with bows and
arrows.  Kate was perfectly delighted with these men, and looked at
and admired them one by one, longing to play a game with them.  Then
there was one of those wonderful clusters of Chinese ivory balls, all
loose, one within the other, carved in different patterns of network,
and there were shells spotted and pink-mouthed, card-cases, red
shining boxes, queer Indian dolls; figures in all manner of costumes,
in gorgeous colours, painted upon shining transparent talc or on soft
rice-paper.  There was no describing how charming the sight was, nor
how Kate dwelt upon each article; and how pleasantly her aunt
explained what it was intended for, and where it came from, answering
all questions in the nicest, kindest way.  When all the wool and
shavings had been pinched, and the curled-up toes of the slippers
explored, so as to make sure that no tiny shell nor ivory carving
lurked unseen, the room looked like a museum; and Mrs. Umfraville
said, "Most of these things were meant for our home friends:  there
is an Indian scarf and a Cashmere shawl for your two aunts, and I
believe the chessmen are for Lord de la Poer."

"O Aunt Emily, I should so like to play one game with them before
they go!"

"I will have one with you, if you can be very careful of their tender
points," said Mrs. Umfraville, without one of the objections that
Kate had expected; "but first I want you to help me about some of the
other things.  Your uncle meant one of the work-boxes for you!"

"O Aunt Emily, how delightful!  I really will work, with such a dear
beautiful box!" cried Kate, opening it, and again peeping into all
its little holes and contrivances.  "Here is the very place for a
dormouse to sleep in!  And who is the other for?"

"For Fanny de la Poer, who is his godchild."

"Oh, I am so glad!  Fanny always has such nice pretty work about!"

"And now I want you to help me to choose the other presents.  There;
these," pointing to a scarf and a muslin dress adorned with the wings
of diamond beetles, "are for some young cousins of my own; but you
will be able best to choose what the other De la Poers and your
cousins at Oldburgh would like best."

"My cousins at Oldburgh!" cried Kate.  "May they have some of these
pretty things?"  And as her aunt answered "We hope they will," Kate
flew at her, and hugged her quite tight round the throat; then, when
Mrs. Umfraville undid the clasp, and returned the kiss, she went like
an India-rubber ball with a backward bound, put her hands together
over her head, and gasped out, "Oh, thank you, thank you!"

"My dear, don't go quite mad.  You will jump into that calabash, and
then it won't be fit for anybody.  Are you so very glad?"

"Oh! so glad!  Pretty things do come so seldom to Oldburgh!"

"Well, we thought you might like to send Miss Wardour this shawl."

It was a beautiful heavy shawl of the soft wool of the Cashmere
goats; really of every kind of brilliant hue, but so dexterously
blended together, that the whole looked dark and sober.  But Kate did
not look with favour on the shawl.

"A shawl is so stupid," she said.  "If you please, I had rather Mary
had the work-box."

"But the work-box is for Lady Fanny."

"Oh! but I meant my own," said Kate earnestly.  "If you only knew
what a pity it is to give nice things to me; they always get into
such a mess.  Now, Mary always has her things so nice; and she works
so beautifully; she has never let Lily wear a stitch but of her
setting; and she always wished for a box like this.  One of her
friends at school had a little one; and she used to say, when we
played at roe's egg, that she wanted nothing but an ivory work-box;
and she has nothing but an old blue one, with the steel turned
black!"

"We must hear what your uncle says, for you must know that he meant
the box for you."

"It isn't that I don't care for it," said Kate, with a sudden
glistening in her eyes; "it is because I do care for it so very much
that I want Mary to have it."

"I know it is, my dear;" and her aunt kissed her; "but we must think
about it a little.  Perhaps Mary would not think an Indian shawl
quite so stupid as you do."

"Mary isn't a nasty vain conceited girl!" cried Kate indignantly.
"She always looks nice; but I heard Papa say her dress did not cost
much more than Sylvia's and mine, because she never tore anything,
and took such care!"

"Well, we will see," said Mrs. Umfraville, perhaps not entirely
convinced that the shawl would not be a greater prize to the thrifty
girl than Kate perceived.

Kate meanwhile had sprung unmolested on a beautiful sandalwood case
for Sylvia, and a set of rice-paper pictures for Lily; and the
appropriating other treasures to the De la Poers, packing them up,
and directing them, accompanied with explanations of their habits and
tastes, lasted till so late, that after the litter was cleared away
there was only time for one game at chess with the grand pieces; and
in truth the honour of using them was greater than the pleasure.
They covered up the board, so that there was no seeing the squares,
and it was necessary to be most inconveniently cautious in lifting
them.  They were made to be looked at, not played with; and yet,
wonderful to relate, Kate did not do one of the delicate things a
mischief!

Was it that she was really grown more handy, or was it that with this
gentle aunt she was quite at her ease, yet too much subdued to be
careless and rough?

The luncheon came; and after it, she drove with her aunt first to a
few shops, and then to take up the Colonel, who had been with his
lawyer.  Kate quaked a little inwardly, lest it should be about the
Lord Chancellor, and tried to frame a question on the subject to her
aunt; but even the most chattering little girls know what it is to
have their lips sealed by an odd sort of reserve upon the very
matters that make them most uneasy; and just because her wild
imagination had been thinking that perhaps this was all a plot to
waylay her into the Lord Chancellor's clutches, she could not utter a
word on the matter, while they drove through the quiet squares where
lawyers live.

Mrs. Umfraville, however, soon put that out of her head by talking to
her about the Wardours, and setting open the flood gates of her
eloquence about Sylvia.  So delightful was it to have a listener,
that Kate did not grow impatient, long as they waited at the lawyer's
door in the dull square, and indeed was sorry when the Colonel made
his appearance.  He just said to her that he hoped she was not tired
of waiting; and as she replied with a frightened little "No, thank
you," began telling his wife something that Kate soon perceived
belonged to his own concerns, not to hers; so she left off trying to
gather the meaning in the rumble of the wheels, and looked out of
window, for she could never be quite at ease when she felt that those
eyes might be upon her.

On coming back to the hotel, Mrs. Umfraville found a note on the
table for her:  she read it, gave it to her husband, and said, "I had
better go directly."

"Will it not be too much?  Can you?" he said very low; and there was
the same repressed twitching of the muscles of his face, as Kate had
seen when he was left with his sister Jane.

"Oh yes!" she said fervently; "I shall like it.  And it is her only
chance; you see she goes to-morrow."

The carriage was ordered again, and Mrs. Umfraville explained to Kate
that the note was from a poor invalid lady whose son was in their own
regiment in India, that she was longing to hear about him, and was
going out of town the next day.

"And what shall I give you to amuse yourself with, my dear?" asked
Mrs. Umfraville.  "I am afraid we have hardly a book that will suit
you."

Kate had a great mind to ask to go and sit in the carriage, rather
than remain alone with the terrible black moustache; but she was
afraid of the Colonel's mentioning Aunt Barbara's orders that she was
not to be let out of sight.  "If you please," she said, "if I might
write to Sylvia."

Her aunt kindly established her at a little table, with a leathern
writing-case, and her uncle mended a pen for her.  Then her aunt went
away, and he sat down to his own letters.

Kate durst not speak to him, but she watched him under her eyelashes,
and noticed how he presently laid down his pen, and gave a long,
heavy, sad sigh, such as she had never heard when his wife was
present; then sat musing, looking fixedly at the grey window; till,
rousing himself with another such sigh, he seemed to force himself to
go on writing, but paused again, as if he were so wearied and
oppressed that he could hardly bear it.

It gave Kate a great awe of him, partly because a little girl in a
book would have gone up, slid her hand into his, and kissed him; but
she could nearly as soon have slid her hand into a lion's; and she
was right, it would have been very obtrusive.

Some little time had passed before there was an opening of the door,
and the announcement, "Lord de la Poer."

Up started Kate, but she was quite lost in the greeting of the two
friends; Lord de la Poer, with his eyes full of tears, wringing his
friend's hand, hardly able to speak, but just saying, "Dear Giles, I
am glad to have you at home.  How is she?"

"Wonderfully well," said the Colonel, with the calm voice but the
twitching face.  "She is gone to see Mrs. Ducie, the mother of a lad
in my regiment, who was wounded at the same time as Giles, and whom
she nursed with him."

"Is not it very trying?"

"Nothing that is a kindness ever is trying to Emily," he said, and
his voice did tremble this time.

Kate had quietly re-seated herself in her chair.  She felt that it
was no moment to thrust herself in; nor did she feel herself
aggrieved, even though unnoticed by such a favourite friend.
Something in the whole spirit of the day had made her only sensible
that she was a little girl, and quite forgot that she was a Countess.

The friends were much too intent on one another to think of her, as
she sat in the recess of the window, their backs to her.  They drew
their chairs close to the fire, and began to talk, bending down
together; and Kate felt sure, that as her uncle at least knew she was
there, she need not interrupt.  Besides, what they spoke of was what
she had longed to he