ar, and would never have dared to ask.  Lord de
la Poer had been like a father to his friend's two sons when they
were left in England; and now the Colonel was telling him--as,
perhaps, he could have told no one else--about their brave spirit,
and especially of Giles's patience and resolution through his
lingering illness; how he had been entirely unselfish in entreating
that anything might happen rather than that his father should resign
his post; but though longing to be with his parents, and desponding
as to his chance of recovery, had resigned himself in patience to
whatever might be thought right; and how through the last sudden
accession of illness brought on by the journey, his sole thought had
been for his parents.

"And she has borne up!" said Lord de la Poer.

"As HE truly said, 'As long as she has anyone to care for, she will
never break down.'  Luckily, I was entirely knocked up for a few days
just at first; and coming home we had a poor young woman on board
very ill, and Emily nursed her day and night."

"And now you will bring her to Fanny and me to take care of."

"Thank you--another time.  But, old fellow, I don't know whether we
either of us could stand your house full of children yet.  Emily
would be always among them, and think she liked it; but I knew how it
would be.  It was just so when I took her to a kind friend of ours
after the little girls were taken; she had the children constantly
with her, but I never saw her so ill as she was afterwards."

"Reaction!  Well, whenever you please; you shall have your rooms to
yourselves, and only see us when you like.  But I don't mean to press
you; only, what are you going to do next?"

"I can hardly tell.  There are business matters of our own, and about
poor James's little girl, to keep us here a little while."  ("Who is
that?" thought Kate.)

"Then you must go into our house.  I was in hopes it might be so, and
told the housekeeper to make ready."

"Thank you; if Emily--We will see, when she comes in I want to make
up my mind about that child.  Have you seen much of her?"

Kate began to think honour required her to come forward, but her
heart throbbed with fright.

"Not so much as I could wish.  It is an intelligent little monkey,
and our girls were delighted with her; but I believe Barbara thinks
me a corrupter of youth, for she discountenances us."

"Ah! one of the last times I was alone with Giles, he said, smiling,
'That little girl in Bruton Street will be just what Mamma wants;'
and I know Emily has never ceased to want to get hold of the
motherless thing ever since Mrs. Wardour's death.  I know it would be
the greatest comfort to Emily, but I only doubted taking the child
away from my sisters.  I thought it would be such a happy thing to
have Jane's kind heart drawn out; and if Barbara had forgiven the old
sore, and used her real admirable good sense affectionately, it would
have been like new life to them.  Besides, it must make a great
difference to their income.  But is it possible that it can be the
old prejudice, De la Poer?  Barbara evidently dislikes the poor
child, and treats her like a state prisoner!"

Honour prevailed entirely above fear and curiosity.  Out flew Kate,
to the exceeding amaze and discomfiture of the two gentlemen.  "No,
no, Uncle Giles; it is--it is because I ran away!  Aunt Barbara said
she would not tell, for if you knew it, you would--you would despise
me;--and you," looking at Lord de la Poer, "would never let me play
with Grace and Addy again!"

She covered her face with her hands--it was all burning red; and she
was nearly rushing off, but she felt herself lifted tenderly upon a
knee, and an arm round her.  She thought it her old friend; but
behold, it was her uncle's voice that said, in the softest gentlest
way, "My dear, I never despise where I meet with truth.  Tell me how
it was; or had you rather tell your Aunt Emily?"

"I'll tell you," said Kate, all her fears softened by his touch.  "Oh
no! please don't go, Lord de la Poer; I do want you to know, for I
couldn't have played with Grace and Adelaide on false pretences!"
And encouraged by her uncle's tender pressure, she murmured out, "I
ran away--I did--I went home!"

"To Oldburgh!"

"Yes--yes!  It was very wrong; Papa--Uncle Wardour, I mean--made me
see it was."

"And what made you do it?" said her uncle kindly.  "Do not be afraid
to tell me."

"It was because I was angry.  Aunt Barbara would not let me go to the
other Wardours, and wanted me to write a--what I thought--a
fashionable falsehood; and when I said it was a lie," (if possible,
Kate here became deeper crimson than she was before,) "she sent me to
my room till I would beg her pardon, and write the note.  So--so I
got out of the house, and took a cab, and went home by the train.  I
didn't know it was so very dreadful a thing, or indeed I would not."

And Kate hid her burning face on her uncle's breast, and was
considerably startled by what she heard next, from the Marquis.

"Hm!  All I have to say is, that if Barbara had the keeping of me, I
should run away at the end of a week."

"Probably!" and Lord de la Poer saw, what Kate did not, the first
shadow of a smile on the face of his friend, as he pressed his arm
round the still trembling girl; "but, you see, Barbara justly thinks
you corrupt youth.--My little girl, you must not let HIM make you
think lightly of this--"

"Oh, no, I never could!  Papa was so shocked!" and she was again
covered with confusion at the thought.

"But," added her uncle, "it is not as if you had not gone to older
and better friends than any you have ever had, my poor child.  I am
afraid you have been much tried, and have not had a happy life since
you left Oldburgh."

"I have always been naughty," said Kate.

"Then we must try if your Aunt Emily can help you to be good.  Will
you try to be as like her own child to her as you can, Katharine?"

"And to you," actually whispered Kate; for somehow at that moment she
cared much more for the stern uncle than the gentle aunt.

He lifted her up and kissed her, but set her down again with the sigh
that told how little she could make up to him for the son he had left
in Egypt.  Yet, perhaps that sigh made Kate long with more fervent
love for some way of being so very good and affectionate as quite to
make him happy, than if he had received her demonstration as if
satisfied by it.



CHAPTER XV.



Nothing of note passed during the rest of the evening.  Mrs.
Umfraville came home; but Kate had fallen back into the shy fit that
rendered her unwilling to begin on what was personal, and the Colonel
waited to talk it over with his wife alone before saying any more.

Besides, there were things far more near to them than their little
great-niece, and Mrs. Umfraville could not see Lord de la Poer
without having her heart very full of the sons to whom he had been so
kind.  Again they sat round the fire, and this time in the dark,
while once more Giles and Frank and all their ways were talked over
and over, and Kate was forgotten; but she was not sitting alone in
the dark window--no, she had a footstool close to her uncle, and sat
resting her head upon his knee, her eyes seeking red caverns in the
coals, her heart in a strange peaceful rest, her ears listening to
the mother's subdued tender tones in speaking of her boys, and the
friend's voice of sympathy and affection.  Her uncle leant back and
did not speak at all; but the other two went on and on, and Mrs.
Umfraville seemed to be drinking in every little trait of her boys'
English life, not weeping over it, but absolutely smiling when it was
something droll or characteristic.

Kate felt subdued and reverent, and loved her new relations more and
more for their sorrows; and she began to dream out castles of the
wonderful goodness by which she would comfort them; then she looked
for her uncle's hand to see if she could dare to stroke it, but one
was over his brow, the other out of reach, and she was shy of doing
anything.

The dinner interrupted them; and Kate had the pleasure of dining
late, and sitting opposite to Lord de la Poer, who talked now and
then to her, and told her what Adelaide and Grace were doing; but he
was grave and sad, out of sympathy with his friends, and Kate was by
no means tempted to be foolish.

Indeed, she began to feel that she might hope to be always good with
her uncle and aunt, and that they would never make her naughty.  Only
too soon came the announcement of the carriage for Lady Caergwent;
and when Aunt Emily took her into the bedroom to dress, she clung to
that kind hand and fondled it.

"My dear little girl!" and Aunt Emily held her in her arms, "I am so
glad!  Kate, I do think your dear uncle is a little cheered to-night!
If having you about him does him any good, how I shall love you,
Katie!" and she hugged her closer.  "And it is so kind in Lord de la
Poer to have come!  Oh, now he will be better!  I am so thankful he
is in England again!  You must be with us whenever Barbara can spare
you, Katie dear, for I am sure he likes it."

"Each wants me, to do the other good," thought Kate; and she was so
much touched and pleased that she did not know what to do, and looked
foolish.

Uncle Giles took her down stairs; and when they were in the carriage,
in the dark, he seemed to be less shy:  he lifted her on his knee and
said, "I will talk to your aunt, and we will see how soon you can
come to us, my dear."

"Oh, do let it be soon," said Kate.

"That must depend upon your Aunt Barbara," he answered, "and upon law
matters, perhaps.  And you must not be troublesome to her; she has
suffered very much, and will not think of herself, so you must think
for her."

"I don't know how, Uncle Giles," said poor sincere Kate.  "At home,
they always said I had no consideration."

"You must learn," he said gravely.  "She is not to be harassed."

Kate was rather frightened; but he spoke in a kinder voice.  "At
home, you say.  Do you mean with my sisters, or at Oldburgh?"

"Oh, at Oldburgh, Uncle Giles!"

"You are older now," he answered, "and need not be so childish."

"And please one thing--"

"Well--"

There came a great choking in her throat, but she did get it out.
"Please, please, don't think all I do wrong is the Wardours' fault!
I know I am naughty and horrid and unladylike, but it is my own own
fault, indeed it is, and nobody ELSE'S!  Mary and Uncle Wardour would
have made me good--and it was all my fault."

"My dear," and he put the other hand so that he completely encircled
the little slim waist, "I do quite believe that Mr. Wardour taught
you all the good you have.  There is nothing I am so glad of as that
you love and reverence him as he deserves--as far as such a child can
do.  I hope you always will, and that your gratitude will increase
with your knowledge of the sacrifices that he made for you."

It was too much of a speech for Kate to answer; but she nestled up to
him, and felt as if she loved him more than ever.  He added, "I
should like to see Mr. Wardour, but I can hardly leave your aunt yet.
Would he come to London?"

Kate gave a gasp.  "Oh dear!  Sylvia said he would have no money for
journeys now!  It cost so much his coming in a first-class carriage
with me."

"You see how necessary it is to learn consideration," said the
Colonel; "I must run down to see him, and come back at night."

By this time they were at the aunts' door, and both entered the
drawing-room together.

Lady Barbara anxiously hoped that Katharine had behaved well.

"Perfectly well," he answered; and his face was really brighter and
tenderer.

It was Kate's bed-time, and she was dismissed at once.  She felt that
the kiss and momentary touch of the hand, with the "Bless you," were
far more earnest than the mere greeting kiss.  She did not know that
it had been his wonted good-night to his own children.

When she was gone, he took a chair, and explained that he could
remain for a little while, as Lord de la Poer would bear his wife
company.  Lady Jane made room for him on the sofa, and Lady Barbara
looked pleased.

"I wished to talk to you about that child," he said.

"I have been wishing it for some time," said Lady Barbara; "waiting,
in fact, to make arrangements till your return."

"What arrangements?"

"For forming an establishment for her."

"The child's natural home is with you or with me."

There was a little silence; then Lady Jane nervously caught her
brother's hand, saying, "O Giles, Giles, you must not be severe with
her, poor little thing!"

"Why should I be severe, Jane?" he said.  "What has the child done to
deserve it?"

"I do not wish to enter into particulars," said Lady Barbara.  "But
she is a child who has been so unfortunately brought up as to require
constant watching; and to have her in the house does so much harm to
Jane's health, that I strongly advise you not to attempt it in
Emily's state of spirits."

"It would little benefit Emily's spirits to transfer a duty to a
stranger," said the Colonel.  "But I wish to know why you evidently
think so ill of this girl, Barbara!"

"Her entire behaviour since she has been with us--" began Lady
Barbara.

"Generalities only do mischief, Barbara.  If I have any control over
this child, I must know facts."

"The truth is, Giles," said his sister, distressed and confused,
"that I promised the child not to tell you of her chief piece of
misconduct, unless I was compelled by some fresh fault."

"An injudicious promise, Barbara.  You do the child more harm by
implying such an opinion of her than you could do by letting me hear
what she has actually done.  But you are absolved from the promise,
for she has herself told me."

"Told you!  That girl has no sense of shame!  After all the pains I
took to conceal it!"

"No, Barbara; it was with the utmost shame that she told me.  It was
unguarded of me, I own; but De la Poer and I had entirely forgotten
that she was present, and I asked him if he could account for your
evident dislike and distrust of her.  The child's honourable feelings
would not allow her to listen, and she came forward, and accused
herself, not you!"

"Before Lord de la Poer!  Giles, how could you allow it?" cried Lady
Barbara, confounded.  "That whole family will tell the story, and she
will be marked for ever!"

"De la Poer has some knowledge of child nature," said the Colonel,
slightly smiling.

"A gentleman often encourages that sort of child, but condemns her
the more.  She will be a by-word in that family!  I always knew she
would be our disgrace!"

"O Giles, do tell Barbara it cannot be so very bad!" entreated Lady
Jane.  "She is such a child--poor little dear!--and so little used to
control!"

"I have only as yet heard her own confused account."

Lady Barbara gave her own.

"I see," said the Colonel, "the child was both accurate and candid.
You should be thankful that your system has not destroyed her
sincerity."

"But, indeed, dear Giles," pleaded Lady Jane, "you know Barbara did
not want her to say what was false."

"No," said the Colonel:  "that was a mere misunderstanding.  It is
the spirit of distrust that--assuming that a child will act
dishonourably--is likely to drive her to do so."

"I never distrusted Katharine till she drove me to do so," said Lady
Barbara, with cold, stern composure.

"I would never bring an accusation of breach of trust where I had not
made it evident that I reposed confidence," said the Colonel.

"I see how it is," said Lady Barbara; "you have heard one side.  I do
not contradict.  I know the girl would not wilfully deceive by word;
and I am willing to confess that I am not capable of dealing with
her.  Only from a sense of duty did I ever undertake it."

"Of duty, Barbara?" he asked.

"Yes--of duty to the family."

"We do not see those things in the same light," he said quietly.  "I
thought, as you know, that the duty was more incumbent when the child
was left an orphan--a burthen on relatives who could ill afford to be
charged with her.  Perhaps, Barbara, if you had noticed her THEN,
instead of waiting till circumstances made her the head of our
family, you might have been able to give her that which has been
wanting in your otherwise conscientious training--affection."

Lady Barbara held up her head, stiffly, but she was very near tears,
of pain and wounded pride; but she would not defend herself; and she
saw that even her faithful Jane did not feel with her.

"I came home, Barbara," continued the Colonel, "resolving that--much
as I wished for Emily's sake that this little girl should need a home
with us--if you had found in her a new interest and delight, and were
in her--let me say it, Barbara--healing old sores, and giving her
your own good sense and high principle, I would not say one word to
disturb so happy a state of things.  I come and find the child a
state prisoner, whom you are endeavouring by all means to alienate
from the friends to whom she owes a daughter's gratitude; I find her
not complaining of you, but answering me with the saddest account a
child can give of herself--she is always naughty.  After this,
Barbara, I can be doing you no injury in asking you to concur with me
in arrangements for putting the child under my wife's care as soon as
possible."

"To-morrow, if you like," said Lady Barbara.  "I took her only from a
sense of duty; and it has half killed Jane.  I would not keep her
upon any consideration!"

"O Barbara, it has not hurt me.--O Giles, she will always be so
anxious about me; it is all my fault for being nervous and foolish!"
cried Lady Jane, with quivering voice, and tears in her eyes.  "If it
had not been for that, we could have made her so happy, dear little
spirited thing.  But dear Barbara spoils me, and I know I give way
too much."

"This will keep you awake all night!" said Barbara, as the Colonel's
tender gesture agitated Jane more.  "Indeed, Giles, you should have
chosen a better moment for this conversation--on almost your first
arrival too!  But the very existence of this child is a misfortune!"

"Let us trust that in a few years she may give you reason to think
otherwise," said the Colonel.  "Did you mean what you said--that you
wished us to take her to-morrow?"

"Not to incommode Emily.  She can go on as she has done till your
plans are made.  You do not know what a child she is."

"Emily shall come and settle with you to-morrow," said Colonel
Umfraville.  "I have not yet spoken to her, but I think she will wish
to have the child with her."

"And you will be patient with her.  You will make her happy," said
Lady Jane, holding his hand.

"Everything is made happy by Emily," he answered.

"But has she spirits for the charge?"

"She has always spirits enough to give happiness to others," he
answered; and the dew was on his dark lashes.

"And you, Giles--you will not be severe even if the poor child is a
little wild?"

"I know what you are thinking of, Jane," he said kindly.  "But
indeed, my dear, such a wife as mine, and such sorrows as she has
helped me to bear, would have been wasted indeed, if by God's grace
they had not made me less exacting and impatient than I used to be.--
Barbara," he added after a pause, "I beg your pardon if I have spoken
hastily, or done you injustice.  All you have done has been
conscientious; and if I spoke in displeasure--you know how one's
spirit is moved by seeing a child unhappy--and my training in
gentleness is not as complete as it ought to be, I am sorry for the
pain I gave you."

Lady Barbara was struggling with tears she could not repress; and at
last she broke quite down, and wept so that Lady Jane moved about in
alarm and distress, and her brother waited in some anxiety.  But when
she spoke it was humbly.

"You were right, Giles.  It was not in me to love that child.  It was
wrong in me.  Perhaps if I had overcome the feeling when you first
told me of it, when her mother died, it would have been better for us
all.  Now it is too late.  Our habits have formed themselves, and I
can neither manage the child nor make her happy.  It is better that
she should go to you and Emily.  And, Giles, if you still bring her
to us sometimes, I will try--"  The last words were lost.

"You will," he said affectionately, "when there are no more daily
collisions.  Dear Barbara, if I am particularly anxious to train this
poor girl up at once in affection and in self-restraint, it is
because my whole life--ever since I grew up--has taught me what a
grievous task is left us, after we are our own masters.  If our
childish faults--such as impetuosity and sullenness--are not
corrected on principle, not for convenience, while we are children."

After this conversation, everyone will be sure that Mrs. Umfraville
came next day, and after many arrangements with Lady Barbara, carried
off the little Countess with her to the house that Lord de la Poer
had lent them.

Kate was subdued and quiet.  She felt that she had made a very
unhappy business of her life with her aunts, and that she should
never see Bruton Street without a sense of shame.  Lady Barbara, too,
was more soft and kind than she had ever seen her; and Aunt Jane was
very fond of her, and grieved over her not having been happier.

"Oh, never mind, Aunt Jane; it was all my naughtiness.  I know Aunt
Emily will make me good; and nobody could behave ill in the house
with Uncle Giles, could they now?  So I shall be sure to be happy.
And I'll tell you what, Aunt Jane; some day you shall come to stay
with us, and then I'll drive you out in a dear delicious open
carriage, with two prancing ponies!"

And when she wished her other aunt good-bye, she eased her mind by
saying, "Aunt Barbara, I am very sorry I was such a horrid plague."

"There were faults on both sides, Katharine," her aunt answered with
dignity.  "Perhaps in time we may understand one another better."

The first thing Katharine heard when she had left the house with Mrs.
Umfraville was, that her uncle had gone down to Oldburgh by an early
train, and that both box and shawl had gone with him.

But when he came back late to Lord de la Poer's house, whom had he
brought with him?

Mary!  Mary Wardour herself!  He had, as a great favour, begged to
have her for a fortnight in London, to take care of her little
cousin, till further arrangements could be made; and to talk over
with Mrs. Umfraville the child's character, and what would be good
for her.

If there was one shy person in the house that night, there was
another happier than words could tell!

Moreover, before very long, the Countess of Caergwent had really seen
the Lord Chancellor, and found him not so very unlike other people
after all; indeed, unless Uncle Giles had told her, she never would
have found out who he was!  And when he asked her whether she would
wish to live with Colonel Umfraville or with Lady Barbara and Lady
Jane, it may be very easily guessed what answer she made!

So it was fixed that she should live at Caergwent Castle with her
uncle and aunt, and be brought up to the care of her own village and
poor people, and to learn the duties of her station under their care.

And before they left London, Mrs. Umfraville had chosen a very bright
pleasant young governess, to be a friend and companion, as well as an
instructress.  Further, it was settled that as soon as Christmas was
over, Sylvia should come for a long visit, and learn of the governess
with Kate.

Those who have learned to know Countess Kate can perhaps guess
whether she found herself right in thinking it impossible to be
naughty near Uncle Giles or Aunt Emily.  But of one thing they may be
sure--that Uncle Giles never failed to make her truly sorry for her
naughtiness, and increasingly earnest in the struggle to leave it
off.

And as time went on, and occupations and interests grew up round
Colonel and Mrs. Umfraville, and their niece lost her childish
wildness, and loved them more and more, they felt their grievous loss
less and less, and did not so miss the vanished earthly hope.  Their
own children had so lived that they could feel them safe; and they
attached themselves to the child in their charge till she was really
like their own.

Yet, all the time, Kate still calls Mr. Wardour "Papa;" and Sylvia
spends half her time with her.  Some people still say that in
manners, looks, and ways, Sylvia would make a better Countess than
Lady Caergwent; but there are things that both are learning together,
which alone can make them fit for any lot upon earth, or for the
better inheritance in Heaven.






Prepared by David Reed haradda@aol.com or davidr@inconnect.com

A Cumberland Vendetta
by John Fox Jr.

TO MINERVA AND ELIZABETH

A Cumberland Vendetta

I

THE cave had been their hiding-place as children; it was a secret
refuge now against hunger or darkness when they were hunting in
the woods. The primitive meal was finished; ashes were raked
over the red coals; the slice of bacon and the little bag of meal
were hung high against the rock wall; and the two stepped from
the cavern into a thicket of rhododendrons.

Parting the bushes toward the dim light, they stood on a massive
shoulder of the mountain, the river girding it far below, and the
afternoon shadows at their feet.  Both carried guns-the tall
mountaineer, a Winchester; the boy, a squirrel rifle longer than
himself.  Climbing about the rocky spur, they kept the same level
over log and bowlder and through bushy ravine to the north. In half
an hour, they ran into a path that led up home from the river, and
they stopped to rest on a cliff that sank in a solid black wall
straight under them. The sharp edge of a steep corn-field ran near,
and, stripped of blade and tassel, the stalks and hooded ears looked
in the coming dusk a little like monks at prayer. In the sunlight
across the river the corn stood thin and frail.  Over there a drought
was on it; and when drifting thistle-plumes marked the noontide of
the year, each yellow stalk had withered blades and an empty
sheath. Every-where a look of vague trouble lay upon the face of
the mountains, and when the wind blew, the silver of the leaves
showed ashen. Autumn was at hand.

There was no physical sign of kinship between the two,
half-brothers though they were. The tall one was dark; the boy, a
foundling, had flaxen hair, and was stunted and ~lender. He was a
dreamy~looking little fellow, and one may easily find his like
throughout the Cumberland -paler than his fellows, from staying
much indoors, with half-haunted face, and eyes that are deeply
pathetic when not cunning; ignorantly credited with idiocy and
uncanny powers; treated with much forbearance, some awe, and a
little contempt; and suffered to do his pleasure-nothing, or much
that is strange-without comment.

"I tell ye, Rome," he said, taking up the thread of talk that was
broken at the cave, "when Uncle Gabe says he's afeard thar's
trouble comm', hit's a-comm'; 'n' I want you to git me a Winchester. 
I'm a-gittin' big enough now. I kin shoot might' nigh as good as
you, 'n' whut am I fit fer with this hyeh old pawpaw pop-gun?"

"I don't want you fightin', boy, I've told ye. Y'u air too little 'n'
puny, 'n' I want ye to stay home 'n' take keer o' mam 'n' the cattle-ef
fightin' does come, I reckon thar won't be triuch."

Don't ye? " cried the boy, with sharp contempt-" with ole Jas
Lewallen a-devilin' Uncle Rufe, 'n' that blackheaded young Jas
a-climbin' on stumps over thar 'cross the river, n' crowin' n' sayin'
out open in Hazlan that ye air afeard o him? Yes; 'n' he called me a
idgit." The boy's voice broke into a whimper of rage.

"Shet up, Isom!  Don't you go gittin' mad now.  You'll be sick ag'in. 
I'll tend to him when the time comes." Rome spoke with rough
kindness, but ugly lines had gathered at his mouth and forehead.
The boy's tears came and went easily. He drew his sleeve across
his eyes, and looked up the river. Beyond the bend, three huge
birds rose into the sunlight and floated toward them.  Close at
hand, they swerved side-wise.

"They hain't buzzards," he said, standing up, his anger gone; "look
at them straight wings!

Again the eagles swerved, and two shot across the river.  The third
dropped with shut wings to the bare crest of a gaunt old poplar
under them.

"Hit's a young un, Rome Y" said the boy, excitedly. "He's goin' to
wait thar tell the old uns come back. Gimme that gun!

Catching up the Winchester, he slipped over the ledge; and Rome
leaned suddenly forward, looking down at the river.

A group of horsemen had ridden around the bend, and were
coming at a walk down the other shore.  Every man carried
something across his saddle-bow. There was a gray horse among
them - young Jasper's - and an evil shadow came into Rome's face,
and quickly passed. Near a strip of woods the gray turned up the
mountain from the party, and on its back he saw the red glint of a
woman's dress. With a half-smile he watched the scarlet figure ride
from the woods, and climb slowly up through the sunny corn. On
the spur above and full in the rich yellow light, she halted, half
turning in her saddle.  He rose to his feet, to his full height, his
head bare, and thrown far back between his big shoulders, and,
still as statues, the man and the woman looked at each other across
the gulf of darkening air. A full minute the woman sat motionless,
then rode on.  At the edge of the woods she stopped and turned
again.

The eagle under Rome leaped one stroke in the air, and dropped
like a clod into the sea of leaves.  The report of the gun and a faint
cry of triumph rose from below.  It was good marksmanship, but
on the cliff Rome did not heed it.  Something had fluttered in the
air above the girl's head, and he laughed aloud. She was waving
her bonnet at him.

II

JUST where young Stetson stood, the mountains racing along each
bank of the Cumberland had sent out against each other, by mutual
impulse, two great spurs.  At the river's brink they stopped sheer,
with crests uplifted, as though some hand at the last moment had
hurled them apart, and had led the water through the breach to
keep them at peace.  To-day the crags looked seamed by thwarted
passion; and, sullen with firs, they made fit symbols of the human
hate about the base of each.

When the feud began, no one knew.  Even the original cause was
forgotten.  Both families had come as friends from Virginia long
ago, and had lived as enemies nearly half a century.  There was
hostility before the war, but, until then, little bloodshed. Through
the hatred of change, characteristic of the mountaineer the world
over, the Lewallens were for the Union. The Stetsons owned a few
slaves, and they fought for them. Peace found both still neighbors
and worse foes.  The war armed them, and brought back an
ancestral contempt for human life; it left them a heritage of
lawlessness that for mutual protection made necessary the very
means used by their feudal forefathers; personal hatred supplanted
its dead issues, and with them the war went on. The Stetsons had a
good strain of Anglo-Saxon blood, and owned valley-lands; the
Lewallens kept store and made "moonshine"; so kindred and
debtors and kindred and tenants were arrayed with one or the other
leader, and gradually the retainers of both settled on one or the
other side of the river.  In time of hostility the Cumberland came
to be the boundary between life and death for the dwellers on each
shore.  It was feudalism born again.

Above one of the spurs each family had its home; the Stetsons,
under the seared face of Thunderstruck Knob; the Lewallens, just
beneath the wooded rim of Wolf's Head.  The eaves and chimney
of each cabin were faintly visible from the porch of the other.  The
first light touched the house of the Stetsons; the last, the Lewallen
cabin.  So there were times when the one could not turn to the
sunrise nor the other to the sunset but with a curse in his heart, for
his eye must fall on the home of his enemy.

For years there had been peace.  The death of Rome Stetson's
father from ambush, and the fight in the court-house square, had
forced it. After that fight only four were left-old Jasper Lewallen
and young Jasper, the boy Rome and his uncle, Rufe Stetson. 
Then Rufe fled to the West, and the Stetsons were helpless.  For
three years no word was heard of him, but the hatred burned in the
heart of Rome's mother, and was traced deep in her grim old face
while she patiently waited the day of retribution. It smouldered,
too, in the hearts of the women of both clans who had lost
husbands or sons or lovers; and the friends and kin of each had
little to do with one another, and met and passed with watchful
eyes.  Indeed, it would take so little to turn peace to war that the
wonder was that peace had lived so long. Now trouble was at hand. 
Rufe Stetson had come back at last, a few months since, and had
quietly opened store at the county-seat, Hazlan-a little town five
miles up the river, where Troubled Fork runs seething into the
Cumberland-a point of neutrality for the factions, and
consequently a battIe-ground. Old Jasper's store was at the other
end of the town, and the old man had never been known to brook
competition.  He had driven three men from Hazlan during the last
term of peace for this offence, and everybody knew that the fourth
must leave or fight.  Already Rufe Stetson had been warned not to
appear outside his door after dusk. Once or twice his wife had seen
skulking shadows under the trees across the road, and a tremor of
anticipation ran along both banks of the Cumberland.

III

A FORTNIGHT later, court came. Rome was going to Hazlan, and
the feeble old Stetson mother limped across the porch from the
kitchen, trailing a Winchester behind her. Usually he went
unarmed, but he took the gun now, as she gave it, in silence.

The boy Isom was not well, and Rome had told him to ride the
horse.  But the lad had gone on afoot to his duties at old Gabe
Bunch's mill, and Rome himself rode down Thunderstruck Knob
through the mist and dew of the early morning.  The sun was
coming up over Virginia, and through a dip in Black Mountain the
foot-hills beyond washed in blue waves against its white disk.  A
little way down the mountain, the rays shot through the gap upon
him, and, lancing the mist into tatters, and lighting the dew-drops,
set the birds singing.  Rome rode, heedless of it all, under primeval
oak and poplar, and along rain-clear brooks and happy waterfalls,
shut in by laurel and rhododendron, and singing past mossy stones
and lacelike ferns that brushed his stirrup. On the brow of every
cliff he would stop to look over the trees and the river to the other
shore, where the gray line of a path ran aslant Wolf's Head, and
was lost in woods above and below.

At the river he rode up-stream, looking still across it.  Old Gabe
Bunch halloed to him from the doorway of the mill, as he splashed
through the creek, and Isom's thin face peered through a breach in
the logs.  At the ford beyond, he checked his horse with a short
oath of pleased surprise.  Across the water, a scarlet dress was
moving slowly past a brown field of corn.  The figure was
bonneted, but he knew the girl's walk and the poise of her head
that far away.  Just who she was, however, he did not know, and he
sat irresolute.  He had seen her first a month since, paddling along
the other shore, erect, and with bonnet off and hair down; she had
taken the Lewallen path up the mountain.  Afterward, he saw her
going at a gallop on young Jasper's gray horse, bareheaded again,
and with her hair loose to the wind, and he knew she was one of
his enemies.  He thought her the girl people said young Jasper was
going to marry, and he had watched her the more closely.  From
the canoe she seemed never to notice him; but he guessed, from
the quickened sweep of her paddle, that she knew he was looking
at her, and once, when he halted on his way home up the
mountain, she half turned in her saddle and looked across at him. 
This happened again, and then she waved her bonnet at him. It was
bad enough, any Stetson seeking any Lewallen for a wife, and for
him to court young Jasper's sweetheart-it was a thought to laugh at.
But the mischief was done. The gesture thrilled him, whether it
meant defiance or good-will, and the mere deviltry of such a
courtship made him long for it at every sight of her with the river
between them. At once he began to plan how he should get near
her, but, through some freak, she had paid no further heed to him.
He saw her less often-for a week, in-deed, he had not seen her at
all till this day-and the forces that hindrance generates in an
imperious nature had been at work within him. The chance now
was one of gold, and with his life in his hand he turned into the
stream. Across, he could see something white on her shoulder-an
empty bag. It was grinding~day, and she was going to the mill-the
Lewallen mill. She stopped as he galloped up, and turned, pushing
back her bonnet with one hand; and he drew rein. But the friendly,
expectant light in her face kindled to such a blaze of anger in her
eyes that he struck his horse violently, as though the beast had
stopped of its own accord, and, cursing himself, kept on. A little
farther, he halted again.  Three horsemen, armed with
Winchesters, were jogging along toward town ahead of him, and
he wheeled about sharply. The girl, climbing rapidly toward Steve
Bray-ton's cabin, was out of the way, but he was too late to reach
the ford again.  Down the road two more Lewallens with guns
were in sight, and he lashed his horse into the stream where the
water was deep.  Old Gabe, looking from the door of his mill, quit
laughing to himself; and under cover of the woods, the girl
watched man and horse fighting the tide.  Twice young Stetson
turned his head.  But his enemies apparently had not seen him, and
horse and rider scrambled up the steep bank and under shelter of
the trees.  The girl had evidently learned who he was. Her sudden
anger was significant, as was the sight of the Lewallens going
armed to court, and Rome rode on, uneasy.

When he reached Troubled Fork, in sight of Hazlan, he threw a
cartridge into place and shifted the slide to see that it was ready for
use. Passing old Jasper's store on the edge of the town, he saw the
old man's bushy head through the open door, and Lewallens and
Braytons crowded out on the steps and looked after him. All were
armed. Twenty paces farther he met young Jasper on his gray, and
the look on his enemy's face made him grip his rifle. With a
flashing cross-fire from eye to eye, the two passed, each with his
thumb on the hammer of his Winchester. The groups on the
court-house steps stopped talking as he rode by, and turned to look
at him. He saw none of his own friends, and he went on at a gallop
to Rufe Stetson's store.  His uncle was not in sight. Steve Marcum
and old Sam Day stood in the porch, and inside a woman was
crying.  Several Stetsons were near, and all with grave faces
gathered about him.

He knew what the matter was before Steve spoke.  His uncle had
been driven from town. A last warning had come to him on the day
before.  The hand of a friend was in the caution, and Rufe rode
away at dusk.  That night his house was searched by men masked
and armed. The Lewallens were in town, and were ready to fight. 
The crisis had come.

IV


BACK at the mill old Gabe was troubled. Usually he sat in a
cane-bottomed chair near the hopper, whittling, while the lad
tended the mill, and took pay in an oaken toll-dish smooth with the
use of half a century. But the incident across the river that morning
had made the old man uneasy, and he moved restlessly from his
chair to the door, and back again, while the boy watched him,
wondering what the matter was, but asking no questions.  At noon
an old mountaineer rode by, and the miller hailed him.

"Any news in town?" he asked.

"Hain't been to town.  Reckon fightin' 's goin' on thar from whut I
heerd."  The careless, high-pitched answer brought the boy with
wide eyes to the door.

Whut d'ye hear? " asked Gabe. Jes heerd fightin' 's goin' on!

Then every man who came for his meal brought a wild rumor from
town, and the old miller moved his chair to the door, and sat there
whittling fast, and looking anxiously toward Hazlan. The boy was
in a fever of unrest, and old Gabe could hardly keep him in the
mill.  In the middle of the afternoon the report of a rifle came
down the river, breaking into echoes against the cliffs below, and
Isom ran out the door, and stood listening for another, with an odd
contradiction of fear and delight on his eager face.  In a few
moments Rome Stetson galloped into sight, and, with a shrill cry
of relief, the boy ran down the road to meet him, and ran back,
holding by a stirrup. Young Stetson's face was black with passion,
and his eyes were heavy with drink. At the door of the mill he
swung from his horse, and for a moment was hardly able to speak
from rage. There had been no fight.  The Stetsons were few and
unprepared. They had neither the guns nor, without Rufe, the
means to open the war, and they believed Rufe had gone for arms. 
So they had chafed in the store all day, and all day Lewallens on
horseback and on foot were in sight; and each was a taunt to every
Stetson, and, few as they were, the young and hot-headed wanted
to go out and fight. In the afternoon a tale-bearer had brought some
of Jasper's boasts to Rome, and, made reckless by moonshine and
much brooding, he sprang up to lead them.  Steve Marcum, too,
caught up his gun, but old Sam's counsel checked him, and the two
by force held Rome back.  A little later the Lewallens left town. 
The Stetsons, too, disbanded, and on the way home a last drop of
gall ran Rome's cup of bitterness over.  Opposite Steve Brayton's
cabin a jet of smoke puffed from the bushes across the river, and a
bullet furrowed the road in front of him. That was the shot they
had heard at the mill.  Somebody was drawing a dead-line," and
Rome wheeled his horse at the brink of it. A mocking yell came
over the river, and a gray horse flashed past an open space in the
bushes.  Rome knew the horse and knew the yell; young Jasper
was "bantering" him.  Nothing maddens the mountaineer like this
childish method of insult; and telling of it, Rome sat in a corner,
and loosed a torrent of curses against young Lewallen and his clan.

Old Gabe had listened without a word, and the strain in his face
was eased.  Always the old man had stood for peace.  He believed
it had come after the court-house fight, and he had hoped against
hope, even when Rufe came back to trade against old Jasper; for
Rufe was big and good-natured, and unsuspected of resolute
purpose, and the Lewallens' power had weakened.  So, now that
Rufe was gone again, the old miller half believed he was gone for
good. Nobody was hurt; there was a chance yet for peace, and with
a rebuke on his tongue and relief in his face, the old man sat back
in his chair and went on whittling. The boy turned eagerly to a
crevice in the logs and, trembling with excitement, searched the
other bank for Jasper's gray horse, going home.

He called me a idgit," he said to himself, with a threatening shake
of his head.  "Jes wouldn't I like to hev a chance at him!  Rome ull
git him! Rome ull git him!"

There was no moving point of white on the broad face of the
mountains nor along the river road.  Jasper was yet to come and,
with ears alert to every word behind him, the lad fixed his eyes
where he should see him first.

"Oh, he didn't mean to hit me.  Not that he ain't mean enough to
shoot from the bresh," Rome broke out savagely.  "That's jes whut
I'm afeard he will do.  Thar was too much daylight fer him.  Ef he
jes don't come a-sneakin' over hyeh, 'n' waitin' in the lorrel atter
dark fer me, it's all I axe."

Waitin' in the lorrel! "  Old Gabe could hold back no longer.  "Hit's
a shame, a burn-in' shame!  I don' know whut things air comm' to! 
'Pears like all you young folks think about is killin' somebody. 
Folks usen to talk about how fer they could kill a deer; now it's
how fer they kin kill a man.  I hev knowed the time when a man
would 'a' been druv out o' the county fer drawin' a knife ur a pistol;
'n' ef a feller was ever killed, it was kinder accidental, by a Barlow. 
I reckon folks got use' to weepons 'n' killin' 'n' bushwhackin' in the
war. Looks like it's been gittin' wuss ever sence, 'n' now hit's dirk 'n'
Winchester, 'n' shootin' from the bushes all the time.  Hit's wuss 'n
stealin' money to take a feller-creetur' s life that way!

The old miller's indignation sprang from memories of a better
youth.  For the courtesies of the code went on to the Blue Grass,
and before the war the mountaineer fought with English fairness
and his fists.  It was a disgrace to use a deadly weapon in those
days; it was a disgrace now not to use it.

Oh, I know all the excuses folks make," he went on: " hit's fa'r fer
one as 'tis fer t'other; y'u can't fight a man fa'r 'n' squar' who'll shoot
you in the back; a pore man can't fight money in the couhts; 'n' thar
hain't no witnesses in the lorrel but leaves; 'n' dead men don't hev
much to say.  I know it all.  Hit's cur'us, but it act'-ally looks like
lots o' decent young folks hev got usen to the idee-thar's so much
of it goin' on, 'n' thar's so much talk 'bout killin' 'n' layin' out in the
lorrel. Reckon folks 'll git to pesterm' women n' strangers bimeby,
'n' robbin' 'n' thievin'.  Hit's bad enough thar's so leetle law thet
folks hev to take it in their own hands oncet in a while, but this
shootin' from the bresh-hit's p'int'ly a sin 'n' shame!  Why," he
concluded, pointing his remonstrance as he always did, "I seed
your grandad and young Jas's fight up thar in Hazlan full two hours
'fore the war-fist and skull-'n' your grandad was whooped.  They
got up and shuk hands. I don't see why folks can't fight that way
now. I wish Rufe 'n' old Jas 'n' you 'n' young Jas could have it out
fist and skull, 'n' stop this killin' o' people like hogs.  Thar's nobody
left but you four.  But thar's no chance o' that, I reckon."

"I'll fight him anyway, 'n' I reckon ef he don't die till I lay out in the
lorrel fer him, he'll live a long time.  Ef a Stetson ever done sech
meanness as that I never heerd it."

Nother hev I," said the old man, with quick justice.  " You air a
over-bearin' race, all o' ye, but I never knowed ye to be that mean.
Hit's all the wus fer ye thet ye air in sech doin's. I tell ye, Rome--

A faint cry rose above the drone of the millstones, and old Gabe
stopped with open lips to listen.  The boy's face was pressed close
to the logs.  A wet paddle had flashed into the sunlight from out
the bushes across the river.  He could just see a canoe in the
shadows under them, and with quick suspicion his brain pictured
Jasper's horse hitched in the bushes, and Jasper stealing across the
river to waylay Rome.  But the canoe moved slowly out of sight
downstream and toward the deep water, the paddler unseen, and
the boy looked around with a weak smile.  Neither seemed to have
heard him. Rome was brooding, with his sullen face in his hands;
the old miller was busy with his own thoughts; and the boy turned
again to his watch.

Jasper did not come.  Isom's eyes began to ache from the steady
gaze, and now and then he would drop them to the water swirling
beneath.  A slow wind swayed the overhanging branches at the
mouth of the stream, and under them was an eddy.  Escaping this,
the froth and bubbles raced out to the gleams beating the air from
the sunlit river.  He saw one tiny fleet caught; a mass of yellow
scum bore down and, sweeping through bubbles and eddy, was
itself struck into fragments by something afloat.  A tremulous
shadow shot through a space of sunlight into the gloom cast by a
thicket of rhododendrons, and the boy caught his breath sharply. A
moment more, and the shape of a boat and a human figure
quivered on the water running under him.  The stern of a Lewallen
canoe swung into the basin, and he sprang to his feet.

"Rome!"  The cry cut sharply through the drowsy air.  " Thar he is! 
Hit's Jas"

The old miller rose to his feet.  The boy threw himself behind the
sacks of grain.  Rome wheeled for his rifle, and stood rigid before
the door.  There was a light step without, the click of a gun-lock
within; a shadow fell across the doorway, and a girl stood at the
threshold with an empty bag in her hand.

V

WITH a little cry she shrank back a step. Her face paled and her
lips trembled, and for a moment she could not speak.  But her eyes
swept the group, and were fixed in two points of fire on Rome.

"Why don't ye shoot! "she asked, scornfully.

"I hev heerd that the Stetsons have got to makin war on
women-folks, but I never believed it afore."  Then she turned to
the miller.

Kin I git some more meal hyeh? " she asked.  " Or have ye stopped
sellin' to folks on t'other side? " she added, in a tone that sought no
favor.

"You kin have all ye want," said old Gabe, quietly.

"The mill on Dead Crick is broke ag'in," she continued, " 'n' co'n is
skeerce on our side. We'll have to begin buyin' purty soon, so I
thought I'd save totin' the co'n down hyeh." She handed old Gabe
the empty bag.

Well,'' said he, '' as it air gittin' late, 'n' ye have to climb the
mountain ag'in, I'll let ye have that comm' out o' the hopper now. 
Take a cheer."

The girl sat down in the low chair, and, loos ening the strings of
her bonnet, pushed it back from her head.  An old-fashioned horn
comb dropped to the floor, and when she stooped to pick it up she
let her hair fall in a head about her shoulders.  Thrusting one hand
under it, she calmly tossed the whole mass of chestnut and gold
over the back of the chair, where it fell rippling like water through
a bar of sunlight. With head thrown back and throat bared, she
shook it from side to side, and, slowly coiling it, pierced it with the
coarse comb.  Then passing her hands across her forehead and
temples, as women do, she folded them in her lap, and sat
motionless.  The boy, crouched near, held upon her the mesmeric
look of a serpent.  Old Gabe was peering covertly from under the
brim of his hat, with a chuckle at his lips.  Rome had fallen back to
a corner of the mill, sobered, speechless, his rifle in a nerveless
hand.  The passion that fired him at the boy's warning had as
swiftly gone down at sight of the girl, and her cutting rebuke made
him hot again with shame. He was angry, too-more than
angry-because he felt so helpless, a sensation that was new and
stifling.  The scorn of her face, as he remembered it that morning,
hurt him again while he looked at her.  A spirit of contempt was
still in her eyes, and quivering about her thin lips and nostrils.  She
had put him beneath further notice, and yet every toss of her head,
every movement of her hands, seemed meant for him, to irritate
him.  And once, while she combed her hair, his brain whirled with
an impulse to catch the shining stuff in one hand and to pinion
both her wrists with the other, Just to show her that he was master,
and still would harm her not at all.  But he shut his teeth, and
watched her.  Among mountain women the girl was more than
pretty; elsewhere only her hair, perhaps, would have caught the
casual eye.  She wore red homespun and coarse shoes; her hands
were brown and hardened.  Her arms and shoulders looked
muscular, her waist was rather large-being as nature meant it-and
her face in repose had a heavy look.  But the poise of her head
suggested native pride and dignity; her eyes were deep, and full of
changing lights; the scarlet dress, loose as it was, showed rich
curves in her figure, and her movements had a certain childlike
grace.  Her brow was low, and her mouth had character; the chin
was firm, the upper lip short, and the teeth were even and white.

"I reckon thar's enough to fill the sack, Isom," said the old miller,
breaking the strained silence of the group.  The girl rose and
handed him a few pieces of silver.

I reckon I'd better pay fer it all," she said. I s'pose I won't be over
hyeh ag'in."

Old Gabe gave some of the coins back.

"Y'u know whut my price al'ays is," he said.

I'm obleeged," answered the girl, flushing.

"Co'n hev riz on our side.  I thought mebbe you charged folks over
thar more, anyways."

"I sells fer the same, ef co'n is high ur low," was the answer.  "This
side or t'other makes no diff'unce to me.  