I hev frien's on both
sides, 'n' I take no part in sech doin's as air a shame to the
mountains."

There was a quick light of protest in the girl's dark eyes; but the
old miller was honored by both factions, and without a word she
turned to the boy, who was tying the sack.

The boat's loose! " he called out, with. the string between his teeth;
and she turned again and ran out.  Rome stood still.

Kerry the sack out, boy, 'n' holp the gal." Old Gabe's voice was
stern, and the young mountaineer doggedly swung the bag to his
shoulders.  The girl had caught the rope, and drawn the rude
dugout along the shore.

"Who axed ye to do that?" she asked, angrily.

Rome dropped the bag into the boat, and merely looked her in the
face.

"Look hyeh, Rome Stetson"-the sound of his name from her lips
almost startled him-"I'll hev ye understan' that I don't want to be
bounden to you, nor none o' yer kin."

Turning, she gave an impatient sweep with her paddle.  The prow
of the canoe dipped and was motionless.  Rome had caught the
stern, and the girl wheeled in hot anger.  Her impulse to strike may
have been for the moment and no longer, or she may have read
swiftly no unkindness in the mountaineer's steady look; for the
uplifted oar was stayed in the air, as though at least she would hear
him.

"I've got nothin' ag'in' you," he said, slowly, Jas Lewallen hev been
threatenin' me, 'n' I thought it was him, 'n' I was ready fer him,
when you come into the mill.  I wouldn't hurt you nur no other
woman.  Y'u ought to know it, 'n' ye do know it."

The words were masterful, but said in a way that vaguely soothed
the girl's pride, and the oar was let slowly into the water.

"I reckon y'u air a friend o' his," he added, still quietly.  "I've seed
ye goin' up thar, but I've got nothin' ag'in' ye, whoever ye be."

She turned on him a sharp look of suspicion. "I reckon I do be a
friend o' hisn," she said, deliberately; and then she saw that he was
in earnest.  A queer little smile went like a ray of light from her
eyes to her lips, and she gave a quick stroke with her paddle.  The
boat shot into the current, and was carried swiftly toward the
Cumberland.  The girl stood erect, swaying through light and
shadow like a great scarlet flower blowing in the wind; and Rome
watched her till she touched the other bank. Swinging the sack out,
she stepped lightly after it, and, without looking behind her,
disappeared in the bushes.

The boy Isom was riding away when Rome, turned, and old Gabe
was watching from the door of the mill.

Who is that gal? " he asked, slowly.  It seemed somehow that he
had known her a long while ago.  A puzzled frown overlay his
face, and the old miller laughed.

"You a-axin' who she be, 'n' she a-axin who you be, 'n' both o' ye
a-knowin' one 'nother sence ye was knee-high.  Why, boy, hit's old
Jasper's gal-Marthy!

VI

IN a flash of memory Rome saw the girl as vividly as when he last
saw her years ago.
They had met at the mill, he with his father, she with hers.  There
was a quarrel, and the two men were held apart.  But the old sore
as usual was opened, and a week later Rome's father was killed
from the brush.  He remembered his mother's rage and grief, her
calls for vcngeance, the uprising, the fights, plots, and ambushes. 
He remembered the look the girl had given him that long ago, and
her look that day was little changed.

When fighting began, she had been sent for safety to the sister of
her dead mother in another county.  When peace came, old Jasper
married again and the girl refused to come home.  Lately the
step-mother, too, had passed away, and then she came back to live. 
All this the old miller told in answer to Rome's questions as the
two walked away in the twilight. This was why he had not
recognized her, and why her face yet seemed familiar even when
he crossed the river that morning. 

"Uncle Gabe, how do you reckon the gal knowed who I was?"

"She axed me."

"She axed you!  Whar?"

Over thar in the mill."  The miller was watching the young
mountaineer closely.  The manner of the girl was significant when
she asked who Rome was, and the miller knew but one reason
possible for his foolhardiness that morning.

"Do you mean to say she have been over hyeh afore?"

"Why, yes, come to think about it, three or four times while Isom
was sick, and whut she come fer I can't make out.  The mill over
thar wasn't broke long, 'n' why she didn't go thar or bring more co'n
at a time, to save her the trouble o' so many trips, I can't see to save
me.

Young Stetson was listening eagerly.  Again the miller cast his
bait.

Mebbe she's spyin'."

Rome faced him, alert with suspicion; but old Gabe was laughing
silently.

"Don't you be a fool, Rome.  The gal comes and goes in that boat,
'n' she couldn't see a soul without my knowin' it.  She seed ye ridin'
by one day, 'n' she looked mighty cur'us when I tole her who ye
was."

Old Gabe stopped his teasing, Rome's face was so troubled, and
himself grew serious.

"Rome," he said, earnestly, "I wish to the good Lord ye wasn't in
sech doin's.  Ef that had been young Jas 'stid o' Marthy, I reckon ye
would 'a' killed him right thar."

"I wasn't going to let him kill me," was the sullen answer.

The two had stopped at a rickety gate swinging open on the road. 
The young mountaineer was pushing a stone about with the toe of
his boot.  He had never before listened to remonstrance with such
patience, and old Gabe grew bold.

"You've been drinkin' ag'in, Rome," he said, sharply, " 'n' I know it. 
Hit's been moonshine that's whooped you Stetsons, not the
Lewallens, long as I kin rickollect, 'n' it ull be moonshine ag'in ef
ye don't let it alone."

Rome made no denial, no defence.  "Uncle Gabe," he said slowly,
still busied with the stone, " hev that gal been over hyeh sence y'u
tol' her who I was?"

The old man was waiting for the pledge that seemed on his lips,
but he did not lose his temper.

Not till to-day," he said, quietly.

Rome turned abruptly, and the two separated with no word of
parting.  For a moment the miller watched the young fellow
striding away under his rifle.

"I have been atter peace a good while," he said to himself, " but I
reckon thar's a bigger hand a-workin' now than mine." Then he
lifted his voice.  "Ef Isom's too sick to come down to the mill
to-morrer, I wish you'd come 'n' holp me."

Rome nodded back over his shoulder, and went on, with head bent,
along the river road. Passing a clump of pines at the next curve, he
pulled a bottle from his pocket.

"Uncle Gabe's about right, I reckon," he said, half aloud; and he
raised it above his head to hurl it away, but checked it in mid-air. 
For a moment he looked at the colorless liquid, then, with quick
nervousness, pulled the cork of sassafras leaves, gulped down the
pale moonshine, and dashed the bottle against the trunk of a beech.
The fiery stuff does its work in a hurry.  He was thirsty when he
reached the mouth of a brook that tumbled down the mountain
along the pathway that would lead him home, and he stooped to
drink where the water sparkled in a rift of dim light from
overhead.  Then he sat upright on a stone, with his wide hat-brim
curved in a crescent over his forehead, his hands caught about his
knees, and his eyes on the empty air.

He was scarcely over his surprise that the girl was young
Lewallen's sister, and the discovery had wrought a curious change. 
The piquant impulse of rivalry was gone, and something deeper
was taking its place.  He was confused and a good deal troubled,
thinking it all over. He tried to make out what the girl meant by
looking at him from the mountain-side, by waving her bonnet at
him, and by coming to old Gabe's mill when she could have gone
to her own.  To be sure, she did not know then who he was, and
she had stopped coming when she learned; but why had she
crossed again that day?  Perhaps she too was bantering him, and he
was at once angry and drawn to her; for her mettlesome spirit
touched his own love of daring, even when his humiliation was
most bitter-when she told him he warred on women; when he held
out to her the branch of peace and she swept it aside with a stroke
of her oar. But Rome was little conscious of the weight of subtle
facts like these.  His unseeing eyes went back to her as she combed
her hair. He saw the color in her cheeks, the quick light in her
eyes, the naked, full throat once more, and the wavering forces of
his unsteady brain centred in a stubborn resolution-to see it all
again.  He would make Isom stay at home, if need be, and he
would take the boy's place at the mill.  If she came there no more,
he would cross the river again.  Come peace or war, be she friend
or enemy, he would see her.  His thirst was fierce again, and, with
this half-drunken determination in his heart, he stooped once more
to drink from the cheerful little stream.  As he rose, a loud curse
smote the air.  The river, pressed between two projecting cliffs,
was narrow at that point, and the oath came across the water.  An
instant later a man led a lamed horse from behind a bowlder, and
stooped to examine its leg.  The dusk was thickening, but Rome
knew the huge frame and gray beard of old Jasper Lewallen. The
blood beat in a sudden tide at his temples, and, half by instinct, he
knelt behind a rock, and, thrusting his rifle through a crevice,
cocked it softly.

Again the curse of impatience came over the still water, and old
Jasper rose and turned toward him.  The glistening sight caught in
the centre of his beard.  That would take him in the throat; it might
miss, and he let the sight fall till the bullet would cut the fringe of
gray hair into the heart.  Old Jasper, so people said, had killed his
father in just this way; he had driven his uncle from the mountains;
he was trying now to revive the feud.  He was the father of young
Jasper, who had threatened his life, and the father of the girl whose
contempt had cut him to the quick twice that day.  Again her taunt
leaped through his heated brain, and his boast to the old miller
followed it.  His finger trembled at the trigger.

"No; by--, no! "he breathed between his teeth; and old Jasper
passed on, unharmed.

VII

NEXT day the news of Rufe Stetson's flight went down the river
on the wind, and before nightfall the spirit of murder was loosed
on both shores of the Cumberland.  The more cautious warned old
Jasper.  The Stetsons were gaining strength again, they said; so
were their feudsmen, the Marcums, enemies of the Braytons, old
Jasper's kinspeople.  Keeping store, Rufe had made money in the
West, and money and friends right and left through the mountains. 
With all his good-nature, he was a persistent hater, and he was
shrewd.  He had waited the chance to put himself on the side of the
law, and now the law was with him. But old Jasper laughed
contemptuously.  Rufe Stetson was gone again, he said, as he had
gone before, and this time for good.  Rufe had tried to do what
nobody had done, or could do, while he was alive.  Anyway, he
was reckless, and he cared little if war did come again.  Still, the
old man prepared for a fight, and Steve Marcum on the other shore
made ready for Rufe's return.

It was like the breaking of peace in feudal days.  The close kin of
each leader were already about him, and now the close friends of
each took sides.  Each leader trading in Hazlan had debtors
scattered through the mountains, and these rallied to aid the man
who had befriended them.  There was no grudge but served a
pretext for partisanship in the coming war.  Political rivalry had
wedged apart two strong families, the Marcums and Braytons; a
boundary line in dispute was a chain of bitterness; a suit in a
country court had sown seeds of hatred. 
Sometimes it was a horse-trade, a fence left down, or a gate left
open, and the trespassing of cattle; in one instance, through spite, a
neighbor had docked the tail of a neighbor's horse-had " muled his
critter," as the owner phrased the outrage.  There was no old sore
that was not opened by the crafty leaders, no slumbering bitterness
that they did not wake to life.  " Help us to revenge, and we will
he!p you," was the whispered promise.  So, had one man a grudge
against another, he could set his foot on one or the other shore,
sure that his enemy would be fighting for the other.

Others there were, friends of neither leader, who, under stress of
poverty or hatred of work, would fight with either for food and
clothes; and others still, the ne'er-do-wells and outlaws, who
fought by the day or month for hire. Even these were secured by
one or the other faction, for Steve and old Jasper left no resource
untried, knowing well that the fight, if there was one, would be
fought to a quick and decisive end.  The day for the leisurely feud,
for patient planning, and the slow picking off of men from one
side or the other, was gone.  The people in the Blue Grass, who
had no feuds in their own country, were trying to stop them in the
mountain.  Over in Breathitt, as everybody knew, soldiers had
come from the " settlemints," had arrested the leaders, and had
taken them to the Blue Grass for the feared and hated ordeal of
trial by a jury of "bigoted furriners."  On the heels of the soldiers
came a young preacher up from the Jellico hills, half " citizen,"
half furriner," with long black hair and a scar across his forehead,
who was stirring up the people, it was said, " as though Satan was
atter them."  Over there the spirit of the feud was broken, and a
good effect was already perceptible around Hazlan.  In past days
every pair of lips was sealed with fear, and the non-combatants left
crops and homes, and moved down the river, when trouble began.
Now only the timid considered this way of escape.  Steve and old
Jasper found a few men who refused to enter the fight. Several,
indeed, talked openly against the renewal of the feud, and
somebody, it was said, had dared to hint that he would send to the
Governor for aid if it should break out again. But these were
rumors touching few people.

For once again, as time and time again before, one bank of the
Cumberland was arrayed with mortal enmity against the other, and
old Gabe sat, with shaken faith, in the door of his mill. For years
he had worked and prayed for peace, and for a little while the
Almighty seemed lending aid.  Now the friendly grasp was
loosening, and yet the miller did all he could.  He begged Steve
Marcum to urge Rufe to seek aid from the law when the latter
came back; and Steve laughed, and asked what justice was
possible for a Stetson, with a Lewallen for a judge and Braytons
for a jury.  The miller pleaded with old Jasper, and old Jasper
pointed to the successes of his own life.

"I hev triumphed ag'in' my enemies time 'n' ag'in," he said.  "The
Lord air on my side, 'n' I gits a better Christian ever' year."  The old
man spoke with the sincerity of a barbarism that has survived the
dark ages, and, holding the same faith, the miller had no answer. 
It was old Gabe indeed who had threatened to send to the
Governor for soldiers, and this he would have done, perhaps, had
there not been one hope left, and only one.  A week had gone, and
there was no word from Rufe Stetson.  Up on Thunderstruck Knob
the old Stetson mother was growing pitiably eager and restless. 
Every day she slipped like a ghost through the leafless woods and
in and out the cabin, kindling hatred. At every dawn or dusk she
was on her porch peering through the dim light for Rufe Stetson.
Steve Marcum was ill at ease.  Rome Stetson alone seemed
unconcerned, and his name was on every gossiping tongue.

He took little interest and no hand in getting ready for the war.  He
forbade the firing of a gun till Rufe came back, else Steve should
fight his fight alone.  He grew sullen and morose. His old mother's
look was a thorn in his soul, and he stayed little at home.  He hung
about the mill, and when Isom became bedfast, the big
mountaineer, who had never handled anything but a horse, a
plough, or a rifle, settled him-self, to the bewilderment of the
Stetsons, into the boy's duties, and nobody dared question him.
Even old Gabe jested no longer.  The matter was too serious.

Meanwhile the winter threw off the last slumbrous mood of
autumn, as a sleeper starts from a dream.  A fortnight was gone,
and still no message came from the absent leader.  One shore was
restive, uneasy; the other confident, mocking.  Between the two,
Rome Stetson waited his chance at the mill.

VIII.

DAY was whitening on the Stetson shore. Across the river the air
was still sharp with the chill of dawn, and the mists lay like flocks
of sheep under shelter of rock and crag. A peculiar cry radiated
from the Lewallen cabin with singular resonance on the crisp
air-the mountain cry for straying cattle.  A soft low came from a
distant patch of laurel, and old Jasper's girl, Martha, folded. her
hands like a conch at her mouth, and the shrill cry again startled
the air.

Ye better come, ye pieded cow-brute." Picking up a cedar piggin,
she stepped from the porch toward the meek voice that had
answered her.  Temper and exertion had brought the quick blood
to her face.  Her head was bare, her thick hair was loosely coiled,
and her brown arms were naked almost to the shoulder.  At the
stable a young mountaineer was overhauling his riding-gear.

Air you goin' to ride the hoss to-day, Jas?" she asked, querulously.

"That's jes whut I was aimin' to do.  I'm a-goin' to town."

Well, I 'lowed I was goin' to mill to-day. The co'n is 'mos' gone."

"Well, y'u 'lowed wrong," he answered, imperturbably.

Y'u're mean, Jas Lewallen," she cried, hotly; " that's whut ye air,
mean-dog-mean!

The young mountaineer looked up, whistled softly, and laughed. 
But when he brought his horse to the door an hour later there was a
bag of corn across the saddle.

"As ye air so powerful sot on goin' to mill, whether or no, I'll leave
this hyeh sack at the bend O' the road, 'n' ye kin git it thar.  I'll
bring the meal back ef ye puts it in the same place.  I hates to see
women-folks a-ridin' this horse.  Hit spiles him."

The horse was a dapple-gray of unusual beauty, and as the girl
reached out her hand to stroke his throat, he turned to nibble at her
arm.

"I reckon he'd jes as lieve have me ride him as you, Jas," she said. 
" Me 'n' him have got to be great friends.  Ye orter n't to be so
stingy."

Well, he ain't no hoss to be left out'n the bresh now, 'n' I hain't goin'
to 'low it."

Old Jasper had lounged out of the kitchen door, and stood with his
huge bulk against a shrinking pillar of the porch.  The two men
were much alike.  Both had the same black, threatening brows
meeting over the bridge of the nose.  A kind of grim humor lurked
about the old man's mouth, which time might trace about young
Jasper's.  The girl's face had no humor; the same square brows,
apart and clearly marked, gave it a strong, serious cast, and while
she had the Lewallen fire, she favored her mother enough, so the
neighbors said, "to have a mighty mild, takin' way about her ef she
wanted."

You're right, Jas," the old mountaineer said; "the hoss air a sin 'n'
temptation.  Hit do me good ever' time I look at him.  Thar air no
sech hoss, I tell ye, this side o' the settlements."

The boy started away, and the old man followed, and halted him
out of the girl's hearing.

"Tell Eli Crump 'n' Jim Stover to watch the Breathitt road close
now," he said, in a low voice.  " See all them citizens I tol' ye, 'n'
tell 'em to be ready when I says the word.  Thar's no tellin' whut's
goin' to happen."

Young Jasper nodded his head, and struck his horse into a gallop. 
The old man lighted his pipe, and turned back to the house.  The
girl, bonnet in hand, was starting for the valley.

"Thar ain't no use goin' to Gabe Bunch's fer yer grist," he said.  "
The mill on Dead Crick's a-runnin' ag'in, 'n' I don't want ye over
thar axin favors, specially jes now."

"I lef' somethin' fer ye to eat, dad," she replied, " ef ye gits hungry
before I git back."

You heerd me? " he called after her, knitting his brows.

Yes, dad; I heerd ye," she answered, adding to herself, " But I don't
heed ye."  In truth, the girl heeded nobody.  It was not her way to
ask consent, even her own, nor to follow advice. At the bend of the
road she found the bag, and for an instant she stood wavering.  An
impulse turned her to the river, and she loosed the boat, and
headed it across the swift, shallow water from the ford and straight
toward the mill. At every stroke of her paddle the water rose above
the prow of the boat, and, blown into spray, flew back and
drenched her; the wind loosed her hair, and, tugging at her skirts,
draped her like a statue; and she fought them, wind and water,
with mouth set and a smile in her eyes.  One sharp struggle still,
where the creek leaped into freedom; the mouth grew a little
firmer, the eyes laughed more, the keel grated on pebbles, and the
boat ran its nose into the withered sedge on the Stetson shore.

A tall gray figure was pouring grain into the hopper when she
reached the door of the mill. She stopped abruptly, Rome Stetson
turned, and again the two were face to face.  No greeting passed. 
The girl lifted her head with a little toss that deepened the set look
about the mountaineer's mouth; her lax figure grew tense as
though strung suddenly against some coming harm, and her eyes
searched the shadows without once resting on him.

Whar's Uncle Gabe? "  She spoke shortly, and as to a stranger.

Gone to town," said Rome, composedly. He had schooled himself
for this meeting.

When's he comm' back?

Not 'fore night, I reckon."

Whar's Isom?

Isom's sick."

Well, who's tendin' this mill?

For answer he tossed the empty bag into the corner and, without
looking at her, picked up another bag.

"I reckon ye see me, don't ye? " he asked, coolly.  " Hev a cheer,
and rest a spell.  Hit's a purty long climb whar you come from."

The girl was confused.  She stayed in the doorway, a little helpless
and suspicious.  What was Rome Stetson doing here?  His mastery
of the situation, his easy confidence, puzzled and irritated her. 
Should she leave?  The mountaineer was a Stetson, a worm to
tread on if it crawled across the path.  It would be like backing
down before an enemy.  He might laugh at her after she was gone,
and, at that thought, she sat down in the chair with composed face,
looking through the door at the tumbling water, which broke with
a thousand tints under the sun, but able still to see Rome,
sidewise, as he moved about the hopper, whistling softly.

Once she looked around, fancying she saw a smile on his sober
face.  Their eyes came near meeting, and she turned quite away.

Ever seed a body out'n his head?

The girl's eyes rounded with a start of surprise.

Well, it's plumb cur'us.  Isom's been that way lately.  Isom's sick,
ye know.  Uncle Gabe's got the rheumatiz, 'n' Isom's mighty fond o'
Uncle Gabe, 'n' the boy pestered me till I come down to he'p him. 
Hit p'int'ly air strange to hear him talkin'.  He's jes a-ravin' 'bout
hell 'n' heaven, 'n' the sin o' killin' folks.  You'd ha' thought he hed
been convicted, though none o' our fambly hev been much atter
religion. He says as how the wrath uv a livin' God is a-goin' to
sweep these mount ins, ef some mighty tall repentin' hain't done. 
Of co'se he got all them notions from Gabe.  But Isom al'ays was
quar, 'n' seed things hisself.  He ain't no fool!"

The girl was listening.  Morbidly sensitive to the supernatural, she
had turned toward him, and her face was relaxed with fear and
awe.

"He's havin' dreams 'n' sech-like now, 'n' I reckon thar's nothing
he's seed or heerd that he don' talk about.  He's been a-goin' on
about you," he added, abruptly.  The girl's hands gave a nervous
twitch. "Oh, he don't say nothin' ag'in' ye.  I reckon he tuk a fancy
to ye. Mam was plumb distracted, not knowin' whar he had seed
ye.  She thought it was like his other talk, 'n' I never let
on-a-knowin' how mam was."  A flush rose like a flame from the
girl's throat to her hair.  " But hit's this," Rome went on in an
unsteady tone, "that he talks most about, 'n' I'm sorry myself that
trouble's a-comm'."  He dropped all pretence now.  "I've been
a-watchin' fer ye over thar on t' other shore a good deal lately.  I
didn't know ye at fust, Marthy "-he spoke her name for the first
time-' 'n' Gabe says y'u didn't know me.  I remembered ye, though,
'n' I want to tell ye now what I tol' ye then:  I've got nothin' ag'in
you.  I was hopin' ye mought come over ag'in-hit was sorter cur'us
that y'u was the same gal-the same gal-"

His self-control left him; he was halting in speech, and blundering
he did not know where. Fumbling an empty bag at the hopper, he
had not dared to look at the girl till he heard her move.  She had
risen, and was picking up her bag.  The hard antagonism of her
face calmed him instantly.

Hain't ye goin' to have yer grist ground?

Not hyeh," she answered, quickly.

"Why, gal    " He got no further. Martha was gone, and he followed
her to the bank, bewildered.

The girl's suspicion, lulled by his plausible explanation, had grown 
sharp  again.  The mountaineer knew that she had been coming
there.  He was at the mill for another reason than to take the boy's
place; and with swift in-tuition she saw the truth.

He got angry as she rode away-angry with himself that he had let
her go; and the same half-tender, half-brutal impulse seized him as
when he saw her first.  This time he yielded. His horse was at
hand, and the river not far below was narrow.  The bridle-path that
led to the Lewallen cabin swerved at one place to a cliff
overlooking the river, and by hard riding and a climb of a few
hundred feet on foot he could overtake her half-way up the
mountain steep.

The plan was no more than shaped before he was in the saddle and
galloping down the river.  The set of his face changed hardly a line
while he swam the stream, and, drenched to the waist, scaled the
cliff.  When he reached the spot, he found the prints of a woman's
shoe in the dust of the path, going down.  There were none
returning, and he had not long to wait.  A scarlet bit of color soon
flashed through the gray bushes below him.  The girl was without
her bag of corn.  She was climbing slowly, and was looking at the
ground as though in deep thought.  Reckless as she was, she had
come to realize at last just what she had done.  She had been
pleased at first, as would have been any woman, when she saw the
big mountaineer watching her, for her life was lonely. She had
waved her bonnet at him from mere mischief. She hardly knew it
herself, but she had gone across the river to find out who he was. 
She had shrunk from him as from a snake thereafter, and had gone
no more until old Jasper had sent her because the Lewallen mill
was broken, and because she was a woman, and would be safe
from harm.  She had met him then when she could not help
herself.  But now she had gone of her own accord.  She had given
this Stetson, a bitter enemy, a chance to see her, to talk with her. 
She had listened to him; she had been on the point of letting him
grind her corn.  And he knew how often she had gone to the mill,
and he could not know that she had ever been sent.  Perhaps he
thought that she had come to make overtures of peace, friendship,
even more.  The suspicion reddened her face with shame, and her
anger at him was turned upon herself. Why she had gone again that
day she hardly knew.  But if there was another reason than simple
perversity, it was the memory of Rome Stetson's face when he
caught her boat and spoke to her in a way she could not answer. 
The anger of the moment came with every thought of the incident
afterward, and with it came too this memory of his look, which
made her at once defiant and uneasy. She saw him now only when
she was quite close, and, startled, she stood still; his stern look
brought her the same disquiet, but she gave no sign of fear.

Whut's the matter with ye?

The question was too abrupt, too savage, and the girl looked
straight at him, and her lips tightened with a resolution not to
speak.  The movement put him beyond control.

"Y'u puts hell into me, Marthy Lewallen; y'u puts downright hell
into me."  The words came between gritted teeth.  "I want to take
ye up 'n' throw ye off this cliff clean into the river, 'n' I reckon the
next minute I'd jump off atter ye.  Y'u've 'witched me, gal!  I forgits
who ye air 'n' who I be, 'n' sometimes I want to come over hyeh 'n'
kerry ye out'n these mount ins, n' nuver come back.  You know
whut I've been watchin' the river fer sence the fust time I seed ye. 
You know whut I've been a-stayin' at the mill fer, 'n' Steve mad 'n'
mam a-jowerin'-'n' a-lookin' over hyeh fer ye night 'n' day!  Y'u
know whut I've jes swum over hyeh fer!  Whut's the matter with
ye?"

Martha was not looking for a confession like this.  It took away her
shame at once, and the passion of it thrilled her, and left her
trembling. While he spoke her lashes drooped quickly, her face
softened, and the color came back to it. She began intertwining her
fingers, and would not look up at him.

Ef y'u hates me like the rest uv ye, why don't ye say it right out? 
'N' ef ye do hate me, whut hev you been lookin' 'cross the river fer,
'n' a-shakin' yer bonnet at me, 'n' paddlin' to Gabe's fer yer grist,
when the mill on Dead Crick's been a-runnin', 'n' I know it?  You've
been banterin' me, hev ye? "-the blood rose to his eyes again.  " Ye
mustn't fool with me, gal, by    , ye mustn't.  Whut hev you been
goin' over thar fer? "  He even took a threatening step toward her,
and, with a helpless gesture, stopped.  The girl was a little
frightened. Indeed, she smiled, seeing her power over him; she
seemed even about to laugh outright; but the smile turned to a
quick look of alarm, and she bent her head suddenly to listen to
something below.  At last she did speak. "Somebody's comm'! "
she said.  " You'd better git out O' the  way," she went on,
hurriedly. "Somebody's  comm', I  tell ye!  Don't ye hear? 

It was no ruse to get rid of him.  The girl's eyes were dilating. 
Something was coming far below.  Rome could catch the faint
beats of a horse's hoofs.  He was unarmed, and he knew it was
death for him to be seen on that forbidden mountain; but he was
beyond caution, and ready to welcome any vent to his passion, and
he merely shook his head.

Ef it's Satan hisself, I hain't goin' to run." The hoof-beats came
nearer.  The rider must soon see them from the coil below.

Rome, hit's Jas!  He's got his rifle, and he'll kill ye, 'n' me too! " 
The girl was white with distress.  She had called him by his name,
and the tone was of appeal, not anger.  The black look passed from
his face, and he caught her by the shoulders with rough tenderness;
but she pushed him away, and without a word he sprang from the
road and let himself noiselessly down the cliff. The hoof-beats
thundered above his head, and Young Jasper's voice hailed Martha.

This hyeh's the bigges' meal I ever straddled.  Why d'n't ye git the
grist ground?"

For a moment the girl did not answer, and Rome waited,
breathless.  " Wasn't the mill runnin'?  Whyn't ye go on 'cross the
river?

That's whut I did," said the girl, quietly. Uncle Gabe wasn't thar, 'n'
Rome Stetson was.  I wouldn't 'low him to grin' the co 'n, 'n' so I
toted hit back."

Rome Stetson! "  The voice was lost in a volley of oaths.

The two passed out of hearing, and Rome went plunging down the
mountain, swinging recklessly from one little tree to another, and
wrenching limbs from their sockets out of pure physical ecstasy. 
When he reached his horse he sat down, breathing heavily, on a
bed of moss, with a strange new yearning in his heart.  If peace
should come!  Why not peace, if Rufe should not come back?  He
would be the leader then, and without him there could be no war.
Old Jasper had killed his father.  He was too young at the time to
feel poignant sorrow now, and somehow he could look even at that
death in a fairer way.  His father had killed old Jasper's brother. 
So it went back: a Lewallen killed a Stetson; that Stetson had
killed a Lewallen, until one end of the chain of deaths was lost,
and the first fault could not be placed, though each clan put it on
the other.  In every generation there had been compromises-
periods of peace; why not now?  Old Gabe would gladly help him. 
He might make friends with young Jasper; he might even end the
feud. And then-he and Martha-why not?  He closed his eyes, and
for one radiant moment t all seemed possible.  And then a gaunt
image rose in the dream, and only the image was left. It was the
figure of his mother, stern and silent through the years, opening
her grim lips rarely without some curse against the Lewallen race.
He remembered she had smiled for the first time when she heard
of the new trouble-the flight of his uncle and the hope of conflict. 
She had turned to him with her eyes on fire and her old hands
clinched.  She had said nothing, but he understood her look.  And
now-Good God! what would she think and say if she could know
what he had done?  His whole frame twitched at the thought, and,
with a nervous spring to escape it, he was on his feet, and starting
down the mountain.

Close to the river he heard voices below him, and he turned his
horse quickly aside into the bushes.  Two women who had been
washing clothes passed, carrying white bundles home. They were
talking of the coming feud.

"That ar young Stetson ain't much like his dad," said one.  "Young
Jas has been a-darin' 'n' a-banterin' him, 'n' he won't take it up. They
say he air turnin' out a plumb coward."

When he reached the Stetson cabin three horses with drooping
heads were hitched to the fence.  All had travelled a long way. 
One wore a man's saddle; on the others were thick blankets tied
together with leathern thongs.

In the dark porch sat several men.  Through the kitchen door he
could see his mother getting supper.  Inside a dozen rifles leaned
against the wall in the firelight, and about their butts was a pile of
ammunition.  In the doorway stood Rufe Stetson.

IX

ALL were smoking and silent. Several spoke from the shadows as
Rome stepped on the porch, and Rufe Stetson faced him a moment
in the doorway, and laughed.

Seem kinder s'prised? " he said, with a searching look.  " Wasn't
lookin' for me?  I reckon I'll s'prise sev'ral ef I hev good-luck."

The subtlety of this sent a chuckle of appreciation through the
porch, but Rome passed in without answer.

Isom lay on his bed within the circle of light, and his face in the
brilliant glow was white, and his eyes shone feverishly. " Rome,"
he said, excitedly, " Uncle Rufe's hyeh, 'n' they laywayed him,
'n'____" He paused abruptly. His mother came in, and at her call
the mountaineers trooped through the covered porch, and sat down
to supper in the kitchen.  They ate hastily and in silence, the
mother attending their wants, and Rome helping her.  The meal
finished, they drew their chairs about the fire.  Pipes were lighted,
and Rufe Stetson rose and closed the door.

Thar's no use harryin' the boy," he said; "I reckon he'll be too puny
to take a hand."

The mother stopped clearing the table, and sat on the rock hearth
close to the fire, her withered lips shut tight about a lighted pipe,
and her sunken eyes glowing like the coal of fire in its black bowl. 
Now and then she would stretch her knotted hands nervously into
the flames, or knit them about her knees, looking closely at the
heavy faces about her, which had lightened a little with
expectancy.  Rufe Stetson stood before the blaze, his hands
clasped behind him, and his huge figure bent in reflection.  At
intervals he would look with half-shut eyes at Rome, who Sat with
troubled face outside the firelight.  Across the knees of Steve
Marcum, the best marksman in the mountains, lay the barrel of a
new Winchester.  Old Sam Day, Rufe's father-in-law and
counsellor to the Stetsons for a score of years, sat as if asleep on
the opposite side of the fireplace from the old mother, with his big
square head pressed down between his misshapen shoulders.

"The time hev come, Rome."  Rufe spoke between the puffs of his
pipe, and Rome's heart quickened, for every eye was upon him. 
Thar's goin' to be trouble now.  I hear as how young Jasper hev
been talkin' purty tall about ye-'lowin' as how ye air afeard O' him."

Rome felt his mother's burning look.  He did not turn toward her
nor Rufe, but his face grew sullen, and his voice was low and
harsh. "I reckon he'll find out about that when the time comes," he
said, quietly-too quietly, for the old mother stirred uneasily, and
significant glances went from eye to eye. Rufe did not look up
from the floor.  He had been told about Rome's peculiar conduct,
and, while the reason for it was beyond guessing, he knew the
temper of the boy and how to kindle it.  He had thrust a thorn in a
tender spot, and he let it rankle.  How sorely it did rankle he little
knew. The voice of the woman across the river was still in Rome 5
ears.  Nothing cuts the mountaineer to the quick like the name of
coward. It stung him like the lash of an ox-whip then; it smarted
all the way across the river and up the mountain.  Young Jasper
had been charging him broadcast with cowardice, and Jasper's
people no doubt believed it.  Perhaps his own did
-his uncle, his mother.  The bare chance of such a humiliation set
up an inward rage.  He wondered how he could ever have been
such a fool as to think of peace.  The woman's gossip had swept
kindly impulses from his heart with a fresh tide of bitterness, and,
helpless now against its current, he sullenly gave way, and let his
passions loose to drift with it.

"Whar d' ye git the guns, Rufe? "  Steve was testing the action of
the Winchester with a kindling look, as the click of the locks
struck softly through the silence.

"Jackson; 'way up in Breathitt, at the eend of the new road."

"No wonder y'u've been gone so long."

"I had to wait thar fer the guns, 'n' I had to travel atter dark comm'
back, 'n' lay out'n the bresh by day.  Hit's full eighty mile up thar."

"Air ye shore nobody seed ye?"

The question was from a Marcum, who had come in late, and
several laughed.  Rufe threw back his dusty coat, which was ripped
through the lapel by a bullet.

They seed me well 'nough fer that," he said, grimly, and then he
looked toward Rome, who thought of old Jasper, and gave back a
gleam of fierce sympathy.  There were several nods of approval
along with the laugh that followed.  It was a surprise-so little
consideration of an escape so narrow-from Rufe; for, as old Gabe
said, Rufe was big and good-natured, and was not thought fit for
leadership. But there was a change in him when he came back
from the West.  He was quieter; he laughed less  No one spoke of
the difference; it was too vague; but every one felt it, and it had an
effect.  His flight had made many uneasy, but his return, for that
reason, brought a stancher fealty from these; and this was evident
now.  All eyes were upon him, and all tongues, even old Sam's,
waited now for his to speak.

"Whut we've got to do, we've got to do mighty quick," he began, at
last.  " Things air changin'.  I seed it over thar in Breathitt.  The
soldiers 'n' that scar-faced Jellico preacher hev broke up the fightin'
over thar, 'n' ef we don't watch out, they'll be a-doin' it hyeh, when
we start our leetle frolic.  We hain't got no time to fool.  Old Jas
knows this as well as me, 'n' thar's goin' to be mighty leetle chance
fer 'em to layway 'n' pick us off from the bresh.  Thar's goin' to be
fa'r fightin' fer once, thank the Lord.  They bushwhacked us dunn'
the war, 'n' they've laywayed us 'n' shot us to pieces ever sence; but
now, ef God A'mighty's willin', the thing's a-goin' to be settled one
way or t'other at last, I reckon."

He stopped a moment to think.  The men's breathing could be
heard, so quiet was the room, and Rufe went on telling in detail,
slowly, as if to himself, the wrongs the Lewallens had done his
people.  When he came to old Jasper his voice was low, and his
manner was quieter than ever.

"Now old Jas have got to the p'int whar he says as how nobody in
this county kin undersell him 'n' stay hyeh.  Old Jas druv Bond
Vickers out'n the mount 'ins fer tryin' hit.  He druv Jess Hale away;
'n' them two air our kin."

The  big mountaineer turned then,  and knocked the ashes from his
pipe.  His eyes grew a little brighter, and his nostrils spread, but
with a sweep of his arm he added, still quietly:

"Y' all know whut he's done."

The gesture lighted memories of personal wrongs in every breast;
he had tossed a fire-brand among fagots, and an angry light began
to burn from the eyes that watched him.

"Ye know, too, that he thinks he has played the same game with
me; but ye don't know, I reckon, that he had ole Jim Stover 'n' that
mis'-able Eli Crump a-hidin' in the bushes to shoot me "-again he
grasped the torn lapel; "that a body warned me to git away from
Hazlan; n' the night I left home they come thar to kill me, 'n'
s'arched the house, 'n' skeered Mollie n' the leetle gal 'most to
death."

The mountaineer's self-control was lost suddenly in a furious oath. 
The men did know, but in fresh anger they leaned forward in their
chairs, and twisted about with smothered curses. The old woman
had stopped smoking, and was rocking her body to and fro.  Her
lips were drawn in upon her toothless gums, and her pipe was
clinched against her sunken breast.  The head of the old
mountaineer was lifted, and his eyes were open and shining
fiercely.

"I hear as how he says I'm gone fer good. Well, I have been kinder
easy-goin', hatin' to fight, but sence the day I seed Rome's dad thar
dead in his blood, I hev had jes one thing I wanted to do.  Thar
wasn't no use stayin' hyeh; I seed that.  Rome thar was too leetle,
and they was too many fer me.  I knowed it was easier to git a new
start out West, 'n' when I come back to the mount'in, hit was to do
jes-whut I'm - going - to - do - now."  He wheeled suddenly upon
Rome, with one huge hand lifted. Under it the old woman's voice
rose in a sudden wail:

Yes; 'n' I want to see it done befoh I die. I hain't hyeh fer long, but I
hain't goin' to leave as long as ole Jas is hyeh, 'n' I want ye all to
know it.  Ole Jas hev got to go fust.  You hear me, Rome?  I'm
a-talkin' to you; I'm a-talkin' to you.  Hit's yo' time now!

The frenzied chant raised Rome from his chair.  Rufe himself took
up the spirit of it, and his voice was above all caution.

"Yes, Rome!  They killed him, boy.  They sneaked on him, 'n' shot
him to pieces from the bushes.  Yes; hit's yo' time now!  Look
hyeh, boys! "  He reached above the fireplace and took down an
old rifle-his brother's-which the old mother had suffered no one to
touch. He held it before the fire, pointing to two crosses made near
the flash-pan.  " Thar's one fer ole Jim Lewallen!  Thar's one fer
ole Jas! He got Jim, but ole Jas has got him, 'n' thar's his cross thar
yit!  Whar's yo' gun, Rome? Shame on ye, boy!"

The wild-eyed old woman was before him. She had divined Rufe's
purpose, and was already at his side, with Rome's Winchester in
one hand and a clasp-knife in the other.  Every man was on his
feet; the door was open, and the boy Isom was at the threshold, his
eyes blazing from his whitc face.  Rome had strode forward.

Yes, boy; now's the time, right hyeh before us all!

The mother had the knife outstretched. Rome took it, and the
scratch of the point on the hard steel went twice through the
stillness-one more fer the young un"; the voice was the old
mother's-then twice again.

The moon was sinking when Rome stood in the door alone.  The
tramp of horses was growing fainter down the mountain.  The trees
were swaying in the wind below him, and he could just see the
gray cliffs on the other shore. The morning seemed far away; it
made him dizzy looking back to it through the tumult of the day. 
Somewhere in the haze was the vision of a girl's white face-white
with distress for him.  Her father and her brother he had sworn to
kill.  He had made a cross for each, and each cross was an oath. 
He closed the door; and then he gave way, and sat down with his
head in both hands.  The noises in the kitchen ceased. The fire
died away, and the chill air gathered about him.  When he rose, the
restless eyes of the boy were upon him from the shadows.

X

IT was court-day in Hazlan, but so early in the morning nothing
was astir in the town that hinted of its life on such a day.  But for
the ring of a blacksmith's anvil on the quiet air, and the fact that
nowhere was a church-spire visible, a stranger would have thought
that the peace of Sabbath overlay a village of God-fearing people. 
A burly figure lounged in the porch of a rickety house, and yawned
under a swinging sign, the rude letters of which promised" private
entertainment " for the traveller unlucky enough to pass that way. 
In the one long, narrow main street, closely flanked by log and
framed houses, nothing else human was in sight. Out from this
street, and in an empty square, stood the one brick building in the
place, the court-house, brick without, brick within; unfinished,
unpencilled, unpainted; panes out of the windows, a shutter off
here and there, or swinging drunkenly on one hinge; the door wide
op en, as though there was no privacy within-a poor structure, with
the look of a good man gone shiftless and fast going wrong.

Soon two or three lank brown figures appeared from each direction
on foot; then a horseman or two, and by and by mountaineers came
in groups, on horse and on foot.  In time the side alleys and the
court-house square were filled with horses and mules, and even
steers.  The mountaineers crowded the narrow street: idling from
side to side; squatting for a bargain on the wooden sidewalks;
grouping on the porch of the rickety hotel, and on the court-house
steps loitering in and out of the one store in sight. Out in the street
several stood about a horse, looking at his teeth, holding his eyes
to the sun, punching his ribs, twisting his tail; while the phlegmatic
owner sat astride the submissive beast, and spoke short answers to
rare questions. Everybody talked politics, the crop failure, or the
last fight at the seat of some private war; but nobody spoke of a
Lewallen or a Stetson unless he knew his listener's heart, and said
it in a whisper.  For nobody knew when the powder would flash, or
who had taken sides, or that a careless word might not array him
with one or the other faction.

A motley throng it was-in brown or gray homespun, with trousers
in cowhide boots, and slouched hats with brims curved according
to temperament, but with striking figures in it; the patriarch with
long, white hair, shorn even with the base of the neck, and bearded
only at the throat-a justice of the peace, and the sage of his district;
a little mountaineer with curling black hair and beard, and dark,
fine features; a grizzled giant with a head rugged enough to have
been carelessly chipped from stone; a bragging candidate claiming
everybody's notice; a square- shouldered fellow surging through
the crowd like a stranger; an open-faced, devil-may- care young
gallant on fire with moonshine; a skulking figure with brutish
mouth and shifting eyes.  Indeed, every figure seemed distinct; for,
living apart from his neighbor, and troubling the law but little in
small matters of dispute, the mountaineer preserves independence,
and keeps the edges of his individuality unworn.  Apparently there
was not a woman in town.  Those that lived there kept housed, and
the fact was significant.  Still, it was close to noon, and yet not a
Stetson or a Lewallen had been seen. The stores of Rufe and old
Jasper were at the extremities of the town, and the crowd did not
move those ways.  It waited in the centre, and whetted impatience
by sly trips in twos and three to stables or side alleys for "mountain
dew." Now and then the sheriff, a little man with a mighty voice,
would appear on the courthouse steps, and summon a witness to
court, where a frightened judge gave instructions to a frightened
jury.  But few went, unless called; for the interest was outside;
every man in the streets knew that a storm was nigh, and was
waiting to see it burst.

Noon passed.  A hoarse bell and a whining hound had announced
dinner in the hotel.  The guests were coming again into the streets.
Eyes were brighter, faces a little more flushed, and the
"moonshine" was passed more openly. Both ways the crowd
watched closely.  The quiet at each end of the street was ominous,
and the delay could last but little longer.  The lookers-on
themselves were getting quarrelsome. The vent must come soon,
or among them there would be trouble.

Thar comes Jas Lewallen! "  At last.  A dozen voices spoke at
once.  A horseman had appeared far down the street from the
Lewallen end.  The clouds broke from about the sun, and a dozen
men knew the horse that bore him; for the gray was prancing the
street sidewise, and throwing the sunlight from his flanks. Nobody
followed, and the crowd was puzzled. Young Jasper carried a
Winchester across his saddle-bow, and, swaying with the action of
his horse, came on.

"What air he about?"

"He's a plumb idgit."

He mus' be crazy."

He's drunk!

The  wonder ceased.  Young Jasper was reeling.  Two or three
Stetsons slipped from the crowd, and there was a galloping of
hoofs the other way.  Another horseman appeared from the
Lewallen end, riding hastily.  The new-comer's errand was to call
Jasper back. But the young dare-devil was close to the crowd, and
was swinging a bottle over his head.

Come back hyeh, Jas!  Come hyeh!" The new-comer was shouting
afar off while he galloped.  Horses were being untethered from the
side alleys.  Several more Lewallen riders came in sight.  They
could see the gray shining in the sunlight amid the crowd, and the
man sent after him halted at a safe distance, gesticulating; and
they, too, spurred forward.

Hello, boys! " young Jasper was calling out, as he swayed from
side to side, the people everywhere giving him way.

"Fun to-day, by- ! fun to-day!  Who'll hev a drink?  Hyeh's hell to
the Stetsons, whar some of 'em '11 be afore night!

With a swagger he lifted the bottle to his lips, and, stopping short,
let it fall untouched to the ground.  He had straightened in his
saddle, and was looking up the street.  With a deep curse he threw
the Winchester to his shoulder, fired, and before his yell had died
on his lips horse and rider were away like a shaft of light. The
crowd melted like magic from the street. The Stetsons, chiefly on
foot, did not return the fire, but halted up the street, as if parleying.
Young Jasper joined his party, and they, too, stood still a moment,
puzzled by the irresolution of the other side.

"Watch out! they're gittin' round ye!  Run for the court-house, ye
fools !-ye, run! "  The voice came in a loud yell from somewhere
down the street, and its warning was just in time.

A wreath of smoke came about a corner of the house far down the
street, and young Jasper yelled, and dashed up a side alley with his
followers.  A moment later judge, jury, witnesses, and sheriff were
flying down the court-house steps at the point of Lewallen guns;
the Lewallen horses, led by the gray, were snorting through the
streets; their riders, barricaded in the forsaken court-house, were
puffing a stream of fire and smoke from every window of
court-room below and jury-room above.

The streets were a bedlam.  The Stetsons were yelling with
triumph.  The Lewallens were divided, and Rufe placed three
Stetsons with Winchesters on each side of the courthouse, and kept
them firing.  Rome, pale and stern, hid his force between the
square and the Lewallen store.  He was none too quick.  The rest
were coming on, led by old Jasper.  It was reckless, riding that
way right into death; but the old man believed young Jasper's life
at stake, and the men behind asked no questions when old Jasper
led them.  The horses' hoofs beat the dirt street like the crescendo
of thunder.  The fierce old man's hat was gone, and his mane-like
hair was shaking in the wind.  Louder-and still the Stetsons were
quiet-quiet too long. The wily old man saw the trap, and, with a
yell, whi