rled the column up an alley, each man flattening over his
saddle.  From every window, from behind every corner and tree,
smoke belched from the mouth of a Winchester. Two horses went
down; one screamed; the other struggled to his feet, and limped
away with an empty saddle.  One pf the fallen men sprang into
safety behind a house, and one lay still, with his arms stretched out
and his face in the dust.

From behind barn, house, and fence the Lewallens gave back a
scattering fire; but the Stetsons crept closer, and were plainly in
greater numbers.  Old Jasper was being surrounded, and he
mounted again, and all, followed by a chorus of bullets and
triumphant yells, fled for a wooded slope in the rear of the
court-house. A dozen Lewallens were prisoners, and must give up
or starve.  There was savage joy in the Stetson crowd, and
many-footed rumor went all ways that night.

Despite sickness and Rome's strict order, Isom had ridden down to
the mill.  Standing in the doorway, he and old Gabe saw up the
river, where the water broke into foam over the ford, a riderless
gray horse plunging across.  Later it neighed at a gate under Wolf's
Head, and Martha Lewallen ran out to meet it.  Across under
Thunderstruck Knob that night the old Stetson mother listened to
Isom's story of the fight with ghastly joy in her death-marked face.

XI

ALL night the court-house was guarded and on guard.  At one
corner of the square Rufe Stetson, with a few men, sat on watch in
old Sam Day's cabin-the fortress of the town, built for such a
purpose, and used for it many times before. The prisoners, too,
were alert, and no Stetson ventured into the open square, for the
moon was high; an exposure anywhere was noted instantly by the
whistle of a rifle-ball, and the mountaineer takes few risks except
under stress of drink or passion.  Rome Stetson had placed pickets
about the town wherever surprise was possible.  All night he
patrolled the streets to keep his men in such readiness as he could
for the attack that the Lewallens would surely make to rescue their
living friends and to avenge the dead ones.

But the triumph was too great and unexpected.  Two Braytons
were dead; several more were prisoners with young Jasper in the
courthouse; and drinking began.

As the night deepened without attack the Stetsons drank more, and
grew reckless.  A dance was started.  Music and "moonshine" were
given to every man who bore a Winchester. The night was broken
with drunken yells, the random discharge of fire-arms, and the
mono-tone of heavy feet. The two leaders were helpless, and the
inaction of the Lewallens puzzled them.  Chafed with anxiety, they
kept their eyes on the court-house or on the thicket of gloom where
their enemies lay.  But the woods were as quiet as the pall of
shadows over them. Once Rome, making his rounds, saw a figure
crawling through a field of corn.  It looked like Crump's, but
before he could fire the man rolled like a ball down the bushy bank
to the river. An instant later some object went swiftly past a side
street-somebody on horseback-and a picket fired an alarm. The
horse kept on, and Rome threw his rifle on a patch of moonlight,
but when the object flashed through, his finger was numbed at the
trigger.  In the moonlight the horse looked gray, and the rider was
seated sidewise. A bullet from the court-house clipped his hat-brim
as he ran recklessly across the street to where Steve Marcum stood
in the dark behind old Sam's cabin.

"Jim Hale 'll  git him as he goes up the road," said Steve,
calmly-and then with hot impatience, "Why the hell don't he
shoot?

Rome started forward in the moonlight, and Steve caught his arm.
Two bullets hissed from the court-house, and he fell back.

A shot sounded from the bushes far away from the road. The horse
kept on, and splashed into Troubled Fork, and Steve swore bitterly.

"Hit hain't Jim.  Hit's that mis'able Bud Vickers; he's been a-stan
din' guard out'n the bushes 'stid o' the road. That was a spy, I tell
ye, 'n' the coward let him in and let him out. They'll know now
we're all drunk! Whut's the matter?

Rome's mouth was half open.  He looked white and sick, and Steve
thought he had been hit, but he took off his hat. " Purty close! " he
said, with a laugh, pointing at the bullet-hole through the brim.

Steve, unsuspicious, went on: "Hit was a spy, I tell ye.  Bud was
afeard to stan' in the road, 'n' I'm goin' out thar 'n' twist his damned
neck. We've got 'em, Rome!  I tell ye, we've got 'em! Ef we kin git
through this night, and git the boys sober in the morning, we've got
'em shore!"

The night did pass in safety, darkness wore away without attack,
and morning broke on the town in its drunken stupor.  Then the
curious silence of the Lewallens was explained.  The rumor came
that old Jasper was dead, and it went broadcast.  Later, friends
coming to the edge of the town for the bodies of the dead
Lewallens confirmed it. A random ball had passed through old
Lewallen's body in the wild  flight for the woods, and during the
night he had spent his last breath in a curse against the man who
fired it.

Then each Stetson, waked from his drunken sleep, drank again
when he heard of the death. The day bade fair to be like the night,
and again the anxiety of the leaders was edged with fear. Old
Jasper dead and young Jasper a prisoner, the chance was near to
end the feud, or there would be no Lewallen left to lead their
enemies. But, again, they were wellnigh helpless.  Already they
had barely enough men to guard their prisoners.  Of the Marcums,
Steve alone was able to handle a Winchester, and outside the
sounds of the carousal were in the air and growing louder.  In a
little while, if the Lewallens but knew it, escape would be easy and
the Stetsons could be driven from the town.

Oh, they know it," said Steve.  "They'll be a-whoopin' down out O'
them woods purty soon, 'n' we re goin to ketch hell.  I'd like to
know mighty well who that spy was last night. That cussed Bud
Vickers says it was a ha'nt, on a white hoss, with long hair flyin' in
the wind, 'n' that he shot plumb through it.  I jus' wish I'd a had a
chance at it."

Still, noon came again without trouble, and the imprisoned
Lewallens had been twenty-four hours without food. Their
ammunition was getting scarce.  The firing was less frequent,
though the watch was as close as ever, and twice a Winchester had
sounded a signal of distress. All knew that a response must come
soon; and come it did. A picket, watching the river road, saw
young Jasper's horse coming along the dark bushes far up the river,
and brought the news to the group standing behind old Sam's
cabin. The gray galloped into sight, and, skirting the woods, came
straight for the town-with a woman on his back.  The stirrup of a
man's saddle dangled on one side, and the woman's bonnet had
fallen from her head.  Some one challenged her.

Stop, I tell ye! Don't ye go near that courthouse! Stop, I tell ye! I'll
shoot! Stop!"

Rome ran from the cabin with a revolver in each hand. A drunken
mountaineer was raising a Winchester to his shoulder, and,
springing from the back of the gray at the court-house steps, was
Martha Lewallen.

"I'll kill the fust man that lifts his finger to hurt the gal," Rome
said, knocking the drunken man's gun in the air.  "We hain't fightin'
women!"

It was too late to oppose her, and the crowd stood helplessly
watching.  No one dared approach, so, shielding with her body the
space of the opening door, she threw the sack of food within. Then
she stood a moment talking and, turning, climbed to her saddle.
The gray was spotted with foam, and showed the red of his nostrils
with every breath as, with face flushed and eyes straight before
her, she rode slowly toward the crowd.  What was she about?
Rome stood rigid, his forgotten pistols hanging at each side; the
mouth of the drunken mountaineer was open with stupid wonder;
the rest fell apart as she came around the corner of the cabin and,
through the space given, rode slowly, her skirt almost brushing
Rome, looking neither to the right nor to the left; and when she
had gone quite through them all, she wheeled and rode, still
slowly, through the open fields toward the woods which sheltered
the Lewallens, while the crowd stood in bewildered silence
looking after her. Yells of laughter came from the old court-house. 
Some of the Stetsons laughed, too; some swore, a few grumbled;
but there was not one who was not stirred by the superb daring of
the girl, though she had used it only to show her contempt.

" Rome, you're a fool; though, fer a fac', we can't shoot a woman;
'n' anyways I ruther shoot her than the hoss. But lemme tell ye, thar
was more'n sump'n to eat in that bag! They air up to some dodge."

Rufe Stetson had watched the incident through a port-hole of the
cabin, and his tone was at once jesting and anxious.

"That grub won't last more'n one day, I reckon," said the drunken
mountaineer.  We'll watch out fer the gal nex' time.  We're boun' to
git 'em one time or t'other."

"She rid through us to find out how many of us wasn't dead drunk,"
said Steve Marcum, still watching the girl as she rode on, toward
the woods; "'n' I'm a-thinkin' they'll be down on us purty soon now,
'n' I reckon we'll have to run fer it. Look thar boys!"

The girl had stopped at the edge of the woods; facing the town, she
waved her bonnet high above her head.

"Well, whut in the--! "he said, with slow emphasis, and then he
leaped from the door with a yell. The bonnet was a signal to the
beleaguered Lewallens.  The rear door of the courthouse had been
quietly opened, and the prisoners were out in a body and
scrambling over the fence before the pickets could give an alarm.
The sudden yells, the crack of Winchesters, startled even the
revellers and all who could, headed by Rome and Steve Marcum,
sprang into the square, and started in pursuit.  But the Lewallens
had got far ahead, and were running in zigzag lines to dodge the
balls flying after them. Half-way to the woods was a gully of red
clay, and into this the fleetest leaped, and turned instantly to cover
their comrades. The Winchesters began to rattle from the woods,
and the bullets came like rain from everywhere.

"T-h-up!  T-h-up!  T-h-up! " there were three of them-the peculiar
soft, dull messages of hot lead to living flesh. A Stetson went
down; another stumbled; Rufe Stetson, climbing the fence, caught
at his breast with an oath, and fell back. Rome and Steve dropped
for safety to the ground. Every other Stetson turned in a panic, and
every Lewallen in the gully leaped from it, and ran under the
Lewallen fire for shelter in the woods. The escape was over.

"That was a purty neat trick," said Steve, wiping a red streak from
his cheek.  " Nex' time she tries that, she'll git herself into trouble."

At nightfall the wounded leader and the dead one were carried up
the mountain, each to his home; and there was mourning far into
the night on one bank of the Cumberland, and, serious though Rufe
Stetson's wound was, exultation on the other. But in it Rome could
take but little part. There had been no fault to find with him in the
fight. But a reaction had set in when he saw the girl flash in the
moonlight past the sights of his Winchester, and her face that day
had again loosed within him a flood of feeling that drove the lust
for revenge from his veins. Even now, while he sat in his own
cabin, his thoughts were across the river where Martha, broken at
last, sat at her death vigils. He knew what her daring ride that day
had cost her, with old Jasper dead out there in the woods; and as
she passed him he had grown suddenly humbled, shamed. He grew
heart-sick now as he thought of it all; and the sight of his mother
on her bed in the corner, close to death as she was, filled him with
bitterness. There was no help for him. He was alone now, pitted
against young Jasper alone. On one bed lay his uncle-nigh to death.
There was the grim figure in the corner, the implacable spirit of
hate and revenge.  His rifle was against the wall.  If there was any
joy for him in old Jasper's death, it was that his hand had not
caused it, and yet-God help him!-there was the other cross, the
other oath. 

XII

THE star and the crescent were swinging above Wolf's Head, and
in the dark hour that breaks into dawn a cavalcade of Lewallens
forded the Cumberland, and galloped along the Stetson shore. At
the head rode young Jasper, and Crump the spy.

Swift changes had followed the court-house fight. In spite of the
death of Rufe Stetson from his wound, and several other Stetsons
from ambush, the Lewallens had lost ground. Old Jasper's store
had fallen into the hands of creditors -" furriners "-for debts, and it
was said his homestead must follow.  In a private war a leader
must be more than leader. He must feed and often clothe his
followers, and young Jasper had not the means to carry on the
feud. The famine had made corn dear.  He could feed neither man
nor horse, and the hired feudsmen fell away, leaving the Lewallens
and the Braytons and their close kin to battle alone. So Jasper
avoided open combat and resorted to ambush and surprise; and,
knowing in some way every move made by the Stetsons, with great
daring and success.  It was whispered, too, that he no longer cared
who owned what he might want for himself. Several dark deeds
were traced to him. In a little while he was a terror to good
citizens, and finally old Gabe asked aid of the Governor. Soldiers
from the settlements were looked for any day, and both factions
knew it. At the least this would delay the war, and young Jasper
had got ready for a last fight, which was close at hand.

Half a mile on the riders swerved into a wooded slope.  There they
hid their horses in the brush, and climbed the spur stealthily. The
naked woods showed the cup-like shape of the mountains there-a
basin from which radiated upward wooded ravines, edged with
ribs of rock. In this basin the Stetsons were encamped. The smoke
of a fire was visible in the dim morning light, and the Lewallens
scattered to surround the camp, but the effort was vain. A picket
saw the creeping figures; his gun echoed a warning from rock to
rock, and with yells the Lewallens ran forward. Rome sprang from
his sleep near the fire, bareheaded, rifle in hand, his body plain
against a huge rock, and the bullets hissed and spat about him as
he leaped this way and that, firing as he sprang, and shouting for
his men. Steve Marcum alone answered. Some, startled from
sleep, had fled in a panic; some had run deeper into the woods for
shelter. And bidding Steve save himself, Rome turned up the
mountain, running from tree to tree, and dropped unhurt behind a
fallen chestnut. Other Stetsons, too, had turned, and answering
bullets began to whistle to the enemy, but they were widely
separated and ignorant of one another's position, and the Lewallens
drove them one by one to new hiding-places, scattering them more. 
To his right Rome saw Steve Marcum speed like a shadow up
through a little open space, but he feared to move, for several
Lewallens had recognized him, and were watching him alone. He
could not even fire; at the least exposure there was a chorus of
bullets about his ears. In a moment they began to come obliquely
from each side-the Lewallens were getting around him. In a
moment more death was sure there, and once again he darted up
the mountain. The bullets sang after him like maddened bees. He
felt one cut his hat and another sting his left arm, but he raced up,
up, till the firing grew fainter as he climbed, and ceased an instant
altogether. Then, still farther below, came a sudden crash of
reports. Stetsons were pursuing the men who were after him, but
he could not join them. The Lewallens were scattered everywhere
between him and his own man, and a desccnt might lead him to
the muzzle of an enemy's Winchester. So he climbed over a ledge
of rock and lay there, peeping through a crevice between two
bowlders, gaining his breath. The firing was far below him now,
and was sharp.  Evidently his pursuers were too busy defending
themselves to think further of him, and he began to plan how he
should get back to his friends. But he kept hidden, and, searching
the cliffs below him for a sheltered descent, he saw something like
a slouched hat just over a log, scarcely fifty feet below him. 
Presently the hat was lifted a few inches; a figure rose cautiously
and climbed toward the ledge, shielding itself behind rock and
tree.  Very quietly Rome crawled back to the face of the cliff
behind him, and crouched behind a rock with his cocked rifle
across his knees. The man must climb over the ledge; there would
be a bare, level floor of rock between them-the Lewallen would be
at his mercy-and Rome, with straining eyes, waited. There was a
footfall on the other side of the ledge; a soft clink of metal against
stone. The Lewallen was climbing slowly-slowly. Rome could hear
his heavy breathing. A grimy hand slipped over the sharp comb of
the ledge; another appeared, clinched about a Winchester-then the
slouched hat, and under it the dark, crafty face of young Jasper.
Rome sat like the stone before him, with a half-smile on his lips.
Jasper peered about with the sly caution of a fox, and his face grew
puzzled and chagrined as he looked at the cliffs above him.

"Stop thar!"

He was drawing himself over the ledge, and the low, stern voice
startled him, as a knife might have done, thrust suddenly from the
empty air at his breast. Rome rose upright against the cliff, with
his resolute face against the stock of a Winchester.

"Drap that gun!"

The order was given along Stetson's barrel, and the weapon was
dropped, the steel ringing on the stone floor. Rome lowered his
gun to the hollow of his arm, and the two young leaders faced each
other for the first time in the life of either.

Seem kinder s'prised to see me," said the Stetson, grimly.  " Hev ye
got a pistol?

Young Jasper glared at him in helpless ferocity.

"Naw!"

"Knife?"

He drew a long-bladed penknife from his pocket, and tossed it at
Rome's feet.

"Jes' move over thar, will ye?"

The Lewallen took his stand against the cliff. Rome picked up the
fallen rifle and leaned it against the ledge.

"Now, Jas Lewallen, thar's nobody left in this leetle trouble 'cept
you 'n' me, 'n' ef one of us was dead, I reckon t'other could live
hyeh, 'n' thar'd be peace in these mount'ins. I thought o' that when I
had ye at the eend o' this Winchester.  I reckon you would 'a' shot
me dead ef I had poked my head over a rock as keerless as you." 
That is just what he would have done, and Jasper did not answer. 
"I've swore to kill ye, too," added Rome, tapping his gun; "I've got
a cross fer ye hyeh."

The Lewallen was no coward. Outcry or resistance was useless. 
The Stetson meant to taunt him, to make death more bitter; for
Jasper expected death, and he sullenly waited for it against the
cliff.

"You've been banterin me a long time now, 'lowin' as how ye air
the better man o' the two; n' I've got a notion o' givin' ye a chance
to prove yer tall talk.  Hit's not our way to kill a man in cold blood,
'n' I don't want to kill ye anyways ef I kin he'p it.  Seem s'prised
ag'in.  Reckon ye don't believe me?  I don't wonder when I think o'
my own dad, 'n' all the meanness yo folks have done mine; but I've
got a good reason fer not killin' ye-ef I kin he'p it.  Y'u don't know
what it is, 'n' y'u'll never know; but I'll give yer a chance now fer
yer life ef y'u'll sw'ar on a stack o' Bibles as high as that tree thar
that y'u'll leave these mount'ins ef I whoops ye, 'n' nuver come back
ag'in as long as you live.  I'll leave, ef ye whoops me. Now whut do
ye say?  Will ye sw'ar?

"I reckon I will, seem' as I've got to," was the surly answer.  But
Jasper's face was dark with suspicion, and Rome studied it keenly.
The Lewallens once had been men whose word was good, but he
did not like Jasper's look.

"I reckon I'll trust ye," he said, at last, more through confidence in
his own strength than faith in his enemy; foi Jasper whipped would
be as much at his mercy as he was now.  So Rome threw off his
coat, and began winding his homespun suspenders about his waist.
Watching him closely, Jasper did the same.

The firing below had ceased.  A flock of mountain vultures were
sailing in great circles over the thick woods. Two eagles swept
straight from the rim of the sun above Wolf's Head, beating over a
turbulent sea of mist for the cliffs, scarcely fifty yards above the
ledge, where a pine-tree grew between two rocks. At the instant of
lighting, they wheeled away, each with a warning scream to the
other. A figure lying flat behind the pine had frightened them, and
now a face peeped to one side, flushed with eagerness over the
coming fight.  Both were ready now, and the Lewallen grew
suddenly white as Rome turned again and reached down for the
guns.

"I reckon I'll put 'em a leetle furder out o' the way," he said,
kicking the knife over the cliff; and, standing on a stone, he thrust
them into a crevice high above his head.

"Now, Jas, we'll fight this gredge out, as our grandads have done
afore us."

Lewallen and Stetson were man to man at last. Suspicion was gone
now, and a short, brutal laugh came from the cliff.

"I'll fight ye! Oh, by God, I'll fight ye!"

The ring of the voice struck an answering gleam from Rome's gray
eyes, and the two sprang for each other. It was like the struggle of
primeval men who had not yet learned even the use of clubs. For
an instant both stood close, like two wild beasts crouched for a
spring, and circling about to get at each other's throats, with
mouths set, eyes watching eyes, and hands twitching nervously.
Young Jasper leaped first, and the Stetson, wary of closing with
him, shrank back.  There were a few quick, heavy blows, and the
Lewallen was beaten away with blood at his lips. Then each knew
the advantage of the other. The Stetson's reach was longer; the
Lewallen was shorter and heavier, and again he closed in. Again
Rome sent out his long arm. A turn of Jasper's head let the heavy
fist pass over his shoulder. The force of the blow drove Rome
forward; the two clinched, and Jasper's arms tightened about the
Stetson's waist. With a quick gasp for breath Rome loosed his
hold, and, bending his enemy's head back with one hand, rained
blow after blow in his face with the other. One terrible stroke on
the jaw, and Jasper's arms were loosed; the two fell apart, the one
stunned, the other breathless. One dazed moment only, and for a
third time the Lewallen came on. Rome had been fighting a man;
now he faced a demon. Jasper's brows stood out like bristles, and
the eyes under them were red and fierce like a mad bull's. Again
Rome's blows fell, but again the Lewallen reached him, and this
time he got his face under the Stetson's chin, -'id the heavy fist fell
upon the back of his head, and upon his neck, as upon wood and
leather. Again Rome had to gasp for breath, and again the two
were fiercely locked-their corded arms as tense as serpents. 
Around and around they whirled, straining, tripping, breaking the
silence only with deep, quick breaths and the stamping of feet,
Jasper firm on the rock, and Rome's agility saving him from being
lifted in the air and tossed from the cliff. There was no pause for
rest.  It was a struggle to the end, and a quick one; and under stress
of excitement the figure at the pine-tree had risen to his knees-
jumping even to his feet in plain view, when the short, strong arms
of the Lewallen began at last to draw Rome closer still, and to
bend him backward. The Stetson was giving way at last. The
Lewallen's vindictive face grew blacker, and his white teeth
showed between his snarling lips as he fastened one leg behind his
enemy's, and, with chin against his shoulder, bent him slowly,
slowly back. The two breathed in short, painful gasps; their
swollen muscles trembled under the strain as with ague. Back -
back - the Stetson was falling; he seemed almost down, when-the
trick is an old one-whirling with the quickness of light, he fell
heavily on his opponent, and caught him by the throat with both
hands.

"'Nough? " he asked, hoarsely. It was the first word uttered.

The only answer was a fierce struggle. Rome felt the Lewallen's
teeth sinking in his arm, and his fingers tightened like twisting
steel, till Jasper caught his breath as though strangling to death.

"'Nough?" asked the hoarse voice again.

No answer; tighter clinched the fingers. The Lewallen shook his
head feebly; his purple face paled suddenly as Rome loosed his
hold, and his lips moved in a whisper.

"'Nough!"

Rome rose dizzily to one knee. Jasper turned, gasping, and lay
with his face to the rock. For a while both were quiet, Rome,
panting with open mouth and white with exhaustion, looking down
now and then at the Lewallen, whose face was turned away with
shame.

The sun was blazing above Wolf's Head now, and the stillness
about them lay unbroken on the woods below.

"I've whooped ye, Jas," Rome said, at last; "I've whooped ye in a
fa'r fight, 'n' I've got nothin' now to say 'bout yer tall talk, 'n' I
reckon you hevn't nuther.  Now, hit's understood, hain't it, that y'u'll
leave these mount'ins?

Y'u kin go West," he continued, as the Lewallen did not answer. "
Uncle Rufe used to say thar's a good deal to do out thar, 'n' nobody
axes questions. Thar's nobody left hyeh but you 'n' me, but these
mount'ins was never big 'nough fer one Lewallen 'n' one Stetson, 'n'
you've got to go.  I reckon ye won't believe me, but I'm glad I didn't
hev to kill ye. But you've promised to go, now, 'n' I'll take yer word
fer it." He turned his face, and the Lewallen, knowing it from the
sound of his voice, sprang to his feet.

"Oh-!"

A wild curse burst from Rome's lips, and both leaped for the guns.
The Lewallen had the start of a few feet, and Rome, lamed in the
fight, stumbled and fell.  Before he could rise Jasper had whirled,
with one of the Winchesters above his head and his face aflame
with fury. Asking no mercy, Rome hid his face with one arm and
waited, stricken faint all at once, and numb. One report struck his
ears, muffled, whip-like.  A dull wonder came to him that the
Lewallen could have missed at such close range, and he waited for
another. Some one shouted-a shrill hallo. A loud laugh followed; a
light seemed breaking before Rome's eyes, and he lifted his head.
Jasper was on his face again, motionless; and Steve Marcum's tall
figure was climbing over a bowlder toward him.

"That was the best fight I've seed in my time, by God," he said,
coolly, " 'n', Rome, y'u air the biggest fool this side o' the
settlements, I reckon. I had dead aim on him, 'n' I was jest
a-thinkin' hit was a purty good thing fer you that old long-nosed
Jim Stover chased me up hyeh, when, damn me, ef that boy up thar
didn't let his ole gun loose.  I'd a-got Jas myself ef he hadn't been
so all-fired quick o' trigger."

Up at the root of the pine-tree Isom stood motionless, with his long
rifle in one hand and a little cloud of smoke breaking above his
white face. When Rome looked up he started down without a
word. Steve swung himself over the ledge.

"I heerd the shootin'," said the boy, " up thar at the cave, 'n' I
couldn't stay thar. I knowed ye could whoop him, Rome, 'n' I seed
Steve, too, but I was afeard-"  Then he saw the body. His tongue
stopped, his face shrivelled, and Steve, hanging with one hand to
the ledge, watched him curiously.

" Rome," said the boy, in a quick whisper, "is he daid?

" Come on! " said Steve, roughly. "They'll be up hyeh atter us in a
minute.  Leave Jas's gun thar, 'n' send that boy back home."

That day the troops came-young Blue Grass Kentuckians.  That
night, within the circle of their camp-fires, a last defiance was cast
in the teeth of law and order.  Flames rose within the old court-
house, and before midnight the moonlight fell on four black walls.
That night, too, the news of young Jasper's fate was carried to the
death-bed of Rome's mother, and before day the old woman passed
in peace. That day Stetsons and Lewallens disbanded. The
Lewallens had no leader; the Stetsons, no enemies to fight. Some
hid, some left the mountains, some gave themselves up for trial. 
Upon Rome Stetson the burden fell. Against him the law was set.
A price was put on his head, his house was burned-a last act of
Lewallen hate-and Rome was homeless, the last of his race, and an
outlaw.

XIII

WITH the start of a few hours and the sympathy of his people one
mountaineer can defy the army of the United States; and the
mountaineers usually laugh when they hear troops are coming. For
the time they stop fighting and hide in the woods; and when the
soldiers are gone, they come out again, and begin anew their little
pleasantries.  But the soldiers can protect the judge on his bench
and the county-seat in time of court, and for these purposes they
serve well.

The search for Rome Stetson, then, was useless.  His friends would
aid him; his enemies feared to betray him.  So the soldiers
marched away one morning, and took their prisoners for safe-
keeping in the Blue Grass, until court should open at Hazlan.

Meantime, spring came and deepened-the mountain spring. The
berries of the wintergreen grew scarce, and Rome Stetson, " hiding
out," as the phrase is, had to seek them on thc northem face of the
mountains.  The moss on the naked winter trees brightened in
color, and along the river, where willows drooped, ran faint lines
of green. The trailing arbutus gave out delicate pink blossoms, and
the south wind blew apart the petals of the anemone. Soon violets
unfolded above the dead leaves; azaleas swung their yellow
trumpets through the undergrowth; over-head, the dogwood tossed
its snow-flakes in gusts through the green and gold of new leaves
and sunlight; and higher still waved the poplar blooms, with honey
ready on every crimson heart for the bees. Down in the valley
Rome Stetson could see about every little cabin pink clouds and
white clouds of peach and of apple blossoms. Amid the ferns about
him shade-loving trilliums showed their many-hued faces, and
every opening was thickly peopled with larkspur seeking the sun.
The giant magnolia and the umbrella-tree spread their great
creamy flowers; the laurel shook out myriads of pink and white
bells, and the queen of mountain flowers was stirring from sleep in
the buds of the rhododendron.

With the spring new forces pulsed the mountain air.  The spirit of
the times reached even Hazlan.  A railroad was coming up the
river, so the rumor was. When winter broke, surveyors had
appeared; after them, mining experts and purchasers of land.  New
ways of bread-making were open to all, and the feudsman began to
see that he could make food and clothes more easily and with less
danger than by sleeping with his rifle in the woods, and by fighting
men who had done him no harm.  Many were tired of fighting;
many, forced into the feud, had fought unwillingly. Others had
sold their farms and wild lands, and were moving toward the Blue
Grass or westward.  The desperadoes of each faction had fled the
law or were in its clutches. The last Lewallen was dead; the last
Stetson was hidden away in the mountains. There were left
Mareums and Braytons, but only those who felt safest from
indictment; in these a spirit of hostility would live for years, and,
roused by passion or by drink, would do murder now on one side
of the Cumberland and now on the other; but the Stetson-Lewallen
feud, old Gabe believed, was at an end at last.

All these things the miller told Rome Stetson, who well knew what
they meant. He was safe enough from the law while the people
took no part in his capture, but he grew apprehensive when he
learned of the changes going on in the valley. None but old Gabe
knew where he was, to be sure, but with his own enemies to guide
the soldiers he could not hope to remain hidden long. Still, with
that love of the mountains characteristic of all races born among
them, he clung to his own land.  He would rather stay where he
was the space of a year and die, he told old Gabe passionately,
than live to old age in another State.

But there was another motive, and he did not hide it.  On the other
side he had one enemy left-the last, too, of her race-who was more
to him than his own dead kindred, who hated him, who placed at
his door all her sorrows. For her he was living like a wolf in a
cave, and old Gabe knew it.  Her-he would not leave.

"I tell ye, Rome, you've got to go.  Thar's no use talkin'.  Court
comes the fust Monday in June. The soldiers ull be hyeh. Hit won't
be safe. Thar's some that s'picions I know whar ye air now, 'n'
they'll be spyin', 'n' mebbe hit'll git me into trouble, too, aidin' 'n'
abettin' a man to git away who air boun' to the law."

The two were sitting on the earthen floor of the cave before a little
fire, and Rome, with his hands about his knees and his brows
knitted, was staring into the yellow blaze. His unshorn hair fell to
his shoulders; his face was pale from insufficient food and
exercise, and tense with a look that was at once caged and defiant.

"Uncle Gabe," he asked, quietly, for the old man's tone was a little
querulous, " air ye sorry ye holped me? Do ye blame me fer whut
I've done?"

"No," said the old miller, answering both questions; "I don't. I
believe whut ye tol' me. Though, even ef ye had 'a' done it, I don't
know as I'd blame ye, seem' that it was a fa'r fight. I don't doubt he
was doin' his best to kill you."

Rome turned quickly, his face puzzled and darkening.

Uncle Gabe, whut air you drivin' at? " The old man spat into the
fire, and shifted his position uneasily, as Rome's hand caught his
knee.

Well, ef I have to tell ye, I s'pose I must. Thar's been nothin'
pertickler ag'in ye so fer, 'cept fer breakin' that confederatin' statute
'bout bandin' fightin' men together; 'n' nobody was very anxious to
git hol' o' ye jes fer that, but now "-the old man stopped a moment,
for Rome's eyes were kindling-" they say that ye killed Jas Lew
allen, 'n' that ye air a murderer; 'n' hit air powerful strange how all
of a suddint folks seem to be gittin' down on a man as kills his
fellow-creetur; 'n' now they means to hunt ye til they ketch ye."

It was all out now, and the old man was relieved.  Rome rose to his
feet, and in sheer agony of spirit paced the floor.

"I tol' ye, Uncle Gabe, that I didn't kill him."

So ye did, 'n' I believe ye. But a feller seed you 'n' Steve comm'
from the place whar Jas was found dead, 'n' whar the dirt 'n' rock
was throwed about as by two bucks in spring-time. Steve says he
didn't do it, 'n' he wouldn't say you didn't.  Looks to me like Steve
did the kuhn', 'n' was lyin' a leetle. He hain't goin' to confess hit to
save your neck; 'n' he can't no way, fer he hev lit out o' these
mount'ins-long ago."

If Steve was out of danger, suspicion could not harm him, and
Rome said nothing.

"Isom's got the lingerin' fever ag'in, 'n' he's out"i his head.  He's
ravin' 'bout that fight. Looks like ye tol' him 'bout it. He says,' Don't
tell Uncle Gabe'; 'n' he keeps sayin' it.  Hit'll 'most kill him ef you
go 'way; but he wants ye to git out o' the mount'ins; 'n', Rome,
you've got to go."

"Who was it, Uncle Gabe, that seed me 'n' Steve comm' 'way from
thar?

He air the same feller who hev been spyin' ye all the time this war's
been goin' on; hit's that dried-faced, snaky Eli Crump, who ye
knocked down 'n' choked up in Hazlan one day fer sayin'
something ag'in Isom."

"I knowed it-I knowed it-oh, ef I could git my fingers roun' his
throat once more-jes once more-I'd be 'mos' ready to die."

He stretched out his hands as he strode back and forth, with his
fingers crooked like talons; his shadow leaped from wall to wall,
and his voice, filling the cave, was, for the moment, scarcely
human.  The old man waited till the paroxysm was over and Rome
had again sunk before the fire.

"Hit 'u'd do no good, Rome," he said, rising to go. "You've got
enough on ye now, without the sin o' takin' his life. You better
make up yer mind to leave the mount ins now right 'way. You're
a-gittin' no more'n half-human, livin' up hyeh like a catamount.  I
don't see how ye kin stand it. Thar's no hope o' things blowin' over,
boy, 'n' givin' ye a chance o' comm' out ag'in, as yer dad and yer
grandad usen to do afore ye. The citizens air gittin' tired o' these
wars. They keeps out the furriners who makes roads 'n' buys lands;
they air ag'in' the law, ag'in' religion, ag'in' yo' pocket, 'n' ag'in'
mine. Lots o' folks hev been ag'in' all this fightin' fer a long time,
but they was too skeery to say so.  They air talkin' mighty big now,
seem' they kin git soldiers hyeh to pertect 'em. So ye mought as
well give up the idea o' staying hyeh, 'less'n ye want to give
yourself up to the law."

The two stepped from the cave, and passed through the
rhododendrons till they stood on the cliff overlooking the valley.
The rich light lay like a golden mist between the mountains, and
through it, far down, the river moaned like the wind of a coming
storm.

Did ye tell the gal whut I tol' ye?"

"Yes, Rome; hit wasn't no use.  She says Steve's word's as good as
yourn; 'n' she knowed about the crosses.  Folks say she swore awful
ag'in' ye at young Jas's burial, 'lowin' that she'd hunt ye down
herse'f, ef the soldiers didn't ketch ye.  I hain't seed her sence she
got sick; 'pears like ever'body's sick.  Mebbe she's a leetle settled
down now-no tellin'. No use foolin' with her, Rome. You git away
from hyeh.  Don't you worry 'bout Isom-I'll take keer o' him, 'n'
when he gits well, he'll want to come atter ye, 'n' I'll let him go. He
couldn't live hyeh without you.  But y'u must git away, Rome, 'n'
git away mighty quick."

With hands clasped behind him, Rome stood and watched the bent
figure slowly pick its way around the stony cliff.

"I reckon I've got to go.  She's ag'in' me; they're all ag'in' me. I
reckon I've jes got to go. Somehow, I've been kinder hopin'-"  He
closed his lips to check the groan that rose to them, and turned
again into the gloom behind him.

XIV

JUNE came. The wild rose swayed above its image along every
little shadowed stream, and the scent of wild grapes was sweet in
the air and as vagrant as a bluebird's note in autumn. The
rhododendrons burst into beauty, making gray ridge and gray cliff
blossom with purple, hedging streams with snowy clusters and
shining leaves, and lighting up dark coverts in the woods as with
white stars. The leaves were full, woodthrushes sang, and bees
droned like unseen running water in the woods.

With June came circuit court once more-and the soldiers.  Faint
music pierced the dreamy chant of the river one morning as Rome
lay on a bowlder in the summer sun; and he watched the guns
flashing like another stream along the water, and then looked again
to the Lewallen cabin. Never, morning, noon, or night, when he
came from the rhododendrons, or when they closed about him, did
he fail to turn his eyes that way. Often he would see a bright speck
moving about the dim lines of the cabin, and he would scarcely
breathe while he watched it, so easily would it disappear. Always
he had thought it was Martha, and now he knew it was, for the old
miller had told him more of the girl, and had wrung his heart with
pity.  She had been ill a long while. The "furriners " had seized old
Jasper's cahin and land.  The girl was homeless, and she did not
know it, for no one had the heart to tell her. She was living with
the Braytons; and every day she went to the cabin, "moonin'' n'
sorrowin' aroun'," as old Gabe said; and she was much changed.

Once more the miller came-for the last time, he said, firmly. 
Crump had trailed him, and had learned where Rome was. The
search would begin next day-perhaps that very night-and Crump
would guide the soldiers. Now he must go, and go quickly.  The
boy, too, sent word that unless Rome went, he would have
something to tell. Old Gabe saw no significance in the message;
but he had promised to deliver it, and he did.  Rome wavered then;
Steve and himself gone, no suspicion would fall on the lad. If he
were caught, the boy might confess.  With silence Rome gave
assent, and the two parted in an apathy that was like heartlessness.
Only old Gabe's shrunken breast heaved with something more than
weariness of descent, and Rome stood watching him a long time
before he turned back to the cave that had sheltered him from his
enemies among beasts and men. In a moment he came out for the
last time, and turned the opposite way. Climbing about the spur, he
made for the path that led down to the river. When he reached it he
glanced at the sun, and stopped in indecision.  Straight above him
was a knoll, massed with rhododendrons, the flashing leaves of
which made it like a great sea-wave in the slanting sun, while the
blooms broke slowly down over it like foam. Above this was a
gray sepulchre of dead, standing trees, more gaunt and spectre-like
than ever, with the rich life of summer about it. Higher still were a
dark belt of stunted firs and the sandstone ledge, and above
these-home.  He was risking his liberty, his life.  Any clump of
bushes might bristle suddenly with Winchesters. If the soldiers
sought for him at the cave they would at the same time guard the
mountain paths; they would guard, too, the Stetson cabin. But no
matter-the sun was still high, and he turned up the steep. The ledge
passed, he stopped with a curse at his lips and the pain of a
knife-thrust at his heart.  A heap of blackened stones and ashes
was before him. The wild mountain-grass was growing up about it. 
The bee-gums were overturned and rifled. The garden was a
tangled mass of weeds. The graves in the little family
burying-ground were unprotected, the fence was gone, and no
boards marked the last two ragged mounds. Old Gabe had never
told him. He, too, like Martha, was homeless, and the old miller
had been kind to him, as the girl's kinspeople had been to her.

For a long while he sat on the remnant of the burned and broken
fence, and once more the old tide of bitterness rose within him and
ebbed away. There were none left to hate, to wreak vengeance on.
It was hard to leave the ruins as they were; and yet he would rather
leave weeds and ashes than, like Martha, have some day to know
that his home was in the hands of a stranger.  When he thought of
the girl he grew calmer; his own sorrows gave way to the thought
of hers; and half from habit he raised his face to look across the
river. Two eagles swept from a dark ravine under the shelf of rock
where he had fought young Jasper, and made for a sun-lighted
peak on the other shore. From them his gaze fell to Wolf's Head
and to the cabin beneath, and a name passed his lips in a whisper.

Then he took the path to the river, and he found the canoe where
old Gabe had hidden it. Before the young moon rose he pushed
into the stream and drifted with the current.  At the mouth of the
creek that ran over old Gabe's water-wheel he turned the prow to
the Lewallen shore.

Not yit! Not yit! " he said. 

XV

THAT night Rome passed in the woods, with his rifle, in a bed of
leaves. Before
daybreak he had built a fire in a deep ravine to cook his breakfast,
and had scattered the embers that the smoke should give no sign.
The sun was high when he crept cautiously in sight of the
Lewallen cabin. It was much like his own home on the other shore,
except that the house, closed and desolate, was standing, and the
bees were busy. At the corner of the kitchen a rusty axe was
sticking in a half-cut piece of timber, and on the porch was a heap
of kindling and fire wood-the last work old Jasper and his son had
ever done. In the Lewallens' garden, also, two graves were fresh;
and the spirit of neglect and ruin overhung the place.

All the morning he waited in the edge of the laurel, peering down
the path, watching the clouds race with their shadows over the
mountains, or pacing to and fro in his covert of leaves and flowers. 
He began to fear at last that she was not coming, that she was ill,
and once he started down the mountain toward Steve Brayton's
cabin.  The swift descent brought him to his senses, and he
stopped half-way, and climbed back again to his hiding-place. 
What he was doing, what he meant to do, he hardly knew. Mid-day
passed; the sun fell toward the mountains, and once more came the
fierce impulse to see her, even though he must stalk into the
Brayton cabin.  Again, half-crazed, he started impetuously
through the brush, and shrank back, and stood quiet.  A little noise
down the path had reached his ear. In a moment he could hear
slow foot-falls, and the figure of the girl parted the pink-and-white
laurel blossoms, which fell in a shower about her when she
brushed through them. She passed quite near him, walking slowly,
and stopped for a moment to rest against a pillar of the porch. She
was very pale; her face was traced deep with suffering, and she
was, as old Gabe said, much changed. Then she went on toward
the garden, stepping with an effort over the low fence, and leaned
as if weak and tired against the apple-tree, the boughs of which
shaded the two graves at her feet.  For a few moments she stood
there, listless, and Rome watched her with hungry eyes, at a loss
what to do.  She moved presently, and walked quite around the
graves without looking at them; then came back past him, and,
seating herself in the porch, turned her face to the river.  The sun
lighted her hair, and in the sunken, upturned eyes Rome saw the
shimmer of tears.

"Marthy! " He couldn't help it-the thick, low cry broke like a groan
from his lips, and the girl was on her feet, facing him.  She did not
know the voice, nor the shaggy, half-wild figure in the shade of the
laurel; and she started back as if to run; but seeing that the man did
not mean to harm her, she stopped, looking for a moment with
wonder and even with quick pity at the hunted face with its white
appeal. Then a sudden spasm caught her throat, and left her body
rigid, her hands shut, and her eyes dry and hard-she knew him. A
slow pallor drove the flush of surprise from her face, and her lips
moved once, but there was not even a whisper from them.  Rome
raised one hand before his face, as though to ward off something. "
Don't look at mc that way, Marthy-my God, don't! I didn't kill him. 
I sw'ar it!  I give him a chance fer his life. I know, I know-Steve
says he didn't. Thar was only us two.  Hit looks ag'in' me; but I
hain't killed one nur t'other. I let 'em both go. Y'u don't believe me?
" He went swiftly toward her, his gun outstretched. Hyeh, gal!  I
heerd ye swore ag' in' me out thar in the gyarden-'lowin' that you
was goin' to hunt me down yerself if the soldiers didn't. Hyeh's yer
chance!

The girl shrank away from him, too startled to take the weapon;
and he leaned it against her, and stood away, with his hands behind
him.

Kill me ef ye think I'm a-lyin' to ye," he said. "Y'u kin git even with
me now. But I want to tell ye fust "-the girl had caught the muzzle
of the gun convulsively, and was bending over it, her eyes burning,
her face inscrutable-hit was a fa'r fight betwixt us, 'n' I whooped
him. He got his gun then, 'n' would 'a' killed me ag'in' his oath ef he
hadn't been shot fust Hit's so, too, 'bout the crosses.  I made 'em;
they're right thar on that gun; but whut could I do with mam
a-standin' right thar with the gun 'n' Uncle Rufe a-tellin' 'bout my
own dad layin' in his blood, 'n' Isom 'n' the boys lookin' on! But I
went ag'in' my oath; I gave him his life when I had the right to take
it.  I could 'a' killed yer dad once, 'n' I had the right to kill him, too,
fer killin' mine; but I let him go, 'n' I reckon I done that fer ye, too. 
'Pears like I hain't done nothin' sence I seed ye over thar in the mill
that day that wasn't done fer ye. Somehow ye put me dead ag'in'
my own kin, 'n' tuk away all my hate ag'in' yourn.  I couldn't fight
fer thinkin' I was fightin' you, 'n' when I seed ye comm' through the
bushes jes now, so white 'n' sickly-like, I couldn't hardly git breath,
a-thinkin' I was the cause of all yer misery. That's all!"  He
stretched out his arms. Shoot, gal, ef ye don't believe me.  I'd jes as
lieve die, ef ye thinks I'm lyin' to ye, 'n' ef ye hates me fer whut I
hain't done."

The gun had fallen to the earth. The girl, trembling at the knees,
sank to her seat on the porch, and, folding her arms against the
pillar, pressed her forehead against them, her face unseen.  Rome
stooped to pick up the weapon.

"I'm goin' 'way now," he went on, slowly, after a little pause, "but I
couldn't leave hyeh without seem' you.  I wanted ye to know the
truth, 'n' I 'lowed y'u'd believe me ef I tol' ye myself.  I've been
a-waitin' thar in the lorrel fer ye sence mornin'. Uncle Gabe tol' me
ye come hyeh ever' day. He says I've got to go. I've been hopin' I
mought come out o' the bushes some day.  But Uncle Gabe says
ever'body's ag'in' me more' n ever, 'n' that the soldiers mean to
ketch me. The gov'ner out thar in the settlements says as how he'll
give five hundred dollars fer me, livin' or dead. He'll nuver git me
livin'-I've swore that-'n' as I hev done nothin' sech as folks on both
sides hev done who air walkin' roun' free, I hain't goin' to give up.
Hit's purty hard to leave these mount'ins. Reckon I'll nuver see 'em
ag'in. Been livin' like a catamount over thar on the knob.  I could
jes see you over hyeh, 'n' I reckon I hain't done much 'cept lay over
thar on a rock 'n' watch ye movin' round.  Hit's mighty good to feel
that ye believe me, 'n' I want ye to know that I been stayin' over
thar fer nothin' on earth but jes to see you ag'in; 'n' I want ye to
know that I was a-sorrowin' fer ye when y'u was sick, 'n' a-pinin' to
see ye, 'n' a-hopin' some day y'u mought kinder git over yer hate fer
me." He had been talking with low tenderness, half to himself, and
with his face to the river, and he did not see the girl's tears falling
to the porch. Her sorrow gave way in a great sob now, and he
turned with sharp remorse, and stood quite near her.

"Don't cry, Marthy," he said. "God knows hit's hard to think I've
brought all this on ye when I'd give all these mount 'ins to save ye
from it. Whut d' ye say? Don't cry."

The girl was trying to speak at last, and Rome bent over to catch
the words.

"I hain't cryin' fer myself," she said, faintly, and then she said no
more; but the first smile that had passed over Rome's face for
many a day passed then, and he put out one big hand, and let it rest
on the heap of lustrous hair.

"Marthy, I hate to go 'way, leavin' ye hyeh with nobody to take
keer o' ye. You're all alone hyeh in the mount'ins; I'm all alone; 'n' I
reckon I'll be all alone wharever I go, ef you stay hyeh. I got a boat
down thar on the river, 'n' I'm goin' out West whar Uncle Rufe use
to live.  I know I hain't good fer nothin' much "-he spoke almost
huskily; he could scarcely get the words to his lips-" but I want ye
to go with me. Won't ye?"

The girl did not answer, but her sobbing ceased slowly, while
Rome stroked her hair; and at last she lifted her face, and for a
moment looked to the other shore. Then she rose. There is a
strange pride in the Kentucky mountaineer.

"As you say, Rome, thar's nobody left but you, 'n' nobody but me;
but they burned you out, we hain't even-yit."  Her eyes were on
Thunderstruck Knob, where the last sunlight used to touch the
Stetson cabin.

"Hyeh, Rome!" He knew what she meant, and he kneeled at the
pile of kindling-wood near the kitchen door.  Then they stood back
and waited.  The sun dipped below a gap in the mountains, the sky
darkened, and the flames rose to the shingled porch, and leaped
into the gathering dusk. On the outer edge of the quivering light,
where it touched the blossomed laurel, the two stood till the blaze
caught the eaves of the cabin; and then they turned their faces
where, burning to ashes in the west, was another fire, whose light
blended in the eyes of each with a light older and more lasting than
its own-the light eternal.

THE END








Scanned by Dianne Bean. Proofed by Doris Ringbloom.





THE CONQUEST OF NEW FRANCE, A CHRONICLE OF THE COLONIAL WARS

by George M. Wrong




CONTENTS

I. THE CONFLICT OPENS: FRONTENAC AND PHIPS
