nflans and La
Clue were no match for Boscawen, Hawke, and Rodney, all seamen of
the first rank, and made the stronger because dominated by the
fiery Pitt.

They kept the French squadrons shut up in their own ports. When,
at last, on November 20, 1759, Conflans came out of Brest and
fought Hawke at Quiberon Bay, the French fleet was nearly
destroyed, and the dream of taking London ended in complete
disaster.



CHAPTER XI. The Fall Of Canada

Though Quebec was in their hands, the position of the British
during the winter of 1759-60 was dangerous. In October General
Murray, who was left in command, saw with misgiving the great
fleet sail away which had brought to Canada the conquering force
of Wolfe and Saunders. Murray was left with some seven thousand
men in the heart of a hostile country, and with a resourceful
enemy, still unconquered, preparing to attack him. He was
separated from other British forces by vast wastes of forest and
river, and until spring should come no fleet could aid him. Three
enemies of the English, the French said exultingly, would aid to
retake Quebec: the ruthless savages who haunted the outskirts of
the fortress and massacred many an incautious straggler; the
French army which could be recruited from the Canadian
population; and, above all, the bitter cold of the Canadian
winter. To Murray, as to Napoleon long afterward in his rash
invasion of Russia, General February was indeed the enemy. About
the two or three British ships left at Quebec the ice froze in
places a dozen feet thick, and snowdrifts were piled so high
against the walls of Quebec that it looked sometimes as if the
enemy might walk over them into the fortress. So solidly frozen
was the surface of the river that Murray sent cannon to the south
shore across the ice to repel a menace from that quarter. There
was scarcity of firewood and of provisions. Scurvy broke out in
the garrison. Many hundreds died so that by the spring Murray had
barely three thousand men fit for active duty.

Throughout the winter Levis, now in command of the French forces,
made increasing preparations to destroy Murray in the spring. The
headquarters of Uvis were at Montreal. Here Vaudreuil, the
Governor, kept his little court. He and Levis worked
harmoniously, for Uvis was conciliatory and tactful. For a time
Vaudreuil treasured the thought of taking command in person to
attack Quebec. In the end, however, he showed that he had learned
something from the disasters of the previous year and did not
interfere with the plans made by Levis. So throughout the winter
Montreal had its gayeties and vanities as of old. There were
feasts and dances--but over all brooded the reality of famine in
the present and--the foreboding of disaster to come.

By April 20, 1760, the St. Lawrence was open and, though the
shores were cumbered with masses of broken ice, the central
channel was free for the boats which Levis filled with his
soldiers. It was a bleak experience to descend the turbulent
river between banks clogged with ice. When Levis was not far from
Quebec, he learned that it was impossible to surprise Murray who
was well on guard between Cap Rouge on the west and Beauport on
the east. The one thing to do was to reach the Plains of Abraham
in order to attack the feeble walls of Quebec from the landward
side. Since Murray's alertness made impossible attack by way of
the high cliffs which Wolfe had climbed in the night, Levis had
to reach Quebec by a circuitous route. He landed his army a
little above Cap Rouge, marched inland over terrible roads in
heavy rain, and climbed to the plateau of Quebec from the rear at
Sainte Foy. On April 27, 1760, he drew up his army on the heights
almost exactly as Wolfe had done in the previous September.
Murray followed the example of Montcalm. He had no trust in the
feeble defenses of Quebec and on the 28th marched out to fight on
the open plain. The battle of Sainte Foy followed exactly the
precedents of the previous year. The defenders of Quebec were
driven off the field in overwhelming defeat. The difference was
that Murray took his army back to Quebec and from behind its
walls still defied his French assailant. Levis had poor
artillery, but he did what he could. He entrenched and poured his
fire into Quebec. In the end it was sea power which balked him.
On the 15th of May, when a British fleet appeared round the head
of the Island of Orleans, Levis withdrew in something like panic
and Quebec was safe.

Levis returned to Montreal; and to this point all the forces of
France slowly retreated as they were pressed in by the
overwhelming numbers of the British. At Oswego, the scene of
Montcalm's first brilliant success four years earlier, Amherst
had gathered during the summer of 1760 an army of about ten
thousand men. From here he descended the St. Lawrence in boats to
attack Montreal from the west. From the south, down Lake
Champlain and the Richelieu River to the St. Lawrence, came
another British force under Haviland also to attack Montreal. At
Quebec Murray put his army on transports, left the city almost
destitute of defense, and thus brought a third considerable force
against Montreal. There was little fighting. The French withdrew
to the common objective as their enemy advanced. Early in
September Levis had gathered at Montreal all his available force,
amounting now to scarcely more than two thousand men, for
Canadians and Indians alike had deserted him. The British pressed
in with the slow and inevitable rigor of a force of nature. On
the 7th of September their united army was before the town and
Amherst demanded instant surrender. The only thing for Vaudreuil
to do was to make the best terms possible. On the next day he
signed a capitulation which protected the liberties in property
and religion of the Canadians but which yielded the whole of
Canada to Great Britain. The struggle for North America had
ended.

In the moment of triumph Amherst inflicted on the French army a
deep humiliation to punish the outrages committed by their Indian
allies. In the early days of the war Loudoun, the
Commander-in-Chief in America, had vowed that the British would
make the French "sick of such inhuman villainy" and teach them to
respect "the laws of nature and humanity." Washington speaks of
his "deadly sorrow" at the dreadful outrages which he saw, the
ravishing of women, the scalping alive even of children.
Philadelphians had seen the grim spectacle of a wagon-load of
corpses brought by mourning friends and relatives of the dead and
laid down at the door of the Assembly to show to pacifist
legislators what was really happening. The French regular
officers, as we have seen, had hated this kind of warfare
Bougainville says that his soul shuddered at the sights in
Montreal, where the whole town turned out to see an English
prisoner killed, boiled, and eaten by the savages. Worse still,
captive mothers were obliged to eat the flesh of their own
children. The French believed that they could not get on without
the savage allies who committed these outrages, and they were not
strong enough to coerce them. Amherst, on the other hand, held
his Indians in check and rebuked outrage. Now he was stern to
punish what the French had permitted. He could write proudly to a
friend that the French were amazed at the order in which he kept
his own Indians. Not a man, woman, or child, he said, had been
hurt or a single atrocity committed. It was a vivid contrast with
what had taken place after the British surrender to Montcalm at
Fort William Henry. The day of retribution had come. Because of
such outrages, the French army was denied the honors of war
usually conceded to a brave and defeated foe. The French officers
and men must not, Amherst insisted, serve again during the war.
Levis protested and begged Vaudreuil to be allowed to go on
fighting rather than accept the terms, but in vain. The
humiliation was rigorously imposed, and it was a sullen host
which the British took captive.

France had lost an Empire. It was nearly three years still before
peace was signed at Paris in 1763. To Britain France yielded
everything east of the Mississippi except New Orleans, and to
Spain she ceded New Orleans and everything else to which she had
any claim. The fleurs-de-lis floated still over only two tiny
fishing islands off the Newfoundland shore. All the glowing plans
of France's leaders--of Richelieu, of Louis XIV, of Colbert, of
Frontenac, of the heroic missionaries of the Jesuit Order--seemed
to have come to nothing.

The fall of France did much to drag down her rival. Already was
America restless under control from Europe. There was now no
danger to the English in America from the French peril which had
made insecure the borders of Massachusetts, of New York, of
Pennsylvania, and Virginia, and had brought widespread desolation
and sorrow. With the removal of the menace went the need of help
and defenses for the colonies from the motherland. The French
belief that there was a natural antipathy between the English of
the Old World and the English of the New was, in reality, based
on the fact of a likeness so great that neither would accept
control or patronage from the other. Towards the Englishman who
assumed airs of superiority the antagonism of the colonists was
always certain to be acute. Open strife came when the assumption
of superiority took the form of levying taxes on the colonies
without asking their leave. In no remote way the fall of French
Canada, by removing a near menace to the English colonies, led to
this new conflict and to the collapse of that older British
Empire which had sprung from the England of the Stuarts.

When Montreal fell there were in the St. Lawrence many British
ships which had been used for troops and supplies. Before the end
of September the French soldiers and also the officials from
France who desired to go home were on board these ships bound for
Europe. By the end of November most of the exiles had reached
home. Varying receptions awaited them. Levis, who took back the
army, was soon again, by consent of the British government, in
active service. Fortune smiled on him to the end. He died a great
noble and Marshal of France just before the Revolution of 1789;
but in that awful upheaval his widow and his two daughters
perished on the scaffold. Vaudreuil's shallow and vain
incompetence did not go unpunished. He was put on trial, accused
of a share in the black frauds which had helped to ruin Canada.
The trial was his punishment. He was acquitted of taking any
share of the plunder and so drops out of history. Bigot and his
gang, on the other hand, were found guilty of vast depredations.
The former Intendant was for a time in the Bastille and in the
end was banished from France, after being forced to repay great
sums. We find echoes of the luxury of Quebec in the sale in
France of the rich plate which the rascal had acquired. There
were, however, other and even worse plunderers. They were tried
and condemned chiefly to return what they had stolen. We rather
wonder that no expiatory sacrifice on the scaffold was required
of any of these knaves. Lally Tollendal, who, as the French
leader in India, had only failed and not plundered, was sent to a
cruel execution.

Under the terms of the surrender and of the final Treaty of Peace
in 1763, civilians in Canada were given leave to return to
France. Nearly the whole of the official class and many of the
large landowners, the seigneurs, left the country. In Canada
there remained a priesthood, largely native, but soon to be
recruited from France by the upheaval of the Revolution, a few
seigneurial families, natural leaders of their race, a peasantry,
exhausted by the long war but clinging tenaciously to the soil,
and a good many hardy pioneers of the forest, men skilled in
hunting and in the use of the axe. Out of these elements,
amounting in 1763 to little more than sixty thousand people, has
come that French-Canadian race in America now numbering perhaps
three millions. The race has scattered far. It is found in the
mills of Massachusetts, in the canebrakes of Louisiana, on the
wide stretches of the prairie of the Canadian West, but it has
always kept intact its strong citadel on the banks of the St.
Lawrence. New France was, in reality, widely separated in spirit
from old France, before the new master in Canada made the
division permanent. The imagination of the Canadian peasant did
not wander across the ocean to France. He knew only the scenes
about his own hearth and in them alone were his thought and
affections centered.

The one wider interest which the habitant treasured was love for
the Catholic Church of his fathers and of his own spiritual
hopes. It thus happened that when France in revolution assailed
and for a time overthrew the Church within her borders, the heart
of French Canada was not with France but with the persecuted
Church; she hated the spirit of revolutionary France. Te Deums
were sung at Quebec in thanksgiving for the defeats of Napoleon.
In language and what literary culture they possessed, in
traditions and tastes, the conquered people remained French, but
they had no allegiance divided between Canada and France. To this
day they are proud to be simply Canadians, rooted in the soil of
Canada, with no debt of patriotic gratitude to the France from
which they sprang or to the Britain which obtained political
dominance over their ancestors after a long agony of war. To the
British Crown many of them feel a certain attachment because of
the liberty guaranteed to them to pursue their own ideals of
happiness. In preserving their type of social life, their faith
and language, they have shown a resolute tenacity. To this day
they are as different in these things from their fellow-citizens
of British origin in the rest of Canada as were their ancestors
from the English colonies which lay on their borders.

The French in Canada are still a separate people. From time to
time a nervous fear seizes them lest too many of their race may
be lost to their old ideals in the Anglo-Saxon world surging
about them. Then they listen readily to appeals to their racial
unity and draw more sharply than ever the lines of division
between themselves and the rest of North America. They remain a
fragment of an older France, remote and isolated, still dreaming
dreams like those of Frontenac of old of the dominance of their
race in North America and asserting passionately their rights in
the soil of Canada to which, first of Europeans, they came. At
the mouth of the Mississippi in the Louisiana founded by Louis
XIV, along the St. Lawrence in the Canada of Champlain and
Frontenac, with a resolution more than half pathetic, and in a
world that gives little heed, men of French race are still on
guard to preserve in America the lineaments of that older France,
long since decayed in Europe, which was above all the eldest
daughter of the Church.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

While the present narrative is based for the most part on more
recondite and widely scattered sources, the most accessible
volumes relating to the period are the following works of Francis
Parkman (Boston: many editions): "La Salle and the Discovery of
the Great West, Frontenac and New France under Louis XIV, A Half
Century of Conflict" (2 vols.), and "Montcalm and Wolfe" (2
vols.). To these should be added, as completing the story, George
M. Wrong, "The Fall of Canada" (Oxford, 1914) which dwells in
detail on the last year of the struggle. All these volumes
contain adequate references to authorities. The last of Parkman's
works was published more than twenty-five years ago and later
research has revised some of his conclusions, but he still
commands great authority. In "The Chronicles of Canada" (Toronto,
191316) half a dozen volumes relate to the period; each of these
volumes, which embody later research and are written in an
attractive style, contains a bibliography relating to its special
subject: C.W. Colby, "The Fighting Governor" [Frontenac]; Agnes
C. Laut, "The Adventurers of England on Hudson Bay"; Lawrence J.
Burpee, "The Pathfinders of the Great Plains"; Arthur G. Doughty,
"The Acadian Exiles"; William Wood, "The Great Fortress"
[Louisbourg], "The Passing of New France", and "The Winning of
Canada." Lawrence J. Burpee's "Search for the Western Sea"
(Toronto, 1908) deals with the work of La Verendrye and other
explorers. Anthony Hendry's "Journal" is published in the
"Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada," series iii, volume
i. The latest phase of the discussions on La Verendrye are
reviewed in an article by Doane Robinson in "The Mississippi
Valley Historical Review" for December, 1916. The material
relating to the discoverer was long scattered, but it has now
been collected in a volume, edited by Lawrence J. Burpee for the
Champlain Society, Toronto, but owing to the war it is at the
present date (1918) still in manuscript. Much of what is
contained in Mr. Burpee's volume will be found in "South Dakota
Historical Collections," volume vii, 1914 (Pierre, S.D.).

Additional references are given in the bibliographies appended to
the articles on "Chatham, Seven Years' War," and "Nova Scotia" in
"The Encyclopaedia Britannica," 11th Edition.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk,
from the 1893 Cassell & Company edition.





COWLEY'S ESSAYS

by Abraham Cowley




Contents:
   Introduction
   Of Liberty
      Martial.  Lib. 2.  Vota tui breviter, etc.
      Martial.  Lib. 2.  Vis fieri Liber, etc.
      Martial.  Lib. 2.  Quod to nomine? etc.
      Ode Upon Liberty.
   Of Solitude.
      Hail, old patrician trees, so great and good!
   Of Obscurity.
      Seneca, ex Thyeste, Act 2.  Chor.
   Of Agriculture.
      Virg. Georg.--O fortunatus nimium, etc.
      Horat.  Epodon.  Beatus ille qui procul, etc.
      The Country Mouse
      Horace To Fuscus Aristius.
      The Country Life
   The Garden
      Happy art thou whom God does bless
   Of Greatness.
      Horace.  Lib. 3.  Ode 1.  Odi profanum vulgus, etc.
   Of Avarice.
      I admire, Maecenas, how it comes to pass,
      "Inclusam Danaen turris ahenea."
   The Dangers of an Honest Man in much Company.
      Claudian's Old Man of Verona.
   The Shortness of Life and Uncertainty of Riches.
      Why dost thou heap up wealth, which thou must quit,
   The Danger Of Procrastination.
      Mart.  Lib. 5, Ep. 59.
      Mart.  Lib. 2, Ep. 90.
   Of Myself.
      Martial, Lib. 10, Ep. 47.
      Martial, Lib. 10. Ep. 96.
      Epitaphium Vivi Auctoiris.
   Epitaph Of The Living Author.
   A Few Notes.



INTRODUCTION.



Abraham Cowley was the son of Thomas Cowley, stationer, and citizen
of London in the parish of St. Michael le Querne, Cheapside.  Thomas
Cowley signed his will on the 24th of July, 1618, and it was proved
on the 11th of the next month by his widow, Thomasine.  He left six
children, Peter, Audrey, John, William, Katherine, and Thomas, with
a child unborn for whom the will made equal provision with the rest.
The seventh child, born before the end of the same year, was named
Abraham, and lived to take high place among the English Poets.

The calm spirit of Cowley's "Essays" was in all his life.  As he
tells us in his Essay "On Myself," even when he was a very young boy
at school, instead of running about on holidays and playing with his
fellows, he was wont to steal from them and walk into the fields,
either alone with a book or with some one companion, if he could
find any of the same temper.  He wrote verse when very young, and
says, "I believe I can tell the particular little chance that filled
my head first with such chimes of verse as have never since left
ringing there; for I remember when I began to read and to take some
pleasure in it, there was wont to lie in my mother's parlour (I know
not by what accident, for she herself never in her life read any
book but of devotion), but there was wont to lie Spenser's works."
The delight in Spenser wakened all the music in him, and in 1628, in
his tenth year, he wrote a "Tragical Historie of Pyramus and
Thisbe."

In his twelfth year Cowley wrote another piece, also in sixteen
stanzas, with songs interspersed, which was placed first in the
little volume of Poetical Blossoms, by A. C., published in 1633.  It
was a little quarto of thirty-two leaves, with a portrait of the
author, taken at the age of thirteen.  This pamphlet, dedicated to
the Dean of Westminster, and with introductory verses by Cowley and
two of his schoolfellows, contained "Constantia and Philetus," with
the "Pyramus and Thisbe," written earlier, and three pieces written
later, namely, two Elegies and "A Dream of Elysium."  The
inscription round the portrait describes Cowley as a King's Scholar
of Westminster School; and "Pyramus and Thisbe" has a special
dedication to the Head Master, Lambert Osbalston.  As schoolboy,
Cowley tells us that he read the Latin authors, but could not be
made to learn grammar rules by rote.  He was a candidate at his
school in 1636 for a scholarship at Cambridge, but was not elected.
In that year, however, he went to Cambridge and obtained a
scholarship at Trinity.

Cowley carried to Cambridge and extended there his reputation as boy
poet.  In 1636 the "Poetical Blossoms" were re-issued with an
appendix of sixteen more pieces under the head of "Sylva."  A third
edition of the "Poetical Blossoms" was printed in 1637--the year of
Milton's "Lycidas" and of Ben Johnson's death.  Cowley had written a
five-act pastoral comedy, "Love's Riddle," while yet at school, and
this was published in 1638.  In the same year, 1638, when Cowley's
age was twenty, a Latin comedy of his, "Naufragium Joculare," was
acted by men of his College, and in the same year printed, with a
dedication to Dr. Comber, Dean of Carlisle, who was Master of
Trinity.  The poet Richard Crashaw, who was about two years older
than Cowley, and, having entered Pembroke Hall in 1632, became a
Fellow of Peterhouse in 1637, sent Cowley a June present of two
unripe apricots with pleasant verses of compliment on his own early
ripeness, on his April-Autumn:-


"Take them, and me, in them acknowledging
How much my Summer waits upon thy Spring."


Cowley was able afterwards to help Crashaw materially, and wrote
some lines upon his early death.

In 1639 Cowley took the degree of B.A.  In 1640 he was chosen a
Minor Fellow, and in 1642 a Major Fellow, of Trinity, and he
proceeded to his M.A. in due course.  In March, 1641, when Prince
Charles visited Cambridge, a comedy called "The Guardian," hastily
written by Cowley, was acted at Trinity College for the Prince's
entertainment.  Cowley is said also to have written during three
years at Cambridge the greater part of his heroic poem on the
history of David, the "Davideis."  One of the occasional poems
written at this time by Cowley was on the early and sudden death of
his most intimate friend at the University, William Hervey, to whom
he was dearer than all but his brothers and sisters, and, says
Cowley:


   "Even in that we did agree,
For much above myself I loved them too."


Hervey and Cowley had walked daily together, and had spent nights in
joint study of philosophy and poetry.  Hervey "had all the light of
youth, of the fire none."


"With as much zeal, devotion, piety,
He always lived as other saints do die.
Still with his soul severe account he kept,
Weeping all debts out ere he slept;
Then down in peace and innocence he lay,
   Like the sun's laborious light,
   Which still in water sets at night,
Unsullied with the journey of the day."


Cowley's friendship with this family affected the course of his
life.  He received many kindnesses from his friend's brother John
Hervey, including introduction to Henry Jermyn, one of the most
trusted friends of Queen Henrietta Maria, the friend who was created
by her wish Baron Jermyn of St. Edmondsbury, who was addressed by
Charles I. as "Harry," and was created by Charles II., in April,
1660, Earl of St. Albans.  He was described in Queen Henrietta's
time by a political scandal-monger, as "something too ugly for a
lady's favourite, yet that is nothing to some."  In 1643 Cowley was
driven from Cambridge, and went to St. John's College, Oxford.  To
Oxford at the end of that year the king summoned a Parliament, which
met on the 22nd of January, 1644.  This brought to Oxford many peers
and Royalists, who deserted the Parliament at Westminster for the
king's Parliament at Oxford.  It continued to sit until the 16th of
April, by which time the king had found even his own Parliament to
be in many respects too independent.  In 1644 the queen, about to
become a mother, withdrew to Exeter from Oxford, against which an
army was advancing; and the parting at Oxford proved to be the last
between her and her husband.  A daughter was born at Exeter on the
16th of June.  Within two weeks afterwards the advance of an army
towards Exeter caused the queen to rise from her bed in a dangerous
state of health, and, leaving her child in good keeping, escape to
Plymouth, where she reached Pendennis Castle on the 29th of June.
On the 2nd of July the king's forces were defeated at Marston Moor.
On the 14th of July the queen escaped from Falmouth to Brest.  After
some rest at the baths of Bourbon, she went on to Paris, where she
was lodged in the Louvre, and well cared for.  Jermyn was still her
treasurer, her minister, and the friend for whose counsel she cared
most.

It was into the service of this Lord Jermyn that Cowley had been
introduced through his friendship with the Herveys.  He went to
Paris as Lord Jermyn's secretary, had charge of the queen's
political correspondence, ciphered and deciphered letters between
Queen Henrietta and King Charles, and was thus employed so actively
under Lord Jermyn that his work filled all his days, and many of his
nights.  He was sent also on journeys to Jersey, Scotland, Flanders,
Holland, or wherever else the king's troubles required his
attendance.  In 1647 Cowley published his volume of forty-four love
poems, called "The Mistress."  He was himself no gallant, neither
paid court to ladies, nor married.  His love poetry was
hypothetical; and of his life at this time he says:  "Though I was
in a crowd of as good company as could be found anywhere; though I
was in business of great and honourable trust; though I ate at the
best table, and enjoyed the best convenience for present subsistence
that ought to be desired by a man of my condition in banishment and
public distresses, yet I could not abstain from renewing my old
schoolboy's wish in a copy of verses to the same effect:-


"'Well, then, I now do plainly see
This busy world and I shall ne'er agree,' &c.,


and I never then proposed to myself any other advantage from his
Majesty's happy restoration, but the getting into some moderately
convenient retreat in the country, which I thought, in that case, I
might easily have compassed, as well as some others who, with no
greater probabilities or pretences, have arrived to extraordinary
fortunes."

In 1654 Queen Henrietta, under influence of a new confessor, had
left the Louvre, and, with the little daughter born at Exeter, taken
up her quarters in a foundation of her own, at Chaillot, for nuns of
the visitation of St. Mary.  Lord Jermyn having little use left for
a secretary in Paris, Cowley in 1656, after twelve years' service in
France, was sent to England that he might there live in the
retirement he preferred, and with the understanding that he would be
able to send information upon the course of home affairs.  In
England he was presently seized by mistake for another man, and,
when his name and position were known, he was imprisoned, until a
friendly physician, Sir Charles Scarborough, undertook to be
security in a thousand pounds for his good conduct.  In this year,
1656, Cowley published the first folio volume of his Poems, prepared
in prison, and suggested, he said, by his finding, when he returned
to England, a book called "The Iron Age," which had been published
as his, and caused him to wonder that any one foolish enough to
write such bad verses should yet be so wise as to publish them under
another man's name.  Cowley thought then that he had taken leave of
verse, which needed less troubled times for its reading, and a mind
less troubled in the writer.  He left out of his book, he said, the
pieces written during the Civil War, including three books of the
Civil War itself, reaching as far as the first battle of Newbury.
These he had burnt, for, he said, "I would have it accounted no less
unlawful to rip up old wounds than to give new ones."  "When the
event of battle and the unaccountable Will of God has determined the
controversy, and that we have submitted to the will of the
conqueror, we must lay down our pens as well as arms."  The first
part of this folio contained early poems; the second part "The
Mistress;" the third part "Pindaric Odes;" and the fourth and last
his "Davideis."

In September of the following year, 1657, Cowley acted as best man
to George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, on his marriage at Bolton
Percy, to Fairfax's daughter; Cowley wrote also a sonnet for the
bride.  In December he obtained, by influence of friends, the degree
of M.D. from the University of Oxford, and retired into Kent to
study botany.  Such study caused him then to write a Latin poem upon
Plants, in six books:  the first two on Herbs, in elegiac verse; the
next two on Flowers, in various measures; and the last two on Trees,
in heroic numbers:- "Plantarum, Libri VI."

After the death of Cromwell, Cowley returned to France, but he came
back to England in 1660, when he published an "Ode on His Majesty's
Restoration and Return," and "A Discourse by way of Vision
concerning the Government of Oliver Cromwell."  He was admitted, as
Dr. Cowley, among the first members of the Royal Society then
founded; but he was excluded from the favour of the king.  He had
written an "Ode to Brutus," for which, said his Majesty, it was
enough for Mr. Cowley to be forgiven.  A noble lord replied to
Cowley's Ode, in praise of Brutus, with an Ode against that Rebel.
Cowley's old friend, Lord Jermyn, now made Earl of St. Alban's,
joined, however, with George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, in
providing for the poet all that was required to secure to him the
quiet life that he desired.  Provision to such end had been promised
him both by Charles I. and Charles II., in the definite form of the
office of Master of the Savoy, but the post was given by Charles II.
to a brother of one of his mistresses.

Cowley recast his old comedy of "The Guardian," and produced it in
December, 1661, as "Cutter of Coleman Street."  It was played for a
week to a full audience, though some condemned it on the supposition
it was a satire upon the king's party.  Cowley certainly was too
pure and thoughtful to be a fit associate for Charles II. and many
of his friends.  The help that came from the Earl of St. Albans and
the Duke of Buckingham, was in the form of such a lease of the
Queen's lands as gave the poet a sufficient income.  Others who had
served little were enriched; but he was set at ease, and sought no
more.  He then made his home by the Thames, first at Barn Elms, and
afterwards at Chertsey, at which latter place he lived for about a
year in the Porch House, that yet stands.  Cowley was living at
Chertsey when a July evening in damp meadows gave him a cold, of
which he died within a fortnight.  That was in the year 1667, year
also of the death of Jeremy Taylor, and of the birth of Jonathan
Swift.

Abraham Cowley is at his truest in these ESSAYS, written during the
last seven years of his life.  Their style is simple, and their
thoughts are pure.  They have, for their keynote, the happiness of
one who loves true liberty in quiet possession of himself.  When he
turns to the Latins, his translations are all from those lines which
would have dwelt most pleasantly upon a mind that to the last held
by the devout wish expressed by himself in a poem of his early
youth--(A Vote, in "Sylva"):


"Books should, not business, entertain the light,
And sleep, as undisturbed as death, the night.
   My house a cottage more
Than palace, and should fitting be
For all my use, no luxury.
   My garden, painted o'er
With Nature's hand, not Art's, should pleasures yield,
Horace might envy in his Sabine field."

H. M.



OF LIBERTY.



The liberty of a people consists in being governed by laws which
they have made themselves, under whatsoever form it be of
government; the liberty of a private man in being master of his own
time and actions, as far as may consist with the laws of God and of
his country.  Of this latter only we are here to discourse, and to
inquire what estate of life does best suit us in the possession of
it.  This liberty of our own actions is such a fundamental privilege
of human nature, that God Himself, notwithstanding all His infinite
power and right over us, permits us to enjoy it, and that, too,
after a forfeiture made by the rebellion of Adam.  He takes so much
care for the entire preservation of it to us, that He suffers
neither His providence nor eternal decree to break or infringe it.
Now for our time, the same God, to whom we are but tenants-at-will
for the whole, requires but the seventh part to be paid to Him at as
a small quit-rent, in acknowledgment of His title.  It is man only
that has the impudence to demand our whole time, though he neither
gave it, nor can restore it, nor is able to pay any considerable
value for the least part of it.  This birthright of mankind above
all other creatures some are forced by hunger to sell, like Esau,
for bread and broth; but the greatest part of men make such a
bargain for the delivery up of themselves, as Thamar did with Judah;
instead of a kid, the necessary provisions for human life, they are
contented to do it for rings and bracelets.  The great dealers in
this world may be divided into the ambitious, the covetous, and the
voluptuous; and that all these men sell themselves to be slaves--
though to the vulgar it may seem a Stoical paradox--will appear to
the wise so plain and obvious that they will scarce think it
deserves the labour of argumentation.  Let us first consider the
ambitious; and those, both in their progress to greatness, and after
the attaining of it.  There is nothing truer than what Sallust says:
"Dominationis in alios servitium suum, mercedem dant":  They are
content to pay so great a price as their own servitude to purchase
the domination over others.  The first thing they must resolve to
sacrifice is their whole time; they must never stop, nor ever turn
aside whilst they are in the race of glory; no, not like Atalanta
for golden apples; "Neither indeed can a man stop himself, if he
would, when he is in this, career.  Fertur equis auriga neque audit
currus habenas.

Pray let us but consider a little what mean, servile things men do
for this imaginary food.  We cannot fetch a greater example of it
than from the chief men of that nation which boasted most of
liberty.  To what pitiful baseness did the noblest Romans submit
themselves for the obtaining of a praetorship, or the consular
dignity?  They put on the habit of suppliants, and ran about, on
foot and in dirt, through all the tribes to beg voices; they
flattered the poorest artisans, and carried a nomenclator with them,
to whisper in their ear every man's name, lest they should mistake
it in their salutations; they shook the hand, and kissed the cheek
of every popular tradesman; they stood all day at every market in
the public places, to show and ingratiate themselves to the rout;
they employed all their friends to solicit for them; they kept open
tables in every street; they distributed wine, and bread, and money,
even to the vilest of the people.  En Romanos, rerum Dorninos!
Behold the masters of the world beginning from door to door.  This
particular humble way to greatness is now out of fashion, but yet
every ambitious person is still in some sort a Roman candidate.  He
must feast and bribe, and attend and flatter, and adore many beasts,
though not the beast with many heads.  Catiline, who was so proud
that he could not content himself with a less power than Sylla's,
was yet so humble for the attaining of it, as to make himself the
most contemptible of all servants, to be a public bawd for all the
young gentlemen of Rome whose hot lusts, and courages, and heads, he
thought he might make use of.  And since I happen here to propose
Catiline for my instance, though there be thousand of examples for
the same thing, give me leave to transcribe the character which
Cicero gives of this noble slave, because it is a general
description of all ambitious men, and which Machiavel perhaps would
say ought to be the rule of their life and actions.  "This man,"
says he, as most of you may well remember, "had many artificial
touches and strokes that looked like the beauty of great virtues;
his intimate conversation was with the worst of men, and yet he
seemed to be an admirer and lover of the best; he was furnished with
all the nets of lust and luxury, and yet wanted not the arms of
labour and industry:  neither do I believe that there was ever any
monster in nature, composed out of so many different and disagreeing
parts.  Who more acceptable, sometimes, to the most honourable
persons? who more a favourite to the most infamous? who, sometimes,
appeared a braver champion? who, at other times, a bolder enemy to
his country? who more dissolute in his pleasures? who more patient
in his toils? who more rapacious in robbing? who more profuse in
giving?  Above all things, this was remarkable and admirable in him.
The arts he had to acquire the good opinion and kindness of all
sorts of men, to retain it with great complaisance, to communicate
all things to them, to watch and serve all the occasions of their
fortune, both with his money and his interest, and his industry, and
if need were, not by sticking at any wickedness whatsoever that
might be useful to them, to bend and turn about his own nature and
laveer with every wind, to live severely with the melancholy,
merrily with the pleasant, gravely with the aged, wantonly with the
young, desperately with the bold, and debauchedly with the
luxurious.  With this variety and multiplicity of his nature, as he
had made a collection of friendships with all the most wicked and
reckless of all nations, so, by the artificial simulation of some
virtues, he made a shift to ensnare some honest and eminent persons
into his familiarity; neither could so vast a design as the
destruction of this empire have been undertaken by him, if the
immanity of so many vices had not been covered and disguised by the
appearances of some excellent qualities."

I see, methinks, the character of an Anti-Paul, who became all
things to all men, that he might destroy all; who only wanted the
assistance of fortune to have been as great as his friend Caesar
was, a little after him.  And the ways of Caesar to compass the same
ends--I mean till the civil war, which was but another manner of
setting his country on fire--were not unlike these, though he used
afterward his unjust dominion with more moderation than I think the
other would have done.  Sallust, therefore, who was well acquainted
with them both and with many such-like gentlemen of his time, says,
"That it is the nature of ambition"  (Ambitio multos mortales falsos
fieri coegit, etc.) "to make men liars and cheaters; to hide the
truth in their breasts, and show, like jugglers, another thing in
their mouths; to cut all friendships and enmities to the measure of
their own interest, and to make a good countenance without the help
of good will."  And can there be freedom with this perpetual
constraint?  What is it but a kind of rack that forces men to say
what they have no mind to?  I have wondered at the extravagant and
barbarous stratagem of Zopirus, and more at the praises which I find
of so deformed an action; who, though he was one of the seven
grandees of Persia, and the son of Megabises, who had freed before
his country from an ignoble servitude, slit his own nose and lips,
cut off his own ears, scourged and wounded his whole body, that he
might, under pretence of having been mangled so inhumanly by Darius,
be received into Babylon (then besieged by the Persians) and get
into the command of it by the recommendation of so cruel a
sufferance, and their hopes of his endeavouring to revenge it.  It
is a great pity the Babylonians suspected not his falsehood, that
they might have cut off his hands too, and whipped him back again.
But the design succeeded; he betrayed the city, and was made
governor of it.  What brutish master ever punished his offending
slave with so little mercy as ambition did this Zopirus? and yet how
many are there in all nations who imitate him in some degree for a
less reward; who, though they endure not so much corporal pain for a
small preferment, or some honour, as they call it, yet stick not to
commit actions, by which they are more shamefully and more lastingly
stigmatised?  But you may say, "Though these be the most ordinary
and open ways to greatness, yet there are narrow, thorny, and
little-trodden paths, too, through which some men find a passage by
virtuous industry."  I grant, sometimes they may; but then that
industry must be such as cannot consist with liberty, though it may
with honesty.

Thou art careful, frugal, painful.  We commend a servant so, but not
a friend.

Well, then, we must acknowledge the toil and drudgery which we are
forced to endure in this assent, but we are epicures and lords when
once we are gotten up into the high places.  This is but a short
apprenticeship, after which we are made free of a royal company.  If
we fall in love with any beauteous woman, we must be content that
they should be our mistresses whilst we woo them.  As soon as we are
wedded and enjoy, 'tis we shall be the masters.

I am willing to stick to this similitude in the case of greatness:
we enter into the bonds of it, like those of matrimony; we are
bewitched with the outward and painted beauty, and take it for
better or worse before we know its true nature and interior
inconveniences.  "A great fortune," says Seneca, "is a great
servitude."  But many are of that opinion which Brutus imputes (I
hope untruly) even to that patron of liberty, his friend Cicero.
"We fear," says he to Atticus, "death, and banishment, and poverty,
a great deal too much.  Cicero, I am afraid, thinks these to be the
worst of evils, and if he have but some persons from whom he can
obtain what he has a mind to, and others who will flatter and
worship him, seems to be well enough contented with an honourable
servitude, if anything, indeed, ought to be called honourable in so
base and contumelious a condition."  This was spoken as became the
bravest man who was ever born in the bravest commonwealth.  But with
us, generally, no condition passes for servitude that is accompanied
with great riches, with honours, and with the service of many
inferiors.  This is but a deception the sight through a false
medium; for if a groom serve a gentleman in his chamber, that
gentleman a lord, and that lord a prince, the groom, the gentleman,
and the lord are as much servants one as the other.  The
circumstantial difference of the one getting only his bread and
wages, the second a plentiful, and the third a superfluous estate,
is no more intrinsical to this matter than the difference between a
plain, a rich and gaudy livery.  I do not say that he who sells his
whole time and his own will for one hundred thousand is not a wiser
merchant than he who does it for one hundred pounds; but I will
swear they are both merchants, and that he is happier than both who
can live contentedly without selling that estate to which he was
born.  But this dependence upon superiors is but one chain of the
lovers of power, Amatorem trecentae Pirithoum cohibent catenae.  Let
us begin with him by break of day, for by that time he is besieged
by two or three hundred suitors, and the hall and anti-chambers (all
the outworks) possessed by the enemy; as soon as his chamber opens,
they are ready to break into that, or to corrupt the guards for
entrance.  This is so essential a part of greatness, that whosoever
is without it looks like a fallen favourite, like a person
disgraced, and condemned to do what he please all the morning.
There are some who, rather than want this, are contented to have
their rooms filled up every day with murmuring and cursing
creditors, and to charge bravely through a body of them to get to
their coach.  Now I would fain know which is the worst duty, that of
any one particular person who waits to speak with the great man, or
the great man's, who waits every day to speak with all the company.
Aliena negotia centum Per caput et circum saliunt latus:  A hundred
businesses of other men (many unjust and most impertinent) fly
continually about his head and ears, and strike him in the face like
dors.  Let us contemplate him a little at another special scene of
glory, and that is his table.  Here he seems to be the lord of all
Nature.  The earth affords him her best metals for his dishes, her
best vegetables and animals for his food; the air and sea supply him
with their choicest birds and fishes; and a great many men who look
like masters attend upon him; and yet, when all this is done, even
all this is but Table d'Hote.  It is crowded with people for whom he
cares not--with many parasites, and some spies, with the most
burdensome sort of guests--the endeavourers to be witty.

But everybody pays him great respect, everybody commends his meat--
that is, his money; everybody admires the exquisite dressing and
ordering of it--that is, his clerk of the kitchen, or his cook;
everybody loves his hospitality--that is, his vanity.  But I desire
to know why the honest innkeeper who provides a public table for his
profits should be but of a mean profession, and he who does it for
his honour a munificent prince.  You'll say, because one sells and
the other gives.  Nay, both sell, though for different things--the
one for plain money, the other for I know not what jewels, whose
value is in custom and in fancy.  If, then, his table be made a
snare (as the Scripture speaks) to his liberty, where can he hope
for freedom? there is always and everywhere some restraint upon him.
He is guarded with crowds, and shackled with formalities.  The half
hat, the whole hat, the half smile, the whole smile, the nod, the
embrace, the positive parting with a little bow, the comparative at
the middle of the room, the superlative at the door; and if the
person be Pan huper sebastos, there's a Huper superlative ceremony
then of conducting him to the bottom of the stairs, or to the very
gate:  as if there were such rules set to these Leviathans as are to
the sea, "Hitherto shalt thou go, and no further."  Perditur haec
inter misero Lux.  Thus wretchedly the precious day is lost.

How many impertinent letters and visits must he receive, and
sometimes answer both too as impertinently?  He never sets his foot
beyond his threshold, unless, like a funeral, he hath a train to
follow him, as if, like the dead corpse, he could not stir till the
bearers were all ready.  "My life," says Horace, speaking to one of
these magnificos, "is a great deal more easy and commodious than
thine, in that I can go into the market and cheapen what I please
without being wondered at; and take my horse and ride as far as
Tarentum without being missed."  It is an unpleasant constraint to
be always under the sight and observation and censure of others; as
there may be vanity in it, so, methinks, there should be vexation
too of spirit.  And I wonder how princes can endure to have two or
three hundred men stand gazing upon them whilst they are at dinner,
and taking notice of every bit they eat.  Nothing seems greater and
more lordly than the multitude of domestic servants, but, even this
too, if weighed seriously, is a piece of servitude; unless you will
be a servant to them, as many men are, the trouble and care of yours
in the government of them all, is much more than that of every one
of them in their observation of you.  I take the profession of a
schoolmaster to be one of the most useful, and which ought to be of
the most honourable in a commonwealth, yet certainly all his farces
and tyrannical authority over so many boys takes away his own
liberty more than theirs.

I do but slightly touch upon all these particulars of the slavery of
greatness; I shake but a few of their outward chains; their anger,
hatred, jealousy, fear, envy, grief, and all the et cetera of their
passions, which are the secret but constant tyrants and torturers of
their life.  I omit here, because though they be symptoms most
frequent and violent in this disease, yet they are common too in
some degree to the epidemical disease of life itself.  But the
ambitious man, though he be so many ways a slave (O toties servus!),
yet he bears it bravely and heroically; he struts and looks big upon
the stage, he thinks himself a real prince in his masking habit, and
deceives too all the foolish part of his spectators.  He's a slave
in Saturnalibus.  The covetous man is a downright servant, a draught
horse without bells or feathers; ad metalla damnatus, a man
condemned to work in mines, which is the lowest and hardest
condition of servitude; and, to increase his misery, a worker there
for he knows not whom.  He heapeth up riches and knows not who shall
enjoy them; 'tis only that he himself neither shall nor can enjoy
them.  He is an indigent needy slave, he will hardly allow himself
clothes and board wages; Unciatim vix demenso de suo suum defraudans
Genium comparsit niser.  He defrauds not only other men, but his own
genius.  He cheats himself for money.  But the servile and miserable
condition of this wretch is so apparent, that I leave it, as evident
to every man's sight, as well as judgment.  It seems a more
difficult work to prove that the voluptuous man too is but a
servant.  What can be more the life of a freeman, or, as we say
ordinarily, of a gentleman, than to follow nothing but his own
pleasures?  Why, I'll tell you who is that true freeman and that
true gentleman; not he who blindly follows all his pleasures (the
very name of follower is servile), but he who rationally guides
them, and is not hindered by outward impediments in the conduct and
enjoyment of them.  If I want skill or force to restrain the beast
that I ride upon, though I bought it, and call it my own, yet in the
truth of the matter I am at that time rather his man than he my
horse.  The voluptuous men (whom we are fallen upon) may be divided,
I think, into the lustful and luxurious, who are both servants of
the belly; the other whom we spoke of before, the ambitious and the
covetous, were [Greek text], evil wild beasts; these are [Greek
text], slow bellies, as our translation renders it; but the word
[Greek text] (which is a fantastical word with two directly opposite
significations) will bear as well the translation of quick or
diligent bellies, and both interpretations may be applied to these
men.  Metrodorus said, "That he had learnt [Greek text], to give his
belly just thanks for all his pleasures."  This by the calumniators
of Epicurus his philosophy was objected as one of the most
scandalous of all their sayings, which, according to my charitable
understanding, may admit a very virtuous sense, which is, that he
thanked his own belly for that moderation in the customary appetites
of it, which can only give a man liberty and happiness in this
world.  Let this suffice at present to be spoken of those great
trinmviri of the world; the covetous man, who is a mean villain,
like Lepidus; the ambitious, who is a brave one, like Octavius; and
the voluptuous, who is a loose and debauched one, like Mark Antony.
Quisnam igitur Li