ber?  Sapiens, sibi qui Imperiosus.  Not Oenomaus,
who commits himself wholly to a charioteer that may break his neck,
but the man


Who governs his own course with steady hand,
Who does himself with sovereign power command;
Whom neither death nor poverty does fright,
Who stands not awkwardly in his own light
Against the truth:  who can, when pleasures knock
Loud at his door, keep firm the bolt and lock.
Who can, though honour at his gate should stay
In all her masking clothes, send her away,
And cry, Begone, I have no mind to play.


This I confess is a freeman; but it may be said that many persons
are so shackled by their fortune that they are hindered from
enjoyment of that manumission which they have obtained from virtue.
I do both understand, and in part feel the weight of this objection.
All I can answer to it is, "That we must get as much liberty as we
can; we must use our utmost endeavours, and when all that is done,
be contented with the length of that line which is allowed us."  If
you ask me in what condition of life I think the most allowed, I
should pitch upon that sort of people whom King James was wont to
call the happiest of our nation, the men placed in the country by
their fortune above an high constable, and yet beneath the trouble
of a justice of the peace, in a moderate plenty, without any just
argument for the desire of increasing it by the care of many
relations, and with so much knowledge and love of piety and
philosophy (that is, of the study of God's laws and of his
creatures) as may afford him matter enough never to be idle though
without business, and never to be melancholy though without sin or
vanity.

I shall conclude this tedious discourse with a prayer of mine in a
copy of Latin verses, of which I remember no other part, and (pour
faire bonne bouche) with some other verses upon the same subject.


Magne Deus, quod ad has vitae brevis attinet boras,
Da mihi, da Pancin Libertatemque, nec ultra
Sollicitas effundo preces, si quid datur ultra
Accipiam gratus; si non, contentus abibo.

For the few hours of life allotted me,
Give me, great God, but Bread and Liberty,
I'll beg no more; if more thou'rt pleased to give,
I'll thankfully that overplus receive.
If beyond this no more be freely sent,
I'll thank for this, and go away content.


MARTIAL.  LIB. 2.
Vota tui breviter, etc.


Well then, sir, you shall know how far extend,
The prayers and hopes of your poetic friend.
He does not palaces nor manors crave,
Would be no lord, but less a lord would have.
The ground he holds, if he his own can call,
He quarrels not with Heaven because 'tis small:
Let gay and toilsome greatness others please,
He loves of homely littleness the ease.
Can any man in gilded rooms attend,
And his dear hours in humble visits spend,
When in the fresh and beauteous fields he may
With various healthful pleasures fill the day?
If there be man, ye gods, I ought to hate,
Dependence and attendance be his fate.
Still let him busy be, and in a crowd,
And very much a slave, and very proud:
Thus he, perhaps, powerful and rich may grow;
No matter, O ye gods! that I'll allow.
But let him peace and freedom never see;
Let him not love this life, who loves not me.


MARTIAL LIB. 2.
Vis fieri Liber, etc.


Would you be free?  'Tis your chief wish, you say,
Come on; I'll show thee, friend, the certain way.
If to no feasts abroad thou lov'st to go,
Whilst bounteous God does bread at home bestow;
If thou the goodness of thy clothes dost prize
By thine own use, and not by others' eyes;
If, only safe from weathers, thou canst dwell
In a small house, but a convenient shell;
If thou without a sigh, or golden wish,
Canst look upon thy beechen bowl and dish;
If in thy mind such power and greatness be -
The Persian King's a slave compared with thee.


MARTIAL.  L. 2.
Quod to nomine? etc.


That I do you with humble bows no more,
And danger of my naked head, adore;
That I, who lord and master cried erewhile,
Salute you in a new and different style,
By your own name, a scandal to you now;
Think not that I forget myself or you:
By loss of all things by all others sought
This freedom, and the freeman's hat, is bought.
A lord and master no man wants but he
Who o'er himself has no authority,
Who does for honours and for riches strive,
And follies without which lords cannot live.
If thou from fortune dost no servant crave,
Believe it, thou no master need'st to have.


ODE UPON LIBERTY.


I.

Freedom with virtue takes her seat;
Her proper place, her only scene,
   Is in the golden mean,
She lives not with the poor, nor with the great:
The wings of those, Necessity has clipped,
   And they're in Fortune's Bridewell whipped,
   To the laborious task of bread;
These are by various tyrants captive led.
Now wild Ambition with imperious force
Rides, reins, and spurs them like th' unruly horse;
   And servile Avarice yokes them now
   Like toilsome oxen to the plough;
And sometimes Lust, like the misguiding light,
Draws them through all the labyrinths of night.
If any few among the great there be
   From the insulting passions free,
   Yet we even those too fettered see
By custom, business, crowds, and formal decency;
And wheresoe'er they stay, and wheresoe'er they go,
   Impertinences round them flow.
   These are the small uneasy things
   Which about greatness still are found,
   And rather it molest than wound
Like gnats which too much heat of summer brings;
But cares do swarm there too, and those have stings:
As when the honey does too open lie,
   A thousand wasps about it fly
Nor will the master even to share admit;
The master stands aloof, and dares not taste of it.

II.

'Tis morning, well, I fain would yet sleep on;
   You cannot now; you must be gone
   To Court, or to the noisy hail
Besides, the rooms without are crowded all;
   The steam of business does begin,
And a springtide of clients is come in.
Ah, cruel guards, which this poor prisoner keep,
   Will they not suffer him to sleep!
Make an escape; out at the postern flee,
And get some blessed hours of liberty.
With a few friends, and a few dishes dine,
   And much of mirth and moderate wine;
To thy bent mind some relaxation give,
And steal one day out of thy life to live.
Oh happy man, he cries, to whom kind Heaven
   Has such a freedom always given
Why, mighty madman, what should hinder thee
From being every day as free?

III.

In all the freeborn nations of the air,
Never did bird a spirit so mean and sordid bear
As to exchange his native liberty
Of soaring boldly up into the sky,
His liberty to sing, to perch, or fly
When, and wherever he thought good,
And all his innocent pleasures of the wood,
For a more plentiful or constant food.
   Nor ever did ambitious rage
   Make him into a painted cage
Or the false forest of a well-hung room
   For honour and preferment come.
Now, blessings on ye all, ye heroic race,
Who keep their primitive powers and rights so well
   Though men and angels fell.
Of all material lives the highest place
   To you is justly given,
   And ways and walks the nearest Heaven;
Whilst wretched we, yet vain and proud, think fit
   To boast that we look up to it.
Even to the universal tyrant Love
   You homage pay but once a year;
None so degenerous and unbirdly prove,
   As his perpetual yoke to bear.
None but a few unhappy household fowl,
   Whom human lordship does control;
   Who from their birth corrupted were
By bondage, and by man's example here.

IV.

He's no small prince who every day
   Thus to himself can say,
Now will I sleep, now eat, now sit, now walk,
Now meditate alone, now with acquaintance talk;
This I will do, here I will stay,
Or, if my fancy call me away,
My man and I will presently go ride
(For we before have nothing to provide,
Nor after are to render an account)
To Dover, Berwick, or the Cornish Mount.
   If thou but a short journey take,
   As if thy last thou wert to make,
Business must be despatched ere thou canst part.
   Nor canst thou stir unless there be
   A hundred horse and men to wait on thee,
   And many a mule, and many a cart:
   What an unwieldy man thou art!
   The Rhodian Colossus so
   A journey too might go.

V.

Where honour or where conscience does not bind,
   No other law shall shackle me?
   Slave to myself I will not be,
Nor shall my future actions be confined
   By my own present mind.
Who by resolves and vows engaged does stand
   For days that yet belong to fate,
Does like an unthrift mortgage his estate
   Before it falls into his hand;
   The bondman of the cloister so
All that he does receive does always owe.
And still as time come in it goes away,
   Not to enjoy, but debts to pay.
Unhappy slave, and pupil to a bell
Which his hour's work, as well as hour's does tell!
Unhappy till the last, the kind releasing knell.

VI.

If Life should a well-ordered poem be
   (In which he only hits the white
Who joins true profit with the best delight),
The more heroic strain let others take,
   Mine the Pindaric way I'll make,
The matter shall be grave, the numbers loose and free.
It shall not keep one settled pace of time,
In the same tune it shall not always chime,
Nor shall each day just to his neighbour rhyme.
A thousand liberties it shall dispense,
And yet shall manage all without offence
Or to the sweetness of the sound, or greatness of the sense;
Nor shall it never from one subject start,
   Nor seek transitions to depart,
Nor its set way o'er stiles and bridges make,
   Nor thorough lanes a compass take
As if it feared some trespass to commit,
   When the wide air's a road for it.
So time imperial eagle does not stay
   Till the whole carcase he devour
   That's fallen into its power;
As if his generous hunger understood
That he can never want plenty of food,
   He only sucks the tasteful blood,
And to fresh game flies cheerfully away;
To kites and meaner birds he leaves the mangled prey.



OF SOLITUDE.



"Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solis," is now become a very vulgar
saying.  Every man and almost every boy for these seventeen hundred
years has had it in his mouth.  But it was at first spoken by the
excellent Scipio, who was without question a most worthy, most
happy, and the greatest of all mankind.  His meaning no doubt was
this:  that he found more satisfaction to his mind, and more
improvement of it by solitude than by company; and to show that he
spoke not this loosely or out of vanity, after he had made Rome
mistress of almost the whole world, he retired himself from it by a
voluntary exile, and at a private house in the middle of a wood near
Linternum passed the remainder of his glorious life no less
gloriously.  This house Seneca went to see so long after with great
veneration, and, among other things, describes his bath to have been
of so mean a structure, that now, says he, the basest of the people
would despise them, and cry out, "Poor Scipio understood not how to
live."  What an authority is here for the credit of retreat! and
happy had it been for Hannibal if adversity could have taught him as
much wisdom as was learnt by Scipio from the highest prosperities.
This would be no wonder if it were as truly as it is colourably and
wittily said by Monsieur de Montaigne, that ambition itself might
teach us to love solitude:  there is nothing does so much hate to
have companions.  It is true, it loves to have its elbows free, it
detests to have company on either side, but it delights above all
things in a train behind, aye, and ushers, too, before it.  But the
greater part of men are so far from the opinion of that noble Roman,
that if they chance at any time to be without company they are like
a becalmed ship; they never move but by the wind of other men's
breath, and have no oars of their own to steer withal.  It is very
fantastical and contradictory in human nature, that men should love
themselves above all the rest of the world, and yet never endure to
be with themselves.  When they are in love with a mistress, all
other persons are importunate and burdensome to them.  "Tecum vivere
amem, tecum obeam lubens,"  They would live and die with her alone.


Sic ego secretis possum bene vevere silvis
   Qua nulla humauo sit via trita pede,
Tu mihi curarum requies, tu nocte vel atra
   Lumen, et in solis tu mihi terba locis.

With thee for ever I in woods could rest,
Where never human foot the ground has pressed;
Thou from all shades the darkness canst exclude,
And from a desert banish solitude.


And yet our dear self is so wearisome to us that we can scarcely
support its conversation for an hour together.  This is such an odd
temper of mind as Catullus expresses towards one of his mistresses,
whom we may suppose to have been of a very unsociable humour.


Odi et Amo, qua nam id faciam ratione requiris?
Nescio, sed fieri sentio, et excrucior.

I hate, and yet I love thee too;
How can that be?  I know not how;
Only that so it is I know,
And feel with torment that 'tis so.


It is a deplorable condition this, and drives a man sometimes to
pitiful shifts in seeking how to avoid himself.

The truth of the matter is, that neither he who is a fop in the
world is a fit man to be alone, nor he who has set his heart much
upon the world, though he has ever so much understanding; so that
solitude can be well fitted and set right but upon a very few
persons.  They must have enough knowledge of the world to see the
vanity of it, and enough virtue to despise all vanity; if the mind
be possessed with any lust or passions, a man had better be in a
fair than in a wood alone.  They may, like petty thieves, cheat us
perhaps, and pick our pockets in the midst of company, but like
robbers, they use to strip and bind, or murder us when they catch us
alone.  This is but to retreat from men, and fall into the hands of
devils.  It is like the punishment of parricides among the Romans,
to be sewed into a bag with an ape, a dog, and a serpent.  The first
work, therefore, that a man must do to make himself capable of the
good of solitude is the very eradication of all lusts, for how is it
possible for a man to enjoy himself while his affections are tied to
things without himself?  In the second place, he must learn the art
and get the habit of thinking; for this too, no less than well
speaking, depends upon much practice; and cogitation is the thing
which distinguishes the solitude of a god from a wild beast.  Now
because the soul of man is not by its own nature or observation
furnished with sufficient materials to work upon; it is necessary
for it to have continual resource to learning and books for fresh
supplies, so that the solitary life will grow indigent, and be ready
to starve without them; but if once we be thoroughly engaged in the
love of letters, instead of being wearied with the length of any
day, we shall only complain of the shortness of our whole life.


   O vita, stulto longa, sapienti brevis!
O life, long to the fool, short to the wise!


The First Minister of State has not so much business in public as a
wise man has in private; if the one have little leisure to be alone,
the other has less leisure to be in company; the one has but part of
the affairs of one nation, the other all the works of God and nature
under his consideration.  There is no saying shocks me so much as
that which I hear very often, "That a man does not know how to pass
his time."  It would have been but ill spoken by Methusalem in the
nine hundred and sixty-ninth year of his life, so far it is from us,
who have not time enough to attain to the utmost perfection of any
part of any science, to have cause to complain that we are forced to
be idle for want of work.  But this you will say is work only for
the learned, others are not capable either of the employments or the
divertisements that arise from letters.  I know they are not, and
therefore cannot much recommend solitude to a man totally
illiterate.  But if any man be so unlearned as to want entertainment
of the little intervals of accidental solitude, which frequently
occur in almost all conditions (except the very meanest of the
people, who have business enough in the necessary provisions for
life), it is truly a great shame both to his parents and himself;
for a very small portion of any ingenious art will stop up all those
gaps of our time, either music, or painting, or designing, or
chemistry, or history, or gardening, or twenty other things, will do
it usefully and pleasantly; and if he happen to set his affections
upon poetry (which I do not advise him too immoderately) that will
overdo it; no wood will be thick enough to hide him from the
importunities of company or business, which would abstract him from
his beloved.


- O quis me geldis sub montibus Haemi
Sistat, et ingenti ramorum protegat umbra?

I.

Hail, old patrician trees, so great and good!
   Hail, ye plebeian underwood!
   Where the poetic birds rejoice,
And for their quiet nests and plenteous food
   Pay with their grateful voice.

II.

Hail, the poor Muses' richest manor seat!
   Ye country houses and retreat
   Which all the happy gods so love,
That for you oft they quit their bright and great
   Metropolis above.

III.

Here Nature does a house for me erect,
   Nature the wisest architect,
   Who those fond artists does despise
That can the fair and living trees neglect,
   Yet the dead timber prize.

IV.

Here let me, careless and unthoughtful lying,
   Hear the soft winds, above me flying,
   With all their wanton boughs dispute,
And the more tuneful birds to both replying,
   Nor be myself too mute.

V.

A silver stream shall roll his waters near,
   Gilt with the sunbeams here and there,
   On whose enamelled bank I'll walk,
And see how prettily they smile, and hear
   How prettily they talk.

VI.

Ah wretched, and too solitary he
   Who loves not his own company!
   He'll feel the weight of't many a day,
Unless he call in sin or vanity
   To help to bear't away.

VII.

Oh solitude, first state of human-kind!
   Which blest remained till man did find
   Even his own helper's company.
As soon as two, alas, together joined,
   The serpent made up three.

VIII.

Though God himself, through countless ages, thee
   His sole companion chose to be,
   Thee, sacred Solitude alone;
Before the branchy head of numbers Three
   Sprang from the trunk of One.

IX.

Thou (though men think thine an unactive part)
   Dost break and tame th' unruly heart,
   Which else would know no settled pace,
Making it move, well managed by thy art
   With swiftness and with grace.

X.

Thou the faint beams of Reason's scattered light
   Dost like a burning glass unite;
   Dost multiply the feeble heat,
And fortify the strength, till thou dost bright
   And noble fires beget.

XI.

Whilst this hard truth I teach, methinks, I see
   The monster London laugh at me;
   I should at thee too, foolish city,
If it were fit to laugh at misery.
   But thy estate, I pity.

XII.

Let but thy wicked men from out thee go,
   And the fools that crowd thee so, -
   Even thou, who dost thy millions boast,
A village less than Islington wilt grow,
   A solitude almost.



OF OBSCURITY.



Nam neque divitibus contingunt gaudia solis,
Nec vixit male, qui natus moriensque fefellit.

God made not pleasures only for the rich,
Nor have those men without their share too lived,
Who both in life and death the world deceived.

This seems a strange sentence thus literally translated, and looks
as if it were in vindication of the men of business (for who else
can deceive the world?) whereas it is in commendation of those who
live and die so obscurely, that the world takes no notice of them.
This Horace calls deceiving the world, and in another place uses the
same phrase.


Secretum iter et fallentis semita vitae.
The secret tracks of the deceiving life.


It is very elegant in Latin, but our English word will hardly bear
up to that sense, and therefore Mr. Broome translates it very well:


Or from a life, led as it were by stealth.


Yet we say in our language, a thing deceives our sight, when it
passes before us unperceived, and we may say well enough out of the
same author:


Sometimes with sleep, sometimes with wine we strive
The cares of life and troubles to deceive.


But that is not to deceive the world, but to deceive ourselves, as
Quintilian says, Vitam fallere, To draw on still, and amuse, and
deceive our life, till it be advanced insensibly to the fatal
period, and fall into that pit which Nature hath prepared for it.
The meaning of all this is no more than that most vulgar saying,
Bene qui latuit, bene vixit, He has lived well, who has lain well
hidden.  Which, if it be a truth, the world, I'll swear, is
sufficiently deceived.  For my part, I think it is, and that the
pleasantest condition of life, is in incognito.  What a brave
privilege is it to be free from all contentions, from all envying or
being envied, from receiving and from paying all kind of ceremonies?
It is in my mind a very delightful pastime, for two good and
agreeable friends to travel up and down together in places where
they are by nobody known, nor know anybody.  It was the case of
AEneas and his Achates, when they walked invisibly about the fields
and streets of Carthage, Venus herself


A veil of thickened air around them cast,
That none might know, or see them as they passed.


The common story of Demosthenes's confession that he had taken great
pleasure in hearing of a Tanker-woman say as he passed, "This is
that Demosthenes," is wonderful ridiculous from so solid an orator.
I myself have often met with that temptation to vanity (if it were
any), but am so far from finding it any pleasure, that it only makes
me run faster from the place, till I get, as it were, out of sight
shot.  Democritus relates, and in such a manner, as if he gloried in
the good fortune and commodity of it, that when he came to Athens,
nobody there did so much as take notice of him; and Epicurus lived
there very well, that is, lay hid many years in his gardens, so
famous since that time, with his friend Metrodorus:  after whose
death, making in one of his letters a kind commemoration of the
happiness which they two had enjoyed together, he adds at last, that
he thought it no disparagement to those great felicities of their
life, that in the midst of the most talked of and talking country in
the world, they had lived so long, not only without fame, but almost
without being heard of.  And yet within a very few years afterward,
there were no two names of men more known or more generally
celebrated.  If we engage into a large acquaintance and various
familiarities, we set open our gates to the invaders of most of our
time:  we expose our life to a Quotidian Ague of frigid
impertinences, which would make a wise man tremble to think of.
Now, as for being known much by sight, and pointed at, I cannot
comprehend the honour that lies in that.  Whatsoever it be, every
mountebank has it more than the best doctor, and the hangman more
than the Lord Chief Justice of a city.  Every creature has it both
of nature and art if it be any ways extraordinary.  It was as often
said, "This is that Bucephalus," or, "This is that Incitatus," when
they were led prancing through the streets, as "This is that
Alexander," or, "This is that Domitian"; and truly for the latter, I
take Incitatus to have been a much more honourable beast than his
master, and more deserving the consulship than he the empire.  I
love and commend a true good fame, because it is the shadow of
virtue; not that it doth any good to the body which it accompanies,
but 'tis an efficacious shadow, and like that of St. Peter cures the
diseases of others.  The best kind of glory, no doubt, is that which
is reflected from honesty, such as was the glory of Cato and
Aristides, but it was harmful to them both, and is seldom beneficial
to any man whilst he lives; what it is to him after his death, I
cannot say, because I love not philosophy merely notional and
conjectural, and no man who has made the experiment has been so kind
as to come back to inform us.  Upon the whole matter, I account a
person who has a moderate mind and fortune, and lives in the
conversation of two or three agreeable friends, with little commerce
in the world besides; who is esteemed well enough by his few
neighbours that know him, and is truly irreproachable by anybody;
and so after a healthful quiet life, before the great inconveniences
of old age, goes more silently out of it than he came in (for I
would not have him so much as cry in the exit); this innocent
deceiver of the word, as Horace calls him, this Muta Persona, I take
to have been more happy in his part, than the greatest actors that
fill the stage with show and noise, nay, even than Augustus himself,
who asked with his last breath, whether he had not played his farce
very well.


Seneca, ex Thyeste,
Act 2.  Chor.
Stet quicunque volet, potens,
Aulae culmine lubrico; etc.

Upon the slippery tops of human state,
   The gilded pinnacles of fate,
Let others proudly stand, and for a while,
   The giddy danger to beguile,
With joy and with disdain look down on all,
   Till their heads turn, and down they fall.
Me, O ye gods, on earth, or else so near
   That I no fall to earth may fear,
And, O ye gods, at a good distance seat
   From the long ruins of the great!
Here wrapped in the arms of quiet let me lie,
Quiet, companion of obscurity.
Here let my life, with as much silence slide,
   As time that measures it does glide.
Nor let the breath of infamy or fame,
From town to town echo about my name;
Nor let my homely death embroidered be
   With scutcheon or with elegy.
   An old plebeian let me die,
Alas, all then are such, as well as I.
   To him, alas, to him, I fear,
The face of death will terrible appear;
Who in his life, flattering his senseless pride
By being known to all the world beside,
Does not himself, when he is dying, know;
Nor what he is, nor whither he's to go.



OF AGRICULTURE.



The first wish of Virgil (as you will find anon by his verses), was
to be a good philosopher; the second, a good husbandman; and God
(whom he seemed to understand better than most of the most learned
heathens) dealt with him just as he did with Solomon:  because he
prayed for wisdom in the first place, he added all things else which
were subordinately to be desired.  He made him one of the best
philosophers, and best husbandmen, and to adorn and communicate both
those faculties, the best poet.  He made him, besides all this, a
rich man, and a man who desired to be no richer, O fortunatas nimium
et bona qui sua novit.  To be a husbandman, is but a retreat from
the city; to be a philosopher, from the world; or rather, a retreat
from the world, as it is Man's--into the world, as it is God's.  But
since Nature denies to most men the capacity or appetite, and
Fortune allows but to a very few the opportunities or possibility,
of applying themselves wholly to philosophy, the best mixture of
human affairs that we can make are the employments of a country
life.  It is, as Columella calls it, Res sine dubitatione proxima et
quasi consanguinea sapientiae, the nearest neighbour, or rather next
in kindred to Philosophy.  Varro says the principles of it are the
same which Ennius made to be the principles of all nature; earth,
water, air, and the sun.  It does certainly comprehend more parts of
philosophy than any one profession, art, or science in the world
besides; and, therefore, Cicero says, the pleasures of a husbandman,
Mihi ad sapientis vitam proxime videntur aecedere, come very nigh to
those of a philosopher.  There is no other sort of life that affords
so many branches of praise to a panegyrist:  The utility of it to a
man's self; the usefulness, or, rather, necessity of it to all the
rest of mankind; the innocence, the pleasure, the antiquity, the
dignity.  The utility (I mean plainly the lucre of it) is not so
great now in our nation as arises from merchandise and the trading
of the city, from whence many of the best estates and chief honours
of the kingdom are derived; we have no men now fetched from the
plough to be made lords, as they were in Rome to be made consuls and
dictators, the reason of which I conceive to be from an evil custom
now grown as strong among us as if it were a law, which is, that no
men put their children to be bred up apprentices in agriculture, as
in other trades, but such who are so poor, that when they come to be
men they have not wherewithal to set up in it, and so can only farm
some small parcel of ground, the rent of which devours all but the
bare subsistence of the tenant; whilst they who are proprietors of
the land are either too proud or, for want of that kind of
education, too ignorant to improve their estates, though the means
of doing it be as easy and certain in this as in any other track of
commerce.  If there were always two or three thousand youths, for
seven or eight years bound to this profession, that they might learn
the whole art of it, and afterwards be enabled to be masters in it,
by a moderate stock, I cannot doubt but that we should see as many
aldermen's estates made in the country as now we do out of all kind
of merchandising in the city.  There are as many ways to be rich;
and, which is better, there is no possibility to be poor, without
such negligence as can neither have excuse nor pity; for a little
ground will, without question, feed a little family, and the
superfluities of life (which are now in some cases by custom made
almost necessary) must be supplied out of the superabundance of art
and industry, or contemned by as great a degree of philosophy.  As
for the necessity of this art, it is evident enough, since this can
live without all others, and no one other without this.  This is
like speech, without which the society of men cannot be preserved;
the others like figures and tropes of speech which serve only to
adorn it.  Many nations have lived, and some do still, without any
art but this; not so elegantly, I confess, but still they have; and
almost all the other arts which are here practised are beholding to
them for most of their materials.  The innocence of this life is in
the next thing for which I commend it, and if husbandmen preserve
not that, they are much to blame, for no men are so free from the
temptations of iniquity.  They live by what they can get by industry
from the earth, and others by what they can catch by craft from men.
They live upon an estate given them by their mother, and others upon
an estate cheated from their brethren.  They live like sheep and
kine, by the allowances of Nature, and others like wolves and foxes
by the acquisitions of rapine; and, I hope, I may affirm (without
any offence to the great) that sheep and kine are very useful, and
that wolves and foxes are pernicious creatures.  They are, without
dispute, of all men the most quiet and least apt to be inflamed to
the disturbance of the commonwealth; their manner of life inclines
them, and interest binds them, to love peace.  In our late mad and
miserable civil wars, all other trades, even to the meanest, set
forth whole troops, and raised up some great commanders, who became
famous and mighty for the mischiefs they had done.  But I do not
remember the name of any one husbandman who had so considerable a
share in the twenty years' ruin of his country, as to deserve the
curses of his countrymen; and if great delights be joined with so
much innocence, I think it is ill done of men not to take them here
where they are so tame and ready at hand, rather than hunt for them
in courts and cities, where they are so wild and the chase so
troublesome and dangerous.

We are here among the vast and noble scenes of Nature; we are there
among the pitiful shifts of policy.  We walk here in the light and
open ways of the divine bounty; we grope there in the dark and
confused labyrinths of human malice.  Our senses are here feasted
with the clear and genuine taste of their objects, which are all
sophisticated there, and for the most part overwhelmed with their
contraries.  Here Pleasure looks, methinks, like a beautiful,
constant, and modest wife; it is there an impudent, fickle, and
painted harlot.  Here is harmless and cheap plenty, there guilty and
expenseful luxury.

I shall only instance in one delight more, the most natural and best
natured of all others, a perpetual companion of the husbandman:  and
that is, the satisfaction of looking round about him, and seeing
nothing but the effects and improvements of his own art and
diligence; to be always gathering of some fruits of it, and at the
same time to behold others ripening, and others budding; to see all
his fields and gardens covered with the beauteous creatures of his
own industry; and to see, like God, that all his works are good.


Hinc atque hinc glomerantur Oreades; ipsi
Agricolae tacitum pertentant gaudia pectus.

On his heart-strings a secret joy does strike.


The antiquity of his art is certainly not to be contested by any
other.  The three first men in the world were a gardener, a
ploughman, and a grazier; and if any man object that the second of
these was a murderer, I desire he would consider, that as soon as he
was so, he quitted our profession and turned builder.  It is for
this reason, I suppose, that Ecclesiasticus forbids us to hate
husbandry; because, says he, the Most High has created it.  We were
all born to this art, and taught by nature to nourish our bodies by
the same earth out of which they were made, and to which they must
return and pay at last for their sustenance.

Behold the original and primitive nobility of all those great
persons who are too proud now not only to till the ground, but
almost to tread upon it.  We may talk what we please of lilies and
lions rampant, and spread eagles in fields d'or or d'argent; but if
heraldry were guided by reason, a plough in a field arable would be
the most noble and ancient arms.

All these considerations make me fall into the wonder and complaint
of Columella, how it should come to pass that all arts or Sciences
(for the dispute, which is an art and which is a science, does not
belong to the curiosity of us husbandmen), metaphysic, physic,
morality, mathematics, logic, rhetoric, etc., which are all, I
grant, good and useful faculties, except only metaphysic, which I do
not know whether it be anything or no, but even vaulting, fencing,
dancing, attiring, cookery, carving, and such like vanities, should
all have public schools and masters; and yet that we should never
see or hear of any man who took upon him the profession of teaching
this so pleasant, so virtuous, so profitable, so honourable, so
necessary art.

A man would think, when he's in serious humour, that it were but a
vain, irrational, and ridiculous thing for a great company of men
and women to run up and down in a room together, in a hundred
several postures and figures, to no purpose, and with no design; and
therefore dancing was invented first, and only practised anciently,
in the ceremonies of the heathen religion, which consisted all in
mummery and madness; the latter being the chief glory of the
worship, and accounted divine inspiration.  This, I say, a severe
man would think, though I dare not determine so far against so
customary a part now of good breeding.  And yet, who is there among
our gentry that does not entertain a dancing master for his children
as soon as they are able to walk?  But did ever any father provide a
tutor for his son to instruct him betimes in the nature and
improvements of that land which he intended to leave him?  That is
at least a superfluity, and this a defect in our manner of
education; and therefore I could wish, but cannot in these times
much hope to see it, that one college in each university were
erected, and appropriated to this study, as well as there are to
medicine and the civil law.  There would be no need of making a body
of scholars and fellows, with certain endowments, as in other
colleges; it would suffice if, after the manner of Halls in Oxford,
there were only four professors constituted (for it would be too
much work for only one master, or Principal, as they call him there)
to teach these four parts of it.  First, aration, and all things
relating to it.  Secondly, pasturage; thirdly, gardens, orchards,
vineyards, and woods; fourthly, all parts of rural economy, which
would contain the government of bees, swine, poultry, decoys, ponds,
etc., and all that which Varro calls Villaticas Pastiones, together
with the sports of the field, which ought not to be looked upon only
as pleasures, but as parts of housekeeping, and the domestical
conservation and uses of all that is brought in by industry abroad.
The business of these professors should not be, as is commonly
practised in other arts, only to read pompous and superficial
lectures out of Virgil's Georgics, Pliny, Varro, or Columella, but
to instruct their pupils in the whole method and course of this
study, which might be run through perhaps with diligence in a year
or two; and the continual succession of scholars upon a moderate
taxation for their diet, lodging, and learning, would be a
sufficient constant revenue for maintenance of the house and the
professors, who should be men not chosen for the ostentation of
critical literature, but for solid and experimental knowledge of the
things they teach such men; so industrious and public spirited as I
conceive Mr. Hartlib to be, if the gentleman be yet alive.  But it
is needless to speak further of my thoughts of this design, unless
the present disposition of the age allowed more probability of
bringing it into execution.  What I have further to say of the
country life shall be borrowed from the poets, who were always the
most faithful and affectionate friends to it.  Poetry was born among
the shepherds.


Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine musas
Ducit, et immemores non sinit esse sui.

The Muses still love their own native place,
'T has secret charms which nothing can deface.


The truth is, no other place is proper for their work.  One might as
well undertake to dance in a crowd, as to make good verses in the
midst of noise and tumult.


As well might corn as verse in cities grow;
In vain the thankless glebe we plough and sow,
Against th' unnatural soil in vain we strive,
'Tis not a ground in which these plants will thrive.


It will bear nothing but the nettles or thorns of satire, which grow
most naturally in the worst earth; and therefore almost all poets,
except those who were not able to eat bread without the bounty of
great men, that is, without what they could get by flattering of
them, have not only withdrawn themselves from the vices and vanities
of the grand world (pariter vitiisque jocisque altius humanis
exeruere caput) into the innocent happiness of a retired life; but
have commended and adorned nothing so much by their ever-living
poems.  Hesiod was the first or second poet in the world that
remains yet extant (if Homer, as some think, preceded him, but I
rather believe they were contemporaries), and he is the first
writer, too, of the art of husbandry.  He has contributed, says
Columella, not a little to our profession; I suppose he means not a
little honour, for the matter of his instructions is not very
important.  His great antiquity is visible through the gravity and
simplicity of his style.  The most acute of all his sayings concerns
our purpose very much, and is couched in the reverend obscurity of
an oracle.  [Greek text which cannot be reproduced].  The half is
more than the whole.  The occasion of the speech is this:  his
brother Perses had by corrupting some great men ([Greek text which
cannot be reproduced], great bribe-eaters he calls them) gotten from
him the half of his estate.  It is no matter, says he, they have not
done me so much prejudice as they imagine.


[Greek text which cannot be reproduced--translation below]

Unhappy they to whom God has not revealed
By a strong light which must their sense control,
That half a great estate's more than the whole.
Unhappy, from whom still concealed does lie
Of roots and herbs the wholesome luxury.


This I conceive to have been honest Hesiod's meaning.  From Homer we
must not expect much concerning our affairs.  He was blind, and
could neither work in the country nor enjoy the pleasures of it; his
helpless poverty was likeliest to be sustained in the richest
places, he was to delight the Grecians with fine tales of the wars
and adventures of their ancestors; his subject removed him from all
commerce with us, and yet, methinks, he made a shift to show his
goodwill a little.  For though he could do us no honour in the
person of his hero Ulysses (much less of Achilles), because his
whole time was consumed in wars and voyages, yet he makes his father
Laertes a gardener all that while, and seeking his consolation for
the absence of his son in the pleasure of planting and even dunging
his own grounds.  Yet, see, he did not contemn us peasants; nay, so
far was he from that insolence, that he always styles Eumaeus, who
kept the hogs with wonderful respect, [Greek text which cannot be
reproduced], the divine swine-herd; he could have done no more for
Menelaus or Agamemnon.  And Theocritus (a very ancient poet, but he
was one of our own tribe, for he wrote nothing but pastorals) gave
the same epithet to a husbandman [Greek text which cannot be
reproduced].  The divine husbandman replied to Hercules, who was but
[Greek text] himself.  These were civil Greeks, and who understood
the dignity of our calling.  Among the Romans, we have in the first
place our truly divine Virgil, who, though by the favour of Maecenas
and Augustus he might have been one of the chief men of Rome, yet
chose rather to employ much of his time in the exercise, and much of
his immortal wit in the praise and instructions of a rustic life;
who, though he had written before whole books of Pastorals and
Georgics, could not abstain in his great and imperial poem from
describing Evander, one of his best princes, as living just after
the homely manner of an ordinary countryman.  He seats him in a
throne of maple, and lays him but upon a bear's skin, the kine and
oxen are lowing in his courtyard, the birds' under the eaves of his
window call him up in the morning; and when he goes abroad only two
dogs go along, with him for his guard.  At last, when he brings
AEneas into his royal cottage, he makes him say this memorable
compliment, greater than ever yet was spoken at the Escurial, the
Louvre, or our Whitehall.


Haec, inquit, limina victor
Alcides subiit, haec illum Regia cepit,
Aude, Hospes, contemnere opes, et te quoque dignum
Finge Deo, rebusque veni non asper egenis.

This humble roof, this rustic court, said he,
Received Alcides crowned with victory.
Scorn not, great guest, the steps where he has trod,
But contemn wealth, and imitate a god.


The next man whom we are much obliged to, both for his doctrine and
example, is the next best poet in the world to Virgil:  his dear
friend Horace, who, when Augustus had desired Mecaenas to persuade
him to come and live domestically and at the same table with him,
and to be Secretary of State of the whole world under him, or rather
jointly with him (for he says, "ut nos in Epistolis scribendis
adjuvet,") could not be tempted to forsake his Sabine or Tiburtine
Manor, for so rich and so glorious a trouble.  There was never, I
think, such an example as this in the world, that he should have so
much moderation and courage as to refuse an offer of such greatness,
and the Emperor so much generosity and good nature as not to be at
all offended with his refusal, but to retain still the same
kindness, and express it often to him in most friendly and familiar
letters, part of which are still extant.  If I should produce all
the passages of this excellent author upon the several subjects
which I treat of in this book, I must be obliged to translate half
his works; of which I may say more truly than, in my opinion, he did
of Homer, "Qui quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non,
plenius, et melius Chrysippo, et Crantore dicit."  I shall content
myself upon this particular theme with three only, one out of his
Odes, the other out of his Satires, the third out of his Epistles,
and shall forbear to collect the suffrages of all other poets, which
may be found scattered up and down through all their writings, and
especially in Martial's.  But I must not omit to make some excuse
for the bold undertaking of my own unskilful pencil upon the
beauties of a face that has been drawn before by so many great
masters, especially that I should dare to do it in Latin verses
(though of another kind) and have the confidence to translate them.
I can only say that I love the matter, and that ought to cover, many
faults; and that I run not to contend with those before me, but
follow to applaud them.


VIRG. GEORG. -
O fortunatus nimium, etc.
A TRANSLATION OUT OF VIRGIL


Oh happy (if his happiness he knows)
The country swain, on whom kind Heaven bestows
At home all riches that wise Nature needs;
Whom the just earth with easy plenty feeds.
'Tis true, no morning tide of clients comes,
And fills the painted channels of his rooms,
Adoring the rich figures, as they pass,
In tapestry wrought, or cut in living brass;
Nor is his wool superfluously dyed
With the dear poison of Assyrian pride:
Nor do Arabian perfumes vainly spoil
The native use and sweetness of his oil.
Instead of these, his calm and harmless life,
Free from th' alarms of fear, and storms of strife,
Does with substantial blessedness abound,
And the soft wings of peace cover him round:
Through artless grots the murmuring waters glide;
Thick trees both against heat and cold provide,
From whence the birds salute him; and his ground
With lowing herds, and bleating sheep does sound;
And all the rivers, and the forests nigh,
Both food and game and exercise supply.
Here a well-hardened, active youth we see,
Taught the great art of cheerful poverty.
Here, in this place alone, there still do shine
Some streaks of love, both human and divine;
From hence Astraea took her flight, and here
Still her last footsteps upon earth appear.
'Tis true, the first desire which does control
All the inferior wheels that move my soul,
Is, that the Muse me her high priest would make;
Into her holiest scenes of mystery take,
And open there to my mind's purged eye
Those wonders which to sense the gods deny;
How in the moon such chance of shapes is found
The moon, the changing world's eternal bound.
What shakes the solid earth, what strong disease
Dares trouble the firm centre's ancient ease;
What makes the sea retreat, and what advance:
Varieties too regular for chance.
What drives the chariot on of winter's light,
And stops the lazy waggon of the night.
But if my dull and frozen blood deny
To send forth spirits that raise a soul so high;
In the next place, let woods and rivers be
My quiet, though unglorious, destiny.
In life's cool vale let my low scene be laid;
Cover me, gods, with Tempe's thickest shade
Happy the man, I grant, thrice happy he
Who can through gross effects their causes see:
Whose courage from the deeps of knowledge springs.
Nor vainly fears inevitable things;
But does his walk of virtue calmly go,
Through all th' alarms of death and hell below.
Happy! but next such conquerors, happy they,
Whose humble life lies not in fortune's way.
They unconcerned from their safe distant seat
Behold the rods and sceptres of the great.
The quarrels of the mighty, without fear,
And the descent of foreign troops they hear.
Nor can even Rome their steady course misguide,
With all the lustre of her perishing pride.
Them never yet did strife or avarice draw
Into the noisy markets of the law,
The camps of gowned war, nor do they live
By rules or forms that many mad men give,
Duty for nature's bounty they repay,
And her sole laws religiously obey.
   Some with bold labour plough the faithless main;
Some rougher storms in princes' courts sustain.
Some swell up their slight sails with popular fame,
Charmed with the foolish whistlings of a name.
Some their vain wealth to earth again commit;
With endless cares some brooding o'er it sit.
Country and friends are by some wretches sold,
To lie on Tyrian beds and drink in gold;
No price too high for profit can be shown;
Not brother's blood, nor hazards of their own.
Around the world in search of it they roam;
It makes e'en their Antipodes their home.
Meanwhile, the prudent husbandman is found
In mutual duties striving with his ground;
And half the year he care of that does take
That half the year grateful returns does make
Each fertile month does some new gifts present,
And with new work his industry content:
This the young lamb, that the soft fleece doth yield,
This loads with hay, and that with corn the field:
All sorts of fruit crown the rich autumn's pride:
And on a swelling hill's warm stony side,
The powerful princely purple of the vine,
Twice dyed with the redoubled sun, does shine.
In th' evening to a fair ensuing day,
With joy he sees his flocks and kids to play,
And loaded kine about his cottage stand,
Inviting with known sound the milker's hand;
And when from wholesome labour he doth come,
With wishes to be there, and wished for home,
He meets at door the softest human blisses,
His chaste wife's welcome, and dear children's kisses.
When any rural holydays invite
His genius forth to innocent delight,
On earth's fair bed beneath some sacred shade,
Amidst his equal friends carelessly laid,
He sings thee, Bacchus, patron of the vine,
The beechen bowl foams with a flood of wine,
Not to the loss of reason or of strength.
To active games and manly sport at length
Their mirth ascends, and with filled veins they see,
Who can the best at better trials be.
Such was the life the prudent Sabine chose,
From such the old Etrurian virtue rose.
Such, Remus and the god his brother led,
From such firm footing Rome grew the world's head.
Such was the life that even till now does raise
The honour of poor Saturn's golden days:
Before men born of earth and buried there,
Let in the sea their mortal fate to share,
Before new ways of perishing were sought,
Before unskilful death on anvils wrought.
Before those beasts which human life sustain,
By men, unless to the gods' use, were slain.


HORAT.  EPODON.
Beatus ille qui procul, etc.


Happy time man whom bounteous gods allow
With his own hand paternal grounds to plough!
Like the first golden mortals, happy he,
From business and the cares of money free!
No human storms break off at land his sleep,
No loud alarms of nature on the deep.
From all the cheats of law he lives secure,
Nor does th' affronts of palaces endure.
Sometimes the beauteous marriageable vine
He to the lusty bridegroom elm does join;
Sometimes he lops the barren trees around,
And grafts new life into the fruitful wound;
Sometimes he shears his flock, and sometimes he
Stores up the golden treasures of the bee.
He sees his lowing herds walk o'er the plain,
Whilst neighbouring hills low back to them again.
And when the season, rich as well as gay,
All her autumnal bounty does display,
How is he pleas'd th' increasing use to see
Of his well trusted labours bend the tree;
Of which large shares, on the glad sacred days,
He gives to friends, and to the gods repays.
With how much joy does he, beneath some shade
By aged trees, reverend embraces made,
His careless head on the fresh green recline,
His head uncharged with fear or with design.
By him a river constantly complains,
The birds above rejoice with various strains,
And in the solemn scene their orgies keep
Like dreams mixed with the gravity of sleep,
Sleep which does always there for entrance wait,
And nought within against it shuts the gate.
   Nor does the roughest season of the sky,
Or sullen Jove, all sports to him deny.
He runs the mazes of the nimble hare,
His well-mouthed dogs' glad concert rends the air,
Or with game bolder, and rewarded more,
He drives into a toil the foaming boar;
Here flies the hawk to assault, and there the net
To intercept the travelling fowl is set;
And all his malice, all his craft is shown
In innocent wars, on beasts and birds alone.
This is the life from all misfortune free,
From thee, the great one, tyrant love, from thee;
And if a chaste and clean though homely wife,
Be added to the blessings of this life, -
S