uch as the ancient sun-burnt Sabines were,
Such as Apulia, frugal still, does bear, -
Who makes her children and the house her care
And joyfully the work of life does share;
Nor thinks herself too noble or too fine
To pin the sheepfold or to milk the kine;
Who waits at door against her husband come
From rural duties, late, and wearied home,
Where she receives him with a kind embrace,
A cheerful fire, and a more cheerful face:
And fills the bowl up to her homely lord,
And with domestic plenty load the board.
Not all the lustful shell-fish of the sea,
Dressed by the wanton hand of luxury,
Nor ortolans nor godwits nor the rest
Of costly names that glorify a feast,
Are at the princely tables better cheer
Than lamb and kid, lettuce and olives, here.


THE COUNTRY MOUSE.
A Paraphrase upon Horace, II Book, Satire vi.


At the large foot of a fair hollow tree,
Close to ploughed ground, seated commodiously,
His ancient and hereditary house,
There dwelt a good substantial country mouse:
Frugal, and grave, and careful of the main,
Yet one who once did nobly entertain
A city mouse, well coated, sleek, and gay,
A mouse of high degree, which lost his way,
Wantonly walking forth to take the air,
And arrived early, and alighted there,
For a day's lodging.  The good hearty host
(The ancient plenty of his hall to boast)
Did all the stores produce that might excite,
With various tastes, the courtier's appetite.
Fitches and beans, peason, and oats, and wheat,
And a large chestnut, the delicious meat
Which Jove himself, were he a mouse, would eat.
And for a haut goust there was mixed with these
The swerd of bacon, and the coat of cheese,
The precious relics, which at harvest he
Had gathered from the reapers' luxury.
"Freely," said he, "fall on, and never spare,
The bounteous gods will for to-morrow care."
And thus at ease on beds of straw they lay,
And to their genius sacrificed the day.
Yet the nice guest's epicurean mind
(Though breeding made him civil seem, and kind)
Despised this country feast, and still his thought
Upon the cakes and pies of London wrought.
"Your bounty and civility," said he,
"Which I'm surprised in these rude parts to see,
Show that the gods have given you a mind
Too noble for the fate which here you find.
Why should a soul, so virtuous and so great,
Lose itself thus in an obscure retreat?
Let savage beasts lodge in a country den,
You should see towns, and manners know, and men;
And taste the generous luxury of the court,
Where all the mice of quality resort;
Where thousand beauteous shes about you move,
And by high fare are pliant made to love.
We all ere long must render up our breath,
No cave or hole can shelter us from death.
Since life is so uncertain and so short,
Let's spend it all in feasting and in sport.
Come, worthy sir, come with me, and partake
All the great things that mortals happy make."
   Alas, what virtue hath sufficient arms
To oppose bright honour and soft pleasure's charms?
What wisdom can their magic force repel?
It draws the reverend hermit from his cell.
It was the time, when witty poets tell,
That Phoebus into Thetis' bosom fell:
She blushed at first, and then put out the light,
And drew the modest curtains of the night.
Plainly the truth to tell, the sun was set,
When to the town our wearied travellers get.
To a lord's house, as lordly as can be,
Made for the use of pride and luxury,
They some; the gentle courtier at the door
Stops, and will hardly enter in before; -
But 'tis, sir, your command, and being so,
I'm sworn t' obedience--and so in they go.
Behind a hanging in a spacious room
(The richest work of Mortlake's noble loom)
They wait awhile their wearied limbs to rest,
Till silence should invite them to their feast,
About the hour that Cynthia's silver light
Had touched the pale meridies of the night,
At last, the various supper being done,
It happened that the company was gone
Into a room remote, servants and all,
To please their noble fancies with a ball.
Our host leads forth his stranger, and does find
All fitted to the bounties of his mind.
Still on the table half-filled dishes stood,
And with delicious bits the floor was strewed;
The courteous mouse presents him with the best,
And both with fat varieties are blest.
The industrious peasant everywhere does range,
And thanks the gods for his life's happy change.
Lo, in the midst of a well-freighted pie
They both at last glutted and wanton lie,
When see the sad reverse of prosperous fate,
And what fierce storms on mortal glories wait!
With hideous noise, down the rude servants come,
Six dogs before run barking into th' room;
The wretched gluttons fly with wild affright,
And hate the fulness which retards their flight.
Our trembling peasant wishes now in vain.
That rocks and mountains covered him again.
Oh, how the change of his poor life, he cursed!
"This, of all lives," said he, "is sure the worst.
Give me again, ye gods, my cave and wood;
With peace, let tares and acorns be my food."


A Paraphrase upon the Eightieth Epistle of the First Book of Horace.
HORACE TO FUSCUS ARISTIUS.


Health, from the lover of the country, me,
Health, to the lover of the city, thee,
A difference in our souls, this only proves,
In all things else, we agree like married doves.
But the warm nest and crowded dove house thou
Dost like; I loosely fly from bough to bough;
And rivers drink, and all the shining day,
Upon fair trees or mossy rocks I play;
In fine, I live and reign when I retire
From all that you equal with heaven admire.
Like one at last from the priest's service fled,
Loathing the honied cakes, I long for bread.
Would I a house for happiness erect,
Nature alone should be the architect.
She'd build it more convenient than great,
And doubtless in the country choose her seat.
Is there a place doth better helps supply
Against the wounds of winter's cruelty?
Is there an air that gentler does assuage
The mad celestial dog's or lion's rage?
Is it not there that sleep (and only there)
Nor noise without, nor cares within does fear?
Does art through pipes a purer water bring
Than that which nature strains into a spring?
Can all your tapestries, or your pictures, show
More beauties than in herbs and flowers do grow?
Fountains and trees our wearied pride do please,
Even in the midst of gilded palaces.
And in your towns that prospect gives delight
Which opens round the country to our sight.
Men to the good, from which they rashly fly,
Return at last, and their wild luxury
Does but in vain with those true joys contend
Which nature did to mankind recommend.
The man who changes gold for burnished brass,
Or small right gems for larger ones of glass,
Is not, at length, more certain to be made
Ridiculous and wretched by the trade,
Than he who sells a solid good to buy
The painted goods of pride and vanity.
If thou be wise, no glorious fortune choose,
Which 't is but pain to keep, yet grief to lose.
For when we place even trifles in the heart,
With trifles too unwillingly we part.
An humble roof, plain bed, and homely board,
More clear, untainted pleasures do afford
Than all the tumult of vain greatness brings
To kings, or to the favourites of kings.
The horned deer, by nature armed so well,
Did with the horse in common pasture dwell;
And when they fought, the field it always won,
Till the ambitious horse begged help of man,
And took the bridle, and thenceforth did reign
Bravely alone, as lord of all the plain:
But never after could the rider get
From off his back, or from his mouth the bit.
So they, who poverty too much do fear,
To avoid that weight, a greater burden bear;
That they might power above their equals have,
To cruel masters they themselves enslave.
For gold, their liberty exchanged we see,
That fairest flower which crowns humanity.
And all this mischief does upon them light,
Only because they know not how aright
That great, but secret, happiness to prize,
That's laid up in a little, for the wise:
That is the best and easiest estate
Which to a man sits close, but not too strait.
'Tis like a shoe:  it pinches, and it burns,
Too narrow; and too large it overturns.
My dearest friend, stop thy desires at last,
And cheerfully enjoy the wealth thou hast.
And, if me still seeking for more you see,
Chide and reproach, despise and laugh at me.
Money was made, not to command our will,
But all our lawful pleasures to fulfil.
Shame and woe to us, if we our wealth obey;
The horse doth with the horseman run away.


THE COUNTRY LIFE.
Libr. 4, Plantarum.


Blest be the man (and blest he is) whom e'er
(Placed far out of the roads of hope or fear)
A little field and little garden feeds;
The field gives all that frugal nature needs,
The wealthy garden liberally bestows
All she can ask, when she luxurious grows.
The specious inconveniences, that wait
Upon a life of business and of state,
He sees (nor does the sight disturb his rest)
By fools desired, by wicked men possessed.
Thus, thus (and this deserved great Virgil's praise)
The old Corycian yeoman passed his days,
Thus his wise life Abdolonymus spent:
The ambassadors which the great emperor sent
To offer him a crown, with wonder found
The reverend gardener hoeing of his ground;
Unwillingly and slow, and discontent,
From his loved cottage to a throne he went.
And oft he stopped in his triumphant way,
And oft looked back, and oft was heard to say,
Not without sighs, "Alas!  I there forsake
A happier kingdom than I go to take."
Thus Aglaus (a man unknown to men,
But the gods knew, and therefore loved him then)
Thus lived obscurely then without a name,
Aglaus, now consigned to eternal fame.
For Gyges, the rich king, wicked and great,
Presumed at wise Apollo's Delphic seat,
Presumed to ask, "O thou, the whole world's eye,
Seest thou a man that happier is than I?"
The god, who scorned to flatter man, replied,
"Aglaus happier is."  But Gyges cried,
In a proud rage, "Who can that Aglaus be?
We have heard as yet of no such king as he."
And true it was, through the whole earth around
No king of such a name was to be found.
"Is some old hero of that name alive,
Who his high race does from the gods derive?
Is it some mighty general that has done
Wonders in fight, and god-like honours won?
Is it some man of endless wealth?" said he;
"None, none of these:  who can this Aglaus be?"
After long search, and vain inquiries passed,
In an obscure Arcadian vale at last
(The Arcadian life has always shady been)
Near Sopho's town (which he but once had seen)
This Aglaus, who monarchs' envy drew,
Whose happiness the gods stood witness to,
This mighty Aglaus was labouring found,
With his own hands, in his own little ground.
   So, gracious God (if it may lawful be,
Among those foolish gods to mention Thee),
So let me act, on such a private stage,
The last dull scenes of my declining age;
After long toils and voyages in vain,
This quiet port let my tossed vessel gain;
Of heavenly rest this earnest to me lend,
Let my life sleep, and learn to love her end.



THE GARDEN
To J. Evelyn, Esquire.



I never had any other desire so strong, and so like to covetousness,
as that one which I have had always, that I might be master at last
of a small house and large garden, with very moderate conveniences
joined to them, and there dedicate the remainder of my life only to
the culture of them and the study of nature.


And there (with no design beyond my wall) whole and entire to lie,
In no unactive ease, and no unglorious poverty.


Or, as Virgil has said, shorter and better for me, that I might
there studiis florere ignobilis otii, though I could wish that he
had rather said Nobilis otii when he spoke of his own.  But several
accidents of my ill fortune have disappointed me hitherto, and do
still, of that felicity; for though I have made the first and
hardest step to it, by abandoning all ambitions and hopes in this
world, and by retiring from the noise of all business and almost
company, yet I stick still in the inn of a hired house and garden,
among weeds and rubbish, and without that pleasantest work of human
industry--the improvement of something which we call (not very
properly, but yet we call) our own.  I am gone out from Sodom, but I
am not arrived at my little Zoar.  "Oh, let me escape thither (is it
not a little one!), and my soul shall live."  I do not look back
yet; but I have been forced to stop and make too many halts.  You
may wonder, sir (for this seems a little too extravagant and
Pindarical for prose) what I mean by all this preface.  It is to let
you know, that though I have missed, like a chemist, my great end,
yet I account my afflictions and endeavours well rewarded by
something that I have met with by-the-by, which is, that they have
produced to me some part in your kindness and esteem; and thereby
the honour of having my name so advantageously recommended to
posterity by the epistle you are pleased to prefix to the most
useful book that has been written in that kind, and which is to last
as long as months and years.

Among many other arts and excellencies which you enjoy, I am glad to
find this favourite of mine the most predominant, that you choose
this for your wife, though you have hundreds of other arts for your
concubines; though you know them, and beget sons upon them all (to
which you are rich enough to allow great legacies), yet the issue of
this seems to be designed by you to the main of the estate; you have
taken most pleasure in it, and bestowed most charges upon its
education, and I doubt not to see that book which you are pleased to
promise to the world, and of which you have given us a large earnest
in your calendar, as accomplished as anything can be expected from
an extraordinary wit and no ordinary expenses and a long experience.
I know nobody that possesses more private happiness than you do in
your garden, and yet no man who makes his happiness more public by a
free communication of the art and knowledge of it to others.  All
that I myself am able yet to do is only to recommend to mankind the
search of that felicity which you instruct them how to find and to
enjoy.

I.

   Happy art thou whom God does bless
With the full choice of thine own happiness;
   And happier yet, because thou'rt blessed
   With prudence how to choose the best.
In books and gardens thou hast placed aright, -
   Things which thou well dost understand,
And both dost make with thy laborious hand -
   Thy noble, innocent delight,
And in thy virtuous wife, where thou again dost meet
   Both pleasures more refined and sweet:
   The fairest garden in her looks,
   And in her mind the wisest books.
Oh! who would change these soft, yet solid joys,
   For empty shows and senseless noise,
   And all which rank ambition breeds,
Which seem such beauteous flowers, and are such poisonous weeds!

II.

When God did man to his own likeness make,
As much as clay, though of the purest kind
   By the Great Potter's art refined,
   Could the Divine impression take,
   He thought it fit to place him where
   A kind of heaven, too, did appear,
As far as earth could such a likeness bear.
   That Man no happiness might want,
Which earth to her first master could afford,
   He did a garden for him plant
By the quick hand of his omnipotent word,
As the chief help and joy of human life,
He gave him the first gift; first, even, before a wife.

III.

For God, the universal architect,
   'T had been as easy to erect
A Louvre, or Escurial, or a tower
That might with heaven communication hold,
As Babel vainly thought to do of old.
      He wanted not the skill or power,
      In the world's fabric those were shown,
And the materials were all his own.
But well he knew what place would best agree
With innocence and with felicity;
And we elsewhere still seek for them in vain.
If any part of either yet remain,
If any part of either we expect,
This may our judgment in the search direct;
God the first garden made, and the first city, Cain.

IV.

Oh, blessed shades!  Oh, gentle, cool retreat
   From all the immoderate heat,
In which the frantic world does burn and sweat!
This does the lion-star, Ambition's rage;
This Avarice, the dog-star's thirst assuage;
Everywhere else their fatal power we see,
They make and rule man's wretched destiny;
      They neither set nor disappear,
      But tyrannise o'er all the year;
Whilst we ne'er feel their flame or influence here.
   The birds that dance from bough to bough,
   And sing above in every tree,
   Are not from fears and cares more free,
Than we who lie, or sit, or walk below,
   And should by right be singers too.
What prince's choir of music can excel
   That which within this shade does dwell,
   To which we nothing pay or give -
   They, like all other poets, live
Without reward or thanks for their obliging pains.
   'Tis well if they become not prey.
The whistling winds add their less artful strains,
And a grave base the murmuring fountains play.
Nature does all this harmony bestow;
   But to our plants, art's music too,
The pipe, theorbo, and guitar we owe;
The lute itself, which once was green and mute,
   When Orpheus struck the inspired lute,
   The trees danced round, and understood
   By sympathy the voice of wood.

V.

These are the spells that to kind sleep invite,
And nothing does within resistance make;
   Which yet we moderately take;
   Who would not choose to be awake,
While he's encompassed round with such delight;
To the ear, the nose, the touch, the taste and sight?
When Venus would her dear Ascanius keep
A prisoner in the downy bands of sleep,
She odorous herbs and flowers beneath him spread,
   As the most soft and sweetest bed;
Not her own lap would more have charmed his head.
Who that has reason and his smell
Would not among roses and jasmine dwell,
Rather than all his spirits choke,
With exhalations of dirt and smoke,
And all the uncleanness which does drown
In pestilential clouds a populous town?
The earth itself breathes better perfumes here,
Than all the female men or women there,
Not without cause, about them bear.

VI.

When Epicurus to the world had taught
   That pleasure was the chiefest good,
(And was perhaps i' th' right, if rightly understood)
   His life he to his doctrine brought,
And in a garden's shade that sovereign pleasure sought.
Whoever a true epicure would be,
May there find cheap and virtuous luxury.
Vitellius his table, which did hold
As many creatures as the Ark of old,
That fiscal table, to which every day
All countries did a constant tribute pay,
Could nothing more delicious afford
   Than Nature's liberality,
Helped with a little art and industry,
Allows the meanest gardener's board.
The wanton taste no fish or fowl can choose
For which the grape or melon she would lose,
Though all the inhabitants of sea and air
Be listed in the glutton's bill of fare;
   Yet still the fruits of earth we see
Placed the third storey high in all her luxury.

VII.

But with no sense the garden does comply,
None courts or flatters, as it does the eye;
When the great Hebrew king did almost strain
The wondrous treasures of his wealth and brain
His royal southern guest to entertain,
   Though, she on silver floors did tread,
With bright Assyrian carpets on them spread
      To hide the metal's poverty;
   Though she looked up to roofs of gold,
   And nought around her could behold
      But silk and rich embroidery,
      And Babylonian tapestry,
   And wealthy Hiram's princely dye:
Though Ophir's starry stones met everywhere her eye;
Though she herself and her gay host were dressed
With all the shining glories of the East;
When lavish art her costly work had done;
   The honour and the prize of bravery
Was by the Garden from the Palace won;
And every rose and lily there did stand
   Better attired by Nature's hand:
The case thus judged against the king we see,
By one that would not be so rich, though wiser far than he.

VIII.

Nor does this happy place only dispense
   Such various pleasures to the sense:
      Here health itself does live,
That salt of life, which does to all a relish give,
Its standing pleasure, and intrinsic wealth,
The body's virtue, and the soul's good fortune, health.
The tree life, when it in Eden stood,
Did its immortal head to heaven rear;
It lasted a tall cedar till the flood;
Now a small thorny shrub it does appear;
   Nor will it thrive too everywhere:
   It always here is freshest seen,
   'Tis only here an evergreen.
   If through the strong and beauteous fence
   Of temperance and innocence,
And wholesome labours and a quiet mind,
   Any diseases passage find,
   They must not think here to assail
   A land unarmed, or without a guard;
They must fight for it, and dispute it hard,
   Before they can prevail.
   Scarce any plant is growing here
Which against death some weapon does not bear,
   Let cities boast that they provide
   For life the ornaments of pride;
   But 'tis the country and the field
   That furnish it with staff and shield.

IX.

Where does the wisdom and the power divine
In a more bright and sweet reflection shine?
Where do we finer strokes and colours see
Of the Creator's real poetry,
   Than when we with attention look
Upon the third day's volume of the book?
If we could open and intend our eye,
   We all like Moses should espy
Even in a bush the radiant Deity.
But we despise these his inferior ways
Though no less full of miracle and praise;
   Upon the flowers of heaven we gaze,
The stars of earth no wonder in us raise,
   Though these perhaps do more than they
      The life of mankind sway.
Although no part of mighty Nature be
More stored with beauty, power, and mystery,
Yet to encourage human industry,
God has so ordered that no other part
Such space and such dominion leaves for art.

X.

We nowhere art do so triumphant see,
   As when it grafts or buds the tree;
In other things we count it to excel,
If it a docile scholar can appear
To Nature, and but imitate her well:
It over-rules, and is her master here.
It imitates her Maker's power divine,
And changes her sometimes, and sometimes does refine:
It does, like grace, the fallen-tree restore
To its blest state of Paradise before:
Who would not joy to see his conquering hand
O'er all the vegetable world command,
And the wild giants of the wood receive
   What laws he's pleased to give?
He bids the ill-natured crab produce
The gentler apple's winy juice,
   The golden fruit that worthy is,
   Of Galatea's purple kiss;
   He does the savage hawthorn teach
   To bear the medlar and the pear;
   He bids the rustic plum to rear
   A noble trunk, and be a peach.
   Even Daphne's coyness he does mock,
   And weds the cherry to her stock,
   Though she refused Apollo's suit,
   Even she, that chaste and virgin tree,
   Now wonders at herself to see
That she's a mother made, and blushes in her fruit.

XI.

Methinks I see great Diocletian walk
In the Salonian garden's noble shade,
Which by his own imperial hands was made:
I see him smile, methinks, as he does talk
With the ambassadors, who come in vain,
   To entice him to a throne again.
"If I, my friends," said he, "should to you show
All the delights which in these gardens grow;
'Tis likelier much that you should with me stay,
Than 'tis that you should carry me away;
And trust me not, my friends, if every day
   I walk not here with more delight,
Than ever, after the most happy fight,
In triumph to the Capitol I rode,
To thank the gods, and to be thought myself almost a god.



OF GREATNESS.



Since we cannot attain to greatness, says the Sieur de Montaigne,
let us have our revenge by railing at it; this he spoke but in jest.
I believe he desired it no more than I do, and had less reason, for
he enjoyed so plentiful and honourable a fortune in a most excellent
country, as allowed him all the real conveniences of it, separated
and purged from the incommodities.  If I were but in his condition,
I should think it hard measure, without being convinced of any
crime, to be sequestered from it and made one of the principal
officers of state.  But the reader may think that what I now say is
of small authority, because I never was, nor ever shall be, put to
the trial; I can therefore only make my protestation.


If ever I more riches did desire
Than cleanliness and quiet do require;
If e'er ambition did my fancy cheat,
With any wish so mean as to be great,
Continue, Heaven, still from me to remove
The humble blessings of that life I love.


I know very many men will despise, and some pity me, for this
humour, as a poor-spirited fellow; but I am content, and, like
Horace, thank God for being so.  Dii bene fecerunt inopis me,
quodque pusilli finxerunt animi.  I confess I love littleness almost
in all things.  A little convenient estate, a little cheerful house,
a little company, and a very little feast; and if I were ever to
fall in love again (which is a great passion, and therefore I hope I
have done with it) it would be, I think, with prettiness rather than
with majestical beauty.  I would neither wish that my mistress, nor
my fortune, should be a bona roba, nor, as Homer used to describe
his beauties, like a daughter of great Jupiter, for the stateliness
and largeness of her person, but, as Lucretius says, "Parvula,
pumilio, [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], tota merum sal."

Where there is one man of this, I believe there are a thousand of
Senecio's mind, whose ridiculous affectation of grandeur Seneca the
elder describes to this effect.  Senecio was a man of a turbid and
confused wit, who could not endure to speak any but mighty words and
sentences, till this humour grew at last into so notorious a habit,
or rather disease, as became the sport of the whole town:  he would
have no servants but huge massy fellows, no plate or household stuff
but thrice as big as the fashion; you may believe me, for I speak it
without raillery, his extravagancy came at last into such a madness
that he would not put on a pair of shoes each of which was not big
enough for both his feet; he would eat nothing but what was great,
nor touch any fruit but horse-plums and pound-pears.  He kept a
concubine that was a very giantess, and made her walk, too, always
in a chiopins, till at last he got the surname of Senecio Grandio,
which, Messala said, was not his cognomen, but his cognomentum.
When he declaimed for the three hundred Lacedaemonians, who also
opposed Xerxes' army of above three hundred thousand, he stretched
out his arms and stood on tiptoes, that he might appear the taller,
and cried out in a very loud voice, "I rejoice, I rejoice!"  We
wondered, I remember, what new great fortune had befallen his
eminence.  "Xerxes," says he, "is all mine own.  He who took away
the sight of the sea with the canvas veils of so many ships . . . "
and then he goes on so, as I know not what to make of the rest,
whether it be the fault of the edition, or the orator's own burly
way of nonsense.

This is the character that Seneca gives of this hyperbolical fop,
whom we stand amazed at, and yet there are very few men who are not,
in some things, and to some degree, grandios.  Is anything more
common than to see our ladies of quality wear such high shoes as
they cannot walk in without one to lead them? and a gown as long
again as their body, so that they cannot stir to the next room
without a page or two to hold it up?  I may safely say that all the
ostentation of our grandees is just like a train, of no use in the
world, but horribly cumbersome and incommodious.  What is all this
but spice of grandio?  How tedious would this be if we were always
bound to it?  I do believe there is no king who would not rather be
deposed than endure every day of his reign all the ceremonies of his
coronation.  The mightiest princes are glad to fly often from these
majestic pleasures (which is, methinks, no small disparagement to
them), as it were for refuge, to the most contemptible
divertisements and meanest recreations of the vulgar, nay, even of
children.  One of the most powerful and fortunate princes of the
world of late, could find out no delight so satisfactory as the
keeping of little singing birds, and hearing of them and whistling
to them.  What did the emperors of the whole world?  If ever any men
had the free and full enjoyment of all human greatness (nay, that
would not suffice, for they would be gods too) they certainly
possessed it; and yet one of them, who styled himself "Lord and God
of the Earth," could not tell how to pass his whole day pleasantly,
without spending constant two or three hours in catching of flies,
and killing them with a bodkin, as if his godship had been
Beelzebub.  One of his predecessors, Nero (who never put any bounds,
nor met with any stop to his appetite), could divert himself with no
pastime more agreeable than to run about the streets all night in a
disguise, and abuse the women and affront the men whom he met, and
sometimes to beat them, and sometimes to be beaten by them.  This
was one of his imperial nocturnal pleasures; his chiefest in the day
was to sing and play upon a fiddle, in the habit of a minstrel, upon
the public stage; he was prouder of the garlands that were given to
his divine voice (as they called it then) in those kind of prizes,
than all his forefathers were of their triumphs over nations.  He
did not at his death complain that so mighty an emperor, and the
last of all the Caesarian race of deities, should be brought to so
shameful and miserable an end, but only cried out, "Alas! what pity
it is that so excellent a musician should perish in this manner!"
His uncle Claudius spent half his time at playing at dice; that was
the main fruit of his sovereignty.  I omit the madnesses of
Caligula's delights, and the execrable sordidness of those of
Tiberius.  Would one think that Augustus himself, the highest and
most fortunate of mankind, a person endowed too with many excellent
parts of nature, should be so hard put to it sometimes for want of
recreations, as to be found playing at nuts and bounding-stones with
little Syrian and Moorish boys, whose company he took delight in,
for their prating and their wantonness?


Was it for this, that Rome's best blood he spilt,
With so much falsehood, so much guilt?
Was it for this that his ambition strove
To equal Caesar first, and after Jove?
Greatness is barren sure of solid joys;
Her merchandise, I fear, is all in toys;
She could not else sure so uncivil be,
To treat his universal majesty,
His new created Deity,
With nuts and bounding-stones and boys.


But we must excuse her for this meagre entertainment; she has not
really wherewithal to make such feasts as we imagine; her guests
must be contented sometimes with but slender cates, and with the
same cold meats served over and over again, even till they become
nauseous.  When you have pared away all the vanity, what solid and
natural contentment does there remain which may not be had with five
hundred pounds a year? not so many servants or horses, but a few
good ones, which will do all the business as well; not so many
choice dishes at every meal; but at several meals all of them, which
makes them both the more healthy and dine more pleasant; not so rich
garments nor so frequent changes, but as warm and as comely, and so
frequent change, too, as is every jot as good for the master, though
not for the tailor or valet-de-chambre; not such a stately palace,
nor gilt rooms, nor the costlier sorts of tapestry, but a convenient
brick house, with decent wainscot and pretty forest-work hangings.
Lastly (for I omit all other particulars, and will end with that
which I love most in both conditions), not whole woods cut in walks,
nor vast parks, nor fountain or cascade gardens, but herb and flower
and fruit gardens, which are more useful, and the water every whit
as clear and wholesome as if it darted from the breasts of a marble
nymph or the urn of a river-god.  If for all this you like better
the substance of that former estate of life, do but consider the
inseparable accidents of both:  servitude, disquiet, danger, and
most commonly guilt, inherent in the one; in the other, liberty,
tranquillity, security, and innocence:  and when you have thought
upon this, you will confess that to be a truth which appeared to you
before but a ridiculous paradox, that a low fortune is better
guarded and attended than a high one.  If indeed, we look only upon
the flourishing head of the tree, it appears a most beautiful
object.


- Sed quantum vertice ad auras
AEtherias, tantum radice ad Tartara tendit.

As far up towards heaven the branches grow,
So far the root sinks down to hell below.


Another horrible disgrace to greatness is, that it is for the most
part in pitiful want and distress.  What a wonderful thing is this,
unless it degenerate into avarice, and so cease to be greatness.  It
falls perpetually into such necessities as drive it into all the
meanest and most sordid ways of borrowing, cozenage, and robbery,
Mancipiis locopules, eget aris Cappadocum Rex.  This is the case of
almost all great men, as well as of the poor King of Cappadocia.
They abound with slaves, but are indigent of money.  The ancient
Roman emperors, who had the riches of the whole world for their
revenue, had wherewithal to live, one would have thought, pretty
well at ease, and to have been exempt from the pressures of extreme
poverty.  But yet with most of them it was much otherwise, and they
fell perpetually into such miserable penury, that they were forced
to devour or squeeze most of their friends and servants, to cheat
with infamous projects, to ransack and pillage all their provinces.
This fashion of imperial grandeur is imitated by all inferior and
subordinate sorts of it, as if it were a point of honour.  They must
be cheated of a third part of their estates, two other thirds they
must expend in vanity, so that they remain debtors for all the
necessary provisions of life, and have no way to satisfy those debts
but out of the succours and supplies of rapine; "as riches
increase," says Solomon, "so do the mouths that devour it."  The
master mouth has no more than before; the owner, methinks, is like
Genus in the fable, who is perpetually winding a rope of hay and an
ass at the end perpetually eating it.  Out of these inconveniences
arises naturally one more, which is, that no greatness can be
satisfied or contented with itself:  still, if it could mount up a
little higher, it would be happy; if it could but gain that point,
it would obtain all its desires; but yet at last, when it is got up
to the very top of the peak of Teneriffe, it is in very great danger
of breaking its neck downwards, but in no possibility of ascending
upwards into the seat of tranquillity above the moon.  The first
ambitious men in the world, the old giants, are said to have made an
heroical attempt of scaling Heaven in despite of the gods, and they
cast Ossa upon Olympus and Pelion upon Ossa, two or three mountains
more they thought would have done their business, but the thunder
spoiled all the work when they were come up to the third storey;


And what a noble plot was crossed,
And what a brave design was lost.


A famous person of their offspring, the late giant of our nation,
when, from the condition of a very inconsiderable captain, he had
made himself lieutenant-general of an army of little Titans, which
was his first mountain; and afterwards general, which was his
second; and after that absolute tyrant of three kingdoms, which was
the third, and almost touched the heaven which he affected; is
believed to have died with grief and discontent because he could not
attain to the honest name of a king, and the old formality of a
crown, though he had before exceeded the power by a wicked
usurpation.  If he could have compassed that, he would perhaps have
wanted something else that is necessary to felicity, and pined away
for the want of the title of an emperor or a god.  The reason of
this is, that greatness has no reality in nature, but is a creature
of the fancy--a notion that consists only in relation and
comparison.  It is indeed an idol; but St. Paul teaches us that an
idol is nothing in the world.  There is in truth no rising or
meridian of the sun, but only in respect to several places:  there
is no right or left, no upper hand in nature; everything is little
and everything is great according as it is diversely compared.
There may be perhaps some villages in Scotland or Ireland where I
might be a great man; and in that case I should be like Caesar--you
would wonder how Caesar and I should be like one another in
anything--and choose rather to be the first man of the village than
second at Rome.  Our Country is called Great Britain, in regard only
of a lesser of the same name; it would be but a ridiculous epithet
for it when we consider it together with the kingdom of China.
That, too, is but a pitiful rood of ground in comparison of the
whole earth besides; and this whole globe of earth, which we account
so immense a body, is but one point or atom in relation to those
numberless worlds that are scattered up and down in the infinite
space of the sky which we behold.  The other many inconveniences of
grandeur I have spoken of dispersedly in several chapters, and shall
end this with an ode of Horace, not exactly copied but rudely
imitated.


HORACE.  LIB. 3.  ODE 1.
Odi profanum vulgus, etc.

I.

Hence, ye profane; I hate ye all;
Both the great vulgar, and the small.
To virgin minds, which yet their native whiteness hold,
Not yet discoloured with the love of gold
      (That jaundice of the soul,
Which makes it look so gilded and so foul),
To you, ye very few, these truths I tell;
The muse inspires my song, hark, and observe it well.

II.

We look on men, and wonder at such odds
   'Twixt things that were the same by birth;
We look on kings as giants of the earth,
These giants are but pigmies to the gods.
   The humblest bush and proudest oak
Are but of equal proof against the thunder-stroke.
Beauty and strength, and wit, and wealth, and power
   Have their short flourishing hour,
   And love to see themselves, and smile,
And joy in their pre-eminence a while;
   Even so in the same land,
Poor weeds, rich corn, gay flowers together stand;
Alas, death mows down all with an impartial hand.

III.

And all you men, whom greatness does so please,
   Ye feast, I fear, like Damocles.
   If you your eyes could upwards move,
(But you, I fear, think nothing is above)
You would perceive by what a little thread
   The sword still hangs over your head.
No tide of wine would drown your cares,
No mirth or music over-noise your fears;
The fear of death would you so watchful keep,
As not to admit the image of it, sleep.

IV.

Sleep is a god too proud to wait in palaces;
And yet so humble, too, as not to scorn
   The meanest country cottages;
   His poppy grows among the corn.
The halcyon sleep will never build his nest
   In any stormy breast.
   'Tis not enough that he does find
   Clouds and darkness in their mind;
   Darkness but half his work will do,
'Tis not enough; he must find quiet too.

V.

The man who, in all wishes he does make,
   Does only Nature's counsel take,
That wise and happy man will never fear
   The evil aspects of the year,
Nor tremble, though two comets should appear.
He does not look in almanacks to see,
   Whether he fortunate shall be;
Let Mars and Saturn in the heavens conjoin,
And what they please against the world design,
   So Jupiter within him shine.

VII.

If of their pleasures and desires no end be found;
God to their cares and fears will set no bound.
   What would content you?  Who can tell?
Ye fear so much to lose what you have got
   As if ye liked it well.
Ye strive for more, as if ye liked it not.
   Go, level hills, and fill up seas,
Spare nought that may your wanton fancy please;
   But trust me, when you have done all this,
Much will be missing still, and much will be amiss.



OF AVARICE.



There are two sorts of avarice; the one is but of a bastard kind;
and that is, the rapacious appetite of gain, not for its own sake,
but for the pleasure of refunding it immediately through all the
channels of pride and luxury.  The other is the true kind, and
properly so called; which is a restless and unsatiable desire of
riches, not for any further end of use, but only to hoard, and
preserve, and perpetually increase them.  The covetous man of the
first kind is like a greedy ostrich, which devours any metal, but it
is with an intent to feed upon it, and in effect it makes a shift to
digest and excern it.  The second is like the foolish chough, which
loves to steal money only to hide it.  The first does much harm to
mankind, and a little good too, to some few.  The second does good
to none; no, not to himself.  The first can make no excuse to God,
or angels, or rational men for his actions.  The second can give no
reason or colour, not to the devil himself, for what he does:  he is
a slave to Mammon without wages.  The first makes a shift to be
beloved; aye, and envied, too, by some people.  The second is the
universal object of hatred and contempt.  There is no vice has been
so pelted with good sentences, and especially by the poets, who have
pursued it with stories and fables, and allegories and allusions;
and moved, as we say, every stone to fling at it, among all which, I
do not remember a more fine and gentlemen-like correction than that
which was given it by one line of Ovid's.


Desunt luxuriae malta, avaritiae omnia.
Much is wanting to luxury; all to avarice


To which saying I have a mind to add one member and render it thus:-


Poverty wants some, luxury many, avarice all things.


Somebody says of a virtuous and wise man, that having nothing, he
has all.  This is just his antipode, who, having all things, yet has
nothing.  He is a guardian eunuch to his beloved gold:  Audivi eos
amatores esse maximos sed nil potesse.  They are the fondest lovers,
but impotent to enjoy.


And, oh, what man's condition can be worse
Than his, whom plenty starves, and blessings curse?
The beggars but a common fate deplore,
The rich poor man's emphatically poor.


I wonder how it comes to pass that there has never been any law made
against him.  Against him, do I say?  I mean for him, as there is a
public provision made for all other madmen.  It is very reasonable
that the king should appoint some persons (and I think the courtiers
would not be against this proposition) to manage his estate during
his life (for his heirs commonly need not that care), and out of it
to make it their business to see that he should not want alimony
befitting his condition, which he could never get out of his own
cruel fingers.  We relieve idle vagrants and counterfeit beggars,
but have no care at all of these really poor men, who are, methinks,
to be respectfully treated in regard of their quality.  I might be
endless against them, but I am almost choked with the superabundance
of the matter.  Too much plenty impoverishes me as it does them.  I
will conclude this odious subject with part of Horace's first
Satire, which take in his own familiar style:-


I admire, Maecenas, how it comes to pass,
That no man ever yet contented was,
Nor is, nor perhaps will be, with that state
In which his own choice plants him, or his fate.
Happy the merchant! the old soldier cries.
The merchant, beaten with tempestuous skies
Happy the soldier! one half-hour to thee
Gives speedy death or glorious victory.
The lawyer, knocked up early from his rest
By restless clients, calls the peasant blest.
The peasant, when his labours ill succeed,
Envies the mouth which only talk does feed.
'Tis not, I think you'll say, that I want store
Of instances, if here I add no more,
They are enough to reach at least a mile
Beyond long Orator Fabius his style.
But hold, you whom no fortune e'er endears,
Gentlemen, malcontents, and mutineers,
Who bounteous Jove so often cruel call,
Behold, Jove's now resolved to please you all.
Thou, soldier, be a merchant; merchant, thou
A soldier be; and lawyer to the plough.
Change all your stations straight.  Why do they stay?
The devil a man will change now when he may.
Were I in General Jove's abused case,
By Jove, I'd cudgel this rebellious race;
But he's too good; be all, then, as you were;
However, make the best of what you are,
And in that state be cheerful and rejoice,
Which either was your fate or was your choice.
No; they must labour yet, and sweat and toil,
And very miserable be awhile.
But 'tis with a design only to gain
What may their age with plenteous ease maintain;
The prudent pismire does this lesson teach,
And industry to lazy mankind preach.
The little drudge does trot about and sweat,
Nor does he straight devour all he can get,
But in his temperate mouth carries it home,
A stock for winter which he knows must come.
And when the rolling world to creatures here
Turns up the deformed wrong side of the year,
And shuts him in with storms and cold and wet,
He cheerfully does his past labours eat.
Oh, does he so? your wise example, the ant
Does not at all times rest, and plenty want.
But, weighing justly a mortal ant's condition,
Divides his life 'twixt labour and fruition.
Thee neither heat, nor storms, nor wet, nor cold
From thy unnatural diligence can withhold,
To the Indies thou wouldst run rather than see
Another, though a friend, richer than thee.
Fond man! what good or beauty can be found
In heaps of treasure buried under ground?
Which, rather than diminished e'er to see,
Thou wouldst thyself, too, buried with them be
And what's the difference is't not quite as bad
Never to use, as never to have had?
In thy vast barns millions of quarters store,
Thy belly, for all that, will hold no more
Than mine does.  Every baker makes much bread,
What then?  He's with no more than others fed.
Do you within the bounds of Nature live,
And to augment your own you need not strive;
One hundred acres will no less for you
Your life's whole business than ten thousand do.
But pleasant 'tis to take from a great store;
What, man? though you're resolved to take no more
Than I do from a small one; if your will
Be but a pitcher or a pot to fill,
To some great river for it must you go,
When a clear spring just at your feet does flow?
Give me the spring which does to human use,
Safe, easy, and untroubled stores produce;
He who scorns these, and needs will drink at Nile,
Must run the danger of the crocodile;
And of the rapid stream itself which may,
At unawares bear him perhaps away.
In a full flood Tantalus stands, his skin
Washed o'er in vain, for ever dry within;
He catches at the stream with greedy lips,
From his touched mouth the wanton torment slips.
You laugh now, and expand your careful brow:
'Tis finely said, but what's all this to you?
Change but the name, this fable is thy story,
Thou in a flood of useless wealth dost glory,
Which thou canst only touch, but never taste;
The abundance still, and still the want does last.
The treasures of the gods thou wouldst not spare,
But when they're made thine own, they sacred are,
And must be kept with reverence; as if thou
No other use of precious gold didst know
But that of curious pictures to delight
With the fair stamp thy virtuoso sight.
The only true and genuine use is this,
To buy the things which nature cannot miss
Without discomfort, oil, and vital bread.
And wine by which the life of life is fed,
And all those few things else by which we live
All that remains is given for thee to give.
If cares and troubles, envy, grief, and fear,
The bitter fruits be which fair riches bear,
If a new poverty grow out of store,
The old plain way, ye gods! let me be poor.


A PARAPHRASE ON AN ODE IN HORACE'S THIRD BOOK, BEGINNING THUS:-
"Inclusam Danaen turris ahenea."


A tower of brass, one would have said,
And locks, and bolts, and iron bars,
And guards as strict as in the heat of wars
Might have preserved one innocent maidenhood.
The jealous father thought he well might spare
      All further jealous care;
And as he walked, to himself alone he smiled
   To think how Venus' arts he had beguiled;
   And when he slept his rest was deep,
But Venus laughed to see and hear him sleep.
   She taught the amorous Jove
   A magical receipt in love,
Which armed him stronger and which helped him more
Than all his thunder did and his almightyship before.

II.

She taught him love's elixir, by which art
His godhead into gold he did convert;
      No guards did then his passage stay,
      He passed with ease, gold was the word;
Subtle as lightning, bright, and quick, and fierce,
   Gold through doors and walls did pierce;
And as that works sometimes upon the sword,
   Melted the maiden dread away,
Even in the secret scabbard where it lay.
   The prudent Macedonian king,
To blow up towns, a golden mine did spring;
   He broke through gates with this petar,
'Tis the great art of peace, the engine 'tis of war,
   And fleets and armies follow it afar;
The ensign 'tis at land, and 'tis the seaman's scar.

III.

Let all the world slave to this tyrant be,
Creature to this disguised deity,
   Yet it shall never conquer me.
A guard of virtues will not let it pass,
And wisdom is a tower of stronger brass.
The muses' laurel, round my temples spread,
Does from this lightning's force secure my head,
   Nor will I lift it up so high,
   As in the violent meteor's way to lie.
Wealth for its power do we honour and adore?
The things we hate, ill fate, and death, have more.

IV.

From towns and courts, camps of the rich and great,
The vast Xerxean army, I retreat,
And to the small Laconic forces fly
   Which hold the straits of poverty.
Cellars and granaries in vain we fill
   With all the bounteous summer's store:
If the mind thirst and hunger still,
   The poor rich man's emphatically poor.
   Slaves to the things we too much prize,
We masters grow of all that we despise.

V.

A field of corn, a fountain, and a wood,
   Is all the wealth by nature understood.
The monarch on whom fertile Nile bestows
   All which that grateful earth can bear,
      Deceives himself, if he suppose
   That more than this falls to his share.
Whatever an estate does beyond this afford,
      Is not a rent paid to the Lord;
But is a tax illegal and unjust,
Exacted from it by the tyrant lust.
      Much will always wanting be,
      To him who much desires.  Thrice happy he
To whom the wise indulgency of Heaven,
   With sparing hand but just enough has given.



THE DANGERS OF AN HONEST MAN IN MUCH COMPANY.



If twenty thousand naked Americans were not able to resist the
assaults of but twenty well-armed Spaniards, I see little
possibility for one honest man to defend himself against twenty
thousand knaves, who are all furnished cap-a-pie with the defensive
arms of worldly prudence, and the offensive, too, of craft and
malice.  He will find no less odds than this against him if he have
much to do in human affairs.  The only advice, therefore, which I
can give him is, to be sure not to venture his person any longer in
the open campaign, to retreat and entrench himself, to stop up all
avenues, and draw up all bridges against so numerous an enemy.  The
truth of it is, that a man in much business must either make himself
a knave, or else the world will make him a fool:  and if the injury
went no farther than the being laughed at, a wise man would content
himself with the revenge of retaliation:  but the case is much
worse, for these civil cannibals too, as well as the wild ones, not
only dance about such a taken stranger, but at last devour him.  A
sober man cannot get too soon out of drunken company; though they be
never so kind and merry among themselves, it is not unpleasant only,
but dangerous to him.  Do ye wonder that a virtuous man should love
to be alone?  It is hard for him to be otherwise; he is so, when he
is among ten thousand; neither is the solitude so uncomfortable to
be alone without any other creature, as it is to be alone in the
midst of wild beasts.  Man is to man all kind of beasts--a fawning
dog, a roaring lion, a thieving fox, a robbing wolf, a dissembling
crocodile, a treacherous decoy, and a rapacious vulture.  The
civilest, methinks, of all nations, are those whom we account the
most barbarous; there is some moderation and good nature in the
Toupinambaltians who eat no men but their enemies, whilst we learned
and polite and Christian Europeans, like so many pikes and sharks,
prey upon everything that we can swallow.  It is the 