great boast of
eloquence and philosophy, that they first congregated men dispersed,
united them into societies, and built up the houses and the walls of
cities.  I wish they could unravel all they had woven; that we might
have our woods and our innocence again instead of our castles and
our policies.  They have assembled many thousands of scattered
people into one body:  it is true, they have done so, they have
brought them together into cities to cozen, and into armies to
murder one another; they found them hunters and fishers of wild
creatures, they have made them hunters and fishers of their
brethren; they boast to have reduced them to a state of peace, when
the truth is they have only taught them an art of war; they have
framed, I must confess, wholesome laws for the restraint of vice,
but they raised first that devil which now they conjure and cannot
bind; though there were before no punishments for wickedness, yet
there was less committed because there were no rewards for it.  But
the men who praise philosophy from this topic are much deceived; let
oratory answer for itself, the tinkling, perhaps, of that may unite
a swarm:  it never was the work of philosophy to assemble
multitudes, but to regulate only, and govern them when they were
assembled, to make the best of an evil, and bring them, as much as
is possible, to unity again.  Avarice and ambition only were the
first builders of towns, and founders of empire; they said, "Go to,
let us build us a city and a tower whose top may reach unto heaven,
and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face
of the earth."  What was the beginning of Rome, the metropolis of
all the world? what was it but a concourse of thieves, and a
sanctuary of criminals? it was justly named by the augury of no less
than twelve vultures, and the founder cemented his walls with the
blood of his brother.

Not unlike to this was the beginning even of the first town, too, in
the world, and such is the original sin of most cities:  their
actual increase daily with their age and growth; the more people,
the more wicked all of them.  Every one brings in his part to
inflame the contagion, which becomes at last so universal and so
strong, that no precepts can be sufficient preservatives, nor
anything secure our safety, but flight from among the infected.  We
ought, in the choice of a situation, to regard above all things the
healthfulness of the place, and the healthfulness of it for the mind
rather than for the body.  But suppose (which is hardly to be
supposed) we had antidote enough against this poison; nay, suppose,
further, we were always and at all places armed and provided both
against the assaults of hostility and the mines of treachery, it
will yet be but an uncomfortable life to be ever in alarms; though
we were compassed round with fire to defend ourselves from wild
beasts, the lodging would be unpleasant, because we must always be
obliged to watch that fire, and to fear no less the defects of our
guard than the diligences of our enemy.  The sum of this is, that a
virtuous man is in danger to be trod upon and destroyed in the crowd
of his contraries; nay, which is worse, to be changed and corrupted
by them, and that it is impossible to escape both these
inconveniences without so much caution as will take away the whole
quiet, that is, the happiness of his life.  Ye see, then, what he
may lose; but, I pray, what can he get there?  Quid Romae faciam?
Mentiri nescio.  What should a man of truth and honesty do at Rome?
he can neither understand, nor speak the language of the place; a
naked man may swim in the sea, but it is not the way to catch fish
there; they are likelier to devour him than he them, if he bring no
nets and use no deceits.  I think, therefore, it was wise and
friendly advice which Martial gave to Fabian when he met him newly
arrived at Rome.


Honest and poor, faithful in word and thought;
What has thee, Fabian, to the city brought?
Thou neither the buffoon nor bawd canst play,
Nor with false whispers the innocent betray:
Nor corrupt wives, nor from rich beldams get
A living by thy industry and sweat:
Nor with vain promises and projects cheat,
Nor bribe or flatter any of the great.
   But you're a man of learning, prudent, just:
A man of courage, firm, and fit for trust.
   Why, you may stay, and live unenvied here;
But, 'faith! go back, and keep you where you were.


Nay, if nothing of all this were in the case, yet the very sight of
uncleanness is loathsome to the cleanly; the sight of folly and
impiety vexatious to the wise and pious.

Lucretius, by his favour, though a good poet, was but an ill-natured
man, when he said, "It was delightful to see other men in a great
storm."  And no less ill-natured should I think Democritus, who
laughed at all the world, but that he retired himself so much out of
it that we may perceive he took no great pleasure in that kind of
mirth.  I have been drawn twice or thrice by company to go to
Bedlam, and have seen others very much delighted with the
fantastical extravagancy of so many various madnesses, which upon me
wrought so contrary an effect, that I always returned not only
melancholy, but even sick with the sight.  My compassion there was
perhaps too tender, for I meet a thousand madmen abroad, without any
perturbation, though, to weigh the matter justly, the total loss of
reason is less deplorable than the total depravation of it.  An
exact judge of human blessings, of riches, honours, beauty, even of
wit itself, should pity the abuse of them more than the want.

Briefly, though a wise man could pass never so securely through the
great roads of human life, yet he will meet perpetually with so many
objects and occasions of compassion, grief, shame, anger, hatred,
indignation, and all passions but envy (for he will find nothing to
deserve that) that he had better strike into some private path; nay,
go so far, if he could, out of the common way, ut nec facta audiat
Pelopidarum; that he might not so much as hear of the actions of the
sons of Adam.  But, whither shall we fly, then? into the deserts,
like the ancient hermits?


Qua terra patet fera regnat Erynnis.
   In facinus jurasse putes.


One would think that all mankind had bound themselves by an oath to
do all the wickedness they can; that they had all, as the Scripture
speaks, sold themselves to sin:  the difference only is, that some
are a little more crafty (and but a little, God knows) in making of
the bargain.  I thought, when I went first to dwell in the country,
that without doubt I should have met there with the simplicity of
the old poetical golden age:  I thought to have found no inhabitants
there, but such as the shepherds of Sir Philip Sidney in Arcadia, or
of Monsieur d'Urfe upon the banks of Lignon; and began to consider
with myself, which way I might recommend no less to posterity the
happiness and innocence of the men of Chertsey:  but to confess the
truth, I perceived quickly, by infallible demonstrations, that I was
still in old England, and not in Arcadia, or La Forrest; that if I
could not content myself with anything less than exact fidelity in
human conversation, I had almost as good go back and seek for it in
the Court, or the Exchange, or Westminster Hall.  I ask again, then,
whither shall we fly, or what shall we do?  The world may so come in
a man's way that he cannot choose but salute it; he must take heed,
though, not to go a whoring after it.  If by any lawful vocation or
just necessity men happen to be married to it, I can only give them
St. Paul's advice:  "Brethren, the time is short; it remains that
they that have wives be as though they had none.  But I would that
all men were even as I myself."

In all cases they must be sure that they do mundum ducere, and not
mundo nubere.  They must retain the superiority and headship over
it:  happy are they who can get out of the sight of this deceitful
beauty, that they may not be led so much as into temptation; who
have not only quitted the metropolis, but can abstain from ever
seeing the next market town of their country.


CLAUDIAN'S OLD MAN OF VERONA.


Happy the man who his whole time doth bound
Within the enclosure of his little ground.
Happy the man whom the same humble place
(The hereditary cottage of his race)
From his first rising infancy has known,
And by degrees sees gently bending down,
With natural propension to that earth
Which both preserved his life, and gave him birth.
Him no false distant lights by fortune set,
Could ever into foolish wanderings get.
He never dangers either saw, or feared,
The dreadful storms at sea he never heard.
He never heard the shrill alarms of war,
Or the worse noises of the lawyers' bar.
No change of consuls marks to him the year,
The change of seasons is his calendar.
The cold and heat winter and summer shows,
Autumn by fruits, and spring by flowers he knows.
He measures time by landmarks, and has found
For the whole day the dial of his ground.
A neighbouring wood born with himself he sees,
And loves his old contemporary trees.
Has only heard of near Verona's name,
And knows it, like the Indies, but by fame.
Does with a like concernment notice take
Of the Red Sea, and of Benacus lake.
Thus health and strength he to a third age enjoys,
And sees a long posterity of boys.
About the spacious world let other roam,
The voyage Life is longest made at home.



THE SHORTNESS OF LIFE AND UNCERTAINTY OF RICHES.



If you should see a man who were to cross from Dover to Calais, run
about very busy and solicitous, and trouble himself many weeks
before in making provisions for the voyage, would you commend him
for a cautious and discreet person, or laugh at him for a timorous
and impertinent coxcomb?  A man who is excessive in his pains and
diligence, and who consumes the greatest part of his time in
furnishing the remainder with all conveniences and even
superfluities, is to angels and wise men no less ridiculous; he does
as little consider the shortness of his passage that he might
proportion his cares accordingly.  It is, alas, so narrow a strait
betwixt the womb and the grave, that it might be called the Pas de
Vie, as well as the Pas de Calais.  We are all [Greek text which
cannot be reproduced] as Pindar calls us, creatures of a day, and
therefore our Saviour bounds our desires to that little space; as if
it were very probable that every day should be our last, we are
taught to demand even bread for no longer a time.  The sun ought not
to set upon our covetousness; no more than upon our anger; but as to
God Almighty a thousand years are as one day, so, in direct
opposition, one day to the covetous man is as a thousand years, tam
brevi fortis jaculatur aevo multa, so far he shoots beyond his butt.
One would think he were of the opinion of the Millenaries, and hoped
for so long a reign upon earth.  The patriarchs before the flood,
who enjoyed almost such a life, made, we are sure, less stores for
the maintaining of it; they who lived nine hundred years scarcely
provided for a few days; we who live but a few days, provide at
least for nine hundred years.  What a strange alteration is this of
human life and manners! and yet we see an imitation of it in every
man's particular experience, for we begin not the cares of life till
it be half spent, and still increase them as that decreases.  What
is there among the actions of beasts so illogical and repugnant to
reason?  When they do anything which seems to proceed from that
which we call reason, we disdain to allow them that perfection, and
attribute it only to a natural instinct.  If we could but learn to
number our days (as we are taught to pray that we might) we should
adjust much better our other accounts, but whilst we never consider
an end of them, it is no wonder if our cares for them be without end
too.  Horace advises very wisely, and in excellent good words,
spatio brevi spem longam reseces; from a short life cut off all
hopes that grow too long.  They must be pruned away like suckers
that choke the mother-plant, and hinder it from bearing fruit.  And
in another place to the same sense, Vitae summa brevis spem nos
vetat inchoare longam, which Seneca does not mend when he says, Oh
quanta dementia est spes longas inchoantium! but he gives an example
there of an acquaintance of his named Senecio, who from a very mean
beginning by great industry in turning about of money through all
ways of gain, had attained to extraordinary riches, but died on a
sudden after having supped merrily, In ipso actu bene cedentium
rerum, in ipso procurrentis fortunae impetu; in the full course of
his good fortune, when she had a high tide and a stiff gale and all
her sails on; upon which occasion he cries, out of Virgil:


Insere nunc Melibaee pyros, pone ordine vites:


Go to, Melibaeus, now,
Go graff thy orchards and thy vineyards plant;
Behold the fruit!


For this Senecio I have no compassion, because he was taken, as we
say, in ipso facto, still labouring in the work of avarice; but the
poor rich man in St. Luke (whose case was not like this) I could
pity, methinks, if the Scripture would permit me, for he seems to
have been satisfied at last; he confesses he had enough for many
years; he bids his soul take its ease; and yet for all that, God
says to him, "Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of
thee, and the things thou hast laid up, whom shall they belong to?"
Where shall we find the causes of this bitter reproach and terrible
judgment; we may find, I think, two, and God perhaps saw more.
First, that he did not intend true rest to the soul, but only to
change the employments of it from avarice to luxury; his design is
to eat and to drink, and to be merry.  Secondly, that he went on too
long before he thought of resting; the fulness of his old barns had
not sufficed him, he would stay till he was forced to build new
ones, and God meted out to him in the same measure; since he would
have more riches than his life could contain, God destroyed his life
and gave the fruits of it to another.

Thus God takes away sometimes the man from his riches, and no less
frequently riches from the man:  what hope can there be of such a
marriage where both parties are so fickle and uncertain; by what
bonds can such a couple be kept long together?


I.


Why dost thou heap up wealth, which thou must quit,
   Or, what is worse, be left by it?
Why dost thou load thyself, when thou'rt to fly,
   O man ordained to die?

II.

Why dost thou build up stately rooms on high,
   Thou who art underground to lie?
Thou sow'st and plantest, but no fruit must see;
   For death, alas? is sowing thee.

III.

Suppose, thou fortune couldst to tameness bring,
   And clip or pinion her wine;
Suppose thou couldst on fate so far prevail
   As not to cut off thy entail.

IV.

Yet death at all that subtlety will laugh,
   Death will that foolish gardener mock
Who does a slight and annual plant engraff,
   Upon a lasting stock.

V.

Thou dost thyself wise and industrious deem;
   A mighty husband thou wouldst seem;
Fond man! like a bought slave, thou, all the while
   Dost but for others sweat and toil.

VI.

Officious fool! that needs must meddling be
   In business that concerns not thee!
For when to future years thou extend'st thy cares,
   Thou deal'st in other men's affairs.

VII.

Even aged men, as if they truly were
   Children again, for age prepare,
Pro visions for long travail they design
   In the last point of their short line.

VIII.

Wisely the ant against poor winter hoards
   The stock which summer's wealth affords,
In grasshoppers, that must at autumn die,
   How vain were such an industry.

IX.

Of power and honour the deceitful light
   Might half excuse our cheated sight,
If it of life the whole small time would stay,
   And be our sunshine all the day.

X.

Like lightning that, begot but in a cloud,
   Though shining bright, and speaking loud,
Whilst it begins, concludes its violent race,
   And where it gilds, it wounds the place.

XI.

Oh, scene of fortune, which dost fair appear
   Only to men that stand not near.
Proud poverty, that tinsel bravery wears,
   And like a rainbow, painted tears.

XII.

Be prudent, and the shore in prospect keep,
   In a weak boat trust not the deep.
Placed beneath envy, above envying rise;
   Pity great men, great things despise.

XIII.

The wise example of the heavenly lark.
   Thy fellow poet, Cowley, mark,
Above the clouds let thy proud music sound,
   Thy humble nest build on the ground.



THE DANGER OF PROCRASTINATION.



A letter to Mr. S. L.

I am glad that you approve and applaud my design of withdrawing
myself from all tumult and business of the world and consecrating
the little rest of my time to those studies to which nature had so
motherly inclined me, and from which fortune like a step-mother has
so long detained me.  But nevertheless, you say--which But is aerugo
mera, a rust which spoils the good metal it grows upon.  But, you
say, you would advise me not to precipitate that resolution, but to
stay a while longer with patience and complaisance, till I had
gotten such an estate as might afford me, according to the saying of
that person whom you and I love very much, and would believe as soon
as another man, cum dignitate otium.  This were excellent advice to
Joshua, who could bid the sun stay too.  But there's no fooling with
life when it is once turned beyond forty.  The seeking for a fortune
then is but a desperate after game, it is a hundred to one if a man
fling two sixes and recover all; especially if his hand be no
luckier than mine.  There is some help for all the defects of
fortune, for if a man cannot attain to the length of his wishes, he
may have his remedy by cutting of them shorter.  Epicurus writes a
letter to Idomeneus, who was then a very powerful, wealthy, and it
seems bountiful person, to recommend to him, who had made so many
men rich, one Pythocles, a friend of his, whom he desired to be made
a rich man too:  But I entreat you that you would not do it just the
same way as you have done to many less deserving persons, but in the
most gentlemanly manner of obliging him, which is not to add
anything to his estate, but to take something from his desires.  The
sum of this is, that for the uncertain hopes of some conveniences we
ought not to defer the execution of a work that is necessary,
especially when the use of those things which we would stay for may
otherwise be supplied, but the loss of time never recovered.  Nay,
further yet, though we were sure to obtain all that we had a mind
to, though we were sure of getting never so much by continuing the
game, yet when the light of life is so near going out, and ought to
be so precious, Le jeu ne vaut pas la chandelle, the play is not
worth the expense of the candle.  After having been long tossed in a
tempest, if our masts be standing, and we have still sail and
tackling enough to carry us to our port, it is no matter for the
want of streamers and topgallants; utere velis totes pande sinus.  A
gentleman in our late civil wars, when his quarters were beaten up
by the enemy, was taken prisoner and lost his life afterwards, only
by staying to put on a band and adjust his periwig.  He would escape
like a person of quality, or not at all, and died the noble martyr
of ceremony and gentility.  I think your counsel of festina lente is
as ill to a man who is flying from the world, as it would have been
to that unfortunate well-bred gentleman, who was so cautious as not
to fly undecently from his enemies, and therefore I prefer Horace's
advice before yours.


- Sapere ande; incipe.


Begin:  the getting out of doors is the greatest part of the
journey.  Varro teaches us that Latin proverb, Portam itineri
longissimam esse.  But to return to Horace,


- Sapere aude;
Incipe.  Virendi qui recte prorogat horam
Rusticus expectat dum labitur amnis; at ille
Labitur, et labetur is omne volubilis aevum.

Begin, be bold, and venture to be wise;
He who defers the work from day to day,
Does on a river's bank expecting stay,
Till the whole stream which stopped him should be gone,
That runs, and as it runs, for ever will run on.


Caesar (the man of expedition above all others) was so far from this
folly, that whensoever in a journey he was to cross any river, he
never went one foot out of his way for a bridge, or a ford, or a
ferry; but flung himself into it immediately, and swam over; and
this is the course we ought to imitate if we meet with any stops in
our way to happiness.  Stay till the waters are low, stay till some
boats come by to transport you, stay till a bridge be built for you;
you had even as good stay till the river be quite past.  Persius
(who, you used to say, you do not know whether he be a good poet or
no, because you cannot understand him, and whom, therefore, I say, I
know to be not a good poet) has an odd expression of these
procrastinations, which, methinks, is full of fancy.


Jam cras hesterum consumpsimus, ecce aliud cras egerit hos annos.

Our yesterday's to-morrow now is gone,
And still a new to-morrow does come on;
We by to-morrows draw up all our store,
Till the exhausted well can yield no more.


And now, I think, I am even with you, for your otium cum dignitate
and festina lente, and three or four other more of your new Latin
sentences:  if I should draw upon you all my forces out of Seneca
and Plutarch upon this subject, I should overwhelm you, but I leave
those as triarii for your next charges.  I shall only give you now a
light skirmish out of an epigrammatist, your special good friend,
and so, vale.


MART.  LIB. 5, EP. 59.


To-morrow you will live, you always cry;
In what far country does this morrow lie,
That 'tis so mighty long ere it arrive?
Beyond the Indies does this morrow live?
'Tis so far-fetched, this morrow, that I fear
'Twill be both very old and very dear.
To-morrow I will live, the fool does say;
To-day itself's too late, the wise lived yesterday.


MART.  LIB. 2, EP. 90.


Wonder not, sir (you who instruct the town
In the true wisdom of the sacred gown),
That I make haste to live, and cannot hold
Patiently out, till I grow rich and old.
Life for delays and doubts no time does give,
None ever yet made haste enough to live.
Let him defer it, whose preposterous care
Omits himself, and reaches to his heir,
Who does his father's bounded stores despise,
And whom his own, too, never can suffice:
My humble thoughts no glittering roofs require,
Or rooms that shine with ought be constant fire.
We ill content the avarice of my sight
With the fair gildings of reflected light:
Pleasures abroad, the sport of Nature yields
Her living fountains, and her smiling fields:
And then at home, what pleasure is 't to see
A little cleanly, cheerful family?
Which if a chaste wife crown, no less in her
Than fortune, I the golden mean prefer.
Too noble, nor too wise, she should not be,
No, nor too rich, too fair, too fond of me.
Thus let my life slide silently away,
With sleep all night, and quiet all the day.



OF MYSELF.



It is a hard and nice subject for a man to write of himself; it
grates his own heart to say anything of disparagement and the
reader's ears to hear anything of praise for him.  There is no
danger from me of offending him in this kind; neither my mind, nor
my body, nor my fortune allow me any materials for that vanity.  It
is sufficient for my own contentment that they have preserved me
from being scandalous, or remarkable on the defective side.  But
besides that, I shall here speak of myself only in relation to the
subject of these precedent discourses, and shall be likelier thereby
to fall into the contempt than rise up to the estimation of most
people.  As far as my memory can return back into my past life,
before I knew or was capable of guessing what the world, or glories,
or business of it were, the natural affections of my soul gave me a
secret bent of aversion from them, as some plants are said to turn
away from others, by an antipathy imperceptible to themselves and
inscrutable to man's understanding.  Even when I was a very young
boy at school, instead of running about on holidays and playing with
my fellows, I was wont to steal from them and walk into the fields,
either alone with a book, or with some one companion, if I could
find any of the same temper.  I was then, too, so much an enemy to
all constraint, that my masters could never prevail on me, by any
persuasions or encouragements, to learn without book the common
rules of grammar, in which they dispensed with me alone, because
they found I made a shift to do the usual exercises out of my own
reading and observation.  That I was then of the same mind as I am
now (which I confess I wonder at myself) may appear by the latter
end of an ode which I made when I was but thirteen years old, and
which was then printed with many other verses.  The beginning of it
is boyish, but of this part which I here set down, if a very little
were corrected, I should hardly now be much ashamed.

IX.

This only grant me, that my means may lie
Too low for envy, for contempt too high.
   Some honour I would have,
Not from great deeds, but good alone.
The unknown are better than ill known.
   Rumour can ope the grave;
Acquaintance I would have, but when it depends
Not on the number, but the choice of friends.

X.

Books should, not business, entertain the light,
And sleep, as undisturbed as death, the night.
   My house a cottage, more
Than palace, and should fitting be
For all my use, no luxury.
   My garden painted o'er
With Nature's hand, not Art's; and pleasures yield,
Horace might envy in his Sabine field.

XI.

Thus would I double my life's fading space,
For he that runs it well twice runs his race.
   And in this true delight,
These unbought sports, this happy state,
I would not fear, nor wish my fate,
   But boldly say each night,
To-morrow let my sun his beams display
Or in clouds hide them--I have lived to-day.


You may see by it I was even then acquainted with the poets (for the
conclusion is taken out of Horace), and perhaps it was the immature
and immoderate love of them which stamped first, or rather engraved,
these characters in me.  They were like letters cut into the bark of
a young tree, which with the tree still grow proportionably.  But
how this love came to be produced in me so early is a hard question.
I believe I can tell the particular little chance that filled my
head first with such chimes of verse as have never since left
ringing there.  For I remember when I begun to read and to take some
pleasure in it, there was wont to lie in my mother's parlour.  (I
know not by what accident, for she herself never in her life read
any book but of devotion), but there was wont to lie Spenser's
works; this I happened to fall upon, and was infinitely delighted
with the stories of the knights, and giants, and monsters, and brave
houses, which I found everywhere there (though my understanding had
little to do with all this); and by degrees with the tinkling of the
rhyme and dance of the numbers, so that I think I had read him all
over before I was twelve years old, and was thus made a poet as
immediately as a child is made an eunuch.  With these affections of
mind, and my heart wholly set upon letters, I went to the
university, but was soon torn from thence by that violent public
storm which would suffer nothing to stand where it did, but rooted
up every plant, even from the princely cedars to me, the hyssop.
Yet I had as good fortune as could have befallen me in such a
tempest; for I was cast by it into the family of one of the best
persons, and into the court of one of the best princesses of the
world.  Now though I was here engaged in ways most contrary to the
original design of my life, that is, into much company, and no small
business, and into a daily sight of greatness, both militant and
triumphant, for that was the state then of the English and French
Courts; yet all this was so far from altering my opinion, that it
only added the confirmation of reason to that which was before but
natural inclination.  I saw plainly all the paint of that kind of
life, the nearer I came to it; and that beauty which I did not fall
in love with when, for aught I knew, it was real, was not like to
bewitch or entice me when I saw that it was adulterate.  I met with
several great persons, whom I liked very well, but could not
perceive that any part of their greatness was to be liked or
desired, no more than I would be glad or content to be in a storm,
though I saw many ships which rid safely and bravely in it.  A storm
would not agree with my stomach, if it did with my courage.  Though
I was in a crowd of as good company as could be found anywhere,
though I was in business of great and honourable trust, though I ate
at the best table, and enjoyed the best conveniences for present
subsistence that ought to be desired by a man of my condition in
banishment and public distresses, yet I could not abstain from
renewing my old schoolboy's wish in a copy of verses to the same
effect.


Well then; I now do plainly see,
This busy world and I shall ne'er agree, etc.


And I never then proposed to myself another advantage from His
Majesty's happy restoration, but the getting into some moderately
convenient retreat in the country, which I thought in that case I
might easily have compassed, as well as some others, with no greater
probabilities or pretences have arrived to extraordinary fortunes.
But I had before written a shrewd prophecy against myself, and I
think Apollo inspired me in the truth, though not in the elegance of
it


"Thou, neither great at court nor in the war,
Nor at th' exchange shalt be, nor at the wrangling bar;
Content thyself with the small barren praise,
Which neglected verse does raise, etc.


However, by the failing of the forces which I had expected, I did
not quit the design which I had resolved on; I cast myself into it A
corps perdu, without making capitulations or taking counsel of
fortune.  But God laughs at a man who says to his soul, "Take thy
ease":  I met presently not only with many little encumbrances and
impediments, but with so much sickness (a new misfortune to me) as
would have spoiled the happiness of an emperor as well as mine.  Yet
I do neither repent nor alter my course.  Non ego perfidum dixi
sacramentum.  Nothing shall separate me from a mistress which I have
loved so long, and have now at last married, though she neither has
brought me a rich portion, nor lived yet so quietly with me as I
hoped from her.


- Nec vos, dulcissima mundi
Nomina, vos Musae, libertas, otia, libri,
Hortique sylvesque anima remanente relinquam.

   Nor by me e'er shall you,
You of all names the sweetest, and the best,
You Muses, books, and liberty, and rest;
You gardens, fields, and woods forsaken be,
As long as life itself forsakes not me.


But this is a very petty ejaculation.  Because I have concluded all
the other chapters with a copy of verses, I will maintain the humour
to the last.


MARTIAL, LIB. 10, EP. 47.
Vitam quae faciunt beatiorem, etc.


Since, dearest friend, 'tis your desire to see
A true receipt of happiness from me;
These are the chief ingredients, if not all:
Take an estate neither too great nor small,
Which quantum sufficit the doctors call;
Let this estate from parents' care descend:
The getting it too much of life does spend.
Take such a ground, whose gratitude may be
A fair encouragement for industry.
Let constant fires the winter's fury tame,
And let thy kitchens be a vestal flame.
Thee to the town let never suit at law,
And rarely, very rarely, business draw.
Thy active mind in equal temper keep,
In undisturbed peace, yet not in sleep.
Let exercise a vigorous health maintain,
Without which all the composition's vain.
In the same weight prudence and innocence take
Ana of each does the just mixture make.
But a few friendships wear, and let them be
By Nature and by Fortune fit for thee.
Instead of art and luxury in food,
Let mirth and freedom make thy table good.
If any cares into thy daytime creep,
At night, without wines, opium, let them sleep.
Let rest, which Nature does to darkness wed,
And not lust, recommend to thee thy bed,
Be satisfied, and pleased with what thou art;
Act cheerfully and well the allotted part.
Enjoy the present hour, be thankful for the past,
And neither fear, nor wish the approaches of the last.


MARTIAL, LIB. 10. EP. 96.


Me, who have lived so long among the great,
You wonder to hear talk of a retreat:
And a retreat so distant, as may show
No thoughts of a return when once I go.
Give me a country, how remote so e'er,
Where happiness a moderate rate does bear,
Where poverty itself in plenty flows
And all the solid use of riches knows.
The ground about the house maintains it there,
The house maintains the ground about it here.
Here even hunger's dear, and a full board
Devours the vital substance of the lord.
The land itself does there the feast bestow,
The land itself must here to market go.
Three or four suits one winter here does waste,
One suit does there three or four winters last.
Here every frugal man must oft be cold,
And little lukewarm fires are to you sold.
There fire's an element as cheap and free
Almost as any of the other three.
Stay you then here, and live among the great,
Attend their sports, and at their tables eat.
When all the bounties here of men you score:
The Place's bounty there, shall give me more.


EPITAPHIUM VIVI AUCTOIRIS.


Hic, O viator, sub Lare parvulo
Couleius hic est conditus, hic jacet;
   Defunctus humani laboris
      Sorte, supervacuague vila.

Non indecora pauperie nitens,
Et non inerti nobilis otio,
   Vanoque dilectis popello
      Divitiis animosus hostis.

Possis ut illum dicere mortuum,
En terra jam nunc quantula sufficit!
   Exempta sit curis, viator;
      Terra sit illa levis, precare.

Hic sparge flores, sparge breves rosas,
Nam vita gaudet mortua floribus,
   Herbisque odoratis corona
      Vatis adhuc cinerem calentem.



EPITAPH OF THE LIVING AUTHOR.
[Translation.]



O wayfarer, beneath his household shrine
   Here Cowley lies, closed in a little den;
A life too empty and his lot combine
   To give him rest from all the toils of men.

Not shining with unseemly shows of want,
   Nor noble with the indolence of ease;
Fearless of spirit as a combatant
   With mob-loved wealth and all its devotees.

That you may fairly speak of him as dead,
   Behold how little earth contents him now!
Pray, wayfarer, that all his cares be fled,
   And that the earth lie lightly on his brow.

Strew flowers here, strew roses soon to perish,
   For the dead life joys in all flowers that blow;
Crown with sweet herbs, bank blossoms high, to cherish
   The poet's ashes that are yet aglow.

HENRY MORLEY.



A FEW NOTES.



Page 15.  Fertur equis, &c.  From the close of Virgil's first
Georgic:


said of horses in a chariot race,
Nor reins, nor curbs, nor threatening cries they fear,
But force along the trembling charioteer.
Dryden's translation.

Page 16.  En Romanos, &c.  Virgil, AEneid I., when Jove says,

The people Romans call, the city Rome,
To them no bounds of empire I assign,
Nor term of years to their immortal line.
Dryden's Virgil.

Page 18.  "Laveer with every wind."  Laveer is an old sea term for
working the ship against the wind.  Lord Clarendon used its noun,
"the schoolmen are the best laveerers in the world, and would have
taught a ship to catch the wind that it should have gained half and
half, though it had been contrary."

Page 24.  Amatorem trecentae Pirithoum cohibent catenae.  Horace's
Ode, Bk. IV., end of ode 4.  Three hundred chains bind the lover,
Pirithous:

Wrath waits on sin, three hundred chains
Pirithous bind in endless pains.
Creech's Translation.

Page 25.  Aliena negotia, &c.  From Horace's Satires, sixth of Book
II.

Page 25.  Dors, cockchafers.

Page 26.  Pan huper sebastos.  Lord over All.

Page 27.  Perditur haec inter misero Lux.  Horace, Satires, II., 6.
This whole Satire is in harmony with the spirit of Cowley's Essays.

Page 29.  A slave in Saturnalibus.  In the Saturnalia, when Roman
slaves had licence to disport themselves.

Page  29.  Unciatim, &c.  Terence's Phormio, Act I., scene 1, in the
opening:  "All that this poor fellow has, by starving himself, bit
by bit, with much ado, scraped together out of his pitiful
allowance--(must go at one swoop, people never considering the price
it cost him the getting)."  Eachard's Terence.

Page 30.  [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], &c.  Paul to
Titus, "The Cretans are always liars, EVIL BEASTS, SLOW BELLIES."

Page 31.  Quisnam igitur, &c.  Horace's Satires, II., 7.  "Who then
is free?  The wise man, who has absolute rule over himself."

Page  31.  Oenomaus, father of Hippodameia, would give her only to
the suitor who could overcome him in a chariot race.  Suitors whom
he could overtake he killed.  He killed himself when outstripped by
Pelops, whom a god assisted, or, according to one version, a man who
took the nails out of Oenomaus' chariot wheels, and brought him down
with a crash.

Page 41.  Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus.  Never less alone than
when alone.

Page 47.  Sic ego, &c.  From Tibullus, IV., 13.

Page 51.  O quis me gelidis, &c.  From the Second Book of Virgil's
Georgics, in a passage expressing the poet's wish:

Ye sacred Muses, with whose beauty fired,
My soul is ravished and my brain inspired;
Whose priest I am, whose holy fillets wear,
Would you your poet's first petition hear:
Give me the ways of wandering stars to know;
The depths of Heaven above, and Earth below;
Teach me, &c. . . .
. . .
But if my heavy blood restrain the flight
Of my free soul aspiring to the height
Of Nature, and unclouded fields of light:
My next desire is, void of care and strife,
To lead a soft, secure, inglorious life.
A country cottage near a crystal flood,
A winding valley and a lofty wood;
Some god conduct me to the sacred shades
Where bacchanals are sung by Spartan maids,
Or lift me high to Haemus hilly crown,
Or in the vales of Tempe lay me down,
Or lead me to some solitary place,
And cover my retreat from human race.
Dryden's translation.

Page 56.  Nam neque divitibus.  Horace's Epistles, I., 18.

Page 58.  Tankerwoman, "water-bearer, one who carried water from the
conduits."

Page 60.  Bucephalus, the horse of Alexander.  Domitian is said to
have given a consulship to his horse Incitatus.

Page 60.  The glory of Cato and Aristides.  See the parallel lives
in Plutarch.

Page 64.  O fortunatos nimium, &c.  Men all too happy, and they knew
their good.

Page 70.  Hinc atque hinc.  From Virgil's AEneid, Book I.

Page 75.  Mr. Hartlib . . . IF THE GENTLEMAN BE YET ALIVE.  Samuel
Hartlib, a public-spirited man of a rich Polish family, came to
England in 1640.  He interested himself in education and other
subjects, as well as agriculture.  In 1645 he edited a treatise of
Flemish Agriculture that added greatly to the knowledge of English
farmers, and thereby to the wealth of England.  He spent a large
fortune among us for the public good.  Cromwell recognised his
services by a pension of 300 pounds a year, which ceased at the
Restoration, and Hartlib then fell into such obscurity that Cowley
could not say whether he were alive or no.

Page 75.  Nescio qua, &c.  Ovid.  Epistles from Pontus.

Page 76.  Pariter, &c.  Ovid's Fasti, Book I.  Referring to the
happy souls who first looked up to the stars, Ovid suggests that in
like manner they must have lifted their heads above the vices and
the jests of man.  Cowley has here turned "locis" into "jocis."

Page 80.  Ut nos in Epistolis scribendis adjuvet.  That he might
help us in writing letters.

Page 81.  Qui quid sit pulchrum, &c.  Who tells more fully than
Chrysippus or Crantor what is fair what is foul, what useful and
what not.

Page 92.  Swerd of bacon, skin of bacon.  First English sweard.  So
green sward is green surface covering.

Page 100.  The Country Life is a translation from Cowley's own Latin
Poem on Plants.

Page 105.  Evelyn had dedicated to Cowley his Kalendarium Hortense.










This etext was produced by Donald Lainson, charlie@idirect.com.





CAP'N WARREN'S WARDS

by JOSEPH C. LINCOLN




CHAPTER I


"Ostable!" screamed the brakeman, opening the car door and yelling
his loudest, so as to be heard above the rattle of the train and
the shriek of the wind; "Ostable!"

The brakeman's cap was soaked through, his hair was plastered down
on his forehead, and, in the yellow light from the car lamps, his
wet nose glistened as if varnished.  Over his shoulders the shiny
ropes of rain whipped and lashed across the space between the cars.
The windows streamed as each succeeding gust flung its miniature
freshet against them.

The passengers in the car--there were but four of them--did not
seem greatly interested in the brakeman's announcement.  The red-
faced person in the seat nearest the rear slept soundly, as he had
done for the last hour and a half.  He had boarded the train at
Brockton, and, after requesting the conductor not to "lemme me git
by Bayport, Bill," at first favored his fellow travelers with a
song and then sank into slumber.

The two elderly men sitting together on the right-hand side of the
car droned on in their apparently endless Jeremiad concerning the
low price of cranberries, the scarcity of scallops on the flats,
the reasons why the fish weirs were a failure nowadays, and similar
cheerful topics.  And in his seat on the left, Mr. Atwood Graves,
junior partner in the New York firm of Sylvester, Kuhn and Graves,
lawyers, stirred uneasily on the lumpy plush cushion, looked at his
watch, then at the time-table in his hand, noted that the train was
now seventy-two minutes late, and for at least the fifteenth time
mentally cursed the railway company, the whole of Cape Cod from
Sandwich to Provincetown, and the fates which had brought him
there.

The train slowed down, in a jerky, hiccoughy sort of way, and crept
on till the car in which Mr. Graves was seated was abreast the
lighted windows of a small station, where it stopped.  Peering
through the water-streaked pane at the end of his seat, the lawyer
saw dim silhouettes of uncertain outline moving about.  They moved
with provoking slowness.  He felt that it would be joy unspeakable
to rush out there and thump them into animation.  The fact that
the stately Atwood Graves even thought of such an undignified
proceeding is sufficient indication of his frame of mind.

Then, behind the door which the brakeman, after announcing the
station, had closed again, sounded a big laugh.  The heartiness of
it grated on Mr. Graves's nerves.  What idiot could laugh on such a
night as this aboard a train over an hour late?

The laugh was repeated.  Then the door was flung briskly open, and
a man entered the car.  He was a big man, broad-shouldered,
inclined to stoutness, wearing a cloth cap with a visor, and a
heavy ulster, the collar of which was turned up.  Through the gap
between the open ends of the collar bristled a short, grayish
beard.  The face above the beard and below the visor was sunburned,
with little wrinkles about the eyes and curving lines from the
nostrils to the corners of the mouth.  The upper lip was shaved,
and the eyebrows were heavy and grayish black.  Cap, face, and
ulster were dripping with water.

The newcomer paused in the doorway for an instant, evidently to add
the finishing touch to a conversation previously begun.

"Well, I tell you, Ezra," he called, over his shoulder, "if it's
too deep to wade, maybe I can swim.  Fat floats, they tell me, and
Abbie says I'm gettin' fleshier every day.  So long."

He closed the door and, smiling broadly, swung down the aisle.  The
pair of calamity prophets broke off their lament over the declining
fisheries and greeted him almost jovially.

"Hello, Cap'n!" cried one.  "What's the south shore doin' over here
in this flood?"

"What's the matter, Cap'n?" demanded the other.  "Broke loose from
your moorin's, have you?  Did you ever see such a night in your
life?"

The man in the ulster shook hands with each of his questioners,
removing a pair of wet, heavy leather gloves as he did so.

"Don't know's I ever did, Dan," he answered.  "Couldn't see much of
this one but its color--and that's black.  I come over this mornin'
to attend to some business at the court-house--deeds to some
cranberry bog property I just bought--and Judge Baxter made me go
home with him to dinner.  Stayed at his house all the afternoon,
and then his man, Ezra Hallett, undertook to drive me up here to
the depot.  Talk about blind pilotin'!  Whew!  The Judge's horse
was a new one, not used to the roads, Ezra's near-sighted, and I
couldn't use my glasses 'count of the rain.  Let alone that, 'twas
darker'n the fore-hold of Noah's ark.  Ho, ho!  Sometimes we was in
the ruts and sometimes we was in the bushes.  I told Ez we'd ought
to have fetched along a dipsy lead, then maybe we could get our
bearin's by soundin's.  'Couldn't see 'em if we did get 'em,' says
he.  'No,' says I, 'but we could taste 'em.  Man that's driven
through as much Ostable mud as you have ought to know the taste of
every road in town.'"

"Well, you caught the train, anyhow," observed Dan.

"Yup.  If we'd been crippled as WELL as blind we could have done
that."  He seated himself just in front of the pair and glanced
across the aisle at Mr. Graves, to find the latter looking intently
at him.

"Pretty tough night," he remarked, nodding.

"Yes," replied the lawyer briefly.  He did not encourage conversation
with casual acquaintances.  The latest arrival had caught his
attention because there was something familiar about him.  It seemed
to Graves that he must have seen him before; and yet that was very
improbable.  This was the attorney's first visit to Cape Cod, and he
had already vowed devoutly that it should be his last.  He turned a
chilling shoulder to the trio opposite and again consulted the
time-table.  Denboro was the next station; then--thank the Lord--
South Denboro, his destination.

Conversation across the aisle was brisk, and its subjects were many
and varied.  Mr. Graves became aware, more or less against his
will, that the person called "Cap'n" was, if not a leader in
politics and local affairs, still one whose opinions counted.  Some
of those opinions, as given, were pointed and dryly descriptive;
as, for instance, when a certain town-meeting candidate was
compared to a sculpin--"with a big head that sort of impresses you,
till you get close enough to realize it HAS to be big to make room
for so much mouth."  Graves, who was fond of salt water fishing,
knew what a sculpin was, and appreciated the comparison.

The conductor entered the car and stopped to collect a ticket from
his new passenger.  It was evident that he, too, was acquainted
with the latter.

"Evening, Cap'n," he said, politely.  "Train's a little late to-
night."

"It is--for to-night's train," was the prompt response, "but if it
keeps on at the rate it's travelin' now, it'll be a little early
for to-morrow mornin's, won't it?"

The conductor laughed.  "Guess you're right," he said.  "This is
about as wet a storm as I've run through since I've been on the
road.  If we get to Provincetown without a washout we'll be
lucky . . .  Well, we've made another hitch.  So far, so good."

The brakeman swung open the door to shout, "Denboro!  Denboro!" the
conductor picked up his lantern and hurried away, the locomotive
whistled hoarsely, and the train hiccoughed alongside another
little station.  Mr. Graves, peering through his window, imagined
that here the silhouettes on the platform moved more briskly.  They
seemed almost excited.  He inferred that Denboro was a bigger and
more wide-awake village than Ostable.

But he was mistaken.  The reason for the excitement was made plain
by the conductor a moment afterwards.  That official entered the
car, removed his uniform cap, and rubbed a wet forehead with a
wetter hand.

"Well, gentlemen," he said, "I've been expecting it, and here it
is.  Mark me down as a good prophet, will you?  There's a washout a
mile further on, and a telegraph pole across the track.  It's
blowing great guns and raining pitchforks.  It'll be out of the
question for us to go forward before daylight, if then.  Darn a
railroad man's job anyhow!"

Five minutes later Mr. Graves descended the steps of the car, his
traveling bag in one hand and an umbrella in the other.  As soon as
both feet were securely planted on the platform, he put down the
bag to wrestle with the umbrella and the hurricane, which was
apparently blowing from four directions at once.  Feeling his hat
leaving his head, he became aware that the umbrella had turned
inside out.  He threw the wreck violently under the train and
stooped to pick up the bag.  The bag was no longer there.

"It's all right," said a calm voice behind him.  "I've got your
satchel, neighbor.  Better beat for harbor, hadn't we?  Here! this
way."

The bewildered New Yorker felt his arm seized in a firm grip, and
he was rushed across the platform, through a deluge of wind-driven
water, and into a small, hot, close-smelling waiting room.  When he
pushed his hat clear of his eyes he saw that his rescuer was the
big man who boarded the train at Ostable.  He was holding the
missing bag and smiling.

"Dirty weather, hey?" he observed, pleasantly.  "Sorry your
umbrella had to go by the board.  I see you was carryin' too much
canvas and tried to run alongside in time to give you a tow; but
you was dismasted just as I got there.  Here's your dunnage, all
safe and sound."

He extended the traveling bag at arm's length.  Mr. Graves accepted
his property and murmured thanks, not too cordially.  His dignity
and temper had gone overboard with the umbrella, and he had not yet
recovered them.

"Well," went on his companion, "here we are!  And I, for one,
wanted to be somewheres else.  Caleb," turning to the station
master, who came in at that moment, "any way of my gettin' home
to-night?"

"'Fraid not, Cap'n," was the answer.  "I don't know of any.  Guess
you'll have to put up at the hotel and wait till mornin'."

"That's right," agreed the passenger called "Dan," who was standing
near.  "That's what Jerry and I are goin' to do."

"Yes, but you and Jerry are bound for Orham.  I'm booked for South
Denboro, and that's only seven miles off.  I'd SWIM the whole seven
rather than put up at Sim Titcomb's hotel.  I've been there afore,
thank you!  Look here, Caleb, can't I hire a team and drive over?"

"Well, I don't know.  S'pose you might ring up Pete Shattuck and
ask him.  He's pretty particular about his horses, though, and I
cal'late he--"

"All right.  I'll ring him up.  Pete ought to get over some of his
particularness to oblige me.  I've helped HIM once or twice."

He was on his way to the ticket office, where the telephone hung on
the wall.  But Mr. Graves stepped forward and spoke to him.

"Excuse me, sir," said the lawyer.  "Did I understand you to say
you were going to South Denboro?"

"Yes.  I am, if the powers--and Pete Shattuck--'ll let me."

"You were going to drive over?  May I go with you?  I'm very
anxious to get to South Denboro tonight.  I have some very
important business there, and I want to complete it and get away
to-morrow.  I must be back in New York by the morning following."

The captain looked his questioner over.  There was a doubtful look
on his face, and he smiled quizzically.

"Well, I don't know, Mr.--"

"Graves is my name."

"I don't know, Mr. Graves.  This ain't goin' to be a pleasure
cruise exactly.  You might get pretty wet."

"I don't care.  I can get dry again when I get there.  Of course I
shall share the expense of the livery.  I shall be greatly obliged
if I may go with you.  If not, I must try for a rig myself."

"Oh, if you feel that way about it, why, come ahead and welcome.  I
was only warnin' you, that's all.  However, with me aboard for
ballast, I guess we won't blow away.  Wait a jiffy till I get after
Pete."

He entered the ticket office and raised a big hand to the little
crank of the telephone bell.

"Let's see, Caleb," he called; "what's Shattuck's number?"

"Four long and two short," answered the station master.

Graves, wondering vaguely what sort of telephone system was in use
on Cape Cod, heard his prospective pilot r