aralyzed Edwards heard a chair crack as if a heavy weight had
descended upon it.  Evidently he had "come to anchor."

The lady was the first to recover the power of speech.

"Why!" she exclaimed, in an alarmed whisper.  "Why!  I never heard
of such brazen impertinence in my life.  He must be insane.  He is
a lunatic, isn't he, Edwards?"

The butler shook his head.  "I--I don't know, ma'am," he stammered.

"I believe he is."  Mrs. Dunn's presence of mind was returning, and
with it her courage.  Her florid cheeks flamed a more vivid red,
and her eyes snapped.  "But whether he is or not, he sha'n't
bulldoze me."

She strode majestically to the door.  The visitor was seated in the
hall, calmly reading a newspaper.  Hat and suit-case were on the
floor beside him.

"What do you mean by this?" demanded the lady.  "Who are you?  If
you have any business here, state it at once."

The man glanced at her, over his spectacles, rose and stood looking
down at her.  His expression was pleasant, and he was remarkably
cool.

"Yes, ma'am," he said, gravely.  "I'll be glad to tell you who I
am, if you'd like to have me.  I'd have done it before, but I
thought there weren't any use troublin' you with my affairs.  But,
just a minute--" he hesitated--"I haven't made any mistake, have I?
I understood your steward--the feller with the brass buttons, to
say that Abijah Warren's children lived here.  That's so, ain't it?
If not, then I AM mistaken."

Mrs. Dunn regarded him with indignation.  "You are," she said
coldly.  "The family of the late Mr. Rodgers Warren lives here.  I
presume the slight resemblance in names misled you.  Edwards, show
the gentleman out."

"Just one moment more, ma'am.  It was Rodgers Warren's children I
was lookin' for.  A. Rodgers Warren he called himself, didn't he?
Yes.  Well, the A stood for Abijah; that was his Christian name.
And he left two children, Caroline and Stephen?  Good!  I thought
for a jiffy I'd blundered in where I had no business, but it's all
right.  You see, ma'am, I'm their uncle from South Denboro,
Massachusetts.  My name is Elisha Warren."

Mrs. Dunn gasped.  Edwards, peering over her shoulder, breathed
heavily.

"You are--their UNCLE?" repeated the lady.

"Yes, ma'am.  I'm 'Bije's brother.  Oh, don't worry.  It's all
right.  And don't fret yourself about me, either.  I'll set right
down out here and read my paper and wait till Caroline or Stephen
get home.  They're expectin' me.  Mr. Graves, the lawyer, told 'em
I was comin'."

He calmly seated himself and adjusted his spectacles.  Mrs. Dunn
stared at him, then at Edwards.  After an instant's indecision,
she stepped back into the library and walked to the window.  She
beckoned, with an agitated finger, to the butler, who joined her.

"Edwards," she whispered, "did you hear what he said?"

"Yes, ma'am," replied Edwards, wide-eyed and wondering.

"Is it true?"

"I don't know, ma'am."

"Did Mr. Warren have a brother?"

"I didn't know that he had, ma'am."

"Do you--do you think it likely that he would have a brother like--
like THAT?"

"I don't know, ma'am."

"Was Miss Caroline expecting him?"

"I don't know, ma'am.  She--"

"Oh, you don't know anything!  You're impossible.  Go away!"

"Yes, ma'am," said Edwards thankfully; and went.  Mrs. Corcoran
Dunn stood for some minutes by the window, thinking, or trying to
think a way to the truth in this astounding development.  Of course
the man MIGHT be a lunatic who had gained his information concerning
the Warren family from the papers; but he did not look like a
lunatic.  On the other hand, he certainly did not look as one would
have expected a brother of Rodgers Warren's to look.  Oddest of all,
if he was such a brother, why had neither Caroline or Stephen
mentioned his existence?  According to his story, Graves, the Warren
lawyer, had warned the children of his coming.  Caroline had been
very reticent concerning her father's will, the amount of his
estate, and the like.  And Mrs. Dunn had repeatedly, though
discreetly, endeavored to find out these important details.  Neither
hints nor questions had resulted satisfactorily.  Was it possible
that this was the reason, this country uncle?  If so--well, if so,
here was a Heaven-sent opportunity for a little genteel and
perfectly safe detective work.  Mrs. Dunn creakingly crossed the
room and spoke.

"Mr. Warren," she said, "I feel guilty in keeping you out there.
Won't you come into the library?"

"Why, thank you, ma'am, I'm all right.  Don't you trouble about me.
Go right on with your readin' or sewing or knittin' or whatever you
was doin' and--"

"I was not reading," replied Mrs. Dunn, with a slight shudder.
"Come in, please.  I wish you to."

Captain Elisha folded his paper and put it in his pocket.  Entering
the library, he stood quietly waiting.

"Won't you sit down?" asked his impromptu hostess, trying hard to
be gracious.

"Thank you," said the captain.  He sank into an armchair and looked
curiously about him.

"So you are the late Mr. Warren's brother?" asked the lady, making
her first lead in the game.

"Yes, ma'am.  His older brother.  'Bije was ten year younger'n I
am, Mrs.--er--"

"Dunn.  I am an old friend of the family."

"That's good.  I'm glad to hear they've got friends.  When you're
in sickness or trouble or sorrer, friendship counts for consider'ble.
How are the young folks--Caroline and Stephen--pretty smart, hey?"

"SMART?  Why, they are intelligent, naturally.  I--"

"No, no.  I mean are they pretty well?"

"Very well, indeed, considering the shock of their recent
bereavement."

"Yes, yes.  Of course.  And they've moved, too.  Movin's an awful
job.  They say three movin's are as bad as a fire, but I cal'late
I'd rather burn up a set of carpets than PULL 'em up, 'specially if
they was insured.  'Tain't half so much strain on your religion.  I
remember the last time we took up our carpets at home, Abbie--she's
my second cousin, keepin' house for me--said if gettin' down on my
knees has that effect on me she'd never ask me to go to prayer-
meetin' again.  Ho! ho!"

He chuckled.  Mrs. Dunn elevated her nose and looked out of the
window.  Then she led another small trump.

"You say that Miss Caroline and her brother expect you," she said.
"You surprise me.  Are you sure?"

"Oh, yes, ma'am.  I'm sure.  When Mr. Graves came down to see me,
last week 'twas, I told him to say I'd be up pretty soon to look
the ground over.  This is a pretty fine place the young folks have
got here," he added, gazing admiringly at the paintings and
bookcases.

"Yes," assented the lady, condescendingly.  "For an apartment it is
really quite livable."

"Livable!"  Captain Elisha's astonishment got the better of his
politeness for the moment.  "Um!  Yes, I should say a body MIGHT
manage to worry along in it.  Was the place where they used to live
any finer than this?"

"Certainly!"

"You don't tell me!  No wonder they talked about economi--Humph!"

"What were you about to say, Mr. Warren?"

"Oh, nothin', nothin'!  Talkin' to myself is a habit I've got.
Abbie--my second cousin; I guess I told you about her--says it's a
sure sign that a person's rich or out of his head, one or t'other.
I ain't rich, so--"  He chuckled once more.

"Mr. Graves came to see you at your home, did he?"

"Yes, ma'am.  At South Denboro.  And he certainly did have a rough
passage.  Ho! ho!  Probably you heard about it, bein' so friendly
with the family."

"Ahem!  Doubtless he would have mentioned it, but he has been ill."

"Sho!  I'm sorry to hear that.  I was afraid he'd catch cold."

"Yes.  I hope Mr. Graves's errand was successful?"

"Well, sort of so--so."

"Yes.  He came to see you in connection with your brother's estate--
some legacy, perhaps?"

She did not look at the captain when she asked this question.
Therefore, she did not notice the glance which he gave her.  When
he answered, it was in the same deliberate, provokingly deliberate,
manner.

"Um-hm.  Somethin' of that kind, Mrs. Dunn.  I can't help thinkin',"
he went on, "how nice it is that Caroline and Steve have such a
good friend as you to help 'em.  Your husband and 'Bije was chums,
I s'pose?

"No, not exactly.  The friendship was on my side of the family."

"So?  Want to know!  Your husband dead, ma'am?"

Mrs. Dunn changed the subject.  Her husband, Mr. Corcoran Dunn--
once Mike Dunn, contractor and Tammany politician--was buried in
Calvary Cemetery.  She mourned him, after a fashion, but she
preferred not to talk about him.

"Yes," she answered shortly.  "It--it looks as if it might snow,
doesn't it?"

"I shouldn't wonder.  Have you any children, ma'am?"

"One--a son."  The widow's tone was frigid.

"So?  He must be a comfort to you.  I s'pose likely he's a friend
of my nephew and niece, too."

"Certainly."

"That's good.  Young folks ought to have young friends.  You live
in this neighborhood, ma'am?"

The lady did not answer.  She gazed haughtily at the trees in the
Park.  Captain Elisha rubbed a smile from his lips with his hand
and remained silent.  The tall clock ticked loud.

There came the sound of laughter from the passage outside.  The
hall door opened.  A moment later, Caroline, followed by her
brother and young Dunn, entered the library.

The girl's cheeks were rosy from the cold wind.  Her hair, beneath
the fur auto cap, had blown in brown, rippled disorder across her
forehead.  She was smiling.

"Oh, Mrs. Dunn!" she cried.  "I'm so glad I accepted your--
Malcolm's--invitation.  We had a glorious ride!  I--"

She stopped short.  Captain Warren had risen from his chair and was
facing her.  Mrs. Dunn also rose.

"Caroline," she said, nervously, "this"--pausing on the word--
"gentleman is here to see you.  He says he is--"

The captain interrupted her.  Stepping forward he seized his
niece's hands in his.  "Well, well!" he exclaimed admiringly.
"'Bije's girl, that I ain't seen since you was a little mite of a
baby!  Caroline, I'm your Uncle Elisha."

"Good LORD!" groaned Stephen Warren.



CHAPTER IV


If the captain heard Stephen's fervent ejaculation, he paid no
attention to it.  Dropping his niece's hand, he extended his own
toward his nephew.

"And this is Stephen?" he said.  "Well, Steve, you and me have
never met afore, I b'lieve.  But that's our misfortune, not our
fault, hey?  How are you?  Pretty smart?"

The boy's face was flaming.  He mumbled something to the effect
that he was all right enough, and turned away without accepting the
proffered hand.  Captain Elisha glanced quickly at him, then at his
sister.

"Well, Caroline," he said, pleasantly, "I s'pose you've been
expectin' me.  Mr. Graves told you I was comin', didn't he?"

Miss Warren, also, was flushed with embarrassment and mortified
surprise.

"No," she stammered.  "He has been ill."

"Sho! you don't say!  Mrs. Dunn--your friend here--said he was laid
up with a cold, but I didn't realize 'twas as bad as that.  So you
didn't know I was comin' at all."

"No.  We--we have not heard from you since he returned."

"That's too bad.  I hope I sha'n't put you out any, droppin' in on
you this way.  You mustn't treat me as comp'ny, you know.  If
'tain't convenient, if your spare room ain't ready so soon after
movin', or anything of that kind, I can go to a hotel somewheres
for a day or so.  Hadn't I better, don't you think?"

Caroline hesitated.  If only they might have been spared this
public humiliation.  If the Dunns had not been there.  It was bad
enough to have this dreadful country uncle come at all; but to have
him come now, before they were prepared, before any explanations
had been made!  What should she do?

Her brother, fidgeting at her elbow, not daring to look at Malcolm
Dunn, who, he knew, was thoroughly enjoying the scene, could stand
it no longer.

"Caro," he snapped, "what are you waiting for?  Don't you KNOW that
the rooms are not ready?  Of course they're not!  We're sorry, and
all that, but Graves didn't tell us and we weren't prepared.
Certainly he'll have to go to the hotel, for--for the present."

He ventured to raise his eyes and glare indignantly at the captain.
Finding the latter looking intently at him, he dropped them again
and jammed his clenched fists into his pockets.

Captain Elisha pulled thoughtfully at his beard.

"Humph!" he grunted.  "Humph! then I cal'late maybe--"  He took a
step toward the door, stopped, turned back, and said, with calm
decision, "I guess I'd better stay.  You won't mind me, Caroline--
you and Stephen.  You MUSTN'T.  As I said, I ain't comp'ny.  I'm
one of the family, your pa's brother, and I've come some
consider'ble ways to see you two young folks and talk with you.
I've come because your pa asked me to.  I'm used to roughin' it,
been to sea a good many v'yages, and if a feather bed ain't handy I
can get my forty winks on the floor.  So that's settled, and you
mustn't have me on your conscience.  That's sense, ain't it, Mrs.
Dunn?"

Mrs. Corcoran Dunn did not deign a reply.  Caroline answered for
her.

"Very well," she said, coldly.  Stepping to the desk she rang a
bell.  The butler appeared in the doorway.

"Edwards," said Miss Warren, "this gentleman," indicating the
captain, "is to be our guest, for the present.  You may show him to
his room--the blue room, I think.  If it is not ready, see that it
is made so."

"Yes, Miss Caroline," replied Edwards.  Retiring to the hall, he
returned with the suit-case.

"Will you wish to go to your room at once, sir?" he asked.

"Why, I guess I might as well, Commodore," answered Captain Elisha,
smiling.  "Little soap and water won't do no harm.  Fact is, I
feel's if 'twas a prescription to be recommended.  You needn't tote
that valise, though," he added.  "'Tain't heavy, and I've lugged it
so fur already sence I got off the car that I feel kind of lonesome
without it."

The butler, not knowing exactly how to answer, grinned sheepishly.
Captain Elisha turned to Mrs. Dunn and her son.

"Well, good afternoon, ma'am," he said.  "I'm real glad to have
made your acquaintance.  Yours, too, sir," with a nod toward
Malcolm.  "Your mother told me what a friend of the young folks you
was, and, as I'm sort of actin' pilot for 'em just now, in a way of
speakin', any friend of theirs ought to be a friend of mine.  Hope
to see you often, Mr. Dunn."

The young man addressed smiled, with amusement not at all concealed,
and languidly admitted that he was "charmed."

"Your first visit to the city?" he inquired, in a tone which caused
Stephen to writhe inwardly.

"No-o.  No, not exactly.  I used to come here pretty frequent, back
in my sea-goin' days, when my ship was in port.  I sailed for
Osgood and Colton, down on South Street, for a spell.  They were my
owners.  You don't remember the firm, I s'pose?"

"No.  The privilege has been denied me.  You find some changes in
New York, don't you--er--Captain?  You are a captain, or a bos'n,
or admiral--something of that sort, I presume?"

"Malcolm!" said his mother, sharply.

"Oh, no offense intended.  My sea terms are rather mixed.  The
captain will excuse me."

"Sartin!  Cap'n's what they all call me, mostly.  Your son ain't
ever been to sea, except as passenger, I cal'late, ma'am?"

"Certainly not," snapped Mrs. Dunn.

"Of course, of course.  Well, 'tain't a life I'd want a boy of mine
to take up, nowadays.  But it did have some advantages.  I don't
know anything better than a v'yage afore the mast to learn a young
feller what's healthy for him to unlearn.  Good day, ma'am.  Good
day, Mr. Dunn.  I mustn't keep the Commodore waitin' here with that
valise.  I'll be out pretty soon, Caroline; just as soon as I've
got the upper layer of railroad dust off my face and hands.  You'll
be surprised to see how light-complected I really am when that's
over.  All right!  Heave ahead, Commodore!"

He departed, preceded by Edwards and the suit-case.  Stephen Warren
threw himself violently into a chair by the window.  Young Dunn
laughed aloud.  His mother flashed an indignant glance at him, and
then hurried to Caroline.

"You poor dear!" she exclaimed, putting an arm about the girl's
shoulder.  "Don't mind us, please don't!  Malcolm and I understand.
That is, we know how you feel and--"

"Oh, but you DON'T know, Mrs. Dunn," cried Caroline, almost in
tears.  "You don't understand!  It's so much worse than you think.
I--I--Oh, why did father do it?  How could he be so inconsiderate?"

"There! there!" purred the friend of the family.  "You mustn't, you
know.  You really mustn't.  Who is this man?  This uncle?  Where
does he come from?  Why does he force himself upon you in this way?
I didn't know your poor father had a brother."

"Neither did we," growled Stephen, savagely.  Malcolm laughed
again.

"What does it all mean, dear?" begged Mrs. Dunn.  "You are in
trouble, I'm sure.  Don't you think we--Malcolm and I--might be
able to help you?  We should so love to do it.  If you feel that
you CAN confide in us; if it isn't a secret--"

She paused expectantly, patting the girl's shoulder.  But Caroline
had heard young Dunn's laugh, and was offended and hurt.  Her eyes
flashed as she answered.

"It's nothing," she said.  "He has come to see us on a matter of
business, I believe.  I am nervous and--foolish, I suppose.  Mr.
Graves will see us soon, and then everything will be arranged.
Thank you for calling, Mrs. Dunn, and for the ride."

It was a very plain hint, but Mrs. Dunn did not choose to understand
it as such.

"You're sure you hadn't better tell me the whole story, dear?" she
urged.  "I am old enough, almost, to be your mother, and perhaps my
advice might . . .  No?  Very well.  You know best but--You
understand that it is something other than mere curiosity which
leads me to ask."

"Of course, I understand," said the girl hastily.  "Thank you very
much.  Perhaps, by and by, I can tell you everything.  But we must
see Mr. Graves first.  I--oh, DON'T ask me more now, Mrs. Dunn."

The widow of so astute a politician as Mike Dunn had been in his
day could have scarcely failed to profit by his teachings.
Moreover, she possessed talent of her own.  With a final pat and a
kiss, she prepared for departure.

"Good-by, then," she said, "or rather, au revoir.  We shall look in
to-morrow.  Come, Malcolm."

"I say, Mal!" cried Stephen, rising hurriedly.

"You won't tell anyone about--"

"Steve!" interrupted his sister.

Malcolm, about to utter a languid sarcasm, caught his mother's
look, and remained silent.  Another meaning glance, and his manner
changed.

"All right, Steve, old man," he said.  "Good-by and good luck.
Caroline, awfully glad we had the spin this afternoon.  We must
have more.  Just what you and Steve need.  At your service any
time.  If there is anything I can do in any way to--er--you
understand--call on me, won't you?  Ready, Mater?"

The pair were shown out by Edwards.  On the way home in the car
Mrs. Corcoran Dunn lectured her son severely.

"Have you no common sense?" she demanded.  "Couldn't you see that
the girl would have told me everything if you hadn't laughed, like
an idiot?"

The young man laughed again.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed, "it was enough to make a wooden Indian
laugh.  The old jay with the barnacles telling us about the
advantages of a sailor's life.  And Steve's face!  Ho! ho!"

His mother snorted disgust.  "If you had brains," she declared,
"you would have understood what he meant by saying that the sea was
the place to learn what to unlearn.  He was hitting at you.  Was it
necessary to insult him the first time you and he exchanged a
word?"

"Insult him?  HIM?  Ha, ha!  Why, Mater, what's the matter with
you?  Do you imagine that a hayseed like that would recognize an
insult without an introduction?  And, besides, what difference does
it make?  You don't intend putting him on your calling list, do
you?"

"I intend cultivating him for the present."

"CULTIVATING him?"

"Yes--for the present.  He is Rodgers Warren's brother.  That
lawyer, Graves, traveled miles to see him.  What does that mean?
That, in some important way, he is connected with the estate and
those two children.  If the estate is worth anything, and we have
reason to believe it is, you and I must know it.  If it isn't, it
is even more important that we should know, before we waste more
time.  If Caroline is an heiress, if she inherits even a moderate
fortune--"

She shrugged her shoulders by way of finish to the sentence.

Malcolm whistled.

"But to think of that old Down-Easter being related to the Warren
family!" he mused.  "It seems impossible."

"Nothing is impossible," observed his mother.  Then, with a
shudder, "You never met your father's relatives.  I have."



When Captain Elisha emerged from his room, after a wash and a
change of linen, he found the library untenanted.  He strolled
about, his hands behind him, inspecting the pictures with critical
interest.  Caroline, dressed for dinner, found him thus engaged.
He turned at the sound of her step.

"Why, hello!" he cried, with hearty enthusiasm.  "All rigged up for
inspection, ain't you?"

"Inspection?"

"Oh, that's just sailor's lingo.  Means you've got your Sunday
uniform on, that's all.  My! my! how nice you look!  But ain't
black pretty old for such a young girl?"

"I am in mourning," replied his niece, coldly.

"There! there! of course you are.  Tut! tut!  How could I forget
it.  You see, I've been so many years feelin' as if I didn't have a
brother that I've sort of got used to his bein' gone."

"I have not."  Her eyes filled as she said it.  The captain was
greatly moved.

"I'm a blunderin' old fool, my dear," he said.  "I beg your pardon.
Do try to forgive me, won't you?  And, perhaps--perhaps I can make
up your loss to you, just a little mite.  I'd like to.  I'll try
to, if--"

He laid a hand on her shoulder.  She avoided him and, moving away,
seated herself in a chair at the opposite side of the desk.  The
avoidance was so obvious as to be almost brutal.  Captain Elisha
looked very grave for an instant.  Then he changed the subject.

"I was lookin' at your oil paintin's," he said.  "They're pretty
fine, ain't they?  Any of them your work, Caroline?"

"MY work?"  The girl's astonishment was so great that she turned to
stare at her questioner.  "MY work?" she repeated.  "Are you
joking?  You can't think that I painted them."

"I didn't know but you might.  That one over there, with the trees
and folks dancin'--sort of picnic scene, I judge--that looks as if
you might have done it."

"That is a Corot."

"'Tis, hey?  I want to know!  A--a--what did you call it?"

"A Corot.  He was a famous French artist.  That was father's
favorite picture."

"Sho!  Well, I like it fust-rate myself.  Did 'Bije--did your
father know this Mr. Corot well?"

"Know him?  Certainly not.  Why should you think such a thing as
that?"

"Well, he bought the picture of him, and so I s'pose likely he knew
him.  There was a young feller come to South Denboro three or four
year ago and offered to paint a picture of our place for fifteen
dollars.  Abbie--that's Abbie Baker, she's one of our folks, you
know, your third cousin, Caroline; keepin' house for me, she is--
Abbie wanted me to have him do the job, but I wa'n't very
particular about it, so it never come to nothin'.  He done two or
three places, though, and I swan 'twas nice work!  He painted Sam
Cahoon's old ramshackle house and barn, and you'd hardly know it,
'twas so fixed up and fine, in the picture.  White paint and green
grass and everything just like real.  He left out the places where
the pickets was off the fence and the blinds hangin' on one hinge.
I told Abbie, I says, 'Abbie, that painter's made Sam's place look
almost respectable, and if that ain't a miracle, I don't know what
is.  I would think Sam would blush every time he sees that
picture.'  Ho, ho!  Abbie seemed to cal'late that Sam Cahoon's
blushin' would be the biggest miracle of the two.  Ho! ho!  You'd
like Abbie; she's got lots of common sense."

He chuckled at the reminiscence and rubbed his knee.  His niece
made no reply.  Captain Elisha glanced at the Corot once more and
asked another question.

"I presume likely," he said, "that that picture cost consider'ble
more than fifteen, hey?"

"Father paid twenty-two thousand dollars for it," was the crushing
answer.

The captain looked at her, opened his mouth to speak, shut it
again, and, rising, walked across the room.  Adjusting his glasses,
he inspected the Corot in silence for a few minutes.  Then he drew
a long breath.

"Well!" he sighed.  "WELL."  Then, after an interval, "Was this the
only one he ever painted?"

"The only one?  The only picture Corot painted?  Of course not!
There are many more."

"Did--did this Corot feller get as much for every job as he did for
this?"

"I presume so.  I know father considered this one a bargain."

"Did, hey?  Humph!  I ought to know enough by this time not to
believe all I hear, but I kind of had an idea that picture paintin'
was starvation work.  I've read about artists committin' suicide,
and livin' in attics, and such.  Whew!  About two such bargain sale
jobs as this, and I'd guarantee not to starve--and to live as nigh
the ground as a second-floor bedroom anyhow.  How about this next
one?  This feller in a dory--coddin', I guess he is.  Did--did Mr.
Corot do him?"

"No.  That is by a well-known American artist.  It is a good piece
of work, but not like the other.  It is worth much less.  Perhaps
five thousand."

"So?  Well, even for that I'd undertake to buy consider'ble many
dories, and hire fellers to fish from 'em, too.  Humph!  I guess
I'm out of soundin's.  When I thought fifteen dollars was a high
price for paintin' a view of a house I was slightly mistaken.  Next
time I'll offer the paintin' feller the house and ask him what he
considers a fair boot, besides.  Sam Cahoon's a better speculator
than I thought he was.  Hello, Commodore! what's worryin' you now?"

Edwards appeared to announce that dinner was served.  Caroline rose
and led the way to the dining room.  Captain Elisha followed,
looking curiously about him as he did so.  Stephen, who had been
sulkily dressing in his own room, entered immediately after.

The captain surveyed the dining room with interest.  Like the
others of the suite, it was sumptuously and tastefully furnished.
He took the chair indicated by the solemn Edwards, and the meal
began.

The butler's sense of humor was not acute, but it was with
considerable difficulty that he restrained his smiles during the
next half hour.  A more appreciative observer would have noticed
and enjoyed the subtler points.  Stephen's glare of disgust at his
uncle when the latter tucked his napkin in the opening of his
waistcoat; Caroline's embarrassment when the captain complimented
the soup, declaring that it was almost as good as one of Abbie's
chowders; the visitor's obvious uneasiness at being waited upon
attentively, and the like.  These Edwards missed, but he could not
help appreciating Captain Elisha's conversation.

Caroline said little during dinner.  Her brother glowered at his
plate and was silent.  But the captain talked and talked.

"Maybe you think I didn't have a time findin' your new lodgin's,"
he said.  "I come over on the cars, somethin' I don't usually do
when there's anything afloat to carry me.  But I had an errand or
two to do in Boston, so I stopped over night at the hotel there
and got the nine o'clock train.  I landed here in New York all
shipshape and on time, and started in to hunt you up."

"How did you get our address?" asked his niece.  "Mr. Graves
couldn't have given it to you, for we only decided on this
apartment a few days ago."

"Ho! ho!" chuckled Captain Elisha, rolling in his chair, like a
ship in a cross sea.  "Ho! ho!  You remind me of Abbie, Caroline.
That's what she said.  'I never heard of such a crazy cruise,' she
says.  ' Startin' off to visit folks when you haven't the least
idea where they live!'  'Oh, yes, I have,' I says, 'I know where
they live; they live in New York.'  Well, you ought to have seen
her face.  Abbie's a good woman--none better--but she generally
don't notice a joke until she trips over it.  I get consider'ble
fun out of Abbie, take her by the large.  'New York!' she says.
'Did anybody ever hear the beat of that?  Do you cal'late New
York's like South Denboro, where everybody knows everybody else?
What are you plannin' to do? run up the fust man, woman or child
you meet and ask 'em to tell you where 'Bijah Warren lives?  Or are
you goin' to trot from Dan to Beersheby, trustin' to meet your
nephew and niece on the way?  I never in my born days!'

"Well," went on the captain, "I told her that the last suggestion
weren't such a bad one, but there was one little objection to it.
Considerin' that I hadn't ever laid eyes on Steve and that I
hadn't seen you since you was a baby, the chances was against my
recognizin' you if we did meet.  Ho, ho, ho!  Finally I hinted that
I might look in the directory, and she got more reconciled to my
startin'.  Honest, I do believe she'd have insisted on takin' me by
the hand and leadin' me to you, if I hadn't told her that.

"So I did look in the directory and got the number on Fifth Avenue
where you used to be.  I asked a policeman the nighest way to get
there, and he said take a bus.  Last time I was in New York I rode
in one of those Fifth Avenue omnibuses, and I never got such a
jouncin' in my life.  The pavement then was round cobble stones,
like some of the roads in Nantucket.  I remember I tried to ask a
feller that set next to me somethin' or other, and I swan to man I
couldn't get nothin' out of my mouth but rattles.  'Metropolitan
Museum,' sounded like puttin' in a ton of coal.  I thought I was
comin' apart, or my works was out of order, or somethin', but when
the feller tried to answer he rattled just as bad, so I realized
'twas the reg'lar disease and felt some better.  I never shall
forget a fleshy woman--somethin' like that Mrs. Dunn friend of
yours, Caroline--that set opposite me.  It give me the crawls to
look at her, her chins shook around so.  Ho! ho! she had no less'n
three of 'em, and they all shook different ways.  Ho! ho! ho!  If
I'd been in the habit of wearin' false hair or teeth or anything
that wa'n't growed to or buttoned on me I'd never have risked a
trip in one of those omnibuses.

"So when the police officer prescribed one for me this v'yage, I
was some dubious.  I'm older'n I was ten year ago, and I wa'n't
sure that I'd hold together.  I cal'lated walkin' was better for my
health.  So I found Fifth Avenue and started to walk.  And the
farther I walked the heavier that blessed satchel of mine got.  It
weighed maybe ten or twelve pounds at the corner of 42nd Street,
but when I got as far as the open square where the gilt woman is
hurryin' to keep from bein' run over by Gen'ral Sherman on
horseback--that statue, you know--I wouldn't have let that blessed
bag go for less'n two ton, if I was sellin' it by weight.  So I
leaned up against an electric light pole to rest and sort of get my
bearin's.  Then I noticed what I'd ought to have seen afore, that
the street wa'n't paved with cobbles, as it used to be, but was
smooth as a stretch of state road down home.  So I figgered that a
bus was a safe risk, after all.  I waited ten minutes or more for
one to come, and finally I asked a woman who was in tow of an
astrakhan-trimmed dog at the end of a chain, if the omnibuses had
stopped runnin'.  When I fust see the dog leadin' her I thought she
was blind, but I guess she was deef and dumb instead.  Anyhow, all
she said was 'Ugh!' not very enthusiastic, at that, and went along.
Ho! ho!  So then I asked a man, and he pointed to a bus right in
front of me.  You see, I was lookin' for the horses, same as they
used to be, and this was an automobile.

"I blushed, I guess, just to show that there was some red underneath
the green, and climbed aboard the omnibus.  I rode along for a
spell, admirin' as much of the scenery as I could see between the
women's hats, then I told the skipper of the thing that I wanted to
make port at 82nd Street.  He said 'Ugh,' apparently suff'rin' from
the same complaint the dog woman had, and we went on and on.  At
last I got kind of anxious and asked him again.

"'Eighty-second!' says he, ugly.  'This is Ninety-first.'

"'Good land!' says I.  'I wanted Eighty-second.'

"'Why didn't you say so?' says he, lookin' as if I'd stole his
mother's spoons.

"'I did,' says I.

"'You DID?' he snarls.  'You did not!  If you did, wouldn't I have
heard you?'

"Well, any answer I'd be likely to make to that would have meant
more argument, and the bus was sailin' right along at the time, so
I piled out and did some more walkin', the other way.  At last I
reached your old number, Stevie, and--Hey?  Did you speak?"

"Don't call me 'Stevie,'" growled his nephew, rebelliously.

"Beg your pardon.  I keep forgettin' that you're almost grown up.
Well, as I was sayin', I got to the house where you used to live,
and 'twas shut tight.  Nobody there.  Ho! ho!  I felt a good deal
like old Beriah Doane must have on his last 'vacation.'  You see,
Beriah is one of our South Denboro notorieties; he's famous in his
way.  He works and loafs by spells until cranberry pickin' time in
the fall; then he picks steady and earns thirty or forty dollars
all at once.  Soon's he's paid off, he starts for Boston on a
'vacation,' an alcoholic one.  Well, last fall his married sister
was visitin' him, and she, bein' strong for good Templarism, was
determined he shouldn't vacate in his regular way.  So she
telegraphed her husband's brother in Brockton to meet Beriah there,
go with him to Boston, and see that he behaved himself and stayed
sober.  Beriah heard of it, and when his train gets as far as
Tremont what does he do but get off quiet and change cars for New
Bedford.  He hadn't been there for nine years, but he had pleasant
memories of his last visit.  And when he does get to New Bedford,
chucklin' over the way he's befooled his sister and her folks, I'm
blessed if he didn't find that the town had gone no-license, and
every saloon was shut up!  Ho! ho! ho!  Well, I felt about the way
he did, I guess, when I stood on the steps of your Fifth Avenue
house and realized you'd gone away.  I wouldn't have had Abbie see
me there for somethin'.  Ho! ho!"

He leaned back in his chair and laughed aloud.  Caroline smiled
faintly.  Stephen threw down his napkin and sprang to his feet.

"Sis," he cried, "I'm going to my room.  By gad!  I can't--"

Catching a warning glance from his sister, he did not finish his
sentence, but stood sulkily beside his chair.  Captain Elisha
looked at him, then at the girl, and stopped laughing.  He folded
his napkin with care, and rose.

"That's about all of it," he said, shortly.  "I asked around at two
or three of the neighbors' houses, and the last one I asked knew
where you'd moved and told me how to get here."

When the trio were again in the library, the captain spoke once
more.

"I'm 'fraid I've talked too much," he said, gravely.  "I didn't
realize how I was runnin' on.  Thought I was home, I guess, with
the fellers of my own age down at the postoffice, instead of bein'
an old countryman, tirin' out you two young city folks with my
yarns.  I beg your pardon.  Now you mustn't mind me.  I see you're
expectin' company or goin' callin' somewheres, so I'll just go to
my bedroom and write Abbie a line.  She'll be kind of anxious to
know if I got here safe and sound and found you.  Don't worry about
me, I'll be comf'table and busy."

He turned to go.  Caroline looked at him in surprise.  "We are not
expecting callers," she said.  "And certainly we are not going out
to-night.  Why should you think such a thing?"

It was her uncle's turn to show surprise.

"Why," he said, with a glance at Stephen, "I see that you're all
dressed up, and so I thought, naturally--"

He paused.

Young Warren grunted contemptuously.

"We dressed for dinner, that is all," said Caroline.

"You--you mean you put these clothes on every night?"

"Certainly."

Captain Elisha was plainly very much astonished.

"Well," he observed, slowly.  "I--guess I've made another mistake.
Hum!  Good night."

"Good night," said Stephen, quickly.  Caroline, however, seemed
embarrassed.

"Captain Warren," she said, "I thought possibly you might wish to
talk business with my brother and me.  We--we understand that you
have come on business connected with father's will.  It seems to me
that the sooner we--we--"

"Get it over the better, hey?  Well, maybe you're right.  It's an
odd business for an old salt like me to be mixed up in, that's a
fact.  If it hadn't been so odd, if I hadn't thought there must be
some reason, some partic'lar reason, I--well, I guess I'd have
stayed to home where I belong.  You mustn't think," he added,
seriously, "that I don't realize I'm as out of place amongst you
and your rich friends as a live fish in a barrel of sawdust.
That's all right; you needn't trouble to say no.  But you must
understand that, realizin' it, I'm not exactly imposin' myself on
you for pleasure or--well, from choice.  I'm so built that I can't
shirk when my conscience tells me I shouldn't, that's all.  I'm
kind of tired to-night, and I guess you are.  To-morrow mornin', if
it's agreeable to all hands, we will have a little business talk.
I'll have to see Lawyer Graves pretty soon, and have a gen'ral look
at your pa's affairs.  Then, if everything is all right and I feel
my duty's done, I'll probably go back to the Cape and leave you to
him, or somebody else able to look out for you.  Until then I'm
afraid," with a smile which had a trace of bitterness in it; "I'm
afraid you'll have to do the best you can with me.  I'll try to be
no more of a nuisance than I can help.  Good night."

When the two young people were left alone, Caroline turned to her
brother.

"Steve," she said, "I'm afraid you were a little rude.  I'm afraid
you hurt his feelings."

The boy stared at her in wonder.  "Hurt his feelings!" he exclaimed.
"HIS feelings!  Well, by Jove!  Caro, you're a wonder!  Did you
expect me to throw my arms around his neck?  If he had had any
feelings at all, if he was the slightest part of a gentleman, do you
suppose he would come here and disgrace us as he is doing?  Who
invited him?  Did we?  I guess not!"

"But he is father's brother, and father asked him to come."

"No, he didn't.  He asked him--heaven knows why--to look out for
our money affairs.  That's bad enough; but he didn't ask him to
LIVE with us.  He sha'n't! by gad, he sha'n't!  YOU may be as sweet
to him as you like, but I'll make it my business to give him the
cold shoulder every chance I get.  I'll freeze him out, that's what
I'll do--freeze him out.  Why, Caro! be sensible.  Think what his
staying here means.  Can we take him about with us?  Can our
friends meet HIM as--as our uncle?  He's got to be made to go.
Hasn't he now?  Hasn't he?"

The girl was silent for a moment.  Then she covered her face with
her hands.  "Oh, yes!" she sobbed.  "Oh, yes, he must! he MUST!
WHY did father do it?"



CHAPTER V


The Warren breakfast hour was nine o'clock.  At a quarter to nine
Caroline, entering the library, found Stephen seated by the fire
reading the morning paper.

"Good morning," she said.  Then, looking about the room, asked,
"Has--has HE been here?"

Her brother shook his head.  "You mean Uncle 'Lish?" he asked,
cheerfully.  "No, he hasn't.  At least, I haven't seen him and I
haven't made any inquiries.  I shall manage to survive if he never
appears.  Let sleeping relatives lie, that's my motto."

He laughed at his own joke and turned the page of the paper.  The
butler entered.

"Breakfast is served, Miss Caroline," he announced.

"Has Captain Warren come from his room?" asked the young lady.

"No, Miss Caroline.  That is, I haven't seen him."

Stephen tossed the paper on the floor and rose.

"I wonder--" he began.  Then, with a broad grin, "A sudden thought
strikes me, Sis.  He has undoubtedly blown out the gas."

"Steve!  How can you!"

"Perfectly simple.  Absolutely reasonable.  Just what might have
been expected.  'He has gone, but we shall miss him.'  Come on,
Caro; I'm hungry.  Let the old hayseed sleep.  You and I can have a
meal in peace.  Heavens! you don't care for another experience like
last night's, do you?"

"Edwards," said Caroline, "you may knock at Captain Warren's door
and tell him breakfast is served."

"Yes," commanded Stephen, "and tell him not to hurry on our account.
Come, Caro, come!  You're not pining for his society.  Well, wait
then!  _I_ won't!"

He marched angrily out of the room.  His sister hesitated, her wish
to follow complicated by a feeling of duty to a guest, no matter
how unwelcome.  The butler reappeared, looking puzzled.

"He's not there, miss?" he said.

"Not there?  Not in his room?"

"No, Miss Caroline.  I knocked, and he didn't answer, so I looked
in and he wasn't there.  His bed's been slept in, but he's gone."

"Gone?  And you haven't seen him?"

"No, miss.  I've been up and about since half past seven, and I
can't understand where he could have got to."

The door of the hall opened and shut.  Edwards darted from the
library.  A moment afterwards Captain Elisha strolled in.  He was
wearing his overcoat, and his hat was in his hand.

"Good mornin', Caroline," he hailed, in his big voice.  "Surprised
to see me, are you?  Ho! ho!  So was the Commodore.  He couldn't
understand how I got in without ringin'.  Well, you see, I'm used
to turnin' out pretty early, and when it got to be most seven
o'clock, I couldn't lay to bed any longer, so I got up, dressed,
and went for a walk.  I fixed the door latch so's I could come in
quiet.  You haven't waited breakfast for me, I hope."

"No; it is ready now, however."

"Ready now," the captain looked at his watch.  "Yes, I should think
so.  It's way into the forenoon.  You HAVE waited for me, haven't
you?  I'm awfully sorry."

"No, we have not waited.  Our breakfast hour is nine.  Pardon me
for neglecting to tell you that last evening."

"Oh, that's all right.  Now you trot right out and eat.  I've had
mine."

"Had your breakfast?"

"Yes, indeed.  When I'm home, Abbie and I usually eat about seven,
so I get sort of sharp-set if I wait after that.  I cal'lated you
city folks was late sleepers, and I wouldn't want to make any
trouble, so I found a little eating house down below here a ways
and had a cup of coffee and some bread and butter and mush.  Then I
went cruisin' round in Central Park a spell.  This IS Central Park
over across here, ain't it?"

"Yes."  The girl was too astonished to say more.

"I thought 'twas.  I'd been through part of it afore, but 'twas
years ago, and it's such a big place and the paths run so criss-
cross I got sort of mixed up, and it took me longer to get out than
it did to get in.  I had the gen'ral points of the compass, and I
guess I could have made a pretty average straight run for home, but
every time I wanted to cut across lots there was a policeman
lookin' at me, so I had to stick to the channel.  That's what made
me so late.  Now do go and eat your breakfast.  I won't feel easy
till I see you start."

Caroline departed, and the captain, after a visit to his own room,
where he left his coat and hat, returned to the library, picked up
the paper which his nephew had dropped, and began reading.

After breakfast came the "business talk."  It was a brief one.
Captain Elisha soon discovered that his brother's children knew
very little concerning their father's affairs.  They had always
plenty of money, had been indulged in practically every wish, and
had never had to think or plan for themselves.  As to the size of
the estate, they knew nothing more than Mr. Graves had told them,
which was that, instead of the several millions which rumor had
credited A. Rodgers Warren with possessing, five hundred thousand
dollars would probably be the extent of their inheritance, and
that, therefore, they must live economically.  As a first step in
that direction, they had given up their former home and moved to
the apartment.

"Yes, yes," mused the captain, "I see.  Mr. Graves didn't know
about your movin', then?  You did it on your own hook, so to
speak?"

Stephen answered promptly.

"Of course we did," he declared.  "Why not?"

"No reason in the world.  A good sensible thing to do, I should
say.  Didn't anybody advise you where to go?"

"Why should we need advice?"  Again it was Stephen who replied.
"We aren't kids.  We're old enough to decide some things for
ourselves, I should think."

"Yes.  Sartin.  That's right.  But I didn't know but p'raps some of
your friends might have helped along.  This Mrs. Dunn now, she kind
of hinted to me that she'd--well, done what she could to make you
comf'table."

"She has," avowed Caroline, warmly.  "Mrs. Dunn and Malcolm have
proved their friendship in a thousand ways.  We never can repay
them, Stephen and I, never!"

"No.  There's some things you can't ever pay, I know that.  Mrs.
Dunn found this nice place for you, did she?"

"Why, yes.  She and I found it together."

"So?  That was lucky, wa'n't it?  Advertised in the newspaper, was
it; or was there a 'To Let' placard up in the window?"

"No, certainly not.  Mrs. Dunn knew that we had decided to move,
and she has a cousin who is interested in New York property.  She
asked him, and he mentioned this apartment."

"One of his own, was it?"

"I believe so.  Why are you so particular?  Don't you like it?"

Her tone was sharp.  Stephen, who resented his uncle's questions as
impertinent intrusions upon the family affairs, added one of his
own.

"Isn't it as good as those in--what do you call it--South Denboro?"
he asked, maliciously.

Captain Elisha laughed heartily.

"Pretty nigh as good," he said.  "I didn't notice any better on the
way to the depot as I drove up.  And I doubt if there's many new
ones built since I left.  It's a mighty fine lot of rooms, I think.
What's the rent?  You'll excuse my askin', things bein' as they
are."

"Twenty-two hundred a year," answered his niece, coldly.

The captain looked at her, whistled, broke off the whistle in the
middle, and did a little mental arithmetic.

"Twenty-two hundred a year!" he repeated.  "That's one hundred and
eighty odd a month.  Say, that cousin of Mrs. Dunn's must want to
get his investment back.  You mean for just these ten rooms?"

Stephen laughed scornfully.

"Our guardian has been counting, Caro," he remarked.

"Yes.  Yes, I counted this mornin' when I got up.  I was interested,
naturally."

"Sure!  Naturally, of course," sneered the boy.  "Did you think the
twenty-two hundred was the rent of the entire building?"

"Well, I didn't know.  I--"

"The rent," interrupted Caroline, with dignity, "was twenty-four
hundred, but, thanks to Mrs. Dunn, who explained to her cousin that
we were friends of hers, it was reduced."

"We being in reduced circumstances," observed her brother in supreme
disgust.  "Pity the poor orphans!  By gad!"

"That was real nice of Mrs. Dunn," declared Captain Elisha, heartily.
"She's pretty well-off herself, I s'pose--hey, Caroline?"

"I presume so."

"Yes, yes.  About how much is she wuth, think?"

"I don't know.  I never inquired."

"No.  Well, down our way," with a chuckle, "we don't have to
inquire.  Ask anybody you meet what his next door neighbor's wuth,
and he'll tell you within a hundred, and how he got it, and how
much he owes, and how he gets along with his wife.  Ho! ho!
Speakin' of wives, is this Mr. Dunn married?"

He looked at his niece as he asked the question.  There was no
reason why Caroline should blush; she knew it, and hated herself
for doing it.

"No," she answered, resentfully, "he is not."

"Um-hm.  What's his business?"

"He is connected with a produce exchange house, I believe."

"One of the firm?"

"I don't know.  In New York we are not as well posted, or as
curious, concerning our friends' private affairs as your
townspeople seem to be."

"I guess that's so.  I imagine New Yorkers are too busy gettin' it
themselves to bother whether their neighbors have got it or not.
Well," he went on, rising, "I guess I've kept you young folks from
your work or--or play, or whatever you was going to do, long enough
for this once.  I think I'll go out for a spell.  I've got an
errand or two I want to do.  What time do you have dinner?"

"We lunch at half past one," answered Caroline.

"We dine at seven."

"Oh, yes, yes!  I keep forgettin' that supper's dinner.  Well, I
presume likely I'll be back for luncheon.  If I ain't, don't wait
for me.  I'll be home afore supper--there I go again!--afore
dinner, anyhow.  Good-by."

Five minutes later he was at the street corner, inquiring of a
policeman "the handiest way to get to Pine Street."  Following the
directions given, he boarded a train at the nearest subway station,
emerged at Wall Street, inquired once more, located the street he
was looking for, and, consulting a card which he took from a big
stained leather pocket-book, walked on, peering at the numbers of
the buildings he passed.

The offices of Sylvester, Kuhn, and Graves, were on the sixteenth
floor of a new and gorgeously appointed sky-scraper.  When Captain
Elisha entered the firm's reception room, he was accosted by a
wide-awake and extremely self-possessed office boy.

"Who'd you want to see?" asked the boy, briskly.

The captain removed his hat and wiped his forehead with his
handkerchief.

"Hold on a jiffy, Sonny," he panted.  "Just give me a minute to
sort of get myself together, as you might say.  I rode up in one of
those express elevators of yours, and I kind of feel as if my boots
had got tangled up with my necktie.  When that elevator feller cast
off from the cellar, I begun to shut up like a spyglass.  Whew!
Say, Son, is Mr. Graves in?"

"No," replied the boy, grinning.

"Hum!  Still in the sick bay, is he--hey?"

"He's to home.  Got a cold."

"Yup.  It's too bad.  Mr.--er--Sylvester, is he in?"

"Naw, he ain't.  And Mr. Kuhn's busy.  Won't one of the clerks do?
What do you want to see the firm about?"

"Well, Son, I had reasons of my own.  However, I guess I won't
disturb Mr. Kuhn, if he's busy's you say.  Here! you tell him, or
Mr. Sylvester when he comes, that Cap'n Warren, Cap'n Elisha Warren
of South Denboro--better write it down--called and will be back
about half past twelve or thereabouts.  Got it, have you?  Hum! is
that Elisha?  You don't tell me!  I've been spellin' it for sixty
years, more or less, and never realized it had such possibilities.
Lend me your pencil.  There! you give Mr. Sylvester that and tell
him I'll see him later.  So long, Son."

He departed, smiling.  The indignant office boy threw the card on
the table.

Captain Elisha strolled down Pine Street, looking about him with
interest.  It had been years since he visited this locality, and
the changes were many.  Soon, however, he began to recognize
familiar landmarks.  He was approaching the water front, and there
were fewer new buildings.  When he reached South Street he was
thoroughly at home.

The docks were crowded.  The river was alive with small craft of
all kinds.  Steamers and schooners were plenty, but the captain
missed the old square-riggers, the clipper ships and barks, such
as he had sailed in as cabin boy, as foremast hand, and, later,
commanded on many seas.

At length, however, he saw four masts towering above the roof of a
freight house.  They were not schooner rigged, those masts.  The
yards were set square across, and along them were furled royals
and upper topsails.  Here, at last, was a craft worth looking at.
Captain Elisha crossed the street, hurried past the covered freight
house, and saw a magnificent great ship lying beside a broad open
wharf.  Down the wharf he walked, joyfully, as one who greets an
old friend.

The wharf was practically deserted.  An ancient watchman was dozing
in a sort of sentry box, but he did not wake.  There was a pile of
foreign-looking crates and boxes at the further end of the pier,
evidently the last bit of cargo waiting to be carted away.  The
captain inspected the pile, recognized the goods as Chinese and
Japanese, then read the name on the big ship's stern.  She was the
Empress of the Ocean, and her home port was Liverpool.

Captain Elisha, as a free-born Yankee skipper, had an inherited and
cherished contempt for British "lime-juicer