t," he replied, solemnly.  "Ain't got any--
er--tips, any sure things you want to put me on to, have you?"

"I have not.  My experience of Wall Street 'sure things' leads me
to believe that they're sure--but only for the other fellow."

"Hum!  I know a chap down home that made money in stocks.  He made
it so easy that, as the boys say, 'twas almost a shame to take the
money.  And 'twas the makin' of him, too."

Pearson was embarrassed and troubled.  If this big-hearted, simple-
minded countryman had come to New York to buck the stock market, it
was time to sound a warning.  But had he, on such short acquaintance,
the right to warn?  The captain was shrewd in his own way.  Might
not the warning seem presumptuous?

"So--this--this friend of yours was a successful speculator, was
he?" he asked.  "He was lucky."

"Think so?  Well, maybe.  His name was Elkanah Chase, and his dad
was old man 'Rastus Chase, who made consider'ble in cranberries and
one thing or 'nother.  The old man brought Elkanah up to be what he
called a gentleman.  Ho! ho!  Hi hum!  I ain't sure what 'Rastus's
idea of a gentleman was, but if he cal'lated to have his son a
tramp in go-to-meetin' clothes, he got his wish.  When the old man
died, he willed the boy fifteen thousand dollars.  Well, fifteen
thousand dollars is a fortune to some folks--if they ain't
economizin' in New York--but to Elkanah 'twas just about enough to
make him realize his poverty.  So, to make it bigger, he got one of
them 'tips' from a college friend down here in Wall Street, and put
the heft of ten thousand into it.  AND, I swan, if it didn't double
his money!"

Captain Elisha's visitor shook his head.  He did not even smile.

"He was extremely fortunate," he said.  "I give you my word,
Captain Warren, that the majority of first speculators don't turn
out that way.  I hope he was wise enough to keep his profits."

The captain rubbed his chin.

"Jim--" he began.  "Excuse me, I should have said Mr. Pearson, but
I've got sort of in the habit of callin' folks by their first
names.  Livin' where you know everybody so well gets you into those
habits."

"Jim suits me.  I hope you'll cultivate the habit."

"Do you?  Well, I will.  Now, Jim, referrin' to what I was goin' to
say, you, bein' a newspaper man, ought to know everything, but it's
pretty plain you don't know Elkanah Chase.  Keep his profits!  Why,
when a feller is all but convinced that he knows it all, one little
bit of evidence like that speculation settles it for him conclusive.
Elkanah, realizin' that Wall Street was his apple pie, opened his
mouth to swaller it at one gulp.  He put his profits and every other
cent he had into another sure thing tip."

"And won again?"

"No.  He lost all that and some more that he borrowed."

"But I thought you said it was the making of him!"

"It was.  He had to take a job over at the overalls factory in
Ostable.  As a fifteen thousand dollar gentleman, he was pretty
average of a mess, but they tell me he makes middlin' good
overalls.  Elkanah convinced me that Wall Street has its good
points."

He chuckled.  Pearson, relieved, laughed in sympathy.  "Has he paid
back the money he borrowed?" he inquired.

"No-o!  I guess the creditors'll have to take it out in overalls.
However, it's a satisfaction to some of 'em to watch Chase really
work.  I know that gives me MY money's worth."

"Oh, ho!  You are one of the creditors!  Captain Warren, I'm
surprised.  I sized you up as a shrewder judge of investments."

Captain Elisha colored.  "I judged that one correct," he answered.
"If I hadn't thought 'twould have turned out that way I never would
have plunged.  You see, old man Chase was a friend of mine, and--
However," he added, hastily changing the subject, "we've strayed
some off the course.  When I mentioned the Stock Exchange I did it
because my brother was a member of it, and I cal'late you might
have known him."

Pearson was astonished.  "Your brother was a member of the
Exchange?" he repeated.

"Um-hm.  Never would have guessed it, would you?  I s'pose you
cal'late all the stock I knew about was on the hoof.  Well, I have
been acquainted with other breeds in my time.  My brother's name
was Abijah Warren--A. Rodgers Warren, he called himself."

The effect of this announcement was instantaneous and electric.
The young man sat back in his chair.

"A. Rodgers Warren was your brother?" he cried.

"Um-hm.  Seems to stagger you some.  Contrast between us as big as
all that comes to?"

"But--but, Captain Warren--Your brother--Tell me, is Miss Caroline
Warren your niece?"

"She is.  And Steve is my nephew.  'Tain't possible you're
acquainted with them?"

Pearson rose to his feet.  "Is--They used to live on the Avenue,"
he said.  "But you said you were visiting.  Captain Warren, is this
your niece's apartment?"

"Yes, hers and Steve's.  Why, what's the matter?  Ain't goin', are
you?"

"I think perhaps I had better.  It is getting late."

"Late!  It's only the shank of the evenin'.  Jim, I ain't so blind
that I can't see through an open window.  It ain't the lateness
that makes you want to leave so sudden.  Is there some trouble
between you and Caroline?  Course, it's none of my business, and
you needn't tell me unless you want to."

The answer was prompt enough.

"No," replied Pearson.  "No.  I assure you there is nothing of that
kind.  I--I met Miss Warren.  In fact, at one time we were well
acquainted.  I have the very highest opinion of her.  But I think
it is best to--"

"Just a minute now.  No trouble with Steve?  He's a boy and at an
age when he's pretty well satisfied with himself and you have to
make allowance."

"No.  Steve and I were quite friendly.  I'm sorry to cut my visit
short, but it is late and I MUST go."

He was moving toward the door.  Captain Elisha looked at him
intently.

"Well, if you must," he said.  "But I hope you'll come again soon.
Will you?"

"I hope I may.  I give you my word, Captain, that I appreciate your
invitation, and I do want to know you better."

"Same here.  I don't often take sudden fancies, Jim, but I knew
your uncle, and I'd bet consider'ble on any member of his family.
And I WAS kind of interested in that novel of yours.  You haven't
said you'd come again.  Will you?"

Pearson was much embarrassed.

"I should like to come, immensely," he said, with an earnestness
unmistakable; "but--but, to be honest, Captain Warren, there is a
reason, one which I may tell you sometime, but can't now--neither
Miss Warren nor her brother have any part in it--which makes me
reluctant to visit you here.  Won't you come and see me at the
boarding house?  Here's the address.  WILL you come?"

"Sartin!  I figured on doin' it, if you gave me the chance."

"Thank you, you'll be welcome.  Of course it is ONLY a boarding
house, and not a very good one.  My own room is--well, different
from this."

"Yup.  Maybe that's why I expect to feel at home in it.  Good
night, Jim.  Thank you for callin'.  Shall I ring for the Commodore
to pilot you out?"

"No, I can find my way.  I--Someone is coming."

From the hall came the clang of the elevator door and the sound of
voices.  Before the captain or his friend could move, Caroline,
Stephen, Mrs. Corcoran Dunn, and Malcolm entered.  Caroline was the
first to reach the library.  Her entrance brought her face to face
with Pearson.

"I beg your pardon," she began.  "I did not know there was anyone
here."

"It's only a friend of mine, Caroline," explained her uncle,
quickly.  "Just callin' on me, he was."

"Good evening, Miss Warren," said Pearson, quietly.

The girl looked at him for an instant.  Then her expression changed,
and, with a smile, she extended her hand.

"Why, Mr. Pearson!" she exclaimed.  "I'm very glad to see you.  You
must excuse me for not recognizing you at once.  Steve, you
remember Mr. Pearson."

Stephen also extended a hand.

"Sure!" he said.  "Glad to see you again, Pearson.  Haven't met you
for an age.  How are you?"

Pearson shook both the hands.  He was embarrassed and hesitated in
his reply.

"It HAS been some time since we met," he said.  "This is an
unexpected pleasure.  Ah, Mr. Dunn, good evening."

"It is Mr. Pearson, the financial writer of the Planet, Malcolm,"
said Caroline.  "You used to know him, I think."

"Don't remember, I'm sure.  Yes, I do.  Met you at the University
Club, didn't I?"

"Yes.  I was formerly a member."

"And let me present you to Mrs. Corcoran Dunn," went on the girl.
"Mr. Pearson used to know father well."

Mrs. Dunn inspected the visitor through her lorgnette, and
condescended to admit that she was "delighted."

"I'm very glad you called," continued Caroline.  "We were just in
time, weren't we?  Do sit down.  And if you will wait a minute
until we remove our wraps--Steve ring for Edwards, please."

"I'm afraid I can't wait, Miss Warren.  I dropped in to see your
uncle, at his invitation, and, as a matter of fact, I didn't know--"

"To see our UNCLE!" interrupted Stephen, in amazement.  "Who?"

"Your uncle, Captain Warren here," explained Pearson, surprised in
his turn.  "He and I made each other's acquaintance yesterday, and
he asked me to call."

"You--you called to see HIM?" repeated Stephen.  "Why, what in the
world--?"

"I took the liberty of askin' him, Caroline," observed Captain
Elisha quietly, and ignoring the last speaker.  "I didn't know you
knew him, and I used to sail along with HIS uncle, so he seemed
almost like own folks."

"Oh!" Caroline's manner changed.  "I presume it was a business
call," she said slowly.  "I beg pardon for interrupting.  We had
not seen you since father's death, Mr. Pearson, and I assumed that
you had called upon my brother and me.  Excuse me.  Mrs. Dunn, we
will go into the drawing-room."

She led the way toward the apartment.  Captain Elisha was about to
speak.  Pearson, however, explained for him.

"Miss Warren," he said, "if by a business call you mean one in the
interest of the Planet, I assure you that you are mistaken.  I am
no longer connected with any paper.  I met Captain Warren, under
rather unusual circumstances.  We discovered that we had mutual
friends and mutual interests.  He asked me to call on him, and I
did so.  I did not know, until five minutes ago, that he was your
uncle or that you and your brother lived here.  I beg you won't
leave the room on my account.  I was about to go when you came.
Good evening."

He bowed and stepped toward the hall.  Captain Elisha laid a hand
on his arm and detained him.

"Just a minute," he said.  "Caroline, I want you and Steve to know
that what Mr. Pearson says is exactly true.  I ain't the kind to
talk to the newspapers about the private affairs of my relations,
and, if I'm any judge of character, Mr. Pearson, knowin' you as it
seems he does, wouldn't be the kind to listen.  That's all.  Now,
Jim, if you must go."

He and his guest were at the door.  Caroline and Mrs. Dunn were at
the opposite side of the room.  Suddenly the girl halted, turned,
and, moving across to where her uncle and the young man were
standing, once more extended her hand.

"Mr. Pearson," she said, impulsively, "again I ask your pardon.  I
should have known.  I am very sorry I spoke as I did.  Will you
forgive me?"

Pearson colored.  His embarrassment was more evident than before.

"There is no occasion for apology, Miss Warren," he said.  "I don't
wonder you thought I had come in my former capacity as reporter."

"Yes, you do.  You MUST have wondered.  I am very glad you called
to see my--my guardian, and I hope you will continue to do so.
Father used to speak so highly of you, and I'm sure he valued your
friendship.  Stephen and I wish to consider his friends ours.
Please believe that you are welcome here at any time."

Pearson's reply was brief.

"Thank you, Miss Warren," he said.  "You are very kind.  Good
evening."

In the hall, as they waited for the elevator, Captain Elisha,
happier than at any time since his arrival in New York, clapped his
friend on the shoulder.

"Jim," he said, "I was beginnin' to doubt my judgment of things and
folks.  Now I feel better.  That niece of mine has got the right
stuff in her.  After THAT invitation, you will come and see us once
in a while.  That makes it easier, hey?"

Pearson shook his head.  "I'm not sure, Captain," he observed,
slowly, "that it doesn't make it harder.  I shall look for you at
the boarding house very soon.  Don't disappoint me.  Good night."

The captain's last remark that evening was made to Edwards, whom he
met just outside the door of his bedroom.

"Commodore," he said, "a barn full of rats is a nuisance, ain't
it?"

"Sir?" stammered the astonished butler.

"I say a barn full of rats is a nuisance."

"Why--why, yes, sir.  I should think it might be, sir."

"Yup.  Well, I know a worse one.  It's a house full of mysteries.
By, by, Son.  Pleasant dreams."

He sat up until late, meditating profoundly.  Then, taking from its
envelope the letter yet unsealed, which he had written to Miss
Abigail Baker, he added this postscript:

"Eleven o'clock.  I have decided, Abbie, to accept the guardianship
and the rest of it, for a spell, anyhow.  Shall notify the lawyers
in the morning.  Necessity is one thing, and pleasure is another.
I doubt if I find the job pleasant, but I guess it is necessary.
Anyhow, it looks that way to me."



CHAPTER VIII


Announcement of Captain Elisha's decision followed quickly.
Sylvester, Kuhn, and Graves received the telephone message stating
it, and the senior partner was unqualifiedly delighted.  Kuhn
accepted his associate's opinion with some reservation.  "It is an
odd piece of business, the whole of it," he declared.  "I shall be
curious to see how it works out."  As for Mr. Graves, when the
information was conveyed to him by messenger, he expressed disgust
and dismay.  "Ridiculous!" he said.  "Doctor, I simply must be up
and about within the next few days.  It is necessary that a sane,
conservative man be at the office.  Far be it from me to say a word
against Sylvester, as a lawyer, but he is subject to impressions.
I imagine this Cape Codder made him laugh, and, therefore, in his
opinion, is all right.  I'm glad I'm not a joker."

The captain said that he would be down later on to talk things
over.  Meanwhile, if the "papers and such" could be gotten
together, it would "sort of help along."  Sylvester explained that
there were certain legal and formal ceremonies pertaining to the
acceptance of the trust to be gone through with, and these must
have precedence.  "All right," answered the captain.  "Let's have
'em all out at once and get the ache and agony over.  I'll see you
by and by."

When Mrs. Corcoran Dunn made her daily visit to the Warren
apartment that afternoon, she found Caroline alone and almost in
tears.  Captain Elisha had broken the news at the table during
luncheon, after which he went downtown.  Stephen, having raved,
protested, and made himself generally disagreeable and his sister
correspondingly miserable, had departed for the club.  It was a
time for confidences, and the wily Mrs. Dunn realized that fact.
She soothed, comforted, and within half an hour, had learned the
whole story.  Caroline told her all, the strange will, the
disclosure concerning the country uncle, and the inexplicable
clauses begging the latter to accept the executorship, the trust,
and the charge of her brother and herself.  Incidentally she
mentioned that a possible five hundred thousand was the extreme
limit of the family's pecuniary resources.

"Now you know everything," sobbed Caroline.  "Oh, Mrs. Dunn, YOU
won't desert us, will you?"

The widow's reply was a triumph, of its kind.  In it were expressed
sorrow, indignation, pity, and unswerving loyalty.  Desert them?
Desert the young people, toward whom she had come to feel almost
like a mother?  Never!

"You may depend on Malcolm and me, my dear," she declared.  "We are
not fair-weather friends.  And, after all, it is not so very bad.
Affairs might be very much worse."

"Worse!  Oh, Mrs. Dunn, how could they be?  Think of it!  Stephen
and I are dependent upon him for everything.  We must ask him for
every penny.  And whatever he says to do we MUST do.  We're obliged
to.  Just think! if he decides to take us back with him to--South
Denboro, or whatever dreadful place he comes from, we shall have to
go--and live there."

"But he won't, my dear.  He won't.  It will take some time to
settle your father's affairs, and the business will have to be
transacted here in New York."

"I know.  I suppose that's true.  But that doesn't make it any
easier.  If he stops here he will stay with us.  And what shall we
do?  We can't introduce him to our friends, or, at least, to any
except our best, our understanding friends, like you and Malcolm."

"Why, I'm not sure.  He is rather--well--er--countryfied, but I
believe he has a good heart.  He is not rude or unkind or anything
of that sort, is he?"

"No.  No-o.  He's not that, at all.  In fact, he means to be kind
in his way.  But it's such a different way from ours.  He is not
used to society; he wouldn't understand that certain things and
ways were absolutely essential.  I suppose it isn't his fault
exactly, but that doesn't help.  And how can we tell him?"

"I don't know that you can tell him, but you might hint.  Diplomacy,
my dear, is one of the necessary elements of life.  Whatever else you
do remember to be diplomatic.  My poor husband used to have a pet
proverb--he was interested in politics, my dear, and some of his
sayings were a trifle grotesque but very much to the point.  He used
to say that one could get rid of more flies with molasses than with
a club.  And I think he was right.  Now let me consider.  Let's look
the situation right in the face.  Of course your guardian, as a
companion, as an associate for us, for our kind of people, is, to be
quite frank, impossible."

"Yes.  Yes, I'm sure he is."

"Yes.  But he IS your guardian.  Therefore, we can't get rid of him
with--well, with a club.  He must be endured and made as endurable
as possible.  And it certainly will not do to offend him."

"Steve says we must do what he calls freezing him out--make him
feel that we do not want him here."

"Hum!  Well, Stephen is a nice boy--Malcolm adores him--but he
isn't a diplomat.  If we should--what is it?--freeze out your
uncle--"

"Please call him something else."

"Well, we'll call him the encumbrance on the estate; that's legal,
I believe, and expresses it nicely.  If we should freeze out the
encumbrance, we MIGHT freeze him to his village, and he MIGHT
insist on your going with him, which wouldn't do at ALL, my dear.
For one thing, Malcolm would probably insist on going, also, and I,
for one, don't yearn for rural simplicity.  Ha! ha!  Oh, you
mustn't mind me.  I'm only a doting mamma, dearie, and I have my
air castles like everyone else.  So, freezing out won't do.  No,
you and Steve must be polite to our encumbrance."

"I shall not get on my knees to him and beg.  That I sha'n't do."

"No one expects you to.  If anyone begs it should be he.  Condescend
to just a little.  Make him feel his place.  Correct him when he
goes too far wrong, and ignore him when he gets assertive.  As for
getting rid of him at times when it may be necessary--well, I think
you may safely leave that to me."

"To you?  Oh, Mrs. Dunn, we couldn't think of dragging you into it.
It is bad enough that we should be disgraced; but you must not be."

"My dear child, I THINK my position in society is sufficiently
established to warrant a risk or two.  If _I_ am seen in company
with--with the encumbrance, people will merely say, 'Oh, it's
another of her eccentricities!' that's all.  Now, don't worry, and
don't fret all that pretty color from your cheeks.  Always remember
this: it is but for a year or a trifle over.  Then you will be of
age and can send your encumbrance to the right-about in a hurry."

Caroline, under the spell of this convincing eloquence, began to
cheer up.  She even smiled.

"Well," she said, "I will try to be diplomatic.  I really will.
But Stephen--I'm not sure what dreadful thing HE will do."

"He will return to college soon.  I will take upon myself the
convincing of the encumbrance to that effect.  And while he is at
home, Malcolm will take charge of him.  He will be delighted to do
it."

"Mrs. Dunn, how can we ever thank you sufficiently?  What should we
do without you and Malcolm?"

"I HOPE, my dear, that you will never have to do without me; not
for many years, at any rate.  Of course, there is always my poor
heart, but--we won't worry, will we?"

So, with a kiss and an embrace, this affecting interview ended.

There was another that evening between Mrs. Dunn and her son, which
was not devoid of interest.  Malcolm listened to the information
which his mother gave him, and commented upon it in characteristic
fashion.

"Humph!" he observed, "two hundred and fifty thousand, instead of
the two million you figured on, Mater!  Two hundred and fifty
thousand isn't so much, in these days."

"No," replied his parent, sharply, "it isn't so much, but it isn't
so little, either."

"I suppose one can get along on it."

"Yes, one can.  In fact, I know of two who are managing with a good
deal less.  Don't be any more of a fool than you can help, Malcolm.
The sum itself isn't small, and, besides, the Warrens are a family
of standing.  To be connected with them is worth a good deal.
There are infinite possibilities in it.  Oh, if only I might live
to see the day when tradespeople meant something other than
nuisances to be dodged, I THINK I could die contented."

"Caro's a decent sort of a girl," commented Malcolm, reflectively.

"She's a bright girl and an attractive one.  Just now she is in a
mood to turn to us, to you.  But, for Heaven's sake, be careful!
She is delicate and sensitive and requires managing.  She likes
you.  If only you weren't such a blunderer!"

"Much obliged, Mater.  You're free with your compliments this
evening.  What's the trouble?  Another 'heart'?

"No.  My heart I can trust, up to certain limits.  But I'm afraid
of your head, just as I always was of your father's.  And here's
one more bit of advice:  Be careful how you treat that country
uncle."

"The Admiral!  Ho! ho!  He's a card."

"He may be the trump that will lose us the trick.  Treat him
civilly; yes, even cordially, if you can.  And DON'T insult him as
you did the first time you and he met."

The young man crossed his legs, and grunted in resignation.

"Well," he said, "it's going to be a confounded bore, but, at the
very longest, it'll last but a year.  Then Caro will be her own
mistress."

"Yes.  But there are three hundred and sixty-five days in a year;
remember that."

"All right, Mater.  You can bet on me.  The old hayseed and I will
be bosom pals.  Wait and see."

The formalities at the lawyers' took some time.  Captain Elisha was
absent from the apartment the better part of the following two
days.  The evenings, however, he spent with his niece and nephew,
and, if at all sensitive to sudden changes of the temperature, he
must have noticed that the atmosphere of the library was less
frigid.  Caroline was not communicative, did not make conversation,
nor was she in the least familiar; but she answered his questions,
did not leave the room when he entered, and seemed inclined to
accept his society with resignation, if not with enthusiasm.  Even
Stephen was less sarcastic and bitter.  At times, when his new
guardian did or said something which offended his highly cultivated
sense of the proprieties, he seemed inclined to burst out with a
sneer; but a quick "ahem!" or a warning glance from his sister
caused him to remain silent and vent his indignation by kicking a
footstool or barking a violent order at the unresisting Edwards.
Caroline and her brother had had a heart to heart talk, and, as a
result, the all-wise young gentleman promised to make no more
trouble than he could help.

"Though, by gad, Caro," he declared, "it's only for you I do it!
If I had my way the old butt-in should understand exactly what I
think of him."

On Thursday, after luncheon, as Captain Elisha sat in his own room,
reading a book he had taken from the library, there came a knock at
the door.

"Come ahead in!" ordered the captain.  Caroline entered.  Her uncle
rose and put down the book.

"Oh!" he exclaimed, "is it you?  Excuse me.  I thought 'twas the
Commodore--Edwards, I mean.  If I'd known you was comin' callin',
Caroline, I shouldn't have been quite so bossy.  Guess I'd have
opened the door for you, instead of lettin' you do it yourself."

"Thank you," answered his niece.  "I came to see you on--I suppose
you might call it business.  At any rate, it is a financial matter.
I sha'n't detain you long."

Captain Elisha was a trifle disappointed.

"Oh," he said, "on business, was it?  I hoped--I didn't know but
you'd come just out of sociability.  However, I'm mighty glad to
see you, Caroline, no matter what it's for.  That's a real becomin'
dress you've got on," he added, inspecting her admiringly.  "I
declare, you look prettier every time I see you.  You favor your pa
consider'ble; I can see it more and more.  'Bije had about all the
good looks there was in our family," with a chuckle.  "Set down,
do."

The girl seated herself in a rocker, and looked at him for a moment
without speaking.  She seemed to have something on her mind, and
not to know exactly how to express it.

"Captain Warren," she began, "I--I came to ask a favor.  I am
obliged to ask it, because you are our--" she almost choked over
the hated word--"our guardian, and I can no longer act on my own
responsibility.  I wish to ask you for some money.

Captain Elisha nodded gravely.

"I see" he said.  "Well, Caroline, I don't believe you'll find me
very close-fisted.  I think I told you and Steve that you was to do
just as you'd been in the habit of doin'.  Of course I AM your
guardian now, and I shall be held responsible for whatever expense
comes to the estate.  It is quite a responsibility, and I so
understand it.  As I said to you when I told you I'd decided to
take the job on trial, WHILE I have it it'll be my pride to see
that you or your brother don't lose anything.  I intend, if the
Almighty spares me so long and I keep on with the trust, to turn
over, when my term's out, at least as much to you and Steve as your
father left.  That's all.  Excuse me for mentioning it again.  Now,
how much do you want?  Is your reg'lar allowance too small?
Remember, I don't know much about such things here in New York, and
you must be frank and aboveboard and tell me if you have any
complaints."

"I have no complaints.  My allowance is sufficient.  It is the same
that father used to give me, and it is all I need.  But this is a
matter outside my personal needs."

"Um-hm.  Somethin' to do with the household expenses, hey?"

"No.  It is--is a matter of--well, of charity.  It may amount to
several hundred dollars."

"Yes, yes.  I see.  Charity, hey?  Church?"

"No.  One of the maids, Annie, has trouble at home, and I wanted to
help her."

The captain nodded once more.

"Annie," he repeated, "that's the rosy-faced one?  The Irish one?"

"Yes.  Her father was seriously injured the other day and cannot
work.  His hip is broken, and the doctor's bill will be large.
They are very poor, and I thought perhaps--"  She hesitated,
faltered, and then said haughtily:  "Father was very sympathetic
and liked to have me do such things."

"Sho! sho!  Sartin!  Course he did.  I like it, too.  I'm glad you
came to me just as you did, Caroline.  How much do you want to
start with?"

"I don't know, exactly.  I thought I might ask our own doctor to
attend to the case, and might send them some delicacies and food."

"Good idea!  Go right ahead, Caroline."

"Thank you.  I have been over to see them, and they need help--they
really do."

"I presume likely.  How'd the accident happen?  Anybody's fault,
was it?"

Caroline's eyes snapped.  "Indeed it was!" she said, indignantly.
"It was a wet morning, after a rain, and the pavement was slippery.
Mr. Moriarty, Annie's father, was not working that day--they were
making some repairs at the factory where he is employed, I believe--
and he had gone out to do the family marketing.  He was crossing
the street when an automobile, recklessly driven, so everyone says,
drove directly down on him.  He tried to jump out of the way and
succeeded--otherwise he might have been killed; but he fell and
broke his hip.  He is an old man, and the case is serious."

"Dear! dear! you don't tell me!  Poor old chap!  The auto feller--
did he help?  Seems to me he ought to be the one to be spendin' the
money.  'Twas his fault."

"Help!  Indeed he didn't!  He and the man with him merely laughed,
as if it was a good joke, put on speed, and disappeared as quickly
as possible."

"Why, the mean swab!  Did this Mr. Moriarty or the folks around get
the license number of the auto?"

"No.  All they know is that it was a big yellow car with two men in
it."

"Hey?  A yellow car?"

"Yes.  Somewhat similar to the one Malcolm--Mr. Dunn drives."

"So, so!  Hum!  Where did it happen?"

"On Saint Nicholas Avenue, near One Hundred and Twenty-Eighth
Street."

"Eh?  Saint Nicholas Avenue, you say?"

"Yes."  Caroline rose and turned to go.  "Thank you, Captain
Warren," she said.  "I will tell Doctor Henry to take the case at
once."

The captain did not answer immediately.  With his chin in his hand
he was gazing at the floor.

"Good afternoon," said Caroline.

Her uncle looked up.

"Er--Wait just a minute, Caroline," he said.  "I guess maybe, if
you don't mind, I'd like to think this over a little afore you go
too far.  You have your doctor go right ahead and see to the old
man, and you order the things to eat and whatever's necessary.  But
afore you give Annie or her father any money, I'd kind of like to
figger a little mite."

His niece stopped short, turned and stared at him.

"Oh!" she said, slowly and icily, "I see.  Please don't trouble
yourself.  I should have known.  However, my allowance is my own,
and I presume I am permitted to do what I please with that."

"Caroline, don't be hasty.  I ain't sayin' no about the money.  Far
from it.  I only--"

"I understand--thoroughly.  Don't trouble to 'figure,' as you call
it.  Oh! WHY did I humiliate myself?  I should have known!"

"Caroline, please--"

But the girl had gone, closing the door after her.  Captain Elisha
shook his head, heaved a deep sigh, and then, sinking back into his
chair, relapsed into meditation.  Soon afterward he put on his hat
and coat and went out.

Half an hour later he entered the office of a firm of commission
brokers on lower Broad Street, and inquired if a gentleman by the
name of Mr. Malcolm Dunn was connected with that establishment.  On
being answered in the affirmative, he asked if Mr. Dunn were in.
Yes, he was.

"Well," said Captain Elisha, "I'd like to speak to him a minute or
so.  Just tell him my name's Warren, if you don't mind, young
feller."

The clerk objected to being addressed as "young feller," and showed
his disapproval by the haughty and indifferent manner in which he
departed on the errand.  However, he did so depart, and returned
followed by Malcolm himself.  The latter, who had been misled by
the name into supposing his caller to be Stephen Warren, was much
astonished when he saw the captain seated outside the railing.

"Good afternoon," said Captain Elisha, rising and extending his
hand:  "How are you to-day, sir?  Pretty smart?"

The young man answered briefly that he was all right.  He added he
was glad to see his visitor, a statement more polite than truthful.

"Well, what's up?" he inquired, condescendingly.  "Nothing wrong
with Caro or Steve, I hope."

"No, they're fust-rate, thank you."

"What's doing, then?  Is it pleasure or business?"

"Well, a little of both, maybe.  It's always a pleasure to see you,
of course; and I have got a little mite of business on hand."

Malcolm smiled, in his languid fashion.  If he suspected sarcasm in
the first part of the captain's reply, it did not trouble him.  His
self-sufficiency was proof against anything of that sort.

"Business," he repeated.  "Well, that's what I'm here for.
Thinking of cornering the--er--potato market, were you?"

"No-o.  Cranberries would be more in my line, and I cal'late you
fellers don't deal in that kind of sass.  I had a private matter I
wanted to talk over with you, Mr. Dunn; that is, if you ain't too
busy."

Malcolm looked at him with an amused curiosity.  As he had
expressed it in the conversation with his mother, this old fellow
certainly was a "card."  He seated himself on the arm of the oak
settle from which the captain had risen and, lazily swinging a
polished shoe, admitted that he was always busy but never too busy
to oblige.

"What's on your mind, Captain?" he drawled.

Captain Elisha glanced about him somewhat uneasily.

"I--I don't know as I made it quite clear," he said, "that it was
sort of private; somethin' just between us, you understand."

Malcolm hesitated.  Sliding from the settle, and impatiently
commanding the clerk to open the gate in the railing, he led his
caller through the main office and into a small room beyond.  On
the glass pane of the door was lettered, "Mr. Dunn--Private."  A
roll-top desk in the corner and three chairs were the furniture.
Malcolm, after closing the door, sprawled in the swing chair before
the desk, threw one leg over a drawer, which he pulled out for that
purpose, and motioned his companion to occupy one of the other
chairs.

Captain Elisha took the offered chair and dropped his hat on the
floor beside it.  Then he inspected the room and its furnishings
with interest.  Dunn drew out a pocket case, extracted a cigarette,
lit it, and waited for him to speak.

"Well," observed the young man, after a moment, what's the trouble,
Admiral?  Better get it off your chest, hadn't you?  We're private
enough here."

The captain answered the last question.  "Yes," he said, "this is
nice and private.  Got a stateroom all to yourself; name on the
door, and everything complete.  You must be one of the officers of
the craft."

"Yes."

"Um-hm.  I sort of expected to find your name on the door outside,
but there 'twas, 'Smith, Haynes & Co.'  I presume likely you're the
'Co.'"

"_I_ 'presume likely,'" with mocking impatience.  "What about that
private matter?"

Captain Elisha did not appear to hear him.  His eyes were fixed on
several photographs stuck in the rail of Mr. Dunn's desk.  The
photos were those of young ladies.

"Friends of yours?" inquired the captain, nodding toward the
photographs.

"No."  Dunn took the photos from the rack and threw them into a
pigeon hole.  "Look here," he said, pointedly, "I wouldn't hurry
you for the world, but--"

He paused.  Captain Elisha did not take the hint.  His mind was
evidently still busy with the vanished photographs.

"Just fancy pictures, I s'pose, hey?" he commented.

"Doubtless.  Any other little points I can give you?"

"I guess not.  I thought they was fancy; looked so to me.  Well,
about that private matter.  Mr. Dunn, I come to see you about an
automobile."

"An automobile!"  The young man was so astonished that he actually
removed his feet from the desk.  Then he burst into a laugh.  "An
automobile?" he repeated.  "Captain, has the influence of the
metropolis made you a sport already?  Do you want to buy a car?"

"Buy one?"  It was Captain Elisha's turn to show irritation.  "Buy
one of them things?  Me?  I wouldn't buy one of 'em, or run one of
'em, for somethin', _I_ tell you!  No, I don't want to buy one."

"Why not?  Sell you mine for a price."

"Not if I see you fust, thank you.  No, Mr. Dunn, 'tain't that.
But one of the hired help up to our place--Caroline's place, I
mean--is in trouble on account of one of the dratted machines.
They're poor folks, of course, and they need money to help 'em
through the doctorin' and nursin' and while the old man's out of
work.  Caroline was for givin' it to 'em right off, she's a good-
hearted girl; but I said--that is, I kind of coaxed her out of it.
I thought I'd ask some questions first."

"So you came to me to ask them?"  Malcolm smiled contentedly.
Evidently the cares and complications of guardianship were already
proving too intricate for the unsophisticated countryman.  He
wished advice, and had come to him for it, possibly at Caroline's
suggestion.  Affairs were shaping themselves well.  Here was an
opportunity to act the disinterested friend, as per maternal
instructions.

"So you wanted to ask questions, did you, Captain?" he repeated.
"Well, fire away.  Anything I can do to help you or Caroline will
be a pleasure, of course.  Smoke?"

He offered the cigarette case.  The captain eyed it dubiously and
shook his head.

"No," he said; "no, thank you, I commenced smokin' at the butt end,
I guess.  Begun with a pipe, and them things would seem sort of
kindergarten, I'm afraid.  No offense meant, you understand.  It's
all accordin' to what you've been used to.  Well, about the
questions.  Here's the first one:  Don't it seem to you that the
right one to pay for the doctorin' and nursin' and such of Mr.
Moriarty--that's Annie's pa--ought to be the feller who hurt him?
That feller, instead of Caroline?"

"Sure thing!  If you know who did it, he's your mark."

"He could be held responsible, couldn't he?"

"Certainly."

"Um-hm.  So I thought.  And if he was a right-minded chap, he'd be
glad to help the poor critter, providin' he knew what damage he'd
done; wouldn't you think so?"

Malcolm nodded sagely, opened his mouth to speak, and then closed
it again.  A sudden recollection came to him, an alarming
recollection.  He turned in his chair and looked at his visitor.
Captain Elisha met his gaze frankly.

"Where did this accident happen?" asked Mr. Dunn, his condescending
smile absent.

"At the corner of Saint Nicholas Avenue and One Hundred and Twenty-
Eighth Street.  It happened last Friday mornin', a week ago.  And
the car that hit him was a yellow one."

Malcolm did not answer.  His pale face grew paler, and then flushed
a brilliant red.  The captain seemed to feel sorry for him.

"Naturally," he went on, "when I heard about it, I remembered what
you told Mr. Sylvester and me at the club that afternoon.  I
understand how 'twas, of course.  You never thought you'd done any
real harm and just went on, thinkin' 'twas a good joke, much as
anything.  If you'd known you'd really hurt the poor old man, you'd
have stopped to see him.  I understand that.  But--"

"Look here!" interrupted Dunn, sharply, "did Caroline send you to
me?"

"Caroline?  No, no!  She don't know 'twas your automobile at all.
I never said a word to her, 'tain't likely.  But afore she spent
any of her money, I thought you'd ought to know, because I was sure
you wouldn't let her.  That's the way I'd feel, and I felt 'twas no
more'n honest to give you the chance.  I come on my own hook; she
didn't know anything about it."

Malcolm drummed on the desk with nervous fingers.  The flush
remained on his face, his cigarette had gone out, and he threw the
stump savagely into the wastepaper basket.  Captain Elisha remained
silent.  At length the young man spoke.

"Well," he growled, pettishly, "how much will it take to square
things with the gang?  How much damages do they want?"

"Damages?  Oh, there won't be any claim for damages, I guess.  That
is, no lawsuit, or anything of that kind.  The Moriartys don't know
you did it, and there's no reason why they should.  I thought maybe
I'd see to 'em and do whatever was necessary; then you could settle
with me, and the whole business would be just between us two.
Outside the doctor's bills and food and nursin' and such, all the
extry will be just the old man's wages for the time he's away from
the factory.  'Twon't be very heavy."

More reflection and finger tattoo by his companion.  Then:

"All right!  I'm in it, I can see that; and it's up to me to get
out as easy as I can.  I don't want any newspaper publicity.  Go
ahead!  I'll pay the freight."

Captain Elisha arose and picked up his hat.

"That's fust-rate," he said, with emphasis.  "I felt sure you'd see
it just as I did.  There's one thing I would like to say," he
added: "that is, that you mustn't think I was stingy about helpin'
'em myself.  But it wa'n't really my affair; and when Caroline
spoke of spendin' her money and Steve's, I didn't feel I'd ought to
let her.  You see, I don't know as you know it yet, Mr. Dunn, but
my brother 'Bije left me in charge of his whole estate, and, now
that I've decided to take the responsibility, I've got a sort of
pride in not wastin' any of his children's inheritance.  Good day,
Mr. Dunn.  I'm much obliged to you."

He opened the office door.  Malcolm, frowning heavily, suddenly
asked a final question.

"Say!" he demanded, "you'll not tell Caroline or Steve a word of
this, mind!"

The captain seemed surprised.

"I guess you didn't catch what I said, Mr. Dunn," he observed,
mildly.  "I told you this whole business would be just between you
and me."



CHAPTER IX


Captain Elisha was very far from considering himself a Solomon.  As
he would have said he had lived long enough with himself to know
what a lot he didn't know.  Nevertheless, deep down in his inner
consciousness, he cherished a belief in his judgment of human
nature.  This judgment was not of the snap variety; he took his
time in forming it.  People and their habits, their opinions and
characters, were to him interesting problems.  He liked to study
them and to reach conclusions founded upon reason, observation, and
common sense.  Having reached such a conclusion, it disturbed him
when the subjects of the problem suddenly upset the whole process
of reasoning and apparently proved him wrong by behavior exactly
contrary to that which he had expected.

He had been pretty well satisfied with the result of his visit to
young Dunn at the latter's office.  Malcolm had surrendered,
perhaps not gracefully or unconditionally, but he had surrendered,
and the condition--secrecy--was one which the captain himself had
suggested.  Captain Elisha's mental attitude toward the son of the
late Tammany leader had been a sort of good-natured but alert
tolerance.  He judged the young man to be a product of rearing and
environment.  He had known spoiled youths at the Cape and, in their
surroundings, they behaved much as Malcolm did in his.  The same
disrespect to their elders, the same cock-sureness, and the same
careless indifference concerning the effect which their actions
might have upon other people--these were natural and nothing but
years and the hard knocks of experience could bring about a change.
Elkanah Chase, country swell and pampered heir to the cranberry
grower's few thousands, and Malcolm Dunn, idol of his set at the
Metropolitan Club, were not so very different, except in externals.
The similarity confirmed his opinion that New York was merely South
Denboro many thousand times magnified.

He knew how young Chase had behaved after an interview not unlike
that just described.  In Elkanah's case several broken windows and
property destroyed on a revel the night before the Fourth had
caused the trouble.  In Malcolm's it was an automobile.  Both had
listened to reason and had knuckled under rather than face possible
lawsuits and certain publicity.  Chase, however, had sulkily
refused to speak to him for a month, and regained affability merely
because he wished to borrow money.  According to the captain's
deduction, Dunn should have acted in similar fashion.  But he
didn't; that was the odd part of it.

For Malcolm, when he next called, in company with his mother, at
the Warren apartment, was not in the least sulky.  Neither was he
over effusive, which would have argued fear and a desire to
conciliate.  Possibly there was a bit more respect in his greeting
of the new guardian and a trifle less condescension, but not much.
He still hailed Captain Elisha as "Admiral," and was as mockingly
careless as ever in his remarks concerning the latter's newness in
the big city.  In fact, he was so little changed that the captain
was perplexed.  A chap who could take a licking when he deserved
it, and not hold malice, must have good in him, unless, of course,
he was hiding the malice for a purpose.  And if that purpose was
the wish to appear friendly, then the manner of hiding it proved
Malcolm Dunn to possess more brains than Captain Elisha had given
him credit for.

One thing seemed sure, the Dunns were not openly hostile.  And
Caroline was.  Since the interview in the library, when the girl
had, as she considered it, humiliated herself by asking her
guardian for money to help the Moriartys, she had scarcely spoken
to him.  Stephen, taking his cue from his sister, was morose and
silent, also.  Captain Elisha found it hard to forgive his dead
brother for bringing all this trouble upon him.

His lawyers, so Sylvester informed him, were setting about getting
Rodgers Warren's tangible assets together.  The task was likely to
be a long one.  The late broker's affairs were in a muddled state,
the books were anything but clear, some of the investments were
foreign, and, at the very earliest, months must elapse before the
executor and trustee could know, for certain, just how large a
property he was in charge of.

He found some solace and forgetfulness of the unpleasant life he
was leading in helping the stricken Moriarty family.  Annie, the
maid at the apartment, he swore to secrecy.  She must not tell Miss
Caroline of his visits to her parents' home.  Doctor Henry, also,
though he could not understand why, promised silence.  Caroline
herself had engaged his services in the case, and he was faithful.
But the patient was more seriously hurt than at first appeared, and
consultations with a specialist were necessary.

"Goin' to be a pretty expensive job, ain't it, Doctor?" asked the
captain of the physician.

"Rather, I'm afraid."

"All right.  If expense is necessary, don't be afraid of it.  You
do just what you'd ought to, and send the bill to me."

"But Miss Warren insisted upon my sending it to her.  She said it
was a private matter, and one with which you, as her guardian, had
nothing to do."

"I know.  Caroline intends to use her own allowance, I s'pose.
Well, let her think she will, if 'twill please her.  But when it
comes to the settlement, call on me.  Give her any reason you want
to; say a--er--wealthy friend of the family come to life all at
once and couldn't sleep nights unless he paid the costs."

"But there isn't any such friend, is there, Captain Warren?  Other
than yourself, I mean?"

Captain Elisha grinned in appreciation of a private joke.  "There
is somebody else," he admitted, "who'll pay a share, anyhow.  I
don't know's he's what you call a bosom friend, and, as for his
sleepin' nights--well, I never heard he couldn't do that, after he
went to bed.  But, anyhow, you saw wood, or bones, or whatever you
have to do, and leave the rest to me.  And don't tell Caroline or
anybody else a word."

The Moriartys lived in a four-room flat on the East Side, uptown,
and his visits there gave the captain a glimpse of another sort of
New York life, as different from that of Central Park West as could
well be imagined.  The old man, Patrick, his wife, Margaret, the
unmarried son, Dennis, who worked in the gas house, and five other
children of various ages were hived somehow in those four small
rooms and Captain Elisha marveled greatly thereat.

"For the land sakes, ma'am," he asked of the nurse, "how do they do
it?  Where do they put 'em nights?  That--that closet in there's
the pantry and woodshed and kitchen and dinin' room; and that one's
the settin' room and parlor; and them two dry-goods boxes with
doors to 'em are bedrooms.  There's eight livin' critters to stow
away when it's time to turn in, and one whole bed's took up by the
patient.  WHERE do they put the rest?  Hang 'em up on nails?"

The nurse laughed.  "Goodness knows!" she said.  "He should have
been taken to the hospital.  In fact, the doctor and I at first
insisted upon his removal there.  He would have been much better
off.  But neither he nor his wife would hear of it.  She said he
would die sure without his home comforts."

"Humph!  I should think more likely he'd die with 'em, or under
'em.  I watch that fleshy wife of his with fear and tremblin'.
Every time she goes nigh the bed I expect her to trip over a young
one and fall.  And if she fell on that poor rack-o'-bones," with a
wave of the hand toward the invalid, "'twould be the final smash--
like a brick chimney fallin' on a lath hencoop."

At that moment the "brick chimney" herself entered the rooms and
the nurse accosted her.

"Captain Warren here," she said, "was asking where you all found
sleeping quarters."

Mrs. Moriarty smiled broadly.  "Sure, 'tis aisy," she explained.
"When the ould man is laid up we're all happy to be a bit
uncomfortable.  Not that we are, neither.  You see, sor, me and
Nora and Rosy sleep in the other bed; and Dinnie has a bit of a
shakedown in the parlor; and Honora is in the kitchen; and--"

"There! there!" Captain Elisha interrupted hastily, "don't tell me
any more.  I'd rather GUESS that the baby bunks in the cookstove
oven than know it for sartin.  How did the grapes I sent you go?"
turning to the sick man.

"Aw, sor! they were foine.  God bless you, sor!  Mary be kind to
you, sor!  Sure the angels'll watch over you every day you live and
breathe!"

Captain Elisha bolted for the parlor, the sufferer firing a gatling
fusillade of blessings after him.  Mrs. Moriarty continued the
bombardment, as she escorted him to the door of the flat.

"There! there!" protested the captain.  "Just belay! cut it short,
there's a good woman!  I'll admit I'm a saint and would wear a halo
instead of a hat if 'twa'n't so unfashionable.  Good day.  If you
need anything you ain't got, tell the nurse."

The grateful Irish woman did not intend to let him escape so
easily.

"Aw, sor," she went on, "it's all right for you to make fun.  I'm
the jokin' kind, sor, meself.  Whin the flats where we used to be
got afire and Pat had to lug me down the fire escape in his arms,
they tell me I was laughin' fit to kill; that is, when I wasn't
screechin' for fear he'd drop me.  And him, poor soul, never seein'
the joke, but puffin' and groanin' that his back was in two pieces.
Ha, ha!  Oh, dear!  And him in two pieces now for sure and all!
Aw, sor, it's all right for you to laugh it off, but what would we
do without you?  You and Miss Caroline, God bless her!"

"Caroline?  She doesn't come here, does she?"

"Indade she does.  Sure, she's the perfect little lady!  Hardly a
day passes--or a week, anyhow--that she doesn't drop in to see how
the ould man's gettin' on."

"Humph!  Well, see that you don't tell her about me."

Mrs. Moriarty held up both hands in righteous protestation.  SHE
tell?  Might the tongue of her wither between her teeth before it
let slip a word, and so on.  Captain Elisha waved her to silence.

"All right! all right!" he exclaimed.  "So long!  Take good care of
your husband, and, and--for Heaven's sake, walk careful and don't
step on any of the children."

Mrs. Moriarty's tongue did not wither; at all events, it was lively
enough when he next met her.  The captain's secret was not
divulged, and he continued his visits to the flat, taking care,
however, to ascertain his niece's whereabouts beforehand.  It was
not altogether a desire to avoid making his charitable deeds public
which influenced him.  He had a habit of not letting his right hand
know what his left was about in such cases, and he detested a
Pharisaical philanthropist.  But there was another reason why
Caroline must not learn of his interest in the Moriartys.  If she
did learn it, she would believe him to be helping them on his own
responsibility; or, if not, that he was using money belonging to
the estate.  Of course he would, and honestly must, deny the latter
charge, and, therefore, the first would, to her mind, be proven.
He intended that Malcolm Dunn should pay the larger share of the
bills, as was right and proper.  But he could not tell Caroline
that, because she must not know of the young man's responsibility
for the accident.  He could not give Malcolm the c