redit, and he
felt that he ought not to take it himself.  It was a delicate
situation.

He was lonely, and the days seemed long.  Reading the paper,
walking in the park, occasionally dropping in at the lawyers'
offices, or visiting the shops and other places of interest about
town made up the monotonous routine.  He breakfasted early, waited
upon by Edwards, got lunch at the restaurant nearest to wherever he
happened to be at noon, and returned to the apartment for dinner.
His niece and nephew dined with him, but when he attempted
conversation they answered in monosyllables or not at all.  Every
evening he wrote a letter to Abbie, and the mail each morning
brought him one from her.  The Dunns came frequently and seemed
disposed to be friendly, but he kept out of their way as much as
possible.

Pearson he had not seen since the latter's call.  This was a
disappointment, for he fancied the young fellow and believed he
should like him even better on closer acquaintance.  He would have
returned the visit, but somehow or other the card with the
boarding-house street and number had been lost or mislaid, and the
long list of "James Pearsons" in the directory discouraged him.  He
speculated much concerning the mystery at which the would-be
novelist hinted as preventing his accepting Caroline's invitation.
Evidently Pearson had once known Rodgers Warren well, and had been
esteemed and respected by the latter.  Caroline, too, had known
him, and was frankly pleased to meet him again.  Whatever the
trouble might be, she, evidently, was ignorant of it.  The captain
wondered and pondered, but reached no satisfactory conclusion.  It
seemed the irony of fate that the one congenial person--Sylvester
excepted--whom he had met during his stay in the big city should be
scratched from his small list of acquaintances.

With Sylvester he held many familiar and enjoyable chats.  The
good-natured, democratic senior member of the law firm liked to
have Captain Elisha drop in for advice or to spin yarns.  Graves,
who was well again, regarded the new guardian with respect of a
kind, but with distinct disapproval.  The captain was, in his
opinion, altogether too flippant and jolly.  There was nothing
humorous in the situation, as Graves saw it, and to laugh when
one's brother's estate is in a tangle, indicated unfitness, if
nothing worse.  Kuhn was a sharp, quick-moving man, who had no time
for frivolity if it delayed business.

It was after a long interview with Sylvester that Captain Elisha
decided to send Stephen back to college.  When he broke the news
there was rebellion, brief but lively.  Stephen had no desire to
continue his studies; he wished to become a stock broker at once,
and, as soon as he was of age, take his father's seat on the
Exchange.

"Stevie," said Captain Elisha, "one of these days, when you get to
be as old as I am or before, you'll realize that an education is
worth somethin'."

"Ugh!" grunted the boy, in supreme disgust.  "What do you know
about that?"

"Why, not much, maybe, but enough."

"Yes?" sarcastically.  "What college did you attend?"

"Me?  Why, none, more's the pity.  What learnin' there was in our
family your dad had.  Maybe that's why he was what he was, so fur
as money and position and society and so on went, and I'm what _I_
am."

"Oh, rubbish!  What difference does it make to Malcolm Dunn--now--
his going through college?"

"Well, he went, didn't he?"

Stephen grinned.  Malcolm had told him some particulars concerning
his university career and its termination.

"He went--part way," he answered.

"Ya-as.  Well, you've gone part way, so fur.  And now you'll go the
rest."

"I'd like to know why."

"For one reason, because I'm your guardian and I say so."

Stephen was furiously angry.  His father's indulgence and his
sister's tolerance had, in most cases, made his will law in the
household.  To be ordered about in this way by an ignorant
interloper, as he considered his uncle, was too much.

"By gad," he shouted, "we'll see!"

"No, we've seen.  You run along now and pack your trunk.  And take
my advice and study hard.  You'll be behindhand in your work, so
Mr. Sylvester tells me, but you're smart, and you can catch up.
Make us proud of you; that's what you can do."

His nephew glanced at him.  Captain Elisha was smiling kindly, but
there was no sign of change of purpose in his look.

Stephen ground his teeth.

"Oh," he snarled, "if it wasn't for the disgrace!  If things
weren't as they are, I'd--"

"S-s-s-h!  I know; but they are.  Maybe I wish they wa'n't 'most as
much as you do, but they are.  I don't blame you for feelin' mad
now; but I'm right and I know it.  And some day you'll know it, and
thank me."

"When I do, I'll be insane."

"No, you'll be older, that's all.  Now pack your trunk--or get the
Commodore to pack it for you."



News from the Moriarty sick room continued favorable for a time.
Then, with alarming suddenness, a change came.  The broken hip was
mending slowly, but poor Pat's age was against him, and the shock
and long illness were too much for his system to fight.  Dr. Henry
shook his head dubiously when the captain asked questions.  And,
one morning at breakfast, Edwards informed him that the old man was
dead.  Annie had been summoned by telephone at midnight and had
gone home.

Captain Elisha, though not greatly surprised, was shocked and
grieved.  It seemed such a needless tragedy, almost like murder,
although there was no malice in it.  And the thought of the
fatherless children and the poverty of the stricken family made him
shudder.  Death at any time, amid any surroundings, is terrible;
when the dead hands have earned the bread for many mouths it is
appalling.

The captain dreaded visiting the flat, but because he felt it to be
a duty he went immediately.  And the misery and wailing and dismay
he found there were worse than his anticipations.  He did his best
to comfort and cheer.  Mrs. Moriarty alternately called upon the
saints to bless him and begged to know what she would do now that
they were all sure to starve.  Luckily, the family priest, a kind-
hearted, quiet man who faced similar scenes almost every day of his
life, was there, and Captain Elisha had a long talk with him.  With
Dennis, the oldest son, and Annie, the maid at the Warrens', he
also consulted.  Money for their immediate needs, he told them, he
would provide.  And the funeral expenses must not worry them.
Afterward--well, plans for the future could be discussed at another
time.  But upon Dennis and Annie he tried to impress a sense of
their responsibility.

"It's up to you, Boy," he said to the former.  "Annie's job's sure,
I guess, as long as she wants it, and she can give her mother
somethin' every month.  But you're the man of the house now, and
you've got to steer the ship and keep it afloat.  That means work,
and hard work, lots of it, too.  You can do it, if you've got the
grit.  If I can find a better place and more pay for you, I will,
but you mustn't depend on that.  It's up to you, I tell you, and
you've got to show what's in you.  If you get stuck and need
advice, come to me."

He handed the priest a sum of money to cover immediate contingencies,
and departed.  His letter to Abbie that afternoon was so blue that
the housekeeper felt sure he was "coming down" with some disease or
other.  He had been riding in that awful subway, where the air--so
the papers said--was not fit to breathe, and just as like as not
he'd caught consumption.  His great-uncle on his mother's side died
of it, so it run in the family."  Either he must come home or she
should come to him, one or the other.

But before evening his blueness had disappeared.  He had just
returned to his room, after stepping into the hall to drop his
letter in the mail chute, when his niece knocked at the door.  He
was surprised to see her, for she had not spoken to him, except in
brief reply to questions, since their misunderstanding in that very
room.  He looked at her wonderingly, not knowing what to say or
what to expect; but she spoke first.

"Captain Warren," she began, hurriedly, "the last time I came to
you--the last time I came here, I came to ask a favor, and you--I
thought you--"

She was evidently embarrassed and confused.  Her guardian was
embarrassed, also, but he tried to be hospitable.

"Yes, Caroline," he said, gravely, "I know what you mean.  Won't
you--won't you sit down?"

To his surprise, she accepted the invitation, taking the same chair
she had taken on the occasion of their former interview.  But there
was a look in her eyes he had never seen there before; at least,
not when she was addressing him.

She went on, speaking hastily, as though determined to head off any
questioning on his part.

"Captain Warren," she began once more, "the time I came to you in
this room you were, so I thought, unreasonable and unkind.  I asked
you for money to help a poor family in trouble, and you refused to
give it to me."

"No, Caroline," he interrupted, "I didn't refuse, you only thought
I did."

She held up her hand.  "Please let me go on," she begged.  "I
thought you refused, and I couldn't understand why.  I was hurt and
angry.  I knew that father never would have refused me under such
circumstances, and you were his brother.  But since then, only
to-day, I have learned that I was wrong.  I have learned--"

She paused.  The captain was silent.  He was beginning to hope, to
believe once more in his judgment of character; and yet, with his
hope and growing joy, there was a trifle of anxiety.

"I have learned," went on his niece, "that I was mistaken.  I can't
understand yet why you wished to wait before saying yes, but I do
know that it must have been neither because you were unkind nor
ungenerous.  I have just come from those poor people, and they have
told me everything."

Captain Elisha started.  "What did they tell you?" he asked,
quickly.  "Who told you?"

"Annie and her mother.  They told me what you had done and were
doing for them.  How kind you had been all through the illness and
to-day.  Oh, I know you made them promise not to tell me; and you
made the doctor and nurse promise, too.  But I knew SOMEONE had
helped, and Annie dropped a hint.  Then I suspected, and now I
know.  Those poor people!"

The captain, who had been looking at the floor, and frowning a bit,
suddenly glanced up to find his niece's eyes fixed upon him, and
they were filled with tears.

"Will you forgive me?" she asked, rising from her chair, and coming
impulsively toward him.  "I'm sorry I misjudged you and treated you
so.  You must be a very good man.  Please forgive me."

He took her hand, which was swallowed up in his big one.  His eyes
were moist, also.

"Lord love you, dearie," he said, "there's nothin' to forgive.
I realized that I must have seemed like a mean, stingy old scamp.
Yet I didn't mean to be.  I only wanted to look into this thing
just a little.  Just as a matter of business, you know.  And
I . . .  Caroline, did that doctor tell you anything more?"

"Any more?" she repeated in bewilderment.  "He told me that you
were the kindest man he had ever seen."

"Yes, yes.  Well, maybe his eyesight's poor.  What I mean is did he
tell you anything about anybody else bein' in this with me?"

"Anybody else?  What do you mean?"

"Oh, nothin', nothin'.  I joked with him a spell ago about a
wealthy relation of the Moriarty tribe turnin up.  'Twas only a
joke, of course.  And yet, Caroline, I--I think I'd ought to say--
He hesitated.  What could he say?  Even a hint might lead to
embarrassing questions and he had promised Dunn.

"What ought you to say?" asked his niece.

"Why, nothin', I guess.  I'm glad you understand matters a little
better and I don't intend for the estate nor you to pay these
Moriarty bills.  Just get 'em off your mind.  Forget 'em.  I'll see
that everything's attended to.  And, later on, if you and me can,
by puttin' our heads together, help those folks to earnin' a better
livin', why, we will, hey?"

The girl smiled up at him.  "I think," she said, "that you must be
one who likes to hide his light under a bushel."

"I guess likely a two-quart measure'd be plenty big enough to hide
mine.  There! there!  We won't have any more misunderstandin's,
will we?  I'm a pretty green vegetable and about as out of place
here as a lobster in a balloon, but, as I said to you and Steve
once before, if you'll just remember I AM green and sort of rough,
and maybe make allowances accordin', this cruise of ours may not be
so unpleasant.  Now you run along and get ready for dinner, or the
Commodore'll petrify from standin' so long behind your chair."

She laughed, as she turned to go.  "I should hate to have him do
that," she said.  "He would make a depressing statue.  I shall see
you again in a few minutes, at dinner.  Thank you--Uncle."

She left Captain Elisha in a curious state of mind.  Against his
will he had been forced to accept thanks and credit which, he
believed, did not rightfully belong to him.  It was the only thing
to do, and yet it seemed almost like disloyalty to Malcolm Dunn.
This troubled him, but the trouble was, just then, a mere pinhead
of blackness against the radiance of his spirit.

His brother's daughter had, for the first time, called him uncle.



CHAPTER X


"Captain Warren," asked Caroline, as they were seated at the
breakfast table next morning, "what are your plans for to-day?"

Captain Elisha put down his coffee cup and pulled his beard
reflectively.  Contrary to his usual desire since he came to the
apartment to live, he was in no hurry to finish the meal.  This
breakfast and the dinner of the previous evening had been really
pleasant.  He had enjoyed them.  His niece had not called him uncle
again, it is true, and perhaps that was too much to be expected as
yet, but she was cheerful and even familiar.  They talked as they
ate, and he had not been made to feel that he was the death's head
at the feast.  The change was marked and very welcome.  The bright
winter sunshine streaming through the window indicated that the
conditions outside were also just what they should be.

"Well," he replied, with a smile, "I don't know, Caroline, as I've
made any definite plans.  Let's see, to-day's Sunday, ain't it?
Last letter I got from Abbie she sailed into me because, as she
said, I seemed to have been 'most everywheres except to meetin'.
She figgers New York's a heathen place, anyhow, and she cal'lates
I'm gettin' to be a backslider like the rest.  I didn't know but I
might go to church."

Caroline nodded.  "I wondered if you wouldn't like to go," she
said.  "I am going, and I thought perhaps you would go with me."

Her uncle had again raised his cup to his lips.  Now he set it down
with a suddenness which caused the statuesque Edwards to bend
forward in anticipation of a smash.  The captain started to speak,
thought better of it, and stared at his niece so intently that she
colored and dropped her eyes.

"I know," she faltered, "that I haven't asked you before, but--
but--" then, with the impulsiveness which was one of her
characteristics, and to her guardian her great charm, she looked
him full in the face and added, "but I hoped you would understand
that--that _I_ understood a little better.  I should like to have
your company very much."

Captain Elisha drew a long breath.

"Thank you, Caroline," he answered.  "I appreciate your askin' me,
I sartinly do.  And I'd rather go with you than anybody else on
earth.  But I was cal'latin' to hunt up some little round-the-
corner chapel, or Bethel, where I'd feel a little bit at home.  I
guess likely your church is a pretty big one, ain't it?"

"We attend Saint Denis.  It IS a large church, but we have always
been connected with it.  Stephen and I were christened there.  But,
of course, if you had rather go somewhere else--"

"No, no!  I hadn't anywhere in particular to go.  I'm a
Congregationalist to home, but Abbie says I've spread my creed so
wide that it ain't more'n an inch deep anywhere, and she shouldn't
think 'twould keep me afloat.  I tell her I'd rather navigate a
broad and shallow channel, where everybody stands by to keep his
neighbor off the shoals, than I would a narrow and crooked one with
self-righteousness off both beams and perdition underneath.

"You see," he added, reflectively, "the way I look at it, it's a
pretty uncertain cruise at the best.  Course there's all sorts of
charts, and every fleet is sartin it's got the only right one.  But
I don't know.  We're afloat--that much we are sure of--but the port
we left and the harbor we're bound for, they're always out of sight
in the fog astern and ahead.  I know lots of folks who claim to see
the harbor, and see it plain; but they don't exactly agree as to
what they see.  As for me, I've come to the conclusion that we must
steer as straight a course as we can, and when we meet a craft in
distress, why, do our best to help her.  The rest of it I guess we
must leave to the Owner, to the One that launched us.  I . . . Good
land!" he exclaimed, coming out of his meditation with a start,
"I'm preachin' a sermon ahead of time.  And the Commodore's goin'
to sleep over it, I do believe."

The butler, who had been staring vacantly out of the window during
the captain's soliloquy, straightened at the sound of his nickname,
and asked hastily, "Yes, sir?  What will you have, sir?"  Captain
Elisha laughed in huge enjoyment, and his niece joined him.

"Well," she said, "will you go with me?"

"I'd like to fust-rate--if you won't be too much ashamed of me."

"Then it's settled, isn't it?  The service begins at a quarter to
eleven.  We will leave here at half-past ten."

The captain shaved with extra care that morning, donned spotless
linen, including a "stand-up" collar--which he detested--brushed
his frock-coat and his hair with great particularity, and gave
Edwards his shoes to clean.  He would have shined them himself, as
he always did at home, but on a former occasion when he asked for
the "blackin' kit," the butler's shocked and pained expression led
to questions and consequent enlightenment.

He was ready by a quarter after ten, but when his niece knocked at
his door she bore a message which surprised and troubled him.

"Mrs. Dunn called," she said, "to ask me to go to church with her.
I told her I had invited you to accompany me.  Would you mind if
she joined us?"

Her guardian hesitated.  "I guess," he answered, slowly, "it ain't
so much a question of my mindin' her as she mindin' me.  Does SHE
want me to go along?"

"She said she should be delighted."

"I want to know!  Now, Caroline, don't you think I'd be sort of in
the way?  Don't you believe she'd manage to live down her
disappointment if I didn't tag on?  You mustn't feel that you've
got to be bothered with me because you suggested my goin', you
know."

"If I had considered it a bother I should not have invited you.  If
you don't wish Mrs. Dunn's company, then you and I will go alone."

"Oh, land sakes!  I wouldn't have you do that for the world!  All
right, I'll be out in a jiffy."

He gave his hair a final brush, straightened his tie, turned around
once more before the mirror, and walked fearfully forth to meet the
visitor.  For him, the anticipated pleasure of the forenoon had
been replaced by uneasy foreboding.

But Mrs. Corcoran Dunn, as she rose creakingly to greet him, was
extremely gracious.  She was gowned and furred and hatted in a
manner which caused the captain to make hasty mental estimate as
to cost, but she extended a plump hand, buttoned in a very tight
glove, and murmured her gratification.

"I'm so glad you are to accompany us, Captain Warren," she gushed.
"It is a charming winter morning, isn't it?"

Captain Elisha touched the plump glove with his own big finger
tips, and admitted that the morning was "fust-rate."  He was
relieved from the embarrassment of further conversation just then
by Caroline's appearance in the library.  She, too, was richly
dressed.

"Are we all ready?" she asked, brightly.  "Then we may as well
start."

"I'm afraid we're a trifle early, my dear," said Mrs. Dunn, "but we
can stroll about a bit before we go in."

The captain looked at the library clock.  The time was a quarter to
eleven.

"Early?" he exclaimed, involuntarily.  "Why, I thought Caroline
said--"

He stopped, suddenly, realizing that he had spoken aloud.  His
niece divined his thought and laughed merrily.

"The service does begin now," she said, "but no one is ever on
time."

"Oh!" ejaculated her uncle, and did not speak again until they were
at the door of the church.  Then Caroline asked him what he was
thinking.

"Nothin' much," he answered, gazing at the fashionably garbed
throng pouring under the carved stone arch of the entrance; "I was
just reorganizin' my ideas, that's all.  I've always sort of
thought a plug hat looked lonesome.  Now I've decided that I'm
wearin' the lonesome kind."

He marched behind his niece and Mrs. Dunn up the center aisle to
the Warren pew.  He wrote his housekeeper afterwards that he
estimated that aisle to be "upwards of two mile long.  And my
Sunday shoes had a separate squeak for every inch," he added.

Once seated, however, and no longer so conspicuous, his common
sense and Yankee independence came to his rescue.  He had been in
much bigger churches than this one, while abroad during his
seagoing years.  He knew that his clothes were not fashionably cut,
and that, to the people about him, he must appear odd and, perhaps,
even ridiculous.  But he remembered how odd certain city people
appeared while summering at South Denboro.  Recollections of
pointed comments made by boatmen who had taken these summer
sojourners on fishing excursions came to his mind.  Well, he had
one advantage over such people, at any rate, he knew when he was
ridiculous, and they apparently did not.

So, saved from humiliation by his sense of humor, he looked about
him with interest.  When the procession of choir boys came up the
aisle, and Mrs. Dunn explained in a condescending whisper what they
were, his answer surprised her a trifle.  "Yes," whispered the
captain in reply, "I know.  I've seen the choir in Saint Peter's at
Rome."

Only once did he appear greatly astonished.  That was when the
offering was taken and a certain dignified magnate, whose fame as a
king of finance is world-wide, officiated as one of the collectors.

"Heavens and earth!" murmured Captain Elisha, staring wide-eyed at
the unmistakable features so often pictured and cartooned in the
daily papers; "Caroline--Caroline, am I seein' things or is that--
is that--"

That is Mr. ----," whispered his niece.  "He is one of the vestrymen
here."

"My soul!" still gazing after the Emperor of Wall Street; "HIM
passin' the plate!  Well," with a grim smile, "whoever picked him
out for the job has got judgment.  If HE can't make a body shell
out, nobody can."

He listened to the sermon, the text of which was from the
Beatitudes, with outward solemnity, but with a twinkle in his eye.
After the benediction, when Caroline asked how he enjoyed it, the
cause of the twinkle became apparent.

"Fine!" he declared, with enthusiasm.  "He's a smart preacher,
ain't he!  And he knew his congregation.  You might not guess
they was meek perhaps, but they certainly did look as if they'd
inherited the earth."

He drew a breath of relief as the trio emerged into the open air.
He had enjoyed the novel experience, in a way, but now he felt
rather like one let out of jail.  The quiet luncheon at home with
Caroline was a pleasant anticipation.

But Mrs. Corcoran Dunn smashed his anticipation at a blow.  She
insisted that he and his niece lunch with her.

"You really must, you know," she declared.  "It will be delightful.
Just a little family party."

Captain Elisha looked distressed.  "Thank you, ma'am," he stammered;
"it's awful kind of you, but I wouldn't feel right to go puttin' you
to all that trouble.  Just as much obliged, but I--I've got a letter
to write, you see."

Mrs. Dunn bore his refusal bravely.

"Very well," she said, "but Caroline MUST come with me.  I told
Malcolm I should bring her."

"Sure!  Sartin!  Caroline can go, of course."

But Caroline also declined.  Having misjudged her guardian in the
matter of the Moriarty family, she was in a repentant mood, and had
marked that day on her calendar as one of self-sacrifice.

"No, Captain Warren," she said, "I shall not go unless you do."

"Then the captain will come, of course," declared Mrs. Dunn, with
decision.  "I'm sure he will not be so selfish as to deprive me--
and Malcolm--of your company."

So, because he did not wish to appear selfish, Captain Elisha
admitted that his letter might be written later in the afternoon,
accepted the invitation, and braced his spirit for further
martyrdom.

It was not as bad as he expected.  The Dunns occupied a small,
brown-stone house on Fifth Avenue, somewhat old-fashioned, but
eminently respectable.  The paintings and bronzes were as numerous
as those in the Warren apartment, and if the taste shown in their
selection was not that of Rodgers Warren, the connoisseur, they
made quite as much show, and the effect upon Captain Elisha was the
same.  The various mortgages on the property were not visible, and
the tradesmen's bills were securely locked in Mrs. Dunn's desk.

The luncheon itself was elaborate, and there was a butler whose
majestic dignity and importance made even Edwards seem plebeian by
comparison.

Malcolm was at home when they arrived, irreproachably dressed and
languidly non-effusive, as usual.  Captain Elisha, as he often
said, did not "set much store" by clothes; but there was something
about this young man which always made him conscious that his own
trousers were a little too short, or his boots too heavy, or
something.  "I wouldn't WEAR a necktie like his," he wrote Abbie,
after his first meeting with Malcolm, "but blessed if I don't wish
I could IF I would!"

Caroline, in the course of conversation during the luncheon,
mentioned the Moriartys and their sorrow.  The captain tried to
head her off and to change the subject, but with little success.
He was uncomfortable and kept glancing under his brows at Malcolm,
with whom, under the circumstances, he could not help sympathizing
to an extent.  But his sympathy was wasted.  The young man did not
appear in the slightest degree nervous.  The memory of his recent
interview with Captain Elisha did not embarrass him, outwardly at
least, half as much as it did the captain.  He declared that old
Pat's death was beastly hard luck, but accidents were bound to
happen.  It was a shame, and all that.  "If there's anything the
mater and I can do, Caroline, call on us, of course."

"Yes, do, Caroline," concurred his mother.  "However, one must be
philosophic in such cases.  It is a mercy that people in their
station do not feel grief and loss as we do.  Providence, in its
wisdom, has limited their susceptibilities as it has their
intelligence.  Don't you agree with me, Captain Warren?"

"Sartin!" was the prompt reply.  "It's always a comfort to me, when
I go fishin', to know that the fish ain't got so much brains as I
have.  The hook hurts, I presume likely, but they ain't got the
sense to realize what a mean trick's been played on 'em.  The one
that's caught's dead, and them that are left are too busy hustlin'
for the next meal to waste much time grievin'.  That eases my
conscience consider'ble."

Caroline seemed to be the only one who appreciated the sarcasm in
this observation.  She frowned slightly.  Mrs. Corcoran Dunn
tolerantly smiled, and her son laughed aloud.

"Say, Admiral," he commented, "when it comes to philosophy you go
some yourself, don't you?"

"Um-hm.  I can be as philosophical about other folk's troubles as
anybody I ever see."  Then, with an involuntary chuckle of
admiration at the young gentleman's coolness, he added, "That is,
anybody I ever see afore I come to New York."

Malcolm opened his mouth to reply, but closed it again.  The
captain, noticing his change of purpose and following the direction
of his look, saw Mrs. Dunn shake her head in sharp disapproval.  He
ate the remainder of his salad in silence, but he thought a good
deal.

"And now," said Mrs. Dunn, rising and leading the way to the
drawing-room, "we must all go for a motor ride.  Everyone rides on
Sunday afternoon," she explained, turning to her male guest.

The distressed look returned to Captain Elisha's face.  His niece
saw it, understood, and came to his rescue.

"I think Captain Warren prefers to be excused," she said, smiling.
"He has a prejudice against automobiles."

"No!" drawled Malcolm, the irrepressible.  "Not really?  Admiral,
I'm surprised!  In these days, you know!"

"It ain't so much the automobiles," snapped Captain Elisha,
irritation getting the better of his discretion, "as 'tis the
devilish fools that--"

"Yes?  Oh, all right, Mater."

"That are careless enough to get in the way of them," finished the
captain, with surprising presence of mind.  "Still, if Caroline
wants to go--"

"I have it!" exclaimed Mrs. Dunn.  "The young people shall go, and
the others remain at home.  Malcolm shall take you for a spin,
Caroline, and Captain Warren and I will stay here and wait until
you return.  We'll have a family chat, Captain, won't we?
Because," with a gay laugh, "in a way we ARE like one family, you
see."

And, somewhat to Miss Warren's surprise, her uncle agreed to this
proposition.  He did not answer immediately, but, when he did, it
was with heartiness.

"Why, yes," he said, "that's a good idea.  That's fust-rate.  You
young folks go, and Mrs. Dunn and I'll wait here till you come
back.  That's the way of the world--young folks on the go, and the
old folks at home by the fire, hey, Mrs. Dunn?"

The lady addressed did not relish being numbered with "old folks,"
but she smiled sweetly, and said she supposed it was.  Malcolm
telephoned to the garage and to Edwards at the Warren apartment,
ordering the butler to deliver his mistress's auto cap and cloak to
the chauffeur, who would call for them.  A few minutes later the
yellow car rolled up to the door.

In the hall Mrs. Dunn whispered a reassuring word to her departing
guest.

"Now enjoy yourself, dear," she whispered.  "Have a nice ride and
don't worry about me.  If he--if our encumbrance bores me too much
I shall--well, I shall plead a headache and leave him to his own
devices.  Besides, he isn't so VERY dreadful, is he?"

Caroline shook her head.  "No," she answered, "he is a good man.  I
understand him better than I did and--yes, I like him better, too."

"Oh! . . . Indeed!  Well, good-by, dear.  Good-by."

The yellow car roared as the chauffeur cranked it, then moved off
up the crowded avenue.  Mrs. Dunn watched it until it was out of
sight.  Her brows were drawn together, and she seemed puzzled and
just a bit disconcerted.  However, when she returned to the
drawing-room, her gracious smile had returned, and her bland
condescension was again in evidence.

Captain Elisha had been standing by the window.  She begged him to
be seated.  He thanked her, but looked dubiously at the Louis XVI
chair indicated.  She noticed the look.

"Suppose we go into the library," she said.  "It is much less
formal.  And there is a fire--for us OLD folks," with a slight
accent on the word.

The library was more homelike.  Not as many books as at the
Warrens', but a great deal of gilt in the bindings and much carving
on the cases.  The fire was cheery, and the pair sat down before it
in big easy chairs.  Mrs. Dunn looked intently at the glowing
coals.

Captain Elisha cleared his throat.  Mrs. Dunn leaned forward
expectantly.  The captain coughed and sank back in his chair.

"Yes?" purred the lady.  "You were about to say?"

"Me?  Oh, no, I didn't say anything."

Another period of silence.  Mrs. Dunn's foot tapped the rug
impatiently.  She wished him to begin the conversation, and he
would not.  At length, in desperation, she began it herself.

"I suppose you find New York rather different from--er--North--
er--"

"From South Denboro?  Yes, ma'am."

"Do you like the city life?"

"Well, I don't know, ma'am."

"Not as well as you do that of the country, doubtless."

"Well, you see, I ain't had so much of it."

"No, of course not.  It does so depend upon what one is accustomed
to.  Now I fancy I should be perfectly desperate in your village."

One corner of Captain Elisha's mouth curled upward.

"I shouldn't be surprised," he admitted.

"Desperately lonely, I mean."

"Yes'm.  I judged that was what you meant.  Still, folks can be
lonesome in New York."

"Perhaps.  But really I don't see how.  With all the whirl and the
crowds and the glorious excitement.  The feeling that one is at the
very heart, the center of everything!"

"Yes.  If you belong to the machinery, I s'pose it's all right.
But if you've been leanin' over the rail, lookin' on, and get
pushed in unexpected, maybe you don't care so much about bein' nigh
the center."

"Then why stay there?  Why not get out?"

"If you're caught in the wheels, gettin' out's somethin' of a job."

"But, as I understand it, Captain Warren--I may be misinformed,
for, of course, I haven't been unduly curious concerning your
family affairs--as _I_ understand it, you were not obliged to
remain among the--among the wheels, as you call them.  You could
have gotten out quite easily, couldn't you?"

"I presume likely I could.  But, you see, ma'am, I had a feelin'
that I'd ought to stay."

Mrs. Dunn laughed lightly.  "Ah me!" she exclaimed; "you felt it
your duty, I suppose.  Oh, you New England Puritans!"

She shook her head in playful mockery.  Then she added, "But, at
all events, it cannot be so very disagreeable--now.  I have no
doubt it was--well, not comfortable for you at first.  Steve and
Caroline were quite impossible--really quite furious.  Your sudden
appearance in the capacity of guardian was too much for them.  They
were sure you must be a perfect ogre, Captain.  I had to use all my
eloquence to convince them they would not be devoured alive.  But
now--what a change!  Why, already Caroline accepts you as--well,
almost like an old friend, like myself.  In the last few days this
change in her attitude is quite marked.  What HAVE you done?  Are
you a wizard?  Do tell me!"

This appeal, delivered with eloquence and most engaging play of
brow and eye, should have been irresistible.  Unfortunately the
captain did not appear to have heard it.  Leaning forward, his
hands clasped between his knees, he was gazing into the fire.
And when he spoke, it was as if he were thinking aloud.

"I s'pose 'tis a sort of disease, this duty business," he mused.
"And most diseases ain't cheerful visitations.  Still a feller
ought not to growl about it in public.  I always did hate for a man
to be goin' about forever complainin' of his sufferin's--whether
they was from duty or rheumatiz."

Mrs. Dunn's lips snapped shut.  She pressed them together
impatiently.  Evidently her questions, and their diplomatic
prelude, had been unheard and wasted.  However, she did not intend
to be sidetracked or discouraged.

"One should not prate of one's duty, of course," she agreed.  "Not
that you do--far from it.  But, as I was saying, our dear Caroline
has--"

"Thank you, ma'am.  I hope I don't groan too loud.  Do you know,
I believe climate has a bearin' on duty, same as it has on
rheumatics.  I s'pose you city folks--"and there was almost
contempt in the words--"are sort of Christian Science, and figger
it's an 'error'--hey?  Somethin' to be forgot."

The lady resented the interruption, and the contempt nettled her.

"Not at all!" she retorted.  "We city dwellers have our duties,
also."

"Is that a fact?  I want to know!"

"Certainly it is a fact," tartly.  "I have my duties and many of
them."

"Um!  So?  Well, I s'pose you do feel you must dress just so, and
live just so, and do just such and such things.  If you call those
duties, why--"

"I do.  What else are they, pray?"

Mrs. Dunn was finding it difficult to keep her temper.  To be
catechised in this contemptuously lofty manner by one to whom she
considered herself so immensely superior, was too much.  She forgot
the careful plan of campaign which she had intended to follow in
this interview, and now interrupted in her turn.  And Captain
Elisha, who also was something of a strategist, smiled at the fire.

"We do have our social duties, our duties to society," snapped the
widow, hotly.  "They are necessary ones.  Having been born--or
risen to--a certain circle, we recognize the responsibilities
attached to it.  We ARE careful with whom we associate; we have to
be.  As for dress, we dress as others of our friends do."

"And maybe a little better, if you can, hey?"

"If we can--yes.  I presume--" with crushing irony--"dress in South
Denboro counts but little."

"You wouldn't say that if you ever went to sewin' circle," with a
chuckle.  "Still, compared to the folks at your meetin'-house this
morning, our congregation would look like a flock of blackbirds
alongside of a cage full of Birds of Paradise.  But most of us--the
women folks especial--dress as well as we can."

"As well as you can!" triumphantly.  "There! you see?  And you live
as well as you can, don't you?"

"If you mean style, why, we don't set as much store by it as you
do."

"Nonsense!  We are obliged to be," with a slight shudder at the
vulgarism, "STYLISH.  If we should lapse, if we should become
shabby and behind the fashion or live in that way, people would
wonder and believe it was because we could not afford to do
otherwise."

"Well, s'pose they did, you'd know better yourselves.  Can't you be
independent?"

"No.  Not unless you are very, very rich; then it might be
considered an eccentricity.  Independence is a costly luxury, and
few can afford it."

"But suppose you can't afford the other thing?"

"Then we must pretend we can.  Oh, you DON'T understand!  So MUCH
depends upon a proper appearance.  Everything depends upon it--
one's future, one's children's future--everything."

"Humph!" with the same irritating smile, "I should think that might
mean some plannin'.  And plans, the best of 'em, are likely to go
wrong.  You talk about the children in your--in what you call your
'circle.'  How can you plan what they'll do?  You might when they
was little, perhaps; but when they grow up it's different."

"It is not.  It CAN'T be!  And, if they have been properly reared
and understand their responsibilities, they plan with you."

"Land sakes!  You mean--why, s'pose they take a notion to get
married?  I'm an old bach, of course, but the average young girl or
feller is subject to that sort of ailment, 'cordin' to the records.
S'pose one of your circle's daughters gets to keepin' company with
a chap who's outside the ring?  A promisin', nice boy enough, but
poor, and a rank outsider?  Mean to say she sha'n't marry him if
she wants to."

"Certainly!  That sort of marriage is never a happy one, unless, of
course, the girl is wealthy enough not to care.  And even then it
is not advisable.  All their customs and habits of thought are
different.  No!  Emphatically, no!  And the girl, if she is
sensible and well reared, as I have said, will understand it is
impossible."

"My soul and body!  Then you mean to tell me that she MUST look out
for some chap in her crowd?  If she ain't got but just enough to
keep inside the circle--this grand whirlamagig you're tellin' me
about--if she's pretendin' up to the limit of her income or over,
then it's her duty, and her ma and pa's duty, to set her cap for a
man who's nigher the center pole in the tent and go right after
him?  Do you tell me that?  That's a note, I must say!"

Mrs. Dunn's foot beat a lively tattoo on the rug.  "I don't know
what you mean by a 'note,'" she commented, with majestic indignation.
"I have not lived in South Denboro, and perhaps my understanding of
English is defective.  But marriages among cultivated people,
SOCIETY people, intelligent, ambitious people are, or should be,
the result of thought and planning.  Others are impossible!"

"How about this thing we read so much about in novels?--Love, I
believe they call it."

"Love!  Love is well enough, but it does not, of itself, pay for
proper clothes, or a proper establishment, or seats at the opera,
or any of the practical, necessary things of modern life.  You
can't keep up a presentable appearance on LOVE!  If I had a
daughter who lacked the brains to understand what I had taught her,
that is, her duty as a member of good society, and talked of making
a love match, I would . . . But there!  You can't understand, I
suppose."

She rose and shook the wrinkles from her gown.  Captain Elisha
straightened in his chair.  "Why, yes, ma'am," he drawled, quietly;
"yes, ma'am, I guess I understand fust-rate."

And suddenly Mrs. Dunn also understood.  Her face, which had grown
almost too red for one attached to a member of polite society, grew
redder still.  She turned away and walked to the window.

"What nonsense we've been talking!" she said, after a moment's
silence.  "I don't see what led us into this silly discussion.
Malcolm and your niece must be having a delightful ride.  I almost
wish I had gone with them."

She did wish it, devoutly.  Captain Elisha still remained by the
fire.

"Automobiles are great things for hustlin' around in," he observed.
"Pity they're such dangerous playthings.  Yet I s'pose they're one
of the necessities of up-to-date folks, same as you said, Mrs.
Dunn."

"Surely," she asked coldly, "you don't condemn automobiles, Captain
Warren?  What would you--return to stage coaches?"

"Not a mite!  But I was thinkin' of that poor Moriarty man."

"His death was due to an accident.  And accidents," she turned and
looked directly at him, "when they involve financial damages, may
be paid for."

The captain nodded.  "Yes," he said.

"And when arrangements for such payment is made, HONORABLE people--
at least, in the circle of which you and I have been speaking--
consider the matter settled and do not refer to it again, either
among themselves--or elsewhere."

"Yes, ma'am."  He nodded again.  She did know; Malcolm, evidently,
had told her.  "Yes, ma'am.  That's the way any decent person would
feel--and act--if such a thing happened--even if they hailed from
South Denboro."

He pushed back his chair and stood up.  She continued to look him
over, much as if she were taking a mental inventory of his
character, or revising an old one.

"I hope," she said, lightly, but with deliberation, "our little
argument and--er--slight disagreement concerning--er--duty will not
make us enemies, Captain Warren."

"Enemies!  Land sakes, no!  I respect anybody's havin' opinions and
not bein' afraid to give 'em.  And I think I can understand some of
how you feel.  Maybe if I was anchored here on Fifth Avenue, same
as you are, instead of bein' blown in by an unexpected no'theaster,
I'd be feelin' the same way.  It's all accordin', as I've said so
often.  Enemies?  No, indeed!"

She laughed again.  "I'm so glad!" she said.  "Malcolm declares
he'd be quite afraid of me--as an enemy.  He seems to think I
possess some mysterious and quite diabolical talent for making my
un-friends uncomfortable, and declares he would compromise rather
than fight me at any time.  Of course it's ridiculous--just one of
his jokes--and I'm really harmless and very much afraid.  That's
why I want you and me to be friends, Captain Warren."

"Sure!" Captain Elisha nodded emphatically.  "That's what I want,
too."

But that evening, immediately after his return to the apartment,
when--Caroline having gone to her own room to remove her wraps--he
and the butler were alone, he characteristically unburdened his
mind.

"Mr. Warren, sir," said Edwards, "a young gentleman left a note
here for you this afternoon.  The elevator man gave it to me, sir.
It's on your dressing table, sir."

The captain's answer had nothing whatever to do with the note.  He
had been thinking of other things.

"Commodore," he said, "I've got the answer."

"To the note?  Already, sir?  I didn't know you'd seen it."

"I ain't.  I've got the answer to the conundrum.  It's Mother!"

"Mother, sir?  I--I don't know what you mean."

"I do.  The answer's Mother.  Sonny don't count, though he may
think he does.  But Mother's the whole team and the dog under the
wagon.  And, Commodore, we've got to trot some if we want to keep
ahead of that team!  Don't you forget it!"

He went to his room, leaving the bewildered butler to retire to the
kitchen, where he informed the cook that the old man was off his
head worse than common tonight.

"Blessed if he don't think he's a trotting horse!" said Edwards.



CHAPTER XI


The note on the dining room table proved, to the captain's delight,
to be from James Pearson.  It was brief and to the point.

"Why don't you come and see me?" wrote the young man.  "I've been
expecting you, and you promised to come.  Have you forgotten my
address?  If so, here it is.  I expect to be in all day to-morrow."

The consequence of this was that eleven o'clock the next day found
Captain Elisha pulling the bell at a brick house in a long brick
block on a West Side street.  The block had evidently been, in its
time, the homes of well-to-do people, but now it was rather dingy
and gone to seed.  Across the street the first floors were, for the
most part, small shops, and in the windows above them doctors'
signs alternated with those of modistes, manicure artists, and
milliners.

The captain had come a roundabout way, stopping in at the Moriarty
flat, where he found Mrs. Moriarty in a curious state of woe and
tearful pride.  "Oh, what will I do, sir?" she moaned.  "When I
think he's gone, it seems as if I'd die, too.  But, thanks to you
and Miss Warren--Mary make it up to her!--my Pat'll have the finest
funeral since the Guinny saloon man was buried.  Ah, if he could
have lived to see it, he'd have died content!"

The pull at the boarding-house bell was answered by a rather
slatternly maid, who informed the visitor that she guessed Mr.
Pearson was in; he 'most always was around lunch time.  So Captain
Elisha waited in a typical boarding-house parlor, before a grate
with no fire in it and surrounded by walnut and plush furniture,
until Pearson himself came hurrying downstairs.

"Say, you're a brick, Captain Warren!" he declared, as they shook
hands.  "I hoped you'd come to-day.  Why haven't you before?"

The captain explained his having mislaid the address.

"Oh, was that it?  Then I'm glad I reminded you.  Rather a cheeky
thing to do, but I've been a reporter, and nerve is necessary in
that profession.  I began to be afraid living among the blue-bloods
had had its effect, and you were getting finicky as to your
acquaintances."

"You didn't believe any such thing."

"Didn't I?  Well, perhaps I didn't.  Come up to my room.  I think
we can just about squeeze in, if you don't mind sitting close."

Pearson's room was on the third flight, at the front of the house.
Through the window one saw the upper half of the buildings
opposite, and above them a stretch of sky.  The bed was a small
brass and iron affair, but the rest of the furniture was of good
quality, the chairs were easy and comfortable, and the walls were
thickly hung with photographs, framed drawings, and prints.

"I put those up to cover the wall paper," explained the host.  "I
don't offer them as an art collection, but as a screen.  Sit down.
Put your coat on the bed.  Shall I close the window?  I usually
keep the upper half open to let out the pipe smoke.  Otherwise I
might not be able to navigate without fog signals."

His visitor chuckled, followed directions with his coat and hat,
and sat down.  Pearson took the chair by the small flat-topped
desk.

"How about that window?" he asked.  "Shall I shut it?"

"No, no!  We'll be warm enough, I guess.  You've got steam heat, I
see."

"You mean you hear.  Those pipes make noise enough to wake the
dead.  At first I thought I couldn't sleep because of the racket
they made.  Now I doubt if I could without it.  Would you consider
a cigar, Captain?"

"Hum!  I don't usually stop to consider.  But I tell you, Jim--just
now you said something about a pipe.  I've got mine aboard, but I
ain't dared to smoke it since I left South Denboro.  If you
wouldn't mind--"

"Not a bit.  Tobacco in this jar on the desk.  I keep a temporary
supply in my jacket pocket.  Matches?  Here you are!  What do you
think of my--er--stateroom?"

"Think it makes nice, snug quarters," was the prompt answer.

"Humph!  Snug is a good word.  Much like living in an omnibus, but
it answers the purpose.  I furnished it myself, except for the bed.
The original bureau had pictures of cauliflowers painted on each
drawer front.  Mrs. Hepton--my landlady--was convinced that they
were roses.  I told her she might be right, but, at all events,
looking at them made me hungry.  Perhaps she noticed the effect on
my appetite and was willing for me to substitute."

The captain laughed.  Then, pointing, he asked:  "What's that
handbill?"

The "handbill" was a fair-sized poster announcing the production at
the "Eureka Opera House" of the "Thrilling Comedy-Drama, The Golden
Gods."  Pearson looked at it, made a face, and shook his head.

"That," he said, "is my combined crusher and comforter.  It is the
announcement of the first, and next to the last, performance of a
play I wrote in my calf days.  The 'Eureka Opera Houses is--or was,
if the 'gods' weren't too much for it--located at Daybury,
Illinois.  I keep that bill to prevent my conceit getting away with
me.  Also, when I get discouraged over my novel, it reminds me
that, however bad the yarn may turn out to be, I have committed
worse crimes.

This led to the captain's asking about the novel and how it was
progressing.  His companion admitted having made some progress,
more in the line of revision than anything else.  He had remodeled
his hero somewhat, in accordance with his new friend's suggestions
during their interview at the Warren apartment, and had introduced
other characters, portrait sketches from memory of persons whom he
had known in his boyhood days in the Maine town.  He read a few
chapters aloud, and Captain Elisha waxed almost enthusiastic over
them.

Then followed a long discussion over a point of seamanship, the
handling of a bark in a gale.  It developed that the young author's
knowledge of saltwater strategy was extensive and correct in the
main, though somewhat theoretical.  That of his critic was based
upon practice and hard experience.  He cited this skipper and that
as examples, and carried them through no'theasters off Hatteras and
typhoons in the Indian Ocean.  The room, in spite of the open
window, grew thick with pipe smoke, and the argument was punctuated
by thumps on the desk and chair arms, and illustrated by diagrams
drawn by the captain's forefinger on the side of the dresser.  The
effects of oil on breaking rollers, the use of a "sea-anchor" over
the side to "hold her to it," whether or not a man was justified in
abandoning his ship under certain given circumstances, these were
debated pro and con.  Always Pearson's "Uncle Jim" was held up as
the final authority, the paragon of sea captains, by the visitor,
and, while his host pretended to agree, with modest reservations,
in this estimate of his relative, he was more and more certain that
his hero was bound to become a youthful edition of Elisha Warren
himself--and he thanked the fates which had brought this fine,
able, old-school mariner to his door.

At length, Captain Elisha, having worked "Uncle Jim" into a safe
harbor after a hundred mile cruise under jury jig, with all hands
watch and watch at the pumps, leaned forward in triumph to refill
his pipe.  Having done so, his eyes remained fixed upon a photograph
standing, partially hidden by a leather collar box, upon the
dresser.  He looked at it intently, then rose and took it in his
hand.

"Well, I swan!" he exclaimed.  "Either what my head's been the
fullest of lately has struck to my eyesight, or else--why, say,
Jim, that's Caroline, ain't it?"

Pearson colored and seemed embarrassed.  "Yes," he answered, "that
is Miss Warren."

"Humph!  Good likeness, too!  But what kind of rig has she got on?
I've seen her wear a good many dresses--seems 