od
feller.  I'd just about reached the stage where I had the girl and
boy stove to flinders under that pesky auto.  I'd even begun to
figger on notifyin' the undertaker.  Tell me I'm an old fool and
then talk about somethin' else.  They'll be here any minute."

But a good many minutes passed, and still they did not come.
Pearson, aware of his companion's growing anxiety, chatted of the
novel, of the people at the boarding house, of anything and
everything he could think of likely to divert attention from the
one important topic.  The answers he received were more and more
brief and absent.  At last, when Edwards again appeared,
appealingly mute, at the entrance to the dining room, Captain
Elisha, with a sigh which was almost a groan, surrendered.

"I guess," he said, reluctantly, "I guess, Jim, there ain't any use
waitin' any longer.  Somethin's kept 'em, and they won't be here
for dinner.  You and I'll set down and eat--though I ain't got the
appetite I cal'lated to have."

Pearson had dined hours before, but he followed his friend, resolved
to please the latter by going through the form of pretending to eat.

They sat down together.  Captain Elisha, with a rueful smile,
pointed to the floral centerpiece.

"There's your posies, Jim," he observed.  "Look pretty, don't they.
She ain't seen 'em yet, but she'll like 'em when she does.  And
that over there, is her present from me.  Stevie gave her a box of
gloves, and I expect, from what Mrs. Dunn hinted, that she and that
son of hers gave her somethin' fine.  She'll show us when she gets
here.  What's this, Commodore?  Oysters, hey?  Well, they ought to
taste like home.  They're 'Cape Cods'; I wouldn't have anything
else."

"We won't touch the birthday cake, Jim," he added, a little later.
"She's got to cut that herself."

The soup was only lukewarm, but neither of them commented on the
fact.  The captain had scarcely tasted of his, when he paused, his
spoon in air.

"Hey?" he exclaimed.  "Listen!  What's that?  By the everlastin',
it IS.  Here they are, at LAST!"

He sprang up with such enthusiasm that his chair tipped backwards
against the butler's devoted shins.  Pearson, almost as much
pleased, also rose.

Captain Elisha paid scant attention to the chair incident.

"What are you waitin' for?" he demanded, whirling on Edwards, who
was righting the chair with one hand and rubbing his knee with the
other.  "Don't you hear 'em at the door?  Let 'em in!"

He reached the library first, his friend following more leisurely.
Caroline and Stephen had just entered.

"Well!" he cried, in his quarter-deck voice, his face beaming with
relief and delight, "you ARE here, ain't you!  I begun to think . . .
Why, what's the matter?"

The question was addressed to Stephen, who stood nearest to him.
The boy did not deign to reply.  With a contemptuous grunt, he
turned scornfully away from his guardian.

"What is it, Caroline?" demanded Captain Elisha.  "HAS anything
happened?"

The girl looked coldly at him.  A new brooch--Mrs. Corcoran Dunn's
birthday gift--sparkled at her throat.

"No accident has happened, if that is what you mean," she said.

"But--why, yes, that was what I meant.  You was so awful late, and
you know you said you'd be home for dinner, so--"

"I changed my mind.  Come, Steve."

She turned to leave the room.  Pearson, at that moment, entered it.
Stephen saw him first.

"WHAT?" he cried.  "Well, of all the nerve!  Look, Caro!"

"Jim--Mr. Pearson, I mean--ran in a few minutes ago," explained
Captain Elisha, bewildered and stammering.  "He thought of course
we'd had dinner and--and--he just wanted to wish you many happy
returns, Caroline."

Pearson had extended his hand and a "Good evening" was on his lips.
Stephen's strange behavior and language caused him to halt.  He
flushed, awkward, surprised, and indignant.

Caroline turned and saw him.  She started, and her cheeks also grew
crimson.  Then, recovering, she looked him full in the face, and
deliberately and disdainfully turned her back.

"Come, Steve!" she said again, and walked from the room.

Her brother hesitated, glared at Pearson, and then stalked
haughtily after her.

Captain Elisha's bewilderment was supreme.  He stared, open-
mouthed, after his nephew and niece, and then turned slowly to his
friend.

"What on earth, Jim," he stammered.  "What's it MEAN?"

Pearson shrugged his shoulders.  "I think I know what it means," he
said.  "I presume that Miss Warren and her brother have learned of
my trouble with their father."

"Hey?  No! you don't think THAT'S it."

"I think there's no doubt of it."

"But how?"

"I don't know how.  What I do know is that I should not have come
here.  I felt it and, if you will remember, I said so.  I was a
fool.  Good night, Captain."

Hot and furiously angry at his own indecision which had placed him
in this humiliating situation, he was striding towards the hall.
Captain Elisha seized his arm.

"Stay where you are, Jim!" he commanded.  "If the trouble's what
you think it is, I'm more to blame than anybody else, and you
sha'n't leave this house till I've done my best to square you."

"Thank you; but I don't wish to be 'squared.'  I've done nothing to
be ashamed of, and I have borne as many insults as I can stand.
I'm going."

"No, you ain't.  Not yet.  I want you to stay."

At that moment Stephen's voice reached them from the adjoining
room.

"I tell you I shall, Caro!" it proclaimed, fiercely.  "Do you
suppose I'm going to permit that fellow to come here again--or to
go until he is made to understand what we think of him and why?
No, by gad!  I'm the man of this family, and I'll tell him a few
things."

Pearson's jaw set grimly.

"You may let go of my wrist, Captain Warren," he said; "I'll stay."

Possibly Stephen's intense desire to prove his manliness made him
self-conscious.  At any rate, he never appeared more ridiculously
boyish than when, an instant later, he marched into the library and
confronted his uncle and Pearson.

"I--I want to say--" he began, majestically; "I want to say--"

He paused, choking, and brandished his fist.

"I want to say--" he began again.

"All right, Stevie," interrupted the captain, dryly, "then I'd say
it if I was you.  I guess it's time you did."

"I want to--to tell that fellow THERE," with a vicious stab of his
forefinger in the direction of Pearson, "that I consider him an--an
ingrate--and a scoundrel--and a miserable--"

"Steady!" Captain Elisha's interruption was sharp this time.
"Steady now!  Leave out the pet names.  What is it you've got to
tell?"

"I--my sister and I have found out what a scoundrel he is, that's
what!  We've learned of the lies he wrote about father.  We know
that he was responsible for all that cowardly, lying stuff in the
Planet--all that about the Trolley Combine.  And we don't intend
that he shall sneak into this house again.  If he was the least
part of a man, he would never have come."

"Mr. Warren--" began Pearson, stepping forward.  The captain
interrupted.

"Hold on, Jim!" he said.  "Just a minute now.  You've learned
somethin', you say, Stevie.  The Dunns told you, I s'pose."

"Never mind who told me!"

"I don't--much.  But I guess we'd better have a clear understandin',
all of us.  Caroline, will you come in here, please?"

He stepped toward the door.  Stephen sprang in front of him.

"My sister doesn't intend to cheapen herself by entering that man's
presence," he declared, hotly.  "I'll deal with him, myself!"

"All right.  But I guess she'd better be here, just the same.
Caroline, I want you."

"She sha'n't come!"

"Yes, she shall.  Caroline!"

The boy would have detained him, but he pushed him firmly aside and
walked toward the door.  Before he reached it, however, his niece
appeared.

"Well?" she said, coldly.  "What is it you want of me?"

"I want you to hear Mr. Pearson's side of this business--and mine--
before you do anything you'll be sorry for."

"I think I've heard quite enough of Mr. Pearson already.  Nothing
he can say or do will make me more sorry than I am, or humiliate me
more than the fact that I have treated him as a friend."

The icy contempt in her tone was cutting.  Pearson's face was
white, but he spoke clearly and with deliberation.

"Miss Warren," he said, "I must insist that you listen for another
moment.  I owe you an apology for--"

"Apology!" broke in Stephen, with a scornful laugh.  "Apology!
Well, by gad!  Just hear that, Caro!"

The girl's lip curled.  "I do not wish to hear your apology," she
said.

"But I wish you to hear it.  Not for my attitude in the Trolley
matter, nor for what I published in the Planet.  Nor for my part in
the disagreement with your father.  I wrote the truth and nothing
more.  I considered it right then--I told your father so--and I
have not changed my mind.  I should act exactly the same under
similar circumstances."

"You blackguard!" shouted Stephen.  Pearson ignored him utterly.

"I do owe you an apology," he continued, "for coming here, as I
have done, knowing that you were ignorant of the affair.  I believe
now that you are misinformed as to the facts, but that is immaterial.
You should have been told of my trouble with Mr. Warren.  I should
have insisted upon it.  That I did not do so is my fault and I
apologize; but for that only.  Good evening."

He shook himself free from the captain's grasp, bowed to the trio,
and left the room.  An instant later the outer door closed behind
him.

Caroline turned to her brother.  "Come, Steve," she said.

"Stay right where you are!"  Captain Elisha did not request now, he
commanded.  "Stevie, stand still.  Caroline, I want to talk to
you."

The girl hesitated.  She had never been spoken to in that tone
before.  Her pride had been already deeply wounded by what she had
learned that afternoon; she was fiercely resentful, angry, and
rebellious.  She was sure she never hated anyone as she did this
man who ordered her to stay and listen to him.  But--she stayed.

"Caroline," said Captain Elisha, after a moment of silence, "I
presume likely--of course I don't know for sartin, but I presume
likely it's Mrs. Dunn and that son of hers who've told you what you
think you know."

"It doesn't concern you who told us!" blustered Stephen, pushing
forward.  He might have been a fly buzzing on the wall for all the
attention his uncle paid him.

"I presume likely the Dunns told you, Caroline," he repeated,
calmly.

His niece met his gaze stubbornly.

"Well," she answered, "and if they did?  Wasn't it necessary we
should know it?  Oh!" with a shudder of disgust, "I wish I could
make you understand how ashamed I feel--how WICKED and ashamed I
feel that I--_I_ should have disgraced father's memory by . . .
Oh, but there!  I can't!  Yes; Mrs. Dunn and Malcolm did tell us--
many things.  Thank God that we HAVE friends to tell us the truth!"

"Amen!" quietly.  "I'll say amen to that, Caroline, any time.  Only
I want you to be sure those you call friends are real ones and that
the truths they tell ain't like the bait on a fishhook, put on FOR
bait and just thick enough to cover the barb."

"Do you mean to insinuate--" screamed the irrepressible nephew,
wild at being so completely ignored.  His uncle again paid not the
slightest attention.

"But that ain't neither here nor there now," he went on.  "Caroline,
Mr. Pearson just told you that his coming to this house without
tellin' you fust of his quarrel with 'Bije was his fault.  That ain't
so.  The fault was mine altogether.  He told me the whole story;
told me that he hadn't called since it happened, on that very
account.  And I took the whole responsibility and ASKED him to come.
I did!  Do you know why?"

If he expected an answer none was given.  Caroline's lids drooped
disdainfully.  "Steve," she said, "let us go."

"Stop!  You'll stay here until I finish.  I want to say that I
didn't tell you about the Trolley fuss because I wanted you to
learn some things for yourself.  I wanted you to know Mr. Pearson--
to find out what sort of man he was afore you judged him.  Then,
when you had known him long enough to understand he wasn't a liar
and a blackguard, and all that Steve has called him, I was goin' to
tell you the whole truth, not a part of it.  And, after that, I was
goin' to let you decide for yourself what to do.  I'm a lot older
than you are; I've mixed with all sorts of folks; I'm past the
stage where I can be fooled by--by false hair or soft soap.  You
can't pour sweet oil over a herrin' and make me believe it's a
sardine.  I know the Pearson stock.  I've sailed over a heap of
salt water with one of the family.  And I've kept my eyes open
since I've run acrost this particular member.  And I knew your
father, too, Caroline Warren.  And I say to you now that, knowin'
Jim Pearson and 'Bije Warren--yes, and knowin' the rights and
wrongs of that Trolley business quite as well as Malcolm Dunn or
anybody else--I say to you that, although 'Bije was my brother, I'd
bet my life that Jim had all the right on his side.  There! that's
the truth, and no hook underneath it.  And some day you'll realize
it, too."

He had spoken with great vehemence.  Now he took a handkerchief
from his pocket and wiped his forehead.  When he again looked at
his niece, he found her staring intently at him; and her eyes
blazed.

"Have you quite finished--now?" she demanded.  "Steve, be quiet!"

"Why, yes, I guess so, pretty nigh.  I s'pose there ain't much use
to say more.  If I was to tell you that I've tried to do for you
and Steve in this--same as in everything else since I took this
job--as if you were my own children, you wouldn't believe it.  If I
was to tell you, Caroline, that I'd come to think an awful lot of
you, you wouldn't believe that, either.  I did hope that since our
other misunderstandin' was cleared up, and you found I wa'n't what
you thought I was, you'd come to me and ask questions afore passin'
judgment; but perhaps--"

And now she interrupted, bursting out at him in a blast of scorn
which took his breath away.

"Oh, stop! stop!" she cried.  "Don't say any more.  You have
insulted father's memory, and defended the man who slandered him.
Isn't that enough?  Why must you go on to prove yourself a greater
hypocrite?  We learned, my brother and I, to-day more than the
truth concerning your FRIEND.  We learned that you have lied--yes,
lied--and--"

"Steady, Caroline! be careful.  I wouldn't say what I might be
sorry for later."

"Sorry!  Captain Warren, you spoke of my misjudging you.  I thought
I had, and I was sorry.  To-day I learned that your attitude in
that affair was a lie like the rest.  YOU did not pay for Mr.
Moriarty's accident.  Mr. Dunn's money paid those bills.  And you
allowed the family--and me--to thank YOU for your generosity.  Oh,
I'm ashamed to be near you!"

"There!  There!  Caroline, be still.  I--"

"I shall not be still.  I have been still altogether too long.  You
are our guardian.  We can't help that, I suppose.  Father asked you
to be that, for some reason; but did he ask you to LIVE here where
you are not wanted?  To shame us before our friends, ladies and
gentlemen so far above you in every way?  And to try to poison our
minds against them and sneer at them when they are kind to us and
even try to be kind to you?  No, he did not!  Oh, I'm sick of it
all! your deceit and your hypocritical speeches and your pretended
love for us.  LOVE!  Oh, if I could say something that would make
you understand how thoroughly we despise you, and how your presence,
ever since you forced it upon Steve and me, has disgraced us!
If I only could!  I--I--"

She had been near to tears ever since Mrs. Corcoran Dunn, in the
kindness of her heart, told her the "truth" that afternoon.  But
pride and indignation had prevented her giving way.  Now, however,
she broke down.

"Oh--oh, Steve!" she cried, and, turning to her brother, sobbed
hysterically on his shoulder.  "Oh, Steve, what shall we do?"

Stephen put his arm about her waist.  "It's all right, Sis," he
said soothingly.  "Don't cry before HIM!  I guess," with a glance
at his uncle, "you've said enough to make even him understand--at
last."

Captain Elisha looked gravely at the pair.  "I guess you have," he
said slowly.  "I guess you have, Caroline.  Anyhow, I can't think
offhand of anything you've left out.  I could explain some things,
but what's the use?  And," with a sigh, "you may be right in a way.
Perhaps I shouldn't have come here to live.  If you'd only told me
plain afore just how you felt, I'd--maybe I'd--but there!  I didn't
know--I didn't know.  You see, I thought . . .  However, I guess
that part of your troubles is over.  But," he added, firmly,
"wherever I am, or wherever I go, you must understand that I'm your
guardian, just the same.  I considered a long spell afore I took
the place, and I never abandoned a ship yet, once I took command of
her.  And I'll stick to this one!  Yes, sir!  I'll stick to it in
spite of the devil--or the Dunns, either.  Till you and your
brother are of age I'm goin' to look out for you and your interests
and your money; and nothin' nor nobody shall stop me.  As for
forcin' my company on you, though, that well, that's different.  I
cal'late you won't have to worry any more.  Good night."

He thrust his hands into his pockets and walked slowly from the
library.



CHAPTER XIV


Stephen, the "man of the family," was the only member of the
household, servants excepted, who slept soundly that night.
Conscious of having done his duty in the affair with Pearson and
his guardian, and somewhat fatigued by the disagreeable task of
soothing his hysterical sister, he was slumbering peacefully at
nine the next morning when awakened by a series of raps on his
bedroom door.

"Ah!  What?  Well, what is it?" he demanded, testily opening his
eyes.  "Edwards, is that you?  What the devil do you mean by making
such a row?"

The voice which answered was not the butler's, but Caroline's.

"Steve!  Oh, Steve!" she cried.  "Do get up and come out!  Come,
quick!"

"What's the matter?" inquired the young man, sitting up in bed.
"Is the house afire?"

"No, no!  But do come!  I want you.  Something has happened."

"Happened?  What is it?"

"I can't tell you here.  Please dress and come to me as quick as
you can."

Stephen, wondering and somewhat alarmed, dressed with unusual
promptitude and obeyed.  He found his sister standing by the
library window, a letter in her hand.  She looked troubled and
anxious.

"Well, Caro," observed the boy, "here I am.  What in the world's up
now?"

She turned.

"Oh, Steve!" she exclaimed, "he's gone!"

"Gone?  Who?"

"Captain Warren.  He's gone."

"Gone?  Gone where?  Caro, you don't mean he's--DEAD?"

"No, he's gone--gone and left us."

Her brother's expression changed to incredulous joy.

"What?" he shouted.  "You mean he's quit?  Cleared out?  Left here
for good?"

"Yes."

"Hurrah!  Excuse me while I gloat!  Hurrah!  We got it through his
skull at last!  Is it possible?  But--but hold on!  Perhaps it's
too good to be true.  Are you sure?  How do you know?"

"He says so.  See."

She handed him the letter.  It was addressed to "My dear Caroline"
and in it Captain Elisha stated his intentions succinctly.  After
the plain speaking of the previous evening he should not, of
course, burden them with his society any longer.  He was leaving
that morning, and, as soon as he "located permanent moorings
somewhere else" would notify his niece and nephew of his
whereabouts.

"For," he added, "as I told you, although I shall not impose my
company on you, I am your guardian same as ever.  I will see that
your allowance comes to you regular, including enough for all
household bills and pay for the hired help and so on.  If you need
any extras at any time let me know and, if they seem to me right
and proper, I will send money for them.  You will stay where you
are, Caroline, and Stevie must go back to college right away.
Tell him I say so, and if he does not I shall begin reducing his
allowance according as I wrote him.  He will understand what I
mean.  I guess that is all until I send you my address and any
other sailing orders that seem necessary to me then.  And,
Caroline, I want you and Stevie to feel that I am your anchor to
windward, and when you get in a tight place, if you ever do, you
can depend on me.  Last night's talk has no bearing on that
whatever.  Good-by, then, until my next.

"ELISHA WARREN."


Stephen read this screed to the end, then crumpled it in his fist
and threw it angrily on the floor.

"The nerve!" he exclaimed.  "He seems to think I'm a sailor on one
of his ships, to be ordered around as he sees fit.  I'll go back to
college when I'm good and ready--not before."

Caroline shook her head.  "Oh, no!" she said.  "You must go to-day.
He's right, Steve; it's the thing for you to do.  He and I were
agreed as to that.  And you wouldn't stay and make it harder for
me, would you, dear?"

He growled a reluctant assent.  "I suppose I shall have to go," he
said, sullenly.  "My allowance is too beastly small to have him
cutting it; and the old shark would do that very thing; he'd take
delight in doing it, confound him!  Well, he knows what we think of
him, that's some comfort."

She did not answer.  He looked at her curiously.

"Why, hang it all, Caro!" he exclaimed in disgust; "what ails you?
Blessed if I sha'n't begin to believe you're sorry he's gone.  You
act as if you were."

"No, I'm not.  Of course I'm not.  I'm--I'm glad.  He couldn't
stay, of course.  But I'm afraid--I can't help feeling that you and
I were too harsh last night.  We said things--dreadful things--"

"Be hanged!  We didn't say half enough.  Oh, don't be a fool, Caro!
I was just beginning to be proud of your grit.  And now you want to
take it all back.  Honestly, girls are the limit!  You don't know
your own minds for twelve consecutive hours.  Answer me now!  ARE
you sorry he's gone?"

"No.  No, I'm not, really.  But I--I feel somehow as if--as if
everything was on my shoulders.  You're going away, and he's gone,
and--What is it, Edwards?"

The butler entered, with a small parcel in his hand.

"I beg your pardon, Miss Caroline," he said.  "I should have given
you this last evening.  It was by your place at the table.  I think
Captain Warren put it there, miss."

Caroline took the parcel and looked at it wonderingly.

"For me?" she repeated.

"Yes, Miss Caroline.  It is marked with your name.  And breakfast
is served, when you and Mr. Stephen are ready."

He bowed and retired.  The girl sat turning the little white box in
her hands.

"HE left it for me," she said.  "What can it be?"

Her brother snatched it impatiently.

"Why don't you open it and find out?" he demanded.  "Perhaps it's
his latch key.  Here!  I'll do it myself."

He cut the cord and removed the cover of the little box.  Inside
was the jeweler's leather case.  He took it out and pressed the
spring.  The cover flew up.

"Whew!" he whistled.  "It's a present.  And rather a decent one,
too, by gad!  Look, Caro!"

He handed her the open case.  She looked at the chain, spread
carefully on the white satin lining.  Inside the cover was fitted a
card.  She turned it over and read:  "To my niece, Caroline.  With
wishes for many happy returns, and much love, from her Uncle Elisha
Warren."

She sat gazing at the card.  Stephen bent down, read the inscription,
and then looked up into her face.

"WHAT?" he cried.  "I believe--You're not CRYING!  Well, I'll be
hanged!  Sis, you ARE a fool!"



The weather that morning was fine and clear.  James Pearson,
standing by the window of his rooms at the boarding house, looking
out at the snow-covered roofs sparkling in the sun, was miserable.
When he retired the night before it was with a solemn oath to
forget Caroline Warren altogether; to put her and her father and
the young cad, her brother, utterly from his mind, never to be
thought of again.  As a preliminary step in this direction, he
began, the moment his head touched the pillow, to review, for the
fiftieth time, the humiliating scene in the library, to think of
things he should have said, and--worse than all--to recall, word
for word, the things she had said to him.  In this cheerful
occupation he passed hours before falling asleep.  And, when he
woke, it was to begin all over again.

Why--Why had he been so weak as to yield to Captain Elisha's
advice?  Why had he not acted like a sensible, self-respecting man,
done what he knew was right, and persisted in his refusal to visit
the Warrens?  Why?  Because he was an idiot, of course--a hopeless
idiot, who had got exactly what he deserved!  Which bit of
philosophy did not help make his reflections less bitter.

He went down to breakfast when the bell rang, but his appetite was
missing, and he replied only in monosyllables to the remarks
addressed to him by his fellow boarders.  Mrs. Hepton, the
landlady, noticed the change.

"You not ill, Mr. Pearson, I hope?" she queried.  "I do hope you
haven't got cold, sleeping with your windows wide open, as you say
you do.  Fresh air is a good thing, in moderation, but one should
be careful.  Don't you think so, Mr. Carson?"

Mr. Carson was a thin little man, a bachelor, who occupied the
smallest room on the third story.  He was a clerk in a department
store, and his board was generally in arrears.  Therefore, when
Mrs. Hepton expressed an opinion he made it a point to agree with
her.  In this instance, however, he merely grunted.

"I say fresh air in one's sleeping room is a good thing in
moderation.  Don't you think so, Mr. Carson?" repeated the
landlady.

Mr. Carson rolled up his napkin and inserted it in the ring.  His
board, as it happened, was paid in full to date.  Also, although he
had not yet declared his intention, he intended changing lodgings
at the end of the week.

"Humph!" he sniffed, with sarcasm, "it may be.  I couldn't get none
in MY room if I wanted it, so I can't say sure.  Morning."

He departed hurriedly.  Mrs. Hepton looked disconcerted.  Mrs. Van
Winkle Ruggles smiled meaningly across the table at Miss Sherborne,
who smiled back.

Mr. Ludlow, the bookseller, quietly observed that he hoped Mr.
Pearson had not gotten cold.  Colds were prevalent at this time of
the year.  "'These are the days when the Genius of the weather sits
in mournful meditation on the threshold,' as Mr. Dickens tells us,"
he added.  "I presume he sits on the sills of open windows, also."

The wife of the Mr. Dickens there present pricked up her ears.

"When did you write that, 'C.' dear?" she asked, turning to her
husband.  "I remember it perfectly, of course, but I have
forgotten, for the moment, in which of your writings it appears."

The illustrious one's mouth being occupied with a section of
scorching hot waffle, he was spared the necessity of confession.

"Pardon me," said Mr. Ludlow.  "I was not quoting our Mr. Dickens
this time, but his famous namesake."

The great "C." drowned the waffle with a swallow of water.

"Maria," he snapped, "don't be so foolish.  Ludlow quotes from--er--
'Bleak House.'  I have written some things--er--similar, but not
that.  Why don't you pass the syrup?"

The bookseller, who was under the impression that he had quoted
from the "Christmas Carol," merely smiled and remained silent.

"My father, the Senator," began Mrs. Van Winkle Ruggles, "was
troubled with colds during his political career.  I remember his
saying that the Senate Chamber at the Capitol was extremely
draughty.  Possibly Mr. Pearson's ailment does come from sleeping
in a draught.  Not that father was accustomed to SLEEP during the
sessions--Oh, dear, no! not that, of course.  How absurd!"

She laughed gayly.  Pearson, who seemed to think it time to say
something, declared that, so far as he knew, he had no cold or any
symptoms of one.

"Well," said Mrs. Hepton, with conviction, "something ails you, I
know.  We can all see it; can't we?" turning to the rest of the
company.  "Why, you've scarcely spoken since you sat down at the
table.  And you've eaten next to nothing.  Perhaps there is some
trouble, something on your mind which is worrying you.  Oh, I HOPE
not!"

"No doubt it is the preoccupation of genius," remarked Mrs.
Dickens.  "I'm sure it must be that.  When 'C.' is engaged with
some particularly trying literary problem he frequently loses all
his appetite and does not speak for hours together.  Isn't it so,
dear?"

"C.," who was painfully conscious that he might have made a miscue
in the matter of the quotation, answered sharply.

"No," he said.  "Not at all.  Don't be silly, Maria."

Miss Sherborne clasped her hands.  "_I_ know!" she exclaimed in
mock rapture; "Mr. Pearson is in love!"

This suggestion was received with applause and hilarity.  Pearson
pushed back his chair and rose.

"I'm much obliged for this outburst of sympathy," he observed,
dryly.  "But, as I say, I'm perfectly well, and the other diagnoses
are too flattering to be true.  Good morning."

Back in his room he seated himself at his desk, took the manuscript
of his novel from the drawer, and sat moodily staring at it.  He
was in no mood for work.  The very sight of the typewritten page
disgusted him.  As he now felt, the months spent on the story were
time wasted.  It was ridiculous for him to attempt such a thing; or
to believe that he could carry it through successfully; or to dream
that he would ever be anything better than a literary hack, a cheap
edition of "C." Dickens, minus the latter's colossal self-
satisfaction.

He was still sitting there, twirling an idle pencil between his
fingers, when he heard steps outside his door.  Someone knocked.

"Well, what is it?" he asked.

His landlady answered.

"Mr. Pearson," she said, "may I see you?"

He threw down the pencil and, rising, walked to the door and opened
it.  Mrs. Hepton was waiting in the hall.  She seemed excited.

"Mr. Pearson," she said, "will you step downstairs with me for a
moment?  I have a surprise for you."

"A surprise?  What sort of a surprise?"

"Oh, a pleasant one.  At least I think it is going to be pleasant
for all of us.  But I'm not going to tell you what it is.  You must
come down and see for yourself."

She led the way downstairs, the young man following her, wondering
what the surprise might be, and fairly certain it, nor anything
else, could be pleasant on that day.

He supposed, of course, that he must descend to the parlor to reach
the solution of the mystery, but he was mistaken.  On the second
floor Mrs. Hepton stopped and pointed.

"It's in there," she said, pointing.

"There" was the room formerly occupied by Mr. Saks, the long-haired
artist.  Since his departure it had been vacant.  Pearson looked at
the closed door and then at the lady.

"A surprise for me in THERE?" he repeated.  "What's the joke, Mrs.
Hepton?"

By way of answer she took him by the arm, and, leading him to the
door, threw the latter open.

"Here he is!" she said.

"Hello, Jim!" hailed Captain Elisha Warren, cheerfully.  "Ship
ahoy!  Glad to see you."

He was standing in the middle of the room, his hat on the table and
his hands in his pockets.

Pearson was surprised; there was no doubt of that--not so much at
the sight of his friend--he had expected to see or hear from the
captain before the day was over--as at seeing him in that room.  He
could not understand what he was doing there.

Captain Elisha noted his bewildered expression, and chuckled.

"Come aboard, Jim!" he commanded.  "Come in and inspect.  I'll see
you later, Mrs. Hepton," he added, "and give you my final word.  I
want to hold officer's council with Mr. Pearson here fust."

The landlady accepted the broad hint and turned to go.

"Very well," she said, "but I do hope for all our sakes that word
will be YES, Mr. Warren--Excuse me, it is Captain Warren, isn't
it?"

"It used to be, yes, ma'am.  And at home it is yet.  'Round here
I've learned to be like a barroom poll-parrot, ready to answer to
most everything.  There!" as the door closed after her; "now we can
be more private.  Set down, Jim!  How are you, anyway?"

Pearson sat down mechanically.  "I'm well enough--everything
considered," he replied, slowly.  "But what--what are you in here
for?  I don't understand."

"You will in a minute.  What do you think of this--er--saloon
cabin?" with a comprehensive sweep of his arm.

The room was of fair size, furnished in a nondescript, boarding-
house fashion, and with two windows overlooking the little back
yard of the house and those of the other adjoining it.  Each yard
contained an assortment of ash cans, and there was an astonishing
number of clothes lines, each fluttering a variety of garments
peculiarly personal to their respective owners.

"Pretty snug, ain't it?" continued the captain.  "Not exactly up to
that I've been luxuriatin' in lately, but more fittin' to my build
and class than that was, I shouldn't wonder.  No Corot paintin's
nor five thousand dollar tintypes of dory codders; but I can manage
to worry along without them, if I try hard.  Neat but not gaudy, I
call it--as the architect feller said about his plans for the
addition to the county jail at Ostable.  Hey?  Ho! Ho!"

Pearson began to get a clue to the situation.

"Captain Warren," he demanded, "have you--Do you mean to say you've
taken this room to LIVE in?"

"No, I ain't said all that yet.  I wanted to talk with you a little
afore I said it.  But that was my idea, if you and I agreed on
sartin matters."

"You've come here to live!  You've left your--your niece's house?"

"Ya-as, I've left.  That is, I left the way the Irishman left the
stable where they kept the mule.  He said there was all out doors
in front of him and only two feet behind.  That's about the way
'twas with me."

"Have your nephew and niece--"

"Um-hm.  They hinted that my room was better than my company, and,
take it by and large, I guess they was right for the present,
anyhow.  I set up till three o'clock thinkin' it over, and then I
decided to get out afore breakfast this mornin'.  I didn't wait for
any good-bys.  They'd been said, or all I cared to hear--Captain
Elisha's smile disappeared for an instant--"last evenin'.  The dose
was sort of bitter, but it had the necessary effect.  At any rate,
I didn't hanker for another one.  I remembered what your landlady
told me when I was here afore, about this stateroom bein' vacated,
and I come down to look at it.  It suits me well enough; seems like
a decent moorin's for an old salt water derelict like me; the price
is reasonable, and I guess likely I'll take it.  I GUESS I will."

"Why do you guess?  By George, I hope you will!"

"Do you?  I'm much obliged.  I didn't know but after last night,
after the scrape I got you into, you might feel--well, sort of as
if you'd seen enough of me."

The young man smiled bitterly.  "It wasn't your fault," he said.
"It was mine entirely.  I'm quite old enough to decide matters for
myself, and I should have decided as my reason, and not my
inclinations, told me.  You weren't to blame."

"Yes, I was.  If you're old enough, I'm TOO old, I cal'late.  But I
did think--However, there's no use goin' over that.  I ask your
pardon, Jim.  And you don't hold any grudge?"

"Indeed I don't.  I may be a fool--I guess I am--but not that
kind."

"Thanks.  Well, there's one objection out of the way, then,
only I don't want you to think that I've hove overboard that
'responsibility' I was so easy and fresh about takin' on my
shoulders.  It's there yet; and I'll see you squared with Caroline
afore this v'yage is over, if I live."

His friend frowned.

"You needn't mind," he said.  "I prefer that you drop the whole
miserable business."

"Well, maybe, but--Jim, you've taken hold of these electric
batteries that doctors have sometimes?  It's awful easy to grab the
handles of one of those contraptions, but when you want to drop 'em
you can't.  They don't drop easy.  I took hold of the handles of
'Bije's affairs, and, though it might be pleasanter to drop 'em, I
can't--or I won't."

"Then you're leaving your nephew and niece doesn't mean that you've
given up the guardianship?"

Captain Elisha's jaw set squarely.

"I don't remember sayin' that it did," he answered, with decision.
Then, his good-nature returning, he added, "And now, Jim, I'd like
your opinion of these new quarters that I may take.  What do you
think of 'em?  Come to the window and take a look at the scenery."

Pearson joined him at the window.  The captain waved toward the
clothes-lines and grinned.

"Looks as if there was some kind of jubilee, don't it," he
observed.  "Every craft in sight has strung the colors."

Pearson laughed.  Then he said:

"Captain, I think the room will do.  It isn't palatial, but one can
live in worse quarters, as I know from experience."

"Yup.  Well, Jim, there's just one thing more.  Have I disgraced
you a good deal, bein' around with you and chummin' in with you the
way I have?  That is, do you THINK I've disgraced you?  Are you
ashamed of me?"

"I?  Ashamed of YOU?  You're joking!"

"No, I'm serious.  Understand now, I'm not apologizin'.  My ways
are my ways, and I think they're just as good as the next feller's,
whether he's from South Denboro or--well, Broad Street.  I've got a
habit of thinkin' for myself and actin' for myself, and when I take
off my hat it's to a bigger MAN than I am and not to a more stylish
hat.  But, since I've lived here in New York, I've learned that,
with a whole lot of folks, hats themselves count more than what's
underneath 'em.  I haven't changed mine, and I ain't goin' to.
Now, with that plain and understood, do you want me to live here,in
the same house with you?  I ain't fishin' for compliments.  I want
an honest answer."

He got it.  Pearson looked him squarely in the eye.

"I do," he said.  "I like you, and I don't care a damn about your
hat.  Is that plain?"

Captain Elisha's reply was delivered over the balusters in the
hall.

"Hi!" he called.  "Hi, Mrs. Hepton."

The landlady had been anxiously waiting.  She ran from the dining
room to the foot of the stairs.

"Yes?" she cried.  "What is it?"

"It's a bargain," said the captain.  "I'm ready to engage passage."



CHAPTER XV


Thus Captain Elisha entered another of New York's "circles," that
which centered at Mrs. Hepton's boarding house.  Within a week he
was as much a part of it as if he had lived there for years.  At
lunch, on the day of his arrival, he made his appearance at the
table in company with Pearson, and when the landlady exultantly
announced that he was to be "one of our little party" thereafter,
he received and replied to the welcoming salutations of his fellow
boarders with unruffled serenity.

"How could I help it?" he asked.  "Human nature's liable to
temptation, they tell us.  The flavor of that luncheon we had last
time I was here has been hangin' 'round the edges of my mouth and
tantalizin' my memory ever since."

"We had a souffle that noon, if I remember correctly, Captain,"
observed the flattered Mrs. Hepton.

"Did you?  Well, I declare!  I'd have sworn 'twas a biled-dinner
hash.  Knew 'twas better than any I ever ate afore, but I'd have
bet 'twas hash, just the same.  Tut! tut! tut!  Now, honest, Mrs.
Hepton, ain't this--er--whatever-you-call-it a close relation--a
sort of hash with its city clothes on, hey?"

The landlady admitted that a souffle was something not unlike a
hash.  Captain Elisha nodded.

"I thought so," he declared.  "I was sartin sure I couldn't be
mistaken.  What is it used to be in the song book?  'You can smash--
you can--'  Well, I don't remember.  Somethin' about your bein'
able to smash the vase if you wanted to, but the smell of the
posies was there yet."

Mr. Ludlow, the bookseller, supplied the quotation.


       "'You may break, you may shatter
           The vase if you will,
         But the scent of the roses
           Will cling to it still,'


he said, smiling.

"That's it.  Much obliged.  You can warm up and rechristen the hash
if you will; but the corned beef and cabbage stay right on deck.
Ain't that so, Mr. Dickens?"

The illustrious "C." bowed.

"Moore?" he observed, with dignity.

"Yes.  That's what _I_ said--'More!'  Said it twice, I believe.
Glad you agree with me.  The hymn says that weakness is sin, but
there's no sin in havin' a weakness for corned-beef hash."

Miss Sherborne and Mrs. Van Winkle Ruggles were at first inclined
to snub the new boarder, considering him a country boor whose
presence in their select society was almost an insult.  The captain
did not seem to notice their hints or sneers, although Pearson grew
red and wrathful.

"Laura, my dear," said Mrs. Ruggles, addressing the teacher of
vocal culture, "don't you feel quite rural today?  Almost as if you
were visiting the country?"

"I do, indeed," replied Miss Sherborne.  "Refreshing, isn't it?
Ha! ha!"

"It is if one cares for such things.  I am afraid _I_ don't
appreciate them.  They may be well enough in their place, but--"

She finished with a shrug of her shoulders.  Captain Elisha smiled.

"Yes, ma'am," he said politely, joining in the conversation;
"that's what the boy said about the cooky crumbs in the bed.  You
don't care for the country, I take it, ma'am"

"I do NOT!"

"So?  Well, it's a mercy we don't think alike; even Heaven would be
crowded if we did--hey?  You didn't come from the country, either?"
turning to Miss Sherborne.

The young lady would have liked to answer with an uncompromising
negative.  Truth and the fact that some of those present were
acquainted with it compelled her to forego this pleasure.

"I was born in a--a small town," she answered coldly.  "But I came
to the city as soon as I possibly could."

"Um-hm.  Well, I came when I couldn't possibly stay away.  We can
agree on one thing--we're all here.  Yes, and on another--that that
cake is fust-rate.  I'll take a second piece, if you've no
objection, Mrs. Hepton."

When they were alone once more, in the captain's room, Pearson
vented his indignation.

"Why didn't you give them as good as they sent?" he demanded.
"Couldn't you see they were doing their best to hurt your feelings?"

"Ya-as.  I could see it.  Didn't need any specs to see that."

"Then why didn't you answer them as they deserved?"

"Oh, I don't know.  What's the use?  They've got troubles of their
own.  One of 'em's a used-to-be, and the other's a never-was.
Either disease is bad enough without addin' complications."

Pearson laughed.  "I don't get the whole of that, Captain," he
said.  "Mrs. Van is the used-to-be, I suppose.  But what is it that
Miss Sherborne never was?"

"Married," was the prompt reply.  "Old maiditis is creepin' on her
fast.  You want to be careful, Jim; a certain kind of female gets
desperate about her stage."

Pearson laughed again.

"Oh, get out!" he exclaimed, turning to go.

"All right!  I will, when you and she are together and you give me
the signal.  But I tell you honest, I'd hate to do it.  Judgin' by
the way she smiles and looks up under her eye-winkers at you,
you're in danger of kidnappin'.  So long.  I'll see you again after
I get my dunnage unpacked."

The snubbing and sneering came to an abrupt end.  Pearson, in
conversation with Mrs. Ruggles, casually imparted the information
that Captain Elisha was the brother of A. Rodgers Warren, late
society leader and wealthy broker.  Also, that he had entire charge
of the latter's estate.  Thereafter Mrs. Ruggles treated the
captain as one whose rank was equal to her own, and, consequently,
higher than anyone's else in the boarding-house.  She made it a
point to publicly ask his advice concerning "securities" and
"investments," and favored him with many reminiscences of her
distinguished father, the Senator.  Miss Sherborne, as usual,
followed her lead.  Captain Elisha, when Pearson joked him on the
altered behavior of the two ladies, merely grinned.

"You may thank me for that, Captain," said the young man.  "When I
told Mrs. Ruggles who and what you were she almost broke down and
sobbed.  The fact that she had risked offending one so closely
connected with the real thing on Fifth Avenue and Wall Street was
too dreadful.  But she's yours devotedly now.  There's an 18-karat
crown on your head."

"Yup.  I suppose so.  Well, I ain't so sot up with pride over
wearin' that crown.  It used to belong to 'Bije, and I never did
care much for second-hand things.  Rather have a new sou'wester of
my own, any day in the week.  When I buy a sou'wester I know what
it's made of."

"Mrs. Ruggles knows what the crown is made of--gold, nicely padded
with bonds and preferred stock."

"Humph!  Sometimes I wonder if the paddin's waterproof.  As for the
gold--well, you can make consider'ble shine with brass when you're
dealin' with nigh-sighted folks . . . and children."

To this indirect reference to Miss Warren and her brother Pearson
made no reply.  The pair conversed freely on other subjects, but
each avoided this one.  The novel, too, was laid on the shelf for
the present.  Its author had not yet mustered sufficient courage to
return to it.  Captain Elisha once or twice suggested a session
with "Cap'n Jim," but, finding his suggestions received with more
or less indifference, did not press them.  His mind was busy with
other things.  A hint dropped by Sylvester, the lawyer, was one of
these.  It suggested alarming possibilities, and his skepticism
concerning the intrinsic worth of his inherited "crown" was
increased by it.

He paid frequent visits to the offices of Sylvester, Kuhn, and
Graves in Pine Street.  Upon the senior partner, whom he esteemed
and trusted not only as a business adviser but a friend, he
depended for information concerning happenings at the Warren
apartment.

Caroline sent him regular statements of her weekly expenditures,
also bills for his approval, but she had written him but once,
and then only a brief note.  The note brought by a messenger,
accompanied a package containing the chain which he and Pearson
selected with such deliberation and care at the Fifth Avenue
jeweler's.  Under the existing circumstances, the girl wrote, she
felt that she did not wish to accept presents from him and
therefore returned this one.  He was alone when the note and
package came and sat by the window of his room, looking out at the
dismal prospect of back yards and clothes-lines, turning the
leather case over and over in his hands.  Perhaps this was the most
miserable afternoon he had spent since his arrival in the city.  He
tried to comfort himself by the exercise of his usual philosophy,
but it was cold comfort.  He had no right to expect gratitude, so
he told himself, and the girl undoubtedly felt that she was justified
in her treatment of him; but it is hard to be misunderstood and
misjudged, even by one whose youth is, perhaps, an excuse.  He
forgave Caroline, but he could not forgive those who were
responsible for her action.

After Pearson had departed, on the morning when the conversation
dealing with Mrs. Van Winkle Ruggles and her change of attitude
took place, Captain Elisha put on his hat and coat and started for
his lawyer's office.  Sylvester was glad to see him and invited him
to lunch.

"No, thank you," replied the captain.  "I just run down to ask if
there was anything new in the offin'.  Last time I see you, you
hinted you and your mates had sighted somethin' or other through
the fog, and it might turn out to be a rock or a lighthouse, you
couldn't tell which.  Made up your mind yet?"

Sylvester shook his head.  "No," he said, slowly; "it is still
foggy.  We're busy investigating, but we're not ready to report."

"Humph!  Well, what's the thing look like?  You must be a little
nigher to it by now."

The lawyer tapped his desk with a pencil.  "I don't know what it
looks like," he answered.  "That is to say, I don't--I can't
believe it is what it appears, at this distance, to be.  If it is,
it is the most--"

He paused.  Captain Elisha waited for him to go on and, when he did
not do so, asked another question.

"The most what?" he demanded.  "Is it likely to be very bad?"

"Why--why--well, I can't say even that yet.  But there! as I told
you, I'm not going to permit it to worry me.  And you mustn't
worry, either.  That's why I don't give you any further particulars.
There may be nothing in it, after all."

His visitor smiled.  "Say, Mr. Sylvester," he said, "you're like
the young-ones used to be when I was a boy.  There'd be a gang of
'em waitin' by the schoolhouse steps and when the particular victim
hove in sight they'd hail him with, 'Ah, ha! YOU'RE goin' to get
it!'  'Wait till teacher sees you!' and so on.  Course the victim
would want to know what it meant.  All the satisfaction he got from
them was, 'That's all right!  You'll find out!  You just wait!'
And the poor feller put in the time afore the bell rung goin' over
all the things he shouldn't have done and had, and wonderin' which
it was this time.  You hinted to me a week ago that there was a
surprisin' possibility loomin' up in 'Bije's financial affairs.
And ever since then I've been puzzlin' my brains tryin' to guess
what could happen.  Ain't discovered any more of those Cut Short
bonds, have you?"

The bonds to which he referred were those of a defunct Short Line
railroad.  A large number of these bonds had been discovered among
A. Rodgers Warren's effects; part of his "tangled assets," the
captain had termed them, differentiating from the "tangible"
variety.

"Abbie, my housekeeper, has been writin' me," he went on, "about
havin' the sewin' room papered.  She wants my advice concernin' the
style of paper; says it ought to be pretty and out of the common,
but not too expensive.  I judge what she wants is somethin' that
looks like money but ain't really wuth more than ten cents a mile.
I've been thinkin' I'd send her a bale or so of those bonds; they'd
fill the bill in those respects, wouldn't they?"

Sylvester laughed.  "They certainly would, Captain," he replied.
"No, we haven't unearthed any more of that sort.  And, as for this
mystery of ours, I'll give you the answer--if it's worth giving at
all, in a very short time.  Meanwhile, you go home and forget it."

"Well, I'll try.  But I guess it sticks out on my face, like a four
days' toothache.  But I WON'T worry about that.  You know best
whether to tell me now or not, and--well, I'm carryin' about all
the worry my tonnage'll stand, as 'tis."

He drew a long breath.  Sylvester regarded him sympathetically.

"You mustn't take your nephew's and niece's treatment too much to
heart," he said.

"Oh, I don't.  That is, I pretend I don't.  And I do try not to.
But I keep thinkin', thinkin', and wonderin' if 'twould have been
better if I hadn't gone there to live at all.  Hi hum! a man of my
age hadn't ought to mind what a twenty-year-old girl says, or does;
'specially when her kind, advisin' friends have shown her how she's
been deceived and hypocrit-ted.  By the way, speakin' of hypocrites,
I suppose there's just as much 'Dunnin'' as ever goin' on up there?"

"Yes.  A little more, if anything, I'm afraid.  Your niece and Mrs.
Dunn and her precious son are together now so constantly that
people are expecting--well, you know what they expect."

"I can guess.  I hope they'll be disapp'inted."

"So do I, but I must confess I'm fearful.  Malcolm himself isn't so
wise, but his mother is--"

"A whole Book of Proverbs, hey?  I know.  She's an able old frigate.
I did think I had her guns spiked, but she turned 'em on me
unexpected.  I thought I had her and her boy in a clove hitch.  I
knew somethin' that I was sartin sure they wouldn't want Caroline to
know, and she and Malcolm knew I knew it.  Her tellin' Caroline of
it, HER story of it, when I wasn't there to contradict, was as smart
a piece of maneuverin' as ever was.  It took the wind out of my
sails, because, though I'm just as right as I ever was, Caroline
wouldn't listen to me, nor believe me, now."

"She'll learn by experience."

"Yup.  But learnin' by experience is a good deal like shippin'
green afore the mast; it'll make an able seaman of you, if it don't
kill you fust.  When I was a boy there was a man in our town name
of Nickerson Cummin's.  He was mate of a ship and smart as a red
pepper poultice on a skinned heel.  He was a great churchgoer when
he was ashore and always preachin' brotherly love and kindness and
pattin' us little shavers on the head, and so on.  Most of the
grown fo