lks thought he was a sort of saint, and I thought he was
more than that.  I'd have worshiped him, I cal'late, if my
Methodist trainin' would have allowed me to worship anybody who
wa'n't named in Scriptur'.  If there'd been an apostle or a prophet
christened Nickerson I'd have fell on my knees to this Cummin's
man, sure.  So, when I went to sea as a cabin boy, a tow-headed
snub-nosed little chap of fourteen, I was as happy as a clam at
highwater 'cause I was goin' in the ship he was mate of."

He paused.  There was a frown on his face, and his lower jaw was
thrust forward grimly.

"Well?" inquired Sylvester.  "What happened?"

"Hey?  Oh, excuse me.  When I get to thinkin' of that v'yage I
simmer inside, like a teakettle on a hot stove.  The second day
out--seasick and homesick and so miserable I wished I could die all
at once instead of by lingerin' spasms--I dropped a dish on the
cabin floor and broke it.  Cummin's was alone with me, eatin' his
dinner; and he jumped out of his chair when I stooped to pick up
the pieces and kicked me under the table.  When I crawled out, he
kicked me again and kept it up.  When his foot got tired he used
his fist.  'There!' says he between his teeth, 'I cal'late that'll
learn you that crockery costs money.'

"It did.  I never broke anything else aboard that ship.  Cummin's
was a bully and a sneak to everybody but the old man, and a toady
to him.  He never struck me or anybody else when the skipper was
around, but there was nothin' too mean for him to do when he
thought he had a safe chance.  And he took pains to let me know
that if I ever told a soul at home he'd kill me.  I'd learned by
experience, not only about the price of crockery, but other things,
things that a youngster ought not to learn--how to hate a man so
that you can wait years to get even with him, for one.  I'm sorry I
learned that, and," dryly, "so was Cummin's, later.  But I did
learn, once and for all, not to take folks on trust, nor to size
'em up by their outside, or the noise they make in prayer-meetin',
nor the way they can spread soft soap when they think it's
necessary.  I'd learned that, and I'd learned it early enough to be
of use to me, which was a mercy.

"It was a hard lesson for me," he added, reflectively; "but I
managed to come out of it without lettin' it bitter my whole life.
I don't mind so much Caroline's bein' down on me.  She'll know
better some day, I hope; and if she don't--well, I'm only a side-
issue in her life, anyhow, hove in by accident, like the section of
dog collar in the sassage.  But I do hope her learnin' by
experience won't come too late to save her from . . . what she'll
be awful sorry for by and by."

"It must," declared the lawyer, with decision.  "You must see to
it, Captain Warren.  You are her guardian.  She is absolutely under
your charge.  She can do nothing of importance unless you consent."

"Yup.  That's so--for one more year; just one, remember!  Then
she'll be of age, and I can't say 'Boo!'  And her share of 'Bije's
money'll be hers, too.  And don't you believe that that fact has
slipped Sister Dunn's memory.  I ain't on deck to head her off now;
if she puts Malcolm up to gettin' Caroline to give her word, and
Caroline gives it--well, I know my niece.  She's honorable, and
she'll stick to her promise if it runs her on the rocks.  And Her
Majesty Dunn knows that, too.  Therefore, the cat bein' away, she
cal'lates now's the time to make sure of the cheese."

"But the cat can come back.  The song says it did, you know."

"Um-hm.  And got another kick, I shouldn't wonder.  However, my
claws'll stay sharp for a year or thereabouts, and, if it comes to
a shindy, there'll be some tall scratchin' afore I climb a tree.
Keep a weather eye on what goes on, won't you?"

"I will.  You can depend on me."

"I do.  And say! for goodness' sakes put me out of my misery
regardin' that rock or lighthouse on 'Bije's chart, soon's ever you
settle which it is."

"Certainly!  And, remember, don't worry.  It may be a lighthouse,
or nothing at all.  At all events, I'll report very soon."



CHAPTER XVI


But, in spite of his promise, Sylvester did not report during the
following week or the next.  Meanwhile, his client tried his best
to keep the new mystery from troubling his thoughts, and succeeded
only partially.  The captain's days and evenings were quiet and
monotonous.  He borrowed a book or two from Mrs. Hepton's meager
library, read, walked a good deal, generally along the water front,
and wrote daily letters to Miss Baker.  He and Pearson were
together for at least a portion of each day.  The author, fighting
down his dejection and discouragement, set himself resolutely to
work once more on the novel, and his nautical adviser was called
in for frequent consultation.  The story, however, progressed but
slowly.  There was something lacking.  Each knew what that
something was, but neither named it.

One evening Pearson entered the room tenanted by his friend to find
the latter seated beside the table, his shoes partially unlaced,
and a pair of big slippers ready for putting on.

"Captain," said the visitor, "you look so comfortable I hate to
disturb you."

Captain Elisha, red-faced and panting, desisted from the unlacing
and straightened in his chair.

"Whew!" he puffed.  "Jim, your remarks prove that your experience
of the world ain't as big as it ought to be.  When you get to my
age and waist measure you'll realize that stoopin' over and comfort
don't go together.  I hope to be comfortable pretty soon; but I
sha'n't be till them boots are off.  Set down.  The agony'll be
over in a minute."

Pearson declined to sit.  "Not yet," he said.  "And you let those
shoes alone, until you hear what I've got to say.  A newspaper
friend of mine has sent me two tickets for the opera to-night.  I
want you to go with me."

Captain Elisha was surprised.

"To the opera?" he repeated.  "Why, that's a--a sort of singin'
theater ain't it?"

"Yes, you're fond of music; you told me so.  And Aida is beautiful.
Come on! it will do us both good."

"Hum!  Well, I don't know."

"I do.  Get ready."

The captain looked at his caller's evening clothes.

"What do you mean by gettin' ready?" he asked.  "You've got on your
regimentals, open front and all.  My uniform is the huntin' case
kind; fits in better with church sociables and South Denboro
no'theasters.  If I wore one of those vests like yours Abbie'd make
me put on a red flannel lung-protector to keep from catchin'
pneumonia.  And she'd think 'twas sinful waste besides, runnin' the
risk of sp'ilin' a clean biled shirt so quick.  Won't I look like
an undertaker, sittin' alongside of you?"

"Not a bit.  If it will ease your mind I'll change to a business
suit."

"I don't care.  You know how I feel; we had a little talk about
hats a spell ago, you remember.  If you're willin' to take me 'just
as I am, without a plea,' as the hymn-tune says, why, I cal'late
I'll say yes and go.  Set down and wait while I get on my
ceremonials."

He retired to the curtain alcove, and Pearson heard him rustling
about, evidently making a hurried change of raiment.  During this
process he talked continuously.

"Jim," he said, "I ain't been to the theater but once since I
landed in New York.  Then I went to see a play named 'The Heart of
a Sailor.'  Ha! ha! that was a great show!  Ever take it in, did
you?"

"No.  I never did."

"Well, you'd ought to.  It's a wonder of it's kind.  I learned more
things about life-savin' and 'longshore life from that drayma than
you'd believe was possible.  You'd have got some p'ints for your
Cap'n Jim yarn from that play; you sartin would!  Yes, indeed!  Way
I happened to go to it was on account of seein' a poster on a fence
over nigh where that Moriarty tribe lived.  The poster pictured a
bark ashore, on her beam ends, in a sea like those off the Horn.
On the beach was a whole parcel of life-savers firin' off rockets
and blue lights.  Keepin' the Fourth of July, I judged they was,
for I couldn't see any other reason.  The bark wa'n't more'n a
hundred foot from 'em, and if all hands on board didn't know they
was in trouble by that time, then they deserved to drown.  Anyhow,
they wa'n't likely to appreciate the celebration.  Ho! ho!  Well,
when I run afoul of that poster I felt I hadn't ought to let
anything like that get away; so I hunted up the theater--it wa'n't
but a little ways off--and got a front seat for that very afternoon."

"Was it up to the advertising?" asked Pearson.

"WAS it?  Hi hum!  I wish you'd been there.  More 'special I wished
some of the folks from home had been there, for the whole business
was supposed to happen on the Cape, and they'd have realized how
ignorant we are about the place we live in.  The hero was a
strappin' six-footer, sort of a combination fisherman and parson,
seemed so.  He wore ileskins in fair weather and went around
preachin' or defyin' folks that provoked him and makin' love to
the daughter of a long-haired old relic that called himself an
inventor. . . .  Oh, consarn it!"

"What's the matter?"

"Dropped my collar button, as usual.  Collar buttons are one of the
Old Harry's pet traps.  I'll bet their responsible for 'most as
many lapses from grace as tangled fishlines.  Where . . . Ow! . . .
All right; I found it with my bare foot, and edge up, of course."

A series of grunts and short-breathed exclamations followed,
indicating that the sufferer was struggling with a tight collar.

"Go on," commanded Pearson. "Tell me some more about the play."

"Hey?  Oh, the play.  Where was I?"

"You were saying that the heroine's father was an inventor."

"That's what HE said he was, though he never furnished any proof.
His daughter helped him with his inventions, but if she'd cut his
hair once in a while 'twould have been a better way of puttin' in
the time, 'cordin' to my notion.  And there was a rich squire, who
made his money by speculatin' in wickedness, and a mortgage, and--I
don't know what all.  And those Cape Cod folks! and the houses they
lived in! and the way they talked!  Oh, dear! oh, dear!  I got my
money's wuth that afternoon."

"What about the wreck?  How did that happen?"

"Don't know.  It happened 'cause it had to be in the play, I
cal'late.  The mortgage, or an 'invention' or somethin', was on
board the bark and just naturally took a short cut for home, way I
figgered it out.  But, Jim, you ought to have seen that hero!  He
peeled off his ileskin-slicker--he'd kept it on all through the
sunshine, but now, when 'twas rainin' and rainin' and wreckin' and
thunderin', he shed it--and jumped in and saved all hands and the
ship's cat.  'Twas great business!  No wonder the life-savers set
off fireworks!  And thunder!  Why, say, it never stopped thunderin'
in that storm except when somebody had to make a heroic speech;
then it let up and give 'em a chance.  Most considerate thunder
ever I heard.  And the lightnin'! and the way the dust flew from
the breakers!  I was glad I went. . . .  There!" appearing fully
dressed from behind the curtains.  "I'm ready if you are.  Did I
talk your head off?  I ask your pardon; but that 'Heart of a
Sailor' touched mine, I guess.  I know I was afraid I'd laugh until
it stopped beatin'.  And all around the people were cryin'.  It was
enough sight damper amongst the seats than in those cloth waves."

The pair walked over to Broadway, boarded a street car, and
alighted before the Metropolitan Opera House.  Pearson's seats were
good ones, well down in the orchestra.  Captain Elisha turned and
surveyed the great interior and the brilliantly garbed audience.

"Whew!" he muttered.  "This is considerable of a show in itself,
Jim.  They could put our town hall inside here and the folks on the
roof wouldn't be so high as those in that main skys'l gallery up
aloft there.  Can they see or hear, do you think?"

"Oh, yes.  The accepted idea is that they are the real music
lovers.  THEY come for the opera itself.  Some of the others come
because--well, because it is the proper thing."

"Yes, yes; I see.  That's the real article right over our heads, I
suppose."

"Yes.  That's the 'Diamond Horseshoe.'"

"All proper things there, hey?"

"Why--er--yes, I suppose so.  What makes you ask?"

"Nothing much.  I was thinking 'twas better Abbie wa'n't along on
this cruise.  She'd probably want to put an 'im' in front of that
'proper.'  I envy those women, Jim; THEY didn't have to stop to
hunt up collar buttons, did they."

He was silent during the first act of the opera.  When the curtain
fell his companion asked how he liked it.

"Good singin'," he replied; "best I ever heard.  Do you understand
what they say?"

"No.  But I'm familiar with the story of Aida, of course.  It's a
favorite of mine.  And the words don't really matter."

"I suppose not.  It's the way they say it.  I had an Irishman
workin' round my barn once, and Tim Bailey drove down from Bayport
to see me.  I was out and Tim and the Irishman run afoul of each
other.  Tim stuttered so that he made a noise when he talked like
one of these gasoline bicycles goin' by.  He watched Mike sweepin'
out the horse stall and he says, 'You're a pup--pup . . . I say
you're a pup--.'  He didn't get any further 'cause Mike went for
him with the broom.  Turned out later that he was tryin' to
compliment that Irishman by sayin' he was a particular sort of
feller.  These folks on the stage might be sayin' most anythin',
and I wouldn't know it.  But I sha'n't knock 'em down, for I like
the way it's said.  When the Almighty give us music he more than
made up for makin' us subject to toothache, didn't he."

Pearson bought a copy of the libretto, and the captain followed the
performance of the next two acts with interest.

"Say, Jim," he whispered, with a broad grin, "it's a good thing
this opera idea ain't carried into real life.  If you had to sing
every word you said 'twould be sort of distressin', 'specially if
you was in a hurry.  A fust-rate solo when you was orderin' the
crew to shorten sail would be a high old brimstone anthem, I'll bet
you.  And think of the dinner table at our boardin' house!  Mrs.
Van and C. Dickens both goin' at once, and Marm Hepton serenadin'
the waiter girl!  Ho! ho!  A cat fight wouldn't be a circumstance."

Between the third and the fourth acts the pair went out into the
foyer, where, ascending to the next floor, they made the round of
the long curve behind the boxes, Pearson pointing out to his friend
the names of the box lessees on the brass plates.

"There!" he observed, as, the half circle completed, they turned
and strolled back again, "isn't that an imposing list, Captain?
Don't you feel as if you were close to the real thing?"

"Godfreys mighty!" was the solemn reply; "I was just thinkin' I
felt as if I'd been readin' one of those muck-rakin' yarns in the
magazines!"

The foyer had its usual animated crowd, and among them Pearson
recognized a critic of his acquaintance.  He offered to introduce
the captain, but the latter declined the honor, saying that he
cal'lated he wouldn't shove his bows in this time.  "You heave
ahead and see your friend, Jim," he added.  "I'll come to anchor by
this pillar and watch the fleet go by.  I'll have to write Abbie
about all this; she'll want to know how the female craft was
rigged."

Left alone, he leaned against the pillar and watched the people
pass and repass just behind him.  Two young men paused just behind
him.  He could not help overhearing their conversation.

"I presume you've heard the news?" asked one, casually.

"Yes," replied the other, "I have.  That is, if you mean the news
concerning Mal Dunn.  The mater learned it this afternoon and
sprung it at dinner.  No one was greatly surprised.  Formal
announcement made, and all that sort of thing, I believe.  Mal's
to be congratulated."

"His mother is, you mean.  She managed the campaign.  The old lady
is some strategist, and I'd back her to win under ordinary
circumstances.  But I understand these were not ordinary; wise owl
of a guardian to be circumvented, or something of that sort."

"From what I hear the Dunns haven't won so much after all.  There
was a big shrinkage when papa died, so they say.  Instead of three
or four millions it panned out to be a good deal less than one.  I
don't know much about it, because our family and theirs have
drifted apart since they moved."

"Humph!  I imagine whatever the pan-out it will be welcome.  The
Dunns are dangerously close to the ragged edge; everybody has been
on to that for some time.  And it takes a few ducats to keep Mal
going.  He's no Uncle Russell when it comes to putting by for the
rainy day."

"Well, on the whole, I'm rather sorry for--the other party.  Mal is
a good enough fellow, and he certainly is a game sport; but--"

They moved on, and Captain Elisha heard no more.  But what he had
heard was quite sufficient.  He sat through the remainder of the
opera in silence and answered all his friend's questions and
remarks curtly and absently.

As they stepped into the trolley Pearson bought an evening paper,
not the Planet, but a dignified sheet which shunned sensationalism
and devoted much space to the doings of the safe, sane, and ultra-
respectable element.  Perceiving that his companion, for some
reason, did not care to talk, he read as the car moved downtown.
Suddenly Captain Elisha was awakened from his reverie by hearing
his friend utter an exclamation.  Looking up, the captain saw that
he was leaning back in the seat, the paper lying unheeded in his
lap.

"What's the matter?" asked the older man, anxiously.

Pearson started, glanced quickly at his friend, hesitated, and
looked down again.

"Nothing--now," he answered, brusquely.  "We get out here.  Come."

He rose, picked up the paper with a hand that shook a little, and
led the way to the door of the car.  Captain Elisha followed, and
they strode up the deserted side street.  Pearson walked so rapidly
that his companion was hard pushed to keep pace with him.  When
they stood together in the dimly lit hall of the boarding house,
the captain spoke again.

"Well, Jim," he asked in a low tone, "what is it?  You may as well
tell me.  Maybe I can guess, anyhow."

The young man reached up and turned the gas full on.  In spite of
the cold from which they had just come, his face was white.  He
folded the paper in his hand, and with his forefinger pointed to
its uppermost page.

"There it is," he said.  "Read it."

Captain Elisha took the paper, drew his spectacle case from his
pocket, adjusted his glasses and read.  The item was among those
under the head of "Personal and Social."  It was what he expected.
"The engagement is to-day announced of Miss Caroline Warren,
daughter of the late A. Rodgers Warren, the well-known broker, to
Mr. Malcolm Corcoran Dunn, of Fifth Avenue.  Miss Warren, it will
be remembered, was one of the most charming of our season-before-
last's debutantes and--" etc.

The captain read the brief item through.

"Yes," he said, slowly, "I see."

Pearson looked at him in amazement.

"You SEE!" he repeated.  "You--Why!  DID YOU KNOW IT?"

"I've been afraid of it for some time.  To-night, when you left me
alone there in the quarter-deck of that opera house, I happened to
hear two young chaps talkin' about it.  So you might say I knew--
Yes."

"Good heavens! and you can stand there and--What are you going to
do about it?"

"I don't know--yet."

"Are you going to permit her to marry that--THAT fellow?"

"Well, I ain't sartin that I can stop her."

"My God, man!  Do you realize--and SHE--your niece--why--"

"There! there! Jim.  I realize it all, I cal'late.  It's my
business to realize it."

"And it isn't mine.  No, of course it isn't; you're right there."

He turned and strode toward the foot of the stairs.

"Hold on!" commanded the captain.  "Hold on, Jim!  Don't you go off
ha'f cocked.  When I said 'twas my business to realize this thing,
I meant just that and nothin' more.  I wa'n't hintin', and you
ought to know it.  You do know it, don't you?"

The young man paused.  "Yes," he answered, after an instant's
struggle with his feelings; "yes, I do.  I beg your pardon,
Captain."

"All right.  And here's somethin' else; I just told you I wasn't
sartin I could stop the marriage.  That's the truth.  But I don't
recollect sayin' I'd actually hauled down the colors, not yet.
Good night."

"Good night, Captain.  I shouldn't have misunderstood you, of
course.  But, as you know, I respected and admired your niece.
And this thing has--has--"

"Sort of knocked you on your beam ends, I understand.  Well, Jim,"
with a sigh, "I ain't exactly on an even keel myself."

They separated, Pearson going to his room.  As Captain Elisha was
passing through the hall on the second floor, he heard someone
calling him by name.  Turning, he saw his landlady's head,
bristling with curl papers, protruding from behind the door at
the other end of the passage.

"Captain Warren," she asked, "is that you?"

"Yes, ma'am," replied the captain, turning back.

"Well, I've got a message for you.  A Mr. Sylvester has 'phoned you
twice this evening.  He wishes to see you at his office at the
earliest possible moment.  He says it is VERY important."



CHAPTER XVII


Nine o'clock is an early hour for a New York lawyer of prominence
to be at his place of business.  Yet, when Captain Elisha asked the
office boy of Sylvester, Kuhn and Graves if the senior partner was
in, he received an affirmative answer.

"Yes, sir," said Tim, respectfully.  His manner toward the captain
had changed surprisingly since the latter's first call.  "Yes, sir;
Mr. Sylvester's in.  He expects you.  I'll tell him you're here.
Sit down and wait, please."

Captain Elisha sat down, but he did not have to wait long.  The
boy returned at once and ushered him into the private office.
Sylvester welcomed him gravely.

"You got my message, then," he said.  "I spent hours last evening
chasing you by 'phone.  And I was prepared to begin again this
morning."

"So?  That's why you're on deck so early?  Didn't sleep here, did
you?  Well, I cal'late I know what you want to talk about.  You
ain't the only one that reads the newspapers."

"The newspapers?  Great heavens! it isn't in the newspapers, is it?
It can't be!"

He seemed much perturbed.  Captain Elisha looked puzzled.

"Course it is," he said.  "But I heard it afore I saw it.  Perhaps
you think I take it pretty easy.  Maybe I act as if I did.  But you
expected it, and so did I, so we ain't exactly surprised.  And,"
seriously, "I realize that it's no joke as well as you do.  But
we've got a year to fight in, and now we must plan the campaign.
I did cal'late to see Caroline this mornin'.  Then, if I heard from
her own lips that 'twas actually so, I didn't know's I wouldn't
drop in and give Sister Corcoran-Queen-Victoria-Dunn a few plain
facts about it not bein' a healthy investment to hurry matters.
You're wantin' to see me headed me off, and I come here instead."

The lawyer looked at him in astonishment.

"See here, Captain Warren," he demanded, "what do you imagine I
asked you to come here for?"

"Why, to talk about that miserable engagement, sartin.  Poor girl!
I've been awake ha'f the night thinkin' of the mess she's been led
into.  And she believes she's happy, I suppose."

Sylvester shook his head.  "I see," he said, slowly.  "You would
think it that, naturally.  No, Captain, it isn't the engagement.
It's more serious than that."

"More serious than--MORE serious!  Why, what on earth?  Hey?  Mr.
Sylvester, has that rock-lighthouse business come to somethin'
after all?"

The lawyer nodded.  "It has," he replied.

"I want to know!  And I'd almost forgot it, not hearin' from you.
It's a rock, too, I judge, by the looks of your face.  Humph! . . .
Is it very bad?"

"I'm afraid so."

The captain pulled his beard.  "Well," he said, wearily, after a
moment, "I guess likely I can bear it.  I've had to bear some
things in my time.  Anyhow, I'll try.  Heave ahead and get it over
with.  I'm ready."

Instead of answering, Sylvester pushed an electric button on his
desk.  The office boy answered the ring.

"Have Mr. Kuhn and Mr. Graves arrived?" asked the lawyer.

"Yes, sir.  Both of them, sir."

"Tell them Captain Warren is here, and ask them to join us in the
inner room.  Remind Mr. Graves to bring the papers.  And, Tim,
remember that none of us is to be disturbed.  Do you understand?"

"Yes, sir," said Tim and departed.

Captain Elisha regarded his friend with some dismay.

"Say!" he exclaimed, "this MUST be serious, if it takes the skipper
and both mates to handle it."

Sylvester did not smile.  "It is," he answered.  "Come."

He led the way into the room opening from the rear of his own.  It
was a large apartment with a long table in the center.  Mr. Kuhn,
brisk and business-like, was already there.  He shook hands with
his client.  As he did so, Graves, dignified and precise as ever,
entered, carrying a small portfolio filled with papers.

"Mornin', Mr. Graves," said the captain; "glad to see you, even
under such distressin' circumstances, as the undertaker said to the
sick man.  Feelin' all right again, I hope.  No more colds or
nothin' like that?"

"No.  Thank you.  I am quite well, at present."

"That's hearty.  If you and me don't do any more buggy ridin' in
Cape Cod typhoons, we'll last a spell yet, hey?  What you got
there, the death warrant?" referring to the portfolio and its
contents.

Mr. Graves evidently did not consider this flippancy worth a reply,
for he made none.

"Sit down, gentlemen," said Sylvester.

The four took chairs at the table.  Graves untied and opened the
portfolio.  Captain Elisha looked at his solemn companions, and his
lips twitched.

"You'll excuse me," he observed, "but I feel as if I was goin' to
be tried for piracy on the high seas.  Has the court any objection
to tobacco smoke?  I'm puttin' the emphasis strong on the 'tobacco,'"
he added, "because this is a cigar you give me yourself, Mr.
Sylvester, last time I was down here."

"No, indeed," replied the senior partner.  "Smoke, if you wish.  No
one here has any objection, unless it may be Graves."

"Oh, Mr. Graves ain't.  He and I fired up together that night we
fust met.  Hot smoke tasted grateful after all the cold water we'd
had poured onto us in that storm.  Graves is all right.  He's a
sportin' character, like myself.  Maybe he'll jine us.  Got another
cigar in my pocket."

But the invitation was declined.  The "sporting character" might
deign to relax amid proper and fitting surroundings, but not in the
sacred precincts of his office.  So the captain smoked alone.

"Well," he observed, after a few preliminary puffs, "go on!  Don't
keep me in suspenders, as the feller said.  Where did the lightnin'
strike, and what's the damage?"

Sylvester took a card from his pocket and referred to a penciled
memorandum on its back.

"Captain Warren," he began, slowly, "as you know, and as directed
by you, my partners here and I have been engaged for months in
carefully going over your brother's effects, estimating values,
tabulating and sorting his various properties and securities,
separating the good from the worthless--and there was, as we saw
at a glance, a surprising amount of the latter--"

"Um-hm," interrupted the captain, "Cut Short bonds and the like of
that.  I know.  Excuse me.  Go on."

"Yes.  Precisely.  And there were many just as valueless.  But we
have been gradually getting those out of the way and listing and
appraising the remainder.  It was a tangle.  Your brother's
business methods, especially of late years, were decidedly
unsystematic and slipshod.  It may have been the condition of his
health which prevented his attending to them as he should.  Or," he
hesitated slightly, "it may have been that he was secretly in great
trouble and mental distress.  At all events, the task has been a
hard one for us.  But, largely owing to Graves and his patient
work, our report was practically ready a month ago."

He paused.  Captain Elisha, who had been listening attentively,
nodded.

"Yes," he said; "you told me 'twas.  What does the whole thing tot
up to?  What's the final figger, Mr. Graves?"

The junior partner adjusted his eyeglasses to his thin nose.

"I have them here," he said.  "The list of securities, et cetera,
is rather long, but--"

"Never mind them now, Graves," interrupted Kuhn.  "The amount,
roughly speaking, is close to over our original estimate, half a
million."

The captain drew a breath of relief.  "Well," he exclaimed, "that's
all right then, ain't it?  That's no poorhouse pension."

Sylvester answered.  "Yes," he said, "that's all right, as far as
it goes."

"Humph!  Well, I cal'late _I_ could make it go to the end of the
route; and then have enough left for a return ticket.  Say!" with
another look at the solemn faces of the three, "what IS the row?
If the estate is wuth ha'f a million, what's the matter with it?"

"That is what we are here this morning to discuss, Captain.  A
month ago, as I said, we considered our report practically ready.
Then we suddenly happened on the trail of something which, upon
investigation, upset all our calculations.  If true, it threatened,
not to mention its effect upon the estate, to prove so distressing
and painful to us, Rodgers Warren's friends and legal advisers,
that we decided not to alarm you, his brother, by disclosing our
suspicions until we were sure there was no mistake.  I did drop you
a hint, you will remember--"

"I remember.  NOW we're comin' to the rock!"

"Yes.  Captain Warren, I think perhaps I ought to warn you that
what my partners and I are about to say will shock and hurt you.
I, personally, knew your brother well and respected him as an
honorable business man.  A lawyer learns not to put too much trust
in human nature, but, I confess, this--this--"

He was evidently greatly disturbed.  Captain Elisha, regarding him
intently, nodded.

"I judge it's sort of hard for you to go on, Mr. Sylvester," he
said.  "I'll help you all I can.  You and Mr. Kuhn and Mr. Graves
here have found out somethin' that ain't exactly straight in
'Bije's doin's?  Am I right?"

"Yes, Captain Warren, you are."

"Somethin' that don't help his character, hey?"

"Yes."

"Somethin's he's, done that's--well, to speak plain, that's crooked?"

"I'm afraid there's no doubt of it."

"Humph!"  The captain frowned.  His cigar had gone out, and he idly
twisted the stump between his fingers.  "Well," he said, with a
sigh, "our family, gen'rally speakin', has always held its head
pretty high.  Dad was poor, but he prided himself on bein' straight
as a plumb line.  And, as for mother, she . . . "  Then, looking up
quickly, he asked, "Does anybody outside know about this?"

"No one but ourselves--yet."

"Yet?  Is it goin' to be necessary for anybody else to know it?"

"We hope not.  But there is a possibility."

"I was thinkin' about the children."

"Of course.  So are we all."

"Um-hm.  Poor Caroline! she put her father on a sort of altar and
bowed down afore him, as you might say.  Any sort of disgrace to
his name would about kill her.  As for me," with another sigh, "I
ain't so much surprised as you might think.  I know that sounds
tough to say about your own brother, but I've been afraid all
along.  You see, 'Bije always steered pretty close to the edge of
the channel.  He had ideas about honesty and fair dealin' in
business that didn't jibe with mine.  We split on just that, as I
told you, Mr. Graves, when you and I fust met.  He got some South
Denboro folks to invest money along with him; sort of savin's
account, they figgered it; but I found out he was usin' it to
speculate with.  So that's why we had our row.  I took pains to see
that the money was paid back, but he and I never spoke afterwards.
Fur as my own money was concerned, I hadn't any kick, but . . .
However, I'm talkin' too much.  Go on, Mr. Sylvester, I'm ready to
hear whatever you've got to say."

"Thank you, Captain.  You make it easier for me.  It seems that
your brother's first step toward wealth and success was taken about
nineteen years ago.  Then, somehow or other, probably through a
combination of luck and shrewdness, he obtained a grant, a
concession from the Brazilian Government, the long term lease of a
good-sized tract of land on the upper Amazon.  It was very valuable
because of its rubber trees."

"Hey?"  Captain Elisha leaned forward.  "Say that again!" he
commanded sharply.

Sylvester repeated his statement.  "He got the concession by paying
twenty thousand dollars to the government of Brazil," he continued.
"To raise the twenty thousand he formed a stock company of two
hundred and fifty shares at one hundred dollars each.  One hundred
of these shares were in his own name.  Fifty were in the name of
one 'Thomas A. Craven,' a clerk at that time in his office.  Craven
was only a dummy, however.  Do you understand what I mean by a
dummy?"

"I can guess.  Sort of a wooden image that moved when 'Bije pulled
the strings.  Like one of these straw directors that clutter up the
insurance companies, 'cordin' to the papers.  Yes, yes; I understand
well enough.  Go ahead! go ahead!"

"That's it.  The fifty shares were in Craven's name, but they were
transferred in blank and in Mr. Warren's safe.  Together with his
own hundred, they gave him control and a voting majority.  That
much we know by the records."

"I see.  But this rubber con--contraption wa'n't really wuth
anything, was it?"

"Worth anything!  Captain Warren, I give you my word that it was
worth more than all the rest of the investments that your brother
made during his lifetime."

"NO!"  The exclamation was almost a shout.

"Why, yes, decidedly more.  Does that surprise you, Captain?"

Captain Elisha did not answer.  He was regarding the lawyer with a
dazed expression.  He breathed heavily.

"What's the matter?" demanded the watchful Kuhn, his gaze fixed
upon his client's face.  "Do you know anything--"

The captain interrupted him.  "Go on!" he commanded.  "But tell me
this fust:  What was the name of this rubber concern of 'Bije's?"

"The Akrae Rubber Company."

"I see. . . .  Yes, yes. . . .  Akry, hey! . . .  Well, what about
it?  Tell me the rest."

"For the first year or two this company did nothing.  Then, in
March, of the third year, the property was released by Mr. Warren
to persons in Para, who were to develop and operate.  The terms of
his new lease were very advantageous.  Royalties were to be paid on
a sliding scale, and, from the very first, they were large.  The
Akrae Company paid enormous dividends."

"Did, hey?  I want to know!"

"Yes.  In fact, for twelve years the company's royalties averaged
$50,000 yearly."

"Whe-e-w!" Captain Elisha whistled.  "Fifty thousand a year!" he
repeated slowly.  "'Bije!  'Bije!"

"Yes.  And three years ago the Akrae Company sold its lease, sold
out completely to the Para people, for seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars."

"Godfreys mighty!  Well," after a moment, "that's what I'd call a
middlin' fair profit on a twenty thousand dollar investment--not to
mention the dividends."

"Captain," Sylvester leaned forward now; "Captain," he repeated,
"it is that sale and the dividends which are troubling us.  I told
you that the Akrae Company was organized with two hundred and fifty
shares of stock.  Your brother held one hundred in his own name and
fifty transferred to him by his dummy, Craven.  What I did not tell
you was that there were another hundred shares, held by someone,
someone who paid ten thousand dollars for them--we know that--and
was, therefore, entitled to two-fifths of every dollar earned by
the company during its existence, and two-fifths of the amount
received for the sale of the lease.  So far as we can find out,
this stockholder has never received one cent."

The effect of this amazing announcement upon the uniniated member
of the council was not as great as the lawyers expected it to be.
"You don't tell me!" was his sole comment.

Graves broke in impatiently:  "I think, Captain Warren," he declared,
"that you probably do not realize what this means.  Besides proving
your brother dishonest, it means that this stockholder, whoever
he may have been--"

"Hey?  What's that?  Don't you know who he was?"

"No, we do not.  The name upon the stub of the transfer book has
been scratched out."

Captain Elisha looked the speaker in the face, then slowly turned
his look upon the other two faces.

"Scratched out?" he repeated.  "Who scratched it out?"

Graves shrugged his shoulders.

"Yes, yes," said the captain.  "You don't know, but we're all
entitled to guess, hey? . . .  Humph!"

"If this person is living," began Sylvester, "it follows that--"

"Hold on a minute!  I don't know much about corporations, of
course--that's more in your line than 'tis in mine--but I want to
ask one question.  You say this what-d'ye-call-it--this Akrae
thingamajig--was sold out, hull, canvas and riggin', to a crowd in
Brazil?  It's gone out of business then?  It's dead?"

"Yes.  But--"

"Wait!  Ain't it customary, when a sale like this is made, to turn
over all the stock, certificates and all?  Sometimes you get stock
in the new company in exchange; I know that.  But to complete the
trade, wouldn't this extry hundred shares be turned in?  Or some
sharp questionin' done if 'twa'n't?"

He addressed the query to Sylvester.  The latter seemed more
troubled than before.

"That," he said with some hesitation, "is one of the delicate
points in this talk of ours, Captain Warren.  A certificate for the
missing hundred shares WAS turned in.  It was dated at the time of
the original issue, made out in the name of one Edward Bradley, and
transferred on the back by him to your brother.  That is, it was
presumably so transferred."

"Presumably.  Pre-sumably?  You mean--?"

"I mean that this certificate is--well, let us say, rather queer.
To begin with, no one knows who this Bradley is, or was.  His name
appears nowhere except on that certificate, unless, of course, it
did appear on the stub where the scratching has been done; we doubt
that, for reasons.  Nobody ever heard of the man; and his transfer
to your brother was made, and the certificate signed by him, only
three years ago, when the Akrae Company sold out.  It will take too
long to go into details; but thanks to the kindness of the Para
concern, which has offices in this city--we have been able to
examine this Bradley certificate.  Experts have examined it, also.
And they tell us--"

He paused.

"Well, what do they tell?" demanded the captain.

"They tell us that--that, in their opinion, the certificate was
never issued at the time when, by this date, it presumes to have
been.  It was made out no longer ago than five years, probably
less.  The signature of Bradley on the back is--is--well, I hate
to say it, Captain Warren, but the handwriting on that signature
resembles very closely that of your brother."

Captain Elisha was silent for some moments.  The others did not
speak, but waited.  Even Graves, between whom and his client there
was little in common, felt the general sympathy.

At length the captain raised his head.

"Well," he said slowly, "we ain't children.  We might as well call
things by their right names.  'Bije forged that certificate."

"I'm afraid there is no doubt of it."

"Dear! dear! dear!  Why, they put folks in state's, prison for
that!"

"Yes.  But a dead man is beyond prisons."

"That's so.  Then I don't see--"

"You will.  You don't grasp the full meaning of this affair even
yet.  If the Bradley certificate is a forgery, a fraud from
beginning to end, then the presumption is that there was never any
such person as Bradley.  But SOMEONE paid ten thousand dollars for
one hundred Akrae shares when the company was formed.  THAT
certificate has never been turned in.  Some person or persons,
somewhere, hold one hundred shares of Akrae Rubber Company stock.
Think, now!  Suppose that someone turns up and demands all that he
has been cheated out of for the past seventeen years!  Think of
that!"

"Well . . . I am thinkin' of it.  I got the scent of what you was
drivin' at five minutes ago.  And I don't see that we need to be
afraid.  He could have put 'Bije in jail; but 'Bije is already
servin' a longer sentence than he could give him.  So that disgrace
ain't bearin' down on us.  And, if I understand about such things,
his claim is against the Akrae Company, and that's dead--dead as
the man that started it.  Maybe he could put in a keeper, or a
receiver, or some such critter, but there's nothin' left to keep or
receive.  Ain't I right?"

"You are.  Or you would be, but for one thing, the really
inexplicable thing in this whole miserable affair.  Your brother,
Captain Warren, was dishonest.  He took money that didn't belong to
him, and he forged that certificate.  But he must have intended to
make restitution.  He must have been conscience-stricken and more
to be pitied, perhaps, than condemned.  No doubt, when he first
began to withhold the dividends and use the money which was not
his, he intended merely to borrow.  He was always optimistic and
always plunging in desperate and sometimes rather shady speculations
which, he was sure, would turn out favorably.  If they had--if, for
instance, the South Shore Trolley Combine had been put through--You
knew of that, did you?"

"I've been told somethin' about it.  Go on!"

"Well, it was not put through, so his hopes there were frustrated.
And that was but one of his schemes.  However, when the sale of the
Company was consummated, he did an extraordinary thing.  He made
out and signed his personal note, payable to the Akrae Company, for
every cent he had misappropriated.  And we found that note in his
safe after his death.  That was what first aroused our suspicions.
NOW, Captain Warren, do you understand?"

Captain Elisha did not understand, that was evident.  His look of
wondering amazement traveled from one face to the others about the
table.

"A NOTE!" he repeated.  "'Bije put his NOTE in the safe?  A note
promisin' to pay all he'd stole!  And left it there where it could
be found?  Why, that's pretty nigh unbelievable, Mr. Sylvester!  He
might just as well have confessed his crookedness and be done with
it."

"Yes.  It is unbelievable, but it is true.  Graves can show you the
note."

The junior partner produced a slip of paper from the portfolio and
regarded it frowningly.

"Of all the pieces of sheer lunacy," he observed, "that ever came
under my observation, this is the worst.  Here it is, Captain
Warren."

He extended the paper.  Captain Elisha waved it aside.

"I don't want to see it--not yet," he protested.  "I want to think.
I want to get at the reason if I can.  Why did he do it?"

"That is what we've been tryin' to find--the reason, remarked Kuhn,
"and we can only guess.  Sylvester has told you the guess.  Rodgers
Warren intended, or hoped, to make restitution before he died."

"Yes.  Knowin' 'Bije, I can see that.  He was weak, that was his
main trouble.  He didn't mean to be crooked, but his knees wa'n't
strong enough to keep him straight when it come to a hard push.
But he made his note payable to a Company that was already sold
out, so it ain't good for nothin'.  Now, why--"

Graves struck the table with his open hand.

"He doesn't understand at all," he exclaimed, impatiently.
"Captain Warren, listen!  That note is made payable to the Akrae
Company.  Against that company some unknown stockholder has an
apparent claim for two-fifths of all dividends ever paid and two-
fifths of the seven hundred and fifty thousand received for the
sale.  With accrued interest, that claim amounts to over five
hundred thousand dollars."

"Yes, but--"

"That note binds Rodgers Warren's estate to pay that claim.  His
own personal estate!  And that estate is not worth over four
hundred and sixty thousand dollars!  If this stockholder should
appear and press his claim, your brother's children would be, not
only penniless, but thirty thousand dollars in debt!  There!  I
think that is plain enough!"

He leaned back, grimly satisfied with the effect of his statement.
Captain Elisha stared straight before him, unseeingly, the color
fading from his cheeks.  Then he put both elbows on the table and
covered his face with his hands.

"You see, Captain," said Sylvester, gently, "how very serious the
situation is.  Graves has put it bluntly, but what he says is
literally true.  If your brother had deliberately planned to hand
his children over to the mercy of that missing stockholder, he
couldn't have done it more completely."

Slowly the captain raised his head.  His expression was a strange
one; agitated and shocked, but with a curious look of relief,
almost of triumph.

"At last!" he said, solemnly.  "At last!  Now it's ALL plain!"

"All?" repeated Sylvester.  "You mean--?"

"I mean everything, all that's been puzzlin' me and troublin' my
head since the very beginnin'.  All of it!  NOW I know why!  Oh,
'Bije!  'Bije!  'Bije!"

Kuhn spoke quickly.

"Captain," he said, "I believe you know who the owner of that one
hundred shares is.  Do you?"

Captain Elisha gravely nodded.

"Yes," he answered.  "I know him."

"What?"

"You do?"

"Who is it?

The questions were blurted out together.  The captain looked at the
three excited faces.  He hesitated and then, taking the stub of a
pencil from his pocket, drew toward him a memorandum pad lying on
the table and wrote a line upon the uppermost sheet.  Tearing off
the page, he tossed it to Sylvester.

"That's the name," he said.



CHAPTER XVIII


Two more hours passed before the lawyers and their client rose from
their seats about the long table.  Even then the consultation was
not at an end.  Sylvester and the Captain lunched together at the
Central Club and sat in the smoking room until after four, talking
earnestly.  When they parted, the attorney was grave and troubled.

"All right, Captain Warren," he said; "I'll do it.  And you may be
right.  I certainly hope you are.  But I must confess I don't look
forward to my task with pleasure.  I think I've got the roughest
end."

"It'll be rough, there's no doubt about that.  Rough for all hands,
I guess.  And I hope you understand, Mr. Sylvester, that there
ain't many men I'd trust to do what I ask you to.  I appreciate
your doin' it more'n I can tell you.  Be as--as gentle as you can,
won't you?"

"I will.  You can depend upon that."

"I do.  And I sha'n't forget it.  Good-by, till the next time."

They shook hands.  Captain Elisha returned to the boarding house,
where he found a letter awaiting him.  It was from Caroline,
telling him of her engagement to Malcolm Dunn.  She wrote that,
while not recognizing his right to interfere in any way, she felt
that perhaps he should know of her action.  He did not go down to
supper, and, when Pearson came to inquire the reason, excused
himself, pleading a late luncheon and no appetite.  He guessed he
would turn in early, so he said.  It was a poor guess.

Next morning he went uptown.  Edwards, opening the door of the
Warren apartment, was surprised to find who had rung the bell.

"Mornin', Commodore!" hailed the captain, as casually as if he were
merely returning from a stroll.  "Is Miss Caroline aboard ship?"

"Why--why, I don't know, sir.  I'll see."

"That's all right.  She's aboard or you wouldn't have to see.  You
and me sailed together quite a spell, so I know your little habits.
I'll wait in the library, Commodore.  Tell her there's no
particular hurry."

His niece was expecting him.  She had anticipated his visit and was
prepared for it.  From the emotion caused by his departure after
the eventful birthday, she had entirely recovered, or thought she
had.  The surprise and shock of his leaving and the consequent
sense of loneliness and responsibility overcame her at the time,
but Stephen's ridicule and Mrs. Corcoran Dunn's congratulations
on riddance from the "encumbrance" shamed her and stilled the
reproaches of her conscience.  Mrs. Dunn, as always, played the
diplomat and mingled just the proper quantity of comprehending
sympathy with the congratulations.

"I understand exactly how you feel, my dear," she said.  "You have
a tender heart, and it pains you to hurt anyone's feelings, no
matter how much they deserve to be hurt.  Every time I dismiss an
incompetent or dishonest servant I feel that I have done wrong;
sometimes I cry, actually shed tears, you know, and yet my reason
tells me I am right.  You feel that you may have been too harsh
with that guardian of yours.  You remember what you said to him and
forget how hypocritically he behaved toward you.  I can't forgive
him that.  I may forget how he misrepresented Malcolm and me to
you--that I may even pardon, in time--but to deceive his own
brother's children and introduce into their society a creature who
had slandered and maligned their father--THAT I never shall forget
or forgive.  And--you'll excuse my frankness, dear--you should
never forget or forgive it, either.  You have nothing with which to
reproach yourself.  You were a brave girl, and if you are not proud
of yourself, _I_ am proud of you."

So, when her uncle was announced, Caroline was ready.  She entered
the library and acknowledged his greeting with a distant bow.  He
regarded her kindly, but his manner was grave.

"Well, Caroline," he began, "I got your letter."

"Yes, I presumed you did."

"Um-hm.  I got it.  It didn't surprise me, what you wrote, because
I'd seen the news in the papers; but I was hopin' you'd tell me
yourself, and I'm real glad you did.  I'm much obliged to you."

She had not expected him to take this tone, and it embarrassed her.

"I--I gave you my reasons for writing," she said.  "Although I do
not consider that I am, in any sense, duty bound to refer matters,
other than financial, to you; and, although my feelings toward you
have not changed--still, you are my guardian, and--and--"

"I understand.  So you're really engaged?"

"Yes."

"Engaged to Mr. Dunn?"

"Yes."

"And you're cal'latin' to marry him?"

"One might almost take that for granted," impatiently.

"Almost--yes.  Not always, but generally, I will give in.  You're
goin' to marry Malcolm Dunn.  Why?"

"Why?" she repeated the question as if she doubted his sanity.

"Yes.  Be as patient with me as you can, Caroline.  I ain't askin'
these things without what seems to me a good reason.  Why are you
goin' to marry him?"

"Why because I choose, I suppose."

"Um-hm.  Are you sure of that?"

"Am I sure?" indignantly.  "What do you mean?"

"I mean are you sure that it's because you choose, or because HE
does, or maybe, because his mother does?"

She turned angrily away.  "If you came here to insult me--" she
began.  He interrupted her.

"No, no," he protested gently.  "Insultin' you is the last thing I
want to do.  But, as your father did put you in my charge, I want
you to bear with me while we talk this over together.  Remember,
Caroline, I ain't bothered you a great deal lately.  I shouldn't
now if I hadn't thought 'twas necessary.  So please don't get mad,
but answer me this:  Do you care for this man you've promised to
marry?"

This was a plain question.  It should have been answered without
the slightest hesitation.  Moreover, the girl had expected him to
ask it.  Yet, for a moment, she did hesitate.

"I mean," continued Captain Elisha, "do you care for him ENOUGH?"
Enough to live with him all your life, and see him every day, and
be to him what a true wife ought to be?  See him, not with his
company manners on or in his automobile, but at the breakfast
table, and when he comes home tired and cross, maybe.  When you've
got to be forbearin' and forgivin' and--"

"He is one of my oldest and best friends--" she interrupted.  Her
uncle went on without waiting for her to end the sentence.

"I know," he said.  "One of the oldest, that's sure.  But
friendship, 'cordin' to my notion, is somethin' so small in
comparison that it hardly counts in the manifest.  Married folks
ought to be friends, sartin sure; but they ought to be a whole lot
more'n that.  I'm an old bach, you say, and ain't had no experience.
That's true; but I've been young, and there was a time when _I_ made
plans . . .  However, she died, and it never come to nothin'.  But I
KNOW what it means to be engaged, the right kind of engagement.  It
means that you don't count 