ward and embarrassing.

"My heart!" she said, gasping, and with a clutch at her breast.
"My poor heart!  I--I fear I'm going to have one of my attacks.
Malcolm, your arm--quick!"

With an expression of intense but patient suffering, and leaning
heavily upon her son's arm, she moved past Captain Elisha and from
the room.



That evening the captain stood in the lower hall of the apartment
house at Central Park West, undecided what to do next.  He wished
more than anything else in the world to go to his niece.  He would
have gone to her before--had been dying to go, to soothe, to
comfort, to tell her of his love--but he was afraid.  His conscience
troubled him.  Perhaps he had been too brutal.  Perhaps he shouldn't
have acted as he did.  Maybe forcing the Dunn fleet to show its
colors could have been done more diplomatically.  He had wanted her
to see those colors for herself, to actually see them.  But he might
have overdone it.  He remembered how she shrank from him and turned
to her brother.  She might hate him more than ever now.  If so, then
the whole scheme under which he was working fell to pieces.

He was worried about Steve, too.  That young man would, naturally,
be furious with his sister for what he would consider her romantic
foolishness.  He had been warned to behave himself; but would he?
Captain Elisha paced up and down the marble floor before the
elevator cage and wondered whether his visiting the apartment would
be a wise move or a foolish one.

The elevator descended, the door of the cage opened, and Stephen
himself darted out.  His face was red, he was scowling fiercely,
and he strode toward the street without looking in his guardian's
direction.

The captain caught him as he passed.

"Here, boy!" he exclaimed; "where's the fire?  Where are you
bound?"

His nephew, brought thus unexpectedly to a halt, stared at him.

"Oh, it's you!" he exclaimed.  "Humph!  I'm bound--I don't know
where I'm bound!"

"You don't, hey?  Well, you can cruise a long ways on a v'yage like
that.  What do you mean?"

"Aw, let me alone!  I'm going to the club, I guess, or somewhere.
Anyhow, I won't stay with her.  I told her so.  Silly little idiot!
By gad, she understands what I think of her conduct.  I'll never
speak to her again.  I told her so.  She--"

"Here!  Belay!  Stop!  Who are you talking about?"

"Caro, of course.  She--"

"You've run off and left her alone--to-night?  Where is she?"

"Upstairs--and crying, I suppose.  She doesn't do anything else.
It's all she's good for.  Selfish, romantic--"

He got no further, for Captain Elisha sent him reeling with a push
and ran to the elevator.

"Eighth floor," he commanded.

The door of the apartment was not latched.  Stephen, in his rage
and hurry, had neglected such trifles.  The captain opened it
quietly and walked in.  He entered the library.  Caroline was lying
on the couch, her head buried in the pillows.  She did not hear him
cross the room.  He leaned over and touched her shoulder.  She
started, looked, and sat up, gazing at him as though not certain
whether he was a dream or reality.

And he looked at her, at her pretty face, now so white and
careworn, at her eyes, at the tear-stains on her cheeks, and his
whole heart went out to her.

"Caroline, dearie," he faltered, "forgive me for comin' here, won't
you?  I had to come.  I couldn't leave you alone; I couldn't rest,
thinkin' of you alone in your trouble.  I know you must feel harder
than ever towards me for this afternoon's doin's, but I meant it
for the best.  I HAD to show you--don't you see?  Can you forgive
me?  Won't you try to forgive the old feller that loves you more'n
all the world?  Won't you try?"

She looked at him, wide-eyed, clasping and unclasping her hands.

"_I_ forgive YOU?" she repeated, incredulously.

"Yes.  Try to, dearie.  Oh, if you would only believe I meant it
for your good, and nothin' else!  If you could only just trust me
and come to me and let me help you.  I want you, my girl, I want
you!"

She leaned forward.  "Do you really mean it?" she cried.  "How can
you? after all I've done? after the way I've treated you? and the
things I've said?  You must HATE me!  Everyone does.  I hate
myself!  You can't forgive me!  You can't!"

His answer was to hold out his arms.  Another moment and she was in
them, clinging to his wet coat, sobbing, holding him fast, and
begging him not to leave her, to take her away, that she would
work, that she would not be a burden to him--only take her with him
and try to forgive her, for he was real and honest and the only
friend she had.

And Captain Elisha, soothing her, stroking her hair, and murmuring
words of love and tenderness, realized that his labor and sacrifice
had not been in vain, that here was his recompense; she would never
misunderstand him again; she was his at last.

And yet, in the midst of his joy, his conscience troubled him more
than ever.



CHAPTER XX


It was April; and May was close at hand.  The weather was all that
late April weather should be, and so often is not.  Trees, bushes,
and vines were in bud; the green of the new grass was showing
everywhere above the dead brown of the old; a pair of bluebirds
were inspecting the hollow of the old apple tree, with an eye
toward spring housekeeping; the sun was warm and bright, and the
water of the Sound sparkled in the distance.  Caroline, sitting by
the living-room window, was waiting for her uncle to return from
the city.

In the kitchen Annie Moriarty was preparing dinner.  Annie was now
cook as well as chamber-maid, for, of all the Warren servants, she
was the only one remaining.  Edwards, the "Commodore," had been
dismissed, had departed, not without reluctance but philosophically,
to seek other employment.  "Yes, miss," observed Edwards, when
notified that his services were no longer required; "I understand.
I've been expecting it.  I was in a family before that met with
financial difficulties, and I know the signs.  All I can say is that
I hope you and Mr. Stephen will get on all right, miss.  If there's
anything I can do to help you, by way of friendship, please let me
know.  I'd be glad, for old times' sake.  And the cook wanted me to
tell you that, being as she's got another job in sight and was paid
up to date, she wouldn't wait for notice, but was leaving immediate.
She's gone already, miss."

The second maid went also.  But Annie, Irish and grateful, refused
to go.  Her mother came to back her in the refusal.

"Indeed she'll not leave you, Miss Caroline--you nor Captain Warren
neither.  Lord love him!  Sure, d'ye think we'll ever forget what
you and him done for me and my Pat and the childer?  You've got to
have somebody, ain't you?  And Annie's cookin' ain't so bad that
it'll kill yez; and I'll learn her more.  Never mind what the wages
is, they're big enough.  She'll stay!  If she didn't, I'd break her
back."

So, when the apartment was given up, and Captain Elisha and his
wards moved to the little house in Westchester County, Annie came
with them.  And her cooking, though not by any means equal to that
at Delmonico's, had not killed them yet.  Mrs. Moriarty came once
a week to do the laundry work.  Caroline acted as a sort of
inexperienced but willing supervising housekeeper.

The house itself had been procured through the kind interest of
Sylvester.  Keeping the apartment was, under the circumstances, out
of the question, and Caroline hated it and was only too anxious to
give it up.  She had no suggestions to make.  She would go anywhere,
anywhere that her guardian deemed best; but might they not please go
at once?  She expected that he would suggest South Denboro, and she
would have gone there without a complaint.  To get away from the
place where she had been so miserable was her sole wish.  And
trusting and believing in her uncle as she now did, realizing that
he had been right always and had worked for her interest throughout,
and having been shown the falseness and insincerity of the others
whom she had once trusted implicitly, she clung to him with an
appeal almost piteous.  Her pride was, for the time, broken.  She
was humble and grateful.  She surrendered to him unconditionally,
and hoped only for his forgiveness and love.

The captain did not suggest South Denboro.  He did, however, tell
Sylvester that he believed a little place out of the city would be
the better refuge for the present.

"Poor Caroline's switched clear around," he said to the lawyer,
"and you can't blame her much.  She cal'lates New York's nothin'
but a sham from stern to stern, manned by liars and swindlers and
hypocrites and officered by thieves.  'Tain't no use to tell her
'tain't, though she might pretend to believe it, if _I_ told her,
for just now the poor girl thinks I'm Solomon and Saint Peter
rolled into one.  The way she agrees to whatever I say and the way
she looks at me and sort of holds on to me, as if I was her only
anchor in a gale, I declare it makes me feel meaner than poorhouse
tea--and that's made of blackberry leaves steeped in memories of
better things, so I've heard say.  AM I a low down scamp, playin'
a dirty mean trick on a couple of orphans?  What do you think,
Sylvester?"

"You know what I think, Captain Warren," replied the lawyer.
"You're handling the whole matter better than any other man could
handle it.  No one else would have thought of it, to begin with;
and the results so far prove that you're right."

"Yup.  Maybe.  I wish you was around to say that to me when I wake
up nights and get to thinkin'.  However, as I said, Caroline
believes New York is like a sailors' dance hall, a place for decent
folks to steer clear of.  And when the feller you've been engaged
to is shown up as a sneak and your own dad as a crook--well, you
can't blame a green hand for holdin' prejudice against the town
that raised 'em.  She'll get over it; but just now I cal'late some
little flat, or, better still, a little home out where the back
yards ain't made of concrete, would be a first-class port for us
to make for.  Don't know of such a place at a reasonable rent, do
you?"

"I might find one.  And you may be right; your niece might like it
better, though it will be somewhat of a change.  But how about your
nephew?  He has no objection to the metropolis, I should judge.
What will he say?"

"Nothin', I guess--unless he says it to himself.  Steve's goin'
back to New Haven with things on his mind.  He and I had a mornin'
service, and I was the parson.  He listened, because when you ain't
got a cent except what the society allows you, it ain't good
orthodoxy to dodge the charity sermon.  Steve'll behave, and what
he don't like he'll lump.  If he starts to open his mouth his
ear'll ache, I cal'late.  I talked turkey to that young man.
Ye-es," with a slight smile, "I'm sort of afraid I lost patience
with Stevie."

When Caroline first saw the little house, with its shingled sides,
the dead vines over the porch, and the dry stalks of last year's
flowers in the yard, her heart sank.  With the wind blowing and the
bare branches of the old apple tree scraping the roof and whining
dolefully, it looked bleak and forsaken.  It was so different, so
unhomelike, and so, to her eyes, small and poverty-stricken.  She
made believe that she liked it, exclaimed over the view--which, on
the particular day, was desolate enough--and declared the Dutch
front door was "old-fashioned and dear."  But Captain Elisha,
watching her closely, knew that she was only waiting to be alone to
give way to wretchedness and tears.  He understood, had expected
that she would feel thus, but he was disappointed, nevertheless.
However, after the front door was passed and they were inside the
house, Caroline looked about her in delighted amazement.  The
living room was small, but bright and warm and cheery.  On its
walls, hiding the rather vivid paper, were hung some of the best of
Rodgers Warren's pictures--the Corot, the codfisher, and others.
The furniture and rugs were those which had been in the library of
the apartment, those she had been familiar with all her life.  The
books, many of them, were there, also.  And the dining room, except
for size, looked like home.  So did the bedrooms; and, in the
kitchen, Annie grinned a welcome.

"But how could you?" asked Caroline.  "How could you keep all these
things, Uncle Elisha?  I thought, of course, they must all be sold.
I cried when they took them away that day when we were leaving to
go to the hotel.  I was sure I should never see them again.  And
here they all are!  How could you do it?"

The captain's grin was as wide as Annie's.  "Oh," he explained, "I
couldn't let 'em all go.  Never intended to.  That five thousand
dollar codder up there seemed like own folks, pretty nigh.  I'd
have kept HIM, if we had to live in one room and a trunk.  And we
ain't got to that--yet.  I tell you, dearie, I thought they'd make
you feel more to home.  And they do, don't they?"

The look she gave him was answer sufficient.

"But the creditors?" she asked.  "That man who--they belong to him,
don't they?  I supposed of course they must go with the rest."

Captain Elisha winked.  "There's times," he answered, "when I
believe in cheatin' my creditors.  This is one of 'em.  Never you
mind that feller you mentioned.  He's got enough, confound him!  He
didn't have the face to ask for any more.  Sylvester looked out for
that.  Five hundred thousand, droppin' in, as you might say,
unexpected, ought to soften anybody's heart; and I judge even that
feller's got some bowels of mercy."

He changed the subject hastily, but Caroline asked no more
questions.  She never alluded to the lost estate, never expressed
any regrets, nor asked to know who it was that had seized her all.
The captain had expected her to ask, had been ready with the same
answer he had given Stephen, but when he hinted she herself had
forbade his continuing.  "Don't tell me about it," she begged.  "I
don't want to know any more.  Father did wrong, but--but I know he
did not mean to.  He was a good, kind father to me, and I loved
him.  This man whose money he took had a right to it, and now it is
his.  He doesn't wish us to know who he is, so Steve says, and I'm
glad.  I don't want to know, because if I did I might hate him.
And," with a shudder, "I am trying so hard not to hate anybody."

Her make-believe liking for the little home became more and more
real as spring drew near.  She began to take an interest in it, in
the flower garden, in the beds beside the porch, where the peonies
and daffodils were beginning to show green heads above the loam,
and in the household affairs.  And she had plans of her own, not
connected with these.  She broached them to her uncle, and they
surprised and delighted him, although he would not give his consent
to them entirely.

"You mustn't think," she said, "that, because I have been willing
to live on your money since mine went, that I mean to continue
doing it.  I don't.  I've been thinking a great deal, and I realize
that I must earn my own way just as soon as I can.  I'm not fitted
for anything now; but I can be and I shall.  I've thought perhaps I
might learn stenography or--or something like that.  Girls do."

He looked at her serious face and choked back his laugh.

"Why, yes," he admitted, "they do, that's a fact.  About four
hundred thousand of 'em do, and four hundred thousand more try to
and then try to make business men think that they have.  I heard
Sylvester sputterin' about a couple in his office t'other day; said
they was no good and not worth the seven dollars a week he paid
'em."

"Seven dollars a WEEK!" she repeated.

"Yes.  Course some make three times that and more; but they're the
experienced ones, the good ones.  And there's heaps that don't.
What makes you so sot on earnin' a livin', Caroline?  Ain't you
satisfied with the kind I'm tryin' to give you?"

She regarded him reproachfully.  "Please don't say that," she
protested.  "You always treat your kindness as a joke, but to me
it--it--"

"There! there!" quickly.  "Don't let's talk foolish.  I see what
you mean, dearie.  It ain't the livin' but because I'm givin' it to
you that troubles you.  I know.  Well, _I_ ain't complainin' but I
understand your feelin's and respect 'em.  However, I shouldn't
study type-writin', if I was you.  There's too much competition in
it to be comfortable, as the fat man said about runnin' races.
I've got a suggestion, if you want to listen to it."

"I do, indeed.  What is it?"

"Why, just this.  I've been about everythin' aboard ship, but I've
never been a steward.  Now I'll say this much for Annie, she tried
hard.  She tumbled into general housekeepin' the way Asa Foster
said he fell into the cucumber frame--with a jolt and a jingle; and
she's doin' her best accordin' to her lights.  But sometimes her
lights need ile or trimmin' or somethin'.  I've had the feelin'
that we need a good housekeeper here.  If Annie's intelligence was
as broad and liberal as her shoes, we wouldn't; as 'tis, we do.
I'll hire you, Caroline, for that job, if you say so."

"I?  Uncle Elisha, you're joking!"

"No, I ain't.  Course I realize you ain't had much experience in
runnin' a house, and I hope you understand I don't want to hire you
as a cook.  But I've had a scheme in the back of my head for a
fortni't or more.  Somethin' Sylvester said about a young lady
cousin of his made me think of it.  Seems over here at the female
college--you know where I mean--they're teachin' a new course that
they've christened Domestic Science.  Nigh's I can find out it is
about what our great gran'marms larned at home; that, with up-to-
date trimmin's.  All about runnin' a house, it is; how to
superintend servants, and what kind of things to have to eat, and
how they ought to be cooked, and takin' care of children--Humph! we
don't need that, do we?--and, well, everything that a home woman,
rich or poor, ought to know.  At least, she ought to 'cordin' to my
old-fashioned notions.  Sylvester's cousin goes there, and likes
it; and I judge she ain't figgerin' to be anybody's hired help,
either.  My idea was about this:  If you'd like to take this
course, Caroline, you could do it afternoons.  Mornin's and the
days you had off, you could apply your science here at home, on
Annie.  Truly it would save me hirin' somebody else, and--well,
maybe you'd enjoy it, you can't tell."

His niece seemed interested.

"I know of the Domestic Science course," she said.  "Several of my
friends--my former friends, were studying it.  But I'm afraid,
Uncle, that I don't see where earning my living has any part in it.
It seems to me that it means your spending more money for me,
paying my tuition."

"No more'n I'd spend for a competent housekeeper.  Honest,
Caroline, I'd like to do it.  You think it over a spell."

She did, visiting the University and making inquiries.  What she
was told there decided her.  She took up the course and enjoyed it.
It occupied her mind and prevented her brooding over the past.  She
might have made many friends among the other students, but she was
careful to treat them only as acquaintances.  Her recent experience
with "friends" was too fresh in her mind.  She studied hard and
applied her knowledge at home.  She and Annie made some odd and
funny mistakes at first, but they were not made twice, and Captain
Elisha noticed a great improvement in the housekeeping.  Also,
Caroline's spirits improved, though more slowly.

Most evenings they spent together in the living room.  She read
aloud to her uncle, who smoked his cigar and listened, commenting
on the doings of the story folk with characteristic originality and
aptitude.  Each night, after the reading was over, he wrote his
customary note to Abbie Baker at South Denboro.  He made one flying
trip to that village:  "Just to prove to 'em that I'm still alive,"
as he explained it.  "Some of those folks down there at the
postoffice must have pretty nigh forgot to gossip about me by this
time.  They've had me eloped and married and a millionaire and a
pauper long ago, I don't doubt.  And now they've probably forgot me
altogether.  I'll just run down and stir 'em up.  Good subjects for
yarns are scurce at that postoffice, and they ought to be thankful."

On his return he told his niece that he found everything much as
usual.  "Thoph Kenney's raised a beard 'cause shavin's so
expensive; and the Come-Outer minister called the place the other
denominations are bound for 'Hades,' and his congregation are
thinkin' of firin' him for turnin' Free-Thinker.  That's about all
the sensations," he said.  "I couldn't get around town much on
account of Abbie.  She kept me in bed most of the time, while she
sewed on buttons and mended.  Said she never saw a body's clothes
in such a state in HER life."

A few of the neighbors called occasionally.  And there were other
callers.  Captain Elisha's unexpected departure from Mrs. Hepton's
boarding house had caused a sensation and much regret to that
select establishment.  The landlady, aided and abetted by Mrs. Van
Winkle Ruggles, would have given a farewell tea in his honor, but
he declined.  "Don't you do it," he said.  "I like my tea pretty
strong, and farewells are watery sort of things, the best of 'em.
And this ain't a real farewell, anyhow."

"'Say au revoir, but not good-by,'" sang Miss Sherborne
sentimentally.

"That's it.  Everybody knows what good-by means.  We'll say the
other thing--as well as we can--and change it to 'Hello' the very
first time any of you come out to see us."

They were curious to know his reason for leaving.  He explained
that his niece was sort of lonesome and needed country air; he was
going to live with her, for the present.  Consequently Mrs. Ruggles,
on the trail of aristocracy, was the first to call.  Hers was a
stately and ceremonious visit.  They were glad when it was over.
Lawton, the bookseller and his wife, came and were persuaded to
remain and dine.  Caroline liked them at sight.  The most impressive
call, however, was that of Mr. and Mrs. "C." Dickens.  The great man
made it a point to dress in the style of bygone years, and his
conversation was a treat.  His literary labors were fatiguing and
confining, he admitted, and the "little breath of rural ozone" which
this trip to Westchester County gave him, was like a tonic--yes, as
one might say, a tonic prescribed and administered by Dame Nature
herself.

"I formerly resided in the country," he told Caroline.

"Yes," put in his wife, "we used to live at Bayonne, New Jersey.
We had such a pretty house there, that is, half a house; you see it
was a double one, and--"

"Maria," her husband waved his hand, "why trouble our friends with
unnecessary details."

"But it WAS a pretty house, 'C.,' dear," with a pathetic little
sigh.  "I've missed it a great deal since, Miss Warren.  'C.' had a
joke about it--he's such a joker!  He used to call it 'Gad's Hill,
Junior.'"

"Named after some of David B.'s folks?" asked Captain Elisha
innocently.  The answer, delivered by Mr. Dickens, was condescending
and explanatory.

Caroline laughed, actually laughed aloud, when the visit was over.
Her uncle was immensely pleased.

"Hooray!" he cried.  "I'll invite 'em up to stay a week.  That's
the fust time I've heard you laugh for I don't know when."

She laughed again.  "I can't help it," she said; "they are so
funny."

The captain chuckled.  "Yes," he said, "and they don't know it.  I
cal'late a person's skull has got room for just about so much in it
and no more.  Cornelius Charles's head is so jammed with self-
satisfaction that his sense of humor was crowded out of door long
ago."

One boarder at Mrs. Hepton's did not call, nor did Captain Elisha
allude to him.  Caroline noticed the latter fact and understood the
reason.  Also, when the captain went to the city, as he frequently
did, and remained longer than usual, she noticed that his
explanations of the way in which he spent his time were sometimes
vague and hurried.  She understood and was troubled.  Yet she
thought a great deal on the subject before she mentioned it.

On the April afternoon when Caroline sat at the window of the
living room awaiting her uncle's return she was thinking of that
subject.  But, at last, her mind was made up.  It was a hard thing
to do; it was humiliating, in a way; it might--though she sincerely
hoped not--be misconstrued as to motive; but it was right.  Captain
Elisha had been so unselfish, so glad to give up every personal
inclination in order to please her, that she would no longer permit
her pride to stand in the way of his gratification, even in little
things.  At least, she would speak to him on the matter.

He came on a later than his usual train, and at dinner, when she
asked where he had been, replied, "Oh, to see Sylvester, and--er--
around."  She asked him no more, but, when they were together in
the living room, she moved her chair over beside his and said
without looking at him:

"Uncle Elisha, I know where you've been this afternoon.  You've
been to see Mr. Pearson."

"Hey?"  He started, leaned back and regarded her with astonishment
and some alarm.

"You've been to see Mr. Pearson," she repeated, "haven't you?"

"Why--why, yes, Caroline, I have--to tell you the truth.  I don't
see how you knew, but," nervously, "I hope you don't feel bad
'cause I did.  I go to see him pretty often.  You see, I think a
good deal of him--a whole lot of him.  _I_ think he's a fine young
feller.  Course I know you don't, and so I never mention him to
you.  But I do hope you ain't goin' to ask me not to see him."

She shook her head.  "No," she said.  "I would have no right to ask
that, even if I wished to.  And I do not wish it.  Uncle Elisha, if
you were alone here, he would come to see you; I know he would.
Invite him to come, please."

His astonishment was greater than ever.

"Invite him to come HERE?" he asked.  "To see you?"

"No," hastily; "to see you.  This is your home.  I have no right to
keep your friends from visiting it.  I know you would sacrifice
everything for me, even them; but I will not be so selfish as to
allow it.  Ask him here, please.  I really want you to."

He pulled his beard.  "Caroline," he answered slowly, "I'm much
obliged to you.  I understand why you're doin' this, and I thank
you.  But it ain't likely that I'll say yes, is it?  And do you
suppose Jim would come if I did ask him?  He knows you believe he's
a--well, all that's bad.  You told him so, and you sent him away.
I will give in that I'd like to have him here.  He's one of the few
men friends I've made since I landed in New York.  But, under the
circumstances--you feelin' as you do--I couldn't ask him, and he
wouldn't come if I did."

She remained silent for a time.  Then she said:

"Uncle, I want you to tell me the truth about Mr. Pearson and
father--just why they quarreled and the real truth of the whole
affair.  Don't spare my feelings; tell me what you believe is the
true story.  I know you think Mr. Pearson was right, for you said
so."

The captain was much troubled.

"I--I don't know's I'd better, dearie," he answered.  "I think I do
know the truth, but you might think I was hard on 'Bije--on your
father.  I ain't.  And I sympathize with the way he felt, too.  But
Jim did right, as I see it.  He acted just as I'd want a son of
mine to do.  And . . .  Well, I cal'late we'd better not rake up
old times, had we?"

"I want you to tell me.  Please do."

"I don't know's I'd better.  You have been told the story different,
and--"

"I know I have.  That is the reason why I ask you to tell it.  Oh,"
with a flash of scorn, "I was told many stories, and I want to
forget them.  And," sadly, "I can bear whatever you may tell me,
even about father.  Since I learned that he was a--a--"

"S-sh, Caroline; don't!"

"After that, I can bear anything, I think.  This cannot be worse."

"Worse!  No, not!  This ain't very bad.  I will tell you, dearie.
This is just what happened."

He told her the exact truth concerning the Trolley Combine, his
brother's part in it, and Pearson's.  She listened without comment.

"I see," she said when he had finished.  "I think I see.  Mr.
Pearson felt that, as a newspaper man, an honest one, he must go
on.  He knew that the thing was wrong and that innocent people
might lose money in it.  It was his duty to expose it, and he did
it, even though it meant the loss of influence and of father's
friendship.  I see."

"That was about it, Caroline.  I think the hardest part for him was
when 'Bije called him ungrateful.  'Bije had been mighty kind to
him, that's a fact."

"Yes.  Father was kind; I know that better than anyone else.  But
Mr. Pearson was right.  Yes, he was right, and brave."

"So I size it up.  And I do sympathize with your father, too.  This
wa'n't such an awful lot worse than a good many stock deals.  And
poor 'Bije was perfectly desp'rate, I guess.  If it had gone
through he'd have been able to square accounts with the Rubber
Company; and just think what that would have meant to him.  Poor
feller! poor feller!"  He sighed.  She reached for his hand and
stroked it gently with her own.

After another interval she said:  "How I insulted and wronged him!
How he must despise me!"

"Who?  Jim?  No, no! he don't do any such thing.  He knows you
didn't understand, and who was responsible.  Jim's got sense, lots
of it."

"But it is my misunderstanding and my insulting treatment of him
which have kept you two apart--here, at any rate."

"Don't let that worry you, Caroline.  I see him every once in a
while, up to the city."

"It does worry me; and it will, until it is made right.  And," in a
lower tone, but with decision, "it shall be."

She rose and, bending over, kissed him on the forehead.  "Good
night, Uncle," she said.

Captain Elisha was disappointed.  "What!" he exclaimed.  "Goin'
aloft so soon?  We ain't had our readin' yet.  Pretty early to turn
in, seems to me.  Stay a little longer, do."

"Not to-night, dear.  I'm going to my room.  Please excuse me this
time."  She turned to go and then, turning back again, asked a
final question.

"You're sure," she said, hesitatingly; "you're quite sure he will
not come here--to you--if you tell him I understand, and--and you
ask him?"

"Well, Caroline, I don't know.  You see, I was responsible for his
comin' before.  He had some scruples against it then, but I talked
him down.  He's sort of proud, Jim is, and he might--might not want
to--to--"

"I see.  Good night, Uncle."

The next morning, after breakfast, she came to him again.

"Uncle Elisha," she said, "I have written him."

"What?  You've written?  Written who?"

"Mr. Pearson.  I wrote him, telling him I had learned the true
story of his disagreement with father and that he was right and I
was wrong.  I apologized for my behavior toward him.  Now, I think,
perhaps, if you ask him, he will come."

The captain looked at her.  He realized the sacrifice of her pride
which writing that letter must have meant, and that she had done it
for him.  He was touched and almost sorry she had done it.  He took
both her hands in his.

"Dearie," he said, "you shouldn't have done that.  I didn't expect
you to.  I know you did it just for my sake.  I won't say I ain't
glad; I am, in one way.  But 'twa'n't necessary, and 'twas too
much, too hard for you altogether."

"Don't say that," she begged.  "Too much!  I never can do enough.
Compared to what you have done for me it--it . . .  Oh, please let
me do what little I can.  But, Uncle Elisha, promise me one thing;
promise that you will not ask me to meet him, if he should come.
That I couldn't do, even for you."



CHAPTER XXI


Promises of that kind are easier to make than to keep.  The captain
promised promptly enough, but the Fates were against him.  He made
it his business to go to town the very next day and called upon his
friend.  He found the young man in a curiously excited and
optimistic frame of mind, radically different from that of the past
few months.  The manuscript of the novel was before him on the
desk, also plenty of blank paper.  His fountain-pen was in his
hand, although apparently, he had written nothing that morning.
But he was going to--oh, yes, he was going to!  He was feeling just
in the mood.  He had read his manuscript, and it was not so bad; by
George, some of the stuff was pretty good!  And the end was not so
far off.  Five or six chapters more and the thing would be finished.
He would have to secure a publisher, of course, but two had already
expressed an interest; and so on.

Captain Elisha drew his own conclusions.  He judged that his
niece's letter had reached its destination.  He did not mention it,
however, nor did Pearson.  But when the captain hinted at the
latter's running out to the house to see him some time or other,
the invitation was accepted.

"That's fine, Jim," declared the visitor.  "Come any time.  I want
you to see what a nice little place I've got out there.  Don't
stand on ceremony, come--er--next week, say."  Then, mindful of his
promise, he added, "You and I'll have it all to ourselves.  I've
been cal'latin' to hire a sail-boat for the summer; got my eye on a
capable little sloop belongin' to a feller on the Sound shore.  If
all goes well I'll close the deal in a few days.  I'll meet you at
the depot and we'll have a sail and get dinner at a hotel or
somewheres, and then we'll come up to the house and take a whack at
Cap'n Jim's doin's in the new chapters.  Just you and I together in
the settin' room; hey?"

Pearson did not seem so enthusiastic over this programme, although
he admitted that it sounded tip-top.

"How is Miss Warren?" he asked, mentioning the name with a
nonchalance remarkable, considering that he had not done so before
for weeks.  "She is well, I hope?"

"Yes, she's fust-rate, thank you.  Very well, everything considered.
She keeps to herself a good deal.  Don't care to meet many folks,
and you can't hardly blame her."

Pearson admitted that, and the remainder of the call was largely a
monologue by Captain Elisha.

"Well, then, Jim," said the latter, when he rose to go, "you come
up Monday or Tuesday of next week.  Will you?"

"Yes.  I--I think so."

"Don't think, do it.  Let me know what train you're comin' on, and
I'll meet you at the depot."

This last remark was what upset calculations.  Pearson came on
Monday, having written the day before.  He did not mail the note
himself, but trusted it to Mrs. Hepton, who was going out to attend
evening service.  She forgot it until the next day.  So it happened
that when he alighted from the train at the suburban station the
captain was not there to meet him.  He waited a while, and then,
inquiring the way of the station agent, walked up to the house by
himself.  As he turned in at the front walk, Caroline came out of
the door.  They met, face to face.

It was a most embarrassing situation, particularly for Caroline;
yet, with feminine resourcefulness, she dissembled her embarrassment
to some extent and acknowledged his stammered, "Good afternoon, Miss
Warren," with a cool, almost cold, "How do you do, Mr. Pearson?"
which chilled his pleasure at seeing her and made him wish devoutly
that he had not been such a fool as to come. However, there he was,
and he hastily explained his presence by telling her of the
captain's invitation for that day, how he had expected to meet him
at the station, and, not meeting him, had walked up to the house.

"Is he in?" he asked.

No, Captain Elisha was not in.  He had gone to see the sail-boat
man.  Not hearing from his friend, he concluded the latter would
not come until the next day.

"He will be so sorry," said Caroline.

Pearson was rather thankful than otherwise.  The captain's absence
afforded him an opportunity to escape from a place where he was
plainly unwelcome.

"Oh, never mind," he said.  "It is not important.  I can run out
another day.  Just tell him I called, Miss Warren, please; that I
wrote yesterday, but my letter must have gone astray.  Good
afternoon."

He was turning to go, but she stopped him.  She had fully made up
her mind that, when he came, she would not meet him--remembering
how she had treated him on the evening of her birthday, she would
be ashamed to look him in the face.  Besides, she could not meet him
after writing that letter; it would be too brazen; he would think--
all sorts of things.  When he visited her uncle she would remain in
her room, or go to the city or somewhere.

But now she had met him.  And he had come in response to her
uncle's invitation, given because she herself had pleaded that it
should be.  To let him go away would be rude and ridiculous; and
how could she explain to the captain?

"You mustn't go, Mr. Pearson," she said.  "You must come in and
wait; Captain Warren will be back soon, I'm sure."

"Thank you; but I think I won't wait.  I can come another time."

"But you must wait.  I insist.  Uncle Elisha will be dreadfully
disappointed if you don't.  There isn't a train for an hour, and he
will return before that, I am sure.  Please come in."

Pearson was reluctant, but he could think of no reasonable excuse.
So he entered the house, removed his overcoat and hat, and seated
himself in the living room to await the captain's return.  Caroline
excused herself, saying that she had an errand at the shop in the
village.  She made that errand as long as she could, but when she
returned he was still there, and Captain Elisha had not appeared.

The conversation was forced, for a time.  Each felt the
embarrassment, and Pearson was still resentful of the manner in
which she had greeted him on his arrival.  But, as he looked at
her, the resentment vanished, and the other feeling, that which he
had determined to forget, returned.  Captain Elisha had told him
how brave she had been through it all, and, contrasting the little
house with the former home, remembering the loss of friends and
fortune, to say nothing of the unmasking of those whom she believed
were her nearest and dearest, he wondered and admired more than
ever.  He understood how very hard it must have been for her to
write that letter to him, a letter in which she justified his
course at the cost of her own father's honor.  He longed to tell
her that he understood and appreciated.

At last he could not resist the temptation.

"Miss Warren," he said, "please excuse my speaking of this, but I
must; I must thank you for writing me as you did.  It was not
necessary, it was too much to expect, too hard a thing for you to
do.  It makes me feel guilty.  I--"

"Please don't!" she interrupted.  "Don't speak in that way.  It was
right.  It was what I should have done long ago."

"But it was not necessary; I understood.  I knew you had heard
another version of the story and that you felt I had been
ungrateful and mean, to say the least, in my conduct toward your
father.  I knew that; I have never blamed you.  And you writing as
you did--"

"I did it for my uncle's sake," she broke in, quickly.  "You are
his closest friend."

"I know, but I appreciate it, nevertheless.  I--I wish you would
consider me your friend as well as his.  I do, sincerely."

"Thank you.  I need friends, I know.  I have few now, which is not
strange," rather bitterly.

He protested earnestly.  "I did not mean it in that way," he said.
"It is an honor and a great privilege to be one of your friends.  I
had that honor and privilege once.  May I have it again?"

"Thank you, Mr. Pearson . . .  Now tell me about your novel.  I
remember it all so well.  And I am very much interested.  You must
have it nearly completed.  Tell me about it, please."

They were deep in the discussion of the novel when Captain Elisha
walked into the living room.  He was surprised, stating his
feelings at their mildest, to find them together, but he did not
express his astonishment.  Instead, he hailed Pearson delightedly,
demanded to know if they had dared tackle Cap'n Jim without the
"head doctor's" being on the scene; and insisted upon the author's
admitting him to the "clinic" forthwith.  Pearson did not take the
next train, nor the next.  Instead, he stayed for dinner and well
into the evening, and when he did go it was after a prompt
acceptance of the captain's invitation to "come again in a mighty
little while."

Caroline, when she and her uncle were alone after their visitor's
departure, made no protest against the invitation having been
given.  She did not speak of Pearson at all.  Captain Elisha also
talked of other things, principally about the sail-boat, the summer
lease of which he had arranged that afternoon.  He declared the
sloop to be an "able craft of her tonnage" and that they would have
some good times aboard her or he missed his guess.  In his own
room, when ready for bed, he favored his reflection in the glass
with a broad smile and a satisfied wink, from which proceeding it
may be surmised that the day had not been a bad one, according to
his estimate.

Pearson came again a week later, and thereafter frequently.  The
sessions with Cap'n Jim and his associates were once more regular
happenings to be looked forward to and enjoyed by the three.  As
the weather grew warmer, the sloop--Captain Elisha had the name she
formerly bore painted out and Caroline substituted--proved to be as
great a source of pleasure as her new skipper had prophesied.  He
and his niece--and occasionally Pearson--sailed and picnicked on
the Sound, and Caroline's pallor disappeared under the influence of
breeze and sunshine.  Her health improved, and her spirits, also.
She seemed, at times, almost happy, and her uncle seldom saw her,
as after the removal to the suburb he so frequently used, with
tears in her eyes and the sadness of bitter memories in her
expression and manner.  Her work at the University grew steadily
more difficult, but she enjoyed it thoroughly and declared that she
would not give it up for worlds.

In June two very important events took place.  The novel was
finished, and Stephen, his Sophomore year at an end, came home from
college.  He had been invited by some classmates to spend a part of
his vacation with them on the Maine coast, and his guardian had
consented to his doing so; but the boy himself had something else
to propose.  On an evening soon after his return, when, his sister
having retired, he was alone with the captain, he broached the
idea.

"Say," he said, "I've been thinking a good deal while I've been
away this last time."

"Glad to hear it, I'm sure," replied his uncle, dryly.

"Yes.  I've been thinking--about a good many things.  I'm flat
broke; down and out, so far as money is concerned.  That's so,
isn't it?"

Captain Elisha looked at him keenly for an instant.  Then:

"It appears that way, I'm afraid," he answered.  "What made you
ask?"

"Nothing.  I wasn't asking, really; I was just stating the case.
Now, the way I look at it, this college course of mine isn't worth
while.  You're putting up for it, and I ought to be much obliged; I
am, of course."

"You're welcome, Stevie."

"I know; but what's the use of it?  I've got to go to work when
it's over.  And the kind of work I want to do doesn't need
university training.  I'm just wasting time; that's what I'm
doing."

"Humph!  I ain't so sure about that.  But what sort of work do you
want to do?"

"I want to be down on the Street, as the governor was.  If this
Rubber Company business hadn't knocked us out, I intended, as soon
as I was of age, to take that seat of his and start in for myself.
Well, that chance has gone, but I mean to get in some way, though I
have to start at the foot of the ladder.  Now why can't I leave
college and start now?  It will be two years gained, won't it?"

Captain Elisha seemed pleased, but he shook his head.

"How do you know you'd like it?" he asked.  "You've never tried."

"No, I never have; but I'll like it all right.  I know I shall.
It's what I've wanted to do ever since I was old enough to think of
such things.  Just let me start in now, right away, and I'll show
you.  I'll make good; you see if I don't."

He was very earnest.  The captain deliberated before answering.

"Stevie," he said, doubtfully, "I rather like to hear you talk that
way; I own up it pleases me.  But, as to your givin' up college--
that's different.  Let me think it over for a day or two; that is,
if you can put off the Maine trip so long as that."

"Hang the Maine trip!  You let me get into business, the business I
want to get into, and I won't ask for a vacation; you can bet on
that!"

"All right then.  I'll think, and do some questionin' around, and
report soon's I've decided what's best."

He laid the stump of his cigar in the ash receiver and rose from
his chair.  But his nephew had not finished.

"There was something else I intended to say," he announced, but
with less eagerness.

"That so?  What?"

"Why--why, just this."  He fidgeted with his watch chain, colored
and was evidently uneasy.  "I guess--" he hesitated--"I guess that
I haven't treated you as I ought."

"I want to know!  You guess that, hey?  Why?"

"Oh, you know why.  I've been thinking since I went back to New
Haven.  I've had a chance to think.  Some of the fellows in the set
I used to be thick with up there have learned that I'm broke, and
they--they aren't as friendly as they were.  Not all of them, of
course, but some.  And I wouldn't chase after them; not much!  If
they wanted to drop me they could.  You bet I didn't try to hang
on!  I was pretty sore for a while and kept to myself and--well, I
did a lot of thinking.  I guess Caro is right; you've been mighty
decent to her and me."

He paused, but Captain Elisha made no comment.

"I guess you have," continued Stephen, soberly.  "When you first
came, you know, Caroline and I couldn't understand.  We thought you
were butting in and weren't our sort, and--and--"

"And a hayseed nuisance generally; I know.  Heave ahead, son; you
interest me."

"Well, we didn't like it.  And Mal Dunn and his mother were always
sympathizing and insinuating, and we believed they were our best
friends, and all that.  So we didn't try to understand you or--or
even make it livable for you.  Then, after the news came that the
money had gone, I acted like a kid, I guess.  That business of
making Mal stick to the engagement was pretty silly.  I was nearly
desperate, you see, and--and--you knew it was silly.  You never
took any stock in it, did you?"

The captain smiled.

"Not a heap," he admitted.

"No.  All you wanted was to show them up.  Well, you did it, and
I'm glad you did.  But Caro and I have talked it over since I've
been home, and we agree that you've been a great deal better to us
than we deserve.  You didn't HAVE to take care of us at all, any
more, after the money went.  By gad! considering how we treated
you, I don't see why you did.  _I_ wouldn't.  But you did--and you
are.  You've given us a home, and you're putting me through college
and--and--"

"That's all right, son.  Good night."

"Just a minute.  I--I--well, if you let me, I'd like to thank you
and--and ask your pardon."

"Granted, my boy.  And never mind the thanks, either.  Just keep on
thinkin' and actin' as you have to-night, and I'll be satisfied.  I
want to see my nephew makin' a man of himself--a real man; and,
Steve, you talk more like a man to-night than I've ever heard you.
Stick to it, and you'll do yet.  As for goin' to work, you let me
chew on that for a few days."

The next morning he called on Sylvester, who in turn took him to a
friend of his, a broker--employing a good-sized staff of clerks.
The three had a consultation, followed, the day after, by another.
That evening the captain made a definite proposal to Stephen.  It
was, briefly, that, while not consenting to the latter's leaving
college, he did consider that a trial of the work in a broker's
office might be a good thing.  Therefore, if the young man wished,
he could enter the employ of Sylvester's friend and remain during
July and August.

"You'll leave about the first of September, Steve," he said, "and
that'll give you time for the two weeks vacation that you ought to
have.  Then you can go back to Yale and pitch in till the next
summer, when the same job'll be ready for you.  After you're
through college for good, if what you've learned about brokerin'
ain't cured you of your likin' for it--if you still want to go
ahead with it for your life job, then--well, then we'll see.  What
do you say?"

Stephen had a good deal to say, principally in the line of
objection to continuing his studies.  Finding these objections
unavailing, he agreed to his guardian's proposition.

"All right," said the captain; "then you can go to work next
Monday.  But you'll HAVE to work, and be just the same as any other
beginner, no better and no worse.  There'll be no favoritism, and,
if you're really wuth your salt, you won't want any.  Show 'em, and
me, that you're wuth it."

The novel, the wonderful tale which Captain Elisha was certain
would make its author famous, was finished that very day in June
when Stephen came back from New Haven.  The question of title
remained, and the "clinic," now re-enforced by Steve--whose dislike
for Pearson had apparently vanished with others of his former likes
and dislikes--considered that at several sessions.  At last "The
Man at the Wheel" was selected, as indicating something of the
hero's profession and implying, perhaps, a hint of his character.
Then came the fateful task of securing a publisher.  And the first
to whom it was submitted--one of the two firms which had already
expressed a desire to read the manuscript--accepted it, at what,
for a first novel, were very fair terms.  During the summer there
was proof to be read and illustrations to be criticized.  Captain
Elisha did not wholly approve of the artist's productions.

"Jerushy!" he exclaimed, "look at that mainmast!  Look at the rake
of it!  More like a yacht than a deep-water bark, she is enough
sight.  And the fust mate's got a uniform cap on, like a purser on
a steamboat.  Make that artist feller take that cap off him, Jim.
He's got to.  I wish he could have seen some of my mates.  They
wa'n't Cunarder dudes, but they could make a crew hop 'round like a
sand-flea in a clam bake."

Or, when the picture happened to be a shore view:

"What kind of a house is that?  Did you ever see a house like that
Down-East?  I'll leave it to anybody if it don't look like a sugar
man's plantation I used to know down Mobile way.  All that feller
standin' by the door needs is to have his face blacked; then he'd
start singin' 'S'wanee River.'  This ain't 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.'
Bah!"

The advance copy, the first one, was ready early in September, and
the author, of course, brought it immediately to his friends.  They
found the dedication especially interesting:  "To C. W. and E. W.,
consulting specialists at the literary clinics, with grateful
acknowledgments."  Probably Captain Elisha was never prouder of
anything, even his first command, than of that dedication.

And the story, when at last it appeared for sale, was almost from
the beginning a success.  The reviewers praised it, the reading
public--that final court of appeal which makes or unmakes novels--
took kindly to it, and discussed and recommended it; and, most
important of all, perhaps, it sold and continued to sell.  There
was something in it, its humanity, its simplicity, its clearly
marked characters, which made a hit.  Pearson no longer needed to
seek publishers; they sought him.  His short stories were bid for
by the magazines, and his prices climbed and climbed.  He found
himself suddenly planted in the middle of the highway to prosperity,
with a clear road ahead of him, provided he continued to do his best.

In September Stephen gave up his work at the broker's office, spent
the weeks with his friends in Maine, and then returned to Yale.  He
gave up the position on the Street with reluctance.  He was sure he
liked it now, he declared.  It was what he was fitted for, and he
meant, more than ever, to take it up permanently as soon as he was
free.  And his employer told Captain Elisha that the youngster was
bright, clever, and apt.  "A little conceited, needs taking down
occasionally, but that is the only trouble.  He has been spoiled, I
should imagine," he said.

"Yup," replied the captain, with emphasis; "your imagination's a
good one.  It don'