 to lay
her heart open to danger.

But the more Rachel saw of her cousin, the more she realized this
peril.  When she went down on Monday morning to complete the matters
of business that had been slurred over on the Saturday, she found
that Fanny had not the slightest notion what her own income was to
be.  All she knew was that her General had left everything
unreservedly to herself, except £100 and one of his swords to Major
Keith, who was executor to the will, and had gone to London to "see
about it," by which word poor Fanny expressed all the business that
her maintenance depended on.  If an old general wished to put a major
in temptation, could he have found a better means of doing so?
Rachel even thought that Fanny's incapacity to understand business
had made her mistake the terms of the bequest, and that Sir Stephen
must have secured his property to his children; but Fanny was
absolutely certain that this was not the case, for she said the Major
had made her at once sign a will dividing the property among them,
and appointing himself and her Aunt Curtis their guardians.  "I did
not like putting such a charge on my dear aunt," said Fanny, "but the
Major said I ought to appoint a relation, and I had no one else!  And
I knew you would all be good to them, if they had lost me too, when
baby was born."

"We would have tried," said Rachel, a little humbly, "but oh! I am
glad you are here, Fanny!"

Nothing could of course be fixed till the Major had "seen about it."
After which he was to come to let Lady Temple know the result; but
she believed he would first go to Scotland to see his brother.  He
and his brother were the only survivors of a large family, and he had
been on foreign service for twelve years, so that it would be very
selfish to wish him not to take full time at home.  "Selfish,"
thought Rachel; "if he will only stay away long enough, you shall
learn, my dear, how well you can do without him!"

The boys had interrupted the conversation less than the previous one,
because the lesser ones were asleep, or walking out, and the elder
ones having learnt that a new week was to be begun steadily with
lessons, thought it advisable to bring themselves as little into
notice as possible; but fate was sure to pursue them sooner or later,
for Rachel had come down resolved on testing their acquirements, and
deciding on the method to be pursued with them; and though their
mamma, with a curtain instinctive shrinking both for them and for
herself, had put off the ordeal to the utmost by listening to all the
counsel about her affairs, it was not to be averted.

"Now, Fanny, since it seems that more cannot be done at present, let
us see about the children's education.  Where are their books?"

"We have very few books," said Fanny, hesitating; "we had not much
choice where we were."

"You should have written to me for a selection."

"Why--so we would, but there was always a talk of sending Conrade and
Francis home.  I am afraid you will think them very backward, dear
Rachel, especially Francie; but it is not their fault, dear children,
and they are not used to strangers," added Fanny, nervously.

"I do not mean to be a stranger," said Rachel.

And while Fanny, in confusion, made loving protestations about not
meaning that, Rachel stepped out upon the lawn, and in her clear
voice called "Conrade, Francis!"  No answer.  She called "Conrade"
again, and louder, then turned round with "where can they be--not
gone down on the beach?"

"Oh, dear no, I trust not," said the mother, flurried, and coming to
the window with a call that seemed to Rachel's ears like the roar of
a sucking dove.

But from behind the bushes forth came the two young gentlemen, their
black garments considerably streaked with the green marks of laurel
climbing.

"Oh, my dears, what figures you are!  Go to Coombe and get yourselves
brushed, and wash your hands, and then come down, and bring your
lesson books."

Rachel prognosticated that these preparations would be made the
occasion, of much waste of time; but she was answered, and with
rather surprised eyes, that they had never been allowed to come into
the drawing-room without looking like little gentlemen.

"But you are not living in state here," said Rachel; "I never could
enter into the cult some people, mamma especially, pay to their
drawing-room."

"The Major used to be very particular about their not coming to sit
down untidy," said Fanny.  "He said it was not good for anybody."

Martinet! thought Rachel, nearly ready to advocate the boys making no
toilette at any time; and the present was made to consume so much
time that, urged by her, Fanny once more was obliged to summon her
boys and their books.

It was not an extensive school library--a Latin grammar an extremely
dilapidated spelling-book, and the fourth volume of Mrs. Marcet's
"Little Willie."  The other three--one was unaccounted for, but Cyril
had torn up the second, and Francis had thrown the first overboard in
a passion.  Rachel looked in dismay.  "I don't know what can be done
with these!" she said.

"Oh, then we'll have holidays till we have got books, mamma," said
Conrade, putting his hands on the sofa, and imitating a kicking
horse.

"It is very necessary to see what kind of books you ought to have,"
returned Rachel.  "How far have you gone in this?"

"I say, mamma," reiterated Conrade, "we can't do lessons without
books."

"Attend to what your Aunt Rachel says, my dear; she wants to find out
what books you should have."

"Yes, let me examine you."

Conrade came most inconveniently close to her; she pushed her chair
back; he came after her.  His mother uttered a remonstrating, "My
dear!"

"I thought she wanted to examine me," quoth Conrade.  "When Dr.
M'Vicar examines a thing, he puts it under a microscope."

It was said gravely, and whether it were malice or simplicity, Rachel
was perfectly unable to divine, but she thought anyway that Fanny had
no business to laugh, and explaining the species of examination that
she intended, she went to work.  In her younger days she had worked
much at schools, and was really an able and spirited teacher, liking
the occupation; and laying hold of the first book in her way, she
requested Conrade to read.  He obeyed, but in such a detestable
gabble that she looked up appealingly to Fanny, who suggested, "My
dear, you can read better than that."  He read four lines, not badly,
but then broke off, "Mamma, are not we to have ponies?  Coombe heard
of a pony this morning; it is to be seen at the 'Jolly Mariner,' and
he will take us to look at it."

"The 'Jolly Mariner!'  It is a dreadful place, Fanny, you never will
let them go there?"

"My dear, the Major will see about your ponies when he comes."

"We will send the coachman down to inquire," added Rachel.

"He is only a civilian, and the Major always chooses our horses,"
said Conrade.

"And I am to have one too, mamma," added Francis.  "You know I have
been out four times with the staff, and the Major said I could ride
as well as Con!"

"Reading is what is wanted now, my dear, go on."

Five lines more; but Francis and his mother were whispering together,
and of course Conrade stopped to listen.  Rachel saw there was no
hope but in getting him alone, and at his mother's reluctant desire,
he followed her to the dining-room; but there he turned dogged and
indifferent, made a sort of feint of doing what he was told, but
whether she tried him in arithmetic, Latin, or dictation, he made
such ludicrous blunders as to leave her in perplexity whether they
arose from ignorance or impertinence.  His spelling was phonetic to
the highest degree, and though he owned to having done sums, he would
not, or did not answer the simplest question in mental arithmetic.
"Five apples and eight apples, come, Conrade, what will they make?"

"A pie."

That was the hopeful way in which the examination proceeded, and when
Rachel attempted to say that his mother would be much displeased, he
proceeded to tumble head over heels all round the room, as if he knew
better; which performance broke up the seance, with a resolve on her
part that when she had the books she would not be so beaten.  She
tried Francis, but he really did know next to nothing, and whenever
he came to a word above five letters long stopped short, and when
told to spell it, said, "Mamma never made him spell;" also muttering
something depreciating about civilians.

Rachel was a woman of perseverance.  She went to the bookseller's,
and obtained a fair amount of books, which she ordered to be sent to
Lady Temple's.  But when she came down the next morning, the parcel
was nowhere to be found.  There was a grand interrogation, and at
last it turned out to have been safely deposited in an empty dog-
kennel in the back yard.  It was very hard on Rachel that Fanny
giggled like a school-girl, and even though ashamed of herself and
her sons, could not find voice to scold them respectably.  No wonder,
after such encouragement, that Rachel found her mission no sinecure,
and felt at the end of her morning's work much as if she had been
driving pigs to market, though the repetition was imposing on the
boys a sort of sense of fate and obedience, and there was less active
resistance, though learning it was not, only letting teaching be
thrown at them.  All the rest of the day, except those two hours,
they ran wild about the house, garden, and beach--the latter place
under the inspection of Coombe, whom, since the "Jolly Mariner"
proposal, Rachel did not in the least trust; all the less when she
heard that Major Keith, whose soldier-servant he had originally been,
thought very highly of him.  A call at Myrtlewood was formidable from
the bear-garden sounds, and delicate as Lady Temple was considered to
be, unable to walk or bear fatigue, she never appeared to be
incommoded by the uproar in which she lived, and had even been seen
careering about the nursery, or running about the garden, in a way
that Grace and Rachel thought would tire a strong woman.  As to a
tete-a-tete with her, it was never secured by anything short of
Rachel's strong will, for the children were always with her, and she
went to bed, or at any rate to her own room, when they did, and she
was so perfectly able to play and laugh with them that her cousins
scarcely thought her sufficiently depressed, and comparing her with
what their own mother had been after ten months' widowhood, agreed
that after all "she had been very young, and Sir Stephen very old,
and perhaps too much must not be expected of her."

"The grand passion of her life is yet to come," said Rachel.

"I hope not," said Grace.

"You may be certain of that," said Rachel.  "Feminine women always
have it one time or other in their lives; only superior ones are
exempt.  But I hope I may have influence enough to carry her past it,
and prevent her taking any step that might be injurious to the
children."




CHAPTER II



RACHEL'S DISCIPLINE



 "Thought is free, as sages tells us--
    Free to rove, and free to soar;
 But affection lives in bondage,
    That enthrals her more and more."
                            JEAN INGELOW.


An old friend lived in the neighbourhood who remembered Fanny's
father, and was very anxious to see her again, though not able to
leave the house.  So the first day that it was fine enough for Mrs.
Curtis to venture out, she undertook to convey Fanny to call upon
her, and was off with a wonderfully moderate allowance of children,
only the two youngest boys outside with their maid.  This drive
brought more to light about Fanny's past way of life and feelings
than had ever yet appeared.  Rachel had never elicited nearly so much
as seemed to have come forth spontaneously to the aunt, who had never
in old times been Fanny's confidante.

Fanny's life had been almost a prolonged childhood.  From the moment
of her marriage with the kind old General, he and her mother had
conspired to make much of her; all the more that she was almost
constantly disabled by her state of health, and was kept additionally
languid and helpless by the effects of climate.  Her mother had
managed her household, and she had absolutely had no care, no duty at
all but to be affectionate and grateful, and to be pretty and
gracious at the dinner parties.  Even in her mother's short and
sudden illness, the one thought of both the patient and the General
had been to spare Fanny, and she had been scarcely made aware of the
danger, and not allowed to witness the suffering.  The chivalrous old
man who had taken on himself the charge of her, still regarded the
young mother of his children as almost as much of a baby herself, and
devoted himself all the more to sparing her trouble, and preventing
her from feeling more thrown upon her by her mother's death.  The
notion of training her to act alone never even occurred to him, and
when he was thrown from his horse, and carried into a wayside-hut to
die, his first orders were that no hurried message might be sent to
her, lest she might be startled and injured by the attempt to come to
him.  All he could do for her was to leave her in the charge of his
military secretary, who had long been as a son to him.  Fanny told
her aunt with loving detail all that she had heard from Major Keith
of the brave old man's calm and resigned end--too full of trust even
to be distressed with alarms for the helpless young wife and
children, but committing them in full reliance to the care of their
Father in heaven, and to the present kindness of the friend who stood
by his pillow.

The will, which not only Rachel but her mother thought strangely
unguarded, had been drawn up in haste, because Sir Stephen's family
had outgrown the provisions of a former one, which had besides
designated her mother, and a friend since dead, as guardians.  Haste,
and the conscious want of legal knowledge, had led to its being made
as simple as possible, and as it was, Sir Stephen had scarcely had
the power to sign it.

It was Major Keith who had borne the tidings to the poor little
widow, and had taken the sole care of the boys during the sad weeks
of care utter prostration and illness.  Female friends were with her,
and tended her affectionately, but if exertion or thought were
required of her, the Major had to be called to her sofa to awaken her
faculties, and she always awoke to attend to his wishes, as though he
were the channel of her husband's.  This state of things ended with
the birth of the little girl, the daughter that Sir Stephen had so
much wished for, coming too late to be welcomed by him, but awakening
her mother to tearful joy and renewed powers of life.  The nine
months of little Stephana's life had been a tone of continual change
and variety, of new interests and occupations, and of the resumption
of a feeling of health which had scarcely been tasted since the first
plunge into warm climates.  Perhaps it was unreasonable to expect to
find Fanny broken down; and she talked in her own simple way with
abundant overflowing affection of her husband; but even Mrs. Curtis
thought it was to her more like the loss of her own father than of
the father of her children; and though not in the least afraid of
anything unbecoming in her gentle, retiring Fanny, still felt that it
was more the charge of a girl than of a widow, dreaded the boys,
dreaded their fate, and dreaded the Major more.

During this drive, Grace and Rachel had the care of the elder boys,
whom Rachel thought safer in her keeping than in Coombe's.  A walk
along the cliffs was one resource for their amusement, but it
resulted in Conrade's climbing into the most break-neck places, by
preference selecting those that Rachel called him out of, and as all
the others thought it necessary to go after him, the jeopardy of
Leoline and Hubert became greater than it was possible to permit; so
Grace took them by the hands, and lured them home with promises of an
introduction to certain white rabbits at the lodge.  After their
departure, their brothers became infinitely more obstreperous.
Whether it were that Conrade had some slight amount of consideration
for the limbs of his lesser followers, or whether the fact were--what
Rachel did not remotely imagine--that he was less utterly
unmanageable with her sister than with herself, certain it is that
the brothers went into still more intolerable places, and treated
their guardian as ducklings treat an old hen.  At last they quite
disappeared from the view round a projecting point of rock, and when
she turned it, she found a battle royal going on over an old lobster-
pot--Conrade hand to hand with a stout fisher-boy, and Francis and
sundry amphibious creatures of both sexes exchanging a hail of
stones, water-smoothed brick-bats, cockle-shells, fishes' backbones,
and other unsavoury missiles.  Abstractedly, Rachel had her theory
that young gentlemen had better scramble their way among their poor
neighbours, and become used to all ranks; but when it came to
witnessing an actual skirmish when she was responsible for Fanny's
sons, it was needful to interfere, and in equal dismay and
indignation she came round the point.  The light artillery fled at
her aspect, and she had to catch Francis's arm in the act of
discharging after them a cuttlefish's white spine, with a sharp "For
shame, they are running away!  Conrade, Zack, have done!"  Zack was
one of her own scholars, and held her in respect.

He desisted at once, and with a touch of his rough forelock, looked
sheepish, and said, "Please ma'am, he was meddling with our lobster-
pot."

"I wasn't doing any harm," said Conrade.  "I was just looking in, and
they all came and shied stones at us."

"I don't care how the quarrel began," said Rachel. "You would not
have run into it if you had been behaving properly.  Zack was quite
right to protect his father's property, but he might have been more
civil.  Now shake hands, and have done with it."

"Not shake hands with a low boy," growled Francis.  But happily
Conrade was of a freer spirit, and in spite of Rachel's interference,
had sense enough to know himself in the wrong.  He held out his hand,
and when the ceremony had been gone through, put his hands in his
pockets, produced a shilling, and said, "There, that's in case I did
the thing any harm."  Rachel would have preferred Zachary's being
above its acceptance, but he was not, and she was thankful that a
wood path offend itself, leading through the Homestead plantations
away from the temptations and perils of the shore.

That the two boys, instead of listening to her remonstrance, took to
punching and kicking one another, was a mitigated form of evil for
which she willingly compounded, having gone through so much useless
interference already, that she felt as if she had no spirit left to
keep the peace, and that they must settle their little affairs
between themselves.  It was the most innocent diversion in which she
could hope to see them indulge.  She only desired that it might last
them past a thrush's nest, in the hedge between the park and
plantation, a somewhat treasured discovery of Grace's.  No such good
luck.  Either the thrush's imprudence or Grace's visits had made the
nest dangerously visible, and it was proclaimed with a shout.
Rachel, in hot haste, warned them against taking birds'-nests in
general, and that in particular.

"Nests are made to be taken," said Francis.

"I've got an egg of all the Australian birds the Major could get me,"
said Conrade, "and I mean to have all the English ones."

"Oh, one egg; there's no harm in taking that; but this nest has young
birds."

The young birds must of course be seen, and Rachel stood by with
despairing frowns, commands, and assurances of their mother's
displeasure, while they peeped in, tantalized the gaping yellow
throats, by holding up their fingers, and laid hands on the side of
the nest, peeping at her with laughing, mischievous eyes, enjoying
her distress.  She was glad at last to find them coming away without
the nest, and after crossing the park, arrived at the house, tired
out, but with two hours of the boys still on her hands.  They,
however, were a little tired, too; and, further, Grace had hunted out
the old bowls, much to the delight of the younger ones.  This sport
lasted a good while, but at last the sisters, who had relaxed their
attention a little, perceived that Conrade and Hubert were both
missing, and on Rachel's inquiry where they were, she received from
Francis that elegant stock answer, "in their skins."  However, they
came to light in process of time, the two mothers returned home, and
Mrs. Curtis and Grace had the conversation almost in their own hands.
Rachel was too much tired to do anything but read the new number of
her favourite "Traveller's Magazine," listening to her mother with
one ear, and gathering additional impressions of Sir Stephen Temple's
imprudence, and the need of their own vigilance.  To make Fanny feel
that she could lean upon some one besides the military secretary,
seemed to be the great object, and she was so confiding and
affectionate with her own kin, that there were great hopes.  Those
boys were an infliction, no doubt, but, thought Rachel, "there is
always an ordeal at the beginning of one's mission.  I am mastering
them by degrees, and should do so sooner if I had them in my own
hands, and no more worthy task can be done than training human beings
for their work in this world, so I must be willing to go through a
little while I bring them into order, and fit their mother for
managing them."

She spent the time before breakfast the next morning in a search
among the back numbers of the "Traveller's Magazine" for a paper upon
"Educational Laws," which she thought would be very good reading for
Fanny.  Her search had been just completed when Grace returned home
from church, looking a good deal distressed.  "My poor thrushes have
not escaped, Rachel," she said; "I came home that way to see how they
were going on, and the nest is torn out, one poor little fellow lying
dead below it."

"Well, that is much worse than I expected!" burst out Rachel.  "I did
think that boy Conrade would at least keep his promises."  And she
detailed the adventure of the previous day, whence the conclusion was
but too evident.  Grace, however, said in her own sweet manner that
she believed boys could not resist a nest, and thought it mere
womanhood to intercede for such lawful game.  She thought it would be
best to take no notice, it would only distress Fanny and make "the
mother" more afraid of the boys than she was already, and she doubted
the possibility of bringing it home to the puerile conscience.

"That is weak!" said Rachel.  "I received the boy's word, and it is
my business to deal with the breach of promise."

So down went Rachel, and finding the boys rushing about the garden,
according to their practice, before her arrival, she summoned
Conrade, and addressed him with, "Well, Conrade, I knew that you
were violent and disobedient, but I never expected you to fail in
your honour as a gentleman."

"I'll thrash any one who says I have," hotly exclaimed Conrade.

"Then you must thrash me.  You gave your word to me not to take your
Aunt Grace's thrush's nest."

"And I didn't," said Conrade, boldly.

But Rachel, used to flat denials at the village-school, was not to be
thus set aside.  "I am shocked at you, Conrade," she said.  "I know
your mamma will be exceedingly grieved.  You must have fallen into
very sad ways to be able to utter such a bold untruth.  You had
better confess at once, and then I shall have something to tell her
that will comfort he."

Conrade's dark face looked set as iron.

"Come; tell me you are sorry you took the nest, and have broken your
word, and told a falsehood."

Red colour flushed into the brown cheek, and the hands were clenched.

"There is not the smallest use in denying it.  I know you took it
when you and Hubert went away together.  Your Aunt Grace found it
gone this morning, and one of the poor little birds dead below.
What have you done with the others?"

Not a word.

"Then I grieve to say I must tell all to your mother."

There was a sort of smile of defiance, and he followed her.  For a
moment she thought of preventing this, and preparing Fanny in
private, but recollecting that this would give him the opportunity
of preparing Hubert to support his falsehood, she let him enter with
her, and sought Lady Temple in the nursery.

"Dear Fanny, I am very sorry to bring you so much vexation.  I am
afraid it will be a bitter grief to you, but it is only for Conrade's
own sake that I do it.  It was a cruel thing to take a bird's-nest at
all, but worse when he knew that his Aunt Grace was particularly fond
of it; and, besides, he had promised not to touch it, and now,
saddest of all, he denies having done so."

"Oh, Conrade, Conrade!" cried Fanny, quite confounded,  "You can't
have done like this!"

"So, I have not," said Conrade, coming up to her, as she held out her
hand, positively encouraging him, as Rachel thought, to persist in
the untruth.

"Listen, Fanny," said Rachel.  "I do not wonder that you are
unwilling to believe anything so shocking, but I do not come without
being only too certain."  And she gave the facts, to which Fanny
listened with pale cheeks and tearful eyes, then turned to the boy,
whose hand she had held all the time, and said, "Dear Con, do pray
tell me if you did it."

"I did not," said Conrade, wrenching his hand away, and putting it
behind his back.

"Where's Hubert?" asked Rachel, looking round, and much vexed when
she perceived that Hubert had been within hearing all the time,
though to be sure there was some little hope to be founded upon the
simplicity of five years old.

"Come here, Hubert dear," said his mother; "don't be frightened, only
come and tell me where you and Con went yesterday, when the others
were playing at bowls."  Hubert hung his head, and looked at his
brother.

"Tell," quoth Conrade.  "Never mind her, she's only a civilian."

"Where did you go, Hubert?"

"Con showed me the little birds in their nest."

"That is right, Hubert, good little boy.  Did you or he touch the
nest?"

"Yes."  Then, as Conrade started, and looked fiercely at him, "Yes
you did, Con, you touched the inside to see what it was made of."

"But what did you do with it?" asked Rachel.

"Left it there, up in the tree," said the little boy.

"There, Rachel!" said the mother, triumphantly.

"I don't know what you mean," said Rachel, angrily, "only that
Conrade is a worse boy than I had thought him, end has been teaching
his little brother falsehood."

The angry voice set Hubert crying, and little Cyril, who was very
soft-hearted, joined in chorus, followed by the baby, who was
conscious of something very disagreeable going on in her nursery.
Thereupon, after the apparently most important business of comforting
Miss Temple had been gone through, the court of justice adjourned,
Rachel opening the door of Conrade's little room, and recommending
solitary imprisonment there till he should be brought to confession.
She did not at all reckon on his mother going in with him, and
shutting the door after her.  It was not the popular notion of
solitary confinement, and Rachel was obliged to retire, and wait in
the drawing-room for a quarter of an hour before Fanny came down, and
then it was to say--

"Do you know, Rachel dear, I am convinced that it must be a mistake.
Conrade assures me he never touched the nest."

"So he persists in it?"

"And indeed, Rachel dear, I cannot help believing him.  If it had
been Francie, now; but I never knew Conrade tell an untruth in his
life."

"You never knew, because you always believe him."

"And it is not only me, but I have often heard the Major say he could
always depend on Conrade's word."

Rachel's next endeavour was at gentle argument.  "It must be dreadful
to make such a discovery, but it was far worse to let deceit go on
undetected; and if only they were firm--" At that moment she beheld
two knickerbocker boys prancing on the lawn.

"Didn't you lock the door?  Has he broken out?  How audacious!"

"I let him come out," said Fanny; "there was nothing to shut him up
for.  I beg your pardon, dear Rachel; I am very sony for the poor
little birds and for Grace, but I am sure Conrade did not take it."

"How can you be so unreasonable, Fanny--the evidence," and Rachel
went over it all again.

"Don't you think," said Fanny, "that some boy may have got into the
park?"

"My dear Fanny, I am sorry for you, it is quite out of the question
to think so; the place is not a stone's-throw from Randall's lodge.
It will be the most fatal thing in the world to let your weakness be
imposed on in this way.  Now  that the case is clear, the boy must be
forced to confession, and severely punished."

Fanny burst into tears.

"I am very sorry for you, Fanny.  I know it is very painful; I assure
you it is so to me.  Perhaps it would be best if I were to lock him
up, and go from time to time to see if he is come to a better mind."

She rose up.

"No, no, Rachel!" absolutely screamed Fanny, starting up, "my boy
hasn't done anything wrong, and I won't have him locked up!  Go away!
If anything is to be done to my boys, I'll do it myself: they haven't
got any one but me.  Oh, I wish the Major would come!"

"Fanny, how can you be so foolish?--as if I would hurt your boys!"

"But you won't believe Conrade--my Conrade, that never told a
falsehood in his life!" cried the mother, with a flush in her cheeks
and a bright glance in her soft eyes.  "You want me to punish him for
what he hasn't done."

"How much alike mothers are in all classes of life," thought Rachel,
and much in the way in which she would have brought Zack's mother to
reason by threats of expulsion from the shoe-club, she observed,
"Well Fanny, one thing is clear, while you are so weak as to let that
boy go on in his deceit, unrepentant and unpunished, I can have no
more to do with his education."

"Indeed," softly said Fanny, "I am afraid so, Rachel.  You have taken
a great deal of trouble, but Conrade declares he will never say a
lesson to you again, and I don't quite see how to make him after
this."

"Oh, very well; then there's an end of it.  I am sorry for you,
Fanny."

And away walked Rachel, and as she went towards the gate two
artificial jets d'eau, making a considerable curve in the air,
alighted, the one just before her, the other, better aimed, in the
back of her neck.  She had too much dignity to charge back upon the
offenders, but she went home full of the story of Fanny's lamentable
weakness, and prognostications of the misery she was entailing on
herself.  Her mother and sister were both much concerned, and thought
Fanny extremely foolish; Mrs. Curtis consoling herself with the hope
that the boys would be cured and tamed at school, and begging that
they might never be let loose in the park again.  Rachel could not
dwell much longer on the matter, for she had to ride to Upper Avon
Park to hold council on the books to be ordered for the book-club;
for if she did got go herself, whatever she wanted especially was
always set aside as too something or other for the rest of the
subscribers.

Mrs. Curtis was tired, and stayed at home; and Grace spent the
afternoon in investigations about the harrying of the thrushes, but,
alas! without coming a bit nearer the truth.  Nothing was seen or
heard of Lady Temple till, at half-past nine, one of the midges, or
diminutive flies used at Avonmonth, came to the door, and Fanny came
into the drawing-room--wan, tearful, agitated.

"Dear Rachel, I am so afraid I was hasty, I could not sleep without
coming to tell you how sorry I am."

"Then you are convinced?  I knew you would be."

"Oh, yes, I have just been sitting by him after he was gone to bed.
He never goes to sleep till I have done that, and he always tells me
if anything is on his mind.  I could not ask him again, it would have
been insulting him; but he went over it all of himself, and owned he
ought not to have put a finger on the edge of the nest, but he wanted
so to see what it was lined with; otherwise he never touched it.  He
says, poor boy, that it was only your being a civilian that made you
not able to believe him, I am sure you must believe him now."

Mrs. Curtis began, in her gentle way, about the difficulty of
believing one's children in fault, but Lady Temple was entirely past
accepting the possibility of Conrade's being to blame in this
particular instance.  It made her bristle up again, so that even
Rachel saw the impossibility of pressing it, and trusted to some
signal confutation to cure her of her infatuation.  But she was as
affectionate as ever, only wanting to be forgiven for the morning's
warmth, and to assure dear Aunt Curtis, dear Grace, and dearest
Rachel in particular, that there was no doing without them, and it
was the greatest blessing to be near them.

"Oh! and the squirting, dear Rachel!  I was so sorry when I found it
out, it was only Francie and Leo.  I was very angry with them for it,
and I should like to make them ask pardon, only I don't think Francie
would.  I'm afraid they are very rude boys.  I must write to the
Major to find me a governess that won't be very strict with them, and
if she could be an officer's daughter, the boys would respect her so
much more."




CHAPTER III



MACKAREL LANE



 "For I would lonely stand
  Uplifting my white hand,
  On a mission, on a mission,
  To declare the coming vision."
               ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.


"Well, Grace, all things considered, perhaps I had better walk down
with you to Mackarel Lane, and then I can form a judgment on these
Williamses without committing Fanny."

"Then you do not intend to go on teaching?"

"Not while Conrade continues to brave me, and is backed up by poor
Fanny."

"I might speak to Miss Williams after church, and bring her in to
Myrtlewood for Fanny to see."

"Yes, that might do in time; but I shall make up my mind first.  Poor
Fanny is so easily led that we must take care what influences fall in
her way."

"I always wished you would call."

"Yes, and I would not by way of patronage to please Mr. Touchett, but
this is for a purpose; and I hope we shall find both sisters at
home."

Mackarel Lane was at right angles to the shore, running up the valley
of the Avon; but it soon ceased to be fishy, and became agricultural,
owning a few cottages of very humble gentility, which were wont to
hang out boards to attract lodgers of small means.  At one of these
Grace rang, and obtained admittance to a parlour with crazy French
windows opening on a little strip of garden.  In a large wheeled
chair, between the fire and the window, surrounded by numerous little
appliances for comfort and occupation, sat the invalid Miss Williams,
holding out her hand in welcome to the guests.

"A fine countenance! what one calls a fine countenance!" thought
Rachel.  "Is it a delusion of insipidity as usual?  The brow is good,
massive, too much for the features, but perhaps they were fuller
once; eyes bright and vigorous, hazel, the colour for thought;
complexion meant to be brilliant brunette, a pleasant glow still;
hair with threads of grey.  I hope she does not affect youth; she
can't be less than one or two and thirty!  Many people set up for
beauties with far less claim.  What is the matter with her?  It is
not the countenance of deformity--accident, I should say.  Yes, it
is all favourable except the dress.  What a material; what a pattern!
Did she get it second-hand from a lady's-maid?  Will there be an
incongruity in her conversation to match?  Let us see.  Grace making
inquiries--Quite at my best--Ah! she is not one of the morbid sort,
never thinking themselves better."

"I was afraid, I had not seen you out for some time."

"No; going out is a troublesome business, and sitting in the garden
answers the same purpose."

"Of air, perhaps, but hardly of change or of view."

"Oh! I assure you there is a wonderful variety," she answered, with
an eager and brilliant smile.

"Clouds and sunsets?" asked Rachel, beginning to be interested.

"Yes, differing every day.  Then I have the tamarisk and its
inhabitants.  There has been a tom-tit's nest every year since we
came, and that provides us with infinite amusement.  Besides the sea-
gulls are often so good as to float high enough for me to see them.
There is a wonderful charm in a circumcribed view, because one is
obliged to look well into it all."

"Yes; eyes and no eyes apply there," said Rachel.

"We found a great prize, too, the other day.  Rosie!"

At the call a brown-haired, brown-eyed child of seven, looking like
a little fawn, sprang to the window from the outside.

"My dear, will you show the sphynx to Miss Curtis?"

The little girl daintily brought a box covered with net, in which
a huge apple-green caterpillar, with dashes of bright colour on his
sides, and a horny spike on his tail, was feasting upon tamarisk
leaves.  Grace asked if she was going to keep it.  "Yes, till it
buries itself," said the child.  "Aunt Ermine thinks it is the
elephant sphynx."

"I cannot be sure," said the aunt, "my sister tried to find a figure
of it at Villars', but he had no book that gave the caterpillars.
Do you care for those creatures?"

"I like to watch them," said Grace, "but I know nothing about them
scientifically; Rachel does that."

"Then can you help us to the history of our sphynx?" asked Miss
Williams, with her pleasant look.

"I will see if I have his portrait," said Rachel, "but I doubt it.
I prefer general principles to details."

"Don't you find working out details the best way of entering into
general principles?"

It was new to Rachel to find the mention of a general principle
received neither with a stare nor a laugh; and she gathered herself
up to answer, "Naming and collecting is not science."

"And masonry is not architecture, but you can't have architecture
without it."

"One can have broad ideas without all the petty work of flower
botanists and butterfly naturalists."

"Don't you think the broad ideas would be rather of the hearsay
order, at least to most people, unless their application were worked
out in the trifle that came first to hand?"

"Experimental philosophy," said Rachel, in rather a considering tone,
as if the notion, when presented to her in plain English, required
translation into the language of her thoughts.

"If you like to call it so," said Miss Williams, with a look of arch
fun.  "For instance, the great art of mud pie taught us the porous
nature of clay, the expansive power of steam, etc. etc."

"You had some one to improve it to you?"

"Oh dear no.  Only afterwards, when we read of such things we
remembered how our clay manufactures always burst in the baking
unless they were well dried first."

"Then you had the rare power of elucidating a principle?"

"No, not I.  My brother had; but I could only perceive the
confirmation."

"This reminds me of an interesting article on the Edgeworth system of
education in the 'Traveller's Review.'  I will send it down to you."

"Thank you, but I have it here."

"Indeed; and do you not think it excellent, and quite agree with it?"

"Yes, I quite agree with it," and there was an odd look in her bright
transparent eyes that made Grace speculate whether she could have
heard that agreement with the Invalid in the "Traveller's Review" was
one of the primary articles of faith acquired by Rachel.

But Grace, though rather proud of Rachel's falling under the spell of
Miss Williams' conversation, deemed an examination rather hard on
her, and took the opportunity of asking for her sister.

"She is generally at home by this time; but this is her last day at
Cliff Cottages, and she was to stay late to help in the packing up."

"Will she be at home for the present?" asked Grace.

"Yes, Rose and I are looking forward to a festival of her."

Grace was not at all surprised to hear Rachel at once commit herself
with "My cousin, Lady Temple," and rush into the matter in hand as if
secure that the other Miss Williams would educate on the principles
of the Invalid; but full in the midst there was a sound of wheels and
a ring at the bell.  Miss Williams quietly signed to her little
attendant to put a chair in an accessible place, and in walked Lady
Temple, Mrs. Curtis, and the middle brace of boys.

"The room will be too full," was Grace's aside to her sister, chiefly
thinking of her mother, but also of their hostess; but Rachel
returned for answer, "I must see about it;" and Grace could only
remove herself into the verandah, and try to attract Leoline and
Hubert after her, but failing in this, she talked to the far more
conversible Rose about the bullfinch that hung at the window, which
loved no one but Aunt Ermine, and scolded and pecked at every one
else; and Augustus, the beloved tame toad, that lived in a hole under
a tree in the garden.  Mrs. Curtis, considerate and tender-hearted,
startled to find her daughter in the field, and wishing her niece to
begin about her own affairs, talked common-place by way of filling up
the time, and Rachel had her eyes free for a range of the apartment.
The foundation was the dull, third-rate lodging-house, the
superstructure told of other scenes.  One end of the room was almost
filled by the frameless portrait of a dignified clergyman, who would
have had far more justice done to him by greater distance; a
beautifully-painted miniature of a lady with short waist and small
crisp curls, was the centre of a system of photographs over the
mantel-piece; a large crayon sketch showed three sisters between the
ages of six and sixteen, sentimentalizing over a flower-basket; a
pair of water-colour drawings represented a handsome church and
comfortable parsonage; and the domestic gallery was completed by two
prints--one of a middle-aged county-member, the other one of Chalon's
ladylike matrons in watered-silk aprons.  With some difficulty Rachel
read on the one the autograph, J. T. Beauchamp, and on the other the
inscription, the Lady Alison Beauchamp.  The table-cover was of
tasteful silk patchwork, the vase in the centre was of red
earthenware, but was encircled with real ivy leaves gummed on in
their freshness, and was filled with wild flowers; books filled every
corner; and Rachel felt herself out of the much-loathed region of
common-place, but she could not recover from her surprise at the
audacity of such an independent measure on the part of her cousin;
and under cover of her mother's civil talk, said to Fanny, "I never
expected to see you here."

"My aunt thought of it," said Fanny, "and as she seems to find the
children too much--"

She broke off, for Mrs. Curtis had paused to let her introduce the
subject, but poor Fanny had never taken the initiative, and Rachel
did it for her by explaining that all had come on the same errand, to
ask if Miss Williams would undertake the lessons of her nephews; Lady
Temple softly murmured under her veil something about hopes and too
much trouble; an appointment was made for the following morning, and
Mrs. Curtis, with a general sensation of an oppressive multitude in a
small room, took her leave, and the company departed, Fanny, all the
way home, hoping that the other Miss Williams would be like her
sister, pitying the cripple, wishing that the sisters were in the
remotest degree military, so as to obtain the respect of the hoys,
and wondering what would be the Major's opinion.

"So many ladies!" exclaimed little Rose.  "Aunt Ermine, have they
made your head ache?"

"No, my dear, thank you, I am only tired.  If you will pull out the
rest for my feet, I will be quiet a little, and be ready for tea when
Aunt Ailie comes."

The child handily converted the chair into a couch, arranging the
dress and coverings with the familiarity of long use, and by no means
shocked by the contraction and helplessness of the lower limbs, to
which she had been so much accustomed all her life that it never even
occurred to her to pity Aunt Ermine, who never treated herself as an
object of compassion.  She was thanked by a tender pressure on her
hair, and then saying--

"Now I shall wish Augustus good night; bring Violetta home from her
play in the garden, and let her drink tea, and go to bed."

Ah, Violetta, purchased with a silver groat, what was not your value
in Mackarel Lane?  Were you not one of its most considered
inhabitants, scarcely less a child of Aunt Ermine and Aunt Alison
than their Rosebud herself?

Murmur, murmur, rippled the child's happy low-toned monologue
directed to her silent but sufficient playmate, and so far from
disturbing the aunt, that more than one smile played on her lips at
the quaint fancies, and at the well of gladness in the young spirit,
which made day after day of the society of a cripple and an old doll,
one constant song of bliss, one dream of bright imaginings.  Surely
it was an equalization of blessings that rendered little lonely Rose,
motherless and well nigh fatherless, poor, with no companion but a
crippled aunt, a bird and a toad, with scarcely a toy, and never a
party of pleasure, one of the most joyous beings under the sun, free
from occasions of childish troubles, without collisions of temper,
with few contradictions, and with lessons rather pleasure than toil.
Perhaps Ermine did not take into account the sunshiny content and
cheerfulness that made herself a delightful companion and playfellow,
able to accept the child as her solace, not her burthen.

Presently Rose looked up, and meeting the bright pleasant eyes,
observed--"Violetta has been very good, and said all her lessons
quite perfect, and she would like to sit up till her Aunt Ailie comes
home.  Do you think she may?"

"Will she not be tired to-morrow?"

"Oh, then she will be lazy, and not get up when she is called, till
I pull all the clothes off, and that will be fun."

"Or she may be fretful now?"

A series of little squeaks ensued, followed by "Now, my love; that is
taking a very unfair advantage of my promise.  You will make your
poor Aunt Ermine's head ache, and I shall have to send you to bed."

"Would not a story pass away the time?"

"You tell it, Aunt Ermine; your stories are always the best.  And let
there be a fairy in it!"

The fairy had nearly performed her part, when the arrival took place,
and Rose darted forward to receive Aunt Ailie's greeting kiss.

"Yes, Rosie--yes, Violetta; what do you think I have got for you?"

And out came a doll's chair with a broken leg, condemned by the
departing pupils, and granted with a laugh to the governess's request
to take it to her little niece; but never in its best days had the
chair been so prized.  It was introduced to Violetta as the reward of
virtue for having controlled her fretfulness, and the repair of its
infirmity was the first consideration that occupied all the three.
After all, Violetta's sitting posture was, as Alison observed, an
example of the inclined plane, but that was nothing to Rose, and the
seance would have been indefinitely prolonged, but for considerations
for Violetta's health.

The sisters were alike, and Alison had, like her elder, what is
emphatically called countenance, but her features were less
chiselled, and her dark straight brows so nearly met that, as Rose
had once remarked, they made a bridge of one arch instead of two.
Six years younger, in full health, and daily battling with the world,
Alison had a remarkable look of concentration and vigour, her upright
bearing, clear decided speech, and glance of kindness won instant
respect and reliance, but her face missed the radiant beamy
brightness of her sister's; her face was sweet and winning, but it
was not habitual with her, and there was about her a look as if some
terrible wave of grief or suffering had swept over her ere yet the
features were fully fixed, and had thus moulded her expression for
life.  But playfulness was the tone that reigned around Ermine's
couch at ordinary moments, and beside her the grave Alison was
lively, not with effort, but by infection.

"There," she said, holding up a cheque; "now we'll have a jubilee,
and take you down under the East cliff, and we'll invest a shilling
in 'Ivanhoe,' and Rose and Violetta shall open their ears!"

"And you shall have a respectable Sunday mantle."

"Oh, I dare say Julia will send us a box."

"Then you will have to put a label on your back, 'Second-hand!' or
her velvet will be a scandal.  I can't wear out that at home like
this flagrant, flowery thing, that I saw Miss Curtis looking at as
rather a disreputable article.  There's preferment for you, Ailie!
What do you think of a general's widow with six boys?  She is come
after you.  We had a great invasion--three Curtises and this pretty
little widow, and various sons!"

"Will she stay?"

"Most likely, for she is a relation of Mrs. Curtis, and comes to be
near her.  You are to call for inspection at eleven o'clock tomorrow,
so I fear your holiday will be short."

"Well, the less play the less anxiety.  How many drives will the six
young gentlemen be worth to you?"

"I am afraid it will be at the cost of tough work to you; she looked
to me too sweet a creature to have broken her sons in, but I should
think she would be pleasant to deal with."

"If she be like Miss Curtis, I am sure she will."

"Miss Curtis?  My old friend you mean.  She was rather suppressed
today, and I began to comprehend the reason of the shudder with which
Mr. Touchett speaks of the dogmatical young lady."

"I hope she did not overwhelm you!"

"Oh, no! I rather liked her; she was so earnest and spirited, I could
fancy enjoying a good passage at arms with her if these were old
times.  But I hope she will not take the direction of your school-
room, though she is an admirer of the educational papers in the
'Traveller.'"

And here the discussion was ended by the entrance of little Rose with
the preliminaries of the evening meal, after which she went to bed,
and the aunts took out books, work, and writing materials.

Alison's report the next day was--"Well, she is a very sweet
creature.  There is something indescribably touching in her voice and
eyes, so soft and wistful, especially when she implores one not to be
hard on those great scrambling boys of hers."

"So she is your fate?"

"Oh, yes, if there had been ten more engagements offered, I could not
have helped accepting hers, even if it had not been on the best terms
I have ever had."

"What?"

"Seventy--for the hours between nine and five.  Pretty well for a
journeyman hack, is it not?  Indeed, the pretty thing's only fear
seemed to be that she was requiring too much, and offering too
little.  No, not her only fear, for there is some major in the
distance to whose approval everything must be subject--uncle or
guardian, I suppose, but he seemed to be rather an object of jealousy
to the younger Miss Curtis, for every hint of wishing to wait for the
Major made her press on the negotiations."

"Seventy!  I hope you will make it do, Ailie.  It would be a great
relief."

"And spare your brains not a little.  Yes, I do trust to keeping it,
for Lady Temple is delightful; and as to the boys, I fancy it is only
taming they want.  The danger is, as Miss Rachel told me, whether she
can bear the sight of the process.  I imagine Miss Rachel herself has
tried it, and failed."

"Part amateur work," said Ermine, smiling.  "It really is lucky you
had to turn governess, Ailie, or there would have been a talent
thrown away."

"Stay till I have tried," said Alison, who had, however, had
experience enough not to be much alarmed at the prospect.  Order was
wont to come with her presence, and she hardly knew the aspect of
tumultuous idleness or insubordination to unenforced authority; for
her eye and voice in themselves brought cheerful discipline without
constraint, and upheld by few punishments, for the strong influence
took away the spirit of rebellion.

After her first morning's work she came home full of good auguries;
the boys had been very pleasant with her after the first ten minutes,
and Conrade had gained her heart by his attention to his mother.
He had, however, examined her minutely whether she had any connexion
with the army, and looked grave on her disavowal of any relationship
with soldiers; Hubert adding, "You see, Aunt Rachel is only a
civilian, and she hasn't any sense at all."