y flowers you used to bring me one at a time,
when I was ill at Cape Town."

There was no more sense to be had after those three once fell upon
their reminiscences.

That night, after having betrayed her wakefulness by a movement in
her bed, Alison Williams heard her sister's voice, low and steady,
saying, "Ailie, dear, be it what it may, guessing is worse than
certainty."

"Oh, Ermine, I hoped--I know nothing--I have nothing to tell."

"You dread something," said Ermine; "you have been striving for
unconcern all the evening, my poor dear, but surely you know, Ailie,
that nothing is so bad while we share it."

"And I have frightened you about nothing."

"Nothing! nothing about Edward?"

"Oh, no, no!"

"And no one has made you uncomfortable?"

"No."

"Then there is only one thing that it can be, Ailie, and you need not
fear to tell me that.  I always knew that if he lived I must be
prepared for it, and you would not have hesitated to tell me of his
death."

"It is not that, indeed it is not, Ermine, it is only this--that I
found to-day that Lady Temple's major has the same name."

"But you said she was come home.  You must have seen him."

"Yes, but I should not know him.  I had only seen him once, remember,
twelve years ago, and when I durst not look at him."

"At least," said Ermine, quickly, "you can tell me what you saw to-
day."

"A Scotch face, bald head, dark beard, grizzled hair."

"Yes I am grey, and he was five years older; but he used not to have
a Scotch face.  Can you tell me about his eyes?"

"Dark," I think.

"They were very dark blue, almost black.  Time and climate must have
left them alone.  You may know him by those eyes, Ailie.  And you
could not make out anything about him?"

"No, not even his Christian name nor his regiment.  I had only the
little ones and Miss Rachel to ask, and they knew nothing.  I wanted
to keep this from you till I was sure, but you always find me out."

"Do you think I couldn't see the misery you were in all the evening,
poor child?  But now you have had it out, sleep, and don't be
distressed."

"But, Ermine, if you--"

"My dear, I am thankful that nothing is amiss with you or Edward.
For the rest, there is nothing but patience.  Now, not another word;
you must not lose your sleep, nor take away my chance of any."

How much the sisters slept they did not confide to one another, but
when they rose, Alison shook her head at her sister's heavy eyelids,
and Ermine retorted with a reproachful smile at certain dark tokens
of sleeplessness under Alison's eyes.

"No, not the flowered flimsiness, please," she said, in the course of
her toilette, "let me have the respectable grey silk."  And next she
asked for a drawer, whence she chose a little Nuremberg horn brooch
for her neck.  "I know it is very silly," she said, "but I can't
quite help it.  Only one question, Ailie, that I thought of too late.
Did he hear your name?"

"I think not, Lady Temple named nobody.  But why did you not ask me
last night?"

"I thought beginning to talk again would destroy your chance of
sleep, and we had resolved to stop."

"And, Ermine, if it be, what shall I do?"

"Do as you feel right at the moment," said Ermine, after a moment's
pause.  "I cannot tell how it may be.  I have been thinking over what
you told me about the Major and Lady Temple."

"Oh, Ermine, what a reproof this is for that bit of gossip."

"Not at all, my dear, the warning may be all the better for me," said
Ermine, with a voice less steady than her words.  "It is not what,
under the circumstances, I could think likely in the Colin whom I
knew; but were it indeed so, then, Ailie, you had better say nothing
about me, unless he found you out.  We would get employment
elsewhere."

"And I must leave you to the suspense all day."

"Much better so.  The worst thing we could do would be to go on
talking about it.  It is far better for me to be left with my dear
little unconscious companion."

Alison tried to comfort herself with this belief through the long
hours of the morning, during which she only heard that mamma and
Colonel Keith were gone to the Homestead, and she saw no one till she
came forth with her troop to the midday meal.

And there, at sight of Lady Temple's content and calm, satisfied
look, as though she were once more in an accustomed atmosphere, and
felt herself and the boys protected, and of the Colonel's courteous
attention to her and affectionate authority towards her sons, it was
an absolute pang to recognise the hue of eye described by Ermine; but
still Alison tried to think them generic Keith eyes, till at length,
amid the merry chatter of her pupils, came an appeal to "Miss
Williams," and then came a look that thrilled through her, the same
glance that she had met for one terrible moment twelve years before,
and renewing the same longing to shrink from all sight or sound.  How
she kept her seat and continued to attend to the children she never
knew, but the voices sounded like a distant Babel; and she did not
know whether she were most relieved, disappointed, or indignant when
she left the dining-room to take the boys for their walk.  Oh, that
Ermine could be hid from all knowledge of what would be so much
harder to bear than the death in which she had long believed!

Harder to bear?  Yes, Ermine had already been passing through a heart
sickness that made the morning like an age.  Her resolute will had
struggled hard for composure, cheerfulness, and occupation; but the
little watchful niece had seen through the endeavour, and had made
her own to the sleepless night and the headache.  The usual remedy
was a drive in a wheeled chair, and Rose was so urgent to be allowed
to go and order one, that Ermine at last yielded, partly because she
had hardly energy enough to turn her refusal graciously, partly
because she would not feel herself staying at home for the vague hope
and when the child was out of sight, she had the comfort of clasping
her hands, and ceasing to restrain her countenance, while she
murmured, "Oh, Colin, Colin, are you what you were twelve years back?
Is this all dream, all delusion, and waste of feeling, while you are
lying in your Indian grave, more mine than you can ever be living be
as it may,--


                  "'Calm me, my God, and keep me calm
                      While these hot breezes blow;
                    Be like the night dew's cooling balm
                      Upon earth's fevered brow.
                    Calm me, my God, and keep me calm,
                      Soft resting on Thy breast;
                    Soothe me with holy hymn and psalm,
                      And bid my spirit rest.'"




CHAPTER V



MILITARY SOCIETY.



                         "My trust
 Like a good parent did beget of him
 A falsehood in its contrary as great
 As my trust was, which had indeed no limit."--TEMPEST.


Rose found the wheeled chair, to which her aunt gave the preference,
was engaged, and shaking her little discreet head at "the shakey
chair" and "the stuffy chair," she turned pensively homeward, and was
speeding down Mackarel Lane, when she was stayed by the words, "My
little girl!" and the grandest and most bearded gentleman she had
ever seen, demanded, "Can you tell me if Miss Williams lives here?"

"My aunt?" exclaimed Rose, gazing up with her pretty, frightened-fawn
look.

"Indeed!" he exclaimed, looking eagerly at her, "then you are the
child of a very old friend of mine!  Did you never hear him speak of
his old school-fellow, Colin Keith?"

"Papa is away," said Rose, turning back her neck to get a full view
of his face from under the brim of her hat.

"'Will you run on and ask your aunt if she would like to see me?" he
added.

Thus it was that Ermine heard the quick patter of the child's steps,
followed by the manly tread, and the words sounded in her ears, "Aunt
Ermine, there's a gentleman, and he has a great beard, and he says he
is papa's old friend!  And here he is."

Ermine's beaming eyes as absolutely met the new comer as though she
had sprung forward.  "I thought you would come," she said, in a voice
serene with exceeding bliss.

"I have found you at last," as their hands clasped; and they gazed
into each other's faces in the untroubled repose of the meeting,
exclusive of all else.

Ermine was the first to break silence.  "Oh, Colin, you look worn and
altered."

"You don't; you have kept your sunbeam face for me with the dear
brown glow I never thought to have seen again.  Why did they tell me
you were an invalid, Ermine?"

"Have you not seen Alison?" she asked, supposing he would have known
all.

"I saw her, but did not hear her name, till just now at luncheon,
when our looks met, and I saw it was not another disappointment."

"And she knows you are come to me?"

"It was not in me to speak to her till I had recovered you!  One can
forgive, but not forget."

"You will do more when you know her, and how she has only lived and
worked for me, dear Ailie, and suffered far more than I--"

"While I was suffering from being unable to do anything but live for
you," he repeated, taking up her words; "but that is ended now--" and
as she made a negative motion of her head, "have you not trusted to
me?"

"I have thought you not living," she said; "the last I know was your
letter to dear Lady Alison, written from the hospital at Cape Town,
after your wound.  She was ill even when it came, and she could only
give it to Ailie for me."

"Dear good aunt, she got into trouble with all the family for our
sake; and when she was gone no one would give me any tidings of you."

"It was her last disappointment that you were not sent home on sick
leave.  Did you get well too fast?"

"Not exactly; but my father, or rather, I believe, my brother,
intimated that I should be welcome only if I had laid aside a certain
foolish fancy, and as lying on my back had not conduced to that end,
I could only say I would stay where I was."

"And was it worse for you?  I am sure, in spite of all that tanned
skin, that your health has suffered.  Ought you to have come home?"

"No, I do not know that London surgeons could have got at the ball,"
he said, putting his hand on his chest, "and it gives me no trouble
in general.  I was such a spectacle when I returned to duty, that
good old Sir Stephen Temple, always a proverb for making his staff
a refuge for the infirm, made me his aide-de-camp, and was like a
father to me."

"Now I see why I never could find your name in any list of the
officers in the moves of the regiment!  I gave you quite up when I
saw no Keith among those that came home from India.  I did believe
then that you were the Colonel Alexander Keith whose death I had seen
mentioned, though I had long trusted to his not being honourable, nor
having your first name."

"Ah! he succeeded to the command after Lady Temple's father.  A kind
friend to me he was, and he left me in charge of his son and daughter.
A very good and gallant fellow is that young Alick.  I must bring him
to see you some day--"

"Oh! I saw his name; I remember!  I gloried in the doings of a Keith;
but I was afraid he had died, as there was no such name with the
regiment when it came home."

"No, he was almost shattered to pieces; but Sir Stephen sent him up
the hills to be nursed by Lady Temple and her mother, and he was sent
home as soon as he could be moved.  I was astonished to see how
entirely he had recovered."

"Then you went through all that Indian war?"

"Yes; with Sir Stephen."

"You must show me all your medals!  How much you have to tell me!
And then--?"

"Just when the regiment was coming home, my dear old chief was
appointed to the command in Australia, and insisted on my coming with
him as military secretary.  He had come to depend on me so much that
I could not well leave him; and in five years there was the way to
promotion and to claiming you at once.  We were just settled there,
when what I heard made me long to have decided otherwise, but I could
not break with him then.  I wrote to Edward, but had my letter
returned to me."

"No wonder; Edward was abroad, all connexion broken."

"I wrote to Beauchamp, and he knew nothing, and I could only wait
till my chief's time should be up.  You know how it was cut short,
and how the care of the poor little widow detained me till she was
fit for the voyage.  I came and sought you in vain in town.  I went
home, and found my brother lonely and dispirited.  He has lost his
son, his daughters are married, and he and I are all the brothers
left out of the six!  He was urgent that I should come and live with
him and marry.  I told him I would, with all my heart, when I had
found you, and he saw I was too much in earnest to be opposed.  Then
I went to Beauchamp, but Harry knew nothing about any one.  I tried
to find out your sister and Dr. Long, but heard they were gone to
Belfast."

"Yes, they lost a good deal in the crash, and did not like
retrenching among their neighbours, so they went to Ireland, and
there they have a flourishing practice."

"I thought myself on my way there," he said, smiling; "only I had
first to settle Lady Temple, little guessing who was her treasure of
a governess!  Last night I had nearly opened, on another false scent;
I fell in with a description that I could have sworn was yours, of
the heather behind the parsonage.  I made a note of the publisher in
case all else had failed."

"I'm glad you knew the scent of the thyme!"

"Then it was no false scent?"

"One must live, and I was thankful to do anything to lighten Ailie's
burthen.  I wrote down that description that I might live in the
place in fancy; and one day, when the contribution was wanted and I
was hard up for ideas, I sent it, though I was loth to lay open that
bit of home and heart."

"Well it might give me the sense of meeting you!  And in other papers
of the series I traced your old self more ripened."

"The editor was a friend of Edward's, and in our London days he asked
me to write letters on things in general, and when I said I saw the
world through a key-hole, he answered that a circumscribed view
gained in distinctness.  Most kind and helpful he has been, and what
began between sport and need to say out one's mind has come to be a
resource for which we are very thankful.  He sends us books for
reviewal, and that is pleasant and improving, not to say profitable."

"Little did I think you were in such straits!" he said, stroking the
child's head, and waiting as though her presence were a restraint on
inquiries, but she eagerly availed herself of the pause.  "Aunt
Ermine, please what shall I say about the chairs?  Will you have the
nice one and Billy when they come home?  I was to take the answer,
only you did talk so that I could not ask!"

"Thank you, my dear; I don't want chairs nor anything else while I
can talk so," she answered, smiling.  "You had better take a run in
the garden when you come back;" and Rose replied with a nod of assent
that made the colonel smile and say, "Good-bye then, my sweet Lady
Discretion, some day we will be better acquainted."

"Dear child," said Ermine, "she is our great blessing, and some day I
trust will be the same to her dear father.  Oh, Colin! it is too much
to hope that you have not believed what you must have heard!  And yet
you wrote to him."

"Nay, I could not but feel great distrust of what I heard, since I
was also told that his sisters were unconvinced; and besides, I had
continually seen him at school the victim of other people's faults."

"This is best of all," exclaimed Ermine, with glistening eyes, and
hand laid upon his; "it is the most comfortable word I have heard
since it happened.  Yes, indeed, many a time before I saw you, had
I heard of 'Keith' as the friend who saw him righted.  Oh, Colin!
thanks, thanks for believing in him more than for all!"

"Not believing, but knowing," he answered--"knowing both you and
Edward.  Besides, is it not almost invariable that the inventor is
ruined by his invention--a Prospero by nature?"

"It was not the invention," she answered; "that throve as long as my
father lived."

"Yes, he was an excellent man of business."

"And he thought the concern so secure that there was no danger in
embarking all the available capital of the family in it, and it did
bring us in a very good income."

"I remember that it struck me that the people at home would find that
they had made a mistake after all, and missed a fortune for me!  It
was an invention for diminishing the fragility of glass under heat;
was it not?"

"Yes, and the manufacture was very prosperous, so that my father was
quite at ease about us.  After his death we made a home for Edward in
London, and looked after him when he used to be smitten with some new
idea and forgot all sublunary matters.  When he married we went to
live at Richmond, and had his dear little wife very much with us, for
she was a delicate tender creature, half killed by London.  In
process of time he fell in with a man named Maddox, plausible and
clever, who became a sort of manager, especially while Edward was in
his trances of invention; and at all times knew more about his
accounts than he did himself.  Nothing but my father's authority had
ever made him really look into them, and this man took them all off
his hands.  There was a matter about the glass that Edward was bent
on ascertaining, and he went to study the manufacture in Bohemia,
taking his wife with him, and leaving Rose with us.  Shortly after,
Dr. Long and Harry Beauchamp received letters asking for a
considerable advance, to be laid out on the materials that this
improvement would require.  Immediately afterwards came the crash."

"Exactly what I heard.  Of course the letters were written in
ignorance of what was impending."

"Colin, they were never written at all by Edward!  He denied all
knowledge of them.  Alison saw Dr. Long's, most ingeniously managed--
foreign paper and all--but she could swear to the forgery--"

"You suspect this Maddox?"

"Most strongly!  He knew the state of the business; Edward did not.
And he had a correspondence that would have enabled so ingenious a
person easily to imitate Edward's letters.  I do not wonder at their
having been taken in; but how Julia--how Harry Beauchamp could
believe--what they do believe.  Oh, Colin! it will not do to think
about it!"

"Oh, that I had been at home!  Were no measures taken?"

"Alas! alas! we urged Edward to come home and clear himself; but that
poor little wife of his was terrified beyond measure, imagined
prisons and trials.  She was unable to move, and he could not leave
her; she took from him an unhappy promise not to put himself in what
she fancied danger from the law, and then died, leaving him a baby
that did not live a day.  He was too broken-hearted to care for
vindicating himself, and no one-no one would do it for him!"

Colonel Keith frowned and clenched the hand that lay in his grasp
till it was absolute pain, but pain that was a relief to feel.
"Madness, madness!" he said.  "Miserable! But how was it at home--?
Did this Maddox stand his ground?"

"Yes, if he had fled, all would have been clear, but he doctored the
accounts his own way, and quite satisfied Dr. Long and Harry.  He
showed Edward's receipt for the £6000 that had been advanced, and
besides, there was a large sum not accounted for, which was, of
course, supposed to have been invested abroad by Edward--some said
gambled away--as if he had not had a regular hatred of all sorts of
games."

"Edward with his head in the clouds!  One notion is as likely as the
other.--Then absolutely nothing was done!"

"Nothing!  The bankruptcy was declared, the whole affair broken up;
and certainly if every one had not known Edward to be the most
heedless of men, the confusion would have justified them in thinking
him a dishonest one.  Things had been done in his name by Maddox that
might have made a stranger think him guilty of the rest, but to those
who had ever known his abstraction, and far more his real honour and
uprightness, nothing could have been plainer."

"It all turned upon his absence."

"Yes, he must have borne the brunt of what had been done in his name,
I know; that would have been bad enough, but in a court of justice,
his whole character would have been shown, and besides, a prosecution
for forgery of his receipt would have shown what Maddox was,
sufficiently to exculpate him."

"And you say the losers by the deception would not believe in it?"

"No, they only shook their heads at our weak sisterly affection."

"I wish I could see one of those letters.  Where is Maddox now?"

"I cannot tell.  He certainly did not go away immediately after the
settlement of accounts, but it has not been possible to us to keep up
a knowledge of his movements, or something might have turned up to
justify Edward.  Oh, what it is to be helpless women!  You are the
very first person, Colin, who has not looked at me pityingly, like a
creature to be forborne with an undeniable delusion!"

"They must be very insolent people, then, to look at that brow and
eyes, and think even sisterly love could blind them," he said.  "Yes,
Ermine, I was certain that unless Edward were more changed than I
could believe, there must be some such explanation.  You have never
seen him since?"

"No, he was too utterly broken by the loss of his wife to feel
anything else.  For a long time we heard nothing, and that was the
most dreadful time of all!  Then he wrote from a little German town,
where he was getting his bread as a photographer's assistant.  And
since that he has cast about the world, till just now he has some
rather interesting employment at the mines in the Oural Mountains,
the first thing he has really seemed to like or care for."

"The Oural Mountains! that is out of reach.  I wish I could see him.
One might find some means of clearing him.  What directed your
suspicion to Maddox?"

"Chiefly that the letters professed to have been sent in a parcel to
him to be posted from the office.  If it had been so, Edward and Lucy
would certainly have written to us at the same time.  I could have
shown, too, that Maddox had written to me the day before to ascertain
where Edward was, so as to be sure of the date.  It was a little
country village, and I made a blunder in copying the spelling from
Lucy's writing.  Ailie found that very blunder repeated in Dr. Long's
letter, and we showed him that Edward did not write it so.  Besides,
before going abroad, Edward had lost the seal-ring with his crest,
which you gave him.  You remember the Saxon's head?"

"I remember!  You all took it much to heart that the engraver had
made it a Saracen's head, and not a long-haired Saxon."

"Well, Edward had renewed the ring, and taken care to make it a
Saxon.  Now Ailie could get no one to believe her, but she is certain
that the letter was sealed with the old Saracen not the new Saxon.
But--but--if you had but been there--"

"Tell me you wished for me, Ermine."

"I durst not wish anything about you," she said, looking up through
a mist of tears.

"And you, what fixed you here?"

"An old servant of ours had married and settled here, and had written
to us of her satisfaction in finding that the clergyman was from
Hereford.  We thought he would recommend Ailie as daily governess to
visitors, and that Sarah would be a comfortable landlady.  It has
answered very well; Rose deserves her name far more than when we
brought her here, and it is wonderful how much better I have been
since doctors have become a mere luxury."

"Do you, can you really mean that you are supporting yourselves?"

"All but twenty-five pounds a year, from a legacy to us, that Mr.
Beauchamp would not let them touch.  But it has been most remarkable,
Colin," she said, with the dew in her eyes, "how we have never wanted
our daily bread, and how happy we have been!  If it had not been for
Edward, this would in many ways have been our happiest time.  Since
the old days the little frets have told less, and Ailie has been
infinitely happier and brighter since she has had to work instead of
only to watch me.  Ah, Colin, must I not own to having been happy?
Indeed it was very much because peace had come when the suspense had
sunk into belief that I might think of you as--, where you would not
be grieved by the sight of what I am now--"

As she spoke, a knock, not at the house, but at the room door, made
them both start, and impel their chairs to a more ordinary distance,
just as Rachel Curtis made her entrance, extremely amazed to find,
not Mr. Touchett, but a much greater foe and rival in that unexpected
quarter.  Ermine, the least disconcerted, was the first to speak.
"You are surprised to find a visitor here," she said, "and indeed
only now, did we find out that 'our military secretary,' as your
little cousins say, was our clear old squire's nephew."

There was a ring of gladness in the usually patient voice that struck
even Rachel, though she was usually too eager to be observant, but
she was still unready with talk for the occasion, and Ermine
continued: "We had heard so much of the Major before-hand, that we
had a sort of Jupiter-like expectation of the coming man.  I am not
sure that I shall not go on expecting a mythic major!"

Rachel, never understanding playfulness, thought this both audacious
and unnecessary, and if it had come from any one else, would have
administered a snub, but she felt the invalid sacred from her
weapons.

"Have you ever seen the boys?" asked Colonel Keith.  "I am rather
proud of Conrade, my pupil; he is so chivalrous towards his mother."

"Alison has brought down a division or two to show me.  How much
alike they are."

"Exactly alike, and excessively unruly and unmanageable," said
Rachel.  "I pity your sister."

"More unmanageable in appearance than in reality," said the colonel:
"there's always a little trial of strength against the hand over
them, and they yield when they find it is really a hand.  They were
wonderfully good and considerate when it was an object to keep the
house quiet."

Rachel would not encourage him to talk of Lady Temple, so she turned
to Ermine on the business that had brought her, collecting and
adapting old clothes for emigrants.--It was not exactly gentlemen's
pastime, and Ermine tried to put it aside and converse, but Rachel
never permitted any petty consideration to interfere with a useful
design, and as there was a press of time for the things, she felt
herself justified in driving the intruder off the field and
outstaying him.  She succeeded; he recollected the desire of the boys
that he should take them to inspect the pony at the "Jolly Mariner,"
and took leave with--"I shall see you to-morrow."

"You knew him all the time!" exclaimed Rachel, pausing in her
unfolding of the Master Temples' ship wardrobe.  "Why did you not
say so?"

"We did not know his name.  He was always the 'Major.'"

"Who, and what is he?" demanded Rachel, as she knelt before her
victim, fixing those great prominent eyes, so like those of Red
Riding Hood's grandmother, that Ermine involuntarily gave a backward
impulse to her wheeled chair, as she answered the readiest thing that
occurred to her,--"He is brother to Lord Keith of Gowan-brae."

"Oh," said Rachel, kneeling on meditatively, "that accounts for it.
So much the worse.  The staff is made up of idle honourables."

"Quoth the 'Times!'" replied Ermine; "but his appointment began on
account of a wound, and went on because of his usefulness--"

"Wounded!  I don't like wounded heroes," said Rachel; "people make
such a fuss with them that they always get spoilt."

"This was nine years ago, so you may forget it if you like," said
Ermine, diversion suppressing displeasure.

"And what is your opinion of him?" said Rachel, edging forward on her
knees, so as to bring her inquisitorial eyes to bear more fully.

"I had not seen him for twelve years," said Ermine, rather faintly.

"He must have had a formed character when you saw him last.  The
twelve years before five-and-forty don't alter the nature."

"Five-and-forty!  Illness and climate have told, but I did not think
it was so much.  He is only thirty-six--"

"That is not what I care about," said Rachel, "you are both of you so
cautious that you tell me what amounts to nothing!  You should
consider how important it is to me to know something about the person
in whose power my cousin's affairs are left."

"Have you not sufficient guarantee in the very fact of her husband's
confidence?"

"I don't know.  A simple-hearted old soldier always means a very
foolish old man."

"Witness the Newcomes," said Ermine, who, besides her usual amusement
in tracing Rachel's dicta to their source, could only keep in her
indignation by laughing.

"General observation," said Rachel, not to be turned from her
purpose.  "I am not foolishly suspicious, but it is not pleasant to
see great influence and intimacy without some knowledge of the person
exercising it."

"I think," said Ermine, bringing herself with difficulty to answer
quietly, "that you can hardly understand the terms they are on
without having seen how much a staff officer becomes one of the
family."

"I suppose much must be allowed for the frivolity and narrowness of
a military set in a colony.  Imagine my one attempt at rational
conversation last night.  Asking his views on female emigration,
absolutely he had none at all; he and Fanny only went off upon a
nursemaid married to a sergeant!"

"Perhaps the bearings of the question would hardly suit mixed
company."

"To be sure there was a conceited young officer there; for as ill
luck will have it, my uncle's old regiment is quartered at
Avoncester, and I suppose they will all be coming after Fanny.  It is
well they are no nearer, and as this colonel says he is going to
Belfast in a day or two, there will not be much provocation to them
to come here.  Now this great event of the Major's coming is over, we
will try to put Fanny upon a definite system, and I look to you and
your sister as a great assistance to me, in counteracting the follies
and nonsenses that her situation naturally exposes her to.  I have
been writing a little sketch of the dangers of indecision, that I
thought of sending to the 'Traveller.'  It would strike Fanny to see
there what I so often tell her; but I can't get an answer about my
paper on 'Curatocult,' as you made me call it."

"Did I!"

"You said the other word was of two languages.  I can't think why
they don't insert it; but in the meantime I will bring down my 'Human
Reeds,' and show them to you.  I have only an hour's work on them; so
I'll come to-morrow afternoon."

"I think Colonel Keith talked of calling again--thank you," suggested
Ermine in despair.

"Ah, yes, one does not want to be liable to interruptions in the most
interesting part.  When he is gone to Belfast--"

"Yes, when he is gone to Belfast!" repeated Ermine, with an
irresistible gleam of mirth about her lips and eyes, and at that
moment Alison made her appearance.  The looks of the sisters met, and
read one another so far as to know that the meeting was over, and for
the rest they endured, while Rachel remained, little imagining the
trial her presence had been to Alison's burning heart--sick anxiety
and doubt.  How could it be well?  Let him be loveable, let him be
constant, that only rendered Ermine's condition the more pitiable,
and the shining glance of her eyes was almost more than Alison could
bear.  So happy as the sisters had been together, so absolutely
united, it did seem hard to disturb that calm life with hopes and
agitations that must needs be futile; and Alison, whose whole life
and soul were in her sister, could not without a pang see that
sister's heart belonging to another, and not for hopeful joy, but
pain and grief.  The yearning of jealousy was sternly reproved and
forced down, and told that Ermine had long been Colin Keith's, that
the perpetrator of the evil had the least right of any one to murmur
that her own monopoly of her sister was interfered with; that she was
selfish, unkind, envious; that she had only to hate herself and pray
for strength to bear the punishment, without alloying Ermine's
happiness while it lasted.  How it could be so bright Alison knew
not, but so it was she recognised by every tone of the voice, by
every smile on the lip, by even the upright vigour with which Ermine
sat in her chair and undertook Rachel's tasks of needlework.

And yet, when the visitor rose at last to go, Alison was almost
unwilling to be alone with her sister, and have that power of
sympathy put to the test by those clear eyes that were wont to see
her through and through.  She went with Rachel to the door, and stood
taking a last instruction, hearing it not at all, but answering, and
relieved by the delay, hardly knowing whether to be glad or not that
when she returned Rose was leaning on the arm of her aunt's chair
with the most eager face.  But Rose was to be no protection, for what
was passing between her and her aunt?

"O auntie, I am go glad he is coming back.  He is just like the
picture you drew of Robert Bruce for me.  And he is so kind.  I never
saw any gentleman speak to you in such: a nice soft voice."

Alison had no difficulty in smiling as Ermine stroked the child's
hair, kissed her, and looked up with an arch, blushing, glittering
face that could not have been brighter those long twelve years ago.

And then Rose turned round, impatient to tell her other aunt her
story.  "O aunt Ailie, we have had such a gentleman here, with a
great brown beard like a picture.  And he is papa's old friend, and
kissed me because I am papa's little girl, and I do like him so very
much.  I went where I could look at him in the garden, when you sent
me out, aunt Ermine."

"You did, you monkey?" said Ermine, laughing, and blushing again.
"What will you do if I send you out next time?  No, I won't then, my
dear, for all the time, I should like you to see him and know him."

"Only, if you want to talk of anything very particular," observed
Rose.

"I don't think I need ask many questions," said Alison, smiling being
happily made very easy to her.  "Dear Ermine, I see you are perfectly
satisfied--"

"O Ailie, that is no word for it!  Not only himself, but to find him
loving Rose for her father's sake, undoubting of him through all.
Ailie, the thankfulness of it is more than one can bear."

"And he is the same?" said Alison.

"The same--no, not the same.  It is more, better, or I am able to
feel it more.  It was just like the morrow of the day he walked down
the lane with me and gathered honeysuckles, only the night between
has been a very, very strange time."

"I hope the interruption did not come very soon."

"I thought it was directly, but it could not have been so soon, since
you are come home.  We had just had time to tell what we most wanted
to know, and I know a little more of what he is.  I feel as if it
were not only Colin again, but ten times Colin.  O Ailie, it must be
a little bit like the meetings in heaven!"

"I believe it is so with you," said Alison, scarcely able to keep the
tears from her eyes.

"After sometimes not daring to dwell on him, and then only venturing
because I thought he must be dead, to have him back again with the
same looks, only deeper--to find that he clung to those weeks so long
ago, and, above all, that there was not one cloud, one doubt about
the troubles--Oh, it is too, too much."

Ermine lent back with clasped hands.  She was like one weary with
happiness, and lain to rest in the sense of newly-won peace.  She
said little more that evening, and if spoken to, seemed like one
wakened out of a dream, so that more than once she laughed at
herself, begged her sister's pardon, and said that it seemed to her
that she could not hear anything for the one glad voice that rang in
her ear, "Colin is come home."  That was sufficient for her, no need
for any other sympathy, felt Alison, with another of those pangs
crushed down.  Then wonder came--whether Ermine could really
contemplate the future, or if it were absolutely lost in the present?

Colonel Keith went back to be seized by Conrade and Francis, and
walked off to the pony inspection, the two boys, on either side of
him, communicating to him the great grievance of living in a poky
place like this, where nobody had ever been in the army, nor had a
bit of sense, and Aunt Rachel was always bothering, and trying to
make mamma think that Con told stories.

"I don't mind that," said Conrade, stoutly; "let her try!"

"Oh, but she wanted mamma to shut you up," added Francis.

"Well, and mamma knows better," said Conrade, "and it made her leave
off teaching me, so it was lucky.  But I don't mind that; only don't
you see, Colonel, they don't know how to treat mamma!  They go and
bully her, and treat her like--like a subaltern, till I hate the very
sight of it."

"My boy," said the Colonel, who had been giving only half attention;
"you must make up your mind to your mother not being at the head of
everything, as she used to be in your father's time.  She will always
be respected, but you must look to yourself as you grow up to make a
position tor her!"

"I wish I was grown up!" sighed Conrade; "how I would give it to Aunt
Rachel!  But why must we live here to have her plaguing us?"

Questions that the Colonel was glad to turn aside by moans of the
ponies, and by a suggestion that, if a very quiet one were found, and
if Conrade would be very careful, mamma might, perhaps, go out riding
with them.  The motion was so transcendant that, no sooner had the
ponies been seen, than the boys raced home, and had communicated it
at the top of their voices to mamma long before their friend made his
appearance.  Lady Temple was quite startled at the idea.  "Dear
papa," as she always called her husband, "had wished her to ride, but
she had seldom done so, and now--" The tears came into her eyes.

"I think you might," said the Colonel, gently; "I could find you a
quiet animal, and to have you with Conrade would be such a protection
to him," he added, as the boys had rushed out of the room.

"Yes; perhaps, dear boy.  But I could not begin alone; it is so long
since I rode.  Perhaps when you come back from Ireland."

"I am not going to Ireland."

"I thought you said--" said Fanny looking up surprised; "I am very
glad!  But if you wished to go, pray don't think about us!  I shall
learn to manage in time, and I cannot bear to detain you."

"You do not detain me," he said, sitting down by her; "I have found
what I was going in search of, and through your means."

"What--what do you mean!  You were going to see Miss Williams this
afternoon, I thought!"

"Yes, and it was she whom I was seeking."  He paused, and added
slowly, as if merely for the sake of dwelling on the words, "I have
found her!"

"Miss Williams!" said Fanny, with perplexed looks.

"Miss Williams!--my Ermine whom I had not seen since the day after
her accident, when we parted as on her deathbed!"

"That sister!  Oh, poor thing, I am so glad!  But I am sorry!" cried
the much confused Fanny, in a breath; "were not you very much
shocked?"

"I had never hoped to see her face in all its brightness again," he
said.  "Twelve years!  It is twelve years that she has suffered, and
of late she has been brought to this grievous state of poverty, and
yet the spirit is as brave and cheerful as ever!  It looks out of the
beautiful eyes--more beautiful than when I first saw them,--I could
see and think of nothing else!"

"Twelve years!" repeated Fanny; "is it so long since you saw her?"

"Almost since I heard of her!  She was like a daughter to my aunt at
Beauchamp, and her brother was my schoolfellow.  For one summer, when
I was quartered at Hertford, I was with her constantly, but my family
would not even hear of the indefinite engagement that was all we
could have looked to, and made me exchange into the --th."

"Ah! that was the way we came to have you!  I must tell you, dear Sir
Stephen always guessed.  Once when he had quite vexed poor mamma by
preventing her from joking you in her way about young ladies, he told
me that once, when he was young, he had liked some one who died or
was married, I don't quite know which, and he thought it was the same
with you, from something that happened when you withdrew your
application for leave after your wound."

"Yes! it was a letter from home, implying that my return would be
accepted as a sign that I gave her up.  So that was an additional
instance of the exceeding kindness that I always received."

And there was a pause, both much affected by the thought of the good
old man's ever ready consideration.  At last Fanny said, "I am sure
it was well for us!  What would he have done without you?--and," she
added, "do you really mean that you never heard of her all these
years?"

"Never after my aunt's death, except just after we went to Melbourne,
when I heard in general terms of the ruin of the family and the false
imputation on their brother."

"Ah!  I remember that you did say something about going home, and Sir
Stephen was distressed, and mamma and I persuaded you because we saw
he would have missed you so much, and mamma was quite hurt at your
thinking of going.  But if you had only told him your reason, he
would never have thought of standing in your way."

"I know he would not, but I saw he could hardly find any one else
just then who knew his ways so well.  Besides, there was little use
in going home till I had my promotion, and could offer her a home;
and I had no notion how utter the ruin was, or that she had lost so
much.  So little did I imagine their straits that, but for Alison's
look, I should hardly have inquired even on hearing her name."

"How very curious--how strangely things come round!" said Fanny; then
with a start of dismay, "but what shall I do?  Pray, tell me what you
would like.  If I might only keep her a little while till I can find
some one else, though no one will ever be so nice, but indeed I would
not for a moment, if you had rather not."

"Why so?  Alison is very happy with you, and there can be no reason
against her going on."

"Oh!" cried Lady Temple, with an odd sound of satisfaction, doubt,
and surprise, "but I thought you would not like it."

"I should like, of course, to set them all at ease, but as I can do
no more than make a home for Ermine and her niece, I can only rejoice
that Alison is with you."

"But your brother!"

"If he does not like it, he must take the consequence of the utter
separation he made my father insist on," said the Colonel sternly.
"For my own part, I only esteem both sisters the more, if that were
possible, for what they have done for themselves."

"Oh! that is what Rachel would like!  She is so fond of the sick--I
mean of your--Miss Williams.  I suppose I may not tell her yet."

"Not yet, if you please.  I have scarcely had time as yet to know
what Ermine wishes, but I could not help telling you."

"Thank you--I am so glad," she said, with sweet earnestness, holding
out her hand in congratulation.  "When may I go to her?  I should
like for her to come and stay here.  Do you think she would?"

"Thank you, I will see.  I know how kind you would be--indeed, have
already been to her."

"And I am so thankful that I may keep Miss Williams!  The dear boys
never were so good.  And perhaps she may stay till baby is grown up.
Oh! how long it will be first!"

"She could not have a kinder friend," said the Colonel, smiling, and
looking at his watch.

"Oh, is it time to dress?  It is very kind of my dear aunt; but I do
wish we could have stayed at home to-night.  It is so dull for the
boys when I dine out, and I had so much to ask you.  One thing was
about that poor little Bessie Keith.  Don't you think I might ask her
down here, to be near her brother?"

"It would be a very kind thing in you, and very good for her, but you
must be prepared for rather a gay young lady."

"Oh, but she would not mind my not going out.  She would have Alick,
you know, and all the boys to amuse her; but, if you think it would
be tiresome for her, and that she would not be happy, I should be
very sorry to have her, poor child."

"I was not afraid for her," said Colonel Keith, smiling, "but of her
being rather too much for you."

"Rachel is not too much for me," said Fanny, "and she and Grace will
entertain Bessie, and take her out.  But I will talk to Alick.  He
spoke of coming to-morrow.  And don't you think I might ask Colonel
and Mrs. Hammond to spend a day?  They would so like the sea for the
children."

"Certainly."

"Then perhaps you would write--oh, I forgot," colouring up, "I never
can forget the old days, it seems as if you were on the staff still."

"I always am on yours, and always hope to be," he said, smiling,
"though I am afraid I can't write your note to the Hammonds for you."

"But you won't go away," she said.  "I know your time will be taken
up, and you must not let me or the boys be troublesome; but to have
you here makes me so much less lost and lonely.  And I shall have
such a friend in your Erminia.  Is that her name?"

"Ermine, an old Welsh name, the softest I ever heard.  Indeed it is
dressing time," added Colonel Keith, and both moved away with the
startled precision of members of a punctual military household, still
feeling themselves accountable to somebody.




CHAPTER VI



ERMINE'S RESOLUTION



 "For as his hand the weather steers,
  So thrive I best 'twixt joys and tears,
  And all the year have some green ears."--H. VAUGHAN.


Alison had not been wrong in her presentiment that the second
interview would be more trying than the first.  The exceeding
brightness and animation of Ermine's countenance, her speaking eyes,
unchanged complexion, and lively manner--above all, the restoration
of her real substantial self--had so sufficed and engrossed Colin
Keith in the gladness of their first meeting that he had failed to
comprehend her helpless state; and already knowing her to be an
invalid, not entirely recovered from her accident, he was only
agreeably surprised to see the beauty of face he had loved so long,
retaining all its vivacity of expression.  And when he met Alison the
next morning with a cordial brotherly greeting and inquiry for her
sister, her "Very well," and "not at all the worse for the
excitement," were so hearty and ready that he could not have guessed
that "well" with Ermine meant something rather relative than
positive.  Alison brought him a playful message from her, that since
he was not going to Belfast, she should meet him with a freer
conscience if he would first give her time for Rose's lessons, and,
as he said, he had lived long enough with Messrs. Conrade and Co. to
acknowledge the wisdom of the message.  But Rose had not long been at
leisure to look out for him before he made his appearance, and walked
in by right, as one at home; and sitting down in his yesterday's
place, took the little maiden on his knee, and began to talk to her
about the lessons he had been told to wait for.  What would she have
done without them?  He knew some people who never could leave the
house quiet enough to hear one's-self speak if they were deprived of
lessons.  Was that the way with her?  Rose laughed like a creature,
her aunt said, "to whom the notion of noise at play was something
strange and ridiculous; necessity has reduced her to Jacqueline
Pascal's system with her pensionnaires, who were allowed to play one
by one without any noise."

"But I don't play all alone," said Rose; "I play with you, Aunt
Ermine, and with Violetta."

And Violetta speedily had the honour of an introduction, very
solemnly gone through, in due form; Ermine, in the languid
sportiveness of enjoyment of his presence and his kindness to the
child, inciting Rose to present Miss Violetta Williams to Colonel
Keith, an introduction that he returned with a grand military salute,
at the same time as he shook the doll's inseparable fingers.  "Well,
Miss Violetta, and Miss Rose, when you come to live with me, I shall
hope for the pleasure of teaching you to make a noise."

"What does he mean?" said Rose, turning round amazed upon her aunt.

"I am afraid he does not quite know," said Ermine, sadly.

"Nay, Ermine," said he, turning from the child, and bending over her,
"you are the last who should say that.  Have I not told you that
there is nothing now in our way--no one with a right to object, and
means enough for all we should wish, including her--? What is the
matter?" he added, startled by her look.

"Ah, Colin!  I thought you knew--"

"Knew what, Ermine?" with his brows drawn together.

"Knew--what I am," she said; "knew the impossibility.  What, they
have not told you?  I thought I was the invalid, the cripple, with
every one."

"I knew you had suffered cruelly; I knew you were lame," he said,
breathlessly; "but--what--"

"It is more than lame," she said.  "I should be better off if the
fiction of the Queens of Spain were truth with me.  I could not move
from this chair without help.  Oh, Colin! poor Colin! it was very
cruel not to have prepared you for this!" she added, as he gazed at
her in grief and dismay, and made a vain attempt to find the voice
that would not come.  "Yes, indeed it is so," she said; "the
explosion, rather than the fire, did mischief below the knee that
poor nature could not repair, and I can but just stand, and cannot
walk at all."

"Has anything been done--advice?" he murmured.

"Advice upon advice, so that I felt at the last almost a compensation
to be out of the way of the doctors.  No, nothing more can be done;
and now that one is used to it, the snail is very comfortable in its
shell.  But I wish you could have known it sooner!" she added, seeing
him shade his brow with his hand, overwhelmed.

"What you must have suffered!" he murmured.

"That is all over long ago; every year has left that further behind,
and made me more content.  Dear Colin, for me there is nothing to
grieve."

He could not control himself, rose up, made a long stride, and passed
through the open window into the garden.

"Oh, if I could only follow him," gasped Ermine, joining her hands
and looking up.

"Is it because you can't walk?" said Rose, somewhat frightened, and
for the first time beginning to comprehend that her joyous-tempered
aunt could be a subject for pity.

"Oh! this was what I feared!" sighed Ermine.  "Oh, give us strength
to go through with it."  Then becoming awake to the child's presence
--"A little water, if you please, my dear."  Then, more composedly,
"Don't be frightened, my Rose; you did not know it was such a shock
to find me so laid by--"

"He is in the garden walking up and down," said Rose.  "May I go and
tell him how much merrier you always are than Aunt Ailie?"

Poor Ermine felt anything but merry just then, but she had some
experience of Rose's powers of soothing, and signed assent.  So in
another second Colonel Keith was met in the hasty, agonized walk by
which he was endeavouring to work off his agitation, and the slender
child looked wistfully up at him from dark depths of half
understanding eyes--"Please, please don't be so very sorry," she
said.  "Aunt Ermine does not like it.  She never is sorry for
herself--"

"Have I shaken her--distressed her?" he asked, anxiously.

"She doesn't like you to be sorry," said Rose, looking up.  "And,
indeed, she does not mind it; she is such a merry aunt!  Please, come
in again, and see how happy we always are--"

The last words were spoken so near the window that Ermine caught
them, and said, "Yes, come in, Colin, and learn not to grieve for me,
or you will make me repent of my selfish gladness yesterday."

"Not grieve!" he exclaimed, "when I think of the beautiful vigorous
being that used to be the life of the place--" and he would have said
more but for a deprecating sign of the hand.

"Well," she said, half smiling, "it is a pity to think even of a
crushed butterfly; but indeed, Colin, if you can bear to listen to
me, I think I can show you that it all has been a blessing even by
sight, as well as, of course, by faith.  Only remember the
unsatisfactoriness of our condition--the never seeing or hearing from
one another after that day when Mr. Beauchamp came down on us.  Did
not the accident win for us a parting that was much better to
remember than that state of things?  Oh, the pining, weary feel as if
all the world had clos