ed on me!  I do assure you it was much worse
than anything that came after the burn.  Yes, if I had been well and
doing like others, I know I should have fretted and wearied, pined
myself ill perhaps, whereas I could always tell myself that every
year of your absence might be a step towards your finding me well;
and when I was forced to give up that hope for myself, why then,
Colin, the never seeing your name made me think you would never be
disappointed and grieved as you are now.  It is very merciful the way
that physical trials help one through those of the mind."

"I never knew," said the Colonel; "all my aunt's latter letters spoke
of your slow improvement beyond hope."

"True, in her time, I had not reached the point where I stopped.  The
last time I saw her I was still upstairs; and, indeed, I did not half
know what I could do till I tried."

"Yes," said he, brightened by that buoyant look so remarkable in her
face; "and you will yet do more, Ermine.  You have convinced me that
we shall be all the happier together--"

"But that was not what I meant to convince you of--" she said,
faintly.

"Not what you meant, perhaps; but what it did convince me was, that
you--as you are, my Ermine--are ten thousand times more to me than
even as the beautiful girl, and that there never can be a happier
pair than we shall be when I am your hands and feet."

Ermine sat up, and rallied all her forces, choked back the swelling
of her throat, and said, "Dear Colin, it cannot be!  I trusted you
were understanding that when I told you how it was with me."

He could not speak from consternation.

"No," she said; "it would be wrong in me to think of it for an
instant.  That you should have done so, shows--O Colin, I cannot talk
of it; but it would be as ungenerous in me to consent, as it is noble
of you to propose it."

"It is no such thing," he answered; "it has been the one object and
thought of my life, the only hope I have had all these years."

"Exactly so," she said, struggling again to speak firmly; "and that
is the very thing.  You kept your allegiance to the bright, tall,
walking, active girl, and it would be a shame in the scorched cripple
to claim it."

"Don't call yourself names.  Have I not told you that you are more
than the same?"

"You do not know.  You are pleased because my face is not burnt, nor
grown much older, and because I can talk and laugh in the same voice
still."  (Oh, how it quivered!)  "But it would be a wicked mockery in
me to pretend to be the wife you want.  Yes, I know you think you do,
but that is just because my looks are so deceitful, and you have kept
on thinking about me; but you must make a fresh beginning."

"You can tell me that," he said, indignantly.

"Because it is not new to me," she said; "the quarter of an hour you
stood by me, with that deadly calm in your white face, was the real
farewell to the young hopeful dream of that bright summer.  I wish it
was as calm now."

"I believed you dying then," answered he.

"Do not make me think it would have been better for you if I had
been," she said, imploringly.  "It was as much the end, and I knew it
from the time my recovery stopped short.  I would have let you know
if I could, and then you would not have been so much shocked."

"So as to cut me off from you entirely?"

"No, indeed.  The thought of seeing you again was too--too
overwhelming to be indulged in; knowing, as I did, that if you were
the same to me, it must be at this sad cost to you," and her eyes
filled with tears.

"It is you who make it so, Ermine."

"No; it is the providence that has set me aside from the active work
of life.  Pray do not go on, Colin, it is only giving us both useless
pain.  You do not know what it costs me to deny you, and I feel that
I must.  I know you are only acting on the impulse of generosity.
Yes, I will say so, though you think it is to please yourself," she
added, with one of those smiles that nothing could drive far from her
lips, and which made it infinitely harder to acquiesce in her denial.

"I will make you think so in time," he said.  "Then I might tell you,
you had no right to please yourself," she answered, still with the
same air of playfulness; "you have got a brother, you know--and--yes,
I hear you growl; but if he is a poor old broken man out of health,
it is the more reason you should not vex him, nor hamper yourself
with a helpless commodity."

"You are not taking the way to make me forget what my brother has
done for us."

"How do you know that he did not save me from being a strong-minded
military lady!  After all, it was absurd to expect people to look
favourably on our liking for one another, and you know they could not
be expected to know that there was real stuff in the affair.  If
there had not been, we should have thought so all the same, you know,
and been quite as furious."

He could not help smiling, recollecting fury that, in the course of
these twelve years, he had seen evinced under similar circumstances
by persons who had consoled themselves before he had done pitying
them.  "Still," he said gravely, "I think there was harshness."

"So do I, but not so much as I thought at that time, and--oh, surely
that is not Rachel Curtis?  I told her I thought you would call."

"Intolerable!" he muttered between his teeth.  "Is she always coming
to bore you?"

"She has been very kind, and my great enlivenment," said Ermine, "and
she can't be expected to know how little we want her.  Oh, there, the
danger is averted!  She must have asked if you were here."

"I was just thinking that she was the chief objection to Lady
Temple's kind wish of having you at Myrtlewood."

"Does Lady Temple know?" asked Ermine, blushing.

"I could not keep it from one who has been so uniformly kind to me;
but I desired her not to let it go further till I should hear your
wishes."

"Yes, she has a right to know," said Ermine; "but please, not a word
elsewhere."

"And will you not come to stay with her?"

"I?  Oh, no; I am fit for no place but this.  You don't half know how
bad I am.  When you have seen a little more of us, you will be quite
convinced."

"Well, at least, you give me leave to come here."

"Leave?  When it is a greater pleasure than I ever thought to have
again; that is, while you understand that you said good-bye to the
Ermine of Beauchamp Parsonage twelve years ago, and that the thing
here is only a sort of ghost, most glad and grateful to be a friend--
a sister."

"So," he said, "those are to be the terms of my admission."

"The only possible ones."

"I will consider them.  I have not accepted them."

"You will," she said.

But she met a smile in return, implying that there might be a will as
steadfast as her own, although the question might be waived for a
time.

Meantime, Rachel was as nearly hating Colonel Keith as principle
would allow, with "Human Reeds," newly finished, burning in her
pocket, "Military Society" fermenting in her brain, and "Curatocult"
still unacknowledged.  Had he not had quite time for any rational
visit?  Was he to devour Mackarel Lane as well as Myrtlewood?  She
was on her way to the latter house, meeting Grace as she went, and
congratulating herself that he could not be in two places at once,
whilst Grace secretly wondered how far she might venture to build on
Alison Williams's half confidence, and regretted the anxiety wasted
by Rachel and the mother; though, to be sure, that of Mrs. Curtis was
less uncalled for than her daughter's, since it was only the fear of
Fanny's not being sufficiently guarded against misconstructions.

Rachel held up her hands in despair in the hall.  "Six officers'
cards!" she exclaimed.

"No, only six cards," said Grace; "there are two of each."

"That's enough," sighed Rachel; "and look there," gazing through the
garden-door.  "She is walking with the young puppy that dined here on
Thursday, and they called Alick."

"Do you remember," said Grace, "how she used to chatter about Alick,
when she first came to us, at six years old.  He was the child of one
of the officers.  Can this be the same?"

"That's one of your ideas, Grace.  Look, this youth could have been
hardly born when Fanny came to us.  No; he is only one of the idlers
that military life has accustomed her to."

Rather against Grace's feeling, Rachel drew her on, so as to come up
with Lady Temple and her friend in the midst of their conversation,
and they heard the last words--

"Then you will give me dear Bessie's direction?"

"Thank you, it will be the greatest kindness--"

"Oh, Grace, Rachel, is it you?" exclaimed Fanny.  "You have not met
before, I think.  Mr. Keith--Miss Curtis."

Very young indeed were both face and figure, fair and pale, and
though there was a moustache, it was so light and silky as to be
scarcely visible; the hair, too, was almost flaxen, and the whole
complexion had a washed-out appearance.  The eyes, indeed, were of
the same peculiar deep blue as the Colonel's, but even these were
little seen under their heavy sleepy lids, and the long limbs had in
every movement something of weight and slowness, the very sight of
which fretted Rachel, and made her long to shake him.  It appeared
that he was come to spend the Sunday at Avonmouth, and Grace tried to
extract the comfort for her mother that two gentlemen were better
than one, and Fanny need not be on their minds for chaperonage for
that day.

A party of garden-chairs on the lawn invited repose, and there the
ladies seated themselves; Fanny laying down her heavy crape bonnet,
and showing her pretty little delicate face, now much fresher and
more roseate than when she arrived, though her wide-spreading black
draperies gave a certain dignity to her slight figure, contrasting
with the summer muslins of her two cousins; as did her hot-house
plant fairness, with their firm, healthy glow of complexion; her
tender shrinking grace, with their upright vigour.  The gentleman of
the party leant hack in a languid, easy posture, as though only half
awake, and the whole was so quiet that Grace, missing the usual
tumult of children, asked after them.

"The boys have gone to their favourite cove under the plantation.
They have a fort there, and Hubert told me he was to be a hero, and
Miss Williams a she-ro."

"I would not encourage that description of sport," said Rachel,
willing to fight a battle in order to avert maternal anecdotes of
boyish sayings.

"They like it so much," said Fanny, "and they learn so much now that
they act all the battles they read about."

"That is what I object to," said Rachel; "it is accustoming them to
confound heroism with pugnacity."

"No, but Rachel dear, they do quarrel and fight among themselves much
less now that this is all in play and good humour," pleaded Fanny.

"Yes, that may be, but you are cultivating the dangerous instinct,
although for a moment giving it a better direction."

"Dangerous?  Oh, Alick! do you think it can be?" said Fanny, less
easily borne down with a supporter beside her.

"According to the Peace Society," he answered, with a quiet air of
courteous deference; "perhaps you belong to it?"

"No, indeed," answered Rachel, rather indignantly, "I think war the
great purifier and ennobler of nations, when it is for a good and
great cause; but I think education ought to protest against
confounding mere love of combat with heroism."

"Query, the true meaning of the word?" he said, leaning back.

"Heros, yes from the same root as the German herr," readily responded
Rachel, "meaning no more than lord and master; but there can be no
doubt that the progress of ideas has linked with it a much nobler
association."

"Progress!  What, since the heroes were half divine!"

"Half divine in the esteem of a people who thought brute courage
godlike.  To us the word maintains its semi-divinity, and it should
be our effort to associate it only with that which veritably has the
god-like stamp."

"And that is--?"

"Doing more than one's duty," exclaimed Rachel, with a glistening
eye.

"Very uncomfortable and superfluous, and not at all easy," he said,
half shutting his already heavy eyes.

"Easy, no, that's the beauty and the glory--"

"Major Sherborne and Captain Lester in the drawing room, my lady,"
announced Coombe, who had looked infinitely cheered since this
military influx.

"You will come with me, Grace," said Fanny, rising.  "I dare say you
had rather not, Rachel, and it would be a pity to disturb you,
Alick."

"Thank you; it would be decidedly more than my duty."

"I am quite sorry to go, you are so amusing," said Fanny, "but I
suppose you will have settled about heroism by the time we come out
again, and will tell me what the boys ought to play at."

Rachel's age was quite past the need of troubling herself at being
left tete-a-tete with a mere lad like this; and, besides, it was an
opportunity not to be neglected of giving a young carpet knight a
lesson in true heroism.  There was a pause after the other two had
moved off.  Rachel reflected for a few moments, and then,
precipitated by the fear of her audience falling asleep, she
exclaimed--

"No words have been more basely misused than hero and heroine.  The
one is the mere fighting animal whose strength or fortune have borne
him through some more than ordinary danger, the other is only the
subject of an adventure, perfectly irrespective of her conduct in
it."

"Bathos attends all high words," he said, as she paused, chiefly to
see whether he was awake, and not like her dumb playfellow of old.

"This is not their natural bathos but their misuse.  They ought to be
reserved for those who in any department have passed the limits to
which the necessity of their position constrained them, and done acts
of self-devotion for the good of others.  I will give you an
instance, and from your own profession, that you may see I am not
prejudiced, besides, the hero of it is past praise or blame."

Encouraged by seeing a little more of his eyes, she went on.  "It was
in the course of the siege of Delhi, a shell came into a tent where
some sick and wounded were lying.  There was one young officer among
them who could move enough to have had a chance of escaping the
explosion, but instead of that he took the shell up, its fuse burning
as it was, and ran with it out of the tent, then hurled it to a
distance.  It exploded, and of course was his death, but the rest
were saved, and I call that a deed of heroism far greater than
mounting a breach or leading a forlorn hope."

"Killed, you say?" inquired Mr. Keith, still in the same lethargic
manner.

"Oh yes, mortally wounded: carried back to die among the men he had
saved."

"Jessie Cameron singing his dirge," mumbled this provoking
individual, with something about the form of his cheek that being
taken by Rachel for a derisive smile, made her exclaim vehemently,
"You do not mean to undervalue an action like that in comparison with
mere animal pugnacity in an advance."

"More than one's duty was your test," he said.

"And was not this more than duty?  Ah! I see yours is a spirit of
depreciation, and I can only say I pity you."

He took the trouble to lift himself up and make a little bow of
acknowledgment.  Certainly he was worse than the Colonel; but Rachel,
while mustering her powers for annihilating him, was annoyed by all
the party in the drawing-room coming forth to join them, the other
officers rallying young Keith upon his luxurious station, and making
it evident that he was a proverb in the regiment for taking his ease.
Chairs were brought out, and afternoon tea, and the callers sat down
to wait for Colonel Keith to come in; Grace feeling obliged to stay
to help Fanny entertain her visitors, and Rachel to protect her from
their follies.  One thing Grace began to perceive, that Lady Temple
had in her former world been a person of much more consideration than
she was made here, and seeing the polite and deferential manner of
these officers to her, could only wonder at her gentle content and
submission in meeting with no particular attention from anybody, and
meekly allowing herself to be browbeaten by Rachel and lectured by
her aunt.

A lecture was brewing up for her indeed.  Poor Mrs. Curtis was very
much concerned at the necessity, and only spurred up by a strong
sense of duty to give a hint--the study of which hint cost her a
whole sleepless night and a very weary Sunday morning.  She decided
that her best course would be to drive to Myrtlewood rather early on
her way to church, and take up Fanny, gaining a previous conference
with her alone, if possible.  "Yes, my dear," she said to Grace, "I
must get it over before church, or it will make me so nervous all
through the service."  And Grace, loving her mother best, durst not
suggest what it might do to Fanny, hoping that the service might help
her to digest the hint.

Mrs. Curtis's regular habits were a good deal shocked to find Fanny
still at the breakfast table.  The children had indeed long finished,
and were scattered about the room, one of them standing between
Colonel Keith's knees, repeating a hymn; but the younger guest was
still in the midst of his meal, and owned in his usual cool manner
that he was to blame for the lateness, there was no resisting the
charms of no morning parade.

Her aunt's appearance made Fanny imagine it much later than it really
was, and she hurried off the children to be dressed, and proceeded
herself to her room, Mrs. Curtis following, and by way of
preliminary, asking when Colonel Keith was going to Ireland.

"Oh!" said Fanny, blushing most suspiciously under her secret, "he is
not going to Ireland now."

"Indeed! I quite understood he intended it."

"Yes," faltered Fanny, "but he found that he need not."

"Indeed!" again ejaculated poor perplexed Mrs. Curtis; "but then, at
least, he is going away soon."

"He must go to Scotland by-and-by, but for the present he is going
into lodgings.  Do you know of any nice ones, dear aunt?"

"Well, I suppose you can't help that; you know, my dear, it would
never do for him to stay in this house."

"I never thought of that," said Fanny simply, the colour coming in a
fresh glow.

"No, my dear, but you see you are very young and inexperienced.  I do
not say you have done anything the least amiss, or that you ever
would mean it, only you will forgive your old aunt for putting you on
your guard."

Fanny kissed her, but with eyes full of tears, and cheeks burning,
then her candour drew from her--"It was he that thought of getting a
lodging.  I am glad I did not persuade him not; but you know he
always did live with us."

"With us.  Yes, my poor dear, that is the difference, and you see he
feels it.  But, indeed, my dear child, though he is a very good man,
I dare say, and quite a gentleman all but his beard, you had better
not encourage-- You know people are so apt to make remarks."

"I have no fear," said Fanny, turning away her head, conscious of the
impossibility of showing her aunt her mistake.

"Ah! my dear, you don't guess how ready people are to talk; and you
would not like--for your children's sake, for your husband's sake--
that--that--"

"Pray, pray aunt," cried Fanny, much pained, "indeed you don't know.
My husband had confidence in him more than in any one.  He told him
to take care of me and look after the boys.  I couldn't hold aloof
from him without transgressing those wishes"--and the words were lost
in a sob.

"My dear, indeed I did not mean to distress you.  You know, I dare
say--I mean--" hesitated poor Mrs. Curtis.  "I know you must see a
great deal of him.  I only want you to take care--appearances are
appearances, and if it was said you had all these young officers
always coming about--"

"I don't think they will come.  It was only just to call, and they
have known me so long.  It is all out of respect to my father and Sir
Stephen," said Fanny, meekly as ever.  "Indeed, I would not for the
world do anything you did not like, dear aunt; but there can't be any
objection to my having Mrs. Hammond and the children to spend the day
to-morrow."

Mrs. Curtis did not like it; she had an idea that all military ladies
were dashing and vulgar, but she could not say there was any
objection, so she went on to the head of poor Fanny's offending.
"This young man, my dear, he seems to make himself very intimate."

"Alick Keith?  Oh aunt!" said Fanny, more surprised than by all the
rest; "don't you know about him?  His father and mother were our
greatest friends always; I used to play with him every day till I
came to you.  And then just as I married, poor Mrs. Keith died, and
we had dear little Bessie with us till her father could send her
home.  And when poor Alick was so dreadfully wounded before Delhi,
Sir Stephen sent him up in a litter to the hills for mamma and me to
nurse.  Mamma was so fond of him, she used to call him her son."

"Yes, my dear, I dare say you have been very intimate; but you see
you are very young; and his staying here--"

"I thought he would be so glad to come and be with the Colonel, who
was his guardian and Bessie's," said Fanny, "and I have promised to
have Bessie to stay with me, she was such a dear little thing--"

"Well, my dear, it may be a good thing for you to have a young lady
with you, and if he is to come over, her presence will explain it.
Understand me, my dear, I am not at all afraid of your--your doing
anything foolish, only to get talked of is so dreadful in your
situation, that you can't be too careful."

"Yes, yes, thank you, dear aunt," murmured the drooping and subdued
Fanny, aware how much the remonstrance must cost her aunt, and sure
that she must be in fault in some way, if she could only see how.
"Please, dear aunt, help me, for indeed I don't know how to manage--
tell me how to be civil and kind to my dear husband's friends
without--without--"

Her voice broke down, though she kept from tears as an unkindness to
her aunt.

In very fact, little as she knew it, she could not have defended
herself better than by this humble question, throwing the whole
guidance of her conduct upon her aunt.  If she had been affronted,
Mrs. Curtis could have been displeased; but to be thus set to
prescribe the right conduct, was at once mollifying and perplexing.

"Well, well, my dear child, we all know you wish to do right; you can
judge best.  I would not have you ungrateful or uncivil, only you
know you are living very quietly, and intimacy--oh! my dear, I know
your own feeling will direct you.  Dear child! you have taken what I
said so kindly.  And now let me see that dear little girl."

Rachel had not anticipated that the upshot of a remonstrance, even
from her mother, would be that Fanny was to be directed by her own
feeling!

That same feeling took Lady Temple to Mackarel Lane later in the day.
She had told the Colonel her intention, and obtained Alison's
assurance that Ermine's stay at Myrtlewood need not be impracticable,
and armed with their consent, she made her timid tap at Miss
Williams' door, and showed her sweet face within it.

"May I come in?  Your sister and your little niece are gone for a
walk.  I told them I would come!  I did want to see you!"

"Thank you," said Ermine, with a sweet smile, colouring cheek, yet
grave eyes, and much taken by surprise at being seized by both hands,
and kissed on each cheek.

"Yes, you must let me," said her visitor, looking up with her pretty
imploring gesture, "you know I have known him so long, and he has
been so good to me!"

"Indeed it is very kind in you," said Ermine, fully feeling the force
of the plea expressed in the winning young face and gentle eyes full
of tears.

"Oh, no, I could not help it.  I am only so sorry we kept him away
from you when you wanted him so much; but we did not know, and he was
Sir Stephen's right hand, and we none of us knew what to do without
him; but if he had only told--"

"Thank you, oh, thank you!" said Ermine, "but indeed it was better
for him to be away."

Even her wish to console that pleading little widow could not make
her say that his coming would not have been good for her.  "It has
been such a pleasure to hear he had so kind and happy a home all
these years."

"Oh, you cannot think how Sir Stephen loved and valued him.  The one
thing I always did wish was, that Conrade should grow up to be as
much help and comfort to his father, and now he never can!  But,"
driving back a tear, "it was so hard that you should not have known
how distinguished and useful and good he was all those years.  Only
now I shall have the pleasure of telling you," and she smiled.  She
was quite a different being when free from the unsympathizing
influence which, without her understanding it, had kept her from
dwelling on her dearest associations.

"It will be a pleasure of pleasures," said Ermine, eagerly.

"Then you will do me a favour, a very great favour," said Lady
Temple, laying hold of her hand again, "if you and your sister and
niece will come and stay with me."  And as Ermine commenced her
refusal, she went on in the same coaxing way, with a description of
her plans for Ermine's comfort, giving her two rooms on the ground
floor, and assuring her of the absence of steps, the immunity from
all teasing by the children, of the full consent of her sister, and
the wishes of the Colonel, nay, when Ermine was still unpersuaded of
the exceeding kindness it would be to herself.  "You see I am
terribly young, really," she said, "though I have so many boys, and
my aunt thinks it awkward for me to have so many officers calling,
and I can't keep them away because they are my father's and Sir
Stephen's old friends; so please do come and make it all right!"

Ermine was driven so hard, and so entirely deprived of all excuse,
that she had no alternative left but to come to the real motive.

"I ought not," she said, "it is not good for him, so you must not
press me, dear Lady Temple.  You see it is best for him that nobody
should ever know of what has been between us."

"What! don't you mean--?" exclaimed Fanny, breaking short off.

"I cannot!" said Ermine.

"But he would like it.  He wishes it as much as ever."

"I know he does," said Ermine, with a troubled voice; "but you see
that is because he did not know what a wretched remnant I am, and he
never has had time to think about any one else."

"Oh no, no."

"And it would be very unfair of me to take advantage of that, and
give him such a thing as I am."

"Oh dear, but that is very sad!" cried Fanny, looking much startled.

"But I am sure you must see that it is right."

"It may be right," and out burst Fanny's ready tears; "but it is
very, very hard and disagreeable, if you don't mind my saying so,
when I know it is so good of you.  And don't you mean to let him even
see you, when he has been constant so long?"

"No; I see no reason for denying myself that; indeed I believe it is
better for him to grow used to me as I am, and be convinced of the
impossibility."

"Well then, why will you not come to me?"

"Do you not see, in all your kindness, that my coming to you would
make every one know the terms between us, while no one remarks his
just coming to me here as an old friend?  And if he were ever to turn
his mind to any one else--"

"He will never do that, I am sure."

"There is no knowing.  He has never been, in his own estimation,
disengaged from me," said Ermine; "his brother is bent on his
marrying, and he ought to be perfectly free to do so, and not under
the disadvantage that any report of this affair would be to him."

"Well, I am sure he never will," said Fanny, almost petulantly;
"I know I shall hate her, that's all."

Ermine thought her own charity towards Mrs. Colin Keith much more
dubious than Lady Temple's, but she continued--

"At any rate you will be so very kind as not to let any one know of
it.  I am glad you do.  I should not feel it right that you should
not, but it is different with others."

"Thank you.  And if you will not come to me, you will let me come to
you, won't you?  It will be so nice to come and talk him over with
you.  Perhaps I shall persuade you some of these days after all.
Only I must go now, for I always give the children their tea on
Sunday.  But please let your dear little niece come up to-morrow and
play with them; the little Hammonds will be there, she is just their
age."

Ermine felt obliged to grant this at least, though she was as
doubtful of her shy Rose's happiness as of the expedience of the
intimacy; but there was no being ungracious to the gentle visitor,
and no doubt Ermine felt rejoiced and elevated.  She did not need
fresh assurances of Colin's constancy, but the affectionate sister-
like congratulations of this loving, winning creature, showed how
real and in earnest his intentions were.  And then Lady Temple's
grateful esteem for him being, as it was, the reflection of her
husband's, was no small testimony to his merits.

"Pretty creature!" said Ermine to herself, "really if it did come to
that, I could spare him to her better than to any one else.  She has
some notion how to value him."

Alison and Rose had, in the meantime, been joined by Colonel Keith
and the boys, whom Alick had early deserted in favour of a sunny
sandy nook.  The Colonel's purpose was hard on poor Alison; it was to
obtain her opinion of her sister's decision, and the likelihood of
persistence in it.  It was not, perhaps, bad for either that they
conversed under difficulties, the boys continually coming back to
them from excursions on the rocks, and Rose holding her aunt's hand
all the time, but to be sure Rose had heard nearly all the Colonel's
affairs, and somehow mixed him up with Henry of Cranstoun.

Very tenderly towards Alison herself did Colin Keith speak.  It was
the first time they had ever been brought into close contact, and she
had quite to learn to know him.  She had regarded his return as
probably a misfortune, but it was no longer possible to do so when
she heard his warm and considerate way of speaking of her sister, and
saw him only desirous of learning what was most for her real
happiness.  Nay, he even made a convert of Alison herself!  She did
believe that would Ermine but think it right to consent, she would be
happy and safe in the care of one who knew so well how to love her.
Terrible as the wrench would be to Alison herself, she thought he
deserved her sister, and that she would be as happy with him as earth
could make her.  But she did not believe Ermine would ever accept
him.  She knew the strong, unvarying resolution by which her sister
had always held to what she thought right, and did not conceive that
it would waver.  The acquiescence in his visits, and the undisguised
exultant pleasure in his society, were evidences to Alison not of
wavering or relenting, but of confidence in Ermine's own sense of
impossibility.  She durst not give him any hope, though she owned
that he merited success.  "Did she think his visits bad for her
sister?" he then asked in the unselfishness that pleaded so strongly
for him.

"No, certainly not," she answered eagerly, then made a little
hesitation that made him ask further.

"My only fear," she said candidly, "is, that if this is pressed much
on her, and she has to struggle with you and herself too, it may hurt
her health.  Trouble tells not on her cheerfulness, but on her
nerves."

"Thank you," he said, "I will refrain."

Alison was much happier than she had been since the first
apprehension of his return.  The first pang at seeing Ermine's heart
another's property had been subdued; the present state of affairs was
indefinitely-prolonged, and she not only felt trust in Colin Keith's
consideration for her sister, but she knew that an act of oblivion
was past on her perpetration of the injury.  She was right.  His
original pitying repugnance to a mere unknown child could not be
carried on to the grave, saddened woman devoted to her sister, and in
the friendly brotherly tone of that interview, each understood the
other.  And when Alison came home and said, "I have been walking with
Colin," her look made Ermine very happy.

"And learning to know him."

"Learning to sympathize with him, Ermine," with steady eyes and
voice.  "You are hard on him."

"Now, Ailie," said Ermine, "once for all, he is not to set you on me,
as he has done with Lady Temple.  The more he persuades me, the
better I know that to listen would be an abuse of his constancy.  It
would set him wrong with his brother, and, as dear Edward's affairs
stand, we have no right to carry the supposed disgrace into a family
that would believe it, though he does not.  If I were ever so well,
I should not think it right to marry.  I shall not shun the sight of
him; it is delightful to me, and a less painful cure to him than
sending him away would be.  It is in the nature of things that he
should cool into a friendly kindly feeling, and I shall try to bear
it.  Or if he does marry, it will be all right I suppose--" but her
voice faltered, and she gave a sort of broken laugh.

"There," she said, with a recovered flash of liveliness, "there's my
resolution, to do what I like more than anything in the world as long
as I can; and when it is over I shall be helped to do without it!"

"I can't believe--" broke out Alison.

"Not in your heart, but in your reason," said Ermine, endeavouring to
smile.  "He will hover about here, and always be kind, loving,
considerate; but a time will come that he will want the home
happiness I cannot give.  Then he will not wear out his affection on
the impossible literary cripple, but begin over again, and be happy.
And, Alison, if your love for me is of the sound, strong sort I know
it is, you will help me through with it, and never say one word to
make all this less easy and obvious to him."




CHAPTER VII



WAITNG FOR ROSE



 "Not envy, sure! for if you gave me
  Leave to take or to refuse
  In earnest, do you think I'd choose
  That sort of new love to enslave me?"--R. BROWNING.


So, instead of going to Belfast, here was Colonel Keith actually
taking a lodging and settling himself into it; nay, even going over
to Avoncester on a horse-buying expedition, not merely for the
Temples, but for himself.

This time Rachel did think herself sure of Miss Williams' ear in
peace, and came down on her with two fat manuscripts upon Human Reeds
and Military Society, preluding, however, by bitter complaints of the
"Traveller" for never having vouchsafed her an answer, nor having
even restored "Curatocult," though she had written three times, and
sent a directed envelope and stamps for the purpose.  The paper must
be ruined by so discourteous an editor, indeed she had not been
nearly so much interested as usual by the last few numbers.  If only
she could get her paper back, she should try the "Englishwoman's
Hobby-horse," or some other paper of more progress than that
"Traveller."   "Is it not very hard to feel one's self shut out from
the main stream of the work of the world when one's heart is
burning?"

"I think you overrate the satisfaction."

"You can't tell!  You are contented with that sort of home peaceful
sunshine that I know suffices many.  Even intellectual as you are,
you can't tell what it is to feel power within, to strain at the
leash, and see others in the race."

"I was thinking whether you could not make an acceptable paper on the
lace system, which you really know so thoroughly."

"The fact is," said Rachel, "it is much more difficult to describe
from one's own observation than from other sources."

"But rather more original," said Ermine, quite overcome by the
naivete of the confession.

"I don't see that," said Rachel.  "It is abstract reasoning from
given facts that I aim at, as you will understand when you have heard
my 'Human Reeds,' and my other--dear me, there's your door bell.  I
thought that Colonel was gone for the day."

"There are other people in the world besides the Colonel," Ermine
began to say, though she hardly felt as if there were, and at any
rate a sense of rescue crossed her.  The persons admitted took them
equally by surprise, being Conrade Temple and Mr. Keith.

"I thought," said Rachel, as she gave her unwilling hand to the
latter, "that you would have been at Avoncester to-day."

"I always get out of the way of horse-dealing.  I know no greater
bore," he answered.

"Mamma sent me down," Conrade was explaining; "Mr. Keith's uncle
found out that he knew Miss Williams--no, that's not it, Miss
Williams' uncle found out that Mr. Keith preached a sermon, or
something of that sort, so mamma sent me down to show him the way to
call upon her; but I need not stay now, need I?"

"After that elegant introduction, and lucid explanation, I think you
may be excused," returned Alick Keith.

The boy shook Ermine's hand with his soldierly grace, but rather
spoilt the effect thereof by his aside, "I wanted to see the toad and
the pictures our Miss Williams told me about, but I'll come another
time;" and the wink of his black eyes, and significant shrug of his
shoulders at Rachel, were irresistible.  They all laughed, even
Rachel herself, as Ermine, seeing it would be worse to ignore the
demonstration, said, "The elements of aunt and boy do not always work
together."

"No," said Rachel; "I have never been forgiven for being the first
person who tried to keep those boys in order."

"And now," said Ermine, turning to her other visitor, "perhaps I may
discover which of us, or of our uncles, preached a sermon."

"Mine, I suspect," returned Mr. Keith.  "Your sister and I made out
at luncheon that you had known my uncle, Mr. Clare, of
Bishopsworthy."

"Mr. Clare!  Oh yes," cried Ermine eagerly, "he took the duty for one
of our curates once for a long vacation.  Did you ever hear him speak
of Beauchamp?"

"Yes, often; and of Dr. Williams.  He will be very much interested to
hear of you."

"It was a time I well remember," said Ermine.  "He was an Oxford
tutor then, and I was about fourteen, just old enough to be delighted
to hear clever talk.  And his sermons were memorable; they were the
first I ever listened to."

"There are few sermons that it is not an infliction to listen to,"
began Rachel, but she was not heard or noticed.

"I assure you they are even more striking now in his blindness."

"Blindness!  Indeed, I had not heard of that."

Even Rachel listened with interest as the young officer explained
that his uncle, whom both he and Miss Williams talked of as a man of
note, of whom every one must have heard, had for the last four years
been totally blind, but continued to be an active parish priest,
visiting regularly, preaching, and taking a share in the service,
which he knew by heart.  He had, of course, a curate, who lived with
him, and took very good care of him.

"No one else?" said Rachel.  "I thought your sister lived at
Bishopsworthy."

"No, my sister lives, or has lived, at Little Worthy, the next
parish, and as unlike it as possible.  It has a railroad in it, and
the cockneys have come down on it and 'villafied' it.  My aunt, Mrs.
Lacy Clare, has lived there ever since my sister has been with her;
but now her last daughter is to be married, she wishes to give up
housekeeping."

"And your sister is coming to Lady Temple," said Rachel, in her
peculiar affirmative way of asking questions.  "She will find it very
dull here."

"With all the advantages of Avoncester at hand?" inquired Alick, with
a certain gleam under his flaxen eyelashes that convinced Ermine that
he said it in mischief.  But Rachel drew herself up gravely, and
answered--

"In Lady Temple's situation any such thing would be most inconsistent
with good feeling."

"Such as the cathedral?" calmly, not to say sleepily, inquired Alick,
to the excessive diversion of Ermine, who saw that Rachel had never
been laughed at in her life, and was utterly at a loss what to make
of it.

"If you meant the cathedral," she said, a little uncertainly,
recollecting the tone in which Mr. Clare had just been spoken of, and
thinking that perhaps Miss Keith might be a curatolatress,  "I am
afraid it is not of much benefit to people living at this distance,
and there is not much to be said for the imitation here."

"You will see what my sister says to it.  She only wants training to
be the main strength of the Bishopsworthy choir, and perhaps she may
find it here."

Rachel was evidently undecided whether chants or marches were Miss
Keith's passion, and, perhaps, which propensity would render the
young lady the most distasteful to herself.  Ermine thought it
merciful to divert the attack by mentioning Mr. Clare's love of
music, and hoping his curate could gratify it.  "No," Mr. Keith said,
"it was very unlucky that Mr. Lifford did not know one note from
another; so that his vicar could not delude himself into hoping that
his playing on his violin was anything but a nuisance to his
companion, and in spite of all the curate's persuasions, he only
indulged himself therewith on rare occasions."  But as Ermine showed
surprise at the retention of a companion devoid of this sixth sense,
so valuable to the blind, he added--"No one would suit him so well.
Mr. Lifford has been with him ever since his sight began to fail, and
understands all his ways."

"Yes, that makes a great difference."

"And," pursued the young man, coming to something like life as he
talked of his uncle, "though he is not quite all that a companion
might be, my uncle says there would be no keeping the living without
him, and I do not believe there would, unless my uncle would have me
instead."

Ermine laughed and looked interested, not quite knowing what other
answer to make.  Rachel lifted up her eyebrows in amazement.

"Another advantage," added Alick, who somehow seemed to accept Ermine
as one of the family, "is, that he is no impediment to Bessie's
living there, for, poor man, he has a wife, but insane."

"Then your sister will live there?" said Rachel.  "What an enviable
position, to have the control of means of doing good that always
falls to the women of a clerical family."

"Tell her so," said the brother, with his odd, suppressed smile.

"What, she does not think so?"

"Now," said Mr. Keith, leaning back, "on my answer depends whether
Bessie enters this place with a character for chanting, croquet, or
crochet.  Which should you like worst, Miss Curtis?"

"I like evasions worst of all," said Rachel, with a flash of
something like playful spirit, though there was too much asperity in
it.

"But you see, unfortunately, I don't know," said Alick Keith, slowly.
"I have never been able to find out, nor she either.  I don't know
what may be the effect of example," he added.  Ermine wondered
whether he were in mischief or earnest, and suspected a little of
both.

"I shall be very happy to show Miss Keith any of my ways," said
Rachel, with no doubts at all; "but she will find me terribly impeded
here.  When does she come?"

"Not for a month or six weeks, when the wedding will be over.  It is
high time she saw something of her respected guardian."

"The Colonel?"

"Yes," then to Ermine, "Every one turns to him with reliance and
confidence.  I believe no one in the army received so many last
charges as he has done, or executes them more fully."

"And," said Ermine, feeling pleasure colour her cheek more deeply
than was convenient, "you are relations."

"So far away that only a Scotsman would acknowledge the cousinship."

"But do not you call yourself Scotch?" said Ermine, who had for years
thought it glorious to do so.

"My great grandfather came from Gowan-brae," said Alick, "but our
branch of the family has lived and died in the --th Highlanders for so
many generations that we don't know what a home is out of it.  Our
birthplaces--yes, and our graves--are in all parts of the world."

"Were you ever in Scotland?"

"Never; and I dread nothing so much as being quartered there.  Just
imagine the trouble it would be to go over the pedigree of every
Keith I met, and to dine with them all upon haggis and sheeps' head!"

"There's no place I want to sea as much as Scotland," said Rachel.

"Oh, yes! young ladies always do."

"It is not for a young lady reason," said Rachel, bluntly.  "I want
to understand the principle of diffused education, as there
practised.  The only other places I should really care to see are the
Grand Reformatory for the Destitute in Holland, and the Hospital for
Cretins in Switzerland."

"Scotch pedants, Dutch thieves, Swiss goitres--I will bear your
tastes in mind," said Mr. Keith, rising to take leave.

"Really," said Rachel, when he was gone, "if he had not that silly
military tone of joking, there might be something tolerable about him
if he got into good hands.  He seems to have some good notions about
his sister.  She must be just out of the school-room, at the very
turn of life, and I will try to get her into my training and show her
a little of the real beauty and usefulness of the career she has
before her.  How late he has stayed!  I am afraid there is no time
for the manuscripts."

And though Ermine was too honest to say she was sorry, Rachel did not
miss the regret.

Colonel Keith came the next day, and under his arm was a parcel,
which was laid in little Rose's arms, and, when unrolled, proved to
contain a magnificent wax doll, no doubt long the object of
unrequited attachment to many a little Avoncestrian, a creature of
beauteous and unmeaning face, limpid eyes, hair that could be
brushed, and all her members waxen, as far as could be seen below the
provisional habiliment of pink paper that enveloped her.  Little
Rose's complexion became crimson, and she did not utter a word, while
her aunt, colouring almost as much, laughed and asked where were her
thanks.

"Oh!" with a long gasp, "it can't be for me!"

"Do you think it is for your aunt?" said the Colonel.

"Oh, thank you!  But such a beautiful creature for me!" said Rose,
with another gasp, quite oppressed.  "Aunt Ermine, how shall I ever
make her clothes nice enough?"

"We will see about that, my dear.  Now take her into the verandah and
introduce her to Violetta."

"Yes;" then pausing and looking into the fixed eyes, "Aunt Ermine, I
never saw such a beauty, except that one the little girl left behind
on the bench on the esplanade, when Aunt Ailie said I should he
coveting if I went on wishing Violetta was like her."

"I remember," said Ermine, "I have heard enough of that 'ne plus
ultra' of doll!  Indeed, Colin, you have given a great deal of
pleasure, where the materials of pleasure are few.  No one can guess
the delight a doll is to a solitary imaginative child."

"Thank you," he said, smiling.

"I believe I shall enjoy it as much as Rose," added Ermine, "both for
play and as a study.  Please turn my chair a little this way, I want
to see the introduction to Violetta.  Here comes the beauty, in
Rose's own cloak."

Colonel Keith leant over the back of her chair and silently watched,
but the scene was not quite what they expected.  Violetta was sitting
in her "slantingdicular" position on her chair placed on a bench, and
her little mistress knelt down before her, took her in her arms, and
began to hug her.

"Violetta, darling, you need not be afraid!  There is a new beautiful
creature come, and I shall call her Colinette, and we must be very
kind to her, because Colonel Keith is so good, and knows your
grandpapa; and to tell you a great secret, Violetta, that you must
not tell Colinette or anybody, I think he is Aunt Ermine's own true
knight."

"Hush!" whispered the Colonel, over Ermine's head, as he perceived
her about to speak.

"So you must be very good to her, Violetta, and you shall help me
make her clothes; but you need not be afraid I ever could love any
one half or one quarter as much as you, my own dear child, not if she
were ten times as beautiful, and so come and show her to Augustus.
She'll never be like you, dear old darling."

"It is a study," said the Colonel, as Rose moved off with a doll in
either hand; "a moral that you should take home."

Ermine shook her head, but smiled, saying, "Tell me, does your young
cousin know--"

"Alick Keith!   Not from me, and Lady Temple is perfectly to be
trusted; but I believe his father knew it was for no worse reason
that I was made to exchange.  But never mind, Ermine, he is a very
good fellow, and what is the use of making a secret of what even
Violetta knows?"

There was no debating the point, for her desire of secrecy was
prompted by the resolution to leave him unbound, whereas his wish for
publicity was with the purpose of binding himself, and Ermine was
determined that discussion was above all to be avoided, and that she
would, after the first explanation, keep the conversation upon other
subjects.  So she only answered with another reproving look and
smile, and said, "And now I am going to make you useful.  The editor
of the 'Traveller' is travelling, and has left his work to me.  I
have been keeping some letters for him to answer in his own hand,
because mine betrays womanhood; but I have just heard that he is to
stay about six weeks more, and people must be put out of their misery
before that.  Will you copy a few for me?  Here is some paper with
the office stamp."

"What an important woman you are, Ermine."

"If you had been in England all this time, you would see how easy the
step is into literary work; but you must not betray this for the
'Traveller's' sake or Ailie's."

"Your writing is not very womanish," said the colonel, as she gave
him his task.  "Or is this yours?  It is not like that of those
verses on Malvern hills that you copied out for me, the only thing
you ever gave me."

"I hope it is more to the purpose than it was then, and it has had to
learn to write in all sorts of attitudes."

"What's this?" as he went on with the paper; "your manuscript
entitled 'Curatocult.'  Is that the word?  I had taken it for the
produce of Miss Curtis's unassisted genius."

"Have you heard her use it!" said Ermine, disconcerted, having by no
means intended to betray Rachel.

"Oh yes!  I heard her declaiming on Sunday about what she knows no
more about than Conrade!  A detestable, pragmatical, domineering
girl!  I am thankful that I advised Lady Temple only to take the
house for a year.  It was right she should see her relations, but she
must not be tyrannized over."

"I don't believe she dislikes it."

"She dislikes no one!  She used to profess a liking for a huge
Irishwoman, whose husband had risen from the ranks; the most
tremendous woman I ever saw, except Miss Curtis."

"You know they were brought up together like sisters."

"All the worse, for she has the habit of passive submission.  If it
were the mother it would be all right, and I should be thankful to
see her in good keeping, but the mother and sister go for nothing,
and down comes this girl to battle every suggestion with principles
picked up from every catchpenny periodical, things she does not half
understand, and enunciates as if no one had even heard of them
before."

"I believe she seldom meets any one who has.  I mean to whom they
are matters of thought.  I really do like her vigour and earnestness."

"Don't say so, Ermine!  One reason why she is so intolerable to me
is that she is a grotesque caricature of what you used to be."

"You have hit it!  I see why I always liked her, besides that it is
pleasant to have any sort of visit, and a good scrimmage is
refreshing; she is just what I should have been without papa and
Edward to keep me down, and without the civilizing atmosphere at the
park."

"Never."

"No, I was not her equal in energy and beneficence, and I was younger
when you came.  But I feel for her longing to be up and doing, and
her puzzled chafing against constraint and conventionality, though it
breaks out in very odd effervescences."

"Extremely generous of you when you must be bored to death with her
interminable talk."

"You don't appreciate the pleasure of variety!  Besides, she really
interests me, she is so full of vigorous crudities.  I believe all
that is unpleasing in her arises from her being considered as the
clever woman of the family; having no man nearly connected enough to
keep her in check, and living in society that does not fairly meet
her.  I want you to talk to her, and take her in hand."

"Me!  Thank you, Ermine!  Why, I could not even stand her talking
about you, though she has the one grace of valuing you."

"Then you ought, in common gratitude, fo