r there is no little
greatness of soul in patiently coming down to Mackarel Lane to be
snubbed by one's cousin's governess's sister."

"If you will come up to Myrtlewood, you don't know what you may do."

"No, you are to set no more people upon me, though Lady Temple's eyes
are very wistful."

"I did not think you would have held out against her."

"Not when I had against you?  No, indeed, though I never did see
anybody more winning than she is in that meek, submissive gentleness!
Alison says she has cheered up and grown like another creature since
your arrival."

"And Alexander Keith's.  Yes, poor thing, we have brought something
of her own old world, where she was a sort of little queen in her
way.  It is too much to ask me to have patience with these relations,
Ermine.  If you could see the change from the petted creature she was
with her mother and husband, almost always the first lady in the
place, and latterly with a colonial court of her own, and now,
ordered about, advised, domineered over, made nobody of, and taking
it as meekly and sweetly as if she were grateful for it!  I verily
believe she is!  But she certainly ought to come away."

"I am not so sure of that. It seems to me rather a dangerous
responsibility to take her away from her own relations, unless there
were any with equal claims."

"They are her only relations, and her husband had none.  Still to be
under the constant yoke of an overpowering woman with unfixed
opinions seems to be an unmitigated evil for her and her boys; and no
one's feelings need be hurt by her fixing herself near some public
school for her sons' education.  However, she is settled for this
year, and at the end we may decide."

With which words he again applied himself to Ermine's correspondence,
and presently completed the letter, offering to direct the envelope,
which she refused, as having one already directed by the author.  He
rather mischievously begged to see it that he might judge of the
character of the writing, but this she resisted.

However, in four days' time there was a very comical twinkle in his
eye, as he informed her that the new number of the "Traveller" was in
no favour at the Homestead, "there was such a want of original
thought in it."  Ermine felt her imprudence in having risked the
betrayal, but all she did was to look at him with her full, steady
eyes, and a little twist in each corner of her mouth, as she said,
"Indeed!  Then we had better enliven it with the recollections of a
military secretary," and he was both convinced of what he guessed,
and also that she did not think it right to tell him; "But," he said,
"there is something in that girl, I perceive, Ermine; she does think
for herself, and if she were not so dreadfully earnest that she can't
smile, she would be the best company of any of the party."

"I am so glad you think so!  I shall be delighted if you will really
talk to her, and help her to argue out some of her crudities.  Indeed
she is worth it.  But I suppose you will hardly stay here long enough
to do her any good."

"What, are you going to order me away?"

"I thought your brother wanted you at home."

"It is all very well to talk of an ancestral home, but when it
consists of a tall, slim house, with blank walls and pepper-box
turrets, set down on a bleak hill side, and every one gone that made
it once a happy place, it is not attractive.  Moreover, my only use
there would be to be kept as a tame heir, the person whose
interference would be most resented, and I don't recognise that
duty."

"You are a gentleman at large, with no obvious duty," said Ermine,
meditatively.

"What, none?" bending his head, and looking earnestly at her.

"Oh, if you come here out of duty--" she said archly, and with her
merry laugh.  "There, is not that a nice occasion for picking a
quarrel?  And seriously," she continued, "perhaps it might be good
for you if we did.  I am beginning to fear that I ought not to keep
you lingering here without purpose or occupation."

"Fulfil my purpose, and I will find occupation."

"Don't say that."

"This once, Ermine.  For one year I shall wait in the hope of
convincing you.  If you do not change, your mind in that time, I
shall look for another staff appointment, to last till Rose is ready
for me."

The gravity of this conclusion made Ermine laugh.  "That's what you
learnt of your chief," she said.

"There would be less difference in age," he said.  "Though I own I
should like my widow to be less helpless than poor little Lady
Temple.  So," he added, with the same face of ridiculous earnest, "if
you continue to reject me yourself, you will at least rear her with
an especial view to her efficiency in that capacity."

And as Rose at that critical moment looked in at the window, eager to
be encouraged to come and show Colinette's successful toilette, he
drew her to him with the smile that had won her whole heart, and
listening to every little bit of honesty about "my work" and "Aunt
Ermine's work," he told her that he knew she was a very managing
domestic character, perfectly equal to the charge of both young
ladies.

"Aunt Ermine says I must learn to manage, because some day I shall
have to take care of papa."

"Yes," with his eyes on Ermine all the while, "learn to be a useful
woman; who knows if we shan't all depend on you by-and-by?"

"Oh do let me be useful to you," cried Rose; "I could hem all your
handkerchiefs, and make you a kettle-holder."

Ermine had never esteemed him more highly than when he refrained from
all but a droll look, and uttered not one word of the sportive
courtship that is so peculiarly unwholesome and undesirable with
children.  Perhaps she thought her colonel more a gentleman than she
had done before, if that were possible; and she took an odd, quaint
pleasure in the idea of this match, often when talking to Alison of
her views of life and education, putting them in the form of what
would become of Rose as Lady Keith; and Colin kept his promise of
making no more references to the future.  On moving into his
lodgings, the hour for his visits was changed, and unless he went out
to dinner, he usually came in the evening, thus attracting less
notice, and moreover rendering it less easy to lapse into the tender
subject, as Alison was then at home, and the conversation was
necessarily more general.

The afternoons were spent in Lady Temple's service.  Instead of the
orthodox dowager britchska and pair, ruled over by a tyrannical
coachman, he had provided her with a herd of little animals for
harness or saddle, and a young groom, for whom Coombe was answerable.
Mrs. Curtis groaned and feared the establishment would look flighty;
but for the first time Rachel became the colonel's ally.  "The worst
despotism practised in England," she said, "is that of coachmen, and
it is well that Fanny should be spared!  The coachman who lived here
when mamma was married, answered her request to go a little faster,
'I shall drive my horses as I plazes,' and I really think the present
one is rather worse in deed, though not in word."

Moreover, Rachel smoothed down a little of Mrs. Curtis's uneasiness
at Fanny's change of costume at the end of her first year of
widowhood, on the ground that Colonel Keith advised her to ride with
her sons, and that this was incompatible with weeds.  "And dear Sir
Stephen did so dislike the sight of them," she added, in her simple,
innocent way, as if she were still dressing to please him.

"On the whole, mother," said Rachel, "unless there is more heart-
break than Fanny professes, there's more coquetry in a pretty young
thing wearing a cap that says, 'come pity me,' than in going about
like other people."

"I only wish she could help looking like a girl of seventeen," sighed
Mrs. Curtis.  "If that colonel were but married, or the other young
man!  I'm sure she will fall into some scrape; she does not know how,
out of sheer innocence."

"Well, mother, you know I always mean to ride with her, and that will
be a protection."

"But, my dear, I am not sure about your riding with these gay
officers; you never used to do such things."

"At my age, mother, and to take care of Fanny."

And Mrs. Curtis, in her uncertainty whether to sanction the
proceedings and qualify them, or to make a protest--dreadful to
herself, and more dreadful to Fanny,--yielded the point when she
found herself not backed up by her energetic daughter, and the
cavalcade almost daily set forth from Myrtlewood, and was watched
with eyes of the greatest vexation, if not by kind Mrs. Curtis, by
poor Mr. Touchett, to whom Lady Temple's change of dress had been a
grievous shock.  He thought her so lovely, so interesting, at first;
and now, though it was sacrilege to believe it of so gentle and
pensive a face, was not this a return to the world?  What had she to
do with these officers?  How could her aunt permit it?  No doubt it
was all the work of his great foe, Miss Rachel.

It was true that Rachel heartily enjoyed these rides.  Hitherto she
had been only allowed to go out under the escort of her tyrant the
coachman, who kept her in very strict discipline.  She had not
anticipated anything much more lively with Fanny, her boys, and
ponies; but Colonel Keith had impressed on Conrade and Francis that
they were their mother's prime protectors, and they regarded her
bridle-rein as their post, keeping watch over her as if her safety
depended on them, and ready to quarrel with each other if the roads
were too narrow for all three to go abreast.  And as soon as the
colonel had ascertained that she and they were quite sufficient to
themselves, and well guarded by Coombe in the rear, he ceased to
regard himself as bound to their company, but he and Rachel extended
their rides in search of objects of interest.  She liked doing the
honours of the county, and achieved expeditions which her coachman
had hitherto never permitted to her, in search of ruins, camps,
churches, and towers.  The colonel had a turn for geology, though a
wandering life even with an Indian baggage-train had saved him from
incurring her contempt for collectors; but he knew by sight the
character of the conformations of rocks, and when they had mounted
one of the hills that surrounded Avonmouth, discerned by the outline
whether granite, gneiss, limestone, or slate formed the grander
height beyond, thus leading to schemes of more distant rides to
verify the conjectures, which Rachel accepted with the less argument,
because sententious dogmatism was not always possible on the back of
a skittish black mare.

There was no concealing from herself that she was more interested by
this frivolous military society than by any she had ever previously
met.  The want of comprehension of her pursuits in her mother's
limited range of acquaintance had greatly conduced both to her over-
weening manner and to her general dissatisfaction with the world, and
for the first time she was neither succumbed to, giggled at, avoided,
nor put down with a grave, prosy reproof.  Certainly Alick Keith, as
every one called him, nettled her extremely by his murmured irony,
but the acuteness of it was diverting in such a mere lad, and showed
that if he could only once be roused, he might be capable of better
things.  There was an excitement in his unexpected manner of seeing
things that was engaging as well as provoking; and Rachel never felt
content if he were at Myrtlewood without her seeing him, if only
because she began to consider him as more dangerous than his elder
namesake, and so assured of his position that he did not take any
pains to assert it, or to cultivate Lady Temple's good graces; he was
simply at home and perfectly at ease with her.

Colonel Keith's tone was different. He was argumentative where his
young cousin was sarcastic.  He was reading some of the books over
which Rachel had strained her capacities without finding any one with
whom to discuss them, since all her friends regarded them as
poisonous; and even Ermine Williams, without being shaken in her
steadfast trust, was so haunted and distressed in her lonely and
unvaried life by the echo of these shocks to the faith of others,
that absolutely as a medical precaution she abstained from dwelling
on them.  On the other hand Colin Keith liked to talk and argue out
his impressions, and found in Rachel the only person with whom the
subject could be safely broached, and thus she for the first time
heard the subjects fairly handled.  Hitherto she had never thought
that justice was done to the argument except by a portion of the
press, that drew conclusions which terrified while they allured her,
whereas she appreciated the candour that weighed each argument,
distinguishing principle from prejudice, and religious faith from
conventional construction, and in this measurement of minds she felt
the strength, and acuteness of powers superior to her own.  He was
not one of the men who prefer unintellectual women.  Perhaps clever
men, of a profession not necessarily requiring constant brain work,
are not so much inclined to rest the mind with feminine empty
chatter, as are those whose intellect is more on the strain.  At any
rate, though Colonel Keith was attentive and courteous to every one,
and always treated Lady Temple as a prime minister might treat a
queen, his tendency to conversation with Rachel was becoming marked,
and she grew increasingly prone to consult him.  The interest of this
new intercourse quite took out the sting of disappointment, when
again Curatocult came back, "declined with thanks."  Nay, before
making a third attempt she hazarded a question on his opinion of
female authorship, and much to her gratification, and somewhat to her
surprise, heard that he thought it often highly useful and valuable.

"That is great candour.  Men generally grudge whatever they think
their own privilege."

"Many things can often be felt and expressed by an able woman better
than by a man, and there is no reason that the utterance of anything
worthy to be said should be denied, provided it is worthy to be
said."

"Ah! there comes the hit.  I wondered if you would get through
without it."

"It was not meant as a hit.  Men are as apt to publish what is not
worth saying as women can be, and some women are so conscientious as
only to put forth what is of weight and value."

"And you are above wanting to silence them by palaver about
unfeminine publicity?"

"There is no need of publicity.  Much of the best and most wide-
spread writing emanates from the most quiet, unsuspected quarters."

"That is the benefit of an anonymous press."

"Yes.  The withholding of the name prevents well-mannered people from
treating a woman as an authoress, if she does not proclaim herself
one; and the difference is great between being known to write, and
setting up for an authoress."

"Between fact and pretension.  But write or not write, there is an
instinctive avoidance of an intellectual woman."

"Not always, for the simple manner that goes with real superiority is
generally very attractive.  The larger and deeper the mind, the more
there would be of the genuine humbleness and gentleness that a
shallow nature is incapable of.  The very word humility presupposes
depth."

"I see what you mean," said Rachel.  "Gentleness is not feebleness,
nor lowness lowliness.  There must be something held back."

"I see it daily," said Colonel Keith; and for a moment he seemed
about to add something, but checked himself, and took advantage of an
interruption to change the conversation.

"Superior natures lowly and gentle!" said Rachel to herself.  "Am I
so to him, then, or is he deceiving himself?  What is to be done?  At
my age!  Such a contravention of my principles!  A soldier, an
honourable, a title in prospect, Fanny's major!  Intolerable!  No,
no!  My property absorbed by a Scotch peerage, when I want it for so
many things!  Never.  I am sorry for him though.  It is hard that a
man who can forgive a woman for intellect, should be thrown back on
poor little Fanny; and it is gratifying--. But I am untouched yet,
and I will take care of myself.  At my age a woman who loves at all,
loves with all the gathered force of her nature, and I certainly feel
no such passion.  No, certainly not; and I am resolved not to be
swept along till I have made up my mind to yield to the force of the
torrent.  Let us see."

"Grace, my dear," said Mrs. Curtis, in one of her most confidential
moments, "is not dear Rachel looking very well?  I never saw her
dress so well put on."

"Yes, she is looking very handsome," said Grace.  "I am glad she has
consented to have her hair in that now way, it is very becoming to
her."

"I--I don't know that it is all the hair," said the mother,
faltering, as if half ashamed of herself; "but it seemed to me that
we need not have been so uneasy about dear Fanny.  I think, don't
you? that there may be another attraction.  To be sure, it would be
at a terrible distance from us; but so good and kind as he is, it
would be such a thing for you and Fanny as well--" Grace gave a great
start.

"Yes, my dear," Mrs. Curtis gently prosed on with her speculation,
"she would be a dreadful loss to us; but you see, so clever and odd
as she is, and with such peculiar ideas, I should be so thankful to
see her in the hands of some good, sensible man that would guide
her."

"But do you really think it is so, mother?"

"Mind, my dear, it is nothing to build on, but I cannot help being
struck, and just thinking to myself.  I know you'll not say
anything."

Grace felt much distressed after this communication had opened her
eyes to certain little touches of softening and consciousness that
sat oddly enough on her sister.  From the first avowal of Colonel
Keith's acquaintance with the Williamses, she had concluded him to be
the nameless lover, and had been disappointed that Alison, so far
from completing the confidence, had become more reserved than ever,
leaving her to wonder whether he were indeed the same, or whether his
constancy had survived the change of circumstances.  There were no
grounds on which to found a caution, yet Grace felt full of
discomfort and distrust, a feeling shared by Alison, who had never
forgiven herself for her half confidence, and felt that it would be
wiser to tell the rest, but was withheld by knowing that her motive
would actuate her sister to a contrary course.  That Colin should
detach himself from her, love again, and marry, was what Ermine
schooled herself to think fitting; but Alison alternated between
indignant jealousy for her sister, and the desire to warn Rachel that
she might at best win only the reversion of his heart.  Ermine was
happy and content with his evening visits, and would not take umbrage
at the daily rides, nor the reports of drawing-room warfare, and
Alison often wavered between the desire of preparing her, and the
doubt whether it were not cruel to inflict the present pain of want
of confidence.  If that were a happy summer to some at Avonmouth, it
was a very trying one to those two anxious, yet apparently
uninterested sisters, who were but lookers-on at the game that
affected their other selves.

At length, however, came a new feature into the quiet summer life at
Avonmouth.  Colin looked in on Ermine one morning to announce, with
shrugged shoulders, and a face almost making game of himself, that
his brother was coming!  Lord Keith had been called to London on
business, and would extend his journey to come and see what his
brother was doing.

"This comes of being the youngest of the family," observed Colin,
meditatively.  "One is never supposed capable of taking care of one's
self.  With Keith I shall be the gay extravagant young officer to the
end of my days."

"You are not forgiving to your brother," said Ermine.

"You have it in your power to make me so," he said eagerly.

"Then you would have nothing to forgive," she replied, smiling.

Lady Temple's first thought was a renewal of her ardent wish that
Ermine should be at Myrtlewood; and that Mackarel Lane, and the
governesship should be as much as possible kept out of sight.  Even
Alison was on her side; not that she was ashamed of either, but she
wished that Ermine should see and judge with her own eyes of Colin's
conduct, and also eagerly hailed all that showed him still committed
to her sister.  She was proportionably vexed that he did not think it
expedient to harass Ermine with further invitations.

"My brother knows the whole," he said, "and I do not wish to attempt
to conceal anything."

"I do not mean to conceal," faltered Fanny, "only I thought it might
save a shock--appearances--he might think better of it, if--"

"You thought only what was kind," answered the colonel, "and I thank
you for it most warmly; but this matter does not depend on my
brother's consent, and even if it did, Ermine's own true position is
that which is most honourable to her."

Having said this, he was forced to console Fanny in her shame at her
own kind attempt at this gentle little feminine subterfuge.  He
gratified her, however, by not interfering with her hospitable
instincts of doing honour to and entertaining his brother, for whose
sake her first approach to a dinner party was given; a very small
one, but treated by her and her household as a far more natural
occurrence than was any sort of entertainment at the Homestead.  She
even looked surprised, in her quiet way, at Mrs. Curtis's proffers of
assistance in the et ceteras, and gratefully answered for Coombe's
doing the right thing, without troubling herself further.  Mrs.
Curtis was less easy in her mind, her housewifely soul questioned the
efficiency of her niece's establishment, and she was moreover
persuaded that Lord Keith must be bent on inspecting his brother's
choice, while even Rachel felt as if the toils of fate were being
drawn round her, and let Grace embellish her for the dinner party, in
an odd sort of mood, sometimes rejecting her attempts at decoration,
sometimes vouchsafing a glance at the glass, chiefly to judge whether
her looks were really as repellently practical and intellectual as
she had been in the habit of supposing.  The wreath of white roses,
which she wore for the first time, certainly had a pleasing and
softening effect, and she was conscious that she had never looked so
well; then was vexed at the solicitude with which her mother looked
her over, and fairly blushed with annoyance at the good lady's
evident satisfaction.

But, after all, Rachel, at her best, could not have competed with the
grace of the quiet little figure that received them, the rich black
silk giving dignity to the slender form, and a sort of compromise
between veil and cap sheltering the delicate fair face; and with a
son on each side, Fanny looked so touchingly proud and well
supported, and the boys were so exultant and admiring at seeing her
thus dressed, that it was a very pretty sight, and struck the first
arrived of her guests, Mr. Touchett, quite dumb with admiration.
Colonel Hammond, the two Keiths, and their young kinsman, completed
the party.  Lord Keith of Gowanbrae was best described by the said
young kinsman's words "a long-backed Scotchman."  He was so intensely
Scottish that he made his brother look and sound the same, whereas
ordinarily neither air nor accent would have shown the colonel's
nation, and there was no definable likeness between them, except,
perhaps, the baldness of the forehead, but the remains of Lord
Keith's hair were silvered red, whereas Colin's thick beard and
scanty locks were dark brown, and with a far larger admixture of
hoar-frost, though he was the younger by twenty years, and his
brother's appearance gave the impression of a far greater age than
fifty-eight, there was the stoop of rheumatism, and a worn, thin look
on the face, with its high cheek bones, narrow lips, and cold eyes,
by no means winning.  On the other hand, he was the most finished
gentleman that Grace and Rachel had ever encountered; he had all the
gallant polish of manner that the old Scottish nobility have
inherited from the French of the old regime--a manner that, though
Colin possessed all its essentials, had been in some degree rubbed
off in the frankness of his military life, but which the old nobleman
retained in its full perfection.  Mrs. Curtis admired it extremely as
a specimen of the "old school," for which she had never ceased to
mourn; and Rachel felt as if it took her breath away by the likeness
to Louis XIV.; but, strange to say, Lady Temple acted as if she were
quite in her element.  It might be that the old man's courtesy
brought back to her something of the tender chivalry of her soldier
husband, and that a sort of filial friendliness had become natural to
her towards an elderly man, for she responded at once, and devoted
herself to pleasing and entertaining him.  Their civilities were
something quite amusing to watch, and in the evening, with a complete
perception of his tastes, she got up a rubber for him.

"Can you bear it?  You will not like to play?" murmured the colonel
to her, as he rung for the cards, recollecting the many evenings of
whist with her mother and Sir Stephen.

"Oh! I don't mind.  I like anything like old times, and my aunt does
not like playing--"

No, for Mrs. Curtis had grown up in a family where cards were
disapproved, and she felt it a sad fall in Fanny to be playing with
all the skill of her long training, and receiving grand compliments
from Lord Keith on joint victories over the two colonels.  It was a
distasteful game to all but the players, for Rachel felt slightly
hurt at the colonel's defection, and Mr. Touchett, with somewhat of
Mrs. Curtis's feeling that it was a backsliding in Lady Temple,
suddenly grew absent in a conversation that he was holding with young
Mr. Keith upon--of all subjects in the world--lending library books,
and finally repaired to the piano, where Grace was playing her
mother's favourite music, in hopes of distracting her mind from
Fanny's enormity; and there he stood, mechanically thanking Miss
Curtis, but all the time turning a melancholy eye upon the game.
Alick Keith, meanwhile, sat himself down near Rachel and her mother,
close to an open window, for it was so warm that even Mrs. Curtis
enjoyed the air; and perhaps because that watching the colonel had
made Rachel's discourses somewhat less ready than usual, he actually
obtained an interval in which to speak!  He was going the next day to
Bishops Worthy, there to attend his cousin's wedding, and at the end
of a fortnight to bring his sister for her visit to Lady Temple.
This sister was evidently his great care, and it needed but little
leading to make him tell a good deal about her.  She had, it seemed,
been sent home from the Cape at about ten years old, when the
regiment went to India, and her brother who had been at school, then
was with her for a short time before going out to join the regiment.

"Why," said Rachel, recovering her usual manner, "you have not been
ten years in the army!"

"I had my commission at sixteen," he answered.

"You are not six-and-twenty!" she exclaimed.

"You are as right as usual," was the reply, with his odd little
smile; "at least till the 1st of August."

"My dear!" said her mother, more alive than Rachel to his amusement
at her daughter's knowing his age better than he did himself, but
adding, politely, "you are hardly come to the time of life for liking
to hear that your looks deceived us."

"Boys are tolerated," he said, with a quick glance at Rachel; but at
that moment something many-legged and tickling flitted into the
light, and dashed over her face.  Mrs. Curtis was by no means a
strong-minded woman in the matter of moths and crane-flies, disliking
almost equally their sudden personal attentions and their suicidal
propensities, and Rachel dutifully started up at once to give chase
to the father-long-legs, and put it out of window before it had
succeeded in deranging her mother's equanimity either by bouncing
into her face, or suspending itself by two or three legs in the wax
of the candle.  Mr. Keith seconded her efforts, but the insect was
both lively and cunning, eluding them with a dexterity wonderful in
such an apparently over-limbed creature, until at last it kindly
rested for a moment with its wooden peg of a body sloping, and most
of its thread-like members prone upon a newspaper, where Rachel
descended on it with her pocket-handkerchief, and Mr. Keith tried to
inclose it with his hands at the same moment.  To have crushed the
fly would have been melancholy, to have come down on the young
soldier's fingers, awkward; but Rachel did what was even more
shocking--her hands did descend on, what should have been fingers,
but they gave way under her--she felt only the leather of the glove
between her and the newspaper.  She jumped and very nearly cried out,
looking up with an astonishment and horror only half reassured by his
extremely amused smile.  "I beg your pardon; I'm so sorry--" she
gasped confused.

"Inferior animals can dispense with a member more or less," he
replied, giving her the other corner of the paper, on which they bore
their capture to the window, and shook it till it took wing, with
various legs streaming behind it.  "That venerable animal is
apparently indifferent to having left a third of two legs behind
him," and as he spoke he removed the already half drawn-off left-hand
glove, and let Rachel see for a moment that it had only covered the
thumb, forefinger, two joints of the middle, and one of the third;
the little finger was gone, and the whole hand much scarred.  She was
still so much dismayed that she gasped out the first question she had
ever asked him--

"Where--?"

"Not under the handkerchief," he answered, picking it up as if he
thought she wanted convincing.  "At Delhi, I imagine."

At that moment, Grace, as an act of general beneficence certainly
pleasing to her mother, began to sing.  It was a stop to all
conversation, for Mrs. Curtis particularly disliked talking during
singing, and Rachel had to digest her discoveries at her leisure, as
soon as she could collect herself after the unnatural and strangely
lasting sensation of the solid giving way.  So Grace was right, he
was no boy, but really older than Fanny, the companion of her
childhood, and who probably would have married her had not the
general come in the way!  Here was, no doubt, the real enemy, while
they had all been thinking of Colonel Keith.  A man only now
expecting his company!  It would sound more absurd.  Yet Rachel was
not wont to think how things would sound!  And this fresh intense
dislike provoked her.  Was it the unsuitability of the young widow
remarrying?  "Surely, surely, it must not be that womanhood in its
contemptible side is still so strong that I want to keep all for
myself!  Shame!  And this may be the true life love, suppressed, now
able to revive!  I have no right to be disgusted, I will watch
minutely, and judge if he will be a good guide and father to the
boys, though it may save the colonel trouble.  Pish! what have I to
do with either?  Why should I think about them?  Yet I must care for
Fanny, I must dislike to see her lower herself even in the eyes of
the world.  Would it really be lowering herself?  I cannot tell, I
must think it out.  I wish that game was over, or that Grace would
let one speak."

But songs and whist both lasted till the evening was ended by Lady
Temple coming up to the curate with her winnings and her pretty
smile, "Please, Mr. Touchett, let this go towards some treat for the
school children.  I should not like to give it in any serious way,
you know, but just for some little pleasure for them."

If she had done it on purpose, she could not have better freshly
riveted his chains.  That pensive simplicity, with the smile of
heartfelt satisfaction at giving pleasure to anybody, were more and
more engaging as her spirits recovered their tone, and the most
unsatisfactory consideration which Rachel carried away that evening
was that Alexander Keith being really somewhat the senior, if the
improvement in Fanny's spirits were really owing to his presence, the
objection on the score of age would not hold.  But, thought Rachel,
Colonel Keith being her own, what united power they should have over
Fanny.  Pooh! she had by no means resigned herself to have him,
though for Fanny's sake it might be well, and was there not a foolish
prejudice in favour of married women, that impeded the usefulness of
single ones?  However, if the stiff, dry old man approved of her for
her fortune's sake, that would be quite reason enough for repugnance.

The stiff old man was the pink of courtesy, and paid his respects in
due order to his brother's friends the next day, Colin attending in
his old aide-de-camp fashion.  It was curious to see them together.
The old peer was not at all ungracious to his brother; indeed, Colin
had been agreeably surprised by an amount of warmth and brotherliness
that he had never experienced from him before, as if old age had
brought a disposition to cling to the remnant of the once
inconveniently large family, and make much of the last survivor,
formerly an undesirable youngest favourite, looked on with jealous
eyes and thwarted and retaliated on for former petting, as soon as
the reins of government fell from the hands of the aged father.  Now,
the elder brother was kind almost to patronizing, though evidently
persuaded that Colin was a gay careless youth, with no harm in him,
but needing to be looked after; and as to the Cape, India, and
Australia being a larger portion of the world than Gowanbrae,
Edinburgh, and London, his lordship would be incredulous to the day
of his death.

He paid his formal and gracious visits at Myrtlewood and the
Homestead, and then supposed that his brother would wish him to call
upon "these unfortunate ladies."  Colin certainly would have been
vexed if he had openly slighted them; but Alison, whom the brothers
overtook on their way into Mackarel Lane, did not think the colonel
looked in the most felicitous frame of mind, and thought the most
charitable construction might be that he shared her wishes that she
could be a few minutes in advance; to secure that neither Rose's
sports nor Colinette's toilette were very prominent.

All was right, however; Ermine's taste for the fitness of things had
trained Rose into keeping the little parlour never in stiff array,
but also never in a state to be ashamed of, and she herself was
sitting in the shade in the garden, whither, after the first
introduction, Colin and Rose brought seats; and the call, on the
whole, went off extremely well.  Ermine naver let any one be
condescending to her, and conducted the conversation with her usual
graceful good breeding, while the colonel, with Rose on his knee,
half talked to the child, half listened and watched.

As soon as he had deposited his brother at the hotel, he came back
again, and in answer to Ermine's "Well," he demanded, "What she
thought of his brother, and if he were what she expected?"

"Very much, only older and feebler.  And did he communicate his views
of Mackarel Lane?  I saw him regarding, me as a species of mermaid or
syren, evidently thinking it a great shame that I have not a burnt
face.  If he had only known about Rose!"

"The worst of it is that he wants me to go home with him, and I am
afraid I must do so, for now that he and I are the last in the
entail, there is an opportunity of making an arrangement about the
property, for which he is very anxious."

"Well, you know, I have long thought it would be very good for you."

"And when I am there I shall have to visit every one in the family;"
and he looked into her eyes to see if she would let them show
concern, but she kept up their brave sparkle as she still said, "You
know you ought."

"Then you deliver me up to Keith's tender mercies till--"

"Till you have done your duty--and forgiven him."

"Remember, Ermine, I can't spend a winter in Scotland.  A cold always
makes the ball remind me of its presence in my chest, and I was told
that if I spent a winter at home, it must be on the Devonshire
coast."

"That ball is sufficient justification for ourselves, I allow," she
said, that one little word our making up for all that had gone
before.

"And meantime you will write to me--about Rose's education."

"To be sure, or what would be the use of growing old?"

Alison felt savage all through this interview.  That perfect
understanding and the playful fiction about waiting for Rose left him
a great deal too free.  Ermine might almost be supposed to want to
get rid of him, and even when he took leave she only remained for a
few minutes leaning her cheek on her hand, and scarcely indulged in a
sigh before asking to be wheeled into the house again, nor would she
make any remark, save "It has been too bright a summer to last for
ever.  It would be very wrong to wish him to stay dangling here.  Let
what will happen, he is himself."

It sounded far too like a deliberate resignation of him, and
persuasion that if he went he would not return to be all he had been.
However, the departure was not immediate, Lord Keith had taken a
fancy to the place and scenery, and wished to see all the lions of
the neighbourhood, so that there were various expeditions in the
carriages or on horseback, in which he displayed his grand courtesy
to Lady Temple, and Rachel enjoyed the colonel's conversation, and
would have enjoyed it still more if she had not been tracing a
meaning in every attention that he paid her, and considering whether
she was committing herself by receiving it.  She was glad he was
going away that she might have time to face the subject, and make up
her mind, for she was convinced that the object of his journey was to
make himself certain of his prospects.  When he said that he should
return for the winter, and that he had too much to leave at Avonmouth
to stay long away from it, there must be a meaning in his words.

Ermine had one more visit from Lord Keith, and this time he came
alone.  He was in his most gracious and courteous mood, and sat
talking of indifferent things for some time, of his aunt Lady Alison,
and of Beauchamp in the old time, so that Ermine enjoyed the renewal
of old associations and names belonging to a world unlike her present
one.  Then he came to Colin, his looks and his health, and his own
desire to see him quit the army.

Ermine assented to his health being hardly fit for the army, and
restrained the rising indignation as she recollected what a
difference the best surgical advice might have made ten years ago.

And then, Lord Keith said, a man could hardly be expected to settle
down without marrying.  He wished earnestly to see his brother
married, but, unfortunately, charges on his estate would prevent him
from doing anything for him; and, in fact, he did not see any
possibility of his--of his marrying, except a person with some means.

"I understand," said Ermine, looking straight before her, and her
colour mounting.

"I was sure that a person of your great good sense would do so," said
Lord Keith.  "I assure you no one can be more sensible than myself of
the extreme forbearance, discretion, and regard for my brother's true
welfare that has been shown here."

Ermine bowed.  He did not know that the vivid carmine that made her
look so handsome was not caused by gratification at his praise, but
by the struggle to brook it patiently.

"And now, knowing the influence over him that, most deservedly, you
must always possess, I am induced to hope that, as his sincere
friend, you will exert it in favour of the more prudent counsels."

"I have no influence over his judgment," said Ermine, a little
proudly.

"I mean," said Lord Keith, forced to much closer quarters, "you will
excuse me for speaking thus openly--that in the state of the case,
with so much depending on his making a satisfactory choice, I feel
convinced, with every regret, that you will feel it to be for his
true welfare--as indeed I infer that you have already endeavoured to
show him--to make a new beginning, and to look on the past as past."

There was something in the insinuating tone of this speech, increased
as it was by the modulation of his Scottish voice, that irritated his
hearer unspeakably, all the more because it was the very thing she
had been doing.

"Colonel Keith must judge for himself," she said, with a cold manner,
but a burning heart.

"I--I understand," said Lord Keith, "that you had most honourably,
most consistently, made him aware that--that what once might have
been desirable has unhappily become impossible."

"Well," said Ermine.

"And thus," he proceeded, "that the sincere friendship with which you
still regard him would prevent any encouragement to continue an
attachment, unhappily now hopeless and obstructive to his prospects."

Ermine's eyes flashed at the dictation.  "Lord Keith," she said, "I
have never sought your brother's visits nor striven to prolong them;
but if he finds pleasure in them after a life of disappointment and
trouble, I cannot refuse nor discourage them."

"I am aware," said Lord Keith, rising as if to go, "that I have
trespassed long on your time, and made a suggestion only warranted by
the generosity with which you have hitherto acted."

"One may be generous of one's own, not of other people's," said
Ermine.

He looked at her puzzled, then said, "Perhaps it will be best to
speak categorically, Miss Williams.  Let it be distinctly understood
that my brother Colin, in paying his addresses to you, is necessarily
without my sanction or future assistance."

"It might not be necessary, my lord.  Good morning;" and her
courteous bow was an absolute dismissal.

But when Alison came home she found her more depressed than she had
allowed herself to be for years, and on asking what was the matter
was answered--

"Pride and perverseness, Ailie!" then, in reply to the eager
exclamation, "I believe he was justified in all he said.  But, Ailie,
I have preached to Colin more than I had a right to do about
forgiving his brother.  I did not know how provoking he can be.
I did not think it was still in me to fly out as I did!"

"He had no business to come here interfering and tormenting you,"
said Alison, hotly.

"I dare say he thought he had!  But one could not think of that when
it came to threatening me with his giving no help to Colin if-- There
was no resisting telling him how little we cared!"

"You have not offended him so that he will keep Colin away!"

"The more he tried, the more Colin would come!  No, I am not sorry
for having offended him.  I don't mind him; but Ailie, how little one
knows!  All the angry and bitter feelings that I thought burnt out
for ever when I lay waiting for death, are stirred up as hotly as
they were long ago.  The old self is here as strong as ever!  Ailie,
don't tell Colin about this; but to-morrow is a saint's day, and
would you see Mr. Touchett, and try to arrange for me to go to the
early service?  I think then I might better be helped to conquer
this."

"But, Ermine, how can you?  Eight o'clock, you know."

"Yes, dearest, it will give you a great deal of trouble, but you
never mind that, you know; and I am so much stronger than I used to
be, that you need not fear.  Besides, I want help so much!  And it is
the day Colin goes away!"

Alison obeyed, as she always obeyed her sister; and Lord Keith,
taking his constitutional turn before breakfast on the esplanade, was
met by what he so little expected to encounter that he had not time
to get out of the way--a Bath chair with Alison walking on one side,
his brother on the other.  He bowed coldly, but Ermine held out her
hand, and he was obliged to come near.

"I am glad to have met you," she said.

"I am glad to see you out so early," he answered, confused.

"This is an exception," she said, smiling and really looking
beautiful.  "Good-bye, I have thought over what passed yesterday, and
I believe we are more agreed than perhaps I gave you reason to
think."

There was a queenly air of dignified exchange of pardon in her manner
of giving her hand and bending her head as she again said "Good-bye,"
and signed to her driver to move on.

Lord Keith could only say "Good-bye;" then, looking after her,
muttered, "After all, that is a remarkable woman."




CHAPTER VIII



WOMAN'S MISSION DISCOVERED.



 "But O unseen for three long years,
  Dear was the garb of mountaineers
  To the fair maid of Lorn."--LORD OF THE ISLES.


"Only nerves," said Alison Williams, whenever she was pushed hard as
to why her sister continued unwell, and her own looks betrayed an
anxiety that her words would not confess.  Rachel, after a visit on
the first day, was of the same opinion, and prescribed globules and
enlivenment; but after a personal administration of the latter in the
shape of a discussion of Lord Keith, she never called in the morning
without hearing that Miss Williams was not up, nor in the afternoon
without Alison's meeting her, and being very sorry, but really she
thought it better for her sister to be quite quiet.

In fact, Alison was not seriously uneasy about Ermine's health, for
these nervous attacks were not without precedent, as the revenge for
all excitement of the sensitive mind upon the much-tried
constitution.  The reaction must pass off in time, and calm and
patience would assist in restoring her; but the interview with Lord
Keith had been a revelation to her that her affection was not the
calm, chastened, mortified, almost dead thing of the past that she
had tried to believe it; but a young, living, active feeling, as
vivid, and as little able to brook interference as when the first
harsh letter from Gowanbrae had fallen like a thunderbolt on the
bright hopes of youth.  She looked back at some verses that she had
written, when first perceiving that life was to be her portion, where
her own intended feelings were ascribed to a maiden who had taken the
veil, believing her crusader slain, but who saw him return and lead a
recluse life, with the light in her cell for his guiding star.  She
smiled sadly to find how far the imaginings of four and twenty
transcended the powers of four and thirty; and how the heart that had
deemed itself able to resign was chafed at the appearance of
compulsion.  She felt that the right was the same as ever; but it was
an increased struggle to maintain the resolute abstinence from all
that could bind Colin to her, at the moment when he was most likely
to be detached, and it was a struggle rendered the more trying by the
monotony of a life, scarcely varied except by the brainwork, which
she was often obliged to relinquish.

Nothing, however, here assisted her so much as Lady Temple's new pony
carriage which, by Fanny's desire, had been built low enough to
permit of her being easily lifted into it.  Inert, and almost afraid
of change, Ermine was hard to persuade, but Alison, guessing at the
benefit, was against her, and Fanny's wistful eyes and caressing
voice were not to be gainsaid; so she suffered herself to be placed
on the broad easy seat, and driven about the lanes, enjoying most
intensely the new scenes, the peeps of sea, the distant moors, the
cottages with their glowing orchards, the sloping harvest fields, the
variety that was an absolute healing to the worn spirits, and
moreover, that quiet conversation with Lady Temple, often about the
boys, but more often about Colonel Keith.

Not only Ermine, but other inhabitants of Avonmouth found the world
more flat in his absence.  Rachel's interest was lessened in her
readings after she had lost the pleasure of discussion, and she asked
herself many times whether the tedium were indeed from love, or if it
were simply from the absence of an agreeable companion.  "I will try
myself," she said to herself, "if I am heartily interested in my
occupations by the end of the next week, then I shall believe myself
my own woman!"

But in going back to her occupations, she was more than ordinarily
sensible of their unsatisfactoriness.  One change had come over her
in the last few months.  She did not so much long for a wider field,
as for power to do the few things within her reach more thoroughly.
Her late discussions had, as it were, opened a second eye, that saw
two sides of questions that she had hitherto thought had only one,
and she was restless and undecided between them, longing for some
impulse from within or without, and hoping, for her own dignity and
consistency's sake, that it was not only Colonel Keith's presence
which had rendered this summer the richest in her life.

A test was coming for her, she thought, in the person of Miss Keith.
Judging by the brother, Rachel expected a tall fair dreamy blonde,
requiring to be taught a true appreciation of life and its duties,
and whether the training of this young girl would again afford her
food for eagerness and energy, would, as she said to herself, show
whether her affections were still her own.  Moreover, there was the
great duty of deciding whether the brother were worthy of Fanny!

It chanced to be convenient that Rachel should go to Avoncester on
the day of the arrival, and call at the station for the traveller.
She recollected how, five months previously, she had there greeted
Fanny, and had seen the bearded apparition since regarded, with so
much jealousy, and now with such a strangely mixed feeling.  This
being a far more indifferent errand, she did not go on the platform,
but sat in the carriage reading the report of the Social Science
Congress, until the travellers began to emerge, and Captain Keith
(for he had had his promotion) came up to her with a young lady who
looked by no means like his sister.  She was somewhat tall, and in
that matter alone realized Rachel's anticipations, for she was black-
eyed, and her dark hair was crepe and turned back from a face of the
plump contour, and slightly rosy complexion that suggested the
patches of the last century; as indeed Nature herself seemed to have
thought when planting near the corner of the mouth a little brown
mole, that added somehow to the piquancy of the face, not exactly
pretty, but decidedly attractive under the little round hat, and in
the point device, though simple and plainly coloured travelling
dress.

"Will you allow me a seat?" asked Captain Keith, when he had disposed
of his sister's goods; and on Rachel's assent, he placed himself on
the back seat in his lazy manner.

"If you were good for anything, you would sit outside and smoke,"
said his sister.

"If privacy is required for swearing an eternal friendship, I can go
to sleep instead," he returned, closing his eyes.

"Quite the reverse," quoth Bessie Keith; "he has prepared me to hate
you all, Miss Curtis."

"On the mutual aversion principle," murmured the brother.

"Don't you flatter yourself!  Have you found out, Miss Curtis, that
it is the property of this species always to go by contraries?"

"To Miss Curtis I always appear in the meekest state of assent," said
Alick.

"Then I would not be Miss Curtis.  How horribly you must differ!"

Rachel was absolutely silenced by this cross fire; something so
unlike the small talk of her experience, that her mind could hardly
propel itself into velocity enough to follow the rapid encounter of
wits.  However, having stirred up her lightest troops into marching
order, she said, in a puzzled, doubtful way, "How has he prepared you
to hate us?--By praising us?"

"Oh, no; that would have been too much on the surface.  He knew the
effect of that," looking in his sleepy eyes for a twinkle of
response.  "No; his very reserve said, I am going to take her to
ground too transcendent for her to walk on, but if I say one word, I
shall never get her there at all.  It was a deep refinement, you see,
and he really meant it, but I was deeper," and she shook her head at
him.

"You are always trying which can go deepest?" said Rachel.

"It is a sweet fraternal sport," returned Alick.

"Have you no brother?" asked Bessie.

"No."

"Then you don't know what detestable creatures they are," but she
looked so lovingly and saucily at her big brother, that Rachel, spite
of herself, was absolutely fascinated by this novel form of
endearment.  An answer was spared her by Miss Keith's rapture at the
sight of some soldiers in the uniform of her father's old regiment.

"Have a care, Bessie; Miss C