urtis will despise you," said her
brother.

"Why should you think so?" exclaimed Rachel, not desirous of putting
on a forbidding aspect to this bright creature.

"Have I not been withered by your scorn!"

"I--I--" Rachel was going to say something of her change of opinion
with regard to military society, but a sudden consciousness set her
cheeks in a flame and checked her tongue; while Bessie Keith, with
ease and readiness, filled up the blank.

"What, Alick, you have brought the service into disrepute!  I am
ashamed of you!"

"Oh, no!" said Rachel, in spite of her intolerable blushes, feeling
the necessity of delivering her confession, like a cannon-ball among
skirmishers; "only we had been used to regard officers as necessarily
empty and frivolous, and our recent experience has--has been
otherwise."  Her period altogether failed her.

"There, Alick, is that the effect of your weight of wisdom?  I shall
be more impressed with it than ever.  It has redeemed the character
of your profession.  Captain Keith and the army."

"I am afraid I cannot flatter myself," said Alick; and a sort of
reflection of Rachel's burning colour seemed to have lighted on his
cheek, "its reputation has been in better hands."

"O Colonel Colin!  Depend upon it, he is not half as sage as you,
Alick.  Why, he is a dozen years older!--What, don't you know, Miss
Curtis, that the older people grow the less sage they get?"

"I hope not," said Rachel.

"Do you!  A contrary persuasion sustains me when I see people
obnoxiously sage to their fellow-creatures."

"Obnoxious sageness in youth is the token that there is stuff
behind," said Alick, with eagerness that set his sister laughing at
him for fitting on the cap; but Rachel had a sort of odd dreamy
perception that Bessie Keith had unconsciously described her
(Rachel's) own aspect, and that Alick was defending her, and she was
silent and confused, and rather surprised at the assumption of the
character by one who she thought could never even exert himself to be
obnoxious.  He evidently did not wish to dwell on the subject, but
began to inquire after Avonmouth matters, and Rachel in return asked
for Mr. Clare.

"Very well," was the answer; "unfailing in spirits, every one agreed
that he was the youngest man at the wedding."

"Having outgrown his obnoxious sageness," said Bessie.

"There is nothing he is so adroit at as guessing the fate of a
croquet-ball by its sound."

"Now Bessie," exclaimed Alick.

"I have not transgressed, have I?" asked Bessie; and in the
exclamations that followed, she said, "You see what want of
confidence is.  This brother of mine no sooner saw you in the
carriage than he laid his commands on me not to ask after your
croquet-ground all the way home, and the poor word cannot come out of
my mouth without--"

"I only told you not to bore Miss Curtis with the eternal subject, as
she would think you had no more brains than one of your mallets," he
said, somewhat energetically.

"And if we had begun to talk croquet, we should soon have driven him
outside."

"But suppose I could not talk it," said Rachel, "and that we have no
ground for it."

"Why, then,"--and she affected to turn up her eyes,--"I can only aver
that the coincidence of sentiments is no doubt the work of destiny."

"Bessie!" exclaimed her brother.

"Poor old fellow! you had excuse enough, lying on the sofa to the
tune of tap and click; but for a young lady in the advanced ranks of
civilization to abstain is a mere marvel."

"Surely it is a great waste of time," said Rachel.

"Ah! when I have converted you, you will wonder what people did with
themselves before the invention."

"Woman's mission discovered," quoth her brother.

"Also man's, unless he neglects it," returned Miss Elizabeth; "I
wonder, now, if you would play if Miss Curtis did."

"Wisdom never pledges itself how it will act in hypothetical
circumstances," was the reply.

"Hypothetical," syllabically repeated Bessie Keith; "did you teach
him that word, Miss Curtis?  Well, if I don't bring about the
hypothetical circumstances, you may call me hyperbolical."

So they talked, Rachel in a state of bewilderment, whether she were
teased or enchanted, and Alexander Keith's quiet nonchalance not
concealing that he was in some anxiety at his sister's reckless talk,
but, perhaps, he hardly estimated the effect of the gay, quaint
manner that took all hearts by storm, and gave a frank careless grace
to her nonsense.  She grew graver and softer as she came nearer
Avonmouth, and spoke tenderly of the kindness she had received at the
time of her mother's death at the Cape, when she had been brought to
the general's, and had there remained like a child of the house, till
she had been sent home on the removal of the regiment to India.

"I remember," she said, "Mrs. Curtis kept great order.  In fact,
between ourselves, she was rather a dragon; and Lady Temple, though
she had one child then, seemed like my companion and playfellow.
Dear little Lady Temple, I wonder if she is altered!"

"Not in the least," returned both her companions at once, and she was
quite ready to agree with them when the slender form and fair young
face met her in the hall amid a cloud of eager boys.  The meeting was
a full renewal of the parting, warm and fond, and Bessie so comported
herself on her introduction to the children, that they all became
enamoured of her on the spot, and even Stephana relaxed her shyness
on her behalf.  That sunny gay good-nature could not be withstood,
and Rachel, again sharing Fanny's first dinner after an arrival, no
longer sat apart despising the military atmosphere, but listening,
not without amusement, to the account of the humours of the wedding,
mingled with Alick Keith's touches of satire.

"It was very stupid," said Bessie, "of none of those girls to have
Uncle George to marry them.  My aunt fancied he would be nervous, but
I know he did marry a couple when Mr. Lifford was away; I mean him to
marry me, as I told them all."

"You had better wait till you know whether he will," observed Alick.

"Will?  Oh, he is always pleased to feel he can do like other
people," returned Bessie, "and I'll undertake to see that he puts
the ring on the right--I mean the left finger.  Because you'll have
to give me away, you know, Alick, so you can look after him."

"You seem to have arranged the programme pretty thoroughly," said
Rachel.

"After four weddings at home, one can't but lay by a little
experience for the future," returned Bessie; "and after all, Alick
need not look as if it must be for oneself.  He is quite welcome to
profit by it, if he has the good taste to want my uncle to marry
him."

"Not unless I were very clear that he liked my choice," said Alick,
gravely.

"Oh, dear!  Have you any doubts, or is that meant for a cut at poor
innocent me, as if I could help people's folly, or as if he was not
gone to Rio Janeiro," exclaimed Bessie, with a sort of meek
simplicity and unconsciousness that totally removed all the
unsatisfactoriness of the speech, and made even her brother smile
while he looked annoyed; and Lady Temple quietly changed the
conversation.  Alick Keith was obliged to go away early, and the
three ladies sat long in the garden outside the window, in the summer
twilight, much relishing the frank-hearted way in which this engaging
girl talked of herself and her difficulties to Fanny as to an old
friend, and to Rachel as belonging to Fanny.

"I am afraid that I was very naughty," she said, with a hand laid on
Lady Temple's, as if to win pardon; "but I never can resist plaguing
that dear anxious brother of mine, and he did so dreadfully take to
heart the absurdities of that little Charlie Carleton, as if any one
with brains could think him good for anything but a croquet partner,
that I could not help giving a little gentle titillation.  I saw you
did not like it, dear Lady Temple, and I am sorry for it."

"I hope I did not vex you," said Fanny, afraid of having been severe.

"Oh, no, indeed; a little check just makes one feel one is cared
for," and they kissed affectionately: "you see when one has a very
wise brother, plaguing him is irresistible.  How little Stephana will
plague hers, in self-defence, with so many to keep her in order."

"They all spoil her."

"Ah, this is the golden age.  See what it will be when they think
themselves responsible for her!  Dear Lady Temple, how could you send
him home so old and so grave?"

"I am afraid we sent him home very ill.  I never expected to see him
so perfectly recovered.  I could hardly believe my eyes when Colonel
Keith brought him to the carriage not in the least lame."

"Yes; and it was half against his will.  He would have been almost
glad to be a lay curate to Uncle George, only he knew if he was fit
for service my father would have been vexed at his giving up his
profession."

"Then it was not his choice!" said Rachel.

"Oh, he was born a soldier, like all the rest of us, couldn't help
it.  The --th is our home, and if he would only take my hint and
marry, I could be with him there, now!  Lady Temple, do pray send for
all the eligible officers--I don't know any of them now, except the
two majors, and Alick suspects my designs, I believe, for he won't
tell me anything about them."

"My dear!" said Fanny, bewildered, "how you talk; you know we are
living a very quiet life here."

"Oh, yes, so Alick has told me," she said, with a pretty compunction
in her tone; "you must be patient with me," and she kissed Fanny's
fingers again and spoke in a gentler way.  "I am used to be a great
chatter-box, and nobody protested but Alick."

"I wish you would tell me about his return, my dear; he seemed so
unfit to travel when your poor father came to the hills and took him
away by dak.  It seemed so impossible he could bear the journey; he
could not stand or help himself at all, and had constant returns of
fever; but they said the long sea voyage was the only chance, and
that in India he could not get vigour enough to begin to recover.
I was very unhappy about him," said Fanny, innocently, whilst Rachel
felt very vigilant, wondering if Fanny were the cause of the change
his sister spoke of.

"Yes, the voyage did him good, but the tidings of papa's death came
two months before him, and Uncle George's eyes were in such a state
that he had to be kept in the dark, so that no one could go and meet
the poor dear boy at Southampton but Mr. Lifford, and the shock of
the news he heard brought the fever back, and it went on intermitting
for weeks and weeks.  We had him at Littleworthy at first, thinking
he could be better nursed and more cheerful there, but there was no
keeping the house quiet enough."

"Croquet!" said Rachel.

"Everything!" returned Bessie.  "Four courtships in more or less
progress, besides a few flirtations, and a house where all the
neighbours were running in and out in a sociable way.  Our loss was
not as recent there as it was to him, and they were only nieces, so
we could not have interfered with them; besides, my aunt was afraid
he would be dull, and wanted to make the most of her conquering hero,
and everybody came and complimented him, and catechised him whether
he believed in the Indian mutilations, when, poor fellow, he had seen
horrors enough never to bear to think of them, except when the fever
brought them all over again.  I am sure there was excuse enough for
his being a little irritable."

"My dear," exclaimed Fanny, quite hurt, "he was patience itself while
he was with us."

"That's the difference between illness and recovery, dear Lady
Temple!  I don't blame him.  Any one might be irritable with fresh
undetected splinters of bone always working themselves out, all down
one side; and doubts which were worse, the fingers on, or the fingers
off, and no escape from folly or politeness, for he could not even
use a crutch.  Oh, no, I don't blame him; I quite excuse the general
dislike he took to everything at poor dear Littleworthy.  He viewed
it all like that child in Mrs. Browning's poem, 'seeing through tears
the jugglers leap,' and we have partaken of the juggler aspect to him
ever since!"

"I don't think he could ever be very irritable," said Fanny, taking
the accusation much to heart.

"Sister and recovery!" lightly said Bessie; "they encounter what no
one else does!  He only pined for Bishopsworthy, and when we let him
move there, after the first month, he and my uncle were happy.  I
stayed there for a little while, but I was only in the way, the dear
good folks were always putting themselves out on my account; and as
to Alick, you can't think how the absence of his poor "souffre-
douleur," invigorated him.  Every day I found him able to put more
point into his cutting compliments, and reading to my uncle with more
energy; till at last by the time the --th came home, he had not so
much as a stiff leg to retire upon.  Luckily, he and my uncle both
cared too much for my poor father's wishes for him to do so without,
though if any unlucky chance should take Mr. Lifford away from my
uncle, he threatens coming to supply the vacancy, unless I should,
and that is past hope."

"Your home is with your uncle," affirmed Rachel.

"Yes," she said, mournfully, "dear Littleworthy was too happy to
last.  It broke itself up by its own charms--all married and gone,
and the last rose of summer in my poor person must float away.  Jane
wants her mother and not me, and my uncle will submit to me as
cheerfully as to other necessary evils.  It is not myself that I fear
for; I shall be very happy with the dear uncle, but it will be a
dreadful overthrow to his habits."

"I do not see why it need be," said Rachel.

"What! two old bachelors with a young lady turned in on them!  And
the housekeeper--think of her feelings!"

"I do not think you need be uneasy, my dear," said Fanny.  "Your
brother is convinced that it will be the greatest pleasure and
comfort to Mr. Clare to have you; and though there may be
difficulties at first, I am sure anybody must be the happier for
having you," and she caressed the upturned face, which responded
warmly, but with a sigh.

"Alick is no judge!  He is the child of the house, and my uncle and
Mr. Lifford don't feel complete without him.  My uncle is as fond of
me as can be, and he and I could get on beautifully, but then Mr.
Lifford is impracticable."

"Impracticable?" said Rachel, taking up the long word.  "He objects
to your exerting yourself in the parish.  I know what that is."

"Pray, Rachel," said Fanny, imploringly, "pray don't any anything
against him!  I am very sorry he has annoyed you, but I do like him."

"Oh, does he play croquet!" cried Bessie.

"I gather," said Rachel, in her impressive tone, a little
disappointed, "that by impracticable you mean one who will not play
croquet."

"You have hit it!" laughed Bessie.  "Who will neither play at
croquet, nor let one work except in his way.  Well, there are hopes
for you.  I cure the curates of every cure I come near, except, of
course, the cure that touches me most nearly.  The shoemaker's wife
goes the worst shod!  I'll tame yours."

"My dear, I can't have poor Mr. Touchett made game of."

"I won't make game of him, dear Lady Temple, only make him play a
game."

"But you said Alick did not approve," said Fanny, with the dimmest
possible ideas of what croquet was, and believing it a wicked
flirtation trap that figured in "Punch."

"Oh, that's fudge on Master Alick's part!  Just the remains of his
old miseries, poor fellow.  What he wants is love!  Now he'll meet
his fate some of these days; and as he can't meet three Englishwomen
without a mallet in hand, love and croquet will come together."

"Alick is very good," went on Lady Temple, not answering, but arguing
with herself whether this opposition could be right.  "Colonel
Hammond gave me such an account of him, so valuable and excellent
among the men, and doing all that is possible for their welfare,
interesting himself about their library, and the regimental school
and all.  The colonel said he wished only that he was a little more
easy and popular among the young officers; but so many of his own
standing were gone by the time he joined again, that he lives almost
too much to himself, reads a good deal, and is most exemplary, but
does not quite make his influence as available as it might be."

"That's just it," cried Bessie, eagerly; "the boy is a lazy boy, and
wants shaking up, or he'll get savage and no good.  Can't you see, by
the way he uses his poor little sister, what an awful don Captain
Keith must be to a schoolboy of an ensign?  He must be taught
toleration and hunted into amiability, or he'll be the most terrible
Turk by the time he is a colonel; and you are the only person that
can do it, dear Lady Temple."

Kachel did not much like this, but it was so prettily and playfully
said that the pleasing impression was quite predominant; and when
Rachel took leave, it was with a sense of vexation that a person whom
she had begun to esteem should be hard upon this bright engaging
sister.  Yet it might be well if Fanny took note of the admission
that he could be irritable as well as stern, and sometimes mistaken
in his judgments.  What would the Colonel say to all this?  The
Colonel--here he was coming back again into her imagination.  Another
symptom!

The brother left the field entirely to his sister for the present; he
was a good deal occupied after his leave, and other officers being
away, he was detained at Avoncester, and meantime Bessie Keith took
all hearts by storm with her gay good humour and eager sympathy.  By
the end of the first morning she had been to the stable with a swarm
of boys, patted, and learnt the names of all the ponies; she was on
the warmest terms with the young spaniel, that, to the Curtises'
vexation, one of the officers had given Conrade, and which was always
getting into the way; she had won Alison by telling her of Mr.
Clare's recollections of Ermine's remarkable beauty and intelligence,
and charmed Ermine herself by his kind messages and her own sunshiny
brightness; she had delighted Mrs. Curtis and Grace by appreciating
their views and their flowers; she had discussed hymnals and chants
with Mr. Touchett, and promised her services; she had given a
brilliant object lesson at Mrs. Kelland's, and received one herself
in lace-making; and had proved herself, to Rachel's satisfaction,
equally practical and well-read.  All the outer world was asking,
"Have you seen the young lady with Lady Temple?"

Nothing came amiss to her, from the antiquity of man to Stephana's
first words; and whether she taught Grace new stitches, played
cricket with Conrade, made boats for Cyril, prattled with Lady
Temple, or studied with Rachel, all was done with grace, zest, and
sympathy peculiarly her own.  Two practisings at the school removed
the leaden drawl, and lessened the twang of the choir; and Mr.
Touchett looked quite exalted, while even Rachel owned that she had
hardly believed her ears.

Rachel and she constituted themselves particular friends, and Grace
kept almost aloof in the fear of disturbing them.  She had many
friends, and this was the first, except Ermine Williams, to whom
Rachel had taken, since a favourite companion of her youth had
disappointed her by a foolish marriage.  Bessie's confidences had a
vigour in them that even Rachel's half-way meetings could not check,
and then the sharp, clever things she would say, in accordance with
Rachel's views, were more sympathetic than anything she had met with.
It was another new charm to life.

One great pleasure they enjoyed together was bathing.  The Homestead
possessed a little cove of its own under the rocks, where there was a
bathing-house, and full perfection of arrangement for young ladies'
aquatic enjoyment, in safety and absolute privacy.  Rachel's vigorous
strength and health had been greatly promoted by her familiarity with
salt water, and Bessie was in ecstasies at the naiad performances
they shared together on the smooth bit of sandy shore, where they
dabbled and floated fearlessly.  One morning, when they had been down
very early to be beforehand with the tide, which put a stop to their
enjoyment long before the breakfast hour, Bessie asked if they could
not profit by their leisure to climb round the edge of the cliff's
instead of returning by the direct path, and Rachel agreed, with the
greater pleasure, that it was an enterprise she had seldom performed.

Very beautiful, though adventurous, was the walk--now on the brow of
the steep cliff, looking down on the water or on little bays of
shingle, now through bits of thicket that held out brambles to
entangle the long tresses streaming on their shoulders; always in the
brisk morning air, that filled them with strength and spirit,
laughing, joking, calling to one another and to Conrade's little dog,
that, like every other creature, had attached itself to Bessie, and
had followed her from Myrtlewood that morning, to the vexation of
Rachel, who had no love for dogs in their early youth.

They were beyond the grounds of the Homestead, but had to go a little
further to get into the path, when they paused above a sort of dip or
amphitheatre of rock around a little bay, whilst Rachel began telling
of the smugglers' traditions that haunted the place--how much brandy
and silk had there been landed in the time of the great French war,
and how once, when hard pressed, a party of smugglers, taking a short
cut in the moonlight midnight across the Homestead gardens, had
encountered an escaped Guinea-pig, and no doubt taking it for the
very rat without a tail, in whose person Macbeth's witch was to do,
and to do, and to do, had been nearly scared out of their wits.

Her story was cut short by a cry of distress from the dog, and
looking down, they perceived that the poor fellow had been creeping
about the rocks, and had descended to the little cove, whence he was
incapable of climbing up again.  They called encouragingly, and
pretended to move away, but he only moaned more despairingly, and
leapt in vain.

"He has hurt his foot!" exclaimed Rachel; "I must go down after him.
Yes, Don, yes, poor fellow, I'm coming."

"My dear Curtia, don't leap into the gulf!"

"Oh, it's no great height, and the tide will soon fill up this
place."

"Don't! don't!  You'll never be able to get up again."

But Rachel was already scrambling down, and, in effect, she was sure-
footed and used to her own crags, nor was the distance much above
thirty foot, so that she was soon safe on the shingle, to the extreme
relief of poor Don, shown by grateful whines; but he was still
evidently in pain, and Rachel thought his leg was broken.  And how to
get up the rock, with a spaniel that when she tried to lift it became
apparently twice the size she had always believed it to be, and where
both hands as well as feet were required, with the sea fast advancing
too?

"My dear Rachel, you will only break your neck, too, it is quite vain
to try!"

"If you could just come to that first rock, perhaps I could push him
up to you!"

Bessie came to it, but screamed.  "Oh, I'm not steady; I couldn't do
it!  Besides, it would hurt him so, and I know you would fall.  Poor
fellow, it is very sad; but indeed, Rachel, your life is more
precious than a dog's!"

"I can't leave him to drown," said Rachel, making a desperate
scramble, and almost overbalancing herself.  "Here, if you could only
get him by the scrough of his neck, it would not hurt him so much;
poor Don, yes, poor fellow!" as he whined, but still showed his
confidence in the touching manner of a sensible dog, knowing he is
hurt for his good.  Bessie made another attempt, but, unused to
rocks, she was uneasy about her footing, and merely frightened
herself.  "Indeed," she said, "I had better run and call some one;
I won't be long, and you are really quite safe."

"Yes, quite safe.  If you were down here and I above I am sure he
could do it easily."

"Ah! but I'm no cragswoman; I'll be back instantly."

"That way, that's the shortest, call to Zack or his father," tried
Rachel, as the light figure quickly disappeared, leaving her a little
annoyed at her predicament.  She was not at all alarmed for herself,
there was no real danger of drowning, she could at any moment get up
the rock herself if she chose to leave the dog to its fate; but that
she could not bear to think of, and she even thought the stimulus of
necessity might prove the mother of invention, if succour should not
come before that lapping flux and reflux of water should have crept
up the shingly beach, on which she stood; but she was anxious, and
felt more and more drawn to the poor dog, so suffering, yet so
patient and confiding.  Nor did she like the awkwardness of being
helped in what ought to be no difficulty at all to a native, and
would not have been had her companion, been Grace or even Conrade.
Her hope was that her ally Zack would come, as she had directed
Bessie towards the cottage; but, behold, after a wearily long
interval, it was no blue jacket that appeared, but a round black sea-
hide hat, and a sort of easy clerical-looking dress, that Bessie was
fluttering before!

Few words were required, the stranger's height and length of arms did
all that was needful, and Don was placed in safety with less pain and
outcry than could have been hoped, Rachel ascending before the polite
stranger had time to offer his assistance.  The dog's hurt was, he
agreed with Rachel, a broken leg, and his offer of carrying it home
could not be refused, especially as he touched it with remarkable
tenderness and dexterity, adding that with a splint or two, he
thought he had surgery enough to set the limb.

They were much nearer the Homestead than to Myrtle-wood, and as it
had been already agreed that Bessie should breakfast there, the three
bent their steps up the hill as fast as might be, in consideration of
Mrs. Curtis's anxieties.  Bessie in a state of great exultation and
amusement at the romantic adventure, Rachel somewhat put out at the
untoward mishap that obliged her to be beholden to one of the casual
visitors, against whom her mother had such a prejudice.

Still, the gentleman himself was far from objectionable, in
appearance or manner; his air was that of an educated man, his dress
that of a clergyman at large, his face keen.  Rachel remembered to
have met him once or twice in the town within the last few days, and
wondered if he could be a person who had called in at the lace school
and asked so many questions that Mrs. Kelland had decided that he
could be after no good; he must be one of the Parliament folks that
they sent down to take the bread out of children's mouths by not
letting them work as many hours as was good for them.  Not quite
believing in a Government commission on lace-making grievances,
Rachel was still prepared to greet a kindred spirit of philanthropy,
and as she reflected more, thought that perhaps it was well that an
introduction had been procured on any terms.

So she thawed a little, and did not leave all the civility to Miss
Keith, but graciously responded to the stranger's admiration of the
views, the exquisite framings of the summer sea and sky made by tree,
rock, and rising ground, and the walks so well laid out on the little
headland, now on smooth turf, now bordering slopes wild with fern and
mountain ash, now amid luxuriant exotic shrubs that attested the
mildness of Avonmouth winters.

When they came near the front of the house, Rachel took man and dog
in through the open window of her own sitting-room, and hastened to
provide him with bandages and splints, leaving Bessie to reassure
Mrs. Curtis that no human limbs were broken, and that no one was even
wet to the skin; nay, Bessie had even the tact to spare Mrs. Curtis
the romantic colouring that delighted herself.  Grace had followed
Rachel to assist at the operation, and was equally delighted with its
neatness and tenderness, as well as equally convinced of the
necessity of asking the performer first to wash his hands and then to
eat his breakfast, both which kind proposals he accepted with
diffident gratitude, first casting a glance around the apartment,
which, though he said nothing, conveyed that he was profoundly struck
with the tokens of occupation that it contained.  The breakfast was,
in the first place, a very hungry one; indeed, Bessie had been too
ravenous to wait till the surgery was over, and was already arrived
at her second egg when the others appeared, and the story had again
to be told to the mother, and her warm thanks given.  Mrs. Curtis did
not like strangers when they were only names, but let her be brought
in contact, and her good nature made her friendly at once, above all
in her own house.  The stranger was so grave and quiet too, not at
all presuming, and making light of his services, but only afraid he
had been trespassing on the Homestead grounds.  These incursions of
the season visitors were so great a grievance at the Homestead that
Mrs. Curtis highly approved his forbearance, whilst she was pleased
with his tribute to her scenery, which he evidently admired with an
artistic eye.  Love of sketching had brought him to Avonmouth, and
before he took leave, Mrs. Curtis had accorded him that permission to
draw in her little peninsula for which many a young lady below was
sighing and murmuring.  He thanked her with a melancholy look,
confessing that in his circumstances his pencil was his toy and his
solace.

"Once again, that landscape painter!" exclaimed Bessie, with uplifted
hands, as soon as both he and Mrs. Curtis were out of earshot, "an
adventure at last."

"Not at all," said Rachel, gravely; "there was neither alarm nor
danger."

"Precisely; the romance minus the disagreeables.  Only the sea
monster wanting.  Young Alcides, and rock--you stood there for
sacrifice, I was the weeping Dardanian dames."

Even Grace could not help laughing at the mischief of the one, and
the earnest seriousness of the other.

"Now, Bessie, I entreat that you will not make a ridiculous story of
a most simple affair," implored Rachel.

"I promise not to make one, but don't blame me if it makes itself."

"It cannot, unless some of us tell the story."

"What, do you expect the young Alcides to hold his tongue?  That is
more than can be hoped of mortal landscape painter."

"I wish you would not call him so.  I am sure he is a clergyman."

"Landscape painter, I would lay you anything you please."

"Nay," said Grace, "according to you, that is just what he ought not
to be."

"I do not understand what diverts you so much," said Rachel, growing
lofty in her displeasure. "What matters it what the man may be?"

"That is exactly what we want to see," returned Bessie.

Poor Rachel, a grave and earnest person like her, had little chance
with one so full of playful wit and fun as Bessie Keith, to whom her
very dignity and susceptibility of annoyance made her the better
game.  To have involved the grave Rachel in such a parody of an
adventure was perfectly irresistible to her, and to expect absolute
indifference to it would, as Grace felt, have been requiring mere
stupidity.  Indeed, there was forbearance in not pushing Rachel
further at the moment; but proceeding to tell the tale at Myrtlewood,
whither Grace accompanied Bessie, as a guard against possible madcap
versions capable of misconstruction.

"Yes," said Rachel to herself, "I see now what Captain Keith regrets.
His sister, with all her fine powers and abilities, has had her tone
lowered to the hateful conventional style of wit that would put me to
the blush for the smallest mishap.  I hope he will not come over till
it is forgotten, for the very sight of his disapproval would incite
her further.  I am glad the Colonel is not here.  Here, of course, he
is in my imagination.  Why should I be referring everything to him;
I, who used to be so independent?  Suppose this nonsense gave him
umbrage?  Let it.  I might then have light thrown on his feelings and
my own.  At any rate, I will not be conscious.  If this stranger be
really worth notice, as I think he is, I will trample on her
ridicule, and show how little I esteem it."




CHAPTER IX



THE NEW SPORT



 "'Sire,' I replied, 'joys prove cloudlets,
   Men are the merest Ixions.'
   Here the King whistled aloud, 'Let's,
   Heigho, go look at our lions!'
   Such are the sorrowful chances
   If you talk fine to King Francis."--R. BROWNING.


The day after Rachel's adventure with Don a card came into the
drawing-room, and therewith a message that the gentleman had availed
himself of Mrs. Curtis's kind permission, and was sketching the
Spinster's Needles, two sharp points of red rock that stood out in
the sea at the end of the peninsula, and were specially appropriated
by Rachel and Grace.

The card was written, not engraved, the name "Rd. R. H. C. L.
Mauleverer;" and a discussion ensued whether the first letters stood
for Richard or for Reverend, and if he could be unconscionable enough
to have five initials.  The sisters had some business to transact at
Villars's, the Avonmouth deposit of literature and stationery, which
was in the hands of a somewhat aspiring genius, who edited the weekly
paper, and respected Miss Rachel Curtis in proportion to the number
of periodicals she took in, and the abstruseness of the publications
she inquired after.  The paper in its Saturday's dampness lay fresh
on the counter, and glancing at the new arrivals, Grace had the
desired opportunity of pointing to Mr. Mauleverer's name, and asking
when he had come. About a week since, said the obliging Mr. Villars,
he appeared to be a gentleman of highly literary and artistic tastes,
a philanthropist; indeed, Mr. Villars understood him to be a clerical
gentlemen who had opinions--

"Oh, Rachel, I am very sorry," said Grace.

"Sorry, what for?"

"Why, you and mamma seemed quite inclined to like him."

"Well, and what have we heard?"

"Not much that is rational, certainly," said Grace, smiling; "but we
know what was meant."

"Granting that we do, what is proved against him?  No, I will not say
proved, but alleged.  He is one of the many who have thought for
themselves upon the perplexing problems of faith and practice, and
has been sincere, uncompromising, self-sacrificing, in avowing that
his mind is still in that state of solution in which all earnest and
original minds must be ere the crystallizing process sets in.
Observe, Grace, I am not saying for an instant that he is in the
right.  All I do say is, that when depth of thought and candour have
brought misfortune upon a man, it is ungenerous, therefore, to treat
him as if he had the leprosy."

"Indeed, Rachel, I think you have made more out of his opinions than
I did."

"I was only arguing on your construction of his opinions."

"Take care--!"  For they were at this moment reaching a gate of
Myrtlewood, and the sound of hoofs came close behind them.  They were
those of the very handsome chestnut, ridden by Alexander Keith, who
jumped off his horse with more alacrity than usual as they were
opening the gate for him, and holding out his hand, eagerly said--

"Then I conclude there is nothing the matter?"

"Nothing at all," said Grace.  "What did you hear?"

"Only a little drowning, and a compound fracture or two," said he,
relapsing into his languid ease as he gave his bridle to a groom, and
walked with them towards the house.

"There, how very annoying!" exclaimed Rachel, "though, of course,
the smallest adventure does travel."

"I may venture to hope that neither are you drowned, nor my sister's
leg broken, nor a celebrated professor and essayist 'in a high fever
wi' pulling any of you out of the sea.'"

"There, Grace," exclaimed Rachel; "I told you he was something
distinguished."

"My dear Rachel, if his celebrity be in proportion to the rest of the
story."

"Then there really was a rescue!" exclaimed Captain Keith, now with
much more genuine anxiety; and Rachel recollecting her desire that
the right version should have the precedence, quickly answered,
"There was no danger, only Don slipped down into that curved cove
where we walked one day with the boys.  I went down after him, but he
had broken his leg.  I could not get up with him in my arms, and
Bessie called some one to help me."

"And why could not Bessie help you herself?"

"Oh! strangers can never climb on our slippery rocks as we can."

"Moreover, it would have spoilt the predicament," muttered the
brother to himself; then turning round with a smile, "And is the
child behaving herself?"

Grace and Rachel answered in a eager duet how she was charming every
one, so helpful, so kind, so everything.

"Ah!" he said with real satisfaction, apparent in the eyes that were
so pleasant when open wide enough to be visible; "I knew she always
did better when I was not there."

They were by this time entering the hall, which, in the confident
fashion of the sea-side, stood open; and at the moment Fanny came
tripping downstairs with her dress looped up, and a shady hat on her
head, looking fearfully girlish, thought her cousins, though her
attire was still rigidly black.

"Oh, I am so glad to see you; Don is so much better, Rachel, and
Conrade wants to thank you.  He went up yesterday, and was so sorry
you were out.  Might it not have been dreadful, Alick?  I have been
so wanting to tell you how very delightful that dear sister of yours
is.  All the boys are distracted about her.  Come out please.  She
has been teaching the boys such a delightful game; so much nicer than
cricket, for I can play with them."

Alick and Rachel could not but exchange a glance, and at the same
moment, emerging through the screen of shrubs on the lawn, Bessie
Keith, Conrade, Francis, and Leoline, were seen each with a mallet in
hand and a gay ball in readiness to be impelled through the hoops
that beset the lawn.

"And you really are learning croquet!" exclaimed innocent Grace;
"well, it makes a beautiful ground."

"Croquet!" exclaimed poor Lady Temple, with startled eyes; "you don't
really mean that it is croquet!  O Bessie, Bessie!"

"Ah! I didn't mean you to have come so soon," said the much amused
Bessie, as she gave her hand in greeting.  "I meant the prejudice to
be first conquered.  See, dear Lady Temple, I'm not ashamed; this
whitey brown moustache is going to kiss me nevertheless and
notwithstanding."

And so it certainly did, and smiled into the bargain, while the boys
came clamouring up, and after thanks for Don's preservation, began
loudly to beg mamma would come, they could not make up their sides
without her, but mamma was distressed and unhappy.

"Not now, my dears--I must--I must.  Indeed I did not know."

"Now, Alick, I trust to your generosity," said Bessie, finding that
they must be pacified.  "Coming, Con--Come, Grace, come and convince
Lady Temple that the pastime is not too wicked for you."

"Indeed, Alick," Lady Temple was saying. "I am very sorry, I won't
allow it one moment if you think it is objectionable."

"But I don't," said Alick, smiling.  "Far from it.  It is a capital
game for you and your boys."

"I thought--I thought you disapproved and could not bear it," said
Lady Temple, wondering and wistful.

"Can't bear is not disapprove.  Indeed," seeing that gentle earnest
alone could console her, "there is no harm in the game itself.  It is
a wholly personal distaste, arising from my having been bored with it
when I was ill and out of spirits."

"But is not there something about it in 'Punch?'" she still asked, so
anxiously, that it was impossible not to smile; but there was not a
particle of that subdued mockery that was often so perplexing in him,
as he replied, "Certainly there is about its abuse as an engine for
flirtation, which, to tell you the truth, was what sickened me with
the sight at Littleworthy; but that is not the line Con and Francie
will take just yet.  Why, my uncle is specially addicted to listening
to croquet, and knows by the step and sound how each player is
getting on, till he is quite an oracle in disputed hits."

"So Bessie told me," said Fanny, still feeling that she had been
taken in and the brother unkindly used; "but I can't think how she
could, when you don't like it."

"Nobody is bound to respect foolish prejudices," said Alick, still
quite in earnest.  "It would have been very absurd not to introduce
it."

"Come, Alick," said Bessie, advancing, "have you absolved her, and
may we begin?  Would it not be a generous act of amnesty if all the
present company united in a match?"

"Too many," said Alick, "odd numbers.  I shall go down and call on
Miss Williams.  May I come back, Lady Temple, and have a holiday from
the mess?"

"I shall be very glad; only I am afraid there is no dinner."

"So much the better.  Only let me see you begin, or I shall never
dare to express an opinion for the future."

"Mamma, do pray, pray begin; the afternoon is wasting like nothing!"
cried Conrade of the much-tried patience.  "And Aunt Rachel," he
added, in his magnanimity, "you shall be my partner, and I'll teach
you."

"Thank you, Conrade, but I can't; I promised to be at home at four,"
said Rachel, who had all this time been watching with curious
interest which influence would prevail--whether Alick would play for
Fanny's sake, or Fanny abstain for Alick's sake.  She was best
satisfied as it was, but she had still to parry Bessie Keith's
persuasive determination.  Why would she go home? it certainly was to
inspect the sketches of the landscape-painter.  "You heard, Alick, of
the interesting individual who acted the part of Rachel's preserver,"
she added.

The very force of Rachel's resolution not to be put out of
countenance served to cover her with the most uncomfortable blushes,
all the more at the thought of her own unlucky exclamation.  "I came
here," said Alick, coolly, "to assist in recovering the beloved
remains from a watery grave;" and then, as Bessie insisted on hearing
the Avoncester version, he gave it; while Grace added the
intelligence that the hero was a clergyman, sinking the opinions, as
too vague to be mentioned, even had not the company been too flighty
for a subject she thought serious and painful.  "And he is at this
moment sketching the Spinster's Needles!" said Bessie.  "Well, I am
consoled.  With all your resolve to flatten down an adventure, fate
is too strong for you.  Something will come of it.  Is not the very
resolve that it shall not be an adventure a token?"

"If any one should wish to forget it, it is you, I think, Bessie,"
said Alick.  "Your admirable sagacity seems to have been at fault.
I thought you prided yourself on your climbing."

"Up a slippery perpendicular--"

"I know the place," he gravely answered.

"Well," exclaimed Bessie, recovering herself, "I am not a mermaid nor
even a dear gazelle, and, in my humble opinion, there was far more
grace in preventing heroism from being 'unwept, unnoticed, and
unsung,' than in perilling my own neck, craning down and strangling
the miserable beast, by pulling him up by the scrough of his neck!
What an introduction would have been lost!"

"If you are going to play, Bessie," said her brother, "it would be
kind to take pity upon those boys."

"One achievement is mine," she said, dancing away backwards, her
bright eyes beaming with saucy merriment, "the great Alexander has
bidden me to croquet."

"I am afraid," said her brother, turning to Rachel as she departed,
"that it was all her fault.  Pray be patient with her, she has had
many disadvantages."

His incomprehensible irony had so often perplexed Rachel, that she
did not know whether his serious apologetic tone were making game of
her annoyance, and she answered not very graciously, "Oh, never mind,
it did not signify."  And at the same time came another urgent
entreaty from the boys that the two "aunts" would join the game,
Conrade evidently considering that partnership with him would seal
the forgiveness Aunt Rachel had won by the rescue of Don.

Grace readily yielded, but Rachel pleaded her engagement, and when
the incorrigible Bessie declared that they perfectly understood that
nothing could compete with the sketch of the Spinster's Needles, she
answered, "I promised to write a letter for my mother on business
before post time.  The Burnaby bargain," she explained, to add
further conviction.

"A business-like transaction indeed!" exclaimed Bessie, much diverted
with the name.

"Only a bit of land in trust for apprenticing poor children," said
Rachel.  "It was left by a Curtis many generations ago, in trust to
the rector of the parish and the lord of the manor; and poor Mr.
Linton is so entirely effete, that it is virtually in our hands.  It
is one of the vexations of my life that more good cannot be done with
it, for the fees are too small for superior tradespeople, and we can
only bind them to the misery of lacemaking.  The system belongs to a
worn-out state of things."

The word system in Rachel's mouth was quite sufficient to send Bessie
to her croquet, and the poor boys were at length rewarded for their
unusual patience.  Their mother had been enduring almost as much as
they did in her dislike to see them tantalised, and she now threw
herself into the game with a relish that proved that as yet, at
least, Conrade's approbation was more to her than Captain Keith's.
It was very pretty to see her so pleased with her instructions, so
eager about her own game, and yet so delighted with every hit of her
boys; while Bessie was an admirable general, playing everybody's game
as well as her own, and with such life and spirit, such readiness and
good nature, that a far duller sport would have been delicious under
her management.

"Poor Alick," said she, meeting him when he again strolled into the
garden, while the boys were collecting the mallets and balls; "he did
think he had one lawn in the world undefiled by those horrible
hoops!" then as she met his smile of amusement and pardon, "but it
was so exactly what they wanted here.  It is so good for Lady Temple
and her boys to have something they can do together."

The pleased affectionate smile was gone.

"I object to nothing but its being for her good," he said gravely.

"But now, does not it make her very happy, and suit her excellently?"

"May be so, but that is not the reason you introduced it."

"You have a shocking habit of driving one up into corners, Alick, but
it shall be purely, purely for my own selfish delight," and she
clasped her hands in so droll an affectation of remorse, that the
muscles round his eyes quivered with diversion, though the hair on
his lip veiled what the corners of his mouth were about; "if only,"
she proceeded, "you won't let it banish you.  You must come over to
take care of this wicked little sister, or who knows what may be the
consequences."

"I kept away partly because I was busy, and partly because I believe
you are such a little ape as always to behave worse when you have the
semblance of a keeper;" he said, with his arm fondly on her shoulder
as they walked.

"And in the mean time fell out the adventure of the distinguished
essayist."

"I am afraid," he returned, "that was a gratuitous piece of mischief,
particularly annoying to so serious and thoughtful a person as Miss
Rachel Curtis."

"Jealousy?" exclaimed Bessie in an ecstatic tone.  "You see what you
lost by not trusting me, to behave myself under the provocation of
your presence."

"What! the pleasure of boxing your ears for a coward?"

"Of seizing the happy opening!  I am very much afraid for you now,
Alick," she proceeded with mock gravity.  "What hope can a poor
Captain of Highlanders, even if he does happen to be a wounded hero
or two, have against a distinguished essayist and landscape painter;
if it were a common case indeed, but where Wisdom herself is
concerned--"

"Military frivolity cannot hope," returned Alick, with a shake of his
head, and a calm matter-of-fact acquiescent tone.

"Ah, poor Alick," pursued his sister, "you always were a discreet
youth; but to be connected with such a union of learning, social
science, and homeaopathy, soared beyond my utmost ambition.  I
suppose the wedding tour--supposing the happy event to take place--
will be through a series of model schools and hospitals, ending in
Hanwell."

"No," said Alick, equally coolly, "to the Dutch reformatory, and the
Swiss cretin asylum."

She was exceedingly tickled at his readiness, and proceeded in a
pretended sentimental tone, "I am glad you have revealed the secrets
of your breast.  I saw there was a powerful attraction and that you
were no longer your own, but my views were humbler.  I thought the
profound respect with which you breathed the name of Avonmouth, was
due to the revival of the old predilection for our sweet little--"

"Hush, Bessie," said her brother, roused for the first time into
sternness, "this is more than nonsense.   One word more of this, and
you will cut me off from my greatest rest and pleasure."

"From the lawn where croquet waits his approbation," was on Bessie's
tongue, but she did not say it.  There were moments when she stood in
fear of her brother.  He paused, and as if perceiving that his
vehemence was in itself suspicious, added, "Remember, I never met her
from seven years old till after her marriage.  She has been the
kindest of friends in right of our fathers' old friendship.  You know
how her mother nursed me, and the sister she was to me.  And Bessie,
if your selfishness--I wish I could call it thoughtlessness--involves
her innocent simplicity in any scrape, derogatory to what is becoming
her situation, I shall find it very hard to forgive you, and harder
still to forgive myself for letting you come here."

Bessie pouted for a moment, but her sweetness and good humour were
never away.  "There, you have given your wicked little sister a
screed," she said, looking insinuatingly up at him.  "Just as if I
did not think her a darling, and would not for the world do anything
to spoil her.  Have not I been leading the most exemplary life,
talking systems and visiting cottages with Rachel and playing with
the boys, and singing with the clergyman; and here am I pounced on,
as if I were come to be the serpent in this anti-croquet paradise."

"Only a warning, Bessie."

"You'll be better now you have had it out.  I've seen you suppressing
it all this time, for fear of frightening me away."

Every one knows how the afternoon croquet match on the Myrtlewood
Lawn became an institution, though with some variation in the
observers thereof, owing to the exigencies of calls, rides, and
Ermine Williams's drive, which Lady Temple took care should happen at
least twice a week.  The most constant votaries of the mallet and
hoop were, of course, the two elder boys, the next pair being distant
worshippers only now and then admitted by special favour, but the
ardour of their mother even exceeded that of Bessie Keith, and it was
always a disappointment to her if she were prevented from playing.
Grace and Alison Williams frequently took their share with enjoyment,
though not with the same devotion, and visitors, civil and military,
also often did their part, but the most fervent of all these was Mr.
Touchett.  Ever since that call of his, when, after long impatience
of his shy jerks of conversation and incapacity of taking leave, Miss
Keith had exclaimed, "Did you ever play at croquet? do come, and we
will teach you," he had been its most assiduous student.  The first
instructions led to an appointment for more, one contest to another,
and the curate was becoming almost as regular a croquet player as
Conrade himself, not conversing much but sure to be in his place; and
showing a dexterity and precision that always made Lady Temple
pleased to have him on her side, and exclaim with delight at his hits
as a public benefit to the cause, or thank him with real gratitude
when he croqued her or one of her sons out of a difficulty.

Indeed that little lawn at Myrtlewood was a battle-field, of which
Alison used to carry her sister amusing and characteristic sketches.
The two leading players were Miss Keith and Mr. Touchett, who alone
had any idea of tactics; but what she did by intuition, sleight of
hand or experience, he effected by calculation and generalship, and
even when Conrade claimed the command of his own side, the
suggestions of the curate really guided the party