r, and
asked after Lovedy Kelland in her new home, she replied like one in a
dream, then gathered herself up and answered to the point, but
feeling the restraint intolerable, soon rose to take leave.

"So soon?" said Ermine; "I have not seen you for a long time."

"I--I was afraid of being in the way," said Rachel, the first time
probably that such a fear had ever suggested itself to her, and
blushing as Ermine did not blush.

"We are sure to be alone after twilight," said Ermine, "if that is
not too late for you, but I know you are much occupied now."

Somehow that invalid in her chair had the dignity of a queen
appointing her levee, and Rachel followed the impulse of thanking and
promising, but then quickly made her escape to her own thoughts.

"Her whole soul is in that asylum," said Ermine, smiling as she went.
"I should like to hear that it is going on satisfactorily, but she
does not seem to have time even to talk."

"The most wonderful consummation of all," observed Bessie.

"No," said Ermine, "the previous talk was not chatter, but real
effervescence from the unsatisfied craving for something to do."

"And has she anything to do now?" said Bessie.

"That is exactly what I want to know.  It would be a great pity if
all this real self-devotion were thrown away."

"It cannot be thrown away," said Alick.

"Not on herself," said Ermine, "but one would not see it misdirected,
both for the waste of good energy and the bitter disappointment."

"Well," said Bessie, "I can't bear people to be so dreadfully in
earnest!"

"You are accountable for the introduction, are not you?" said Ermine.

"I'm quite willing!  I think a good downfall plump would be the most
wholesome thing that could happen to her; and besides, I never told
her to take the man for her almoner and counsellor!  I may have
pointed to the gulf, but I never bade Curtia leap into it."

"I wish there were any one to make inquiries about this person," said
Ermine; "but when Colonel Keith came it was too late.  I hoped she
might consult him, but she has been so much absorbed that she really
has never come in his way."

"She would never consult any one," said Bessie.

"I am not sure of that," replied Ermine.  "I think that her real
simplicity is what makes her appear so opinionated.  I verily believe
that there is a great capability of humility at the bottom."

"Of the gulf," laughed Bessie; but her brother said, "Quite true.
She has always been told she is the clever woman of the family, and
what can she do but accept the position?"

"Exactly," said Ermine; "every one has given way to her, and, of
course, she walks over their bodies, but there is something so noble
about her that I cannot but believe that she will one day shake
herself clear of her little absurdities."

"That is contrary to the usual destiny of strong-minded women," said
Bessie.

"She is not a strong-minded woman, she only has been made to believe
herself one," said Ermine, warmly.

With this last encounter, Bessie and her brother took leave, and the
last at once exclaimed, in sentimental tones, "Generous rivals!  I
never saw so good a comedy in all my days!  To disclose the fatal
truth, and then bring the rival fair ones face to face!"

"If that were your belief, Bessie, the demon of teasing has fuller
possession of you than I knew."

"Ah! I forgot," exclaimed Bessie, "it is tender ground with you
likewise.  Alas! Alick, sisterly affection cannot blind me to the
fact of that unrequited admiration for your honourable rival."

"What, from the strong-minded Curtia?"

"Ah! but have we not just heard that this is not the genuine article,
only a country-made imitation?  No wonder it was not proof against an
honourable colonel in a brown beard."

"So much the better; only unluckily there has been a marked avoidance
of him."

"Yes; the Colonel was sacrificed with all other trivial incidents at
the shrine of the F. U. L. E.--E. E., I mean.  And only think of
finding out that one has been sacrificing empty air after all--and to
empty air!"

"Better than to sacrifice everything to oneself," said Alick.

"Not at all.  The latter practice is the only way to be agreeable!
By-the-bye, Alick, I wonder if she will deign to come to the ball?"

"What ball?"

"Your ball at Avoncester.  It is what I am staying on for!  Major
McDonald all but promised me one; and you know you must give one
before you leave this place."

"Don't you know that poor Fraser has just been sent for home on his
sister's death?"

"But I conclude the whole regiment does not go into mourning?"

"No, but Fraser is the one fellow to whom this would be real
enjoyment.  Indeed, I particularly wish no hints may be given about
it.  Don't deny, I know you have ways of bringing about what you
wish, and I will not have them used here.  I know something of the
kind must be done before we leave Avoncester, but to give one this
autumn would be much sooner than needful.  I believe there is hardly
an officer but myself and Fraser to whom the expense would not be a
serious consideration, and when I tell you my father had strong
opinions about overdoing reciprocities of gaiety, and drawing heavily
on the officers' purses for them, I do not think you will allow their
regard for him to take that manifestation towards you."

"Of course not," said Bessie, warmly; "I will not think of it again.
Only when the fate does overtake you, you will have me here for it,
Alick?"

He readily promised, feeling gratified at the effect of having spoken
to his sister with full recognition of her good sense.

Meantime Rachel was feeling something of what Bessie ascribed to her,
as if her sacrifice had been snatched away, and a cloud placed in its
stead.  Mortification was certainly present, and a pained feeling of
having been made a fool of, whether by the Colonel or herself, her
candid mind could hardly decide; but she was afraid it was by
herself.  She knew she had never felt sure enough of his attentions
to do more than speculate on what she would do if they should become
more pointed, and yet she felt angry and sore at having been exposed
to so absurd a blunder by the silence of the parties concerned.
"After all," she said to herself, "there can be no great harm done, I
have not been weak enough to commit my heart to the error.  I am
unscathed, and I will show it by sympathy for Ermine.  Only--only,
why could not she have told me?"

An ordeal was coming for which Rachel was thus in some degree
prepared.  On the return of the party from the book club, Mrs. Curtis
came into Rachel's sitting-room, and hung lingering over the fire as
if she had something to say, but did not know how to begin.  At last,
however, she said, "I do really think it is very unfair, but it was
not his fault, he says."

"Who?" said Rachel, dreamily.

"Why, Colonel Keith, my dear," said good Mrs. Curtis, conceiving that
her pronominal speech had "broken" her intelligence; "it seems we
were mistaken in him all this time."

"What, about Miss Williams?" said Rachel, perceiving how the land
lay; "how did you hear it?"

"You knew it, my dear child," cried her mother in accents of extreme
relief.

"Only this afternoon, from Bessie Keith."

"And Fanny knew it all this time," continued Mrs. Curtis.  "I cannot
imagine how she could keep it from me, but it seems Miss Williams was
resolved it should not be known.  Colonel Keith said he felt it was
wrong to go on longer without mentioning it, and I could not but say
that it would have been a great relief to have known it earlier."

"As far as Fanny was concerned it would," said Rachel, looking into
the fire, but not without a sense of rehabilitating satisfaction, as
the wistful looks and tone of her mother convinced her that this
semi-delusion had not been confined to herself.

"I could not help being extremely sorry for him when he was telling
me," continued Mrs. Curtis, as much resolved against uttering the
idea as Rachel herself could be.  "It has been such a very long
attachment, and now he says he has not yet been able to overcome her
scruples about accepting him in her state.  It is quite right of her,
I can't say but it is, but it is a very awkward situation."

"I do not see that," said Rachel, feeling the need of decision in
order to reassure her mother; "it is very sad and distressing in some
ways, but no one can look at Miss Williams without seeing that his
return has done her a great deal of good; and whether they marry or
not, one can only be full of admiration and respect for them."

"Yes, yes," faltered Mrs. Curtis; "only I must say I think it was due
to us to have mentioned it sooner."

"Not at all, mother.  Fanny knew it, and it was nobody's concern but
hers.  Pray am I to have Owen's 'Palaeontology'?"

"No, Colonel Keith bought that, and some more of the solid books.  My
dear, he is going to settle here; he tells me he has actually bought
that house he and his brother are in."

"Bought it!"

"Yes; he says, any way, his object is to be near Miss Williams.
Well, I cannot think how it is to end, so near the title as he is,
and her sister a governess, and then that dreadful business about her
brother, and the little girl upon her hands.  Dear me, I wish Fanny
had any one else for a governess."

"So do not I," said Rachel.  "I have the greatest possible admiration
for Ermine Williams, and I do not know which I esteem most, her for
her brave, cheerful, unrepining unselfishness, or him for his
constancy and superiority to all those trumpery considerations.  I am
glad to have the watching of them.  I honour them both."

Yes, and Rachel honoured herself still more for being able to speak
all this freely and truly out of the innermost depths of her candid
heart.




CHAPTER XIV.



THE GOWANBRAE BALL.



              "Your honour's pardon,
 I'd rather have my wounds to heal again,
 Than hear say how I got them."--Coriolanus.


"Yes, I go the week after next."

"So soon?  I thought you were to stay for our ball."

"Till this time next year!  No, no, I can't quite do that, thank
you."

"This very winter."

"Oh, no--no such thing!  Why, half the beauty and fashion of the
neighbourhood is not come into winter quarters yet.  Besides, the
very essence of a military ball is that it should be a parting--the
brightest and the last.  Good morning."

And Meg's head, nothing loth, was turned away from the wide view of
the broad vale of the Avon, with the Avoncester Cathedral towers in
the midst, and the moors rising beyond in purple distance.  The two
young lieutenants could only wave their farewells, as Bessie cantered
merrily over the soft smooth turf of the racecourse, in company with
Lord Keith, the Colonel, and Conrade.

"Do you not like dancing?" inquired Lord Keith, when the canter was
over, and they were splashing through a lane with high hedges.

"I'm not so unnatural," returned Bessie, with a merry smile, "but it
would never do to let the Highlanders give one now.  Alick has been
telling me that the expense would fall seriously on a good many of
them."

"True," said Colonel Keith, "too many fetes come to be a heavy tax."

"That is more consideration than is common in so young a lad," added
Lord Keith.

"Yes, but dear Alick is so full of consideration," said the sister,
eagerly.  "He does not get half the credit for it that he deserves,
because, you know, he is so quiet and reserved, and has that unlucky
ironical way with him that people don't like; especially rattlepates
like those," pointing with her whip in the direction of the two young
officers.

"It is a pity," said the Colonel, "it lessens his influence.  And it
is strange I never perceived it before his return to England."

"Oh! there's much owing to the habitual languor of that long illness.
That satirical mumble is the only trouble he will take to lift up his
testimony, except when a thing is most decidedly his duty, and then
he does it as England expects."

"And he considered it his duty to make you decline this ball?" said
Lord Keith.

"Oh, not his more than mine," said Bessie.  "I don't forget that I am
the Colonel's daughter."

No more was said on that occasion, but three days after cards were
going about the county with invitations from Lord Keith to an evening
party, with "Dancing."  Lord Keith averred, with the full concurrence
of his brother, that he owed many civilities to the ladies of the
neighbourhood, and it was a good time to return them when he could
gratify the young kinswoman who had showed such generous forbearance
about the regimental ball.  It was no unfavourable moment either,
when he had his brother to help him, for the ordering of balls had
been so much a part of Colin's staff duties, that it came quite
naturally to him, especially with Coombe within reach to assist.
There was some question whether the place should be the public rooms
or Gowanbrae, but Bessie's vote decided on the latter, in
consideration of the Colonel's chest.  She was rather shocked, while
very grateful, at the consequences of the little conversation on the
hill top, but she threw herself into all the counsels with bright,
ardent pleasure, though carefully refraining from any presumption
that she was queen of the evening.

Lady Temple received an invitation, but never for one moment thought
of going, or even supposed that any one could imagine she could.
Indeed, if she had accepted it, it would have been a decisive
encouragement to her ancient suitor, and Colin saw that he regarded
her refusal, in its broad black edges, as a further clenching of the
reply to his addresses.

Bessie was to be chaperoned by Mrs. Curtis.  As to Rachel, she had
resolved against youthful gaieties for this winter and all others,
but she felt that to show any reluctance to accept the Keith
invitation might be a contradiction to her indifference to the
Colonel, and so construed by her mother, Grace, and Bessie.  So all
she held out for was, that as she had no money to spend upon
adornments, her blue silk dinner dress, and her birthday wreath,
should and must do duty; and as to her mother's giving her finery,
she was far too impressive and decided for Mrs. Curtis to venture
upon such presumption.  She was willing to walk through her part for
an evening, and indeed the county was pretty well accustomed to Miss
Rachel Curtis's ball-room ways, and took them as a matter of course.

Gowanbrae had two drawing-rooms with folding doors between, quite
practicable for dancing, and the further one ending in a
conservatory, that likewise extended along the end of the entrance
hall and dining-room. The small library, where Colonel Keith usually
sat, became the cloak-room, and contained, when Mrs. Curtis and her
daughters arrived, so large a number of bright cashmere cloaklets,
scarlet, white, and blue, that they began to sigh prospectively at
the crowd which,  Mrs. Curtis would have encountered with such joyful
valour save for that confidence on the way home from the book club.

They were little prepared for the resources of a practised staff-
officer.  Never had a ball even to them looked so well arranged, or
in such thorough style, as a little dexterous arrangement of flowers,
lights, and sofas, and rendered those two rooms.  The two hosts
worked extremely well.  Lord Keith had shaken off much of his
careless stoop and air of age, and there was something in his old-
world polish and his Scotch accent that gave a sort of romance to the
manner of his reception.  His brother, with his fine brow, and
thoughtful eyes, certainly appeared to Rachel rather thrown away as
master of the ceremonies, but whatever he did, he always did in the
quietest and best way, and receptions had been a part of his
vocation, so that he infused a wonderful sense of ease, and supplied
a certain oil of good breeding that made everything move suavely.
Young ladies in white, and mothers in all the colours of the rainbow,
were there in plenty, and, by Bessie's special command, the scene was
enlivened by the Highland uniform, with the graceful tartan scarf
fastened across the shoulder with the Bruce brooch.

Rachel had not been long in the room before she was seized on by
Emily Grey, an enthusiastic young lady of the St. Norbert's
neighbourhood, whom she met seldom, but was supposed to know
intimately.

"And they say you have the hero here--the Victoria Cross man--and
that you know him.  You must show him to me, and get me introduced."

"There is no Victoria Cross man here," said Rachel, coldly.  "Colonel
Keith did not have one."

"Oh, no, I don't mean Colonel Keith, but Captain Alexander Keith,
quite a young man.  Oh, I am sure you remember the story--you were
quite wild about it--of his carrying the lighted shell out of the
hospital tent; and they told me he was always over here, and his
sister staying with Lady Temple."

"I know Captain Alexander Keith," said Rachel, slowly; "but you must
be mistaken, I am certain I should know if he had a Victoria Cross."

"It is very odd; Charlie told me it was the same," said Miss Grey,
who, like all others, was forced to bend to Rachel's decisive manner.

"Scottish names are very common," said Rachel, and at that moment a
partner came and carried Emily off.

But as Rachel stood still, an odd misgiving seized her, a certain
doubt whether upon the tall lazy figure that was leaning against a
wall nearly opposite to her, talking to another officer, she did not
see something suspiciously bronze and eight-pointed that all did not
wear.  There was clearly a medal, though with fewer clasps than some
owned; but what else was there?   She thought of the lecture on
heroism she had given to him, and felt hot all over.  Behold, he was
skirting the line of chaperons, and making his way towards their
party.  The thing grew more visible, and she felt more disconcerted
than ever had been her lot before; but escape there was none, here he
was shaking hands.

"You don't polk?" he said to her.  "In fact, you regard all this as a
delusion of weak minds.  Then, will you come and have some tea?"

Rachel took his arm, still bewildered, and when standing before him
with the tea-cup in her hand, she interrupted something he was
saying, she knew not what, with, "That is not the Victoria Cross?"

"Then it is, like all the rest, a delusion," he answered, in his
usual impassive manner.

"And gained," she continued, "by saving the lives of all those
officers, the very thing I told you about!"

"You told me that man was killed."

"Then it was not you!"

"Perhaps they picked up the pieces of the wrong one."

"But if you would only tell me how you gained it."

"By the pursuit of conchology."

"Then it was yourself?" again said Rachel, in her confusion.

"If I be I as I suppose I be," he replied, giving her his arm again,
and as they turned towards the conservatory, adding, "Many such
things have happened, and I did not know whether you meant this."

"That was the reason you made so light of it."

"What, because I thought it was somebody else?"

"No, the contrary reason; but I cannot understand why you let me go
on without telling me."

"I never interfere when a story is so perfect in itself."

"But is my story perfect in itself?" said Rachel, "or is it the
contrary?"

"No one knows less of the particulars than I do," he answered.  "I
think your version was that it was an hospital tent that the shell
came into.  It was not that, but a bungalow, which was supposed to be
out of range.  It stood on a bit of a slope, and I thought I should
have been able to kick the shell down before it had time to do
mischief."

"But you picked it up, and took it to the door--I mean, did you?"
said Rachel, who was beginning to discover that she must ask Alick
Keith a direct question, if she wished to get an answer, and she
received a gesture of assent.

"I was very blind," she said, humbly, "and now I have gone and
insisted to poor Emily Grey that you never did any such thing."

"Thank you," he said; "it was the greatest kindness you could do me."

"Ah! your sister said you had the greatest dislike to hero worship."

"A natural sense of humbug," he said.  "I don't know why they gave me
this," he added, touching his cross, "unless it was that one of the
party in the bungalow had a turn for glorifying whatever happened to
himself.  Plenty of more really gallant things happened every day,
and were never heard of, and I, who absolutely saw next to nothing of
the campaign, have little right to be decorated."

"Ah!" said Rachel, thoughtfully, "I have always wondered whether one
would be happier for having accomplished an act of heroism."

"I do not know," said Alick, thoughtfully; then, as Rachel looked up
with a smile of amazement, "Oh, you mean this; but it was mere self-
preservation.  I could hardly even have bolted, for I was laid up
with fever, and was very shaky on my legs."

"I suppose, however," said Rachel, "that the vision of one's life in
entering the army would be to win that sort of distinction, and so
young."

"Win it as some have done," said Alick, "and deserve what is far
better worth than distinction.  That may be the dream, but, after
all, it is the discipline and constant duty that make the soldier,
and are far more really valuable than exceptional doings."

"People must always be ready for them, though," said Rachel

"And they are," said Alick, with grave exultation in his tone.

Then, after a pause, she led back the conversation to its personal
character, by saying. "Do you mean that the reception of this cross
was no gratification to you?"

"No, I am not so absurd," he replied, but he added sadly, "That was
damped quite otherwise.  The news that I was named for it came almost
in the same breath with that of my father's death, and he had not
heard I was to receive it."

"Ah! I can understand."

"And you can see how intolerable was the fuss my good relations made
with me just when the loss was fresh on me, and with that of my two
chief friends, among my brother officers, fellows beside whom I was
nobody, and there was my uncle's blindness getting confirmed.  Was
not that enough to sicken one with being stuck up for a lion, and
constantly poked up by the showwoman, under pretext of keeping up
one's spirits!"

"And you were--I mean were you--too ill to escape?"

"I was less able to help myself than Miss Williams is.  There had
been a general smash of all the locomotive machinery on this side,
and the wretched monster could do nothing but growl at his visitors."

"Should you growl very much if I introduced you to Emily Grey?  You
see it is a matter of justice and truth to tell her now, after having
contradicted her so flatly.  I will wait to let you get out of the
way first if you like, but I think that would be unkind to her; and
if you ever do dance, I wish you would dance with her."

"With all my heart," he answered.

"Oh, thank you," said Rachel, warmly.

He observed with some amusement Rachel's utter absence of small
dexterities, and of even the effort to avoid the humiliation of a
confession of her error.  Miss Grey and a boy partner had wandered
into the conservatory, and were rather dismally trying to seem
occupied with the camellias when Rachel made her way to them, and
though he could not actually hear the words, he knew pretty well what
they were.  "Emily, you were right after all, and I was mistaken,"
and then as he drew near, "Miss Grey, Captain Keith wishes to be
introduced to you."

It had been a great shock to Rachel's infallibility, and as she
slowly began working her way in search of her mother, after observing
the felicity of Emily's bright eyes, she fell into a musing on the
advantages of early youth in its indiscriminating powers of
enthusiasm for anything distinguished for anything, and that sense of
self-exaltation in any sort of contact with a person who had been
publicly spoken of.  "There is genuine heroism in him," thought
Rachel, "but it is just in what Emily would never appreciate--it is
in the feeling that he could not help doing as he did; the half-
grudging his reward to himself because other deeds have passed
unspoken.  I wonder whether his ironical humour would allow him to
see that Mr. Mauleverer is as veritable a hero in yielding hopes of
consideration, prospects, honours, to his sense of truth and
uprightness.  If he would only look with an unprejudiced eye, I know
he would be candid."

"Are you looking for Mrs. Curtis?" said Colonel Keith.  "I think she
is in the other room."

"Not particularly, thank you," said Rachel, and she was surprised to
find how glad she was to look up freely at him.

"Would it be contrary to your principles or practice to dance with
me?"

"To my practice," she said smilingly, "so let us find my mother.  Is
Miss Alison Williams here?  I never heard whether it was settled that
she should come," she added, resolved both to show him her knowledge
of his situation, and to let her mother see her at her ease with him.

"No, she was obstinate, though her sister and I did our utmost to
persuade her, and the boys were crazy to make her go."

"I can't understand your wishing it."

"Not as an experience of life?  Alison never went to anything in her
girlhood, but devoted herself solely to her sister, and it would be
pleasant to see her begin her youth."

"Not as a mere young lady!" exclaimed Rachel.

"That is happily not possible."

An answer that somewhat puzzled Rachel, whose regard for him was
likely to be a good deal dependent upon his contentment with Alison's
station in life.

"I must say young ladyhood looks to the greatest advantage there,"
Rachel could not help exclaiming, as at that moment Elizabeth Keith
smiled at them, as she floated past, her airy white draperies looped
with scarlet ribbons; her dark hair turned back and fastened by a
snood of the same, an eagle's feather clasped in it by a large
emerald, a memory of her father's last siege--that of Lucknow.

"She is a very pretty creature," said the Colonel, under the sparkle
of her bright eyes.

"I never saw any one make the pursuits of young ladyhood have so much
spirit and meaning," added Rachel.  "Here you see she has managed to
make herself sufficiently like other people, yet full of individual
character and meaning."

"That is the theory of dress, I suppose," said the Colonel.

"If one chooses to cultivate it."

"Did you ever see Lady Temple in full dress?"

"No; we were not out when we parted as girls."

"Then you have had a loss.  I think it was at our last Melbourne
ball, that when she went to the nursery to wish the children good
night, one of them--Hubert, I believe--told her to wear that dress
when she went to heaven, and dear old Sir Stephen was so delighted
that he went straight upstairs to kiss the boy for it."

"Was that Lady Temple?" said Alick Keith, who having found Miss Grey
engaged many deep, joined them again, and at his words came back a
thrill of Rachel's old fear and doubt as to the possible future.

"Yes," said the Colonel; "I was recollecting the gracious vision she
used to be at all our chief's parties."

"Vision, you call her, who lived in the house with her?  What do you
think she was to us--poor wretches--coming up from barracks where
Mrs. O'Shaughnessy was our cynosure?  There was not one of us to whom
she was not Queen of the East, and more, with that innocent, soft,
helpless dignity of hers!"

"And Sir Stephen for the first of her vassals," said the Colonel.

"What a change it has been!" said Alick.

"Yes; but a change that has shown her to have been unspoilable.
We were just agreeing on the ball-room perfections of her and your
sister in their several lines."

"Very different lines," said Alick, smiling.

"I can't judge of Fanny's," said Rachel, "but your sister is almost
enough to make one believe there can be some soul in young lady
life."

"I did not bring Bessie here to convert you," was the somewhat
perplexing answer.

"Nor has she," said Rachel, "except so far as I see that she can
follow ordinary girls' pursuits without being frivolous in them."
Alick bowed at the compliment.

"And she has been a sunbeam," added Rachel, "we shall all feel graver
and cloudier without her."

"Yes," said Colonel Keith, "and I am glad Mr. Clare has such a
sunbeam for his parsonage.  What a blessing she will be there!" he
added, as he watched Bessie's graceful way of explaining to his
brother some little matter in behalf of the shy mother of a shy girl.
Thinking he might be wanted, Colonel Keith went forward to assist,
and Rachel continued, "I do envy that power of saying the right thing
to everybody!"

"Don't--it is the greatest snare," was his answer, much amazing her,
for she had her mind full of the two direct personal blunders she had
made towards him.

"It prevents many difficulties and embarrassments."

"Very desirable things."

"Yes; for those that like to laugh, but not for those that are
laughed at," said Rachel.

"More so; the worst of all misfortunes is to wriggle too smoothly
through life."

This was to Rachel the most remarkable part of the evening; as to the
rest, it was like all other balls, a weariness: Grace enjoying
herself and her universal popularity, always either talking or
dancing, and her mother comfortable and dutiful among other mothers;
the brilliant figure and ready grace of Bessie Keith being the one
vision that perpetually flitted in her dreams, and the one ever-
recurring recollection that Captain Keith, the veritable hero of the
shell, had been lectured by her on his own deed!  In effect Rachel
had never felt so beaten down and ashamed of herself; so doubtful of
her own most positive convictions, and yet not utterly dissatisfied,
and the worst of it was that Emily Grey was after all carried off
without dancing with the hero; and Rachel felt as if her own
opinionativeness had defrauded the poor girl.

Other balls sent her home in a state of weariness, disgust, and
contempt towards every one, but this one had resulted in displeasure
with herself, yet in much interest and excitement; and, oh, passing
strange! through that same frivolous military society.

Indeed the military society was soon in better odour with her than
the clerical.  She had been making strenuous efforts to get to St.
Herbert's, with Mr. Mitchell, for some time past, but the road was in
a state of being repaired, and the coachman was determined against
taking his horses there.  As to going by train, that was equally
impossible, since he would still less have driven her to the station,
finally, Rachel took the resolute stop of borrowing Fanny's pony
carriage, and driving herself and the clergyman to the station, where
she was met by Mrs. Morris, the mother of one of the girls, to whom
she had promised such a visit, as it had been agreed that it would be
wisest not to unsettle the scholars by Christmas holidays.

The F. U. E. E. was in perfect order; the little girls sat upon a
bench with their copies before them, Mrs. Rawlins in the whitest of
caps presided over them, and Mr. Mauleverer was very urbane,
conducting the visitors over the house himself, and expatiating on
his views of cleanliness, ventilation, refinement, and equality of
cultivation, while Mrs. Rawlins remained to entertain Mrs. Morris.
Nothing could be more practical and satisfactory; some admirable
drawings of the children's were exhibited, and their conduct was said
to be excellent; except, Mr. Mauleverer remarked unwillingly, that
there was a tendency about little Mary to fancy herself injured, and
he feared that she was not always truthful; but these were childish
faults, that he hoped would pass away with further refinement, and
removal from the lower influences of her home.

After this, Rachel was not surprised that poor, ignorant, and always
deplorable Mrs. Morris did not seem in raptures with the state of her
child, but more inclined to lament not having seen more of her, and
not having her at home.  That was quite in accordance with peasant
shortsightedness and ingratitude, but it was much more disappointing
that Mr. Mitchell said little or nothing of approbation; asked her a
few questions about her previous knowledge of Mr. Mauleverer and Mrs.
Rawlins, and when she began to talk of arranging for some one or two
of his London orphans, thanked her rather shortly, but said there was
no way of managing it.  It was evident that he was quite as
prejudiced as others of his clerical brethren, and the more Rachel
read of current literature, the more she became convinced of their
bondage to views into which they durst not examine, for fear honesty
should compel them to assert their conclusions.

She had hoped better things from the stranger, but she began to be
persuaded that all her former concessions to the principles infused
in her early days were vain entanglements, and that it was merely
weakness and unwillingness to pain her mother that prevented her from
breaking through them.

She could not talk this out with anybody, except now and then an
utterance to the consenting Mr. Mauleverer, but in general she would
have been shocked to put these surging thoughts into words, and
Bessie was her only intimate who would avow that there could be
anything to be found fault with in a clergyman.  When alone together,
Bessie would sometimes regretfully, sometimes in a tone of amusement,
go over bits of narrow-minded folly that had struck her in the
clergy, and more especially in her uncle's curate, Mr. Lifford, whose
dryness was, she owned, very repulsive to her.

"He is a good creature," she said, "and most necessary to my uncle,
but how he and I are to get through life together, I cannot tell.  It
must soon be tried, though!  After my visit at Bath will come my home
at Bishopsworthy!"  And then she confided to Rachel all the parish
ways, and took counsel on the means of usefulness that would not
clash with the curate and pain her uncle.  She even talked of a
possible orphan for the F. U. E. E., only that unlucky prejudice
against Mr. Mauleverer was sure to stand in the way.

So acceptable had Bessie Keith made herself everywhere, that all
Avonmouth was grieved at her engagement to spend the winter at Bath
with her married cousin, to whom she was imperatively necessary in
the getting up of a musical party.

"And I must go some time or other," she said to Colonel Keith, "so it
had better be when you are all here to make Myrtlewood cheerful, and
I can be of most use to poor Jane!  I do think dear Lady Temple is
much more full of life and brightness now!"

Everybody seemed to consider Bessie's departure as their own personal
loss: the boys were in despair for their playfellow, Ermine would
miss those sunny visits; Colonel Keith many a pleasant discussion,
replete with delicate compliments to Ermine, veiled by tact; and Lord
Keith the pretty young clanswoman who had kept up a graceful little
coquetry with him, and even to the last evening, went on walking on
the esplanade with him in the sunset, so as to set his brother free
to avoid the evening chill.

And, above all, Lady Temple regretted the loss of the cheery
companion of her evenings.  True, Bessie had lately had a good many
small evening gaieties, but she always came back from them so fresh
and bright, and so full of entertaining description and anecdote,
that Fanny felt as if she had been there herself, and, said Bessie,
"it was much better for her than staying at home with her, and
bringing in no novelty."

"Pray come to me again, dearest!  Your stay has been the greatest
treat.  It is very kind in you to be so good to me."

"It is you who are good to me, dearest Lady Temple."

"I am afraid I shall hardly get you again.  Your poor uncle will
never be able to part with you, so I won't ask you to promise, but
if ever you can--"

"If ever I can!  This has been a very happy time, dear Lady Temple,"
a confidence seemed trembling on her lips, but she suppressed it.
"I shall always think of you as the kindest friend a motherless girl
ever had!  I will write to you from Bath.  Good-bye--"

And there were all the boys in a row, little affectionate Hubert
absolutely tearful, and Conrade holding up a bouquet, on which he had
spent all his money, having persuaded Coombe to ride with him to the
nursery garden at Avoncester to procure it.  He looked absolutely shy
and blushing, when Bessie kissed him and promised to dry the leaves
and keep them for ever.




CHAPTER XV.



GO AND BRAY



 "Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this!"--
                                              As You Like It


"Alick, I have something to say to you."

Captain Keith did not choose to let his sister travel alone, when he
could help it, and therefore was going to Bath with her, intending to
return to Avoncester by the next down train.  He made no secret that
he thought it a great deal of trouble, and had been for some time
asleep, when, at about two stations from Bath, Bessie having shut the
little door in the middle of the carriage, thus addressed him,
"Alick, I have something to say to you, and I suppose I may as well
say it now."

She pressed upon his knee, and with an affected laziness, he drew his
eyes wide open.

"Ah, well, I've been a sore plague to you, but I shall be off your
hands now."

"Eh! whose head have you been turning?"

"Alick, what do you think of Lord Keith?"

Alick was awake enough now!  "The old ass!" he exclaimed.  "But at
least you are out of his way now."

"Not at all.  He is coming to Bath to-morrow to see my aunt."

"And you want me to go out to-morrow and stop him?"

"No, Alick, not exactly.  I have been cast about the world too long
not to be thankful."

"Elizabeth!"

"Do not look so very much surprised," she said, in her sweet pleading
way.  "May I not be supposed able to feel that noble kindness and
gracious manner, and be glad to have some one to look up to?"

"And how about Charlie Carleton?" demanded Alick, turning round full
on her.

"For shame, Alick!" she exclaimed hotly; "you who were the one to
persecute me about him, and tell me all sorts of things about his
being shallow and unprincipled, and not to be thought of, you to
bring him up against me now."

"I might think all you allege," returned Alick, gravely, "and yet be
much amazed at the new project."

Bessie laughed.  "In fact you made a little romance, in which you
acted the part of sapient brother, and the poor little sister broke
her heart ever after!  You wanted such an entertainment when you were
lying on the sofa, so you created a heroine and a villain, and
thundered down to the rescue."

"Very pretty, Bessie, but it will not do.  It was long after I was
well again, and had joined."

"Then it was the well-considered effect of the musings of your
convalescence!  When you have a sister to take care of, it is as well
to feel that you are doing it."

"Now, Elizabeth," said her brother, with seriousness not to be
laughed aside, and laying his hand on hers, "before I hear another
word on this matter, look me in the face and tell me deliberately
that you never cared for Carleton."

"I never thought for one moment of marrying him," said Bessie,
haughtily.  "If I ever had any sort of mercy on him, it was all to
tease you.  There, are you satisfied?"

"I must be, I suppose," he replied, and he sighed heavily.  "When
was this settled?"

"Yesterday, walking up and down the esplanade.  He will tell his
brother to-day, and I shall write to Lady Temple.  Oh, Alick, he is
so kind, he spoke so highly of you."

"I must say," returned Alick, in the same grave tone, "that if you
wished for the care of an old man, I should have thought my uncle the
more agreeable of the two."

"He is little past fifty.  You are very hard on him."

"On the contrary, I am sorry for him.  You will always find it good
for him to do whatever suits yourself."

"Alick?" said his sister mournfully, "you have never forgotten or
forgiven my girlish bits of neglect after your wound."

"No, Bessie," he said, holding her hand kindly, "it is not the
neglect or the girlishness, but the excuses to me, still more to my
uncle, and most of all to yourself.  They are what make me afraid for
you in what you are going to take upon yourself."

She did not answer immediately, and he pursued--"Are you driven to
this by dislike to living at Bishopsworthy?  If so, do not be afraid
to tell me.  I will make any arrangement, if you would prefer living
with Jane.  We agreed once that it would be too expensive, but now I
could let you have another hundred a year."

"As if I would allow that, Alick!  No, indeed!  Lord Keith means you
to have all my share."

"Does he?  There are more words than one to that question.  And pray
is he going to provide properly for his poor daughter in the West
Indies?"

"I hope to induce him to take her into favour."

"Eh? and to make him give up to Colin Keith that Auchinvar estate
that he ought to have had when Archie Keith died?"

"You may be sure I shall do my best for the Colonel.  Indeed, I do
think Lord Keith will consent to the marriage now."

"You have sacrificed yourself on that account?" he said, with irony
in his tone, that he could have repented the next moment, so good-
humoured was her reply, "That is understood, so give me the merit."

"The merit of, for his sake, becoming a grandmother.  You have
thought of the daughters?  Mrs. Comyn Menteith must be older than
yourself."

"Three years," said Bessie, in his own tone of acceptance of
startling facts, "and I shall have seven grandchildren in all, so you
see you must respect me."

"Do you know her sentiments?"

"I know what they will be when we have met.  Never fear, Alick.  If
she were not married it might be serious, being so, I have no fears."

Then came a silence, till a halt at the last station before Bath
roused Alick again.

"Bessie," he said, in the low voice the stoppage permitted, "don't
think me unkind.  I believe you have waited on purpose to leave me no
time for expostulation, and what I have said has sounded the more
harsh in consequence."

"No, Alick," she said, "you are a kind brother in all but the
constructions you put upon my doings.  I think it would be better if
there were more difference between our ages.  You are a young
guardian, over anxious, and often morbidly fanciful about me during
your illness.  I think we shall be happier together when you no
longer feel yourself responsible."

"The tables turned," muttered Alick.

"I am prepared for misconstruction," added Bessie.  "I know it will
be supposed to be the title; the estate it cannot be, for you know
how poor a property it is; but I do not mean to care for the world.
Your opinion is a different thing, and I thought you would have seen
that I could not be insensible to such dignified kindness, and the
warmth of a nature that many people think cold."

"I don't like set speeches, Bessie."

"Then believe me, Alick.  May I not love the fine old man that has
been so kind to me?"

"I hope you do," said Alick, slowly.

"And you can't believe it?  Not with Lady Temple before you and hers
was really an old man."

"Do not talk of her or Sir Stephen either.  No, Bessie," he added
more calmly after a time, "I may be doing great injustice to you
both, but I must speak what it is my duty to say.  Lord Keith is a
hard, self-seeking man, who has been harsh and grasping towards his
family, and I verily believe came here bent on marriage, only because
his brother was no longer under his tyranny.  He may not be harsh to
you, because he is past his vigour, and if he really loves you, you
have a power of governing; but from what I know of you, I cannot
believe in your loving him enough to make such management much better
than selfish manoeuvring.  Therefore I cannot think this marriage for
your real welfare, or be other than bitterly grieved at it.  Do not
answer, Bessie, but think this over, and if at any time this evening
you feel the least doubt of your happiness in this matter, telegraph
to me, and I will stop him."

"Indeed, Alick," she answered, without anger, "I believe you are very
anxious for my good."

It will readily be believed that Captain Keith received no telegram.

Nevertheless, as soon as his time was his own the next morning, he
rode to Avonmouth and sought out the Colonel, not perhaps with very
defined hopes of making any change in his sister's intentions, but
feeling that some attempt on his own part must be made, if only to
free himself from acquiescence, and thinking that Colin, as late
guardian to the one party, and brother to the other, was the most
proper medium.

Colonel Keith was taken by surprise at the manner in which his
cordial greeting was met.  He himself had been far from displeased at
his brother's communication; it was a great relief to him personally,
as well as on Lady Temple's account, and he had been much charmed at
Bessie's good sense and engaging graces.  As to disparity of years,
Lord Keith had really made himself much younger of late, and there
was much to excite a girl's romance in the courtesy of an elderly
man, the chief of her clan; moreover, the perfect affection and
happiness Colin had been used to witness in his general's family
disposed him to make light of that objection; and he perceived that
his brother was sufficiently bewitched to be likely to be kind and
indulgent to his bride.

He had not expected Alexander Keith to be as well pleased as he was
himself, but he was not prepared for his strong disapprobation, and
earnest desire to find some means of prevention, and he began to
reassure him upon the placability of Mrs. Comyn Menteith, the
daughter, as well as upon his brother's kindness to the objects of
his real affection.

"Oh, I am not afraid of that.  She will manage him fast enough."

"Very likely, and for his good.  Nor need you question his being a
safe guide for her in higher matters.  Perhaps you are prejudiced
against him because his relations with me have not been happy, but
candidly, in them you know the worst of him; and no doubt he thought
himself purely acting for my welfare.  I know much more of him now
that I have been at home with him, and I was greatly struck with his
real consideration for the good of all concerned with him."

"No, I am not thinking of Lord Keith.  To speak it out, I cannot
believe that my sister has heart enough in this to justify her."

"Young girls often are more attracted by elderly men than by lads."

"You do not know Bessie as, I am sorry to say, I do," said Alick,
speaking slowly and sadly, and with a flush of shame on his cheek.
"I do not say that she says anything untrue, but the truth is not in
her.  She is one of those selfish people who are infinitely better
liked than those five hundred times their worth, because they take
care to be always pleased."

"They give as much pleasure as they take."

"Yes, they take every one in.  I wish to my heart I could be taken in
too, but I have seen too much of her avoidance of every service to my
uncle that she did not like.  I verily believe, at this moment, that
one great inducement with her is to elude the care of him."

"Stern judgments, Alick.  I know you would not speak thus without
warrant; but take it into account that marriage makes many a girl's
selfishness dual, and at last drowns the self."

"Yes, when it is a marriage of affection.  But the truth must be
told, Colonel.  There was a trumpery idle fellow always loitering at
Littleworthy, and playing croquet.  I set my face against it with all
my might, and she always laughed to scorn the notion that there was
anything in it, nor do I believe that she has heart enough to wish to
marry him.  I could almost say I wish she had, but I never saw her
show the same pleasure in any one's attentions, and I believe he is
gone out to Rio in hopes of earning means to justify his addresses."

Colonel Keith sat gravely considering what he knew would not be
spoken lightly.  "Do you mean that there was attachment enough to
make it desirable that you should tell my brother?"

"No, I could say nothing that she could not instantly contradict with
perfect truth, though not with perfect sincerity."

"Let me ask you one question, Alick--not a flattering one.  May not
some of these private impressions of yours have been coloured by your
long illness!"

"That is what Bessie gives every one to understand," said Alick,
calmly.  "She is right, to a certain degree, that suffering sharpened
my perceptions, and helplessness gave me time to draw conclusions.
If I had been well, I might have been as much enchanted as other
people; and if my uncle had not needed her care, and been neglected,
I could have thought that I was rendered exacting by illness.  But I
imagine all I have said is not of the slightest use, only, if you
think it right to tell your brother to talk to me, I would rather
stand all the vituperation that would fall on me than allow this to
take place."

Colonel Keith walked up and down the room considering, whilst Alick
sat in a dejected attitude, shading his face, and not uttering how
very bitter it had been to him to make the accusation, nor how dear
the sister really was.

"I see no purpose that would be answered," said Colonel Keith, coming
to a pause at last; "you have nothing tangible to mention, even as to
the former affair that you suspect.  I see a great deal in your view
of her to make you uneasy, but nothing that would not be capable of
explanation, above all to such a man as my brother.  It would appear
like mere malevolence."

"Never mind what it would appear," said Alick, who was evidently in
such a ferment as his usually passive demeanour would have seemed
incapable of.

"If the appearance would entirely baffle the purpose, it must be
considered," said the Colonel; "and in this case it could only lead
to estrangement, which would be a lasting evil.  I conclude that you
have remonstrated with your sister."

"As much as she gave me time for; but of course that is breath spent
in vain."

"Your uncle had the same means of judging as yourself."

"No, Colonel, he could do nothing!  In the first place, there can be
no correspondence with him; and next, he is so devotedly fond of
Bessie, that he would no more believe anything against her than Lady
Temple would.  I have tried that more than once."

"Then, Alick, there is nothing for it but to let it take its course;
and even upon your own view, your sister will be much safer married
than single."

"I had very little expectation of your saying anything else, but in
common honesty I felt bound to let you know."

"And now the best thing to be done is to forget all you have said."

"Which you will do the more easily as you think it an amiable
delusion of mine.  Well, so much the better.  I dare say you will
never think otherwise, and I would willingly believe that my senses
went after my fingers' ends."

The Colonel almost believed so himself.  He was aware of the
miserably sensitive condition of shattered nerve in which Alick had
been sent home, and of the depression of spirits that had ensued on
the news of his father's death; and he thought it extremely probable
that his weary hours and solicitude for his gay young sister might
have made molehills into mountains, and that these now weighed on his
memory and conscience.  At least, this seemed the only way of
accounting for an impression so contrary to that which Bessie Keith
made on every one else, and, by his own avowal, on the uncle whom he
so much revered.  Every other voice proclaimed her winning, amiable,
obliging, considerate, and devoted to the service of her friends,
with much drollery and shrewdness of perception, tempered by kindness
of heart and unwillingness to give pain; and on that sore point of
residence with the blind uncle, it was quite possibly a bit of
Alick's exaggerated feeling to imagine the arrangement so desirable--
the young lady might be the better judge.

On the whole, the expostulation left Colonel Keith more uncomfortable
on Alick's account than on that of his brother.




CHAPTER XVI.



AN APPARITION.



 "And there will be auld Geordie Tanner,
  Who coft a young wife wi' his gowd."
                           JOANNA BAILLIE.


"Mamma," quoth Leoline, "I thought a woman must not marry her
grandfather.  And she called him the patriarch of her clan."

"He is a cross old man," added Hubert.  "He said children ought not
to be allowed on the esplanade, because he got into the way as I was
pushing the perambulator."

"This was the reason," said Francis, gravel