 all about, for I cannot get the fragment of a letter from
Alick; and I met an Avoncestrian the other day, who told me that the
whole county was in a state of excitement about the F. U. etc.; that
every one believed that the fascinating landscape-painter was on the
high road to winning one of the joint-heiresses; but that Lady
Temple--the most incredible part of the story--had blown up the whole
affair, made her way into the penetralia of the asylum, and rescued
two female 'prentices, so nearly whipped to death that it took an
infinitesimal quantity of Rachel's homoeopathy to demolish one
entirely, and that the virtuous public was highly indignant that
there was no inquest nor trial for manslaughter; but that it was
certain that Rachel had been extremely ill ever since.  Poor Rachel,
there must be some grain of truth in all this, but one would like to
be able to contradict it.  I wrote to ask Alick the rights of the
story, but he has not vouchsafed me a line of reply; and I should
take it as very kind in you to let me know whether he is in the land
of the living or gone to Edinburgh--as I hear is to be the lot of the
Highlanders--or pining for the uncroquetable lawn, to which I always
told him he had an eye.'"

"She may think herself lucky he has not answered," said Ermine; "he
has always been rather unreasonably angry with her for making the
introduction."

"That is the reason he has not," added Alison, "for he is certainly
not far off.  He has been over almost every day to inquire, and
played German tactics all Saturday afternoon with Francis to our
great relief.  But I have stayed away long enough."

"I will walk back with you, Ailie.  I must see the good little
heroine of the most incredible part of the story."

Lady Temple looked a good deal paler than when he had last seen her,
and her eyelids still showed that they had long arrears of sleep to
make up; but she came down with outstretched hands and a sunny smile.
"They are so much better, and I am so glad you were not at home in
the worst of it."

"And I am sorry to have deserted you."

"Oh, no, no, it was much better that you should be away.  We should
all have wanted you, and that would have been dangerous, and dear,
dear Miss Williams did all that could be done.  Do you know, it
taught me that you were right when you told me I ought never to rest
till the boys learnt to obey, for obedience' sake, at a word.  It
showed what a bad mother I am, for I am sure if dear Conrade had been
like what he was last year, even she could not have saved him," said
Fanny, her eyes full of tears.

Then came her details, to which he listened, as ever, like the
brotherly friend he was, and there was a good deal said about
restoring the little ones, who were still at Gowanbrae, to which he
would by no means as yet consent, though Fanny owned herself to have
time now to pine for her Stephana, and to "hear how dismal it is to
have a silent nursery."

"Yes, it has been a fearful time.  We little guessed how much risk
you ran when you went to the rescue."

"Dear Con, when he thought--when we thought he could not get better,
said I was not to mind that, and I don't," said Fanny.  "I thought it
was right, and though I did not know this would come of it, yet you
see God has been very merciful, and brought both of my boys out of
this dreadful illness, and I dare say it will do them good all their
lives now it is over.  I am sure it will to me, for I shall always be
more thankful."

"Everything does you good," he said.

"And another thing," she added, eagerly, "it has made me know that
dear Miss Williams so much better.  She was so good, so wonderfully
good, to come away from her sister to us.  I thought she was quite
gone the first day, and that I was alone with my poor Francie, and
presently there she was by my side, giving me strength and hope by
her very look.  I want to have her for good, I want to make her my
sister!  She would teach the boys still, for nobody else could make
them good, but if ever her sister could spare her, she must never go
away again."

"You had better see what she says," replied the Colonel, with
suppressed emotion.

That night, when Conrade and Francis were both fast asleep, their
mother and their governess sat over the fire together, languid but
happy, and told out their hearts to one another--told out more than
Alison had ever put into words even to Ermine, for her heart was
softer and more unreserved now than ever it had been since her
sister's accident had crushed her youth.  There was thenceforth a
bond between her and Lady Temple that gave the young widow the
strong-hearted, sympathizing, sisterly friend she had looked for in
Rachel, and that filled up those yearnings of the affection that had
at first made Alison feel that Colin's return made the world dreary
to her.  Her life had a purpose, though that purpose was not Ermine!
But where were Edward and his letter?




CHAPTER XXI.



THE QUARTER SESSIONS.



"Is it so nominated in the bond?"--Merchant of Venice.


Malgre her disinclination, Rachel had reached the point of recovery
in which the fresh air and change of scene of the drive to Avoncester
could not fail to act as restoratives, and the first evening with the
Dean and his gentle old sister was refreshing and comfortable to her
spirits.

It was in the afternoon of the ensuing day that Mr. Grey came to tell
her that her presence would soon be required, and both her mother and
sister drove to the court with her.  Poor Mrs. Curtis, too anxious to
go away, yet too nervous to go into court, chose, in spite of all Mr.
Grey's advice, to remain in the carriage with the blinds closed, far
too miserable for Grace to leave her.

Rachel, though very white, called up a heroic smile, and declared
that she should get on very well.  Her spirit had risen to the
occasion, so as to brace her nerves to go becomingly through what was
inevitable; and she replied with a ready "yes," to Mr. Grey's
repetition of the advice for ever dinned into her ears, not to say a
word more than needful, feeling indeed little disposed to utter
anything that she could avoid.

She emerged from the dark passage into full view of faces which were
far more familiar than she could have wished.  She would have greatly
preferred appearing before a judge, robed, wigged, and a stranger, to
coming thus before a country gentleman, slightly known to herself,
but an old friend of her father, and looking only like his ordinary
self.

All the world indeed was curious to see the encounter between Rachel
Curtis and her impostor, and every one who had contributed so much as
a dozen stamps to the F. U. E. E. felt as if under a personal wrong
and grievance, while many hoped to detect other elements of
excitement, so that though all did not overtly stare at the witness,
not even the most considerate could resist the impulse to glance at
her reception of the bow with which he greeted her entrance.

She bent her head instinctively, but there was no change of colour on
her cheek.  Her faculties were concentrated, and her resolute will
had closed all avenues to sensations that might impair her powers;
she would not give way either to shame and remorse for herself, or to
pity or indignation against the prisoner; she would attend only to
the accuracy of the testimony that was required of her as an
expiation of her credulous incaution; but such was the tension of her
nerves, that, impassive as she looked, she heard every cough, every
rustle of paper; each voice that addressed her seemed to cut her ears
like a knife; and the chair that was given to her after the
administration of the oath was indeed much needed.

She was examined upon her arrangement that the prisoner should
provide for the asylum at St. Herbert's, and on her monthly payment
to him of the sums entered in the account-book.  In some cases she
knew he had shown her the bills unreceipted; in others, he had simply
made the charge in the book, and she had given to him the amount that
he estimated as requisite for the materials for wood-engraving.  So
far she felt satisfied that she was making herself distinctly
understood, but the prisoner, acting as his own counsel, now turned
to her and asked the question she had expected and was prepared for,
whether she could refer to any written agreement.

"No; it was a viva voce agreement."

Could she mention what passed at the time of making the arrangement
that she had stated as existing between himself and her?

"I described my plans, and you consented."

An answer at which some of the audience could have smiled, so well
did it accord with her habits.  The prisoner again insisted on her
defining the mode of his becoming bound to the agreement.  Rachel
took time for consideration, and Alison Williams, sitting between
Lady Temple and Colonel Keith, felt dizzy with anxiety for the
answer.  It came at last.

"I do not remember the exact words; but you acquiesced in the
appearance of your name as secretary and treasurer."

The prospectus was here brought forward, and Mauleverer asked her to
define the duties he had been supposed to undertake in the character
in which he had there figured.  It of course came out that she had
been her own treasurer, only entrusting the nominal one with the
amount required for current expenses, and again, in reply to his
deferential questions, she was obliged to acknowledge that he had
never in so many words declared the sums entered in the book to have
been actually paid, and not merely estimates for monthly expenditure
to be paid to the tradesmen at the usual seasons.

"I understood that they were paid," said Rachel, with some
resentment.

"Will you oblige me by mentioning on what that understanding was
founded?" said the prisoner, blandly.

There was a pause.  Rachel knew she must say something; but memory
utterly failed to recall any definite assurance that these debts had
been discharged.  Time passed, all eyes were upon her, there was a
dire necessity of reply, and though perfectly conscious of the
weakness and folly of her utterance, she could only falter forth, "I
thought so."  The being the Clever Woman of the family, only rendered
her the more sensible both of the utter futility of her answer, and
of the effect it must be producing.

Alison hung her head, and frowned in absolute shame and despair,
already perceiving how matters must go, and feeling as if the hope of
her brother's vindication were slipping away--reft from her by
Rachel's folly.  Colin gave an indignant  sigh, and whispering to
her, "Come out when Lady Temple does, I will meet you," he made his
way out of court.

There had been a moment's pause after Rachel's "I thought so," and
then the chairman spoke to the counsel for the prosecution.  "Mr.
Murray, can you carry the case any further by other witnesses?  At
present I see no case to go to the jury.  You will see that the
witness not only does not set up any case of embezzlement, but rather
loads to an inference in the contrary direction."

"No, sir," was the answer; "I am afraid that I can add nothing to the
case already presented to you."

Upon this, the chairman said,

"Gentlemen of the Jury,--The case for the prosecution does not
sustain the indictment or require me to call on the prisoner for his
defence, and it is your duty to find him not guilty.  You will
observe that we are not trying a civil action, in respect of the
large sum which he has received from the young lady, and for which he
is still accountable to her; nor by acquitting him are you
pronouncing that he has not shown himself a man of very questionable
honesty, but only that the evidence will not bring him within the
grasp of the criminal law, as guilty of embezzlement under the
statute, and this because of the looseness of the arrange ments, that
had been implied instead of expressed.  It is exceedingly to be
regretted that with the best intentions and kindest purposes, want of
caution and experience on her part should have enabled the prisoner
thus to secure himself from the possibility of a conviction; but
there can be no doubt that the evidence before us is such as to leave
no alternative but a verdict of not guilty."

The very tenderness and consideration of the grey-haired Sir Edward
Morden's tone were more crushing to Rachel than severe animadversions
on her folly would have been from a stranger.  Here was she, the
Clever Woman of the family, shown in open court to have been so
egregious a dupe that the deceiver could not even be punished, but
must go scot-free, leaving all her wrongs unredressed!  To her
excited, morbid apprehension, magnified by past self-sufficiency, it
was as though all eyes were looking in triumph at that object of
general scorn and aversion, a woman who had stepped out of her place.
She turned with a longing to rush into darkness and retirement when
she was called to return to her mother, and even had she still been
present, little would she have recked that when the jury had, without
many moments' delay, returned a verdict of "Not Guilty," the prisoner
received a strong, stem reprimand from Sir Edward, to whom he replied
with a bow that had in it more of triumph than of acceptance.

Burning tears of disappointment were upon Alison's cheek, the old
hopeless blank was returning, and her brother might come back in
vain, to find his enemy beyond his reach.  Here was an end alike of
his restoration and of Ermine's happiness!

"Oh!" whispered Lady Temple, "is it not horrid?  Is nothing to be
done to that dreadful man?  I always thought people came here to do
justice.  I shall never like Sir Edward Morden again!  But, oh! what
can that be?  Where is the Colonel?"

It was a loud, frightful roar and yell, a sound of concentrated fury
that, once heard, could never be forgotten.  It was from the crowd
outside, many of them from Avonmouth, and all frantic with
indignation at the cruelty that had been perpetrated upon the
helpless children.  Their groans and execrations were pursuing the
prison van, from which Maria Hatherton was at that moment making her
exit, and so fearful was the outcry that penetrated the court, that
Fanny trembled with recollections of Indian horrors, looked wistfully
for her protector the Colonel, and murmured fears that her aunt must
have been very much terrified.

At that moment, however, a summons came for Lady Temple, as this was
the case in which she was to bear witness.  Alison followed, and was
no sooner past the spectators, who gladly made way, than she found
her arm drawn into Colonel Keith's.  "Is he come?" she asked. "No,"
was rather signed than spoken.  "Oh, Colin!" she sighed, but still
there was no reply, only she was dragged on, downstairs and along
dark passages, into a room furnished with a table, chairs, pens, ink,
and paper, and lighted with gas, which revealed to her not only Mr.
Grey, but one who, though eight years had made him stouter, redder,
and rougher, had one of the moat familiar faces of her youthful days.
Her senses almost reeled with her as he held out his hand, saying
heartily, "Well, Ailie, how are you? and how is Ermine?  Where can
this brother of yours be?"

"Harry!  Mr. Beauchamp!  You here!" she exclaimed, in the extremity
of amazement.

"Here is Colin seeming to think that something may be done towards
nailing this scoundrel for the present, so I am come at his call.
We shall have the fellow in a moment."  And then, by way of getting
rid of embarrassment, he began talking to Mr. Grey about the County
Hall, and the room, which Mr. Grey explained to be that of the clerk
of the peace, lent for this occasion while the usual justice room was
occupied, Alison heard all as in a dream, and presently Mauleverer
entered, as usual spruce, artist-like, and self-possessed, and was
accosted by Harry Beauchamp, "Good evening, Mr. Maddox, I am sorry
to trouble you."

"I hope there is no misunderstanding, sir," was the reply.  "I have
not the pleasure of knowing for whom you take me."

Without regarding this reply, however, Mr. Beauchamp requested Mr.
Grey to take his deposition, stating his own belief in the identity
of the person before him with Richard Maddox, whom he charged with
having delivered to him a letter falsely purporting to come from
Edward Williams, demanding three hundred pounds, which upon this he
had delivered to the accused, to be forwarded to the said Mr.
Williams.

Alison's heart beat violently at the ordeal before her of speaking to
the genuineness of the letter.  She had seen and suspected that to
her brother-in-law, but she could not guess whether the flaws in that
to Mr. Beauchamp would be equally palpable, and doubt and anxiety
made her scarcely able to look at it steadily.  To her great relief,
however, she was able to detect sufficient variations to justify her
assertion that it was not authentic, and she was able to confirm her
statement by comparison of the writing with that of a short,
indignant denial of all knowledge of the transaction, which Harry
Beauchamp had happily preserved, though little regarding it at the
time.  She also showed the wrong direction, with the name of the
place misspelt, according to her own copy of her sister-in-law's
address, at the request of Maddox himself, and pointed out that a
letter to Ermine from her brother bore the right form.  The seal upon
that to Mr. Beauchamp she likewise asserted to be the impression of
one which her brother had lost more than a year before the date of
the letter.

"Indeed, sir," said the accused, fuming to Mr. Grey, "this is an
exceedingly hard case.  Here am I, newly acquitted, after nearly six
weeks' imprisonment, on so frivolous a charge that it has been
dismissed without my even having occasion to defend myself, or to
call my own most respectable witnesses as to character, when another
charge is brought forward against me in a name that there has been an
unaccountable desire to impose on me.  Even if I were the person that
this gentleman supposes, there is nothing proved.  He may very
possibly have received a forged letter, but I perceive nothing to fix
the charge upon the party he calls Maddox.  Let me call in my own
witnesses, who had volunteered to come down from Bristol, and you
will be convinced how completely mistaken the gentleman is."

To this Mr. Grey replied that the case against him was not yet
closed, and cautioning him to keep his own witnesses back; but he was
urgent to be allowed to call them at once, as it was already late,
and they were to go by the six o'clock train.  Mr. Grey consented,
and a messenger was sent in search of them.  Mr. Beauchamp looked
disturbed.  "What say you to this, Colin?" he asked, uneasily.  "That
man's audacity is enough to stagger one, and I only saw him three
times at the utmost."

"Never fear," said Colin, "delay is all in our favour."  At the same
time Colin left them, and with him went some hope and confidence,
leaving all to feel awkward and distressed during the delay that
ensued, the accused expatiating all the time on the unreasonableness
of bringing up an offence committed so many years ago, in the absence
of the only witness who could prove the whole story, insisting,
moreover, on his entire ignorance of the names of either Maddox or
Williams.

The sight of his witnesses was almost welcome.  They were a
dissenting minister, and a neat, portly, respectable widow, the owner
of a fancy shop, and both knew Mr. Mauleverer as a popular lecturer
upon philanthropical subjects, who came periodically to Bristol, and
made himself very acceptable.  Their faith in him was genuine, and he
had even interested them in the F. U. E. E. and the ladies that
patronized it.  The widow was tearfully indignant about the
persecution that had been got up against him, and evidently intended
to return with him in triumph, and endow him with the fancy shop if
he would condescend so far.  The minister too, spoke highly of his
gifts and graces, but neither of them could carry back their
testimony to his character for more than three years.

Mr. Grey looked at his watch, Harry Beauchamp was restless, and
Alison felt almost faint with suspense; but at last the tramp of feet
was heard in the passage.  Colonel Keith came first, and leaning over
Alison's chair, said, "Lady Temple will wait for me at the inn.  It
will soon be all right."

At that moment a tall figure in mourning entered, attended by a
policeman.  For the first time, Mauleverer's coolness gave way,
though not his readiness, and, turning to Mr. Grey, he exclaimed,
"Sir, you do not intend to be misled by the malignity of a person of
this description."

"Worse than a murderess!" gasped the scandalized widow Dench.  "Well,
I never!"

Mr. Grey was obliged to be peremptory, in order to obtain silence,
and enforce that, let the new witness be what she might, her evidence
must be heard.

She had come in with the habitual village curtsey to Mr. Beauchamp,
and putting back her veil, disclosed to Alison the piteous sight of
the well-remembered features, once so bright with intelligence and
innocence, and now sunk and haggard with the worst sorrows of
womanhood.  Her large glittering eyes did not seem to recognise
Alison, but they glared upon Mauleverer with a strange terrible
fixedness, as if unable to see any one else.  To Alison the sight was
inexpressibly painful, and she shrank back, as it were, in dread of
meeting the eyes once so responsive to her own.

Mr. Grey asked the woman the name of the person before her, and
looking at him with the same fearful steadiness, she pronounced it to
be Richard Maddox, though he had of late called himself Mauleverer.

The man quailed for a moment, then collecting himself, said, "I now
understand the incredible ingratitude and malignity that have pointed
out against me these hitherto unaccountable slanders.  It is a
punishment for insufficient inquiry into character.  But you, sir, in
common justice, will protect me from the aspersions of one who wishes
to drag me down in her justly merited fall."

"Sentenced for three years!  To take her examination!" muttered Mrs.
Dench, and with some difficulty these exclamations were silenced, and
Maria Hatherton called on for her evidence.

Concise, but terrible in its clear brevity, was the story of the
agent tampering with her, the nursemaid, until she had given him
access to the private rooms, where he had turned over the papers.
On the following day, Mr. Williams had been inquiring for his seal-
ring, but she herself had not seen it again till some months after,
when she had left her place, and was living in lodgings provided for
her by Maddox, when she had found the ring in the drawer of his desk;
her suspicion had then been first excited by his displeasure at her
proposing to him to return it, thinking it merely there by accident,
and she had afterwards observed him endeavouring to copy fragments of
Mr. Williams's writing.  These he had crushed up and thrown aside,
but she had preserved them, owning that she did not know what might
come of them, and the family had been very kind to her.

The seal and the scraps of paper were here produced by the policeman
who had them in charge.  The seal perfectly coincided with that which
had closed the letter to Harry Beauchamp, and was, moreover,
identified by both Alison and Colonel Keith.  It was noticeable, too,
that one of these fragments was the beginning of a note to Mr.
Beauchamp, as "Dear H." and this, though not Edward's most usual
style of addressing his friend, was repeated in the demand for the
£300.

"Sir," said the accused, "of course I have no intention of intimating
that a gentleman like the Honourable Colonel Keith has been in any
collusion with this unhappy woman, but it must be obvious to you that
his wish to exonerate his friend has induced him to give too easy
credence to this person's malignant attempts to fasten upon one whom
she might have had reason to regard as a benefactor the odium of the
transactions that she acknowledges to have taken place between
herself and this Maddox, thereto incited, no doubt, by some
resemblance which must be strong, since it has likewise deceived Mr.
Beauchamp."

Mr. Grey looked perplexed and vexed, and asked Mr. Beauchamp if he
could suggest any other person able to identify Maddox.  He frowned,
said there must have been workmen at the factory, but knew not where
they were, looked at Colin Keith, asked Alison if she or her sister
had ever seen Maddox, then declared he could lay his hands on no one
but Dr. Long at Belfast.

Mauleverer vehemently exclaimed against the injustice of detaining
him till a witness could be summoned from that distance.  Mr. Grey
evidently had his doubts, and began to think of calling in some fresh
opinion whether he had sufficient grounds for committal, and Alison's
hopes were only unstained by Colin's undaunted looks, when there came
a knock at the door, and, as much to the surprise of Alison as of
every one else, there entered an elderly maid-servant, leading a
little girl by the hand, and Colonel Keith going to meet the latter,
said, "Do not be frightened, my dear, you have only to answer a few
questions as plainly and clearly as you can."

Awed, silent, and dazzled by the sudden gas-light, she clung to his
hand, but evidently distinguished no one else; and he placed her
close to the magistrate saying, "This is Mr. Grey, Rose, tell him
your name."

And Mr. Grey taking her hand and repeating the question, the clear
little silvery voice answered,

"I am Rose Ermine Williams."

"And how old are you, my dear?"

"I was eight on the last of June."

"She knows the nature of an oath?" asked Mr. Grey of the Colonel.

"Certainly, you can soon satisfy yourself of that."

"My dear," then said Mr. Grey, taking her by the hand again, and
looking into the brown intelligent eyes, "I am sure you have been
well taught.  Can you tell me what is meant by taking an oath before
a magistrate?"

"Yes," said Rose, colour flushing into her face, "it is calling upon
Almighty God to hear one speak the truth."  She spoke so low that she
could hardly be heard, and she looked full of startled fear and
distress, turning her face up to Colonel Keith with a terrified
exclamation,

"Oh please, why am I here, what am I to say?"

He was sorry for her; but her manifest want of preparation was all in
favour of the cause, and he soothed her by saying, "Only answer just
what you are asked as clearly as you can, and Mr. Grey will soon let
you go.  He knows you would try any way to speak the truth, but as he
is going to examine you as a magistrate, he must ask you to take the
oath first."

Rose repeated the oath in her innocent tones, and perhaps their
solemnity or the fatherly gentleness of Mr. Grey reassured her, for
her voice trembled much less when she answered his next inquiry, who
her parents were.

"My mother is dead," she said; "my father is Mr Williams, he is away
at Ekaterinburg."

"Do you remember any time before he was at Ekaterinburg?"

"Oh yes; when we lived at Kensington, and he had the patent glass
works."

"Now, turn round and say if there is any one here whom you know?"

Rose, who had hitherto stood facing Mr. Grey, with her back to the
rest of the room, obeyed, and at once exclaimed, "Aunt Alison," then
suddenly recoiled, and grasped at the Colonel.

"What is it, my dear?"

"It is--it is Mr. Maddox," and with another gasp of fright, "and
Maria!  Oh, let me go."

But Mr. Grey put his arm round her, and assured her that no one could
harm her, Colonel Keith let his fingers be very hard pinched, and her
aunt came nearer, all telling her that she had only to make her
answers distinctly; and though still shrinking, she could reply to
Mr. Grey's question whom she meant by Mr. Maddox.

"The agent for the glass--my father's agent."

"And who is Maria?"

"She was my nurse."

"When did you last see the person you call Mr. Maddox?"

"Last time, I was sure of it, was when I was walking on the esplanade
at Avoncester with Colonel Keith," said Rose, very anxious to turn
aside and render her words inaudible.

"I suppose you can hardly tell when that was?"

"Yes, it was the day before you went away to Lord Keith's wedding,"
said Rose, looking to the Colonel.

"Had you seen him before?"

"Twice when I was out by myself, but it frightened me so that I never
looked again."

"Can you give me any guide to the time?"

She was clear that it had been after Colonel Keith's first stay at
Avonmouth, but that was all, and being asked if she had ever
mentioned these meetings, "Only when Colonel Keith saw how frightened
I was, and asked me."

"Why were you frightened?" asked Mr. Grey, on a hint from the
Colonel.

"Because I could not quite leave off believing the dreadful things
Mr. Maddox and Maria said they would do to me if I told."

"Told what?"

"About Mr. Maddox coming and walking with Maria when she was out with
me," gasped Rose, trying to avert her head, and not comforted by
hearing Mr. Grey repeat her words to those tormentors of her infancy.

A little encouragement, however, brought out the story of the
phosphoric letters, the lions, and the vision of Maddox growling in
the dressing-room.  The date of the apparition could hardly be hoped
for, but fortunately Rose remembered that it was two days before her
mamma's birthday, because she had felt it so bard to be eaten up
before the fete, and this date tallied with that given by Maria of
her admitting her treacherous admirer into the private rooms.

"The young lady may be precocious, no doubt, sir," here said the
accused, "but I hardly see why she has been brought here.  You can
attach no weight to the confused recollections of so young a child,
of matters that took place so long ago."

"The question will be what weight the jury will attach to them at the
assizes," said Mr. Grey.

"You will permit me to make one inquiry of the young lady, sir.  Who
told her whom she might expect to see here?"

Mr. Grey repeated the query, and Rose answered, "Nobody; I knew my
aunt and the Colonel and Lady Temple were gone in to Avoncester, and
Aunt Ermine got a note from the Colonel to say that I was to come in
to him with Tibbie in a fly."

"Did you know what you were wanted for?"

"No, I could not think.  I only knew they came to get the woman
punished for being so cruel to the poor little girls."

"Do you know who that person was?"

"Mrs. Rawlins," was the ready answer.

"I think," said Mr. Grey to the accused, "that you must perceive
that, with such coincidence of testimony as I have here, I have no
alternative but to commit you for the summer assizes."

Mauleverer murmured something about an action for false imprisonment,
but he did not make it clear, and he was evidently greatly
crestfallen.  He had no doubt hoped to brazen out his assumed
character sufficiently to disconcert Mr. Beauchamp's faith in his own
memory, and though he had carried on the same game after being
confronted with Maria, it was already becoming desperate.  He had not
reckoned upon her deserting his cause even for her own sake, and the
last chance of employing her antecedents to discredit her testimony,
had been overthrown by Rose's innocent witness to their mutual
relations, a remembrance which had been burnt in on her childish
memory by the very means taken to secure her silence.  When the
depositions were read over, their remarkable and independent
accordance was most striking; Mrs. Dench had already been led away by
the minister, in time to catch her train, just when her sobs of
indignation at the deception were growing too demonstrative, and the
policeman resumed the charge of Maria Hatherton.

Little Rose looked up to her, saying, "Please, Aunt Ailie, may I
speak to her?"

Alison had been sitting restless and perplexed between impulses of
pity and repulsion, and doubts about the etiquette of the justice
room; but her heart yearned over the girl she had cherished, and she
signed permission to Rose, whose timidity had given way amid
excitement and encouragement.

"Please, Maria," she said, "don't be angry with me for telling;
I never did till Colonel Keith asked me, and I could not help it.
Will you kiss me and forgive me as you used?"

The hard fierce eyes, that had not wept over the child's coffin,
filled with tears.

"Oh, Miss Rose, Miss Rose, do not come near me.  Oh, if I had minded
you--and your aunts--" And the pent-up misery of the life that had
fallen lower and lower since the first step in evil, found its course
in a convulsive sob and shriek, so grievous that Alison was thankful
for Colin's promptitude in laying hold of Rose, and leading her out
of the room before him.  Alison felt obliged to follow, yet could not
bear to leave Maria to policemen and prison warders.

"Maria, poor Maria, I am so sorry for you, I will try to come and see
you--"

But her hand was seized with an imperative, "Ailie, you must come,
they are all waiting for you."

How little had she thought her arm would ever be drawn into that arm,
so unheeded by both.

"So that is Edward's little girl!  Why, she is the sweetest little
clear-headed thing I have seen a long time.  She was the saving of
us."

"It was well thought of by Colin."

"Colin is a lawyer spoilt--that's a fact.  A first-rate get-up of a
case!"

"And you think it safe now?"

"Nothing safer, so Edward turns up.  How he can keep away from such a
child as that, I can't imagine.  Where is she?  Oh, here--" as they
came into the porch in fuller light, where the Colonel and Rose
waited for them.  "Ha, my little Ailie, I must make better friends
with you."

"My name is Rose, not Ailie," replied the little girl.

"Oh, aye!  Well, it ought to have been, what d'ye call her--that was
a Daniel come to judgment?"

"Portia," returned Rose; "but I don't think that is pretty at all."

"And where is Lady Temple?" anxiously asked Alison.  "She must be
grieved to be detained so long."

"Oh! Lady Temple is well provided for," said the Colonel, "all the
magistrates and half the bar are at her feet.  They say the grace and
simplicity of her manner of giving her evidence were the greatest
contrast to poor Rachel's."

"But where is she?" still persisted Alison.

"At the hotel; Maria's was the last case of the day, and she went
away directly after it, with such a choice of escorts that I only
just spoke to her."

And at the hotel they found the waggonette at the gateway, and Lady
Temple in the parlour with Sir Edward Morden, who, late as it was,
would not leave her till he had seen her with the rest of the party.
She sprang up to meet them, and was much relieved to hear that
Mauleverer was again secured.  "Otherwise," she said, "it would have
been all my fault for having acted without asking advice.  I hope I
shall never do so again."

She insisted that all should go home together in the waggonette, and
Rose found herself upon Mr. Beauchamp's knee, serving as usual as a
safety valve for the feelings of her aunt's admirers.  There was no
inconstancy on her part, she would much have preferred falling to the
lot of her own Colonel, but the open carriage drive was rather a risk
for him in the night air, and though he had undertaken it in the
excitement, he soon found it requisite to muffle himself up, and
speak as little as possible.  Harry Beauchamp talked enough for both.
He was in high spirits, partly, as Colin suspected, with the escape
from a dull formal home, and partly with the undoing of a wrong that
had rankled in his conscience more than he had allowed to himself.
Lady Temple, her heart light at the convalescence of her sons, was
pleased with everything, liked him extremely, and answered gaily; and
Alison enjoyed the resumption of pleasant habits of days gone by.
Yet, delightful as it all was, there was a sense of disenchantment:
she was marvelling all the time how she could have suffered so much
on Harry Beauchamp's account.  The rejection of him had weighed like
a stone upon her heart, but now it seemed like freedom to have
escaped his companionship for a lifetime.

Presently a horse's feet were heard on the road before them; there
was a meeting and a halt, and Alick Keith's voice called out--"How
has it gone?"

"Why, were you not in court?"

"What!  I go to hear my friends baited!"

"Where were you then?"

"At Avonmouth."

"Oh, then you have seen the boys," cried Lady Temple. "How is
Conrade?"

"Quite himself.  Up to a prodigious amount of indoor croquet.  But
how has it gone?"

"Such a shame!" returned Lady Temple.  "They acquitted the dreadful
man, and the poor woman, whom he drove to it, has a year's
imprisonment and hard labour!"

"Acquitted!  What, is he off?"

"Oh, no, no! he is safe, and waiting for the Assizes, all owing to
the Colonel and little Rose."

"He is committed for the former offence," said Colonel Keith; "the
important one."

"That's right!  Good night!  And how," he added, reining back his
horse, "did your cousin get through it?"

"Oh, they were so hard on her!" cried Lady Temple.  "I could hardly
bring myself to speak to Sir Edward after it!  It was as if he
thought it all her fault!"

"Her evidence broke down completely," said Colonel Keith.  "Sir
Edward spared her as much as he could; but the absurdity of her whole
conduct was palpable.  I hope she has had a lesson."

Alick's impatient horse flew on with him, and Colin muttered to
Alison under his mufflers,--"I never could make out whether that is
the coolest or the most sensitive fellow living!"




CHAPTER XXII.



THE AFTER CLAP



 "I have read in the marvellous heart of man,
  That strange and mystic scroll,
  That an army of phantoms vast and wan
  Beleaguer the human soul.

 "Encamped beside life's rushing stream,
  In Fancy's misty light,
  Gigantic shapes and shadows gleam
  Portentous through the night."
                The Beleaguered City, LONGFELLOW.


A dinner party at the Deanery in the sessions week was an
institution, but Rachel, lying on the sofa in a cool room, had
thought herself exempt from it, and was conscious for the time of but
one wish, namely, to be let alone, and to be able to shut her eyes,
without finding the lids, as it were, lined with tiers of gazing
faces, and curious looks turned on her, and her ears from the echo of
the roar of fury that had dreadfully terrified both her and her
mother, and she felt herself to have merited!  The crush of public
censure was not at the moment so overwhelming as the strange morbid
effect of having been the focus of those many, many glances, and if
she reflected at all, it was with a weary speculating wonder whether
one pair of dark grey eyes had been among those levelled at her.  She
thought that if they had, she could not have missed either their
ironical sting, or perchance  some kindly gleam of sympathy, such as
had sometimes surprised her from under the flaxen lashes.

There she had lain, unmolested and conscious of a certain relief in
the exceeding calm; the grey pinnacle of the cathedral, and a few
branches of an elm-tree alone meeting her eye through the open
window, and the sole sound the cawing of the rooks, whose sailing
flight amused and attracted her glance from time to time with dreamy
interest.  Grace had gone into court to hear Maria Hatherton's trial,
and all was still.

The first break was when her mother and Miss Wellwood came in, after
having wandered gently together round the warm, walled Deanery
garden, comparing notes about their myrtles and geraniums.  Then it
was that amid all their tender inquiries after her headache, and
their administration of afternoon tea, it first broke upon Rachel
that they expected her to go down to dinner.

"Pray excuse me," she said imploringly, looking at her mother for
support, "indeed, I don't know that I could sit out a dinner!  A
number of people together make me so dizzy and confused."

"Poor child!" said Miss Wellwood, kindly, but looking to Mrs. Curtis
in her turn.  "Perhaps, as she has been so ill, the evening might be
enough."

"Oh," exclaimed Rachel, "I hope to be in bed before you have finished
dinner.  Indeed I am not good company for any one."

"Don't say that, my dear," and Miss Wellwood looked puzzled.

"Indeed, my dear," said Mrs. Curtis, evidently distressed, "I think
the exertion would be good for you, if you could only think so."

"Yes, indeed," said Miss Wellwood, catching at the notion; "it is your
mind that needs the distraction, my dear."

"I am distracted enough already," poor Rachel said, putting her hand
up.  "Indeed, I do not want to be disobliging," she said,
interpreting her mother's anxious gestures to mean that she was
wanting in civility; "it is very kind in you, Miss Wellwood, but this
has been a very trying day, and I am sure I can give no pleasure to
anybody, so if I might only be let off."

"It is not so much--" began Miss Wellwood, getting into a puzzle, and
starting afresh.  "Indeed, my dear, my brother and I could not bear
that you should do anything you did not like, only you see it would
never do for you to seem to want to shut yourself up."

"I should think all the world must feel as if I ought to be shut up
for life," said Rachel, dejectedly.

"Ah! but that is the very thing.  If you do not show yourself it will
make such a talk."

Rachel had nearly said, "Let them talk;" but though she felt
tormented to death, habitual respect to these two gentle, nervous,
elderly women made her try to be courteous, and she said, "Indeed,
I cannot much care, provided I don't hear them."

"Ah! but you don't know, my dear," said Mrs. Curtis, seeing her
friend looked dismayed at this indifference.  "Indeed, dear Miss
Wellwood, she does not know; we thought it would be so awkward for
her in court."

"Know what?" exclaimed Rachel, sitting upright, and putting down her
feet.  "What have you been keeping from me?"

"Only--only, my dear, people will say such things, and nobody could
think it that knew you."

"What?" demanded Rachel.

"Yes," said Mrs. Curtis, perhaps, since her daughter was to have the
shock, rather glad to have a witness to the surprise it caused her:
"you know people will gossip, and some one has put it about that--
that this horrid man was--"

Mrs. Curtis paused, Miss Wellwood was as pink as her cap strings.
Rachel grasped the meaning at last.  "Oh!" she said, with less
reticence than her elders, "there must needs be a spice of flirtation
to give piquancy to the mess of gossip!  I don't wonder, there are
plenty of people who judge others by themselves, and think that
motive must underlie everything!  I wonder who imagines that I am
fallen so low?"

"There, I knew she would take it in that way," said Mrs. Curtis.
"And so you understand us, my dear, we could not bear to ask you to
do anything so distressing except for your own sake."

"I am far past caring for my own sake," said Rachel, "but for yours
and Grace's, mother, I will give as much ocular demonstration as I
can, that I am not pining for this hero with a Norman name.  I own I
should have thought none of the Dean's friends would have needed to
be convinced."

"Oh, no! no! but--" Miss Wellwood made a great confusion of noes,
buts, and my dears, and Mrs. Curtis came to the rescue.  "After all,
my love, one can't so much wonder!  You have always been very
peculiar, you know, and so clever, and you took up this so eagerly.
And then the Greys saw you so unwilling to prosecute.  And--and I
have always allowed you too much liberty--ever since your poor dear
papa was taken--and now it has come upon you, my poor child!  Oh, I
hope dear Fanny will take warning by me," and off went poor Mrs.
Curtis into a fit of sobs.

"Mother--mother! this is worse than anything," exclaimed Rachel in an
agony, springing to her feet, and flying after sal volatile, but
feeling frightfully helpless without Grace, the manager of all Mrs.
Curtis's ailments and troubles.  Grace would have let her quietly cry
it out.  Rachel's remedies and incoherent protestations of all being
her own fault only made things worse, and perhaps those ten minutes
were the most overwhelming of all the griefs that Rachel had brought
on herself.  However, what with Miss Wellwood's soothing, and her own
sense of the becoming, Mrs. Curtis struggled herself into composure
again by the time the maid came to dress them for dinner; Rachel all
the while longing for Grace's return, not so much for the sake of
hearing the verdict, as of knowing whether the mother ought to be
allowed to go down to dinner, so shaken did she look; for indeed,
besides her distress for her daughter, no small ingredient in her
agitation was this recurrence to a stated custom of her husband's
magisterial days.

Persuasion was unavailing.  At any cost the Curtis family must
present an unassailable front to the public eye, and if Mrs. Curtis
had forced forward her much tried and suffering daughter, far more
would she persist in devoting herself to gaiety and indifference, but
her nervousness was exceeding, and betrayed itself in a continual
wearying for Grace, without whom neither her own dress nor Rachel's
could be arranged to her satisfaction, and she was absolutely
incapable of not worrying Rachel about every fold, every plait, every
bow, in a manner that from any one else would have been unbearable;
but those tears had frightened Rachel into a penitent submission that
endured with an absolute semblance of cheerfulness each of these
torments.  The languor and exhaustion had been driven away, and
feverish excitement had set in, not so much from the spirit of
defiance that the two elder ladies had expected to excite, as from
the having been goaded into a reckless determination to sustain her
part.  No matter for the rest.

It often happened in these parties that the ladies would come in from
the country in reasonable time, while their lords would be detained
much later in court, so when the cathedral clock had given notice of
the half-hour, Mrs. Curtis began to pick up fan and handkerchief, and
prepare to descend.  Rachel suggested there would be no occasion so
to do till Grace's return, since it was plain that no one could yet
be released.

"Yes, my dear, but perhaps--don't you think it might be remarked as
if you chose to keep out of sight?"

"Oh, very well."

Rachel followed her mother down, sustained by one hope, that Captain
Keith would be there.  No; the Deanery did not greatly patronize the
barracks; there was not much chance of any gentleman under forty,
except, perhaps, in the evening.  And at present the dean himself and
one canon were the entire gentleman element among some dozen ladies.
Everybody knew that the cause of delay was the trial of the cruel
matron, and added to the account of Rachel's iniquities their
famished and weary state of expectation, the good Dean gyrating among
the groups, trying to make conversation, which every one felt too
fretful and too hungry to sustain with spirit.  Rachel sat it out,
trying to talk whenever she saw her mother's anxious eyes upon her,
but failing in finding anything to say, and much doubting whether her
neighbours liked talking to her.

At last gentlemen began to appear in twos and threes, and each made
some confidence to the womankind that first absorbed him, but no one
came in Rachel's way, and the girl beside her became too unfeignedly
curious to support even the semblance of conversation, but listened
for scraps of intelligence.  Something was flying about respecting
"a gentleman who came down by the train," and something about "Lady
Temple" and "admirable," and the young lady seized the first
opportunity of deserting Rachel, and plunging into the melee.  Rachel
sat on, sick with suspense, feeling utterly unable to quit her seat.
Still they waited, the whole of the party were not arrived, and here
was the curfew ringing, and that at the Deanery, which always felt
injured if it were seven o'clock before people were in the dining-
room!  Grace must be upstairs dressing, but to reach her was
impossible!

At last Mr. Grey was announced, and he had mercy upon Rachel; he came
up to her as soon as he could without making her remarkable, and told
her the cause of his delay had been the necessity of committing
Mauleverer upon an accusation by a relation of Colonel Keith, of very
extensive frauds upon Miss Williams's brother.  Rachel's illness and
the caution of the Williamses had prevented her from being fully
aware of the complication of their affairs with her own, and she
became paler and paler, as she listened to the partial explanation,
though she was hardly able as yet to understand it.

"The woman?" she asked.

"Sentenced to a year's imprisonment with hard labour, and let me tell
you, Rachel, you had a most narrow escape there!  If that army doctor
had not come in time to see the child alive, they could not have
chosen but have an inquest, and no mortal can tell what might have
been the decision about your homoeopathy.  You might have been
looking forward to a worse business than this at the next assizes."

Mr. Grey had done his work at last!  The long waiting, the weary
constraint, and at last the recurrence of Lovedy's sufferings and her
own share in them, entirely overcame her.  Mists danced before her
eyes, and the very sensation that had been so studiously avoided was
produced by her fainting helplessly away in her chair, while Mr. Grey
was talking to her.

To be sure it brought deliverance from the multitude, and she awoke
in the quiet of her room, upon her bed, in the midst of the
despairing compunction of the mother, and the tender cares of Grace,
but she was too utterly overdone for even this to be much relief to
her; and downstairs poor Miss Wellwood's one desire was to hinder the
spread of the report that her swoon had been caused by the tidings of
Mauleverer's apprehension.  It seemed as if nothing else had been
wanting to make the humiliation and exposure complete.  Rachel had
despised fainting ladies, and had really hitherto been so
superabundant in strength that she had no experience of the symptoms,
or she might have escaped in time.  But there she lay, publicly
censured before the dignitaries of her county for moral folly, and
entirely conquered before the rest of the world by the physical
weakness she had most contemned.

Then the mother was so terrified and distressed that all sorts of
comforting reassurances were required, and the chief object soon
became to persuade her to go downstairs and leave Rachel to her bed.
And at last the thought of civility and of the many Mrs. Grundys
prevailed, and sent her downstairs, but there was little more comfort
for Rachel even in being left to herself--that for which she had a
few minutes before most ardently longed.

That night was perhaps the most painful one of her whole life. The
earnest desire to keep her mother from uneasiness, and the longing to
be unmolested, made her play her part well when the mother and Grace
came up to see her before going to bed, and they thought she would
sleep off her over-fatigue and excitement, and yielded to her desire
that they should bid her good night, and leave her to rest.

But what sort of rest was it?  Sometimes even her own personal
identity was gone, and she would live over again in the poor
children, the hunger and the blows, or she would become Mrs. Rawlins,
and hear herself sentenced for the savage cruelty, or she would
actually stand in court under sentence for manslaughter.  Her pulses
throbbed up to fever pitch, head and cheeks burnt, the very power to
lie still was gone, and whether she commanded her thoughts or lapsed
into the land of dreams, they worked her equal woe.

Now it was the world of gazing faces, feverishly magnified,
multiplied, and pressing closer and closer on her, till she could
have screamed to dispel them; now it was her mother weeping over the
reports to which she had given occasion, and accusing herself of her
daughter's errors; and now it was Lovedy Kelland's mortal agony, now
the mob, thirsting for vengeance, were shouting for justice on her,
as the child's murderer, and she was shrieking to Alick Keith to
leave her to her fate, and only save her mother.

It would hardly be too much to say that the positive wretchedness of
actually witnessing the child's death was doubled in these its
imaginary repetitions on that still more suffering night of waking
dreams, when every solemn note of the cathedral clock, every resolute
proclamation from its fellow in the town hall, every sharp r