ions, and by
her two unfortunate dinner parties.

The wedding was to have been quietness itself, but though the
bridegroom had refused to contribute sister, brother-in-law, or even
uncle to the numbers, conventionalities had been too strong for Mrs.
Curtis, and "just one more" had been added to the guests till a
sufficient multitude had been collected to renew all Rachel's morbid
sensations of distress and bewilderment with their accompanying
feverish symptoms, and she had been only able to proceed on her
journey by very short stages, taken late in the day.

Alick had not forgotten her original views as to travelling, and as
they were eventually to go to Scotland, had proposed beginning with
Dutch reformatories and Swiss cretins; but she was so plainly unfit
for extra fatigue and bustle, that the first few weeks were to be
spent in Wales, where the enjoyment of fine scenery might, it was
hoped, be beneficial to the jaded spirits, and they had been going
through a course of passes and glens as thoroughly as Rachel's powers
would permit, for any over-fatigue renewed feverishness and its
delusive miseries, and the slightest alarm told upon the shattered
nerves.

She did not easily give way at the moment, but the shock always took
revenge in subsequent suffering, which all Alick's care could not
prevent, though the exceeding charm of his tenderness rendered even
the indisposition almost precious to her.

"What a lovely sunset!" he said, coming to lean over the back of her
chair.  "Have you been watching it?"

"I don't know."

"Are you very much tired?"

"No, it is very quiet here."

"Very; but I must take you in before that curling mist mounts into
your throat."

"This is a very nice place, Alick, the only really quiet one we have
found."

"I am afraid that it will be so no longer.  The landlord tells me he
has letters from three parties to order rooms."

"Oh, then, pray let us go on," said Rachel, looking alarmed.

"To-morrow afternoon then, for I find there's another waterfall."

"Very well," said Rachel, resignedly.

"Or shall we cut the waterfall, and get on to Llan-- something?"

"If you don't think we ought to see it."

"Ought?" he said, smiling.  "What is the ought in the case?  Why are
we going through all this?  Is it a duty to society or to ourselves?"

"A little of both, I suppose," said Rachel.

"And, Rachel, from the bottom of your heart, is it not a trying
duty?"

"I want to like what you are showing me," said Rachel.

"And you are more worried than delighted, eh?"

"I--I don't know!  I see it is grand and beautiful!  I did love my
own moors, and the Spinsters' Needles, but-- Don't think me very
ungrateful, but I can't enter into all this!  All I really do care
for is your kindness, and helping me about," and she was really
crying like a child unable to learn a lesson.

"Well," he said, with his own languor of acquiescence, "we are
perfectly agreed.  Waterfalls are an uncommon bore, if one is not in
a concatenation accordingly."

Rachel was beguiled into a smile.

"Come," he said, "let us be strong minded!  If life should ever
become painful to us because of our neglect of the waterfalls, we
will set out and fulfil our tale of them.  Meantime, let me take you
where you shall be really quiet, home to Bishopsworthy."

"But your uncle does not expect you so soon."

"My uncle is always ready for me, and a week or two of real rest
there would make you ready for the further journey."

Rachel made no opposition.  She was glad to have her mind relieved
from the waterfalls, but she had rather have been quite alone with
her husband.  She knew that Lord and Lady Keith had taken a house at
Littleworthy, while Gowanbrae was under repair, and she dreaded the
return to the bewildering world, before even the first month was
over; but Alick made the proposal so eagerly that she could not help
assenting with all the cordiality she could muster, thinking that it
must be a wretched, disappointing wedding tour for him, and she would
at least not prevent his being happy with his uncle; as happy as he
could be with a person tied to him, of whom all his kindred must
disapprove, and especially that paragon of an uncle, whom she heard
of like an intensification of all that class of clergy who had of
late been most alien to her.

Alick did not press for her real wishes, but wrote his letter, and
followed it as fast as she could bear to travel.  So when the train,
a succession of ovens for living bodies disguised in dust, drew up at
the Littleworthy Station, there was a ready response to the smart
footman's inquiry, "Captain and Mrs. Keith?"  This personage by no
means accorded with Rachel's preconceived notions of the Rectory
establishment, but she next heard the peculiar clatter by which a
grand equipage announces its importance, and saw the coronetted
blinkers tossing on the other side of the railing.  A kind little
note of welcome was put into Rachel's hand as she was seated in the
luxurious open carriage, and Alick had never felt better pleased with
his sister than when he found his wife thus spared the closeness of
the cramping fly, or the dusty old rectory phaeton.  Hospitality is
never more welcome than at the station, and Bessie's letter was
complacently accepted.  Rachel would, she knew, be too much tired to
see her on that day, and on the next she much regretted having an
engagement in London, but on the Sunday they would not fail to meet,
and she begged that Rachel would send word by the servant what time
Meg should be sent to the Rectory for her to ride; it would be a
kindness to exercise her, for it was long since she had been used.

Rachel could not help colouring with pleasure at the notion of riding
her own Meg again, and Alick freely owned that it was well thought
of.  He already had a horse at his uncle's, and was delighted to see
Rachel at last looking forward to something.  But as she lay back in
the carriage, revelling in the fresh wind, she became dismayed at the
succession of cottages of gentility, with lawns and hedges of various
pretensions.

"There must be a terrible number of people here!"

"This is only Littleworthy."

"Not very little."

"No; I told you it was villafied and cockneyfied.  There," as the
horses tried to stop at a lodge leading to a prettily built house,
"that's Timber End, the crack place here, where Bessie has always
said it was her ambition to live."

"How far is it from the Parsonage?"

"Four miles."

Which was a comfort to Rachel, not that she wished to be distant from
Bessie, but the population appalled her imagination.

"Bishopsworthy is happily defended by a Dukery," explained Alick, as
coming to the end of the villas they passed woods and fields, a bit
of heathy common, and a scattering of cottages.  Labourers going home
from work looked up, and as their eyes met Alick's there was a mutual
smile and touch of the hat.  He evidently felt himself coming home.
The trees of a park were beginning to rise in front, when the
carriage turned suddenly down a sharp steep hill; the right side of
the road bounded by a park paling; the left, by cottages, reached by
picturesque flights of brick stairs, then came a garden wall, and a
halt.  Alick called out, "Thanks," and "we will get out here,"
adding, "They will take in the goods the back way.  I don't like
careering into the churchyard."

Rachel, alighting, saw that the lane proceeded downwards to a river
crossed by a wooden bridge, with an expanse of meadows beyond.  To
her left was a stable-yard, and below it a white gate and white
railings enclosing a graveyard, with a very beautiful church standing
behind a mushroom yew-tree.  The upper boundary of the churchyard was
the clipped yew hedge of the rectory garden, whose front entrance was
through the churchyard.  There was a lovely cool tranquillity of
aspect as the shadows lay sleeping on the grass; and Rachel could
have stood and gazed, but Alick opened the gate, and there was a
movement at the seat that enclosed the gnarled trunk of the yew tree.
A couple of village lads touched their caps and departed the opposite
way, a white setter dog bounded forward, and, closely attended by a
still snowier cat, a gentleman came to meet them, so fearlessly
treading the pathway between the graves, and so youthful in figure,
that it was only the "Well, uncle, here she is," and, "Alick, my dear
boy," that convinced her that this was indeed Mr. Clare.  The next
moment he had taken her hand, kissed her brow, and spoken a few words
of fatherly blessing, then, while Alick exchanged greetings with the
cat and dog, he led her to the arched yew-tree entrance to his
garden, up two stone steps, along a flagged path across the narrow
grass-plat in front of the old two-storied house, with a tiled
verandah like an eyebrow to the lower front windows.

Instead of entering by the door in the centre, he turned the corner
of the house, where the eastern gable disclosed a window opening on a
sloping lawn full of bright flower-beds.  The room within was lined
with books and stored with signs of parish work, but with a refined
orderliness reigning over the various little ornaments, and almost
betokening feminine habitation; and Alick exclaimed with admiration
of a large bowl of fresh roses, beautifully arranged.

"Traces of Bessie," said Mr. Clare; "she brought them this morning,
and spent nearly an hour in arranging them and entertaining me with
her bright talk.  I have hardly been able to keep out of the room
since, they make it so delicious."

"Do you often see her?" asked Alick.

"Yes, dear child, she is most good-natured and attentive, and I take
it most kindly of her, so courted as she is."

"How do you get on with his lordship?"

"I don't come much in his way, he has been a good deal laid up with
sciatica, but he seems very fond of her; and it was all her doing
that they have been all this time at Littleworthy, instead of being
in town for the season.  She thought it better for him."

"And where is Mr. Lifford?" asked Alick.

"Gone to M-- till Saturday."

"Unable to face the bride."

"I fear Ranger is not equally shy," said Mr. Clare, understanding a
certain rustle and snort to import that the dog was pressing his chin
hard upon Rachel's knee, while she declared her content with the
handsome creature's black depth of eye; and the cat executed a
promenade of tenderness upon Alick.

"How are the peacocks, Alick?" added Mr. Clare; "they, at least, are
inoffensive pets.  I dreaded the shears without your superintendence,
but Joe insisted that they were getting lop-sided."

Alick put his head out at the window.  "All right, sir; Joe has been
a little hard on the crest of the left-hand one, but it is
recovering."

Whereupon, Rachel discovered that the peacocks were creatures of yew-
tree, perched at either end of the garden fence.  Mr. Clare had found
them there, and preserved them with solicitous fidelity.

Nothing could be less like than he was to the grave, thin, stooping
ascetic in a long coat, that she had expected.  He was a tall, well-
made man, of the same youthful cast of figure as his nephew, and a
far lighter and more springy step, with features and colouring
recalling those of his niece, as did the bright sunny playful
sweetness of his manner; his dark handsome eyes only betraying their
want of sight by a certain glassy immobility that contrasted with the
play of the expressive mouth.  It was hard to guess why Bessie should
have shunned such an uncle.  Alick took Rachel to the bedroom above
the library, and, like it, with two windows--one overlooking
churchyard, river, and hay-fields, the other commanding, over the
peacock hedge, a view of the playground, where Mr. Clare was seen
surrounded by boys, appealing to him on some disputed matter of
cricket.  There was a wonderful sense of serenity, freshness, and
fragrance, inexpressibly grateful to Rachel's wearied feelings, and
far more comfortable than the fine scenery through which she had been
carried, because no effort to look and admire was incumbent on her--
nay, not even an effort to talk all the evening.  Mr. Clare seemed to
have perfectly imbibed the idea that rest was what she wanted, and
did not try to make small talk with her, though she sat listening
with pleased interest to the conversation between him and his nephew
--so home like, so full of perfect understanding of one another.

"Is there anything to be read aloud?" presently asked Alick.

"You have not by chance got 'Framley Parsonage?'"

"I wish I had.  I did pick up 'Silas Marner,' at a station, thinking
you might like it," and he glanced at Rachel, who had, he suspected,
thought his purchase an act of weakness.  "Have you met with it?"

"I have met with nothing of the sort since you were here last;" then
turning to Rachel, "Alick indulges me with novels, for my good curate
had rather read the catalogue of a sale any day than meddle with one,
and I can't set on my pupil teacher in a book where I don't know what
is coming."

"We will get 'Framley,'" said Alick.

"Bessie has it.  She read me a very clever scene about a weak young
parson bent on pleasing himself; and offered to lend me the book, but
I thought it would not edify Will Walker.  But, no doubt, you have
read it long ago."

"No," said Rachel; and something withheld her from disclaiming such
empty employments.  Indeed, she was presently much interested in the
admirable portraiture of "Silas Marner," and still more by the keen,
vivid enjoyment, critical, droll, and moralizing, displayed by a man
who heard works of fiction so rarely that they were always fresh to
him, and who looked on them as studies of life.  His hands were busy
all the time carving a boss for the roof of one of the side aisles of
his church--the last step in its gradual restoration.

That night there was no excitement of nerve, no morbid fancy to
trouble Rachel's slumbers; she only awoke as the eight o'clock bell
sounded through the open window, and for the first time for months
rose less weary than she had gone to rest.  Week-day though it were,
the description "sweet day, so calm, so cool, so bright," constantly
recurred to her mind as she watched the quiet course of occupation.
Alick, after escorting his uncle to a cottage, found her searching
among the stores in the music stand.

"You unmusical female," he said, "what is that for?"

"Your uncle spoke of music last night, and I thought he would like
it."

"I thought you had no such propensity."

"I learnt like other people, but it was the only thing I could not do
as well as Grace, and I thought it wasted time, and was a young
ladyism; but if can recover music enough to please him, I should be
glad."

"Thank you," said Alick, earnestly.  "He is very much pleased with
your voice in speaking.  Indeed, I believe I first heard it with his
ears."

"This is a thorough lady's collection of music," said Rachel, looking
through it to hide her blush of pleasure.  "Altogether the house has
not a bachelor look."

"Did you not know that he had been married?  It was when he first had
the living twelve years ago.  She was a very lovely young thing, half
Irish, and this was the happiest place in the world for two years,
till her little brother was sent home here from school without proper
warning of a fever that had begun there.  We all had it, but she and
her baby were the only ones that did not recover!  There they lie,
under the yew-tree, where my uncle likes to teach the children.  He
was terribly struck down for years, though he went manfully to his
work, and it has been remarkable how his spirits and sociability have
returned since he lost his sight; indeed, he is more consistently
bright than ever he was."

"I never saw any one like him," said Rachel.  "I have fallen in with
clergy that some call holy, and with some that others call pious, but
he is not a bit like either.  He is not even grave, yet there is a
calming, refreshing sense of reverence towards him that would be awe,
only it is so happy."

Alick's response was to bend over her, and kiss her brow.  She had
never seen him so much gratified.

"What a comfort your long stay with him must have been," she said
presently, "in the beginning of his blindness!"

"I hope so.  It was an ineffable comfort to me to come here out of
Littleworthy croquet, and I think cheering me did him good.  Rachel,
you may do and say what you please," he added, earnestly, "since you
have taken to him."

"I could not help it," said Rachel, though a slight embarrassment
came over her at the recollection of Bessie, and at the thought of
the narrow views on which she expected to differ.  Then, as Alick
continued to search among the music, she asked, "Will he like the
piano to be used?"

"Of all things.  Bessie's singing is his delight.  Look, could we get
this up?"

"You don't sing, Alick!  I mean, do you?"

"We need not betray our talents to worldlings base."

Rachel found her accompaniment the least satisfactory part of the
affair, and resolved on an hour's practice every day in Mr. Clare's
absence, a wholesome purpose even as regarded her health and spirits.
She had just sat down to write letters, feeling for the first time as
if they would not be a toil, when Mr. Clare looked in to ask Alick to
refer to a verse in the Psalms, quoting it in Greek as well as
English, and after the research had been carried to the Hebrew, he
told Rachel that he was going to write his sermon, and repaired to
the peacock path, where he paced along with Ranger and the cat, in
faithful, unobtrusive attendance.

"What, you can read Hebrew, Alick?"

"So can you."

"Enough to appreciate the disputed passages.  When did you study it?"

"I learnt enough, when I was laid up, to look out my uncle's texts
for him."

She felt a little abashed by the tone, but a message called him away,
and before his return Mr. Clare came back to ask for a reference to
St. Augustine.  On her offer of her services, she was thanked, and
directed with great precision to the right volume of the Library of
the Fathers, but spying a real St. Augustine, she could not be
satisfied without a flight at the original.  It was not, however,
easy to find the place; she was forced to account for her delay by
confessing her attempt, and then to profit by Mr. Clare's directions,
and, after all, her false quantities, though most tenderly and
apologetically corrected, must have been dreadful to the scholarly
ear, for she was obliged to get Alick to read the passage over to him
before he arrived at the sense, and Rachel felt her flight of clever
womanhood had fallen short.  It was quite new to her to be living
with people who knew more of, and went deeper into, everything than
she did, and her husband's powers especially amazed her.

The afternoon was chiefly spent in the hay-field under a willow-tree;
Mr. Clare tried to leave the young people to themselves, but they
would not consent; and, after a good deal of desultory talk and
description of the minnows and water-spiders, in whom Mr. Clare
seemed to take a deep interest, they went on with their book till the
horses came, and Alick took Rachel for a ride in Earlsworthy Park, a
private gate of which, just opposite to the Rectory, was free to its
inhabitants.  The Duke was an old college friend of Mr. Clare, and
though much out of health, and hardly ever able to reside at the
Park, all its advantages were at the Rector's service, and they were
much appreciated when, on this sultry summer's day, Rachel found
shade and coolness in the deep arcades of the beech woods, and
freshness on the upland lawns, as she rode happily on the dear old
mare, by whom she really thought herself fondly recognised.  There
was something in the stillness of the whole, even in the absence of
the roll and plash of the sea waves beside which she had grown up,
that seemed to give her repose from the hurry and throb of sensations
and thoughts that had so long preyed upon her; and when the ride was
over she was refreshed, not tired, and the evening bell drew her to
the conclusion most befitting a day spent in that atmosphere of
quietude.  She felt grateful to her husband for making no remark,
though the only time she had been within a church since her illness
had been at their wedding, he only gave her his arm, and said she
should sit in the nook that used to be his in the time of his
lameness; and a most sheltered nook it was, between a pillar and the
open chancel screen, where no eyes could haunt her, even if the
congregation had been more than a Saturday summer evening one.

She only saw the pure, clear, delicately-toned hues of the east
window, and the reverent richness of the chancel, and she heard the
blind pastor's deep musical voice, full of that expressive power
always enhanced by the absence of a book.  He led the Psalms with
perfect security and a calm fervour that rendered the whole familiar
service like something new and touching; the Lessons were read by
Alick, and Rachel, though under any other circumstances she would
have been startled to see him standing behind the Eagle, could not
but feel all appropriate, and went along with each word as he read it
in a tone well worthy of his uncle's scholar.  Whether few or many
were present, Rachel knew not, thought not; she was only sensible of
the fulness of calm joy that made the Thanksgiving touch her heart
and fill her eyes with unbidden tears, that came far more readily
than of old.

"Yet this can't be all," she said to herself, as she wandered among
the tall white lilies in the twilight; "is it a trance, or am I
myself?  I have not unthought or unfelt, yet I seem falling into a
very sweet hypocrisy!  Alick says thought will come back with
strength.  I don't think I wish it!"

The curate did not return till after she had gone to bed, and in the
morning he proved to be indeed a very dry and serious middle-aged
man, extremely silent, and so grave that there was no knowing how
much to allow for shyness.  He looked much worn and had a wearied
voice, and Mr. Clare and Alick were contriving all they could to give
him the rest which he refused, Mr. Clare insisting on taking all the
service that could be performed without eyes, and Alick volunteering
school-work.  This Rachel was not yet able to undertake, nor would
Alick even let her go to church in the morning; but the shady garden,
and the echoes of the Amens, and sweet, clear tones of singing,
seemed to lull her on in this same gentle, unthinking state of dreamy
rest; and thence, too, in the after part of the day, she could watch
the rector, with his Sunday class, on his favourite seat under the
yew-tree, close to the cross that marked the resting-place of his
wife and child.

She went to church in the evening, sheltered from curious eyes in her
nook, and there for a moment she heard the peculiar brush and sweep
of rich silk upon pavement, and wondered at so sophisticated a sound
in the little homely congregation, but forgot it again in the
exulting, joyous beauty of the chants and hymns, led by the rector
himself, and, oh, how different from poor Mr. Touchett's best
efforts! and forgot it still more in the unfettered eloquence of the
preaching of a man of great natural power, and entirely accustomed to
trust to his own inward stores.  Like Ermine Williams, she could have
said that this preaching was the first that won her attention.
It certainly was the first that swept away all her spirit of
criticising, and left her touched and impressed, not judging.  On
what north country folk call the loosing of the kirk, she, moving
outwards after the throng, found herself close behind a gauzy white
cloak over a lilac silk, that filled the whole breadth of the central
aisle, and by the dark curl descending beneath the tiny white bonnet,
as well as by the turn of the graceful head, she knew her sister-in-
law, Lady Keith, of Gowanbrae.  In the porch she was met with
outstretched hands and eager greetings--

"At last!  Where did you hide yourself?  I had begun to imagine dire
mischances."

"Only in the corner by the chancel."

"Alick's old nook!  Keeping up honeymoon privileges!  I have kept
your secret faithfully.  No one knows you are not on the top of
Snowdon, or you would have had all the world to call on you."

"There are always the Earlsworthy woods," said Alick.

"Or better still, come to Timber End.  No one penetrates to my
morning room," laughed Bessie.

"Now, Uncle George," she said, as the rector appeared, "you have had
a full allowance of them for three days, you must spare them to me
to-morrow morning."

"So it is you, my lady," he answered, with a pleased smile; "I heard
a sort of hail-storm of dignity sailing in!  How is Lord Keith?"

"Very stiff.  I want him to have advice, but he hates doctors.  What
is the last Avonmouth news?  Is Ermine in good heart, and the boys
well again?"

She was the same Bessie as ever--full of exulting animation, joined
to a caressing manner that her uncle evidently delighted in; and to
Rachel she was most kind and sisterly, welcoming her so as amply to
please and gratify Alick.  An arrangement was made that Rachel should
be sent for early to spend the day at Timber End, and that Mr. Clare
and Alick should walk over later.  Then the two pretty ponies came
with her little low carriage to the yew-tree gate, were felt and
admired by Mr. Clare, and approved by Alick, and she drove off gaily,
leaving all pleased and amused, but still there was a sense that the
perfect serenity had been ruffled.

"Rachel," said Alick, as they wandered in the twilight garden, "I
wonder if you would be greatly disappointed if our travels ended
here."

"I am only too glad of the quiet."

"Because Lifford is in great need of thorough rest.  He has not been
away for more than a year, and now he is getting quite knocked up.
All he does care to do, is to take lodgings near his wife's asylum,
poor man, and see her occasionally: sad work, but it is rest, and
winds him up again; and there is no one but myself to whom he likes
to leave my uncle.  Strangers always do too little or too much; and
there is a young man at Littleworthy for the long vacation who can
help on a Sunday."

"Oh, pray let us stay as long as we can!"

"Giving up the Cretins?"

"It is no sacrifice.  I am thankful not to be hunted about; and if
anything could make me better pleased to be here, it would be feeling
that I was not hindering you."

"Then I will hunt him away for six weeks or two months at least.  It
will be a great relief to my uncle's mind."

It was so great a relief that Mr. Clare could hardly bring himself to
accept the sacrifice of the honeymoon, and though there could be
little doubt which way the discussion would end, he had not yielded
when the ponies bore off Rachel on Monday morning.

Timber End was certainly a delightful place.  Alick had railed it a
cockney villa, but it was in good taste, and very fair and sweet with
flowers and shade.  Bessie's own rooms, where she made Rachel
charmingly at home, were wonderful in choiceness and elegance,
exciting Rachel's surprise how it could be possible to be so
sumptuously lodged in such a temporary abode, for the house was only
hired for a few months, while Gowanbrae was under repair.  It was
within such easy reach of London that Bessie had been able from
thence to go through the more needful season gaieties; and she had
thought it wise, both for herself and Lord Keith, not to enter on
their full course.  It sounded very moderate and prudent, and Rachel
felt vexed with herself and Alick for recollecting a certain hint of
his, that Lady Keith felt herself more of a star in her own old
neighbourhood than she could be in London, and wisely abstained from
a full flight till she had tried her wings.  It was much pleasanter
to go along with Bessie's many far better and more affectionate
reasons for prudence, and her minutely personal confidences about her
habits, hopes, and fears, given with a strong sense of her own
importance and consideration, yet with a warm sisterly tone that made
them tokens of adoption, and with an arch drollery that invested them
with a sort of grace.  The number of engagements that she mentioned
in town and country did indeed seem inconsistent with the prudence
she spoke of with regard to her own health, or with her attention to
that of her husband; but it appeared that all were quite necessary
and according to his wishes, and the London ones were usually for the
sake of trying to detach his daughter, Mrs. Comyn Menteith, from the
extravagant set among whom she had fallen.  Bessie was excessively
diverting in her accounts of her relations with this scatter-brained
step-daughter of hers, and altogether showed in the most flattering
manner how much more thoroughly she felt herself belonging to her
brother's wife.  If she had ever been amazed or annoyed at Alick's
choice, she had long ago surmounted the feeling, or put it out of
sight, and she judiciously managed to leap over all that had passed
since the beginning of the intimacy that had arisen at the station
door at Avoncester.  It was very flattering, and would have been
perfectly delightful, if Rachel had not found herself wearying for
Alick, and wondering whether at the end of seven months she should be
as contented as Bessie seemed, to know her husband to be in the
sitting-room without one sight of him.

At luncheon, however, when Lord Keith appeared, nothing could be
prettier than his wife's manner to him--bright, sweet, and with a
touch of graceful deference, at which he always smiled and showed
himself pleased, but Rachel thought him looking much older than in
the autumn--he had little appetite, stooped a good deal, and
evidently moved with pain.  He would not go out of doors, and Bessie,
after following him to the library, and spending a quarter of an hour
in ministering to his comfort, took Rachel to sit by a cool dancing
fountain in the garden, and began with some solicitude to consult her
whether he could be really suffering from sciatica, or, as she had
lately begun to suspect, from the effects of a blow from the end of a
scaffold-pole that had been run against him when taking her through a
crowded street.  Rachel spoke of advice.

"What you, Rachel! you who despised allopathy!"

"I have learnt not to despise advice."

And Bessie would not trench on Rachel's experiences.

"There's some old Scotch doctor to whom his faith is given, and that
I don't half believe in.  If he would see our own Mr. Harvey here it
would be quite another thing; but it is of no use telling him that
Alick would never have had an available knee but for Mr. Harvey's
management.  He persists in leaving me to my personal trust in him,
but for himself he won't see him at any price!  Have you seen Mr.
Harvey?"

"I have seen no one."

"Oh, I forgot, you are not arrived yet; but--"

"There's some one," exclaimed Rachel, nervously; and in fact a young
man was sauntering towards them.  Bessie rose with a sort of
annoyance, and "Never mind, my dear, he is quite inoffensive, we'll
soon get rid of him."  Then, as he greeted her with "Good morning,
Lady Keith, I thought I should find you here," she quickly replied.

"If you had been proper behaved and gone to the door, you would have
known that I am not at home."

He smiled, and came nearer.

"No, I am not at home, and, what is more, I do not mean to be.  My
uncle will be here directly," she added, in a fee-faw-fum tone.

"Then it is not true that your brother and his bride are arrived?"

"True in the same sense as that I am at home.  There she is, you see
--only you are not to see her on any account," as a bow necessarily
passed between him and Rachel.  "Now mind you have not been
introduced to Mrs. Keith, and if you utter a breath that will bring
the profane crowd in shoals upon the Rectory, I shall never forgive
you."

"Then I am afraid we must not hope to see you at the bazaar for the
idiots."

"No, indeed," Bessie answered, respecting Rachel's gesture of
refusal; "no one is to infringe her incog, under penalty of never
coming here again."

"You are going?" he added to Bessie; "indeed, that was what brought
me here.  My sisters sent me to ask whether they may shelter
themselves under your matronly protection, for my mother dreads the
crush."

"I suppose, as they put my name down, that I must go, but you know I
had much rather give the money outright.  It is a farce to call a
bazaar charity."

"Call it what you will, it is one device for a little sensation."

Rachel's only sensation at that moment was satisfaction at the sudden
appearance of Ranger's white head, the sure harbinger of his master
and Alick, and she sprang up to meet them in the shrubbery path--all
her morbid shyness at the sight of a fresh face passing away when her
hand was within Alick's arm.  When they came forth upon the lawn,
Alick's brow darkened for a moment, and there was a formal exchange
of greetings as the guest retreated.

"I am so sorry," began Bessie at once; "I had taken precautions
against invasion, but he did not go to the front door.  I do so hope
Rachel has not been fluttered."

"I thought he was at Rio," said Alick.

"He could not stand the climate, and was sent home about a month ago
--a regular case of bad shilling, I am afraid, poor fellow!  I am so
sorry he came to startle Rachel, but I swore him over to secrecy.  He
is not to mention to any living creature that she is nearer than
Plinlimmon till the incog, is laid aside!  I know how to stand up for
bridal privileges, and not to abuse the confidence placed in me."

Any one who was up to the game might have perceived that the sister
was trying to attribute all the brother's tone of disapprobation to
his anxiety lest his wife should have been startled, while both knew
as well as possible that there was a deeper ground of annoyance which
was implied in Alick's answer.

"He seems extremely tame about the garden."

"Or he would not have fallen on Rachel.  It was only a chance; he
just brought over a message about that tiresome bazaar that has been
dinned into our ears for the last three months.  A bazaar for idiots
they may well call it!  They wanted a carving of yours, Uncle
George!"

"I am afraid I gave little Alice Bertie one in a weak moment,
Bessie," said Mr. Clare, "but I hardly durst show my face to Lifford
afterwards."

"After all, it is better than some bazaars," said Bessie; "it is only
for the idiot asylum, and I could not well refuse my name and
countenance to my old neighbours, though I stood out against taking a
stall.  Lord Keith would not have liked it."

"Will he be able to go with you?" asked Alick.

"Oh, no; it would be an intolerable bore, and his Scottish thrift
would never stand the sight of people making such very bad bargains!
No, I am going to take the Carleton girls in, they are very
accommodating, and I can get away whenever I please.  I am much too
forbearing to ask any of you to go with me, though I believe Uncle
George is pining to go and see after his carving."

"No, thank you; after what I heard of the last bazaar I made up my
mind that they are no places for an old parson, nor for his carvings
either, so you are quite welcome to fall on me for my inconsistency."

"Not now, when you have a holiday from Mr. Lifford," returned Bessie.
"Now come and smell the roses."

All the rest of the day Alick relapsed into the lazy frivolous young
officer with whom Rachel had first been acquainted.

As he was driving home in the cool fresh summer night, he began--

"I think I must go to this idiotical bazaar!"

"You!" exclaimed Rachel.

"Yes; I don't think Bessie ought to go by herself with all this
Carleton crew."

"You don't wish me to go," said Rachel, gulping down the effort.

"You!  My dear Rachel, I would not take you for fifty pounds, nor
could I go myself without leaving you as vice deputy curate."

"No need for that," said Mr. Clare, from the seat behind; "young
people must not talk secrets with a blind man's ears behind them."

"I make no secret," said Alick.  "I could not go without leaving my
wife to take care of my uncle, or my uncle to take care of my wife."

"And you think you ought to go?" said Mr. Clare.  "It is certainly
better that Bessie should have a gentleman with her in the crowd; but
you know this is a gossiping neighbourhood, and you must be prepared
for amazement at your coming into public alone not three weeks after
your wedding."

"I can't help it, she can't go, and I must."

"And you will bring down all the morning visitors that you talk of
dreading."

"We will leave you to amuse them, sir.  Much better that," he added
between his teeth, "than to leave the very semblance of a secret
trusted by her to that intolerable puppy--"

Rachel said no more, but when she was gone upstairs Mr. Clare
detained his nephew to say, "I beg your pardon, Alick, but you should
be quite sure that your wife likes this proposal."

"That's the value of a strong-minded wife, sir," returned Alick; "she
is not given to making a fuss about small matters."

"Most ladies might not think this a small matter."

"That is because they have no perspective in their brains.  Rachel
understands me a great deal too well to make me explain what is
better unspoken."

"You know what I think, Alick, that you are the strictest judge that
ever a merry girl had."

"I had rather you continued to think so, uncle; I should like to
think so myself.  Good night."

Alick was right, but whether or not Rachel entered into his motives,
she made no objection to his going to the bazaar with his sister,
being absolutely certain that he would not have done so if he could
have helped it.

Nor was her day at all dreary; Mr. Clare was most kind and attentive
to her, without being oppressive, and she knew she was useful to him.
She was indeed so full of admiration and reverence for him, that once
or twice it crossed her whether she were not belying another of her
principles by lapsing into Curatocult, but the idea passed away with
scorn at the notion of comparing Mr. Clare with the objects of such
devotion.  He belonged to that generation which gave its choicest in
intellectual, as well as in religious gifts to the ministry, when a
fresh tide of enthusiasm was impelling men forward to build up,
instead of breaking down, before disappointment and suspicion had
thinned the ranks, and hurled back many a recruit, or doctrinal
carpings had taught men to dread a search into their own tenets.  He
was a highly cultivated, large-minded man, and the conversation
between him and his nephew was a constant novelty to her, who had
always yearned after depth and thought, and seldom met with them.
Still here she was constantly feeling how shallow were her
acquirements, how inaccurate her knowledge, how devoid of force and
solidity her reasonings compared with what here seemed to be old,
well-beaten ground.  Nay, the very sparkle of fun and merriment
surprised and puzzled her; and all the courtesy of the one gentleman,
and the affection of the other, could not prevent her sometimes
feeling herself the dullest and most ignorant person present.  And
yet the sense was never mortifying except when here and there a spark
of the old conceit had lighted itself, and lured her into pretensions
where she thought herself proficient.  She was becoming more and more
helpful to Mr. Clare, and his gratitude for her services made them
most agreeable, nor did that atmosphere of peace and sincerity that
reigned round the Rectory lose its charm.  She was really happy all
through the solitary Wednesday, and much more contented with the
results than was Alick.  "A sickening place," he said, "I am glad I
went."

"How glad Bessie must have been to have you!"

"I believe she was.  She has too much good taste for much of what
went on there."

"I doubt," said Mr. Clare, laughing, "if you could have been an
agreeable acquisition."

"I don't know.  Bessie fools one into thinking oneself always doing
her a favour.  Oh, Rachel, I am thankful you have never taken to
being agreeable."




CHAPTER XXV.



THE HUNTSFORD CROQUET.



"Une femme egoiste, non seulement de coeur, mais d'esprit,
ne pent pas sortir d'elle-meme.  Le moi est indelible chez elle.
Une veritable egoiste ne sait meme pas etre fausse."
                                         --MME. E. DE GIRARDIN.


"I am come to prepare you," said Lady Keith, putting her arm into her
brother's, and leading him into the peacock path.  "Mrs. Huntsford is
on her way to call and make a dead set to get you all to a garden
party."

"Then we are off to the Earlsworthy Woods."

"Nay, listen, Alick.  I have let you alone and defended you for a
whole month, but if you persist in shutting up you wife, people won't
stand it."

"Which of us is the Mahometan?"

"You are pitied!  But you see it was a strong thing our appearing
without our several incumbrances, and though an old married woman
like me may do as she pleases, yet for a bridegroom of not three
weeks' standing to resort to bazaars solus argues some weighty
cause."

"And argues rightly."

"Then you are content to be supposed to have an unproduceably
eccentric melancholy bride?"

"Better they should think so than that she should be so.  She has
been victimized enough already to her mother's desire to save
appearances."

"You do not half believe me, Alick, and this is really a very kind,
thoughtful arrangement of Mrs. Huntsford's.  She consulted me, saying
there were such odd stories about you two that she was most anxious
that Rachel should appear and confute them; and she thought that an
out-of-door party like this would suit best, because it would be
early, and Rachel could get away if she found it too much for her."

"After being walked out to satisfy a curious neighbourhood."

"Now Alick, do consider it.  This sort of thing could remind her of
nothing painful; Uncle George would enjoy it."

"And fall over the croquet traps."

"No; if you wanted to attend to him, I could take care of Rachel."

"I cannot tell, Bessie, I believe it is pure goodnature on Mrs.
Huntsford's part, but if we go, it must be from Rachel's spontaneous
movement.  I will not press her on any account.  I had rather the
world said she was crazy at once than expose her to the risk of one
of the dreadful nights that haunted us till we came here to perfect
quiet."

"But she is well now. She looks better and nicer than I ever saw her.
Really, Alick, now her face is softer, and her eyes more veiled, and
her chin not cocked up, I am quite proud of her.  Every one will be
struck with her good looks."

"Flattery, Bessie," he said, not ill pleased.  "Yes, she is much
better, and more like herself; but I dread all this being overthrown.
If she herself wishes to go, it may be a good beginning, but she must
not be persuaded."

"Then I must not even tell her that she won't be required to croquet,
and that I'll guard her from all civil speeches."

"No, for indeed, Bessie, on your own account and Lord Keith's, you
should hardly spend a long afternoon from home."

"Here's the war in the enemy's quarters!  As to fatigue, dawdling
about Mrs. Huntsford's garden, is much the same as dawdling about my
own, and makes me far more entertaining."

"I cannot help thinking, Bessie, that Lord Keith is more ill than you
suppose.  I am sure he is in constant pain."

"So I fear," said Bessie, gravely; "but what can be done?  He will
see no one but his old surgeon in Edinburgh."

"Then take him there."

"Take him?  You must know what it is to be in the hands of a clever
woman before you make such a proposal."

"You are a cleverer woman than my wife in bringing about what you
really wish."

"Just consider, Alick, our own house is uninhabitable, and this one
on our hands--my aunt coming to me in a month's time.  You don't ask
me to do what is reasonable."

"I cannot tell, Bessie.  You can be the only judge of what is regard
of the right kind for your husband's health or for yourself; and see,
there is Mrs. Huntsford actually arrived, and talking to my uncle."

"One moment, Alick: I am not going to insult myself so far as to
suppose that poor Charlie Carleton's being at home has anything to do
with your desire to deport me, but I want you to know that he did not
come home till after we were settled here."

"I do not wish to enter into details, Bessie," and he crossed the
lawn towards the window where Mr. Clare and Rachel had just received
Mrs. Huntsford, a goodnatured joyous-looking lady, a favourite with
every one.  Her invitation was dexterously given to meet a few
friends at luncheon, and in the garden, where the guests would be
free to come and go; there might perhaps be a little dancing later,
she had secured some good music which would, she knew, attract Mr.
Clare, and she hoped he would bring Captain and Mrs. Keith.  She knew
Mrs. Keith had not been well, but she promised her a quiet room to
rest in, and she wanted to show her a view of the Devon coast done by
a notable artist in water-colours.  Rachel readily accepted--in fact,
this quiet month had been so full of restoration that she had almost
forgotten her morbid shrinking from visitors; and Bessie infused into
her praise and congratulations a hint that a refusal would have been
much against Alick's reputation, so that she resolved to keep up to
the mark, even though he took care that she should know that she
might yet retract.

"You did not wish me to refuse, Alick," said she, struck by his grave
countenance, when she found him lying on the slope of the lawn
shortly after, in deep thought.

"No, not at all," he replied; "it is likely to be a pleasant affair,
and my uncle will be delighted to have us with him.  No," he added,
seeing that she still looked at him inquisitively, "it is the old
story.  My sister!  Poor little thing!  I always feel as though I
wore more unkind and unjust to her than any one else, and yet we are
never together without my feeling as if she was deceiving herself and
me; and yet it is all so fair and well reasoned that one is always
left in the wrong.  I regretted this marriage extremely at first, and
I am not the less disposed to regret it now."

"Indeed!  Every one says how attentive she is to him, and how nicely
they go on together."

"Pshaw, Rachel! that is just the way.  A few words and pretty ways
pass with her and all the world for attention, when she is wherever
her fancy calls her, all for his good.  It is just the attention she
showed my uncle.  And now it is her will and pleasure to queen it
here among her old friends, and she will not open her eyes to see the
poor old man's precarious state."

"Do you think him so very ill, Alick?"

"I was shocked when I saw him yesterday.  As to sciatica, that is all
nonsense; the blow in his side has done some serious damage, and if
it is not well looked-to, who knows what will be the end of it!  And
then, a gay young widow with no control over her--I hate to think of
it."

"Indeed," said Rachel, "she is so warm and bright, and really earnest
in her kindness, that she will be sure to see her own way right at
home.  I don't think we can guess how obstinate Lord Keith may be in
refusing to take advice."

"He cut me off pretty short," said Alick.  "I am afraid he will see
no one here; and, as Bessie says, the move to Scotland would not be
easy just now.  As I said, she leaves one in the wrong, and I don't
like the future. But it is of no use to talk of it; so let us come
and see if my uncle wants to go anywhere."

It was Alick's fate never to meet with sympathy in his feeling of his
sister's double-mindedness.  Whether it were that he was mistaken, or
that she really had the gift of sincerity for the moment in whatever
she was saying, the most candid and transparent people in the world--
his uncle and his wife--never even succeeded in understanding his
dissatisfaction with Bessie's doings, but always received them at her
own valuation.  Even while he had been looking forward, with hope
deferred, to her residence with him as the greatest solace the world
could yet afford him, Mr. Clare had always been convinced that her
constant absence from his Rectory, except when his grand neighbours
were at home, had been unavoidable, and had always credited the
outward tokens of zealous devotion to his church and parish, and to
all that was useful or good elsewhere.  In effect there was a charm
about her which no one but her brother ever resisted, and even he
held out by an exertion that made him often appear ungracious.

However, for the present the uneasiness was set aside, in the daily
avocations of the Rectory, where Alick was always a very different
person from what he appeared in Lady Temple's drawing-room,
constantly engaged as he was by unobtrusive watchfulness over his
uncle, and active and alert in this service in a manner that was a
curious contrast to his ordinary sauntering ways.  As to Rachel, the
whole state of existence was still a happy dream.  She floated on
from day to day in the tranquil activity of the Rectory, without
daring to look back on the past or to think out her present frame of
mind; it was only the languor and rest of recovery after suffering,
and her husband was heedfully watching her, fearing the experiment of
the croquet party, though on many accounts feeling the necessity of
its being made.

Ermine's hint, that with Rachel it rested to prevent her unpopularity
from injuring her husband, had not been thrown away, and she never
manifested any shrinking from the party, and even took some interest
in arraying herself for it.

"That is what I call well turned out," exclaimed Alick, when she came
down.

"Describe her dress, if you please," said Mr. Clare, "I like to hear
how my nieces look."

Alick guided his hand.  "There, stroke it down, a long white feather
in a shady hat trimmed with dark green, velvet; she is fresh and
rosy, you know, sir, and looks well in green, and then, is it Grace's
taste, Rachel? for it is the prettiest thing you have worn--a pale
buff sort of silky thing, embroidered all over in the same colour,"
and he put a fold of the dress into his uncle's hand.

"Indian, surely," said Mr. Clare, feeling the pattern, "it is too
intricate and graceful for the West."

"Yes," said Alick, "I remember now, Grace showed it to me.  It was
one that Lady Temple brought from India, and never had made up.  Poor
Grace could get no sympathy from Rachel about the wedding clothes, so
she was obliged to come to me."

"And I thought you did not know one of my things from another," said
Rachel.  "Do you really mean that you care?"

"Depend upon it, he does, my dear," said Mr. Clare.  "I have heard
him severely critical on his cousins."

"He has been very good in not tormenting me," said Rachel, nestling
nearer to him.

"I apprehended the consequences," said Alick, "and besides, you never
mounted that black lace pall, or curtain, or whatever you call it,
upon your head, after your first attempt at frightening me away with
it."

"A cap set against, instead of at," said Mr. Clare, laughing; and
therewith his old horse was heard clattering in the yard, and Alick
proceeded to drive the well-used phaeton about three miles through
Earlsworthy Park, to a pleasant-looking demesne in the village
beyond.  As they were turning in at the gate, up came Lady Keith with
her two brisk little Shetlands.  She was one mass of pretty, fresh,
fluttering blue and white muslin, ribbon, and lace, and looked
particularly well and brilliant.

"Well met," she said, "I called at the Rectory to take up Rachel, but
you were flown before me."

"Yes, we went through the Park."

"I wish the Duke would come home.  I can't go that way now till I
have called.  I have no end of things to say to you," she added, and
her little lively ponies shot ahead of the old rectorial steed.
However, she waited at the entrance.  "Who do you think is come?
Colin Keith made his appearance this morning.  He has safely captured
his Ouralian bear, though not without plenty of trouble, and he could
not get him on to Avonmouth till he had been to some chemical
institution about an invention.  Colin thought him safe there, and
rushed down by the train to see us.  They go on to-morrow."

"What did he think of Lord Keith?" said Alick, in the more haste
because he feared something being said to remind Rachel that this was
the assize week at Avoncester.

"He has settled the matter about advice," said Bessie, seriously;
"