into one or two, and her face lighted up.  "Oh!" she
exclaimed, "this is enough to make up for all.  This is his letter to
tell about Alick's wound.  Oh how beautifully he speaks of him," and
Rachel, with no voice to read, handed the thin paper to her
companion, that he might see the full commendation, that had been
wrung from the reserved father's heart by his son's extremity.

"You must be prepared to hear that all is over," wrote the father to
his daughter; "in fact, I doubt whether he can live till morning,
though M'Vicar declares that nothing vital has been touched.  Be it
as it may, the boy has been in all respects, even more than I dared
to wish, and the comfort he has been ever since he came out to me has
been unspeakable.  We must not grudge him such a soldier's death
after his joyous life.  But for you, my poor girl, I could only wish
the same for myself to-morrow.  You will, at least, if you lose a
brother's care, have a memory of him, to which to live up.  The
thought of such a dead brother will be more to you than many a living
one can ever be to a sister."

Rachel's heart beat high, and her eyes were full of tears of
exultation.  And the Colonel was well pleased to compensate for all
the pain he had inflicted by giving her all the details he could
recollect of her husband's short campaign.  They had become excellent
friends over their mournful work, and were sorry to have their tete-
a-tete interrupted when a message was brought that his Lordship was
ready, if Mrs. Keith would be so good as to come into his sitting-
room.

She wiped away the tears, and awe-struck and grave, followed the
Colonel; a great contrast to Lord Keith's more frequent lady-visitor,
as she silently received the polished greeting, its peculiar
stateliness of courtesy, enhanced by the feeble state of the
shattered old man, unable to rise from his pillowed chair, and his
face deeply lined by suffering.  He would not let her give him any
account of her labours, nor refer any question to him, he only
entreated that everything might be taken away, and that he might hear
nothing about it.  He spoke warmly of Alick's kindness and attention,
and showed much solicitude about his indisposition, and at last he
inquired for Rachel's "little charge," hoping he was not clamorous or
obnoxious to her, or to Mr. Clare's household.  Her eager description
of his charms provoked a look of interest and a sad smile, followed
by a request, that weather and doctor permitting, she would bring the
child to be seen for a few minutes.  The next day there was an
appointment, at which both the Colonel and Alick were wanted, but on
the following one, the carriage should be sent to bring her and the
little one to Timber End.

The effect of this invitation amused Alick.  The first thing he heard
in the morning was a decided announcement from Rachel that she must
go up to London to procure equipments for the baby to be presented
in!

"You know I can't go with you to-day."

"Of course, but I must make him fit to be seen.  You know he has been
wearing little Una's things all this time, and that will not do out
of the nursery."

"A superior woman ought to know that his Lordship will never find out
what his son has on."

"Then it is all the more reason that I should not let the poor dear
little fellow go about wrapped up in somebody's old shawl!"

"What will you do then--take your maid?"

"Certainly not.  I can't have him left."

"Then take him with you?"

"What, Alick, a little unvaccinated baby!  Where have you ever lived!
I don't see the least reason why I should not go alone."

"You need not begin beating about the world yet, Rachel.  How many
times did you say you had been in London?"

"Three; once with my father when I was a child, once in the time of
the Great Exhibition, and passing through it now with you.  But any
one of common sense can manage."

"If you will wait till tive o'clock I will come with you," said
Alick, wearily.

"No, indeed, I had rather not go, than that you should, you are quite
tired out enough at the end of the day."

"Then do not go."

"Alick, why will you have no proper feeling for that poor dear
child!" said Rachel with tears in her eyes.

If he winced he did not show it.  "My proper feeling takes the
direction of my wife," he said.

"You don't really mean to forbid me to go," she exclaimed.

"I don't mean it, for I do so, unless you find some one to go with
you."

It was the first real collision that had taken place, but Alick's
quiet, almost languid tone had an absolute determination in it from
the very absence of argument, and Rachel, though extremely annoyed,
felt the uselessness of battling the point.  She paused for a few
moments, then said with an effort, "May I take the housekeeper?"

"Yes, certainly," and then he added some advice about taking a
brougham, and thus lightened her heart; so that she presently said
humbly,

"Have I been self-willed and overbearing, Alick?"

He laughed.  "Not at all; you have persevered just where you ought.
I dare say this is all more essential than shows on the surface.
And," he added, with a shaken voice, "if you were not myself, Rachel,
you know how I should thank you for caring for my poor Bessie's
child."  He was gone almost as he spoke the words, but Rachel still
felt the kiss and the hot tears that had fallen on her face.

Mr. Clare readily consented to spare his housekeeper, but the
housekeeper was untoward, she was "busied in her housewife skep," and
would not stir.  Alick was gone to Timber End, and Rachel was just
talking of getting the schoolmaster's wife as an escort, when Mr.
Clare said--

"Pray are you above accepting my services?"

"You!  Oh, uncle; thank you, but--"

"What were your orders?  Anybody with you, was it not?  I flatter
myself that I have some body, at least."

"If Alick will not think I ought not!"

"The boy will not presume to object to what I do with you."

"I do wish it very much," said candid Rachel.

"Of course you do, my dear.  Alick is not cured of a young man's
notion that babies are a sort of puppies.  He is quite right not to
let you run about London by yourself, but he will be quite satisfied
if you find eyes and I find discretion."

"But is it not very troublesome to you?"

"It is a capital lark!" said Mr. Clare, with a zest that only the
slang word could imply, removing all Rachel's scruples, and in effect
Mr. Clare did enjoy the spice of adventure in a most amusing way.  He
knew perfectly well how to manage, laid out the plan of operations,
gave orders to the driver, went into all the shops, and was an
effective assistant in the choice of material and even of embroidery.
His touch and ear seemed to do more for him than many men's eyes do
for them; he heard odd scraps of conversation and retailed them with
so much character; he had such pleasant colloquies with all in whose
way he fell, and so thoroughly enjoyed the flow and babble of the
full stream of life, that Rachel marvelled that the seclusion of his
parsonage was bearable to him.  He took her to lunch with an old
friend, a lady who had devoted herself to the care of poor girls to
be trained as servants, and Rachel had the first real sight of one of
the many great and good works set on foot by personal and direct
labour.

"If I had been sensible, I might have come to something like this!"
she said.

"Do you wish to undo these last three months?"

"No; I am not fit to be anything but an ordinary married woman, with
an Alick to take care of me; but I am glad some people can be what I
meant to be."

"And you need not regret not being useful now," said Mr. Clare.
"Where should any of us be without you?"

It had not occurred to Rachel, but she was certainly of far more
positive use in the world at the present moment than ever she had
bean in her most assuming maiden days.

Little Alexander was arrayed in all that could enhance his baby
dignity, and Rachel was more than ever resolved to assert his
superiority over "great frightful fine children," resenting
vehemently an innocent observation from Alick, that the small
features and white skin promised sandiness of hair.  Perhaps Alick
delighted in saying such things for the sake of proving the "very
womanhood" of his Clever Woman.  Rachel hung back, afraid of the
presentation, and would have sent her maid into the room with the
child if Colonel Keith had not taken her in himself.  Even yet she
was not dexterous in handling the baby, her hands were both occupied,
and her attention absorbed, and she could not speak, she felt it so
mournful to show this frail motherless creature to a father more like
its grandfather, and already almost on the verge of the grave.  She
came up to Lord Keith, and held the child to him in silence.  He
said, "Thank you," and kissed not only the little one, but her own
brow, and she kept the tears back with difficulty.

Colonel Keith gave her a chair and footstool, and she sat with the
baby on her lap, while very few words were spoken.  It was the
Colonel who asked her to take off the hood that hid the head and
brow, and who chiefly hazarded opinions as to likeness and colour of
eyes.  Lord Keith looked earnestly and sadly, but hardly made any
observation, except that it looked healthier than he had been led to
expect.  He was sure it owed much to Mrs. Keith's great care and
kindness.

Rachel feared he would not be able to part with his little son, and
began to mention the arrangements she had contemplated in case he
wished to keep the child at Timber End.  On this, Lord Keith asked
with some anxiety, if its presence were inconvenient to Mr. Clare;
and being assured of the contrary, said, "Then while you are so kind
as to watch over him, I much prefer that things should remain in
their present state, than to bring him to a house like this.  You do
not object?"

"Oh, no; I am so glad.  I was only dreading the losing him.  I
thought Mrs. Menteith wished for him when he is old enough to
travel."

"Colin!" said Lord Keith, looking up sharply, "will nothing make the
Menteiths understand that I would rather put out the child to nurse
in a Highland hut than in that Babel of a nursery of theirs?"

Colin smiled and said, "Isabel does not easily accept an answer she
dislikes."

"But remember, both of you," continued Lord Keith, "that happen what
may, this poor child is not to be in her charge.  I've seen enough of
her children left alone in perambulators in the sun.  You will be in
Edinburgh?" he added, turning to Rachel.

"Yes, when Alick's leave ends."

"I shall return thither when this matter is over, I know I shall be
better at home in Scotland, and if I winter in Edinburgh, may be we
could make some arrangement for his being still under your eye."

Rachel went home more elevated than she had been for months past.




CHAPTER XIXX.



AT LAST.



 "I bid thee hail, not as in former days,
  Not as my chosen only, but my bride,
  My very bride, coming to make my house
  A glorious temple."          A. H. HALLAM.


                                                  "Timber End,
                                                   Littleworthy,
                                                   September 10th.

"Dear Miss Williams,--I must begin by entreating your forgiveness for
addressing you in a manner for which perhaps you may be unprepared;
but I trust you have always been aware, that any objections that I
may have offered to my brother Colin's attachment to yourself have
never been personal, or owing to anything but an unfortunate
complication of circumstances.  These difficulties are, as no doubt
he will explain to you, in great measure removed by the present
condition of my family, which will enable me to make such settlements
as I could wish in the ease of one so nearly connected with me; so
that I am enabled to entreat of you at length to reward the
persevering constancy so well deserved. I have a further, and a
personal cause for wishing that the event should not be deferred, as
regard for my feelings might have led you to propose.  You are aware
of the present state of my health, and that it has become expedient
to make immediate arrangements for the future guardianship of my
little boy.  His uncles are of course his natural guardians, and I
have unbounded confidence in both; but Alexander Keith's profession
renders it probable that he may not always be at hand, and I am
therefore desirous of being able to nominate yourself, together with
my brother, among the personal guardians.  Indeed, I understand from
Alexander Keith, that such was the express wish of his sister.  I
mention this as an additional motive to induce you to consent.  For
my own part, even without so stringent a cause, all that I have ever
seen or known of yourself would inspire me with the desire that you
should take a mother's place towards my son.  But you must be aware
that such an appointment could only be made when you are already one
of the family, and this it is that leads me to entreat you to
overlook any appearance of precipitancy on my brother's part, and
return a favourable reply to the request, which with my complete
sanction, he is about to address to you.

"Yes, Ermine Williams, forgive all that is past, and feel for an old,
it may be, a dying man, and for a motherless infant.  There is much
to forget, but I trust to your overcoming any scruples, and giving me
all the comfort in your power, in thinking of the poor child who has
come into the world under such melancholy circumstances.

                                               "Yours most truly,
                                               "Keith of Gowanbrae"


"Poor Keith, he has given me his letter open, his real anxiety has
been too much at last for his dignity; and now, my Ermine, what do
you say to his entreaty?  The state of the case is this.  How soon
this abscess may be ready for the operation is still uncertain, the
surgeons think it will be in about three weeks, and in this interval
he wishes to complete all his arrangements.  In plain English, his
strongest desire is to secure the poor little boy from falling into
Menteith's hands.  Now, mine is a precarious life, and Alick and
Rachel may of course be at the ends of the earth, so the point is
that you shall be 'one of the family,' before the will is signed.
Alick's leave has been extended to the 1st of October, no more is
possible, and he undertakes to nurse poor Keith for a fortnight from
to-morrow, if you will consent to fulfil this same request within
that time.  After the 1st, I should have to leave you, but as soon as
Keith is well enough to bear the journey, he wishes to return to
Edinburgh, where he would be kindly attended to by Alick and Rachel
all the winter.  There, Ermine, your victory is come, your consent
has been entreated at last by my brother, not for my sake, but as a
personal favour to himself, because there is no woman in the world of
whom he thinks so highly.  For myself I say little.  I grieve that
you should be thus hurried and fluttered, and if Ailie thinks it
would harm you, she must telegraph back to me not to come down, and
I will try to teach myself patience by preaching it to Keith, but
otherwise you will see me by four o'clock to-morrow.  Every time I
hear Rachel's name, I think it ought to have been yours, and surely
in this fourteenth year, lesser objections may give way.  But
persuasions are out of the question, you must be entirely led by your
own feeling.  If I could have seen you in July, this should not have
come so suddenly at last. "Yours, more than ever, decide as you may,

                                                  "Colin A Keith.

"P. S.--I am afraid Rose would hardly answer this purpose equally
well."


Colonel Keith followed his letter at four o'clock, and entering his
own study, found it in a cloud of smoke, in the midst of which he
dimly discerned a long beard and thin visage absorbed in calculation.

"Edward!  How is Ermine?"

"Oh?" (inquiringly) "Keith!" (as taken by surprise) "ah! you were to
come home to-day.  How are you?"

"How is she?  Has she had my letter?"

"What letter?  You write every day, I thought."

"The letter of yesterday.  Have you heard nothing of it?"

"Not that I know of.  Look here, Keith, I told you I was sure the
platinum--"

"Your brain is becoming platinum.  I must go," and the chemist
remained with merely a general impression of having been interrupted.

Next the Colonel met Rose, watching at his own gate, and this time
his answer was more explicit.

"Yes, Aunt Ermine said you were coming, and that I might meet you,
but that I must let you come in alone, for she had not seen you so
long, that she wanted you all to herself."

"And how is she; how has she been?"

"She is well now," said Rose, in the grave, grown-up way she always
assumed when speaking of her aunt's health; "but she has been having
a good deal of her nervous headache this summer, and Lady Temple
wanted her to see Mr. Frampton, but Aunt Ailie said it was only
excitement and wear of spirits.  Oh, I am glad you have come back!
We have so wearied after you."

Nevertheless Rose duteously loosed the hand to which she had been
clinging till they came to the door; and as Colin Keith opened it,
again he was met by the welcoming glances of the bright eyes.  This
time he did not pause till he was close to her, and kneeling on one
knee beside her, he put his arm round her, and held her hands in his.

The first words that passed were, "You had the letters?"

"Colin, Colin, my one prayer has been, 'Make Thy way plain before my
face.'"

"And now it is?"

"The suspicion is gone; the displeasure is gone; the doubts are gone;
and now there is nothing--nothing but the lameness and the poverty;
and if you like the old cinder, Colin, that is your concern;" and she
hid her face, with a sort of sobbing laugh.

"And even the haste; you consent to that?"

"I don't feel it like haste," she said, looking up with a smile, and
then crimsoning.

"And Ailie gives leave, and thinks the hurry will not harm you?"

"Ailie!  O Colin, did you think I could tell any one of your letter,
before you had had your answer?"

"Then Edward is not so moonstruck as I thought him!  And when shall
it be, dearest?  Give me as much time as you can.  I must go back
this day fortnight."

"I suppose your expectations are not high in the matter of finery,"
said Ermine, with a certain archness of voice.

"Those eyes are all the finery I ever see."

"Then if you will not be scandalized at my natural Sunday dress, I
don't see why this day week should not do as well as any other time."

"Ermine, you are the only woman I ever met totally free from
nonsense."

"Take care, it is very unfeminine and disagreeable to be devoid of
nonsense."

"Very, and therefore you are talking it now!  Ermine, how shall I
thank you?  Not only for the sake of the ease of mind to my poor
brother; but in the scenes we are going through, a drop of happiness
is wanted as a stimulant.  When I looked at the young couple at
Bishopsworthy, I often felt as if another half-year of suspense was
more than I could bear, and that I must ask you to help me through
with at least a definite hope."

"Ah! you have gone through a great deal I am sure it has been a time
of great trouble."

"Indeed it has.  The suffering has become unceasing and often most
severe, and there is grievous depression of spirits; I could not have
left him even for a day, if he had not been so fervently bent on
this."

"Is he feeling his loss more acutely than at first?"

"Not so much that, as for the poor little boy, who is a heavy burthen
on his mind.  He has lived in such a state of shrewd distrust that he
has no power of confidence, and his complications for making all the
boy's guardians check one another till we come to a dead lock, and to
make provision for Isabel out of Menteith's reach, are enough to
distract the brain of a man in health."

"Is he fond of the child?"

"It is an oppressive care to him, and he only once has made up his
mind to see it, though it is never off his mind, and it is very
curious how from the first he has been resolved on your taking charge
of it.  It is the most real testimony he could give you."

"It is very comfortable not to be brought in like an enemy in spite
of him, as even a year ago I could have been proud to do."

"And I to have brought you," he answered, "but it is far better as it
is.  He is very cordial, and wants to give up the Auchinvar estate to
me; indeed, he told me that he always meant me to have it as soon as
I had washed my hands of you--you wicked syren--but I think you will
agree with me that he had better leave it to his daughter Mary, who
has nothing.  We never reckoned on it."

"Nor on anything else," said Ermine, smiling.

"You have never heard my ways and means," he said, "and as a prudent
woman you ought, you know.  See," taking out his tablets, "here is my
calculation."

"All that!"

"On the staff in India there were good opportunities of saving; then
out of that sum I bought the house, and with my half-pay, our income
will be very fair, and there would be a pension afterwards for you.
This seems to me all we can reasonably want."

"Unless I became like "die Ilsebill" in the German tale.  After four
years of living from hand to mouth, this will be like untold gold.
To wish to be above strict economy in wheeled chairs has seemed like
perilous discontent in Rose and me."

"I have ventured on the extravagance of taking the ponies and little
carriage off my brother's hands, it is low enough for you, and I
shall teach Rose to ride one of the ponies with me."

"The dear little Rose!  But, Colin, there is a dreadful whisper about
her going with her father, and Ailie too!  You see now his character
is cleared, he has been offered a really lucrative post, so that he
could have them with him."

"Does he wish it?"

"I dare not ask.  I must be passive or I shall be selfish.  You are
all my world, and Edward has no one.  Make them settle it without me.
Talk of something else!  Tell me how your brother is to be taken care
of."

"There cannot be a better nurse than Alick Keith; and Ferguson, the
agent, is there, getting directions from Keith whenever he can bear
it.  I am best out of the way of all that.  I have said once for all
that I will do anything for them except live at Gowanbrae, and I am
sick of demonstrating that the poor child's existence is the greatest
possible relief to me; and I hope now not to go back till the whole
is settled and done with."

"You look regularly worn out with the discussions!"

"It was an endless business!  The only refreshment was in now and
then getting over to Bishopsworthy."

"What? to Rachel?" said Ermine archly.

"Rachel is showing to great advantage.  I did not think it was in her
to be so devoted to the child, and it is beautiful to see her and Mr.
Clare together."

"There's a triumph," said Ermine, smiling.  "Do you grant that the
happy medium is reached, that Alick should learn to open his eyes and
Rachel to shut hers?"

"Well!  Her eyes are better, but he, poor lad, has been in no spirits
to open his very wide.  The loss of his sister went very deep, and
those aguish attacks, though they become much slighter, make him look
wretchedly ill.  I should have doubted about leaving him in charge in
his present state, but that he was urgent on me, and he is spared all
the night nursing.  Any way, I must not leave him longer than I can
help.  I may have one week with you at home--at our home, Ermine."

"And let us make the most of that," said Ermine, quickly.

Meanwhile Alison, sore and sick at heart, wandered on the esplanade,
foreboding that the blow was coming that she ought to rejoice at, if
her love could only be more unselfish.  At last the Colonel joined
her, and, as usual, his tone of consideration cheered and supported
her when in actual conference with him, and as he explained his
plans, he added that he hoped there would be scarcely any
interruption to her intercourse with her sister.

"You know," she said abruptly, "that we could go to Ekaterinburg."

"And what is your feeling about it?  Remember, Ailie, that I am your
brother too."  And as she hesitated, "your feelings--no doubt you are
in many minds!"

"Ah, yes; I never settled anything without Ermine, and she will not
help me now.  And she has been so worn with the excitement and
anxiety of all this long detention of yours, that I don't dare to say
a word that could prey on her."

"In fact, you would chiefly be decided by Edward's own wishes."

"If I were sure of them," sighed poor Alison; "but he lives on
experiments, and can hardly detach himself from them even to attend
to Ermine herself.  I don't know whether we should be a comfort or a
burthen, and he would be afraid to hurt our feelings by telling the
truth.  I have been longing to consult you who have seen him at that
place in Russia."

"And indeed, Ailie, he is so wedded to smoke and calculations, and so
averse to this sublunary world, that though your being with him might
be beneficial, still I greatly question whether the risk of carrying
poor little Rose to so remote a place in such a climate, would be
desirable.  If he were pining to have a home made for him, it would
be worth doing; as it is, the sacrifice would be disproportioned."

"It would be no sacrifice if he only wanted us."

"Where you are wanted is here.  Ermine wants you.  I want you.  The
Temples want you."

"Now, Colin, tell me truly.  Edward feels as I do, and Dr. Long spoke
seriously of it.  Will not my present position do you and Ermine harm
among your friends?"

"With no friend we wish to make or keep!"

"If I do remain," continued Alison, "it must be as I am.  I would not
live upon you, even if you asked me, which you have too much sense to
do; and though dear Lady Temple is everything to me, and wants me to
forget that I am her governess, that would be a mere shuffle, but if
it is best for you that I should give it up, and go out, say so at
once."

"Best for me to have eight Temples thrown on my hands, all in
despair!  To have you at Myrtlewood is an infinite relief to me, both
on their account and Ermine's.  You should not suspect a penniless
Scotsman of such airs, Ailie."

"Not you, Colin, but your family."

"Isabel Menteith thinks a glass-blower was your father, and
Mauleverer your brother, so yours is by far the most respectable
profession.  No, indeed, my family might be thankful to have any one
in it who could do as you have done."

Alison's scruples were thus disposed of, and when Edward's brain
cleared itself from platinum, he showed himself satisfied with the
decision, though he insisted on henceforth sending home a sum
sufficient for his daughter's expenses, and once said something that
could be construed into a hope of spending a quiet old age with her
and his sister; but at present he was manifestly out of his element,
and was bent on returning to Ekaterinburg immediately after the
marriage.

His presence was but a qualified pleasure.  Naturally shy and absent,
his broken spirits and removal from domestic life, and from society,
had exaggerated his peculiarities; and under the pressure of
misfortune, caused in a great measure by his own negligence, he had
completely given way, without a particle of his sister's patience or
buoyancy, and had merely striven to drown his troubles in engrossing
problems of his favourite pursuit, till the habit of abstraction had
become too confirmed to be shaken off.  When the blot on his name was
removed, he was indeed sensible that he was no longer an exile, but
he could not resume his old standing, friendships rudely severed
could not be re-united; his absorption had grown by indulgence; old
interests had passed away; needful conformity to social habits was
irksome, and even his foreign manner and appearance testified to his
entire unfitness for English life.

Tibbie was in constant dread of his burning the house down, so
incalculable and preposterous were his hours, and the Colonel,
longing to render the house a perfect shrine for his bride, found it
hard to tolerate the fumes with which her brother saturated it.  If
he had been sure that opium formed no portion of Edward's solace, his
counsel to Alison would have been less decisive.  To poor little
Rose, her father was an abiding perplexity and distress; she wanted
to love him, and felt it absolute naughtiness to be constantly
disappointed by his insensibility to her approaches, or else repelled
and disgusted by that vice of the Russian sheep.  And a vague hint of
being transported to the Ural mountains, away from Aunt Ermine, had
haunted her of late more dreadfully than even the lions of old; so
that the relief was ineffable when her dear Colonel confided to her
that she was to be his niece and Aunt Ermine's handmaid, sent her to
consult with Tibbie on her new apartment, and invited Augustus to the
most eligible hole in the garden.  The grotto that Rose, Conrade, and
Francis proceeded to erect with pebbles and shells, was likely to
prove as alarming to that respectable reptile as a model cottage to
an Irish peasant.

Ermine had dropped all scruples about Rose's intercourse with other
children, and the feeling that she might associate with them on equal
terms, perhaps, was the most complete assurance of Edward's
restoration.  She was glad that companionship should render the
little maiden more active and childlike, for Edward's abstraction had
made her believe that there might be danger in indulging the
dreaminess of the imaginative child.

No one welcomed the removal of these restraints more warmly than Lady
Temple.  She was perhaps the happiest of the happy, for with her
there was no drawback, no sorrow, no parting to fear.  Her first
impulse, when Colonel Keith came to tell her his plans, was to seize
on hat and shawl, and rush down to Mackarel Lane to kiss Ermine with
all her heart, and tell her that "it was the most delightful thing of
her to have consented at last, for nobody deserved so well to be
happy as that dear Colonel;" and then she clung to Alison, declaring
that now she should have her all to herself, and if she would only
come to Myrtlewood, she would do her very best to make her
comfortable there, and it should be her home--her home always.

"In fact," said Ermine, afterwards to the Colonel, "when you go to
Avoncester, I think you may as well get a licence for the wedding of
Alison Williams and Fanny Temple at the same time.  There has been
quite a courtship on the lady's part."

The courtship had been the more ardent from Fanny's alarm lest the
brother should deprive her of Alison; and when she found her fears
groundless, she thanked him with such fervour, and talked so eagerly
of his sister's excellences that she roused him into a lucid
interval, in which he told Colonel Keith that Lady Temple might give
him an idea of the style of woman that Lucy had been.  Indeed, Colin
began to think that it was as well that he was so well wrapped up in
smoke and chemistry, otherwise another might have been added to the
list of Lady Temple's hopeless adorers.  The person least satisfied
was Tibbie, who could not get over the speediness of the marriage,
nor forgive the injury to Miss Williams, "of bringing her hame like
any pleughman's wife, wantin' a honeymoon trip, forbye providin'
hersel' with weddin' braws conformable.  Gin folk tak' sic daft
notions aff the English, they'd be mair wise like to bide at hame,
an' that's my way o' thinkin'."

Crusty as she was, there was no danger of her not giving her warmest
welcome, and thus the morning came.  Tibbie had donned her cap, with
white satin ribbons, and made of lace once belonging to the only
heiress who had ever brought wealth to the Keiths.  Edward Williams,
all his goods packed up, had gone to join his sisters, and the
Colonel, only perceptibly differing from his daily aspect in having
a hat free from crape, was opening all the windows in hopes that a
thorough draft would remove the last of the tobacco, when the letters
were brought in, and among them one of the black bordered bulletins
from Littleworthy, which ordinarily arrived by the second post.  It
was a hurried note, evidently dashed off to catch the morning mail.


My Dear Colonel,--Alick tells me to write in haste to catch the
morning post, and beg you to telegraph the instant your wedding is
over.  The doctors see cause to hasten their measures, but your
brother will have nothing done till the will is signed.  He and Alick
both desire you will not come, but it is getting to be far too much
for Alick.  I would tell you more if there were time before the post
goes.  Love to dear Ermine.
                                              Very sincerely yours,
                                                           R. KEITH.


There was so shocked and startled a look on Colin's face, that Tibbie
believed that his brother must be dead, and when in a few almost
inaudible words he told her that he must start for Bishopsworthy by
the afternoon train, she fairly began to scold, partly by way of
working off the irritation left by her alarm.  "The lad's clean
demented!  Heard ye ever the like, to rin awa' frae his new-made wife
afore the blessin's been weel spoke; an' a' for the whimsie of that
daft English lassie that made siccan a piece of work wi' her
cantrips."

"I am afraid she is right now," said the Colonel, "and my brother
must not be left any longer."

"Hout awa, Maister Colin, his lordship has come between you and your
luve oft enough already, without partin' ye at the very church door.
Ye would na have the English cast up to us, that one of your name did
na ken better what was fittin by his bride!"

"My bride must be the judge, Tibbie.  You shall see whether she bids
me stay," said Colin, a little restored by his amusement at her
anxiety for his honour among the English.  "Now desire Smith to meet
me at the church door, and ride at once from thence to Avoncester;
and get your face ready to give a cheerful welcome, Tibbie.  Let her
have that, at least, whatever may come after."

Tibbie looked after him, and shook her head, understanding from her
ain laddie's pallid check, and resolute lip, nay, in the very sound
of his footfall, how sore was his trial, and with one-sided
compassion she muttered, "Telegrafted awa on his vera weddin' day.
His Lordship'll be the death o' them baith before he's done."

As it was in every way desirable that the wedding should be
unexpected by Avonmonth in general, it was to take place at the close
of the ordinary morning service, and Ermine in her usual seat within
the vestry, was screened from knowing how late was Colin's entrance,
or seeing the determined composure that would to her eyes have
betrayed how much shaken he was.  He was completely himself again by
the time the congregation dispersed, leaving only Grace Curtis, Lady
Temple, and the little best man, Conrade, a goodly sight in his grey
suit and scarlet hose.  Then came the slow movement from the vestry,
the only really bridal-looking figure being Rose in white muslin and
white ribbons; walking timidly and somewhat in awe beside her younger
aunt; while her father upheld and guided the elder.  Both were in
quiet, soft, dark dresses, and straw bonnets, but over hers Ermine
wore the small though exquisite Brussels lace veil that had first
appeared at her mother's wedding; and thankful joy and peaceful awe
looked so lovely on her noble brow, deep, soft dark eyes, and the
more finely moulded, because somewhat worn, features; and so
beauteously deepened was the carnation on her cheek, that Mr.
Mitchell ever after maintained that he had never married any one to
compare with that thirty-three years' old bride upon crutches, and,
as he reported to his wife, in no dress at all.

Her brother, who supported her all the time she stood, was infinitely
more nervous than she was.  Her native grace and dignity, and absence
of all false shame entirely covered her helplessness, and in her
earnestness, she had no room for confusion; her only quivering of
voice was caught for one moment from the tremulous intensity of
feeling that Colin Keith could not wholly keep from thrilling in his
tones, as he at last proclaimed his right to love and to cherish her
for whom he had so long persevered.

Unobserved, he filled up the half-written despatch with the same pen
with which he signed the register, and sent Conrade to the door with
it to his already mounted messenger.  Then assuming Edward's place as
Ermine's supporter, he led her to the door, seated her in her wheeled
chair, and silently handing Rachel's note as his explanation to
Alison, he turned away, and walked alone by Ermine's side to his own
house.  Still silent, he took her into the bright drawing-room he had
so long planned for her, and seated her in her own peculiar chair.
Then his first words were, "Thank God for this!"

She knew his face.  "Colin, your brother is worse?"  He bent his
head, he could not speak.

"And you have to go to him!  This very day?"

"Ermine, you must decide.  You are at last my first duty!"

"That means that you know you ought to go.  Tell me what it is."

He told the substance of the note, ending with, "If you could come
with me!"

"I would if I should not be a tie and hindrance.  No, I must not do
that; but here I am, Colin, here I am.  And it is all true--it has
all come right at last!  All we waited for.  Nothing has ever been
like this."

She was the stronger.  Tears, as much of loving thankfulness as of
overflowing disappointment, rushed into his eyes at such a fulfilment
of the purpose that he had carried with him by sea and land, in
battle and sickness, through all the years of his manhood.  And
withal her one thought was to infuse in its strongest measure the
drop of happiness that was to sustain him through the scenes that
awaited him, to make him feel her indeed his wife, and to brighten
him with the sunbeam face that she knew had power to cheer him.
Rallying her playfulness, she took off her bonnet, and said as she
settled her hair, "There, that is being at home!  Take my shawl, yes,
and these white gloves, and put them out of sight, that I may not
feel like a visitor, and that you may see how I shall look when you
come back.  Do you know, I think your being out of the way will be
rather a gain, for there will be a tremendous feminine bustle with
the fitting of our possessions."

Her smile awoke a responsive look, and she began to gaze round and
admire, feeling it safest to skim on the surface; and he could not
but be gratified by her appreciation of the pains spent upon this,
her especial home.  He had recovered himself again by the time these
few sentences had passed; they discussed the few needful arrangements
required by his departure, and Tibbie presently found them so
cheerful that she was quite scandalized, and when Ermine held out her
hands, saying, "What Tibbie, won't you come and kiss me, and wish me
joy?" she exclaimed--

"Wish ye joy!  It's like me to wish ye joy an yer lad hurled awa frae
yer side i' the blink o' an ee, by thae wild telegrams.  I dinna see
what joy's to come o't; it's clean again the Scripture!"

"I told you I had left it to her to decide, Tibbie," said the
Colonel.

"Weel, an what wad ye hae the puir leddy say?  She kens what sorts
ye, when the head of yer name is sick an lyin' among thae English
loons that hae brocht him to siccan a pass."

"Right, Tibbie," exclaimed Ermine, greatly amused at the unexpected
turn, purely for the sake of putting Maister Colin in the wrong.  "If
a gentleman won't be content without a bride who can't walk, he must
take the consequence, and take his wedding trip by himself!  It is my
belief, Tibbie, as I have just been telling him, that you and I shall
get the house in all the better order for having him off our hands,
just at first," she added, with a look of intelligence.

"Deed, an maybe we shall," responded Tibbie, with profound
satisfaction.  "He was aye a camsteary child when there was any wark
on hand."

Colin could not help laughing, and when once this had been effected,
Ermine felt that his depression had been sufficiently met, and that
she might venture on deeper, and more serious sympathy, befitting the
chastened, thankful feelings with which they hailed the crowning of
their youthful love, the fulfilment of the hopes and prayers that the
one had persisted in through doubt and change, the other had striven
to resign into the All-wise Hands.

They had an early meal together, chiefly for the sake of his wheeling
her to the head of his table, and "seeing how she looked there," and
then the inexorable hour was come, and he left her, with the echo of
her last words in his ear, "Goodbye, Colin, stay as long as you
ought.  It will make the meeting all the sweeter, and you have your
wife to some back to now.  Give a sister's love to your brother, and
thanks for having spared you," and his last look at the door was
answered with her sunshiny smile.

But when, a few minutes after, Edward came up with Alison for his
farewell, they found her lying back in her chair, half fainting, and
her startled look told almost too plainly that she had not thought of
her brother.  "Never mind," said Edward, affectionately, as much to
console Alison as Ermine for this oblivion; "of course it must be so,
and I don't deserve otherwise.  Nothing brought me home but Colin
Keith's telling me that he saw you would not have him till my
character was cleared up; and now he has repaired so much of the evil
I did you, all I can do is to work to make it up to you in other
ways.  Goodbye, Ermine, I leave you all in much better hands than
mine ever were, you are right enough in feeling that a week of his
absence outweighs a year of mine.  Bless you for all that you and he
have done for my child.  She, at least, is a comfort to you."

Ermine's powers were absolutely exhausted; she could only answer him
by embraces and tears; and all the rest of the day she was, to use
her own expression, "good for nothing but to be let alone."  Nor,
though she exerted herself that she might with truth write that she
was well and happy, was she good for much more on the next, and her
jealous guardians allowed her to see no one but soft, fondling Lady
Temple, who insisted on a relationship (through Rachel), and whose
tender pensive quietness could not fail to be refreshment to the
strained spirits, and wearied physical powers, and who better than
anybody could talk of the Colonel, nay, who could understand, and
even help Ermine herself to understand, that these ever-welling tears
came from a source by no means akin to grief or repining.

The whole aspect of the rooms was full of tokens of his love and
thought for her.  The ground-floor had been altered for her
accommodation, the furniture chosen in accordance with her known
tastes or with old memories, all undemonstratively prepared while yet
she had not decided on her consent.  And what touched her above all,
was the collection of treasures that he had year by year gathered
together for her throughout the weary waiting, purchases at which
Lady Temple remembered her mother's banter, with his quiet evasions
of explanation.  No wonder Ermine laid her head on her hand, and
could not retain her tears, as she recalled the white, dismayed face
of the youth, who had printed that one sad earliest kiss on her brow,
as she lay fire-scathed and apparently dying; and who had cherished
the dream unbroken and unwaveringly, had denied himself consistently,
had garnered up those choice tokens when ignorant over whether she
still lived; had relied on her trust, and come back, heart-whole, to
claim and win her, undaunted by her crippled state, her poverty, and
her brother's blotted name.  "How can such love ever be met?  Why am
I favoured beyond all I could have dared to image to myself?" she
thought, and wept again; because, as she murmured to Fanny, "I do
thank God for it with all my heart, and I do long to tell him all.
I don't think my married life ought to begin by being sillier than
ever I was before, but I can't help it."

"And I do love you so much the better for it," said Fanny; a better
companion to-day than the grave, strong Alison, who would have been
kind, but would have had to suppress some marvel at the break-down,
and some resentment that Edward had no greater share in it.

The morning's post brought her the first letter from her husband,
and in the midst of all her anxiety as to the contents, she could not
but linger a moment on the aspect of the Honourable Mrs. Colin Keith
in his handwriting; there was a carefulness in the penmanship that
assured her that, let him have to tell her what he would, the very
inditing of that address had been enjoyment to him.  That the border
was black told nothing, but the intelligence was such as she had been
fully prepared for.  Colin had arrived to find the surgeon's work
over, but the patient fast sinking.  Even his recognition of his
brother had been uncertain, and within twenty-four hours of the
morning that had given Colin a home of his own, the last remnant of
the home circle of his childhood had passed from him.

Still Ermine had to continue a widowed bride for full a fortnight,
whilst the funeral and subsequent arrangements necessitated Colin's
presence in Scotland.  It was on a crisp, beautiful October evening
that Rose, her chestnut hair flying about her brow, stood, lighted up
by the sunbeams in the porch, with upraised face and outstretched
hands, and as the Colonel bent down to receive her joyous embrace,
said, "Aunt Ermine gave me leave to bring you to the door.  Then I am
going to Myrtlewood till bed-time.  And after that I shall always
have you."

The open door showed Ermine, too tremulous to trust to her crutch,
but leaning forward, her eyes liquid with tears of thankfulness.  The
patient spirits had reached their home and haven, the earthly haven
of loving hearts, the likeness of the heavenly haven, and as her head
leant, at last, upon his shoulder, and his guardian arm encircled
her, there was such a sense of rest and calm that even the utterance
of their inward thanksgiving, or of a word of tenderness would have
jarred upon them.  It was not till a knock and message at the door
interrupted them, that they could break the blessed stillness.

"And there you are, my Ermine!" said Colin, standing on the hearth-
rug, and surveying her with satisfied eyes.  "You are a queenly
looking dame in your black draperies, and you look really well, much
better than Rachel led me to expect."

"Ah! when she was here I had no fixed day to look forward to.  And
receiving our poor little orphan baby was not exactly like receiving
his uncle, though Rachel seemed to think it ought to make up for
anything."

"She was thoroughly softened by that child!  It was a spirited thing
her bringing him down here on the Monday when we started for
Scotland, and then coming all the way alone with her maid.  I did not
think Alick would have consented, but he said she would always be the
happier for having deposited her charge in your hands."

"It was a great wrench to her.  I felt it like robbery when she put
the little fellow down on my lap and knelt over him, not able to get
herself away, but saying that she was not fit to have him; she could
not bear it if she made him hate her as Conrade did!  I am glad she
has had his first smile, she deserves it."

"Is Tibbie in charity with him?"

"Oh, more than in charity!  She did not take the first announcement
of his coming very amiably; but when I told her she was to reign in
the nursery, and take care the poor little chief know the sound of a
Scots' tongue, she began to thaw; and when he came into the house,
pity or loyalty, or both, flamed up hotly, and have quite relieved
me; for at first she made a baby of me, and was a perfect dragon of
jealousy at poor Ailie's doing anything for me.  It was a rich scene
when Rachel began giving her directions out of 'Hints for the
Management of Infants,' just in the old voice, and Tibbie swept round
indignantly, 'His Lordship, Lord Keith of Gowanbrae, suld hae the
best tendance she could gie him.  She did na lippen to thae English
buiks, as though she couldna rear a wean without bulk learning.'
Poor Rachel nearly cried, and was not half comforted by my promising
to study the book as much as she pleased."

"It will never do to interfere with Tibbie, and I own I am much of
her opinion, I had rather trust to her than to Rachel, or the book!"

"Well, the more Rachel talked book, the more amiable surprise passed
between her mother and Lady Temple that the poor little follow should
have lived at all, and I believe they were very angry with me for
thinking her views very sensible.  Lady Temple is so happy with him.
She says it is so melancholy to have a house without a baby, that she
comes in twice or three times a day to console herself with this
one."

"Did you not tell me that she and the Curtises spent the evening with
you?"

"Yes, it was rather shocking to receive them without you, but it was
the only way of being altogether on Rachel's one evening here; and it
was very amusing, Mrs. Curtis so happy with her daughter looking well
and bright, and Rachel with so much to tell about Bishopsworthy, till
at last Grace, in her sly odd way, said she thought dear Alexander
had even taught Rachel curatolatry; whereupon Rachel fired up at such
an idea being named in connexion with Mr. Clare, then came suddenly,
and very prettily, down, and added, 'Living with Alick and Mr. Clare
has taught me what nonsense I talked in those days.'"

"Well done, Rachel!  It proves what Alick always said, that her great
characteristic is candour!"

"I hope she was not knocked up by the long night journey all at one
stretch.  Mrs. Curtis was very uneasy about it, but nothing would
move her; she owned that Alick did not expect her, for she had taken
care he should not object, by saying nothing of her intention, but
she was sure he would be ill on Wednesday morning, and then Mrs.
Curtis not only gave in directly, but all we married women turned
upon poor Grace for hinting that Alick might prefer a day's solitary
illness to her being over-tired."

"She was extremely welcome!  Alick was quite done for by all he had
gone through; he was miserably ill, and I hardly knew what to do with
him, and he mended from the moment his face lightened up at the sight
of her."

"There's the use of strength of mind!  How is Alick?"

"Getting better under M'Vicar and Edinburgh winds.  It was hard on
him to have borne the brunt of all the nursing that terrible last
week, and in fact I never knew how much he was going through rather
than summon me.  His sauntering manner always conceals how much he is
doing, and poor Keith was so fond of him, and liked his care so much
that almost the whole fell upon him at last.  And I believe he said
more that was good for Keith, and brought in Mr. Clare more than
perhaps I should ever have been able to do.  So though I must regret
having been away, it may have been the best thing."

"And it was by your brother's earnest wish," said Ermine; "it was not
as if you had stayed away for your own pleasure."

"No!  Poor Keith repeatedly said he could not die in peace till he
had secured our having the sole charge of his son.  It was a strong
instinct that conquered inveterate prejudice!  Did I tell you about
the will?"

"You said I should hear particulars when you came."

"The personal guardianship is left to us first, then to Alick and
Rachel, with 300 a year for the expenses.  Then we have Auchinvar.
The estate is charged with an equivalent settlement upon Mary, a
better plan, which I durst not propose, but with so long a minority
the estate will bear it.  Alick has his sister's fortune back again,
and the Menteith children a few hundreds; but Menteith is rabid about
the guardianship, and would hardly speak to Alick."

"And you?"

"They always keep the peace with me.  Isabel even made us a wedding
present--a pair of miniatures of my father and mother, that I am very
glad to rescue, though, as she politely told me, I was welcome to
them, for they were hideously dressed, and she wanted the frames for
two sweet photographs of Garibaldi and the Queen of Naples."

Then looking up as if to find a place for them--

"Why, Ermine, w