hat have you done to the room?  It is the old
parsonage drawing-room!"

"Did not you mean it, when you took the very proportions of the bay
window, and chose just such a carpet?"

"But what have you done to it?"

"Ailie and Rose, and Lady Temple and her boys, have done it.  I have
sat looking on, and suggesting.  Old things that we kept packed up
have seen the light, and your beautiful Indian curiosities have found
their corners."

"And the room has exactly the old geranium scent!"

"I think the Curtises must have brought half their greenhouse down.
Do you remember the old oak-leaf geranium that you used to gather a
leaf of whenever you passed our old conservatory?"

"I have been wondering where the fragrance came from that made the
likeness complete.  I have smelt nothing like it since!"

"I said that I wished for one, and Grace got off without a word, and
searched everywhere at Avoncester till she found one in a corner of
the Dean's greenhouse.  There, now you have a leaf in your fingers,
I think you do feel at home."

"Not quite, Ermine.  It still has the dizziness of a dream.  I have
so often conjured up all this as a vision, that now there is nothing
to take me away from it, I can hardly feel it a reality."

"Then I shall ring.  Tibbie and the poor little Lord upstairs are
substantial witnesses to the cares and troubles of real life."




CHAPTER XXX.



WHO IS THE CLEVER WOMAN?



 "Half-grown as yet, a child and vain,
  She cannot fight the fight of death.
  What is she cut from love and faith?
                    Knowledge and Wisdom, TENNYSON.


It was long before the two Mrs. Keiths met again.  Mrs. Curtis and
Grace were persuaded to spend the spring and summer in Scotland, and
Alick's leave of absence was felt to be due to Mr. Clare, and thus it
was that the first real family gathering took place on occasion of
the opening of the institution that had grown out of the Burnaby
Bargain.  This work had cost Colonel Keith and Mr. Mitchell an
infinity of labour and perseverance before even the preliminaries
could be arranged, but they contrived at length to carry it out, and
by the fourth spring after the downfall of the F. U. E. E. a house
had been erected for the convalescents, whose wants were to be
attended to by a matron, assisted by a dozen young girls in training
for service.

The male convalescents were under the discipline of Sergeant O'Brien
and the whole was to be superintended by Colonel and Mrs. Keith.
Ermine undertook to hear a class of the girls two or three times a
week, and lower rooms had been constructed with a special view to her
being wheeled into them, so as to visit the convalescents, and give
them her attention and sympathy.  Mary Morris was head girl, most of
the others were from Avonmouth, but two pale Londoners came from Mr.
Touchett's district, and a little motherless lassie from the --th
Highlanders was brought down with the nursery establishment, on which
Mrs. Alexander Keith now practised the "Hints on the management of
Infants."

May was unusually propitious, and after an orthodox tea-drinking, the
new pupils and all the Sunday-schools were turned out to play on the
Homestead slopes, with all the world to look on at them.  It was a
warm, brilliant day, of joyous blossom and lively green, and long
laughing streaks of sunlight on the sea, and no one enjoyed it more
than did Ermine, as she sat in her chair delighting in the fresh
sweetness of the old thorns, laughing at the freaks of the scampering
groups of children, gaily exchanging pleasant talk with one friend
after another, and most of all with Rachel, who seemed to gravitate
back to her whenever any summons had for a time interrupted their
affluence of conversation.

And all the time Ermine's footstool was serving as a table for the
various flowers that two children were constantly gathering in the
grass and presenting to her, to Rachel, or to each other, with a
constant stream of not very comprehensible prattle, full of pretty
gesticulation that seemed to make up for the want of distinctness.
The yellow-haired, slenderly-made, delicately-featured boy, whose
personal pronouns were just developing, and his consonants very
scanty, though the elder of the two, dutifully and admiringly obeyed
the more distinct, though less connected, utterances of the little
dark-eyed girl, eked out by pretty imperious gestures, that seemed
already to enchain the little white-frocked cavalier to her service.
All the time it was droll to see how the two ladies could pay full
attention to the children, while going on with their own unbroken
stream of talk.

"I am not overwhelming you," suddenly exclaimed Rachel, checking
herself in mid-career about the mothers' meetings for the soldiers'
wives.

"Far from it.  Was I inattentive--?"

"Oh no--(Yes, Una dear, very pretty)--but I found myself talking in
the voice that always makes Alick shut his eyes."-

"I should not think he often had to do so," said Ermine, much amused
by this gentle remedy--("Mind, Keith, that is a nettle. It will
sting--")

"Less often than before," said Rachel--("Never mind the butterfly,
Una)--I don't think I have had more than one thorough fit of what he
calls leaping into the gulf.  It was about the soldiers' wives
married without leave, who, poor things, are the most miserable
creatures in the world; and when I first found out about them I was
in the sort of mood I was in about the lace, and raved about the
system, and was resolved to employ one poor woman, and Alick looked
meeker and meeker, and assented to all I said, as if he was half
asleep, and at last he quietly took up a sheet of paper, and said he
must write and sell out, since I was bent on my gulf, and an
officer's wife must be bound by the regulations of the service.
I was nearly as bad as ever, I could have written an article on the
injustice of the army regulations, indeed I did begin, but what do
you think the end was?  I got a letter from a good lady, who is
always looking after the poor, to thank Mrs. Alexander Keith for the
help that had been sent for this poor woman, to be given as if from
the general fund.  After that I could not help listening to him, and
then I found it was so impossible to know about character, or to be
sure that one was not doing more harm than--What is it, boys?" as
three or four Temples rushed up.

"Aunt Rachel, Mr. Clare is going to teach us a new game, and he says
you know it.  Pray come."

"Come, Una.  What, Keith, will you come too?  I'll take care of him,
Ermine."

And with a child in each hand, Rachel followed the deputation, and
had scarcely disappeared before the light gracious figure of Rose
glanced through the thorn trees.  "Aunt Ermine, you must come nearer;
it is so wonderful to see Mr. Clare teaching this game."

"Don't push my chair, my dear; it is much too heavy for you uphill."

"As if I could not drive you anywhere, and here is Conrade coming."

Conrade was in search of the deserter, but he applied himself
heartily to the propulsion of aunt Ermine, informing Rose that Mr.
Clare was no end of a man, much better than if he could see, and aunt
Rachel was grown quite jolly.

"I think she has left off her long words," said Rose.

"She is not a civilian now," said Conrade, quite unconscious of
Ermine's amusement at his confidences as he pushed behind her.
"I did think it a most benighted thing to marry her, but that's what
it is.  Military discipline has made her conformable."  Having placed
the chair on a spot which commanded the scene, the boy and girl
rushed off to take their part in the sport, leaving Ermine looking
down a steep bank at the huge ring of performers, with linked hands,
advancing and receding to the measure of a chanted verse round a
figure in the centre, who made gesticulations, pursued and caught
different individuals in the ring, and put them through a formula
which provoked shouts of mirth.  Ermine much enjoyed the sight, it
was pretty to watch the 'prononce' dresses of the parish children,
interspersed with the more graceful forms of the little gentry, and
here and there a taller lady.  Then Ermine smiled to recognise Alison
as usual among her boys, and Lady Temple's soft greys and whites, and
gentle floating movements, as she advanced and receded with Stephana
in one hand, and a shy infant-school child in the other.  But
Ermine's eye roamed anxiously, for though Rachel's animated,
characteristic gestures were fully discernible, and her little Una's
arch toss of the head marked her out, yet the companion whom she had
beguiled away, and who had become more to Ermine than any other of
the frisking little ones of the flock, was neither with her not with
his chief protector, Rose.  In a second or two, however, the step
that to her had most "music in't" of all footfalls that ever were
trodden, was sounding on the path that led circuitously up the path,
and the Colonel appeared with the little runaway holding his hand.

"Why, baby, you are soon come away!"

"I did not like it,--sit on mamma's knee," said the little fellow,
scrambling to his place then as one who felt it his own nest and
throne.

"He was very soon frightened," said the Colonel; "it was only that
little witch Una who could have deluded him into such a crowd, and,
as soon as she saw a bigger boy to beguile, she instantly deserted
Keith, so I relieved Rachel of him."

"See Rachel now; Mr. Clare is interrogating her.  How she is making
them laugh!  I did not think she could ever have so entered into
fun."

"Alick must have made it a part of her education.  When the Invalid
has time for another essay, Ermine, it should be on the Benefits of
Ridicule."

"Against Clever Womanhood?   But then the subject must have Rachel's
perfect good humour."

"And the weapon must be in the most delicately skilful hands," added
the Colonel.  "Properly wielded, it saves blunting the superior
weapon by over-frequent use.  Here the success is complete."

"It has been irony rather than ridicule," said Ermine, "though, when
he taught her to laugh, he won half the battle.  It is beautiful to
see her holding herself back, and most forbearing where she feels
most positive.  I am glad to see him looking so much stronger and
more substantial.  Where is he?"

"On the further bank, supposed by Mrs. Curtis to be asleep, but
watching uncle, wife, and child through his eyelashes.  Did you ever
see any one so like his sister as that child?"

"Much more so than this one.  I am glad he may one day see such a
shadow of his bright-faced mother."

"You are mother!" said the the little orphan, looking up into
Ermine's face with a startled, wistful look, as having caught more of
her meaning than she had intended, and she met his look with a kiss,
the time was not yet come for gainsaying the belief more than in the
words, "Yes, always a mother to you, my precious little man."

"Nor could you have had a bonnier face to look into," added the
Colonel.  "There, the game breaks up.  We should collect our flock,
and get them them back to Les Invalides, as Alick calls it."

"Take care no one else does so," said Ermine, laughing.  "It has been
a most happy day, and chief of all the pleasures has been the sight
of Rachel just what I hoped, a thorough wife and mother, all the more
so for her being awake to larger interests, and doing common things
better for being the Clever Woman of the family.  Where is she?  I
don't see her now."

Where is she? was asked by more than one of the party, but the next
to see her was Alick, who found her standing at the window of her own
room, with her long-robed, two-months' old baby in her arms. "Tired?"
he asked.

"No; I only sent down nurse to drink tea with the other grandees.
What a delightful day it has been!  I never hoped that such good
fruit would rise out of my unhappy blunders."

"The blunders that brought so much good to me."

"Ah! the old places bring them back again.  I have been recollecting
how it used to seem to me the depth of my fall that you were marrying
me out of pure pity, without my having the spirit to resent or
prevent it, and now I just like to think how kind and noble it was in
you."

"I am glad to hear it!  I thought I was so foolishly in love, that I
was very glad of any excuse for pressing it on."

"Are the people dispersing?  Where is your uncle?"

"He went home with the Colonel and his wife; he has quite lost his
heart to Ermine."

"And Una--did you leave her with Grace?"

"No, she trotted down hand in hand with his little lordship:
promising to lead her uncle back."

"My dear Alick, you don't mean that you trust to that?"

"Why, hardly implicitly."

"Is that the way you say so?  They may be both over the cliffs.  If
you will just stay in the room with baby, I will go down and fetch
them up."

Alick very obediently held out his arms for his son, but when Rachel
proceeded to take up her hat, he added, "You have run miles enough
to-day.  I am going down as soon as my uncle has had time to pay his
visit in peace, without being hunted."

"Does he know that?"

"The Colonel does, which comes to the same thing.  Is not this boy
just of the age that little Keith was when you gave him up?"

"Yes; and is it not delightful to see how much larger and heavier he
is!"

"Hardly, considering your objections to fine children."

"Oh, that was only to coarse, over-grown ones.  Una is really quite
as tall as little Keith, and much more active.  You saw he could not
play at the game at all, and she was all life and enjoyment, with no
notion of shyness."

"It does not enter into her composition."

"And she speaks much plainer.  I never miss a word she says, and I
don't understand Keith a bit, though he tells such long stories."

"How backward!"

"Then she knows all her letters by sight--almost all, and Ermine can
never get him to tell b from d; and you know how she can repeat so
many little verses, while he could not even say, 'Thank you, pretty
cow,' this morning, when I wanted to hear him."

"Vast interval!"

"It is only eight months; but then Una is such a bright, forward
child."

"Highly-developed precocity!"

"Now, Alick, what am I about?  Why are you agreeing with me?"

"I am between the horns of a dilemma.  Either our young chieftain
must be a dunce, or we are rearing the Clever Woman of the family."

"I hope not!" exclaimed Rachel.

"Indeed?  I would not grudge her a superior implement, even if I had
sometimes cut my own fingers."

"But, Alick, I really do not think I ever was such a Clever Woman."

"I never thought you one," he quietly returned.

She smiled.  This faculty had much changed her countenance.  "I see,"
she said, thoughtfully, "I had a few intellectual tastes, and liked
to think and read, which was supposed to be cleverness; and my
wilfulness made me fancy myself superior in force of character, in a
way I could never have imagined if I had lived more in the world.
Contact with really clever people has shown me that I am slow and
unready."

"It was a rusty implement, and you tried weight instead of edge.  Now
it is infinitely brighter."

"But, Alick," she said, leaving the thought of herself for that of
her child, "I believe you may be right about Una, for," she added in
low voice, "she is like the most practically clever person I ever
saw."

"True," he answered gravely, "I see it every day, in every saucy
gesture and coaxing smile, when she tries to turn away displeasure in
her naughty fits.  I hardly knew how to look on at her airs with
Keith, it was so exactly like the little sister I first knew.
Rachel, such cleverness as that is a far more perilous gift to woman
than your plodding intellectuality could ever be.  God grant," he
added, with one of the effusions which sometimes broke through his
phlegmatic temperament, "that this little fellow may be a kinder,
wiser brother than ever I was, and that we may bring her up to your
own truth and unselfishness.  Then such power would be a happy
endowment."

"Yes," said Rachel, "may she never be out of your influence, or be
left to untrustworthy hands.  I should have been much better if I had
had either father or brother to keep me in order.  Poor child, she
has a wonderful charm, not all my fancy, Alick.  And yet there is one
whose real working talent has been more than that of any of us, who
has made it effective for herself and others, and has let it do her
only good, not harm."

"You are right.  If we are to show Una how intellect and brilliant
power can be no snares, but only blessings helping the spirits in
infirmity and trouble, serving as a real engine for independence and
usefulness, winning love and influence for good, genuine talents in
the highest sense of the word, then commend me to such a Clever Woman
of the family as Ermine Keith."










This etext was produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team




CHILDREN OF THE WHIRLWIND

by Leroy Scott




CHAPTER I


It was an uninspiring bit of street: narrow, paved with cobble; hot
and noisy in summer, reeking with unwholesome mud during the drizzling
and snow-slimed months of winter. It looked anything this May after
noon except a starting-place for drama. But, then, the great dramas of
life often avoid the splendid estates and trappings with which
conventional romance would equip them, and have their beginnings in
unlikeliest environment; and thence sweep on to a noble, consuming
tragedy, or to a glorious unfolding of souls. Life is a composite of
contradictions--a puzzle to the wisest of us: the lily lifting its
graceful purity aloft may have its roots in a dunghill. Samson's dead
lion putrefying by a roadside is ever and again being found to be a
storehouse of wild honey. We are too accustomed to the ordinary and
the obvious to consider that beauty or worth may, after bitter
travail, grow out of that which is ugly and unpromising.

Thus no one who looked on Maggie Carlisle and Larry Brainard at their
beginnings, had even a guess what manner of persons were to develop
from them or what their stories were to be.

The houses on the bit of street were all three-storied and all of a
uniform, dingy, scaling redness. The house of the Duchess, on the left
side as you came down the street toward the little Square which
squatted beside the East River, differed from the others only in that
three balls of tarnished gilt swung before it and unredeemed pledges
emanated a weakly lure from behind its dirt-streaked windows, and also
in that the personality of the Duchess gave the house something of a
character of its own.

The street did business with her when pressed for funds, but it knew
little definite about the Duchess except that she was shriveled and
bent and almost wordless and was seemingly without emotions. But of
course there were rumors. She was so old, and had been so long in the
drab little street, that she was as much a legend as a real person. No
one knew exactly how she had come by the name of "Duchess." There were
misty, unsupported stories that long, long ago she had been a shapely
and royal figure in colored fleshings, and that her title had been
given her in those her ruling days. Also there was a vague story that
she had come by the name through an old liking for the romances of
that writer who put forth her, or his, or their, prolific
extravagances under the exalted pseudonym of "The Duchess." Also there
was a rumor that the title came from a former alleged habit of the
Duchess of carrying beneath her shapeless dress a hoard of jewels
worthy to be a duchy's heirlooms. But all these were just stories--no
more. Down in this quarter of New York nicknames come easily, and once
applied they adhere to the end.

Some believed that she was now the mere ashes of a woman, in whom
lived only the last flickering spark. And some believed that beneath
that drab and spent appearance there smouldered a great fire, which
might blaze forth upon some occasion. But no one knew. As she was now,
so she had always been even in the memory of people considered old in
the neighborhood.

Beside the fact that she ran a pawnshop, which was reputed to be also
a fence, there were only two or three other facts that were known to
her neighbors. One was that in the far past there had been a daughter,
and that while still a very young girl this daughter had disappeared.
It was rumored that the Duchess had placed the daughter in a convent
and that later tire girl had married; but the daughter had never
appeared again in the quarter. Another fact was that there was a
grandson, a handsome young devil, who had come down occasionally to
visit his grandmother, until he began his involuntary sojourn at Sing
Sing. Another fact--this one the best known of all--was that two or
three years before an impudent, willful young girl named Maggie
Carlisle had come to live with her.

It was rather a meager history. People wondered and talked of mystery.
But perhaps the only mystery arose from the fact that the Duchess was
the kind of woman who never volunteered information about her affairs,
and the kind even the boldly curious hesitate to question...

And down here it was, in this unlovely street, in the Duchess's
unlovely house, that the drama of Maggie Carlisle and Larry Brainard
began its unpromising and stormy career: for, though they had thought
of it little, their forebears had been sowers of the wind, they
themselves had sown some of that careless seed and were to sow yet
more--and there was to be the reaping of that seed's wild crop.




CHAPTER II


When Maggie entered the studio on the Duchess's third floor, the big,
red-haired, unkempt painter roared his rebukes at her. She stiffened,
and in the resentment of her proud youth did not even offer an
explanation. Nodding to her father and Barney Palmer, she silently
crossed to the window and stood sullenly gazing over the single
mongrel tree before the house and down the narrow street and across
the little Square, at the swirling black tide which raced through East
River. That painter was a beast! Yes, and a fool!

But quickly the painter was forgotten, and once more her mind reverted
to Larry--at last Larry was coming back!--only to have the painter,
after a minute, interrupt her excited imagination with:

"What's the matter with your tongue, Maggie? Generally you stab back
with it quick enough."

She turned, still sulky and silent, and gazed with cynical superiority
at the easel. "Nuts"--it was Barney Palmer who had thus lightly
rechristened the painter when he had set up his studio in the attic
above the pawnshop six months before--Nuts was transferring the seamy,
cunning face of her father, "Old Jimmie" Carlisle, to the canvas with
swift, unhesitating strokes.

"For the lova Christ and the twelve apostles, including that piker
Judas," woefully intoned Old Jimmie from the model's chair, "lemme get
down off this platform!"

"Move and I'll wipe my palette off on that Mardi Gras vest of yours!"
grunted the big painter autocratically through his mouthful of
brushes.

"O God--and I got a cramp in my back, and my neck's gone to sleep!"
groaned Old Jimmie, leaning forward on his cane. "Daughter, dear"--
plaintively to Maggie--"what is the crazy gentleman doing to me?"

"It's an awful smear, father." Maggie spoke slightingly, but with a
tone of doubt. It was not the sort of picture that eighteen has been
taught to like--yet the picture did possess an intangible something
that provoked doubt as to its quality. "You sure do look one old
burglar!"

"Not a cheap burglar?"--hopefully.

"Naw!" exploded the man at the easel in his big voice, first taking
the brushes from his mouth. "You're a swell-looking old pirate!--ready
to loot the sub-treasury and then scuttle the old craft with all
hands on board! A breathing, speaking, robbing likeness!"

"Maggie's right, and Nuts's right," put in Barney Palmer. "It's sure a
rotten picture, and then again it sure looks like you, Jimmie."

The smartly dressed Barney--Barney could not keep away from Broadway
tailors and haberdashers with their extravagant designs and color
schemes--dismissed the insignificant matter of the portrait, and
resumed the really important matter which had brought him to her.

"Are you certain, Maggie, that the Duchess hasn't heard from Larry?"

"If she has, she hasn't mentioned it. But why don't you ask her
yourself?"

"I did, but she wouldn't say a thing. You can't get a word out of the
Duchess with a jimmy, unless she wants to talk--and she never wants to
talk." He turned his sharp, narrowly set eyes upon the lean old man.
"It's got me guessing, Jimmie. Larry was due out of Sing Sing
yesterday, and we haven't had a peep from him, and though she won't
talk I'm sure he hasn't been here to see his grandmother."

"Sure is funny," agreed Old Jimmie. "But mebbe Larry has broke
straight into a fresh game and is playing a lone hand. He's a quick
worker, Larry is--and he's got nerve."

"Well, whatever's keeping him we're tied up till Larry comes." Barney
turned back to Maggie. "I say, sister, how about robing yourself in
your raiment of joy and coming with yours truly to a palace of jazz,
there to dine and show the populace what real dancing is?"

"Can't, Barney. Mr. Hunt"--the name given the painter at his original
christening--"asked the Duchess and me to have dinner up here. He's to
cook it himself."

"For your sake I hope he cooks better than he paints." And sliding
down in his chair until he rested upon a more comfortable vertebra,
the elegant Barney lit a monogrammed cigarette, and with idle patience
swung his bamboo stick.

"You're half an hour late, Maggie," Hunt began at her again in his
rumbling voice. "Can't stand for such a waste of my time!"

"How about my time?" retorted Maggie, who indeed had a grievance. "I
was supposed to have the day off, but instead I had to carry that tray
of cigarettes around till the last person in the Ritzmore had finished
lunch. Anyhow," she added, "I don't see that your time's worth so much
when you spend it on such painty messes as these."

"It's not up to you to tell me what my time's worth!" retorted Hunt.
"I pay you--that's enough for you!... Because you weren't on time, I
stuck Old Jimmie out there to finish off this picture. I'll be through
with the old cut-throat in ten minutes. Be ready to take his place."

"All right," said Maggie sulkily.

For all his roaring she was not much afraid of the painter. While his
brushes flicked at, and streaked across, the canvas she stood idly
watching him. He was in paint-smeared, baggy trousers and a soft shirt
whose open collar gave a glimpse of a deep chest matted with hair and
whose rolled-up sleeves revealed forearms that seemed absurdly large
to be fiddling with those slender sticks. A crowbar would have seemed
more in harmony. He was unromantically old--all of thirty-five Maggie
guessed; and with his square, rough-hewn face and tousled, reddish
hair he was decidedly ugly. But for the fact that he really did work--
though of course his work was foolish--and the fact that he paid his
way--he bought little, but no one could beat him by so much as a penny
in a bargain, not even the Duchess--Maggie might have considered him
as one of the many bums who floated purposelessly through that drab
region.

Also, had there not been so many queer people coming and going in this
neighborhood--Eads Howe, the hobo millionaire, settlement workers,
people who had grown rich and old in their business and preferred to
live near it--Maggie might have regarded Hunt with more curiosity,
and even with suspicion; but down here one accepted queer people as a
matter of course, the only fear being that secretly they might be
police or government agents, which Maggie and the others knew very
well Hunt was not. When Hunt had rented this attic as a studio they
had accepted his explanation that he had taken it because it was cheap
and he could afford to pay no more. Likewise they had accepted his
explanation that he was a mechanic by trade who had roughed it all
over the world and was possessed with an itch for painting, that
lately he had worked in various garages, that it was his habit to
hoard his money till he got a bit ahead and then go off on a painting
spree. All these admissions were indubitably plausible, for his
paintings seemed the unmistakable handiwork of an irresponsible, hard-
fisted motor mechanic.

Maggie shifted to her other foot and glanced casually at the canvases
which leaned against the walls of the shabby studio. There was the
Duchess: incredibly old, the face a web of wrinkles, the lips indrawn
over toothless and shrunken gums, the nose a thin, curved beak, the
eyes deep-set, gleaming, inscrutable, watching; and drawn tight over
the hair--even Maggie did not know whether that hair was a wig or the
Duchess's--the faded Oriental shawl which was fastened beneath her
chin and which fell over her thin, bent chest. There was O'Flaherty,
the good-natured policeman on the beat. There was the old watchmaker
next door. There was Black Hurley, the notorious gang leader, who
sometimes swaggered into the district like a dirty and evil feudal
lord. There was a Jewish pushcart peddler, white-bearded and skull-
capped. There was an Italian mother sitting on the curb, her feet in
the gutter, smiling down at the baby that was hungrily suckling at her
milk-heavy breast. And so on, and so on. Just the ordinary,
uninteresting things Maggie saw around the block. There was not a
single pretty picture in the lot.

Hunt swung the canvas from his easel and stood it against the wall.
"That'll be all for you, Jimmie. Beat it and make room for Maggie.
Maggie, take your same pose."

Old Jimmie ambled forward and gazed at his portrait as Hunt was
settling an unfinished picture on his easel. It had rather amused
Jimmie and filled in his idle time to sit for the crazy painter; and,
incidentally, another picture of him would do him no particular harm
since the police already had all the pictures they needed of him over
at Headquarters. As he gazed at Hunt's work Old Jimmie snickered.

"I say, Nuts, what you goin' to do with this mess of paint?"

"Going to sell it to the Metropolitan Museum, you old sinner!" snapped
Hunt.

Old Jimmie cackled at the joke. He knew pictures; that is, good
pictures. He had had an invisible hand in more than one clever
transaction in which handsome pictures alleged to have been smuggled
in, Gainsboroughs and Romneys and such (there had been most profit for
him in handling the forgeries of these particular masters), had been
put, with an air of great secrecy, into the hands of divers newly rich
gentlemen who believed they were getting masterpieces at bargain
prices through this evasion of customs laws.

"Nuts," chuckled Old Jimmie, "this junk wouldn't be so funny if you
didn't seem to believe you were really painting."

"Junk! Funny!" Hunt swung around, one big hand closed about Jimmie's
lean neck and the other seized his thin shoulder. "You grandfather of
the devil and all his male progeny, you talk like that and I'll chuck
you through the window!"

Old Jimmie grinned. The grip of the big hands of the painter, though
powerful, was light. They all knew that the loud ravings of the
painter never presaged violence. They had grown to like him, to accept
him as almost one of themselves; though of course they looked down
upon him with amused pity for his imbecility regarding his paintings.

"Get out of here," continued Hunt, "or cut out all this noise that
comes from your having a brain that rattles. I've got to work."

Hunt turned again to his easel, and Old Jimmie, still grinning,
lowered himself into a chair, lit a cigar, and winked at Barney. Hunt,
with brush poised, regarded Maggie a moment.

"You there, Maggie," he ordered, "chin up a bit more, some flash in
your eyes, more pep in your bearing--as though you were asking all the
dames of the Winter Garden, and the Charity Ball, and the Horse Show,
and that gang of tea-swilling women at the Ritzmore you sell
cigarettes to--as though you were asking them all who the dickens they
think they are ... O God, can't you do anything!"

"I'm doing the best I can, and I look more like those dames than you
look like a painter!"

"Shut up! I'm paying you a dollar an hour to pose, not to talk back to
me. And you'd have more respect for my money if you knew how hard I
had to work to earn it: carrying a motor car around in each hand. Wash
off that scowl and try to look as I said ... There, that's better.
Hold it."

He began to paint rapidly, with quick glances back and forth between
the canvas and Maggie. Maggie's dress was just the ordinary shirt-
waist and skirt that the shopgirl and her sisters wear; Hunt had
ordered it so. She was above the medium height, with thick black hair
tinted with shadowy blue, long dark lashes, dark scimitars of
eyebrows, a full, firm mouth, a nose with just the right tilt to it--
all effective points for Hunt in what he wished to do. But what had
attracted him most and given him his idea was her look; hardly
pertness, or impudence--rather a cynical, mature, defiant certainty
in herself.

Erect in her cheap shirt-waist, she gazed off into space with a
smiling, confident challenge to all the world. Hunt was trying to make
his picture a true portrait--and also make it a symbol of many things
which still were only taking shape in his own mind: of beauty rising
from the gutter to overcome beauty of more favored birth, and to reign
above it; also of a lower stratum surging up and breaking through the
upper stratum, becoming a part of it, or assimilating it, or
conquering it. Leading families replaced by other families, classes
replaced by other classes, nations replaced by other nations--such was
the inevitable social process--so read the records of the fifty or
sixty centuries since history began to be written. Oh, he was trying
to say a lot in this portrait of a girl of ordinary birth--even less
than ordinary--in her cheap shirt-waist and skirt!

And it pleased the sardonic element in Hunt's unmoral nature that this
Maggie, through whom he was trying to symbolize so much, he knew to be
a petty larcenist: shoplifting and matters of similar consequence. She
had been cynically frank about this to him; casual, almost boastful.
Her possessing a bent toward such activities was hardly to be wondered
at, with her having Old Jimmie as her father, and the Duchess as a
landlady, and having for acquaintances such gentlemen as Barney Palmer
and this returning prison-bird, Larry Brainard.

But petty crime, thought Hunt, would not be Maggie's forte if she
developed her possibilities. With her looks, her boldness, her
cleverness, she had the makings of a magnificent adventuress. As he
painted, he wondered what she was going to do, and become; and he
watched her not only with a painter's eye intent upon the present, but
with keen speculation upon the future.




CHAPTER III


Presently Hunt's mind shifted to Larry Brainard, whom Barney Palmer
and Old Jimmie Carlisle had come here to see. Hunt had a mind curious
about every thing and every one; and blustering, bullying creature
though he was, he had the gift, possessed by but few, of audaciously
thrusting himself into other people's affairs without arousing their
resentment. He was keen to learn Maggie's attitude toward Larry; and
he spoke not so much to gain knowledge of Larry as to draw her out.

"This Larry--what sort of chap is he, Maggie?" As with most artists,
talking did not interfere with Hunt's painting.

Warm color slowly tinted Maggie's cheeks. "He's clever," she said
positively. "You already know that. But I was only a girl when he was
sent away."

Hunt smiled at her idea of her present maturity, implied by her last
sentence. "But you lived with the Duchess for a year before he was
sent away. You must have seen a lot of him, and got to know him well."

"Oh, he used to come down now and then to see his grandmother--I was
only fifteen or sixteen then--just a girl, and he didn't pay much
attention to me. Father can tell you better just how smart he is."

Old Jimmie spoke up promptly. He knew Hunt was not a police stool, and
he liked the painter as much as it was in him to like any man; so he
felt none of the reserve or caution that might have controlled him in
other company.

"You bet Larry's smart! Got the quickest brain of any con man in the
business--and him only about twenty-seven now. Some think I'm a smooth
proposition myself, but Larry puts it all over me. That's why I'm
willing to let him be my boss. He's a wonder at thinking up new
stunts, and then at working out safe new ways of putting them across."

"But the police landed him at last," commented Hunt.

"Yes, but that was only because another man muffed his end of the
job."

The handsome Barney Palmer had been restless during Old Jimmie's
eulogy. "Oh, Larry's all to the good--but he's not the only party
that's got real ideas."

"Huh!" grunted Old Jimmie. "But you'll remember that we haven't put
over any big ones since Larry's been in stir."

"That's been because you wouldn't listen to any of my ideas!" retorted
Barney. "And I handed out some peaches."

Even during the period of Larry's active reign it had irked Barney to
accept another man as leader, and it had irked him even more during
the interregnum while Larry was guest of the State. For Barney
believed in his own Napoleonic strain.

"Don't let yourself get sore, Barney," Old Jimmie said appeasingly.
"You'll have plenty of chances to try out your ideas as the main guy
before you cash in. You know the outfit wanted to lay low for a while,
anyhow. But we'll be putting over a lot of the big stuff when Larry
gets out."

Hunt had noted a quick light come into Maggie's dark eyes while her
father praised the absent leader. He himself suddenly perceived a new
possibility.

"Maggie, ever think about teaming up with Larry?" he demanded, with
his audacious keenness.

She flushed, and hesitated. He did not wait for her slow-coming reply,
but turned to her father.

"Jimmie, did Larry ever use women in his stunts?"

"Never. Whenever we suggested using a skirt, Larry absolutely said
there was nothing doing. That's one point where he was all wrong.
Nothing helps so much, when the sucker is at all sentimental, as a
clever, good-looking woman. And Larry'll come around to it all right.
He'll see the sense of it, now that he's older and has had two years
to think things over."

Old Jimmie nodded, showing his yellow teeth in a sly grin. "You said
something a second ago: Maggie and Larry! They'll make a wonder of a
team! I mean that she'll work under him with the rest of us. I've been
thinking about it a long while. Mebbe you haven't guessed it, but
we've been coaching her for the part, and she's just about ripe. She's
got the looks, and we can dress her right for whatever job's on hand.
Oh, Larry'll put over some great things with Maggie!"

If Hunt felt that there was anything cynically unpaternal in this
father planning for his daughter a career of crime, he gave no sign of
it. His attention was just then all on Maggie. He saw her eyes grow
yet more bright at these last sentences of her father: bright with the
vision of approaching adventure.

"The idea suits you, Maggie?" he asked.

"Sure. It'll be great--for Larry is a wonder!"

Barney Palmer suddenly rose, his face twisted with anger. "I'm all fed
up on this Larry, Larry, Larry! Come on, Jimmie. Let's get uptown."

Wise Old Jimmie saw that Barney was near an outburst. "All right,
Barney, all right," he said promptly. "Not much use waiting any
longer, anyhow. If Larry comes, we'll fix it with the Duchess to meet
him tomorrow."

"Then so-long, Maggie," Barney flung at her, and that swagger
ex-jockey, gambler, and clever manipulator of the confidence of people
with money, slashed aside the shabby burlap curtains with his wisp of
a bamboo walking-stick, and strode out of the room.

"Good-night, daughter," and Old Jimmie crossed and kissed her. She
kissed him back--a perfunctory kiss. Maggie had never paused to think
the matter out, but for some reason she felt little real affection for
her father, though of course she admired his astuteness. Perhaps her
unconscious lack of love was due in part to the fact that she had
never lived with him. Ever since she remembered he had boarded her
out, here and there, as he was now boarding her at the Duchess's--and
had only come to visit her at intervals, sometimes intervals that
stretched into months.

"Barney is rather sweet on you," remarked Hunt after the two were
gone.

"I know he is," conceded Maggie in a matter-of-fact way.

"And he seems jealous of Larry--both regarding you, and regarding the
bunch."

"He thinks he can run the bunch just as well as Larry. Barney's clever
all right, and has plenty of nerve--but he's not in Larry's class.
Not by a million miles!"

Hunt perceived that this daring, world-defying, embryonically
beautiful model of his had idealized the homecoming nephew of the
Duchess into her especial hero. Hunt said no more, but painted
rapidly. Night had fallen outside, and long since he had switched on
the electric lights. He seemed not at all finicky in this matter of
light; he had no supposedly indispensable north light, and midday or
midnight were almost equally apt to find him slashing with brush or
scratching with crayon.

Presently the Duchess entered. No word was spoken. The Duchess,
noteworthy for her mastery of silence, sank into a chair, a bent and
shrunken image, nothing seemingly alive about her but her faintly
gleaming, deep-set eyes. Several minutes passed, then Hunt lifted the
canvas from the easel and stood it against the wall.

"That's all for to-day, Maggie," he announced, pushing the easel to
one side. "Duchess, you and this wild young thing spread the banquet-
table while I wash up."

He disappeared into a corner shut off by burlap curtains. From within
there issued the sound of splashing water and the sputtering roar of
snatches of the Toreador's song in a very big and very bad baritone.

Maggie put out a hand, and kept the Duchess from rising. "Sit still--
I'll fix the table."

Silently the Duchess acquiesced. Maggie had never felt any tenderness
toward this strange, silent woman with whom she had lived for three
years, but it was perhaps an indication of qualities within Maggie,
whose existence she herself never even guessed, that she instinctively
pushed the old woman aside from tasks which involved any physical
effort. Maggie now swung the back of a laundry bench up to form a
table-top, and upon it proceeded to spread a cloth and arrange a
medley of chipped dishes. As she moved swiftly and deftly about, the
Duchess watching her with immobile features, these two made a
strangely contrasting pair: one seemingly spent and at life's grayest
end, the other electric with vitality and giving off the essence of
life's unknown adventures.

Hunt stepped out between the curtains, pulling on his coat. "You'll
find that chow in my fireless cooker will beat the Ritz," he boasted.
"The tenderest, fattest kind of a fatted calf for the returned
prodigal."

Maggie started. "The prodigal! You mean--Larry is coming?"

"Sure," grinned Hunt. "That's why we celebrate."

Maggie wheeled upon the Duchess. "Is Larry really coming?"

"Yes," said the old woman.

"But--but why the uncertainty about when he was coming back? Father
and Barney thought he was due to get out yesterday."

"Just a mistake we all made about his release. His time was up this
afternoon."

"But you told Barney and my father you hadn't heard from him."

"I had heard," said the Duchess in her flat tone. "If they want to see
him they can see him to-morrow."

"When--when will he be here?"

"Any minute," said the Duchess.

Without a word Maggie whirled about and the next moment she was in her
room on the floor below. She did not know what prompted her, but she
had a frantic desire to get out of this plain shirt-waist and skirt
and into something that would be striking. She considered her scanty
wardrobe; her father had recently spoken of handsome gowns and
furnishings, but as yet these existed only in his words, and the
pseudo-evening gowns which she had worn to restaurant dances with
Barney she knew to be cheap and uneffective.

Suddenly she remembered the things Hunt had given her, or had loaned
her, the evening four months earlier when he had taken her to an
artists' masquerade ball--though to her it had been a bitter
disappointment when Hunt had carried her away before the unmasking at
twelve o'clock. She tore off the offending waist and skirt, pulled
from beneath the bed the pasteboard box containing her costume; and in
five minutes of flying hands the transformation was completed. Her
thick hair of burnished black was piled on top of her head in gracious
disorder, and from it swayed a scarlet paper flower. About her lithe
body, over a black satin skirt, swathing her in its graceful folds,
clung a Spanish shawl of saffron-colored background with long brown
silken fringe, and flowered all over with brown and red and peacock
blue, and held in place by three huge barbaric pins jeweled with
colored glass, one at either hip and upon her right shoulder, leaving
her smooth shoulders bare and free. With no more than a glance to get
the hasty effect, she hurried up to the studio.

Hunt whistled at sight of her, but made no remark. Flushed, she looked
back at him defiantly. The Duchess gave no sign whatever of being
aware of the transformation.

Maggie with excited touches tried to improve her setting of the table,
aquiver with expectancy and suspense at the nearness of the meeting--
every nerve of audition strained to catch the first footfall upon the
stairs. Hunt, watching her, could but wonder, in case Larry was the
clever, dashing person that had been described, what would be the
outcome when these two natures met and perhaps joined forces.




CHAPTER IV


While the preparations for dinner were going on in the studio, down
below Larry turned a corner and swung up the narrow street toward the
pawnshop. He halted and peered in before entering; in doing this he
was obeying the caution that was his by instinct and training.

Leaning over the counter within, and chatting with his grandmother's
assistant was Casey, one of the two plain-clothesmen who had arrested
him. Larry drew back. He was not afraid of Casey, or of Gavegan,
Casey's partner, or of the whole police force, or of the State of New
York; they had nothing on him, he had settled accounts by having done
his bit. All the same, he preferred not to meet Casey just then. So he
went down the street, crossed the cobbled plaza along the water-front,
and slipped through the darkness among the trucks out to the end of
the pier. Under his feet the East River splashed sluggishly against
the piles, but out near the river's center he could see the tide
swirling out to sea at six miles an hour, toward the great shadowy
Manhattan Bridge crested with its splendid tiara of lights.

He stretched himself and breathed deeply of the warm free spring. It
tasted good after two long years of the prison's sealed air. He would
have liked to shed his clothing and dive down for a brisk fight with
the tingling water. Larry had always taken pleasure in keeping his
body fit. He had not cared for the gymnasiums of the ward clubs where
he would have been welcome; in them there had been too much rough
horseplay and foulness of mouth, and such had always been offensive to
him. And though he had ever looked the gentleman, he had known that
the New York Athletic Club and other similar clubs were not for him;
they pried a bit too much into a candidate's social and professional
standing. So he had turned to a club where really searching inquiries
were rarely made; for years he had belonged to a branch of the
Y.M.C.A. located just off Broadway, and had played handball and boxed
with chunky, slow-footed city detectives who were struggling to retain
some physical activity, and with fat playwrights, and with Jewish
theatrical managers, and with the few authentic Christians who
occasionally strayed into the place and seemed ill at ease therein. He
had liked this club for another reason; his sense of humor had often
been highly excited by the thought of his being a member of the
Y.M.C.A.

Having this instinct for physical fitness, he had not greatly minded
being a coal-passer during the greater part of his stay at Sing Sing;
better that than working in the knitting mills; so that now, though
underfed and under weight, he was active and hard-muscled.

Larry Brainard could not have told why, and just when, he had turned
to devious ways. He had never put that part of his life under the
microscope. But the simple facts were that he had become an orphan at
fifteen and a broker's clerk at nineteen after a course in a business
college; and that experiences with wash-sales and such devious and
dubious practices of brokers, his high spirits, his instinct for
pleasure, his desire for big winnings--these had swept him into a wild
crowd before he had been old enough to take himself seriously, and had
started him upon a brilliant career of adventures and unlawful money-
making in whose excitement there had been no let-up until his arrest.
He had never thought about such technical and highly academic subjects
as right and wrong up to the day when Casey and Gavegan had slipped
the handcuffs upon him. To laugh, to dance, to plan and direct clever
coups, to spend the proceeds gayly and lavishly--to challenge the
police with another daring coup: that had been life to him, a game
that was all excitement.

And now, after two years in which there had been plenty of time for
thinking, his conscience still did not trouble him on the score of his
offenses. He believed, and was largely right in this belief, that the
suckers he had trimmed had all been out to secure unlawful gain and to
take cunning advantage of his supposedly foolish self and of other
dupes. He had been too clever for them, that was all; in desire and
intent they had been as great cheats as himself. So he felt no remorse
over his victims; and as for anything he may have done against that
impersonal entity, the criminal statutes, why, the period in prison
had squared all such matters. So he now faced life pleasantly and with
care-free soul.

Larry had turned away from the dark river and had started to retrace
his way, when he saw a man approaching through the darkness. Larry
paused. The man drew near and halted exactly in front of Larry. By the
swing of his body Larry had recognized the man, and his own figure
instinctively grew tense.

"What you doin' out here, Brainard?" The voice was peremptory and
rough.

"Throwing kisses over at Brooklyn," Larry replied coolly. "And what
are you doing out here, Gavegan?"

"Following you. I wanted a quiet word with you. I've been right behind
you ever since you hit New York."

"I knew you would be. You and Casey. But you haven't got anything on
me."

"I got plenty on you before!--with Casey helping," retorted Gavegan.
"And I'll get plenty on you again!--now that I know you are the main
guy of a clever outfit. You'll be starting some smooth game--but I'm
going to be right after you every minute. And I'll get you. That's the
news I wanted to slip you."

"So!" commented Larry drawlingly. "Casey's a fairly decent guy,
considering his line--but, Gavegan, I don't see how Casey stands you
as a partner. And, Gavegan, I don't see why the Board of Health lets
you stay around the streets--when putrefying matter causes so much
disease."

"None of your lip, young feller!" growled Gavegan. He stepped closer,
bulking over Larry. "You think you are such a damned smart talker and
such a damned clever schemer--but I'll bet I'll have you locked up in
six months."

Anger boiled up within Larry. Against all the persons connected with
his arrest, trial, and imprisonment, he had no particular resentment,
except against this one man. He never could forget the time he and
Gavegan, he handcuffed, had been locked in a sound-proof cell, and
Gavegan had given him the third degree--in this case a length of heavy
rubber hose, applied with a powerful arm upon head and shoulders--in
an effort to make him squeal upon his confederates. And that third
degree was merely a sample of the material of which Gavegan was made.

Larry held his desire in leash. "So you bet you'll get me. I'l