l take
that bet--any figure you like. I've already got a new game cooked up,
Gavegan. Cleverer than anything I've ever tried before."

"Oh, I'll get you!" Gavegan growled again.

"Oh, no, you won't!" And then Larry's old anger against Gavegan got
into his tongue and made it wag tauntingly. "You didn't get me the
last time; that was a slip and police stools got me. All by yourself,
Gavegan, you couldn't get anything. Your brain's got flat tires, and
its motor doesn't fire, and its clutch is broken. The only thing about
it that still works is the horn. You've got a hell of a horn, Gavegan,
and it never stops blowing."

A tug was nearing the dock, and by its light Larry saw the terrific
swing that the enraged detective started. Larry swayed slightly aside,
and as Gavegan lunged by, Larry's right fist drove into Gavegan's
chin--drove with all the power of his dislike and all the strength of
five years in a Y.M.C.A. gymnasium and a year in a prison boiler-room.

Gavegan went down and out.

Larry gazed a moment at the dim, sprawling figure, then turned and
made his way off the pier and again to the door of the pawnshop. Casey
was gone; he could see no one within but Old Isaac, the assistant.

Larry opened the door and entered. "Hello, Isaac. Where's
grandmother?"

It is not a desirable trait in one connected with a pawnshop, that is
also reputed to be a fence, to show surprise or curiosity. So Isaac's
reply was confined to a few facts and brief direction.

Wondering, Larry mounted the stairway which opened from the
confidential business room behind the pawnshop. It was common enough
for his grandmother to rent out the third floor; but to a painter, and
a crazy painter--that seemed strange. And yet more strange was it for
her to be having dinner with the painter.

Larry knocked at the door. A big male voice within gave order:

"Be parlor-maid, Maggie, and see who's there."

The door opened and Larry half entered. Then he stopped, and in
surprise gazed at the flushed, gleaming Maggie, slender and supple in
the folds of the Spanish shawl.

"Why, Maggie!" he exclaimed, holding out his hand.

"Larry!"

She was thrillingly confused by his surprised admiration. For a moment
they stood gazing at each other, holding hands. The clothes given him
on leaving prison were of course atrocious, but in all else he
measured up to her dreams: lithe, well-built, handsome, a laugh ready
on his lips, and the very devil of daring in his smiling, gray-blue
eyes.

"How you have grown up, Maggie!" he said, still amazed.

"That's all I've had to do for two years," she returned.

"Come on in, Larry," said the Duchess.

Larry shut the door, bowed with light grace as he had to pass in front
of Maggie, and crossed to the Duchess.

"Hello, grandmother," he said as though he had last seen her the day
before. He held out his hand, the left one, and she took it in a
mummified claw. In all his life he had never kissed his grandmother,
nor did he remember ever having been kissed by her.

"Glad you're back, Larry." She dropped his hand. "The man's name is
Hunt."

Larry turned to the painter. His laughing eyes could be sharp; they
were penetratingly sharp now. And so were Hunt's eyes.

Larry held out his hand, again the left. "And so you're the painter?"

"They call me a painter," responded Hunt, "but none of them believe
I'm a painter."

Larry turned again to Maggie. "And so you're actually Maggie! Meaning
no offense"--and there was a smiling audacity in his face that it
would have been hard to have taken offense at--"I don't see how Old
Jimmie Carlisle's daughter got such looks without stealing them."

"Well, then," retorted Maggie, "I don't see how you got your looks
unless--"

She broke off and bit her tongue. She had been about to retort with
the contrast between Larry's face and his shriveled, hook-nosed
grandmother's. They all perceived her intention, however.

Larry came instantly to her rescue with almost imperceptible ease.

"Dinner!" he exclaimed, gazing at the miscellany of dishes on the
table. "Am I invited?"

"Invited?" said Hunt. "You're the guest of honor."

"Then might the guest of honor beg the privilege of cleaning up a
bit?" Larry drew his right hand from his coat pocket, where it had
been all this while, and started to unwind the handkerchief which he
had wound about his knuckles as he had crossed from the pier.

"Is your hand hurt much?" Maggie inquired eagerly.

"Just skinned my knuckles."

"How?"

"They happened to connect with a flatfoot's jaw while he was trying to
make hypnotic passes at me. He's coming to about now. Officer
Gavegan."

"Gavegan!" exclaimed Hunt. "You picked a tough bird. Young man, you're
off to a grand start--a charge of assault on an officer the very day
they turn you out of jail."

Larry smiled. "Gavegan is a dirty one, but he'll make no charge of
assault. He claims to be heavy-weight champion boxer of the Police
Department. Put a fine crimp in his reputation, wouldn't it, if he
admitted in public that he'd been knocked out by a fellow, bare-
handed, supposed to be weak from prison life, forty pounds lighter.
He'd get the grand razoo all along the line. Oh, Gavegan will never
let out a peep."

"He'll square things in some other way," said Hunt.

"I suppose he'll try," Larry responded carelessly. "Where's the first-
aid room?"

Hunt showed him through the curtains. When he came out, Hunt, Maggie,
and the Duchess were all engaged in getting the dinner upon the table.
Additional help would only be interference, so Larry's eyes wandered
casually to the canvases standing in the shadows against the walls.

"Mr. Hunt," he remarked, "you seem to have earned a very real
reputation of its sort in the neighborhood. Old Isaac downstairs told
me you were crazy--said they called you 'Nuts'--said you were the
worst painter that ever happened."

"Yeh, that's what they say," agreed Hunt.

"They certainly are awful, Larry," put in Maggie, coming to his side.
"Father thinks they are jokes, and father certainly knows pictures.
Just look at a few of them."

"Yeh, look at 'em and have a good laugh," invited Hunt.

Larry carried the portrait of the Duchess to beneath the swinging
electric bulb and examined it closely. Maggie, at his shoulder, waited
for his mirth; and Hunt regarded him with a sidelong gaze. But Larry
did not laugh. He silently returned the picture, and then examined the
portrait of Old Jimmie--then of Maggie--then of the Italian madonna,
throned on her curbstone. He replaced this last and crossed swiftly to
Hunt. Maggie watched this move in amazement.

Larry faced the big painter. His figure was tense, his features hard
with suspicion. That moment one could understand why he was sometimes
called "Terrible Larry"; just then he looked a devastating explosion
that was still unexploded.

"What's your game down here, Hunt?" he demanded harshly.

"My game?" repeated the big painter. "I don't get you."

"Yes, you do! You're down here posing as a boob who smears up
canvases!"

"What's wrong with that?"

"Only this: those are not crazy daubs. They're real pictures!"

"Eh!" exclaimed Hunt. Maggie stared in bewilderment at the two men.

Hunt spoke again. "What the dickens do you know about pictures? Old
Jimmie, who's said to be a shark, thinks all these things are just
comics."

"Jimmie only thinks a picture's good after a thousand press-agents
have said it's good," Larry returned. "I studied at the Academy of
Design for two years, till I learned I could never paint. But I know
pictures."

"And you think mine are good?"

"Not in the popular manner--they're too original. But they're great.
And you're a great painter. And I want to know--"

"Hurray!" shouted Hunt, and flung an enthusiastic arm about Larry, and
began to pound his back. "Oh, boy! Oh, boy!"

Larry wrenched himself free. "Cut that out. Then you admit you're a
great painter?"

"Of course I'm a great painter!" shouted Hunt. "Who should know it
better than I do?"

"Then what's a great painter doing down here? What's the game you're
trying to put over, posing as--"

"Listen, son," Hunt grinned. "You've called me and I've got to show my
cards. Only you mustn't ever tell--nor must Maggie; the Duchess
doesn't talk, anyway. No need bothering you just now with a lot of
details about myself. It's enough to say that people wouldn't pay me
except when I did the usual pretty rot; no one believed in the other
stuff I wanted to do. I wanted to get away from that bunch; I wanted
to do real studies of human people, with their real nature showing
through. So I beat it. Understand so far?"

"But why pose as a dub down here?"

"I never started the yarn that I was a dub. The people who looked at
my work, and laughed, started that talk. I didn't shout out that I was
a great artist for the mighty good reason that if I had, and had been
believed, the people who posed for me either wouldn't have done it or
would have been so self-conscious that they would have tried to look
like some one else, and would never have shown me themselves at all.
Thinking me a joke, they just acted natural. Which, young man, is
about all you need to know."

Maggie looked on breathlessly at the two men, bewildered by this new
light in which Hunt was presented, and fascinated by the tense
alertness of her hero, Larry.

Slowly Larry's tensity dissipated. "I don't know about the rest of
your make-up," he said slowly, "but as a painter you're a whale."

"The rest of him's all right, too," put in the dry, unemotional voice
of the Duchess. "Dinner's ready. Come on."

As they moved to the table Hunt clapped a big hand on Larry's
shoulder. "And to think," he chuckled, "it took a crook fresh from
Sing Sing to discover me as a great artist! You're clever, Larry--
clever! Maggie, get the corkscrew into action and fill the glasses
with the choicest vintage of H2O. A toast. Here's to Larry!"




CHAPTER V


The dinner was simple: beef stewed with potatoes and carrots and
onions, and pie, and real coffee. But it measured up to Hunt's boast:
the chef of the Ritz, limited to so simple a menu, could indeed have
done no better. And Larry, after his prison fare, was dining as dine
the gods.

The irrepressible Hunt, trying to read this new specimen that had come
under his observation, sought to draw Larry out. "Barney Palmer and
Old Jimmie were here this afternoon, wanting to see you. They've got
something big waiting for you. I suppose you're all ready to jump in
and put it over with a wallop."

"I'm going to put something over with a wallop--but I guess business
will have to wait until Barney, Jimmie, and I have a talk. Can you
spare me a little more of that stew?"

His manner of speaking was a quiet announcement to Hunt that his plans
were for the present a closed subject. Hunt felt balked, for this
lean, alert, much-talked-of adventurer piqued him greatly; but he
switched to other subjects, and during the rest of the meal did most
of the talking. The Duchess was silent, and seemingly was concerned
only with her food. Larry got in a fair portion of speech, but for the
most part his attention, except for that required for eating, was
fixed upon Maggie.

How she had sprung up since he had last seen her! Almost a woman now--
and destined to be a beauty! And more than just a beauty: she was
colorful, vital, high-strung. Before he had gone away he had regarded
her with something akin to the negligent affection of an older
brother. But this thing which was already beginning to surge up in him
was altogether different, and he knew it.

As for Maggie, when she looked at him, she flushed and her eyes grew
bright. Larry was back!--the brilliant, daring Larry. She was aware
that she had been successful in startling and gripping his attention.
Yes, they would do great things together!

When the dinner was finished and the dishes washed, Larry gave voice
to this new urge that had so quickly grown up within him.

"What do you say, Maggie, to a little walk?"

"All right," she replied eagerly.

They went down the narrow stairway together. On the landing of the
second floor, which contained only Maggie's bedroom and the Duchess's
and a tiny kitchen, Maggie started to leave him to change into street
clothes; but he caught her arm and said, "Come on." They descended the
next flight and came into the back room behind the pawnshop, which the
Duchess used as a combination of sitting-room, office, and storeroom.
About this musty museum hung or stood unredeemed seamen's jackets, men
and women's evening wear, banjos, guitars, violins, umbrellas, and one
huge green stuffed parrot sitting on top of the Duchess's safe.

"I wanted to talk, not walk," he said. "Let's stay here."

He took her hands and looked down on her steadily. Under the yellow
gaslight her face gleamed excitedly up into his, her breath came
quickly.

"Well, sir, what do you think of me?" she demanded. "Have I changed
much?"

"Changed? Why, it's magic, Maggie! I left you a schoolgirl; you're a
woman now. And a wonder!"

"You think so?" She flushed with pride and pleasure, and a wildness of
spirit possessed her and demanded expression in action. She freed her
left hand and slipped it over Larry's shoulder. "Come on--let's two-
step."

"But, Maggie, I've forgotten."

"Come on!"

Instantly she was dragging him over the scanty floor space. But after
a moment he halted, protesting.

"These prison brogans were not intended by their builders for such
work. If you've got to dance, you'll have to work it out of your
system alone."

"All right!"

At once, in the midst of the dingy room, humming the music, she was
doing Carmen's dance--wild, provocative, alluring. It was not a
remarkable performance in any professionally technical sense; but it
had vivid personality; she was light, lithe, graceful, flashing with
color and spirits.

"Maggie!" he exclaimed, when she had finished and stood before him
glowing and panting. "Good! Where did you learn that?"

"In the chorus of a cabaret revue."

"Is that what you're doing now, working in a chorus?"

"No. Barney and father said a chorus was no place for me." She drew
nearer. "Oh, Larry, I've such a lot to tell you."

"Go on."

"Well"--she cocked her head impishly--"I've been going to school."

"Going to school! Where?"

"Lots of places. Just now I'm going to school at the Ritzmore Hotel."

"At the Ritzmore Hotel!" He stared at her bewildered. "What are you
learning there?"

"To be a lady." She laughed at his increasing bewilderment. "A real
lady, Larry," she went on excitedly. "Oh, it's such a wonderful idea!
Father had never seemed to think much of me till the night I went to a
masquerade ball with Mr. Hunt, and he and Barney saw me in these
clothes. They had never seen me really dressed up before; Barney said
it was an eye-opener. They saw how I could be of big use to you all.
But to be that, I've got to be a lady--a real lady, who knows how to
behave and wear real clothes. That's what they're doing now: making me
a lady."

"Making you a lady!" exclaimed Larry. "How?"

"By putting me where I can watch real ladies, and study them. Barney
cut short my being in a chorus; Barney said a chorus girl never
learned to pass for a lady. So I've been working in places where the
swellest women come. First in a milliner shop; then as dresser to a
model in the shop of a swell modiste; always watching how the ladies
behave. Now I'm at the Ritzmore, and I carry a tray of cigarettes
around the tables at lunch and at tea-time and during dinner and
during the after-theater supper. I'm supposed to be there to sell
cigarettes, but I'm really there to watch how the ladies handle their
knives and forks and behave toward the men. Isn't it all awfully
clever?"

"Why, Maggie!" he exclaimed.

"And pretty soon, when I've learned more," she continued rapidly, "I'm
going to have swell clothes of my own--and be a lady--and get away
from this dingy, stuffy, dead old place! I can't stand for being
buried down here much longer. And, oh, Larry, I'm going to begin to
work with you!"

"What?" he blinked, not yet quite understanding.

"You think I'm not clever enough? But I am!" she protested. "I tell
you I've learned a lot. And Barney and father have let me help in a
lot of things--nothing really big yet, of course. They think I'm going
to be a wonder. Just to-day father was saying that you and I, teamed
up--Why, what's the matter, Larry?"

"You and I--teamed up," he repeated slowly.

"Yes. Don't you like the idea?"

His hands suddenly gripped her bare shoulders.

"There's nothing to it!" he exclaimed almost savagely.

"What's that?" she cried, startled.

"I tell you there's nothing to it!"

"You--you think I can't put it over?"

"You can't! And I'm not going to have it!"

"Why--why--"

Staring, she drew slowly away from him. His face, which a few moments
before had been smiling, was now harsh and dominant with decision. She
had heard him spoken of as "Laughing Larry"; and also as "Terrible
Larry" whose aroused will none could brook. He looked this latter
person now, and she could not understand.

But though she could not understand, her own defiant spirit stormed up
to fight this unexpected opposition. He didn't believe in her--that
was it! He didn't think she was equal to working with him! Her young
figure stiffened in angered pride, and her mind was gathering hot
phrases to fling at him when the door from the pawnshop began to creak
open. Instantly Larry turned toward it, relaxed and yet alert for
anything. Old Jimmie and Barney Palmer entered.

"Hello, Larry!" cried the old man, crossing. "Welcome to our city!"

"Hello, Jimmie. Hello, Barney." And Larry shook hands with his
partners of other days.

"Gee, Larry, it's good to see you!" exclaimed the cunning-eyed old
man. "Didn't know you were back till I bumped into Gavegan on
Broadway. He told me, and so Barney and I beat it over here to see
you. Believe me, Larry, that flatfoot is certainly sore at you!"

Larry ignored the last sentence. "Think it exactly wise for you two to
come here?"

"Why, Larry?"

"Gavegan, Casey, the police, may follow, thinking you've come to see
me for some purpose. That outfit may act upon suspicion."

Jimmie grinned cunningly. "A man can come to visit his own daughter as
often as he likes. Father love, Larry."

"I see; that'll be your explanation." Larry's eyes grew keen at the
new understanding. "I hadn't thought of that before, Jimmie. So that's
why you've always boarded Maggie around in shady joints: so's you
could meet your pals and yet always have the excuse that you had come
to meet your daughter?"

"Partly that," smiled Old Jimmie blandly--perhaps too blandly.
"Suppose we sit down."

They did so, Maggie sitting a little apart from the men and regarding
Larry with indignant, questioning eyes. She still could not understand
his queer behavior when she had announced her intention of working
with him. Could it be, as her father had said, because he would never
work with women--not trusting them? She'd show him!

She was so occupied with this wonderment that she gave no heed to the
talk about Larry's experience in Sing Sing and Old Jimmie's recital of
what had happened among Larry's friends during his absence. During
this gossip the Duchess entered from the stairway, and without word to
any one shuffled across to her desk in a corner and bent silently over
her accounts: just one more grotesque and unredeemed pledge in this
museum of antiquities and forgotten pawns.

Presently Barney Palmer, who had been impatient during all this, broke
out with:

"Aw, let's cut out this chatter about what used to be and get down to
cases. Jimmie, will you spill the business to Larry, or want me to?"

"I'll tell him. Listen, Larry." Maggie pricked up her ears; the talk
was now excitingly important. "We've got our very greatest game all
planned out. Stock-selling game; going to unload the whole thing on
one sucker, and we've got the sucker picked out. Besides you and
Barney and me, there's Red Hannigan and Jack Rosenfeldt in it--a
classy bunch all right. And we think that for the woman end we'll take
in Mae Gorham. She's clever and innocent-eyed--"

"But I thought you were going to take me in!" protested Maggie.

"Maggie'll be just as good as Mae Gorham," put in Barney.

"We'll let that pass," said Old Jimmie. "The main thing, Larry, is
that everything is ready. It's a whale of a business proposition.
We've been waiting for you; you're all that's lacking--the brainy guy
to sit behind the scenes and manage the thing. You've handled the
bunch for a long time, and they want you to handle this. For you're
sure a wonder at business, Larry! None keener. Well, we've held this
off waiting for you for a month. How about jumping right in?"

All three eyed Larry. His lean face was expressionless. He lit a
cigarette, rose and leaned against the Duchess's safe on which stood
the green parrot, and, gaze on the floor, slowly exhaled smoke through
his nostrils.

"Well?" demanded Barney.

Larry looked at the two men with quiet, even eyes. "Thanks to both of
you. It's a great compliment. But I've had time to do a little
planning myself up in Sing Sing, and I've worked out a game that's got
this one beat a mile."

"Hell!" ejaculated Barney in wrathful disgust. "Jimmie, I told you we
were wasting time waiting for him!"

"Hold on a second, Barney. If Larry's worked out a better game, he'll
take us into it. But, Larry, how can your game beat this one?"

"Because there's more money in it. And because it's safer."

"Safe! Aw, hell!" The smouldering jealousy and hatred glared out of
Barney's greenish eyes. "I always knew you had a yellow streak!
Something safe! Aw, hell!"

"Don't blow up, Barney. What is the new game, Larry?" queried the old
man.

Larry regarded the two men steadfastly. He seemed reluctant to speak.

"Well?" prompted Old Jimmie. "Is it something you don't want to let us
in on?"

"Of course I'll let you in on it, and be glad to, if you want to come
in," Larry replied in his level tone. "As I said, I've thought it all
out and it's a great proposition. Here's the game: I'm going to run
straight."

For a moment all three sat astounded by this quiet statement from
their leader. Nothing he might have said could have been more
unexpected, more stupefying. The Duchess alone moved; she turned her
head and held her sunken eyes upon her grandson.

Simultaneously the two men and Maggie stood up.

"The hell you say!" grated Barney Palmer.

"Larry, you gone crazy?" cried Old Jimmie.

Maggie moved a pace nearer him. "Going to go straight?" she asked
incredulously.

"Listen, all of you," Larry said quietly. "No, Jimmie, I've not gone
crazy. I'm merely going a little sane. You just said I was a wonder at
business, Jimmie. I think I am myself. I thought it all over as a
business proposition. Suppose we clean up fifty or a hundred thousand
on a big deal. We've got to split it several ways, perhaps pay a big
piece to the police for protection, perhaps pay a lot of lawyers, and
then perhaps get sent away for a year or several years, during which
we don't take in a nickel. I figured that over a term of years my
average income was mighty small. As a business man it seemed to me
that I was in a poor business, with no future. So I decided to get
into a new business that had a future. That's the size of it."

"You're turning yellow--that's the real size of it!" snarled Barney
Palmer, half starting toward him.

"Better be a little careful, Barney," Larry warned with tightening
jaw.

"You really mean, Larry," demanded Old Jimmie, "that you're going to
drop us after us counting on you and waiting for you so long?"

"I'm sorry about having kept you waiting, Jimmie. But we've parted
definitely." Then Larry added: "Unless you want to travel my road."

"Your road! Never!" snapped Barney.

"And you, Jimmie?" Larry inquired, his eyes on Barney's inflamed
face.

"I don't see your proposition. And I'm too old a bird to start
something new. No, thanks. I'll stick to what I know."

His next words, showing his long yellow teeth, were spoken slowly, but
they were hard, and had a cutting edge. "You've got a sweet idea of
what's straight, Larry: dropping us without a leader, just when we
need a leader most."

Larry's composed yet watchful gaze was still on Barney. "You're not
really left in such a bad way. Barney here is ready to take charge."

"You bet I am!" Barney flamed at him, his hands clenching. "And the
bunch won't lose by the change, you bet! The bunch always thought you
were an ace--and I always knew you were a two-spot. And now they'll
see I was right--that you were always yellow!"

Larry still leaned against the safe in the same posture of seeming
ease, but he expected Barney to strike at any moment, and held himself
in readiness for a flashing fist. Barney had been hard to hold in
leash in the old days; now that all ties of partnership were broken,
he saw in those small gleaming eyes a defiance and a hatred that
henceforth had no reason for restraint. And he knew that Barney was
shrewd, grimly tenacious, and limitless in self-confidence and
ambition.

"And listen to this, too, Larry Brainard," Barney's temper carried him
on. "Don't you mix in and try any preaching on Maggie." He half turned
his head jealously. "Maggie, don't you listen to any of this boob's
Salvation Army talk!"

Maggie did not at once respond, but stood gazing at the two
confronting figures. To her they were an oddly dissimilar pair: Barney
in the smartest clothes that an over-smart Broadway tailor could
create, and Larry in the shapeless garments that were the State's gift
to him on leaving prison.

"Maggie," he repeated, "don't you listen to this boob's talk!"

"I'll do just as I please, Barney."

"But you're going to come our way?" he demanded.

"Of course."

He turned back to Larry. "You hear that? You leave Maggie alone!"

Larry did not answer, though his temper was rising. He looked over
Barney's head at Maggie's father.

"Jimmie," he remarked in his same even voice, "anything more you'd
like to say?"

"I'm through."

"Then," said Larry, "better lead your new commander-in-chief out of
here, or I'll carry him out and spank him."

"What's that?" snarled Barney.

"Get out!" Larry ordered, in a voice suddenly like steel.

Barney's fist swung viciously at Larry's head. It did not land,
because Larry's head was elsewhere. Larry did not take advantage of
the opening to strike back, but as the fist flashed by he seized the
wrist, and in the same instant he seized the other wrist. The next
moment he held Barney helpless in a twisting, torturing grip that he
had learned from one of his non-Christian friends at the Y.M.C.A.

"Barney--are you going to walk out, or shall I kick you out?"

Barney's answer came after a moment through gritted teeth: "I'll walk
out--but I'll get you for this!"

"I know you'll try, Barney. And I know you'll try to get me behind my
back." Larry loosed his grip. "Good-night."

Barney backed glowering to the door; and Old Jimmie, his gray face an
expressionless mask, silently followed him out.

All this while the Duchess had looked on, motionless in her corner, a
dingy, forgotten part of the dingy background--no more noticeable than
one of her own dusty, bizarre pledges.




CHAPTER VI


For a moment after the door had closed upon Barney and Old Jimmie,
Larry stood gazing at it. Then he turned to Maggie.

She was standing slenderly upright. Her head was imperiously high, her
black eyes defiant. Neither spoke at once. More than before was he
impressed by her present and her potential beauty. Till this night he
had thought of her only casually, as merely a young girl; he was not
now consciously in love with her--her young woman-hood had burst upon
him too suddenly for such a consciousness--but a warm tingling went
through him as he gazed at her imperious, self-confident youth. Part
of his mind was thinking much the same thought that Hunt had
considered a few hours earlier: here were the makings of a magnificent
adventuress.

"Maggie," he mused, "you didn't get your looks from your father. You
must have had a fine-looking mother."

"I don't know--I never saw her," she returned shortly.

"Poor kid," Larry mused on--"and with only Old Jimmie for a father."
She did not know what to say. For a long time she had dreamed of this
man as her hero; she had dreamed of splendid adventures with him in
which she should win his praise. And now--and now--

He switched to another subject.

"So you have decided to string along with your father and Barney?"

"I have."

"Don't you do it, Maggie."

"Don't you preach, Larry."

"I'm not preaching. I'm just talking business to you. The same as I
talked business to myself. The crooked game is a poor business for a
woman who can do something else--and you can do something else. I've
known a lot of women in the crooked game. They've all had a rotten
finish, or are headed for one. So forget it, Maggie. There's more in
the straight game."

She had swiftly come to feel herself stronger and wiser than her ex-
hero. In her tremendous pride and confidence of eighteen, she regarded
him almost with pitying condescension.

"Something's softened your brain, Larry. I know better. The people who
pretend to go straight are just fakes; they're playing a different
kind of a smooth game, that's all. Everybody is out to get his, and
get it the easiest and quickest way he can. You know that's so. And
that's just what I am going to do."

Larry had once talked much the same way, but it seemed puzzlingly
strange just now to hear such talk from a young girl. Then he
understood.

"You couldn't help having such ideas, Maggie, living among crooks ever
since you were a kid. Why, Old Jimmie could not have used better
methods, or got better results, if he had set out consciously to make
you a crook." Then a sudden possibility came to him. "D'you suppose he
could always have had that plan--to make you into a crook?" he asked.

"What difference does that make?" she demanded shortly.

"A funny thing for a father to do with his own child," Larry returned.
"But whether Jimmie intended it or not, that's just what he's done."

"What I am, I am," she retorted with her imperious defiance. Just then
she felt that she hated him; she quivered with a desire to hurt him:
he had so utterly destroyed her romantic hero and her romantic dreams.
Her hands clenched.

"You talk about going straight--it's all rot!" she flamed at him. "A
lot of men say they're going straight, but no one ever does! And you
won't either!"

"You think I won't?"

"I know you won't! You don't know how to do any regular work. And,
besides, no one will give a crook a chance."

She had unerringly placed her finger upon his two great problems, and
Larry knew it; he had considered them often enough.

"All the same, I'm going to make good!" he declared.

"Oh, no, you're not!"

Perhaps he was stirred chiefly by the sting of her taunting tongue, by
the blaze of her dark, disdainful eyes; and perhaps by the changed
feeling toward this creature whom he had left a half-grown girl and
returned to find a woman. At any rate, he crossed and seized her
wrists and gazed fiercely down upon her.

"I tell you, I'm going to go straight, and I'm going to make a success
of it! You'll see!" And then he added dominantly: "What's more, I'm
going to make you go straight, too!"

She made no attempt to free herself, but blazed up at him defiantly.
"You'll make me do nothing. I'm going to be just what I said, and I'm
going to make a success of it. Just wait--I'll prove to you what I can
do! And you--you'll be a failure, and will come slinking back and beg
us to take you in!"

They glared at each other silently, angrily, their aroused wills
defying each other. For a moment they stood so. Then something--a
mixture of his desire to dominate this defiant young thing and of that
growing change in him toward her--surged madly into Larry's head. He
caught Maggie in his arms and kissed her.

All the rigidity went suddenly from her figure and she hung loose in
his embrace. Their gazes held for a moment. She went pale, and
quivering all through she looked up at him in startled, wide-eyed
silence. As for Larry, a dizzying, throbbing emotion permeated his
whole astonished being.

Suddenly she pushed herself free from his relaxing arms, and backed
away from him.

"What did you do that for?" she whispered huskily.

But she did not wait for his answer. She turned and hurried for the
stairway. Three steps up she turned again and gazed down upon him. Her
cheeks were once more flushed and her dark eyes blazing.

"It's going to be just as I said!" she flung at him. "I'm going to
succeed--you're going to fail! You just wait and see!"

She turned and ran swiftly up the stairway and out of sight. Neither
of them had been aware that the Duchess, a drab figure merged into a
drab background, had regarded them fixedly during all this scene. And
Larry was still unconscious that the old eyes were now watching him
with their deep-set, expressionless fixity.

Motionless, Larry stood gazing at where Maggie had been. Within him
was tumult; he did not yet understand the significance of that
impulsive kiss . . . He began to walk the floor, his mind and will now
more in control. Yes, he was going to go straight; he was going to
make good, and make good in a big way! And he was going to make Maggie
go straight, too. He'd show her! It wasn't going to be easy, but he
had his big plan made, and he had determination, and he knew he'd win
in the end. Yes, he'd show her! . . .

Up before the mirror Maggie sat looking intently at herself. Part of
her consciousness was wondering about that kiss, and part kept
fiercely repeating that she'd show him--she'd show him--she'd show
him! . . .

Looking thus into their futures they were both very certain of
themselves and of the roads which they were to travel.




CHAPTER VII


Larry was still gazing at where Maggie had stood, flashing her
defiance at him, when Hunt came thumping down the stairway.

"Hello, young fellow; what you been doing to Maggie?" demanded the
painter.

"Why?"

"Her door was open when I came by and I called to her. She didn't
answer, but, oh, what a look! What's in the air?"

And then Hunt noted the Duchess apart in her corner. "I say, Duchess--
what were Larry and Maggie rowing about?"

"Grandmother!" Larry exclaimed with a start. "I'd forgotten you were
here! You must have heard it all--go ahead and tell him."

"Tell him yourself," returned the Duchess.

Larry and Hunt took chairs, and Larry gave the gist of what he had
said about his decision to Barney and Old Jimmie and Maggie. The
Duchess, still motionless at her desk as she had been all during
Larry's scene with Old Jimmie and Barney, and then his scene with
Maggie, regarded her grandson with that emotionless, mummified face in
which only the red-margined eyes showed life or interest.

"So you're going to go straight, eh?" queried Hunt. The big painter
sat with his long legs sprawling in front of him, a black pipe in his
mouth, and looked at Larry skeptically. "You certainly did hand a jolt
to your friends who'd been counting on you. And yet you're sore
because they were sore at you and didn't believe in you."

"Did I say that I was sore?" queried Larry.

"No, but you're acting it. And you're sore at Maggie because she
didn't believe that you could make good or that you'd stick it out.
Well, I don't believe you will either."

"You're a great painter, Hunt, and a great cook--but I don't give a
damn what you believe."

"Keep your shirt on, young fellow," Hunt responded, puffing
imperturbably. "I say I believe you won't win out--but that's not
saying I don't want you to win out. If that's what you want to do, go
to it, and may luck be with you, and may the devil stay in hell. The
morals of other people are out of my line--none of my business. I'm a
painter, and it's my business to paint people as I find them. But
Maggie certainly did put her finger on the tough spot in your
proposition: for a crook to find a job and win the confidence of
people. It's up grade all the way, and it takes ten men's nerve to
stick it out to the top. Yep, Maggie was sure right!"

And then the Duchess broke her accustomed silence with her thin croak:

"Never you mind Maggie! She thinks she knows everything, but she
doesn't know anything."

Larry looked in surprise at his grandmother. There was a flash in her
old eyes; but the next moment the spark was gone.

"Sure you're up against it--but I'll be rooting for you." Hunt was
grinning. "But say, young fellow, what made you decide to vote the
other ticket?"

Larry was trained at reading faces; and in the rough-hewn, grinning
features of Hunt he read good-fellowship. Larry swiftly responded in
kind, for from the moment he had pulled the mask of being a fool from
the painter and shown him to be a real artist, he had felt drawn
toward this impecunious swashbuckler of the arts. So he now repeated
the business motives which he had presented to Barney and Old Jimmie.
As Larry talked he became more spontaneous, and after a time he was
telling of the effect upon him of seeing various shrewd men locked up
and unexercised in prison. And presently his reminiscence settled upon
one prison acquaintance: a man past middle age, clever in his
generation, who had already done some fifteen years of a long
sentence. He was, said Larry, grim and he rarely spoke; but a close,
wordless friendship had developed between them. Only once, in an
unusually relaxed mood, had the old convict spoken of himself, but
what he had then said had had a greater part in rousing Larry to his
new decision than the words of any other man.

"It was a queer story Joe let out," continued Larry. "Before he was
sent away he had a kid, just a baby whose mother was dead. He told me
he wanted to have his kid brought up without ever knowing anything
about the kind of people he knew and the kind of life he'd lived. He
wanted it to grow up among decent people. He had money put away and he
had an old friend, a pal, that he'd trust with anything. So he turned
over his money and his baby to his friend, and gave orders that the
kid was to be brought up decent, sent to school, and that the kid was
never to know anything about Joe. Of course the baby was too young
then ever to remember him; and when he gets out he's going to keep
absolutely clear of the kid's life--he wants his kid to have the best
possible chance."

"What is his whole name, and what was he sent up for?" queried the
Duchess, that flickering fire of interest once more in her old eyes.

"Joe Ellison. He was an old-time confidence man. He got caught in a
jam--there had been drinking--there was some shooting--and he had
attempted manslaughter tacked on to the charge of swindling. But Joe
said everybody had been drinking and that the shooting was
accidental."

"Joe Ellison--I knew him," said the Duchess. "He was about the
cleverest man of his day. But I never knew he had a child. Who was
this best friend of his?"

"Joe Ellison didn't mention his name," answered Larry. "You see Joe
spoke of his story only once. But he then said that he'd had letters
once a month telling how fine the kid was getting on--till three or
four years ago when he got word that his friend had died. The way
things stand now, Joe won't know how to find the kid when he gets out
even if he should want to find it--and he wouldn't know it even if he
saw it. Up in Sing Sing when I had nothing else to do," concluded
Larry, "I tell you I thought a lot about that situation--for it
certainly is some situation: Joe Ellison for fifteen years in prison
with just one big idea in his life, the idea being the one thing he
felt he was really doing or ever could do, his very life built on that
one idea: that outside, somewhere, was his kid growing up into a fine
young person--never guessing it had such a father--and Joe never
intending to see it again and not being able to know it if he ever
should see it. I tell you, after learning Joe's story, it made me feel
that I'd had enough of the old life."

Again the Duchess spoke. "Did Joe ever mention its name?"

"No, he just spoke of it as 'his kid.'"

Larry was quiet a moment. "You see," he added, "I want to get settled
before Joe comes out--his time's up in a few months--so that I can
give him some sort of place near me. He's all right, Joe is; but he's
too old to have any show at a fresh start if he tries to make it all
on his own."

"Larry, you haven't got such a tough piece of old brass for a heart
yourself," commented Hunt. "What are your own plans?"

"I know I've got the makings of a real business man--I've already
told you that," said Larry confidently. He had thought this out
carefully during his days as a coal-passer and his long nights upon
the eighteen-inch bunk in his cell. "I've got a lot of the finishing
touches; I know the high spots. What I need are the rudiments--the
fundamentals--connecting links. You see, I had part of a business
college training a long time before I went to work in a broker's
office, stenography and typewriting; I've been a secretary in the
warden's office the last few months and I've brushed up on the old
stuff and I'm pretty good. That ought to land me a job. Then I'm going
to study nights. Of course, I'd get on faster if I could have private
lessons with one of the head men of one of these real business
schools. I'd mop up this stuff about organization and management
mighty quick, for that business stuff comes natural to me. A bit of
that sort of going to school would connect up and give a working unity
to what I already know. But then I'll find a job and work the thing
out some way. I'm in this to win out, and win out big!"

Once more the rarely heard voice of the Duchess sounded, and though
thin it had a positive quality:

"You're not going to take any job at first. First thing, you're going
to give all your time to those private lessons."

Larry gazed at the Duchess, surprised by the tone in which she spoke.
"But, grandmother, these lessons cost money. And I didn't have a thin
dime left when my lawyers finished with me."

"I've got plenty of money--and it's yours. And the money you get from
me will be honest money, too; the interest on loans made in my
pawnshop is honest all right. It'll be better, anyhow, for you to be
out in the world a few days, getting used to it, before you take a
job."

"Why, grandmother!"

The explanation seemed bald and inadequate, but Larry did not know
what else to say, he was so taken aback. The Duchess, as far as he had
been able to see, had never shown much interest in him. And now,
unless he was mistaken, there was something very much like emotion
quavering in her thin voice and shining in her old eyes.

"I don't interfere with what people want to do," she continued--"but,
Larry, I'm glad you've decided to go straight."

And then the Duchess went on to make the longest speech that any
living person had ever heard issue from her lips, and to reveal more
than had yet been heard of that unmysterious mystery which lived
within her shriveled, misshapen figure:

"That's what made me interested in Joe Ellison's story--his wanting to
get his child clear of the life he was living; though I didn't know he
had any such ideas till you told me. Larry, I couldn't get out of this
life myself; I was part of it, I belonged to it. But I felt the same
as Joe Ellison, and over forty years ago I got your mother out of it,
and your mother never came back to it. I did that much. After she died
it made me sick when you, all I've got left, began to go crooked. But
I had no control over you; I couldn't do anything. So I'm glad that at
last you're going to go straight. I'm glad, Larry!"

The emotion that had given her voice a strange and increasing
vibrance, was suddenly brought under control or snuffed out; and she
added in her usual thin, mechanical tone: "The money will be ready for
you in the morning."

Startled and embarrassed by this outbreak of things long hidden
beneath the dust in the secret chambers of her being, and wishing to
avoid the further embarrassment of thanks, the Duchess turned quickly
and awkwardly back to her desk, and her bent old body became fixed
above her figures. In a moment the ever-alert Hunt had out the little
block of drawing-paper he always carried in a pocket, and with swift,
eager strokes he was sketching the outline of that bent, shrunken
shape that had subsided so swiftly from emotion to the commonplace.

Larry gazed at the Duchess in silent bewilderment. He had thought he
had known his grandmother. He was now realizing that perhaps he did
not know his grandmother at all.




CHAPTER VIII


That night Larry slept on a cot set up in Hunt's studio. Hunt had made
the proposition that Larry consider the studio his headquarters for
the present, and Larry had accepted. Of course the cot and the rough-
and-ready furnishings of the studio were grotesquely short of the
luxury of those sunny days when Larry had had plenty of easy money and
had been free to gratify his taste for the best of everything; but the
quarters were infinitely more luxurious and comfortable than his more
recent three-by-seven room at Sing Sing with its damp and chilly stone
walls.

There were many reasons why Larry was appealed to by the idea of
making his home for the present in this old house in this dingy,
unexciting, unromantic street. He was drawn toward this bluff,
outspoken, autocratic painter, and was curious about him. And then the
way his grandmother had spoken, the gleam in her old eyes, had stirred
an affection for her that he had never before felt. And then there was
Maggie, with her startlingly new dusky beauty, her admiration of him
that had so swiftly altered to defiance, her challenge to a duel of
purposes.

Yes, for the present, this dingy old house in this dingy old street
was just the place he preferred to be.

It was not the part of wisdom to start forth on the beginning of his
new career in his shapeless prison shoddy; so the next day Larry
pottered about the studio, acting as maid-of-all-work, while the
clothes in his trunk which had been stored with the Duchess were being
sponged and pressed by the little tailor down the street, and while a
laundress, driven by the Duchess, was preparing the rest of his outfit
for his debut. In his capacity of maid, with a basket on his arm, he
went out into the little street, where in his shabby clothes he was
recognized by none and leaned for a time against the mongrel, underfed
tree that was hesitatingly greeting the spring with a few half-hearted
leaves. He bathed himself in the warm sun which seemed over-glorious
for so mean a street; he filled his lungs with the tangy May air; yes,
it was wonderful to be free again!

Then he strolled about the street on his business of marketing. It
amused him to be buying three pounds of potatoes and a pound of
chopped meat and a package of macaroni, and to be counting Hunt's
pennies--remembering those days when he had been a personage to head
waiters, and had had his table reserved, and with a careless Midas's
gesture had left a dollar, or five, or twenty, for the waiter's tip.

When he climbed back into the studio he watched Hunt slashing about
with his paint. Hunt growled and roared at him, and kidded him; and
Larry came back at him with the same kind of verbal horseplay, after
the fashion of men. Presently a relaxation, if not actual friendship,
began to develop in their attitude toward each other.

"Tell you what," Larry remarked, standing with legs wide apart gazing
at the picture of the Italian mother throned on the curb nursing her
child, "if I were dolled up all proper, I bet I could take some of
this stuff out and sell it for real dough."

"Huh, nobody wants that stuff!" snorted Hunt. "It's too good. Sell it!
You're off your bean, young fellow!"

"I can sell anything, my bucko," Larry returned evenly. "All I need is
a man who has plenty of money and a moderate willingness to listen.
I've sold pictures of an oil derrick on a stock certificate, exact
value nothing at all, for a masterpiece's price--so I guess I could
sell a real picture."

"Aw, you shut up!"

"The real trouble with you," commented Larry, "is that, though you can
paint, as a business man, as a promoter of your own stock, the
suckling infant in that picture is a J. Pierpont Morgan of multiplied
capacity compared to--"

"Stop making that noise like a damned fool!"

This amiable pastime of throwing stones at each other was just then
interrupted by the entrance of Maggie for an appointed sitting, before
going to her business of carrying a tray of cigarettes about the
Ritzmore. She gave Hunt a pleasant "good-morning," the pleasantness
purposely stressed in order to make more emphatic her curt nod to
Larry and the cold hostility of her eye. During the hour she posed,
Larry, moving leisurely about his kitchen duties, addressed her
several times, but no remark got a word from her in response. He took
his rebuffs smilingly, which irritated her all the more.

"Maggie, I'll get my real clothes late this afternoon; how about my
dropping in at the Ritzmore for a cup of tea, and letting me buy some
cigarettes and talk to you when you're not busy?" he inquired when
Hunt had finished with her.

"You may buy cigarettes, but you'll get no talk!" she snapped, and
head high and dark eyes flashing contempt, she swept past him.

Hunt watched her out. As the door slammed behind her, he remarked
dryly, his eyes searching Larry keenly:

"Our young queen doesn't seem wildly enthusiastic about you or your
programme."

"She certainly is not."

"Don't let that worry you, young fellow. That's a common trait of her
whole tribe; women simply cannot believe in a man!"

There was an emphasis and a cynicism in this last remark which caused
Larry to regard the painter searchingly. "You seem to know what it is.
Don't mean to butt in, Hunt, if there are any trespassing signs up--
but there's a woman in your case?"

"Of course there is--there's always a woman; that's another reason I'm
here," Hunt answered. "She didn't believe in me--didn't believe I
could paint--didn't believe in the things I wanted to do--so I just
picked up my playthings and walked out of her existence."

"Wife?" queried Larry.

"Thank God, no!" exclaimed Hunt emphatically. "No--'I thank whatever
gods there be, I am the captain of my soul!' Oh, she's all right--
altogether too good for me," he added. "Here, try this tobacco."

Larry picked up the pouch flung him and accepted without remark this
being abruptly shunted off the track. But he surmised that this woman
in the background of Hunt's life meant a great deal more to the
painter than Hunt tried to indicate by his attempt to dismiss her
casually--and Larry wondered what kind of woman she was, and what the
story had been.

The following day, clean-shaven and in his freshened clothes--they
were smart and well-tailored, though sober indeed compared with
Barney's, and two years behind the style of which Barney's were the
extreme expression--Larry passed Maggie on the stairway with a smile,
who gave him no smile in return, and started forth upon his quest. He
was well-dressed, he had money in his pockets, he had a plan, and the
air of freedom of a new life was sweet in his nostrils. He was going
to succeed!

It was easy enough, with his mind alert for what he wanted, and with
the Duchess's liberal allowance to pay for what he wanted, for Larry
to find in this city of ten thousand institutes teaching business
methods, the particular article which suited his especial needs. He
found this article in an institute whose black-faced headline in its
advertisements was, "We Make You a $50,000 Executive"; and the article
which he found, by payment of a special fee, was an old man who had
been the manager of a big brokerage concern until his growing
addiction to drink and later to drugs had rendered him undependable.
But old Bronson certainly did know the fundamentals and intricacies of
the kind of big business which is straight, and it was a delight to
him to pour out his knowledge to a keen intelligence.

Larry, in his own words, simply "mopped it up." His experience had
been so wide and varied that he now had only to be shown a bone of
fact and almost instantly he visioned in their completeness unextinct
ichthyosauri of business. By day he fairly consumed old B