ronson; he
read dry books far into the night. Thus he rapidly filled the holes in
the walls of his knowledge, and strengthened its rather sketchy
foundation. Of course he realized that what he was learning was in a
sense academic; it had to be tested and developed and made flexible by
experience; but then much of it became instantly a living enlargement
of the things of which he was already a master.

Old Bronson was delighted; he had never had so apt a pupil. "In less
than no time you'll be the real head of that house you're with!" he
proudly declared. Larry had not seen it as needful to tell the truth
about himself; his casual story was that he was there putting to use a
month's holiday granted him by a mythical firm in Chicago.

The Duchess's statement that it would be best for him not to seek work
at once was founded on wisdom. Larry was busy and interested, but he
did not yet have to face the constant suspicion and hostility which
are usually the disheartening lot of the ex-convict who asks for a
position. In this period his confidence and his purpose expanded with
new vitality.

As the busy days passed down in the little street, the bantering
fellowship between Larry and Hunt took deeper root. The Duchess did
not again show any of the emotion which had gleamed in her briefly
when Larry had announced his new plan; but bent and silent went like
an oddly revivified mummy about her affairs. And during these days he
did not again see Barney or Old Jimmie; he had learned that on the day
following his conference with them they had gone to Chicago on a very
private matter of business.

He saw Maggie daily, but she maintained the same attitude toward him.
He was now conscious that he was in love. He saw splendid qualities in
her, most of them latent. Maggie had determination, high spirits,
cleverness, courage, and capacity for sympathy and affection; she had
head, heart, and beauty, the makings of an unusual woman, if only she
could be swung into a different attitude of mind. But he realized that
there was small chance indeed of his working any alteration in her,
much less winning her admitted regard, until he was definitely a
success, until he had definitely proven himself right. So he took her
rebuffs with a smile, and waited his time.

He understood her point of view, and sympathized with her; for her
point of view had once been his own. With a growing understanding he
saw her as the natural product of such a fathership as Old Jimmie's,
and of the cynical environment which Old Jimmie had given her in which
crime was a matter of course. In this connection one matter that had
previously interested him began to engage his speculation more and
more. All her life, until recently, Old Jimmie had apparently shown
little more concern over Maggie than one shows over a piece of baggage
which is stored in this and that warehouse--and so valueless a piece
of baggage in Old Jimmie's case that it had always been stored in the
worst warehouses. What was behind Old Jimmie's new interest in his
daughter?

Old Jimmie had in late months awakened to the value to him of Maggie
as a business proposition--that was Larry's answer to his own
question.

As for Maggie, during these days, the mere fact that Larry smiled at
her and refused to get angry angered her all the more. Her anger at
him, the manner in which he had refused her offered and long-dreamed-
of partnership, would not permit her pride and self-confidence to
consider any justification for him to enter her mind and argue in his
behalf. The great dream she had nourished had been destroyed. And,
moreover, he had proclaimed himself a fool.

Yes, despite him and all he could do, she was going to go the
brilliant, exciting way she had planned!

In fairness to Maggie it must be remembered that despite her assumed
maturity and self-confident wisdom, she really was only eighteen, and
perhaps did not yet fully know herself, and had all the world yet to
learn. And it must be remembered that she believed herself entirely in
the right. This was a world where strength and cunning were the
qualities that counted, and every one was trying to outwit his
neighbor; and all who acted otherwise were either weak-witted fools or
else pretenders who saw in their hypocrisy the keenest game of all.
Living under the influence of Old Jimmie, and later of Barney, and of
the environment in which she had been bred, these beliefs had come to
be her religion. She was thoroughly orthodox, and had the defensive
and aggressive fervor which is the temper of militant orthodoxy.

And so more keenly than ever, because she was more determined than
ever, Maggie studied the groups of well-dressed men and women who ate
and danced at the Ritzmore, among whom she circulated in her short,
smart skirt with her cigarette tray swung from her neck by a broad
purple ribbon. Particularly she liked the after-theater crowd, for
then only evening wear was permitted in the supper-room and the people
were at their liveliest. She liked to watch the famous professional
couple do their specialties on the glistening central space with the
agile spot-lights always bathing them; and then watch the smartly
dressed guests take the floor with the less practiced and more humble
steps. Sometime soon she was going to have clothes as smart as any of
these. Soon she would be one of these brilliant people, and have a
life more exciting than any. Very soon--for her apprenticeship was
almost over!

Barney Palmer had these last few months, since he had discovered in
Maggie a star who only needed coaching and then an opportunity, made
it a practice to come for Maggie occasionally when one o'clock, New
York's curfew hour, dispersed the pleasure-seekers and ended Maggie's
day of work, or rather her day of intensive schooling for her greater
life. On the night of his return from Chicago, which was a week after
his break with Larry, Barney reported to take Maggie home. He was in
swagger evening clothes and he asked the starter for a taxi; with an
almost lordly air and for the service of a white-gloved gesture to a
chauffeur, he carelessly handed the starter (who, by the way, was a
richer man than Barney) a crisp dollar bill. Barney was trying to make
his best impression.

"Seen much of that stiff, Larry Brainard?" he asked when the cab was
headed southward.

His tone, which he tried to make merely contemptuous, conveyed the
deep wrath which he still felt whenever his mind reverted to Larry.
Maggie reserved to herself the privilege of thinking of Larry just as
she pleased; but being the kind of girl she was, she could not help
being also a bit of a coquette.

"I didn't think he was such a stiff, Barney," she said in an
irritatingly pleasant voice. "His prison clothes were bad, but now
that he's dressed right I think he looks awfully nice. You and father
have always said he looked the perfect swell."

"See here--has he been talking to you?" Barney demanded savagely.

"A little. Yes, several times. In fact he said quite a lot that night
after you'd gone."

"What did he say?"

"He said he was not only going to go straight, but"--in her
provocative, teasing voice--"he was going to make me go straight."

"What's that? Tell me just what he said!" demanded Barney, his wrath
suddenly flaring into furious jealousy.

Maggie told him in detail; in fact told him the scene in greater
detail and with a greater length than had been the actuality. Also she
censored the scene by omitting her own opposition to Larry's
determination. She enjoyed playing with Barney, the exercise of the
power she had over Barney's passions.

"And you stood for all that!" cried Barney. By this time they were far
down town. "You listen to me, Maggie: What I said to Larry's face that
night at the Duchess's still stands. I think he's yellow and has
turned against his old pals. I tell you what, I'm going to watch that
guy!"

"You won't find it hard to watch him, Barney. Larry never hides
himself."

"Oh, I'll watch him all right! And you, Maggie--why, you talk as
though you liked that line of talk he gave you!"

"Larry talks well--and I did like it, rather."

"See here! You're not falling for him? You're not going to let him
make you go straight?"

Maggie certainly had no intention of letting any such thing come to
pass; but she could not check her innocent-toned baiting.

"How do I know what he'll make me do? He's clever and handsome, you
know."

Barney gripped her shoulder fiercely. "Maggie--are you falling in love
with him?"

"How do I know, when--"

"Maggie!" He gripped her more tightly, and his phrases tumbled out
fiercely, rapidly. "You're not going to do anything of the sort! If he
goes straight--if you go straight--how can he ever help you? He can't!
And it will be your finish--the finish of all the big things we've
talked about. Listen: since Larry threw us down, I've taken hold of
things and will soon be ready to spring something big. Just a few days
now and you'll be out of that dirty street, and you'll be in swell
clothes doing swell work--and it will mean the best restaurants,
theaters, swell times!"

The car had turned into the narrow, cobbled street and had paused
before the Duchess's. Suddenly Barney caught her into his arms.

"And, Maggie, you're going to be mine! We'll have a nifty little
place, all right! You know I'm dippy about you....And, Maggie, I don't
even want you to go back in there where Larry Brainard is. Let's drive
back uptown and start in together now! To-night!"

It was not the fact that he had not suggested marriage which stirred
Maggie: men and women in Barney's class lived together, and sometimes
they were married and sometimes they were not. It was something else,
something of which she was not definitely conscious: but she felt no
such momentary thrill, no momentary, dazing surrender, as she had felt
the night when Larry had similarly held her.

"Stop that, Barney!" she gasped. "Let me go!" She struggled fiercely,
and then tore herself free.

"What's wrong with you?" panted Barney. "You're mine, ain't you?"

"You leave me alone! I'm going to get out!"

She had the door open, and was stepping out when he caught her sleeve.
But she pulled so determinedly that to have held her would have meant
nothing better than ripping the sleeve out of her coat. So he freed
her and followed her across the sidewalk to the Duchess's door.

"What's the idea?" he demanded, choking with fierce jealousy. "It's
not Larry, after all? You're not going to let him make you go
straight?"

She had recovered her poise, and she replied banteringly:

"As I said, how can I tell what he's going to make me do?"

She heard him draw a deep, quivering breath between clenched teeth;
but she could not see how his figure tensed and how his face twisted
into a glower.

"Get this, Maggie: Larry Brainard is never going to be able to make
you do anything. You get that?"

"Yes, I get it, Barney; good-night," she said lightly.

And Maggie slipped through the door and left Barney trembling in the
little street.




CHAPTER IX


Maggie, as she mounted to her room, was hardly conscious of the ring
of menace in Barney's voice; but once she was in bed, his tone and his
words came back to her and stirred a strange uneasiness in her mind.
Barney was angry; Barney was cunning; Barney would stop at nothing to
gain his ends. What might be behind his threatening words?

The next morning as she was coming in with milk for her breakfast
coffee, she met Larry in the Duchess's room behind the pawnshop. He
smilingly planted himself squarely in her way.

"See here, Maggie--aren't you ever going to speak to a fellow?"

Something within her surged up impelling her to tell him of Barney's
savage yet unformulated threat. The warning got as far as her tongue,
and there halted, struggling.

Her strange, fixed look startled Larry. "Why, what's the matter,
Maggie?" he exclaimed.

But her pride, her settled determination to unbend to him in no way
and to have no dealings with him, were stronger than her impulse; and
the struggling warning remained unuttered.

"Nothing's the matter," she said, and brushed past him and hurried up
the stairway.

At times during the day, while tutoring with Mr. Bronson, Larry
thought of Maggie's strange look. And his mind was upon it late in the
afternoon when he entered the little street. But as he neared his
grandmother's house all such thought was banished by Detective Gavegan
of the Central Office stepping from the pawnshop and blocking the door
with his big figure. There was grim, triumphant purpose on the hard
features of Gavegan, conceited by nature and trained to harsh
dominance by long rule as a petty autocrat.

"Hello, Gavegan," Larry greeted him pleasantly. "Gee, but you look
tickled! Did the Duchess give you a bigger loan than you expected on
the Carnegie medal you just hocked?"

"You'll soon be cuttin' out your line of comedy." Gavegan slipped his
left arm through Larry's right. "You're comin' along with me, and
you'd better come quiet."

Larry stiffened. "Come where?"

"Headquarters."

"I haven't done a thing, Gavegan, and you know it! What do you want me
for?"

"Me and the Chief had a little talk about you," leered Gavegan. "And
now the Chief wants to have a little personal talk with you. He asked
me to round you up and bring you in."

"I've done nothing, and I'll not go!" Larry cried hotly.

"Oh, yes, you will!" Gavegan withdrew his right hand from his coat
pocket where it had been resting in readiness. In the hand, its thong
about his wrist, was a short leather-covered object filled with lead.
"I've got my orders, and you'll come peaceably, or--But I'd just as
soon you'd resist, for I owe you something for the punch you slipped
over on me the other night."

Larry, taut with the desire to strike, gazed for a moment into the
glowering face of the detective. Gavegan, gripping his right arm, with
that bone-crushing slug-shot itching for instant use, was apparently
master in the present circumstances. But before Larry's quick mind had
decided upon a course, the door of the pawnshop opened and closed, and
a voice said sharply:

"Nothing doing on that rough stuff, Gavegan!" The speaker was now on
Larry's left side, a heavy-faced man in a black derby. "Larry, better
be a nice boy and come with us."

"Oh, it's you, Casey!" said Larry. "If you say I've got to go, I'll
go--for you're one white copper, even if you do have Gavegan for a
partner. Come on. What're we standing here for?"

The trio made their way out of the narrow street, and after some
fifteen minutes of walking through the twisting byways of that part of
the city, they passed through the granite doorway at Headquarters and
entered the office of Deputy Commissioner Barlow, Chief of the
Detective Bureau. Barlow was talking over the telephone in a growling
staccato, and the three men sat down. After a moment Barlow banged the
receiver upon its hook, and turned upon them. He had a clenched,
driving face, with small, commanding eyes. It was his boast that he
got results, that it was his policy to make people do what you told
'em. He had no other code.

"Well, Brainard," he snapped, "here you are again. What you up to
now?"

"Going to try the straight game, Chief," returned Larry.

"Don't try to put that old bunk over on me!"

"It's not bunk, Chief. It's the real stuff."

"Cut it out, I say! Don't you suppose I had a clever bird like you
picked up the minute you landed in the city, and have had you covered
ever since? And if you are going straight, what about the session you
had with Barney Palmer and Old Jimmie Carlisle the very night you blew
in? And I'm on to this bluff of your going to that business institute.
So come across, Brainard! I've got your every move covered!"

"I've already come across, Chief," replied Larry, trying to keep his
temper in the face of the other's bullying manner. "I told Barney and
Old Jimmie that I was through with the old game, and through with them
as pals at the old game--that's all there was to that meeting. I'm
going to that business institute for the same reason that every other
person goes there--to learn. That's all there is to the whole
business, Chief: I'm going to go straight."

Chief Barlow, hunched forward, his undershot jaw clenched on a cigar
stub, regarded Larry steadily with his beady, autocratic eyes. Barlow
was trained to penetrate to the inside of men's minds, and he
recognized that Larry was in earnest.

"You mean you think you are going to go straight," Barlow remarked
slowly and meaningly.

"I know I am going to go straight," Larry returned evenly, meeting
squarely the gaze of the Chief of Detectives.

"Do you realize, young man," Barlow continued in the same measured,
significant tone, "that whether you go straight, and how you go
straight, depends pretty much on me?"

"Mind making that a little clearer, Chief?"

"I'll show you part of my hand--just remember that I'm holding back my
high cards. I don't believe you're going to go straight, so we'll
start with the proposition that you're not going to run straight and
work on from there. You're clever, Brainard--I hand you that; and all
the classy crooks trust you. That's why I had picked you out for what
I wanted long before you left stir. Brainard, you're wise enough to
know that some of our best pinches come from tips handed us from the
inside. Brainard"--the slow voice had now become incisive, mandatory--
"you're not going to go straight. You're going to string along with
Barney and Old Jimmie and the rest of the bunch--we'll protect you--
and you're going to slip us tips when something big is about to be
pulled off."

Larry, experienced with police methods though he was, could hardly
believe this thing which was being proposed to him, Larry Brainard.
But he controlled himself.

"If I get you, Chief, you are suggesting that I become a police
stool?"

"Exactly. We'll never tip your hand. And any little thing you pull off
on your own we'll not bother you about. And, besides, we'll slip you a
little dough regular on the quiet."

"And all you want me to do in exchange," Larry asked quietly, "is to
hand up my pals?"

"That's all."

Larry found it required his all of strength to control himself; but he
did.

"There are only three small objections to your proposition, Chief."

"Yes?"

"The first is, I shall not be a stool."

"What's that?"

"And the second is, I wouldn't squeal on a pal to you even if I were a
crook. And the third is what I said in the beginning: I'm not going to
be a crook."

Barlow's squat, powerful figure arose menacingly. Casey also stood up.

"I tell you you ARE going to be a crook!" Barlow's big fist crashed
down on his desk in a tremendous exclamation point. "And you're going
to work for me exactly as I tell you!"

"I have already given you my final word," said Larry.

"You--you--" Barlow almost choked at this quiet defiance. His face
turned red, his breath came in a fluttering snarl, his powerful
shoulders hunched up as if he were about to strike. But he held back
his physical blows.

"That's your ultimatum?"

"If you care to call it so--yes."

"Then here's mine! I told you I was holding back my high cards. Either
you do as I say, and work with Gavegan and Casey, or you'll not be
able to hold a job in New York! My men will see to that. And here's
another high card. You do as I've said, or I'll hang some charge on
you, one that'll stick, and back up the river you'll go for another
stretch! There's an ultimatum for you to think about!"

It certainly was. Larry gazed into the harsh, glaring face, set in
fierce determination. He knew that Barlow, as part of his policy,
loved to break down the spirit of criminals; and he knew that nothing
so roused Barlow as opposition from a man he considered in his power.
Close beside the Chief he saw the gloating, malignant face of Gavegan;
Casey, who had been restless since the beginning of the scene, had
moved to the window and was gazing down into Center Street.

For a moment Larry did not reply. Barlow mistook Larry's silence for
wavering, or the beginning of an inclination to yield.

"You turn that over in your noodle," Barlow drove on. "You're going to
go crooked, anyhow, so you might as well go crooked in the only way
that's safe for you. I'm going to have Gavegan and Casey watch you,
and if in the next few days you don't begin to string along with
Barney and Old Jimmie and that bunch, and if you don't get me word
that your answer to my proposition is 'yes,' hell's going to fall on
you! Now get out of here!"

Larry got out. He was liquid lava of rage inside; but he had had
enough to do with police power to know that it would help him not at
all to permit an eruption against a police official while he was in
the very heart of the police stronghold.

He walked back toward his own street in a fury, beneath which was
subconsciously an element of uneasiness: an uneasiness which would
have been instantly roused to caution had he known that Barney Palmer
had this hour and more been following him in a taxicab, and that
across the street from the car's window Barney's sharp face had
watched him enter Police Headquarters and had watched him emerge.

Home reached, Larry briefly recounted his experience at Headquarters
to Hunt and the Duchess. The painter whistled; the Duchess blinked and
said nothing at all.

"Maggie was more right than she knew when she first said you were
facing a tough proposition!" exclaimed Hunt. "Believe me, young
fellow, you're certainly up against it!"

"Can you beat it for irony!" said Larry, pacing the floor. "A man
wants to go straight. His pals ask him to be a crook, and are sore
because he won't be a crook. The police ask him to be a crook, and
threaten him because he doesn't want to be a crook. Some situation!"

"Some situation!" repeated Hunt. "What're you going to do?"

"Do?" Larry halted, his face set with defiant determination. "I'm
going to keep on doing exactly what I've been doing! And they can all
go to hell!"




CHAPTER X


For several days nothing seemed to be happening, though Larry had a
sense that unknown forces were gathering on distant isothermal lines
and bad weather was bearing down upon him. During these days, trying
to ignore that formless trouble, he gave himself with a most rigid
determination to his new routine--the routine which he counted on to
help him into the way of great things.

Every day he saw Maggie; sometimes he was in her company for an hour
or more. He had the natural hunger of a young man to talk to a young
woman; and, moreover, it is a severe strain for a man to be living
under the same roof with the girl he loves and not to be on terms of
friendship with her. But Maggie maintained her aloofness. She spoke
only when she was pressed into it, and her speech was usually no more
than a "yes" or a "no," or a flashing phrase of disdain.

At times Larry had the feeling that, for all her repression, Maggie
would have been glad to be more free with him. And he knew enough of
human nature not to be too disheartened by her attitude. Had he been a
nonentity to her, she would have ignored him. Her very insults were
proof that he was a positive personality with real significance in her
life. And so he counseled himself to have patience and await a thawing
or an awaking. Besides, he kept repeating to himself, there would be
small chance of effecting a conversion in this militant young
orthodoxist of cynicism until he had proved the soundness of contrary
views by his own established success.

And thus the days drifted by. But on the fifth day after his interview
with Barlow things began to happen. First of all, he noticed in a
morning paper that Red Hannigan and Jack Rosenfeldt, members of his
old outfit and suggested by Old Jimmie as participants in his proposed
new enterprise, had just been arrested by Gavegan and Casey on the
charge of alleged connection with the sale of fraudulent mining stock.

Second, on his return at the end of the afternoon, he saw standing
before the house a taxicab with a trunk beside the chauffeur. In the
musty museum of a room behind the pawnshop he found Hunt and the
Duchess and Old Jimmie and Barney; and also Maggie, coming down the
stairway, hat and coat on and carrying a suitcase. A sharp pain
throbbed through him as he recognized the significance of Maggie's hat
and coat and baggage.

"Maggie--you're going away?" he exclaimed.

"Yes."

She had paused at the foot of the stairway, and at sight of him had
gone a little pale and wide-eyed. But in an instant she had recovered
her accustomed flair; there came a proud lift to her head, a flash of
scorn into her dark eyes.

"At last I'm leaving this street for good," she said. "I told you that
some day I was going out into the world and do big things. The time's
come--I'm graduated--I'm going to begin real work. And I'm going to
succeed--you see!"

"Maggie!" he breathed. Then impulsively he started toward her
authoritatively. "Maggie, I'm not going to let you do anything of the
sort!"

But swiftly Barney had stepped in between them, Old Jimmie just behind
him.

"Keep out of this!" Barney snapped at Larry, a reddish blaze in his
eyes. "Maggie's going away and you can't stop her. D'you think her
father is going to let her stay down here any longer, where you can
spout your preaching at her!--and you all the time a stool and a
squealer!"

"What's that?" cried Larry.

"I called you a stool!" repeated the malignantly exultant Barney,
alert for any move on the part of the suddenly tensed Larry. "And you
are a stool! Didn't I see you myself go into Headquarters with Casey
and Gavegan where you sold yourself to Chief Barlow!"

"Why, you damned--"

Even before he spoke Larry launched a furious swing straight from the
hip at Barney's twisted face. But Barney had been expecting exactly
that, and was even the quicker. He caught Larry's wrist before it was
fairly started, and thrust a dull-hued automatic into Larry's stomach.

"Behave; damn you," gritted Barney, "or I'll blow your damned guts
out! No--go ahead and try to hit me. I'd like nothing better than to
kill you, you rat, and have a good plea of self-defense!"

Larry let his hands unclench and fall to his sides. "You've got the
drop on me, Barney--but you're a liar."

"You bet I got the drop on you! And not only with my gun. I've got it
on you about being a stool. Everybody knows you are a stool. And
what's more, they know you are a squealer!"

"A squealer!" Larry stiffened again.

"A stool and a squealer!" Barney fairly hurled at Larry these two most
despised epithets of his world. "You've done your job swell as a
stool, and squealed on Red Hannigan and Jack Rosenfeldt and turned
them up for the police!"

"You believe I had anything to do with their arrest?" exclaimed Larry.

Barney laughed in his derision.

"Of course we believe it," put in Old Jimmie, his seamed, cunning face
now ruthlessly hard. "And what's more, we know it!"

"And what's still more," Barney taunted, "Maggie believes it, too!"

Larry turned to Maggie. Her face was now drawn, with staring eyes.

"Maggie--do you believe it?" he demanded.

For a moment she neither spoke nor moved. Then slowly she nodded.

"But, Maggie," he protested, "I didn't do it! Barlow did ask me to be
a stool, but I turned him down! Aside from that, I know no more of
this than you do!"

"Of course you'd deny it--we were waiting for that," sneered Barney.
"Jimmie, we've wasted enough time here. Take Maggie's bag and let's be
moving on."

Old Jimmie picked up Maggie's suitcase, and slipping a hand through
her arm led her across the room. She did not even say good-bye to Hunt
or the Duchess, or even glance at them; but went out silently, her
drawn, staring look on Larry alone.

Barney backed after them, his automatic still held in readiness. "I'm
letting you down damned easy, Brainard," he said, hate glittering in
his eyes. "But there's some who won't be so nice!"

With that he closed the door. Until that moment both Hunt and the
Duchess had said nothing. Now the Duchess spoke up:

"I'm glad they've taken Maggie away, Larry. I've seen the way you've
come to feel about her, and she's not the right sort for you."

But Larry was still too dazed by the way in which Maggie had walked
out of his life to make any response.

"But there's a lot in what Barney said about there being some who
wouldn't be easy on you," continued the Duchess. "That word had been
brought me before Barney showed up. So I had this ready for you."

From a slit pocket in her baggy skirt the Duchess drew out a pistol
and handed it to Larry.

"What's this for?" Larry asked.

"I was told that word had gone out to the Ginger Buck Gang to get
you," answered the Duchess. "Barney has some secret connection with
the Ginger Bucks. His saying that you were a stool and a squealer is
not the only thing he's got against you; he's jealous of you on
account of everything--especially Maggie. So you'll need that gun."

"What's this I've fallen into the middle of?" exclaimed Hunt. "A
Kentucky feud?"

"It's very easy to understand when you know the code," Larry explained
grimly. "Down here when an outfit thinks one of its members has
squealed on them, it's their duty to be always on the watch for their
chance to finish him off. I'm to be finished off--that's all."

"Say, young fellow, the life of a straight crook doesn't seem to be
getting much simpler! Why, man, you hardly dare to stir from the
house! What are you going to do?"

"Going to go around my business, always with the pleasant anticipation
of a bullet in my back when some fellow thinks it safe for him to
shoot."

The three of them discussed this latest development over their dinner,
which they had together up in Hunt's studio. But despite all their
talk of his danger, a very real and near danger, Larry's mind was more
upon Maggie who had thus suddenly been wrenched out of his life. He
remembered her excited, boastful talk of their first evening. Her
period of schooling was indeed now over; she was now committed to her
rosily imagined adventure, in which she saw herself as a splendid
lady. And with Barney Palmer as her guiding influence! . . .

Dinner had been finished and Hunt was trying to give Larry such cheer
as "Buck up, young fellow--you know the worst--there's nothing else
that can happen," when the lie direct was given to his phrases by
heavy steps running up the stairway and the opening and closing of the
door. There stood Officer Casey, heaving for breath.

Instinctively Larry drew his pistol. "Casey! What're you here for?"

"Get rid of that gat--don't be found with a gun on," ordered Casey.
"And beat it. You've got less than five minutes to make your get-
away."

"My get-away! What's up?"

"You haven't come across as the Chief ordered you to, and he's out to
give you just what he said he would," Casey said rapidly, his speech
broken by panting. "There's been a stick-up, with assault that may be
changed to attempted manslaughter, and the Chief has three men who
swear you're the guilty party. It's a sure-fire case against you,
Larry--and it'll mean five to ten years if you're caught. Gavegan and
I got the order to arrest you. I've beat Gavegan to it so's to tip you
off, but he's only a few minutes behind. Hurry, Larry! Only--only--"

Casey paused, gasping for his wind.

"Only what, Casey?"

"Only alibi me, Larry, by slipping over a haymaker on me like you did
on Gavegan. So's I can say I tried to get you, but you were too quick
and knocked me cold. Quick! Only not too hard--I know how to play
possum."

Larry handed the pistol to Hunt. "Casey, you're a real scout! Thanks!"
He grasped Casey's hand, then swiftly relaxed his grip. "Ready?"

"Fire," said Casey.

Larry held his open left hand close to Casey's jaw, and drove his
right fist into his palm with a thudding smack. Casey went sprawling
to the floor, and lay there loosely, with mouth agape, in perfect
simulation of a man who has been knocked out.

Larry turned quickly. "You two will testify that I beat Casey up and
then made my escape?"

"Sure, I'll testify to anything for the sake of a good old goat like
Casey!" cried Hunt. "But hurry, boy--beat it!"

The Duchess held out Larry's hat to him, and thrust into his coat
pocket a roll of bills which had come from her capacious skirt.
"Hurry, Larry--and be careful--for you're all I've got."

Impulsively Larry stooped and kissed the thin, shriveled lips of his
grandmother--the first kiss he had ever given her. Then he turned and
ran down the stairway, Hunt just behind him. He turned out the light
in the back room, and called to Old Isaac to darken the pawnshop
proper. He was going forth with two forces in arms against him, the
police and his pals, and he had no desire to be a shining mark for
either or both by stepping through a lighted doorway.

"Larry, my son, you're all right!" said Hunt, gripping his hand in the
darkness. "Listen, boy: if ever you're trapped and can get to a
telephone, call Plaza nine-double-o-one and say 'Benvenuto Cellini.'"

"All right."

"Remember, you're to say 'Benvenuto Cellini,' and the telephone is
Plaza nine-double-o-one. Luck to you!" Again they gripped hands. Then
Larry slipped through the darkened doorway into whatever might lie
beyond.




CHAPTER XI


A misting rain was being swirled about by a temperish wind as Larry
came out into the little street. Down toward the river the one
gaslight glowed faintly like an expiring nebula; all the little shops
were closed; home lights gleamed behind the curtained windows which
the storm had closed; so that the street was now a little canyon of
uncertain shadows.

Larry had not needed to think to know that Gavegan would be making his
vindictive approach from the westerly regions where lay Headquarters.
So, keeping in the deeper shadows close to the building, Larry took
the eastern course of the street, remembering in a flash a skiff he
had seen tethered to a scow moored to the pier which stretched like a
pointer finger from the little Square. As yet he had no plan beyond
the necessity of the present moment, which was flight. Could he but
make that skiff unseen and cast off, he would have time, in the brief
sanctuary which the black river would afford him, to formulate the
wisest procedure his predicament permitted him.

As he came near that smothered glow-worm of a street-lamp it assumed
for him the betraying glare of a huge spot-light. But it had to be
passed to gain the skiff; and with collar turned up and hat-brim
pulled down and head hunched low, he entered the dim sphere of
betrayal, walked under its penny's-worth of flame, and glided toward
the shadows beyond, his eyes straining with the preternatural keenness
of the hunted at every stoop and doorway before him.

He was just passing out of the sphere of mist-light--the lamp being
now at his back helped him--when he saw three vague figures lurking
half a dozen paces ahead of him. His brain registered these vague
figures with the instantaneity of a snapshot camera at full noon. They
were mere shadows; but the farther of the three seemed to be Barney
Palmer--he was not sure; but of the identity of the other two there
was no doubt: "Little Mick" and "Lefty Ed," both members high in the
councils of the Ginger Bucks, and either of whose services as a killer
could be purchased for a hundred dollars or a paper of cocaine,
depending upon which at the moment there was felt the greater need.

In the very instant that he saw, Larry doubled about and ran at full
speed back up the street. Two shots rang out; Larry could not tell
whether they were fired by Little Mick or Lefty Ed or Barney Palmer--
that is, if the third man really were Barney. Again two shots were
fired, then came the sound of pursuing feet. Luckily not one of the
bullets had touched Larry; for the New York professional gunman is the
premier bad shot of all the world, and cannot count upon his
marksmanship, unless he can get his weapon solidly anchored against
his man, or can sneak around to the rear and pot his unsuspecting
victim in the back.

As Larry neared the pawnshop with the intention of making his escape
through the western stretch of the street, he saw that Old Isaac has
switched on the lights; and he also saw Officer Gavegan bearing down
in his direction. They sighted each other in the same instant, and
Gavegan let out a roar and started for him.

Caught between two opposing forces, Larry again had no time to plan.
Rather, there was nothing he could plan, for only one way was open to
him. He dashed into the pawnshop and into the back room. At the
Duchess's desk Hunt was scribbling at furious speed.


"I'm caught, Hunt--Gavegan's coming," he gasped, and ran up the
stairs, Hunt following and stuffing his scribblings into a pocket. As
Larry passed the open studio door he saw Casey sitting up. "Down on
the floor with you, Casey! Hunt, work over him to bring him to--and
stall Gavegan for a while if you can."

With that Larry sprang to a ladder at the end of the little hall, ran
up it, unhooked and pushed up the trap, scrambled through upon the
roof, and pushed the trap back into place.

Fortune, or rather the well-wishing wits of friends below, gave Larry
a few precious moments more than he had counted on. He was barely out
on the rain-greased tin roof, with the trap down, when Gavegan came
thumping up the stairs and into the studio. At sight of the recumbent
Casey, head limply on Hunt's knees, and his loose face being laved by
a wet towel in Hunt's hands, Gavegan let out another roar:

"Hell's bells! What the hell's this mean?"

"I tried to nab Brainard," Casey mumbled feebly, "and he knocked me
out cold--the same as he did you, Gavegan."

"Hell!" snorted Gavegan, his wrath increased by this reference. "You
there"--to Hunt and the Duchess--"where'd Brainard go? He's in this
house some place!"

"I don't know," said Hunt.

"Yes, you do! Leave that boob side-kick of mine sleep it off, and help
me find Brainard or you'll feel my boot!"

The big painter stood up facing the big detective and his left hand
gripped the latter's wrist and his right closed upon the detective's
throat just as it had closed upon the lean throat of Old Jimmie on the
day of Larry's return--only now there was nothing playful in the noose
of that big hand. He shook Gavegan as he might have shaken a pillow,
with a thumb thrusting painfully in beneath Gavegan's ear.

"I've done nothing, and that bully stuff doesn't go with me!" he
fairly spat into Gavegan's face. "You talk to me like a gentleman and
apologize, or I'll throw you out of the window and let your head
bounce off one of its brother cobblestones below!"

Gavegan choked out an apology, whereat Hunt flung him from him. The
detective, glowering at the other, pulled aside curtains, peered into
corners; then made furious and fruitless search of the rooms below,
bringing up at last at Maggie's door, which the Duchess had slipped
ahead of him and locked. When he demanded the key, the Duchess told
him of Maggie's departure and her carrying the key with her. It was a
solid door, with strong lock and hinges; and two minutes of Gavegan's
battering shoulders were required to make it yield entrance. Not till
he found the room empty did Gavegan think of the trap and the roof.

Larry made good use of these few extra minutes granted him. Whatever
he was to do he realized he must do it quickly. Not for long would the
forces arrayed against him be small in number; Gavegan, though beaten
at the outset, would send out an alarm that would arouse the police of
the city--and in their own degree the gangsters would do the same.
During his weeks of freedom Larry had unconsciously studied the layout
of the neighborhood, his old instincts at work. The subconscious
knowledge thus gained was of instant value. He hurried along the
slippery roofs, taking care not to trip over the dividing walls, and
came to the rear edge of a roof where he had marked a fire-escape with
an unusually broad upper landing. He could discern the faint outlines
of this; and hanging to the gutter he dropped to the fire-escape, and
a moment later he was down in the back yard; and yet two moments later
he was over two fences and going through a rabbit's burrow of a
passageway that went beneath a house into the street behind his own.

He did not pause to reconnoiter. Time was of the essence of his
safety, risks had to be taken. He plunged out of his hole--around the
first corner--around the next--and thus wove in and out, working
westward, till at last, on turning a corner into a lighted street, he
saw possible relief in two stray taxicabs before a little East Side
restaurant, one of which was just leaving.

"Taxi!" he called breathlessly.

The chauffeur of the moving car swung back beside the curb and opened
the door. But even as he started to enter he saw Little Mick and Lefty
Ed turn into the street behind him. However, the brightness of this
street ill-accorded with the anonymity with which their art is most
safely and profitably practiced, so Larry got in without a bullet
flicking at him.

"Forty-Second Street and Broadway," he called to the chauffeur as he
closed the door.

The car started off. Looking back through the little window he saw
Lefty Ed enter the other taxicab, and saw Little Mick standing on the
curb. He understood. Little Mick was to send out the alarm, while
Lefty was to follow the trail.

Let Lefty follow. At least Larry now had a few minutes to consider
some plan which should look beyond the safety of the immediate moment.
He was well-dressed, albeit somewhat wet and soiled; he had money in
his pockets. What should he do?

Yes, what should he do? The more he considered it the more ineluctable
did his situation become. By now Gavegan had sent out his alarm;
within a few moments every policeman on duty would have instructions
to watch for him. He might escape for the time, at least, these allies
of his one-time pals by going to a hotel and taking a room there; but
to walk into a hotel would be to walk into arrest. On the other hand,
he might evade the police if he sought refuge in one of his old
haunts, or perhaps with old Bronson; but then his angered pals knew of
these haunts, and to enter one of them would be to offer himself
freely to their vengeance.

There were other cities--but then how was he to get to them? He saw
Manhattan for what it was to a man who was a fugitive from justice and
injustice: an island, a trap, with only a few outlets and inlets for
its millions: two railway stations--a few ferries--a few bridges--a
few tunnels: and at every one of them policemen watching for him. He
could not leave New York. And yet how in God's name was he to stay
here?

He thought of Maggie. So she wanted the life of dazzling, excitement,
of brilliant adventure, did she? He wondered how she would like a
little of the real thing--such as this?

As he neared Forty-Second Street he still was without definite plan
which would guarantee him safety, and there was Lefty hanging on
doggedly. An idea came which would at least extend his respite and
give him more time for thought. He opened the door of his cab and
thrust a ten-dollar note into the instinctively ready hand of his
driver.

"Keep the change--and give me a swing once around Central Park,
slowing down on those hilly turns on the west side."

"I gotcha."

The car entered the park at the Plaza and sped up the shining, almost
empty drive. Larry kept watch, now on the trailing Lefty, now on the
best chance for execution of his idea--all the way up the east side
and around the turn at the north end. As the car, now south-bound,
swung up the hill near One Hundred and Fifth Street, at whose crest
there is a sharp curve with thick-growing, overhanging trees, Larry
opened the right door and said:

"Show me a little speed, driver, as soon as you pass this curve!"

"I gotcha," replied the chauffeur.

The slowing car hugged the inside of the sharp turn, Larry holding the
door open and waiting his moment. The instant the taxi made the curve
Lefty's car was cut from view; and that instant Larry sprang from the
running-board, slamming the door behind him, landed on soft earth and
scuttled in among the trees. Crouching in the shadows he saw his car
speed away as per his orders, and the moment after he saw Lefty's car,
evidently taken by surprise by this obvious attempt at escape, leap
forward in hot pursuit.

Larry slipped farther in among the trees and sat down, his back
against a tree. This was better. For the time he was safe.

He drew a long breath. Then for a moment what he had just been through
this last hour came back to him in an almost amusing light: as
something grotesquely impossible--much like those helter-skelter,
utterly unreal chases which, with slight variations of personalities
and costumes, were the chief plots for the motion-picture drama in its
crude childhood. But though there seemed a likeness, there was a
tremendous difference. For this was real! Every one was in earnest!

Again he thought of Maggie. What would she think, what would be her
attitude, if she knew the truth about him?--the truth about those she
had gone with and the life she had gone into? Would she be inclined
toward HIM, would she help him?...

Again he thought of what he should do. Now that he commanded a
composure which had not been his during the stress of his flight, he
examined every aspect with greater care. But the conclusions of
composure were the same as those of excitement. He could not gain
entrance to one of the great hotels and remain in his room,
unidentified among its thousands of strangers; he could not find
asylum in one of his old haunts; he dared not try to leave Manhattan.
He was a prisoner, whose only privilege was a larger but most
uncertain liberty.

And that liberty was becoming penetratingly uncomfortable. An hour had
passed, the ground on which he sat was wet and cold, and the misty air
was assuming a distressing kinship with departed winter and was making
shivering assaults upon his bones. At the best, he realized, he could
not hope to remain secure in this cultivated wilderness beyond
daylight. With the coming of morning he would certainly be the prey of
either his pals or the police. And if they did not beat him from his
hiding, plain mortal hunger would drive him out into the open streets.
If he was to do anything at all, he must do it while he still had the
moderate protection of the night.

And then for the first time there came to him remembrance of Hunt's
rapid injunction, given him in the hurly-burly of escape when no
thoughts could impress the upper surface of his mind save those of the
immediate moment. "If you're trapped, call Plaza nine-double-o-one and
say 'Benvenuto Cellini.'"

Larry had no idea what that swift instruction might be about. And the
chance seemed a slender, fantastical one, even if he could safely get
to a public telephone. But it seemed his only chance.

He arose, and, keeping as much as he could to the wilder regions of
the park, and making the utmost use of shadows when he had to cross a
path or a drive, he stole southward. He remembered a drug-store at
Eighty-Fourth Street and Columbus Avenue, peculiarly suited to his
purpose, for it had a side entrance on Eighty-Fourth Street and was
in a neighborhood where policemen were infrequent.

Fortune favored him. At length he reached Eighty-Fourth Street and
peered over the wall. Central Park West was practically empty of
automobiles, for the theaters had not yet discharged their crowds and
no policeman was in sight. He vaulted the wall; a minute later he was
in a booth in the drug-store, had dropped his nickel in the slot, and
was asking for Plaza nine-double-o-one.

"Hello, sir!" responded the very correct voice of a man.

"Benvenuto Cellini," said Larry.

"Hold the wire, sir," said the voice.

Larry held the wire, wondering. After a moment the same correct voice
asked where Larry was speaking from. Larry gave the exact information.

"Stay right in the booth, and keep on talking; say anything you like;
the wire here will be kept open," continued the voice. "We'll not keep
you waiting long, sir."

The voice ceased. Larry began to chat about topics of the day, about
invented friends and engagements, well knowing that his stream of talk
was not being heard unless Central was "listening in"; and knowing
also that, to any one looking into the glass door of his booth, he was
giving a most unsuspicious appearance of a busy man. And while he
talked, his wonder grew. What was about to happen? What was this
Benvenuto Cellini business all about?

He had been talking for fifteen minutes or more when the glass door of
the booth was opened from without and a man's voice remarked:

"When you are through, sir, we will be going."

The voice was the same he had heard over the wire. Larry hung up and
followed the man out the side door, noting only that he had a lean,
respectful face. At the curb stood a limousine, the door of which was
opened by the man for Larry. Larry stepped in.

"Are you followed, sir?" inquired the man.

"I don't know."

"We'd better make certain. If you are, we'll lose them, sir. We'll
stop somewhere and change our license plates again."

Instead of getting into the unlighted body with him, as Larry had
expected, the man closed the door, mounted to the seat beside the
chauffeur, and the car shot west and turned up Riverside Drive.

One may break the speed laws in New York if one has the speed, and if
one has the ability to get away with it. This car had both. Never
before had Larry driven so rapidly within New York City limits; he
knew this, that any trailing taxicab would be lost behind. At Two-
Hundred-and-Forty-Fifth Street the car swung into Van Cortland Park,
and switched off all lights. Two minutes later they halted in a dark
stretch of one of the by-roads of the Park.

"We'll be stopping only a minute, sir, to put on our right number
plates," the man opened the door to explain.

Within the minute they were away again, now proceeding more leisurely,
in the easy manner of a private car going about its private business--
though the interior of the car was discreetly dark and Larry huddled
discreetly into a corner. Thus they drove over the Grand Boulevards
and recrossed the Harlem River and presently drew up in front of a
great apartment house in Park Avenue.

The man opened the door. "Walk right in, sir, as though you belong
here. The doorman and the elevatorman are prepared."

They might be prepared, but Larry certainly was not; and he shot up
the elevator to the top floor with mounting bewilderment. The man
unlocked the door of an apartment, ushered Larry in, took his wet hat,
then ushered the dazed Larry through the corner of a dim-lit drawing-
room and through another door.

"You are to wait here, sir," said the man, and quietly withdrew.

Larry looked about him. He took in but a few details, but he knew
enough about the better fittings of life to realize that he was in the
presence of both money and the best of taste. He noted the log fire in
the broad fireplace, comfortable chairs, the imported rugs on the
gleaming floor, the shelves of books which climbed to the ceiling, a
quaint writing-desk in one corner which seemed to belong to another
country and another century, but which was perfectly at home in this
room.

On the desk he saw standing a leather-framed photograph which seemed
familiar. He crossed and picked it up. Indeed it was familiar! It was
a photograph of Hunt: of Hunt, not in the shabby, shapeless garments
he wore down at the Duchess's, but Hunt accoutered as might be a man
accustomed to such a room as this--though in this picture there was
the same strong chin, the same belligerent good-natured eyes.

Now how and where did that impecunious, rough-neck painter fit into--

But the dazed question Larry was asking was interrupted by a voice
from the door--the thick voice of a man:

"Who the hell 'r' you?"

Larry whirled about. In the doorway stood a tall, bellicose young
gentleman of perhaps twenty-four or five, in evening dress, flushed of
face, holding unsteadily to the door-jamb.

"I beg your pardon," said Larry.

"'N' what the hell you doin' here?" continued the belligerent young
gentleman.

"I'd be obliged to you if you could tell me," said Larry.

"Tryin' to stall, 'r' you," declared the young gentleman with a
scowling profundity. "N