 An event, some big experience, would be required to check him
short and bring him to his senses.

While Larry was keeping at this grind something was happening to Larry
of which he was not then conscious: something which was part of the
big development in him that was in time to lead him far. A confidence
man is essentially a "sure-thing" gambler. It had been Larry's
practice, before the law had tripped him up, to study every detail of
an enterprise he was planning to undertake, to know the psychology of
the individuals with whom he was dealing, to eliminate every
perceivable uncertainty: that was what had made almost all of his
deals "sure things." Strip a clever knave of all intent or inclination
for knavery, and leave all his other qualities and practices intact
and eager, and you have the makings of a "sure-thing" business man:--a
man who does not cheat others, and who takes precious care that his
every move is sound and forward-looking. Aside from the moral element
involved, the difference between the two is largely a difference in
percentage: say the difference between a thousand per cent profit and
six per cent profit. The element of trying to play a "safe thing"
still remains.

This transformation of character, under the stimulus of hard, steady
work upon a tangled thing which contained the germ of great
constructive possibilities for some one, was what was happening
unconsciously to Larry.




CHAPTER XVI


All this while Maggie, and what he was to do about her, and how do it,
was in Larry's mind. Even this work he was doing for Miss Sherwood, he
was doing also for Maggie in the hope that in some unseen way it might
lead him to her and help lead her to herself. There were difficulties
enough between them, God knew; but of them all two were forever
presenting themselves as foremost: first, he did not dare go openly to
see her; and, second, even if he so dared he did not know where she
was.

When he had been with the Sherwoods some three weeks Larry determined
upon a preliminary measure. By this time he knew that the letters
mailed from Chicago, according to the plan he had arranged with Miss
Sherwood, had had their contemplated effect. He knew that he was
supposed by his enemies to be in Chicago or some other Western point,
and that New York was off its guard as far as he was concerned.

His preliminary measure was to discover, if possible, Maggie's
whereabouts. The Duchess seemed to him the most likely source of
information. He dared not write asking her for this, for he was
certain her mail was still being scrutinized. The safest method would
be to call at the pawnshop in person; the police, and his old friends,
and the Ginger Bucks would expect anything else before they would
expect him to return to his grandmother's. Of course he must use all
precautions.

Incidentally he was prompted to this method by his desire to see his
grandmother and Hunt. He had an idea or two which he had been mulling
over that concerned the artist.

He chose a night when a steady, blowing rain had driven all but
limousined and most necessitous traffic from the streets. The rain was
excuse for a long raincoat with high collar which buttoned under his
nose, and a cap which pulled down to his eyes, and an umbrella which
masked him from every direct glance. Thus abetted and equipped he
came, after a taxi ride and a walk, into his grandmother's street. It
was as seemingly deserted as on that tumultuous night when he had left
it; and on this occasion no figures sprang out of the cover of
shadows, shooting and cursing. He had calculated correctly and
unmolested he gained the pawnshop door, passed the solemn-eyed,
incurious Isaac, and entered the room behind.

His grandmother sat over her accounts at her desk in a corner among
her curios. Hunt, smoking a black pipe, was using his tireless right
hand in a rapid sketch of her: another of those swift, few-stroked,
vivid character notes which were about his studio by the hundreds. The
Duchess saw Larry first; and she greeted him in the same unsurprised,
emotionless manner as on the night he had come back from Sing Sing.

"Good-evening, Larry," said she.

"Good-evening, grandmother," he returned.

Hunt came to his feet, knocking over a chair in so doing, and gripped
Larry's hand. "Hello--here's our wandering boy to-night! How are you,
son?"

"First-rate, you old paint-slinger. And you?"

"Hitting all twelve cylinders and taking everything on high! But say,
listen, youngster: how about your copper friends and those gun-toting
schoolmates of yours?"

"Missed them so far."

"Better keep on missing 'em." Hunt regarded him intently for a moment,
then asked abruptly: "Never heard one way or another--but did you use
that telephone number I gave you?"

"Yes."

"Miss Sherwood take care of you?"

"Yes."

"Still there?"

"Yes."

Again Hunt was silent for a moment. Larry expected questions about
Miss Sherwood, for he knew the quality of the painter's interest. But
Hunt seemed quite as determined to avoid any personal question
relating to Miss Sherwood as she had been about personal questions
relating to him; for his next remark was:

"Young fellow, still keeping all those commandments you wrote for
yourself?"

"So far, my bucko."

"Keep on keeping 'em, and write yourself a few more, and you'll have a
brand-new decalogue. And we'll have a little Moses of our own. But in
the meantime, son, what's the great idea of coming down here?"

"For one thing, I came to ask for a couple of your paintings."

"My paintings!" Hunt regarded the other suspiciously. "What the hell
you want my paintings for?"

"They might make good towels if I can scrape the paint off."

"Aw, cut out the vaudeville stuff! I asked you what you wanted my
paintings for? Give me a straight answer!"

"All right--here's your straight answer: I want your paintings to sell
them."

"Sell my paintings! Say, are you trying to say something still
funnier?"

"I want them to sell them. Remember I once told you that I could sell
them--that I could sell anything. Let me have them, and then just
see."

"You'd sure have to be able to sell anything to sell them!" A
challenging glint had come into Hunt's eyes. "Young fellow, you're so
damned fresh that if you had any dough I'd bet you five thousand, any
odds you like, that you couldn't even GIVE one of the things away!"

"Loan me five thousand," Larry returned evenly, "and I'll cover the
bet with even money--it being understood that I'm to sell the picture
at a price not less than the highest price you ever received for one
of your 'pretty pictures' which you delight to curse and which made
your fortune. Now bring down your pictures--or shut up!"

Hunt's jaw set. "Young fellow, I take that bet! And I'll not let you
off, either--you'll have to pay it! Which pictures do you want?"

"That young Italian woman sitting on the curb nursing her baby--and
any other picture you want to put with it."

Hunt went clumping up the stairway. When he was out of earshot, the
Duchess remarked quietly:

"What did you really come for, Larry?"

Larry was somewhat taken aback by his grandmother's penetration, but
he did not try to evade the question nor the steady gaze of the old
eyes.

"I thought you might know where Maggie is, and I came to ask."

"That's what I thought."

"Do you know where she is?"

"Yes."

"Where is she?"

The old eyes were still steady upon him. "I don't know that I should
tell you. I want you to get on--and the less you have to do with
Maggie, the better for you."

"I'd like to know, grandmother."

The Duchess considered for a long space. "After all, you're of age--
and you've got to decide what's best for yourself. I'll tell you.
Maggie was here the other day--dressed simple--to get some letters
she'd forgotten to take and which I couldn't find. We had a talk.
Maggie is living at the Grantham under the name of Margaret Cameron.
She has a suite there."

"A suite at the Grantham!" exclaimed Larry, astounded. "Why, the
Grantham is in the same class with the Ritzmore, where she used to
work--or the Plaza! A suite at the Grantham!"

And then Larry gave a twitching start. "At the Grantham--alone?"

"Not alone--no. But it's not what just came into your mind. It's a
woman that's with her; a hired companion. And they're doing everything
on a swell scale."

"What's Maggie up to?"

"She didn't tell me, except to say that the plan was a big one. She
was all excited over it. If you want to know just what it is, ask
Barney Palmer and Old Jimmie."

"Barney and Old Jimmie!" ejaculated Larry. And then: "Barney and Old
Jimmie--and a suite at the Grantham!"

At that moment Hunt came back down the stairway, carrying a roll
wrapped in brown paper.

"Here you are, young fellow," he announced. "De-mounted 'em so the junk
would be easier to handle. The Dago mother you asked for--the second
painting may be one you'd like to have for your own private gallery.
I'm not going to let you get away with your bluff--and don't you
forget it! . . . Duchess, don't you think he'd better beat it before
Gavegan and his loving friends take a tumble to his presence and mess
up the neighborhood?"

"Yes," said the Duchess. "Good-night, Larry."

"Good-night," said he.

Mechanically he took the roll of paintings and slipped it under his
raincoat; mechanically he shook hands; mechanically he got out of the
pawnshop; mechanically he took all precautions in getting out of the
little rain-driven street and in getting into a taxicab which he
captured over near Cooper Institute. All his mind was upon what the
Duchess had told him and upon a new idea which was throbbingly growing
into a purpose. Maggie and Barney and Old Jimmie! Maggie in a suite at
the Grantham!

What Larry now did, as he got into the taxi, he would have called
footless and foolhardy an hour before, and at any other hour his
judgment might have restrained him. But just now he seemed controlled
by a force greater than smooth-running judgment--a composite of many
forces: by sudden jealousy, by a sudden desire to shield Maggie, by a
sudden desire to see her. So as he stepped into the taxi, he said:

"The Grantham--quick!"




CHAPTER XVII


The taxi went rocking up Fourth Avenue. But now that decision was made
and he was headed toward Maggie, a little of judgment reasserted
itself. It would not be safe for him to walk openly into the Grantham
with a mouthful of questions. He did not know the number of Maggie's
suite. And Maggie might not be in. So he revised his plan slightly. He
called to his driver:

"Go to the Claridge first."

Five minutes later the taxi was in Forty-Fourth Street and Larry was
stepping out. Fortune favored him in one fact--or perhaps his
subconscious mind had based his plan upon this fact: the time was
half-past ten, the theaters still held their crowds, the streets were
empty, the restaurants were practically unoccupied. He was incurring
the minimum of risk.

"Wait for me," he ordered the driver. "I'll be out in five minutes."

In less than the half of the first of these minutes Larry had attained
his first objective: the secluded telephone-room down behind the
grill. It was unoccupied except for the telephone girl who was gazing
raptly at the sorrowful, romantic, and very soiled pages of "St.
Elmo." The next moment she was gazing at something else--a five-
dollar bill which Larry had slipped into the open book.

"That's to pay for a telephone call; just keep the change," he said
rapidly. "You're to do all the talking, and say just what I tell you."

"I got you, general," said the girl, emerging with alacrity from
romance to reality. "Shoot."

"Call up the Hotel Grantham--say you're a florist with an order to
deliver some flowers direct to Miss Margaret Cameron--and ask for the
number of her suite--and keep the wire open."

The girl obeyed promptly. In less than a minute she was reporting to
Larry:

"They say 1141-1142-1143."

"Ask if she's in. If she is, get her on the 'phone, tell her long
distance is calling, but doesn't want to speak to her unless she is
alone. You get it?"

"Sure, brother. This ain't the first time I helped a party out."

There was more jabbing with the switch-board plug, evident switching
at the other end, several questions, and then the girl asked: "Is this
Miss Margaret Cameron? Miss Cameron--" and so on as per Larry's
instructions.

The operator turned to Larry: "She says she's alone."

"Tell her to hold the wire till you get better connections--the storm
has messed up connections terribly--and keep your own wire open and
make her hold her end."

As Larry went out he heard his instructions being executed while an
adept hand safely banked the bill inside her shirt-waist. Within two
minutes his taxi set him down at the Grantham; and knowing that
whatever risks he ran would be lessened by his acting swiftly and
without any suspicious hesitation, he walked straight in and to the
elevators, in the manner of one having business there, his collar
again pulled up, his cap pulled down, and his face just then covered
with a handkerchief which was caring for a sniffling nose in a highly
natural manner.

With his heart pounding he got without mishap to the doors numbered
1141, 1142, and 1143. Instinctively he knew in a general way what the
apartment was like: a set of rooms of various character which the
hotel could rent singly or throw together and rent en suite. But which
of the three was the main entrance? He dared not hesitate, for the
slightest queer action might get the attention of the floor clerk down
the corridor. So Larry chose the happy medium and pressed the mother-
of-pearl button of 1142.

The door opened, and before Larry stood a large, elderly, imposing
woman in a rigidly formal evening gown--a gown which, by the way, had
been part of Miss Grierson's equipment for many a year for helping raw
young things master the art of being ladies. Larry surmised at once
that this was the "hired companion" his grandmother had spoken of. In
other days Larry had had experience with this type and before Miss
Grierson could bar him out or ask a question, Larry was in the room
and the door closed behind him--and he had entered with the easiest,
most natural, most polite manner imaginable.

"You were expecting me?" inquired Larry with his disarming and wholly
engaging smile.

Neither Miss Grierson's mind nor body was geared for rapid action. She
was taken aback, and yet not offended. So being at a loss, she
resorted to the chief item in her stock in trade, her ever dependable
dignity.

"I cannot say that I was. In fact, sir, I do not know who you are."

"Miss Cameron knows--and she is expecting me," Larry returned
pleasantly. His quick eyes had noted that this was a sitting-room: an
ornate, patterned affair which the great hotels seem to order in
hundred lots. "Where is Miss Cameron?"

"In the next room," nodding at the connecting door. "She is engaged.
Telephoning. A long-distance call. I'm quite sure she is not expecting
you," Miss Grierson went on to explain ponderously and elaborately,
but with politeness, for this young man was handsome and pleasant and
well-bred and might prove to be some one of real importance. "We were
to have had a theater party with supper afterwards; but owing to Miss
Cameron's indisposition we did not go to the theater. But she insisted
on keeping the engagement for the supper, but changing it to here.
Besides herself and myself, there are to be only her uncle, her
cousin, and just one guest. That is why I am so certain, sir, she is
not expecting you."

"But you see," smiled Larry, "I am that one guest."

Miss Grierson shook her carefully coiffured transformation. "I've met
the guest who is coming, and I certainly have not met you."

"Then she must have asked two of us. Anyhow, I'll just speak to her,
and if I'm mistaken and de trop, I'll withdraw." And ere Miss Grierson
could even stir up an intention to intervene further, this well-
mannered young man had smiled his disarming smile and bowed to her and
had passed through the door, closing it behind him.

He halted, the knob in his hand. Maggie was standing sidewise to him,
holding a telephone in her hand, its receiver at her ear. She must
have supposed that it was Miss Grierson who had so quietly entered,
for she did not look around.

"Yes, I'm still waiting," she was saying impatiently. "Can't you ever
get that connection?"

Larry had seen Maggie only in the plain dark suit which she had worn
to her daily business of selling cigarettes at the Ritzmore; and once,
on the night of his return from Sing Sing, in that stage gypsy
costume, which though effective was cheap and impromptu and did not at
all lift her out of the environment of the Duchess's ancient and grimy
house. But Larry was so startled by this changed Maggie that for the
moment he could not have moved from the door even had he so desired.
She was accoutered in the smartest of filmy evening gowns, with the
short skirt which was then the mode, with high-heeled silver
slippers, her rounded arms and shoulders and bosom bare, her abundant
black hair piled high in careful carelessness. The gown was cerise in
color, and from her forearm hung a great fan of green plumes. In all
the hotels and theaters of New York one could hardly have come upon a
figure that night more striking in its finished and fresh young
womanhood. Larry trembled all over; his heart tried to throb madly up
out of his throat.

At length he spoke. And all he was able to say was:

"Maggie."

She whirled about, and telephone and receiver almost fell from her
hands. She went pale, and stared at him, her mouth agape, her dark
eyes wide.

"La-Larry!" she whispered.

"Maggie!" he said again.

"La-Larry! I thought you were in Chicago."

"I'm here now, Maggie--especially to see you." He did not know it, but
his voice was husky. He noted that she was still holding the telephone
and receiver. "It was I who put in that long-distance call. But I came
instead. So you might as well hang up."

She obeyed, and set the instrument upon its little table.

"Larry--where have you been all this while?"

He was now conscious enough to note that there was tense concern in
her manner. He exulted at it, and crossed and took her hand.

"Right here in New York, Maggie."

"In hiding?"

"In mighty good hiding."

"But, Larry--don't you know it's dangerous for you to come out? And to
come here of all places?"

"I couldn't help myself. I simply had to see you, Maggie."

He was still holding her hand, and there was an instinctive grip of
her fingers about his. For a moment--the moment during which her
outer or more conscious self was startled into forgetfulness--they
gazed at each other silently and steadily, eye into eye.

And then the things the Duchess had said crept back into his mind, and
he said:

"Maggie, I've come to take you out of all this. Get ready--let's leave
at once."

That broke the spell. She jerked away from him, and instantly she was
the old Maggie: the Maggie who had jeered at him and defied him the
night of his return from prison when he had announced his new plan--
the Maggie who had flaunted him as "stool" and "squealer" the evening
she had left the Duchess's to enter upon this new career.

"No, you're not going to take me out of this!" she flung at him. "I
told you once before that I wasn't going your way! I told you that I
was going my own way! That held for then, and it holds for now, and it
will hold for always!"

The softer mood which had come upon him by surprise at sight of her
and filled him, now gave way to grim determination. "Yes, you are
coming my way--sometime, if not now! And now if I can make you!"

Their embattled gazes gripped each other. But now Larry was seeing
more than just Maggie. He was also taking in the room. It was close
kin to the room in which he had left Miss Grierson: ornate,
undistinguished, and very expensive. He noted one slight difference: a
tiny hallway giving on the corridor, its inner door now opened.

But the greatest difference was what he saw over Maggie's smooth white
shoulders: a table all set with china and glass and silver, and
arranged for five.

"Maggie, what's this game you're up to?" he demanded.

"It's none of your business!" she said fiercely, but in a low tone--
for both were instinctively remembering Miss Grierson in the adjoining
room. And then she added proudly: "But it's big! Bigger than anything
you ever dreamed of! And you can see I am putting it across so far--
and I'll be putting it across at the finish! Compare it to the cheap
line you talked about. Bah!"

"Listen, Maggie!" In his intensity he gripped her bare forearm. "This
is bad business, and if you had any sense you'd know it! Don't you
think I get the layout? Barney is your cousin, Old Jimmie is your
uncle, that dame in the next room and this suite and your swell
clothes to help put up a front! And your sickness that wouldn't let
you go to the theater is just a fake, so that, not wanting to
disappoint them entirely, you'd have an excuse for having supper
here--and thus adroitly draw some person into the trap of a more
intimate relationship. It's a clever and classy layout. Maggie,
exactly what's your game?"

"I'll not tell you!"

"Who's that man that's coming here?"

"I'll not tell you!"

"Is he the sucker you're out to trim?"

"I'll not tell you!"

"You will tell me!" he cried dominantly. "And you're going to get out
of all this! You hear me? It may look good to you now. But I tell you
it has only one finish! And that's a rotten finish!"

She tore free from his punishing grip, and pantingly glared at
him--her former defiance now an egoistic fury.

"I won't have you interfering with my life!--you fake preacher!--you
stool, you squealer!" she flung at him madly. "Stool--squealer!" she
repeated. "I tell you I'm going my own way--and it's a big way--and I
tell you again nothing you can say or do can stop me! If I could have
my best wish, all I'd wish for would be something to keep you from
always interfering--something to get you out of my way!"

Panting, she paused. Her tense figure, with hands closing and
unclosing, expressed the very acme of furious defiance--of desire to
annihilate--of ultimate hatred. Larry was astounded by the very
extent, the profundity, of her passion. And so they stood, silent
except for their quick breathing, eyes fixed upon eyes, for several
moments.

And then a key sounded in the outer door of the little hallway.
Instantly there was an almost unbelievable transformation in Maggie.
From an imperious, uncontrollable fury, she changed to a white,
quivering thing.

"Barney!" she whispered; and sprang to the inner door of the little
hallway, closed and locked it.

She turned on Larry a face that was ghastly in its pallor.

"Barney always carries a pistol," she whispered.

They had heard the outer door close with a click of its automatic
lock. They now heard the knob of the inner door turn and tugged at;
and then heard Barney call: "What's the matter, Maggie? Let us in."

Maggie made a supreme effort to reply in a controlled voice:

"Just a minute. I'm not quite ready."

Then a second voice sounded from the other side of the door:

"Don't keep us too long, Maggie. Please!"

There was a distantly familiar quality to Larry in that second voice.
But he did not try to place it then: he was too poignantly concerned
in his own situation, and in the bewildering change in Maggie.

She slipped a hand through his arm. "Oh, La-Larry, why did you ever
take such a risk!" she breathed. Her whisper was piteous, aquiver with
fright. "Come this way!" and she quickly pulled him into the room
where he had met Miss Grierson and to the door by which he had
entered.

Maggie opened this door. "They're all in the little hallway--I don't
think they'll see you," her rapid, agitated whisper went on. "Don't
take the elevators in this corridor, they're in plain sight. There are
elevators just around the corner. Take them; they're safer. Good-bye,
Larry--and, oh, Larry, don't ever take such a risk again!"

With that she pushed him out and closed the door.

Larry followed her instructions about the elevator; he used the same
precautions in leaving that he had used in coming, and twenty minutes
later he was back in his room in the Sherwood apartment. For an hour
or more he sat motionless--thinking--thinking: asking himself
questions, but in his tumultuous state of mind and emotions not able
to keep to a question long enough to reason out its possible answer.

Just what was that game in which Maggie was involved?--a game which
required that Grantham setting, that eminently respectable companion,
and Maggie's accouterment as a young lady of obvious wealth.

Whose was that vaguely familiar second voice?--that voice which he
still could not place.

But what he thought about most of all was something very different.
What had caused that swift change in Maggie?--from a fury that was
both fire and granite, to that pallid, quivering, whispering girl who
had so rapidly led him safely out of his danger.

To and fro, back and forth, shuttled these questions. Toward two
o'clock he stood up, mind still absorbed, and mechanically started to
undress. He then observed the roll of paintings Hunt had given him.
Better for them if they were flattened out. Mechanically he removed
string and paper. There on top was the Italian mother he had asked
for. A great painting--a truly great painting. Mechanically he lifted
this aside to see what was the second painting Hunt had included.
Larry gave a great start and the Italian mother went flapping to the
floor.

The second painting was of Maggie; the one on which Hunt had been
working the day Larry had come back: Maggie in her plain working
clothes, looking out at the world confidently, conqueringly; the
painting in which Hunt, his brain teeming with ideas, had tried to
express the Maggie that was, the many Maggies that were in her, and
the Maggie that was yet to be.




CHAPTER XVIII


The next morning Larry tried to force his mind to attend strictly to
Miss Sherwood's affairs. But in this effort he was less than fifty per
cent effective. His experience of the night before had been too
exciting, too provocative of speculation, too involved with what he
frankly recognized to be the major interest of his life, to allow him
to apply himself with perfect and unperturbed concentration to the
day's routine. Constantly he was seeing the transformed Maggie in the
cerise evening gown with the fan of green plumes--seeing her elaborate
setting in her suite at the Grantham--hearing that vaguely familiar
but unplaceable voice outside her door--recalling the frenzied effort
with which Maggie had so swiftly effected his escape.

This last matter puzzled him greatly. If she were so angered at him as
she had declared, if she so distrusted him, why had she not given him
up when she had had him at her mercy? Could it be that, despite her
words, she had an unacknowledged liking for him? He did not dare let
himself believe this.

Again and again he thought of this adventure in whose very middle
Maggie now was, and of whose successful issue she had proudly boasted
to him. It was indeed something big, as she had said; that
establishment at the Grantham was proof of this. Larry could now
perceive the adventure's general outlines. There was nothing original
in what he perceived; and the plan, so far as he could see it, would
not have interested him in the least as a novel creation of the brain
were not Maggie its central figure, and were not Barney and Old Jimmie
her directing agents. A pretty woman was being used as a lure to some
rich man, and his infatuation for her was to cause him to part with a
great deal of money: some variation of this ancient idea, which has a
thousand variations--that was the plan.

Obviously the enterprise was not directed at some gross victim whose
palate might permit his swallowing anything. If any one item
essentially proved this, it was the item of the overwhelmingly
respectable chaperon. Maggie was being presented as an innocent,
respectable, young girl; and the victim, whoever he was, was the type
of man for whom only such a type of girl would have a compelling
appeal.

And this man--who was he? Ever and again he tried to place the man's
voice, with its faintly familiar quality, but it kept dodging away
like a dream one cannot quite recall.

The whole business made Larry rage within himself. Maggie to be used
in such a way! He did not blame Maggie, for he understood her. Also he
loved her. She was young, proud, willful, had been trained to regard
such adventures as colorful and legitimate; and had not lived long
enough for experience to teach her otherwise. No, Maggie was not to
blame. But Old Jimmie! He would like to twist Old Jimmie's neck! But
then Old Jimmie was Maggie's father; and the mere fact of Old Jimmie
being Maggie's father would, he knew, safeguard the old man from his
wrath even were he at liberty to go forth and act.

He cursed his enforced seclusion. If only he were free to go out and
do his best in the open! But then, even if he were, his best endeavors
would have little influence upon Maggie--with her despising and
distrusting him as she did, and with her so determined to go ahead in
her own way.

Once during the morning, he slipped from the library into his room and
gazed at the portrait of Maggie that Hunt had given him the night
before: Maggie, self-confident, willful, a beautiful nobody who was
staring the world out of countenance; a Maggie that was a thousand
possible Maggies. And as he gazed he thought of the wager he had made
with Hunt, and of his own rather scatter-brained plannings concerning
it. He removed Maggie's portrait from the fellowship of the picture of
the Italian mother, and hid it in his chiffonier. Whatever he might do
in his endeavor to make good his boast to Hunt, for the present he
would regard Maggie's portrait as his private property. To use the
painting as he had vaguely planned, before he had been surprised to
find it Maggie's portrait, would be to pass it on into other
possession where it might become public--where, through some chance,
the Maggie of the working-girl's cheap shirt-waist might be identified
with the rich Miss Cameron of the Grantham, to Maggie's great
discomfiture, and possibly to her entanglement with the police.

When Miss Sherwood came into the library a little later, Larry tried
to put Maggie and all matters pertaining to his previous night's
adventure out of his mind. He had enough other affairs which he was
trying adroitly to handle--for instance, Miss Sherwood and Hunt; and
when his business talk with her was ended, he remarked:

"I saw Mr. Hunt last evening."

He watched her closely, but he could detect no flash of interest at
Hunt's name.

"You went down to your grandmother's?"

"Yes."

"That was a very great risk for you to take," she reproved him. "I'm
glad you got back safely."

Despite the disturbance Maggie had been to his thoughts, part of his
brain had been trying to make plans to forward this other aim; so he
now told Miss Sherwood of his wager with Hunt and his bringing away a
picture--he said "one picture." He wanted to awaken the suppressed
interest each had in the other; to help bridge or close the chasm
which he sensed had opened between them. So he brought the picture of
the Italian mother from his room. She regarded it critically, but with
no sign of approval or disapproval.

"What do you think of it?" she asked.

"It's a most remarkable piece of work!" he said emphatically--wishing
he could bring in that picture of Maggie as additional evidence
supporting his opinion.

She made no further comment, and it was up to Larry to keep the
conversation alive. "What is the most Mr. Hunt ever was paid for a
painting? I mean one of what he swears at as his `pretty pictures'?"

"I believe about two thousand dollars."

That was part of the information necessary to Larry's plan.

"Miss Sherwood, I'm going to ask another favor of you. In connection
with a bet I made with Mr. Hunt. I want to talk with a picture
dealer--the best one there is. I can't very well go to him. Can you
manage to have him come here?"

"Easily. I know the man best for your purpose. I'll telephone, and if
he's in New York he'll come to see you this afternoon."

"Thank you."

She started out, then turned. "Better finish your business with him
to-day if you can. We go to the country to-morrow or the day after.
I've just had word that the workmen are finally out of the house;
though the grounds, of course, are in bad shape, and will probably
remain so. With this labor situation, it's practically impossible to
get men."

Larry remembered something else. "Miss Sherwood, you recall my once
speaking about a man I got to be friends with in prison--Joe Ellison?"

"Yes."

"I've written him, under an assumed name, of course, and have had an
answer. He'll be out in a very few days now. He's through with his old
ways. I know he'd like nothing better than a quiet place to work, off
to himself somewhere. I'm sure you can trust him."

"We'll arrange to have him come out to Cedar Crest. Oh, don't think
I'm being generous or sentimental," she interrupted smilingly as he
started to thank her. "I'd be glad to put two or three more
ex-convicts to work on our place if I could get them. And so would my
friends; they can't get workmen of any kind."

That afternoon the picture dealer came. Miss Sherwood introduced Larry
to him as Mr. Brandon, her cousin, and then left the two men together.
Larry appraised Mr. Graham as a shrewd man who knew his business and
who would like to score a triumph in his own particular field. He
decided that the dealer had to be handled with a great deal of
frankness, and with some stiff bluffing which must appear equally
frank. The secret of Larry's earlier success had been to establish
confidence and even enthusiasm in something which had little or no
value. In selling an honest thing at an honest price, the first and
fundamental procedure was the same, to establish confidence and, if
possible, enthusiasm.

From the moment of introduction Larry quietly assumed the manner of an
art collector who was very sure of himself; which manner was abetted
by the setting of the Sherwood library. He felt something of the old
zest when wits had been matched against wits, even though this was to
be a strictly honorable enterprise.

"You know the work of Mr. Jerome Hunt?" he asked.

"I have handled practically all his work since he began to sell,"
replied Mr. Graham.

"I was referring to work in his recent manner."

"He has not been doing any work recently," corrected Mr. Graham.

"No?" Larry picked up the Italian mother which for this occasion he
had mounted with thumb-tacks upon a drawing-board, and stood it upon a
chair in the most advantageous light. "There is a little thing in Mr.
Hunt's recent manner which I lately purchased."

Mr. Graham regarded the painting long and critically.

Finally he remarked:

"At least it is different."

"Different and better," said Larry with his quiet positiveness. "So
much better that I paid him three thousand dollars for it."

"Three thousand!" The dealer regarded Larry sharply. "Three thousand
for that?"

"Yes. And I consider that I got a bargain."

Mr. Graham was silent for several moments. Then he said "For what
reason have I been asked here?"

"I want you to undertake to sell this picture."

"For how much?"

"Five thousand dollars."

"Five thousand dollars!"

"It is easily worth five thousand," Larry said quietly.

"If you value it so highly, why do you want to sell?"

"I am pressed by the present money shortage. Also I secured a second
picture when I got this one. That second picture I shall not sell. You
should have no difficulty in selling this," Larry continued, "if you
handle the matter right. Think of how people have started again to
talk about Gaugin: about his starting to paint in a new manner down
there in the Marquesas Islands, of his trading a picture for a stick
of furniture or selling it for a few hundred francs--which same
paintings are now each worth a small fortune. Capitalize this Gaugin
talk; also the talk about poor mad Blakeslie. You've got a new
sensation. One all your own."

"You can't start a sensation with one painting," Mr. Graham remarked
dryly.

This had been the very remark Larry had adroitly been trying to draw
from the dealer.

"Why, that's so!" he exclaimed. And then as if the thought had only
that moment come to him: "Why not have an exhibition of paintings done
in his new manner? He's got a studio full of things just as
characteristic as this one."

Larry caught the gleam which came into the dealer's eyes. It was
instantly masked.

"Too late in the spring for a picture show. Couldn't put on an
exhibition before next season."

"But why not have a private pre-exhibition showing?" Larry argued--
"with special invitations sent to a small, carefully chosen list,
putting it over strong to them that you were offering them the chance
of a first and exclusive view of something very remarkable. Most of
them will feel flattered and will come. And that will start talk and
stir up interest in your public exhibition in the fall. That's the
idea!"

Again there was the gleam, quickly masked, in the dealer's eyes. But
Larry got it.

"How do I know this picture here isn't just an accident?--the only
one of the sort Mr. Hunt has ever painted, or ever will paint?"
cautiously inquired Mr. Graham. "You said you had a second picture.
May I see it?"

Larry hesitated. But he believed he had the dealer almost "sold"; a
little more and Mr. Graham would be convinced. So he brought in
Maggie's portrait. The dealer looked it over with a face which he
tried to keep expressionless.

"How much is this one?" he asked at length.

"It is not for sale."

"It will bring more money than the other. It's a more interesting
subject."

"That's why I'm keeping it," said Larry. "I think you'll admit, Mr.
Graham, that this proves that Mr. Hunt is not now painting accidents."

"You're right." The mask suddenly dropped from Mr. Graham's face; he
was no longer merely an art merchant; he was also an art enthusiast.
"Hunt has struck something bold and fresh, and I think I can put him
over. I'll try that scheme you mentioned. Tell me where I can find him
and I'll see him at once."

"That picture has got to be sold before I give you his address. No use
seeing him until then; he'd laugh at you, and not listen to anything.
He's sore at the world; thinks it doesn't understand him. An actual
sale would be the only argument that would have weight with him."

"All right--I'll buy the picture myself. Hunt and I have had a falling
out, and I'd like him to have proof that I believe in him." Again Mr.
Graham was the art merchant. "Though, of course, I can't pay the five
thousand you ask. Hunt's new manner may catch on, and it may not. It's
a big gamble."

"What will you pay?"

"What you paid for it--three thousand."

"That's an awful drop from what I expected. When can you pay it?"

"I'll send you my check by an assistant as soon as I get back to my
place."

"I told you I was squeezed financially--so the picture is yours. I'll
send you Mr. Hunt's present address when I receive your check. Make it
payable to 'cash.'"

When Mr. Graham had gone with the Italian mother--it was then the
very end of the afternoon--Larry wondered if his plan to draw Hunt out
of his hermitage was going to succeed; and wondered what would be the
result, if any, upon the relationship between Hunt and Miss Sherwood
if Hunt should come openly back into his world an acclaimed success,
and come with the changed attitude toward every one and every thing
that recognition bestows.

But something was to make Larry wonder even more a few minutes later.
Dick, that habitual late riser, had had to hurry away that morning
without speaking to him. Now, when he came home toward six o'clock,
Dick shouted cheerily from the hallway:

"Ahoy! Where you anchored, Captain Nemo?"

Larry did not answer. He sat over his papers as one frozen. He knew
now whose had been the elusively familiar voice he had heard outside
Maggie's door. It was Dick Sherwood's.

Dick paused without to take some messages from Judkins, and Larry's
mind raced feverishly. Dick Sherwood was the victim Maggie and Barney
and Old Jimmie were so cautiously and elaborately trying to trim! It
seemed an impossible coincidence. But no, not impossible, after all.
Their net had been spread for just such game: a young man,
impressionable, pleasure-loving, with plenty of money, and with no
strings tied to his spending of it. That Barney should have made his
acquaintance was easily explained; to establish acquaintance with such
persons as Dick was Barney's specialty. What more natural than that
the high-spirited, irresponsible Dick should fall into this trap?--or
indeed that he should have been picked out in advance as the ideal
victim and have been drawn into it?

"Hello, there!" grumbled Dick, entering. "Why didn't you answer a
shipmate's hail?"

"I heard you; but just then I was adding a column of figures, and I
knew you'd look in."

At that moment Larry noted the portrait of Maggie, looking up from the
chair beside him. With a swiftness which he tried to disguise into a
mechanical action, he seized the painting and rolled it up, face
inside.

"What's that you've got?" demanded Dick.

"Just a little daub of my own."

"So you paint, too. What else can you do? Let's have a look."

"It's too rotten. I'd rather let you see something else--though all my
stuff is bad."

"You wouldn't do any little thing, would you, to brighten this
tiredest hour in the day of a tired business man," complained Dick.
"I've really been a business man to-day, Captain. Worked like the
devil--or an angel--whichever works the harder."

He lit a cigarette and settled with a sigh on the corner of Larry's
desk. Larry regarded him with a stranger and more contradicting
mixture of feelings than he had ever thought to contain: solicitude
for Dick--jealousy of him--and the instinct to protect Maggie. This
last seemed to Larry grotesquely absurd the instant it seethed up in
him, but there the instinct was: was Dick treating Maggie right?

"How was the show last night, Dick?"

"Punk!"

"I thought you said you were to see 'The Jest.' I've heard it's one of
the best things for years."

"Oh, I guess the show's all right. But the company was poor. My
company, I mean. The person I wanted to see couldn't come."

"Hope you had a supper party that made up for the disappointment,"
pursued Larry, adroitly trying to lead him on.

"I sure had that, Captain!"

Dick slid to a chair beside Larry, dropped a hand on Larry's knee, and
said in a lowered tone:

"Captain, I've recently met a new girl--and believe me, she's a knock-
out!"

"Better keep clear of those show girls, Dick."

"Never again! The last one cured me for life. Miss Cameron--Maggie
Cameron, how's that for a name?--is no Broadway girl, Captain. She's
not even a New York girl."

"No?"

"She's from some place out West. Father owned several big ranches. She
says that explains her crudeness. Her crude? I should say not! They
don't grow better manners right here in New York. And she's pretty,
and clever, and utterly naive about everything in New York. Though I
must say," Dick added, "that I'm not so keen about her cousin and her
uncle. I'd met the cousin a few times the last year or two around
town; he belongs here. The two are the sort of poor stock that crops
out in every good family. They've got one merit, though: they don't
try to impose on her too much."

"What is your Miss Cameron doing in New York?"

"Having her first look at the town before going to some resort for the
summer; perhaps taking a cottage somewhere. I say, Captain"--leaning
closer--"I wish you didn't feel you had to stick around this apartment
so tight. I'd like to take you out and introduce you to her."

Larry could imagine the resulting scene if ever this innocently
proposed introduction were given.

"I guess that for the present I'll have to depend upon your reports,
Dick."

"Well, you can take it from me that she's just about all right!"

It was Larry's strange instinct to protect Maggie that prompted his
next remark:

"You're not just out joy-riding, are you, Dick?"

Dick flushed. "Nothing of that sort. She's not that kind of girl.
Besides--I think it's the real thing, Captain."

The honest look in Dick's eyes, even more than his words, quieted
Larry's fear for Maggie. Presently Dick walked out leaving Larry yet
another problem added to his life. He could not let anything happen to
Maggie. He could not let anything happen to Dick. He had to protect
each; he had to do something. Yet what could he do?

Yes, this certainly was a problem! He paced the room, another victim
of the ancient predicament of divided and antagonistic duty.




CHAPTER XIX


The night of Larry's unexpected call upon her at the Grantham, Maggie
had pulled herself together and aided by the imposing Miss Grierson
had done her best as ingenue hostess to her pseudo-cousin, Barney, and
her pseudo-uncle, Old Jimmie, and to their quarry, Dick Sherwood, whom
they were so cautiously stalking. But when Dick had gone, and when
Miss Grierson had withdrawn to permit her charge a little visit with
her relatives, Barney had been prompt with his dissatisfaction.

"What was the matter with you to-night, Maggie?" he demanded. "You
didn't play up to your usual form."

"If you don't like the way I did it, you may get some one else,"
Maggie snapped back.

"Aw, don't get sore. If I'm stage-managing this show, I guess it's my
business to tell you how to act the part, and to tell you when you're
endangering the success of the piece by giving a poor performance."

"Maybe you'd better get some one else to take my part right now."

Maggie's tone and look were implacable. Barney moved uneasily. That
was the worst about Maggie: she wouldn't take advice from any one
unless the advice were a coincidence with or an enlargement of her own
wishes, and she was particularly temperish to-night. He hastened to
appease her.

"I guess the best of us have our off days. It's all right unless"--
Barney hesitated, business fear and jealousy suddenly seizing him--
"unless the way you acted tonight means you don't intend to go through
with it?"

"Why shouldn't I go through with it?"

"No reason. Unless you acted as you did to-night because"--again
Barney hesitated; again jealousy prompted him on--"because you've
heard in some way from Larry Brainard. Have you heard from Larry?"

Maggie met his gaze without flinching. She would take the necessary
measures in the morning with Miss Grierson to keep that lady from
indiscreet talking.

"I have not heard from Larry, and if I had, it wouldn't be any of your
business, Barney Palmer!"

He chose to ignore the verbal slap in his face of her last phrase.
"No, I guess you haven't heard from Larry. And I guess none of us will
hear from him--not for a long time. He's certainly fixed himself for
fair!"

"He sure has," agreed Old Jimmie.

Maggie said nothing.

"Seems to me we've got this young Sherwood hooked," said Old Jimmie,
who had been impatient during this unprofitable bickering. "Seems to
me it's time to settle just how we're going to get his dough. How
about it, Barney?"

"Plenty of time for that, Jimmie. This is a big fish, and we've got to
be absolutely sure we've got him hooked so he can't get off. We've got
to play safe here; it's worth waiting for, believe me. Besides, all
the while Maggie's getting practice."

"Seems to me we ought to make our clean-up quick. So that--so that--"

"See here--you think you got some other swell game you want to use
Maggie in?"

Old Jimmie's shifty gaze wavered before Barney's glare.

"No. But she's my daughter, ain't she?"

"Yes. But who's running this?" Barney demanded. Thank Heavens, Old
Jimmie was one person he did not have to treat like a prima donna!

"You are."

"Then shut up, and let me run it!"

"You might at least tell if you've decided how you're going to run
it," persisted Old Jimmie.

"Will you shut up!" snapped Barney.

Old Jimmie said no more. And having asserted his supremacy over at
least one of the two, Barney relented and condescended to talk,
lounging back in his chair with that self-conscious grace which had
helped make him a figure of increasing note in the gayer restaurants
of New York.

It did not enter into Barney's calculations, present or for the
future, to make Maggie the mistress of any man. Not that Barney was
restrained by moral considerations. The thing was just bad business.
Such a woman makes but comparatively little; and what is worse, if she
chooses, she makes it all for herself. And Barney, in his cynical
wisdom of his poor world, further knew that the average man enticed
into this poor trap, after the woman has said yes, and after the first
brief freshness has lost its bloom, becomes a tight-wad and there is
little real money to be got from him for any one.

"It's like this: once we've got this Sherwood bird safely hooked,"
expanded Barney with the air of an authority, flicking off his
cigarette ash with his best restaurant manner, "we can play the game a
hundred ways. But the marriage proposition is the best bet, and there
are two best ways of working that."

"Which d'you think we ought to use, Barney?" inquired Old Jimmie.

But Barney went on as if the older man had not asked a question. "Both
ways depend upon Sherwood being crazy in love, and upon his coming
across with a proposal and sticking to it. The first way, after being
proposed to, Maggie must break down and confess she's married to a man
she doesn't love and who doesn't love her. This husband would probably
give her a divorce, but he's a cagy guy and is out for the coin, and
if he smelled that she wanted to remarry some one with money he would
demand a large price for her freedom. Maggie must further confess that
she really has no money, and is therefore helpless. Then Sherwood
offers to meet the terms of this brute of a husband. If Sherwood falls
for this we shove in a dummy husband who takes Sherwood's dough--and a
big bank roll it will be!--and that'll be the last Sherwood'll ever
see of Maggie."

Old Jimmie nodded. "When it's worked right, that always brings home
the kale."

"The only question is," continued Barney, "can Maggie put that stuff
over? How about it, Maggie? Think you're good enough to handle a
proposition like that?"

Looking the handsome Barney straight in the eyes, Maggie for the
moment thought only of his desire to manage her and of the challenge
in his tone. Larry and the appeal he had made to her were forgotten,
as was also Dick Sherwood.

"Anything you're good enough to think up, Barney Palmer, I guess I'm
good enough to put over," she answered coolly.

And then: "What's the other way?" she asked.

"Old stuff. Have to be a sure-enough marriage. Sherwoods are big-time
people, you know; a sister who's a regular somebody. After marriage,
family permitted to learn truth--perhaps something much worse than
truth. Family horrified. They pay Maggie a big wad for a separation--
same as so many horrified families get rid of daughters-in-law they
don't like. Which of the ways suits you best, Maggie?"

Maggie shrugged her shoulders with indifference. It suited her present
mood to maintain her attitude of being equal to any enterprise.

"Which do you like best, Barney?" Old Jimmie asked.

"The second is safer. But then it's slower; and there would be
lawyers' fees which would eat into our profits; and then because of
the publicity we might have to wait some time before it would be safe
to use Maggie again. The first plan isn't so complicated, it's quick,
and at once we've got Maggie free to use in other operations. The
first looks the best bet to me--but, as I said, we don't have to
decide yet. We can let developments help make the actual decision for
us."

Barney did not add that a further reason for his objecting to the
second plan was that he didn't want Maggie actually tied in marriage
to any man. That was a relationship his hopes were reserving for
himself.

Barney's inborn desire for acknowledged chieftainship again craved
assertion and pressed him on to say:

"You see, Maggie, how much depends on you. You've got a whale of a
chance for a beginner. I hope you take a big