 brace over to-night and
play up to the possibilities of your part."

"You take care of your end, and I'll take care of mine!" was her sharp
retort.

Barney was flustered for a moment by his second failure to dominate
Maggie. "Oh, well, we'll not row," he tried to say easily. "We
understand each other, and we're each trying to help the other
fellow's game--that's the main point."

The two men left, Jimmie without kissing his daughter good-night. This
caused Maggie no surprise. A kiss, not the lack of it, would have been
the thing that would have excited wonder in Maggie.

Barney went away well satisfied on the whole with the manner in which
the affair was progressing, and with his management of it and of
Maggie. Maggie was obstinate, to be sure; but he'd soon work that out
of her. He was now fully convinced of the soundness of his explanation
of Maggie's poor performance of that night: she had just had an off
day.

As for Maggie, after they had gone she sat up long, thinking--and her
thoughts reverted irresistibly to Larry. His visit had been most
distracting. But she was not going to let it affect her purpose. If
anything, she was more determined than ever to be what she had told
him she was going to be, to prove to him that he could not influence
her.

She tried to keep her mind off Larry, but she could not. He was for
her so many questions. How had he escaped?--thrown off both police
and old friends? Where was he now? What was he doing? And when and how
was he going to reappear and interfere?--for Maggie had no doubt, now
that she knew him to be in New York, that he would come again; and
again try to check her.

And there was a matter which she no more understood than Larry, and
this was another of her questions: Why had she gone into a panic and
aided his escape?

Of course, she now and then thought of Dick Sherwood. She rather liked
Dick. But thus far she regarded him exactly as her scheme of life had
presented him to her: as a pleasant dupe who, in an exciting play in
which she had the thrilling lead, was to be parted from his money. She
was rather sorry for him; but this was business, and her sorrow was
not going to interfere with what she was going to do.

Maggie Cameron, at this period of her life, was not deeply
introspective. She did not realize what, according to other standards,
this thing was which she was doing. She was merely functioning as she
had been taught to function. And if any change was beginning in her,
she was thus far wholly unconscious of it.




CHAPTER XX


Larry's new problem was the most difficult and delicate dilemma of his
life--this divided loyalty: to balk Maggie and the two men behind her
without revealing the truth about Maggie to Dick, to protect Dick
without betraying Maggie. It certainly was a trying, baffling
situation.

He had no such foolish idea that he could change Maggie by exposing
her. At best he would merely render her incapable of continuing this
particular course; he would increase her bitterness and hostility to
him. Anyhow, according to the remnants of his old code, that wouldn't
be playing fair--particularly after her aiding his escape when he had
been trapped.

Upon only one point was he clear, and on this he became more settled
with every hour: whatever he did he must do with the idea of a
fundamental awakening in Maggie. Merely to foil her in this one scheme
would be to solve the lesser part of his problem; Maggie would be left
unchanged, or if changed at all the change would be toward a greater
hardness, and his major problem would be made more difficult of
solution.

He considered many ways. He thought of seeing Maggie again, and once
more appealing to her. That he vetoed, not because of the danger to
himself, but because he knew Maggie would not see him; and if he again
did break in upon her unexpectedly, in her obstinate pride she would
heed nothing he said. He thought of seeing Barney and Old Jimmie and
somehow so throwing the fear of God into that pair that they would
withdraw Maggie from the present enterprise; but even if he succeeded
in so hazardous an undertaking, again Maggie would be left unchanged.
He thought of showing Miss Sherwood the hidden portrait of Maggie, of
telling her all and asking her aid; but this he also vetoed, for it
seemed a betrayal of Maggie.

He kept going back to one plan: not a plan exactly, but the idea upon
which the right plan might be based. If only he could adroitly, with
his hand remaining unseen, place Maggie in a situation where
circumstances would appeal conqueringly to her best self, to her
latent sense of honor--that was the idea! But cudgel his brain as he
would, Larry could not just then develop a working plan whose
foundation was that idea.

But even if Larry had had a brilliant plan it would hardly have been
possible for him to have devoted himself to its execution, for two
days after his visit to Maggie at the Grantham, the Sherwoods moved
out to their summer place some forty miles from the city on the North
Shore of Long Island; and Larry was so occupied with routine duties
pertaining to this migration that at the moment he had time for little
else. Cedar Crest was individual yet typical of the better class of
Long Island summer residences. It was a long white building of many
piazzas and many wings, set on a bluff looking over the Sound, with a
broad stretch of silken lawn, and about it gardens in their June
glory, and behind the house a couple of hundred acres of scrub pine.

On the following day, according to a plan that had been worked out
between Larry and Miss Sherwood, Joe Ellison appeared at Cedar Crest
and was given the assistant gardener's cottage which stood apart on
the bluff some three hundred yards east of the house. He was a tall,
slightly bent, white-haired man, apparently once a man of physical
strength and dominance of character and with the outer markings of a
gentleman, but now seemingly a mere shadow of the forceful man of his
prime. As a matter of fact, Joe Ellison had barely escaped that
greatest of prison scourges, tuberculosis.

The roses were given over to his care. For a few brief years during
the height of his prosperity he had owned a small place in New Jersey
and during that period had seemingly been the country gentleman.
Flowers had been his hobby; so that now he could have had no work
which would have more suited him than this guardianship of the roses.
For himself he desired no better thing than to spend what remained of
his life in this sunlit privacy and communion with growing things.

He gripped Larry's hand when they were first alone in the little
cottage. "Thanks, Larry; I'll not forget this," he said. He said
little else. He did not refer to his prison life, or what had gone
before it. He had never asked Larry, even while in prison together,
about Larry's previous activities and associates; and he asked no
questions now. Apparently it was the desire of this silent man to have
the bones of his own past remain buried, and to leave undisturbed the
graves of others' mistakes.

A retiring, unobtrusive figure, he settled quickly to his work. He
seemed content, even happy; and at times there was a far-away,
exultant look in his gray eyes. Miss Sherwood caught this on several
occasions; it puzzled her, and she spoke of it to Larry. Larry
understood what lay behind Joe's bearing, and since the thing had
never been told to him as a secret he retold that portion of Joe's
history he had recited to the Duchess: of a child who had been brought
up among honorable people, protected from the knowledge that her
father was a convict--a child Joe never expected to see and did not
even know how to find.

Joe Ellison became a figure that moved Miss Sherwood deeply: content
to busy himself in his earthly obscurity, ever dreaming and gloating
over his one great sustaining thought--that he had given his child the
best chance which circumstances permitted; that he had removed himself
from his child's life; that some unknown where out in the world his
child was growing to maturity among clean, wholesome people; that he
never expected to make himself known to his child. The situation also
moved Larry profoundly whenever he looked at his old friend, merging
into a kindly fellowship with the earth.

But while busy with new affairs at Cedar Crest, Larry was all the
while thinking of Maggie, and particularly of his own dilemma
regarding Maggie and Dick. But the right plan still refused to take
form in his brain. However, one important detail occurred to him which
required immediate attention. If his procedure in regard to Hunt's
pictures succeeded in drawing the painter from his hermitage, nothing
was more likely than that Hunt unexpectedly would happen upon Maggie
in the company of Dick Sherwood. That might be a catastrophe to
Larry's unformed plan; it had to be forestalled if possible. Such a
matter could not be handled in a letter, with the police opening all
mail coming to the Duchess's house. So once more he decided upon a
secret visit to the Duchess's house. He figured that such a visit
would be comparatively without risk, since the police and Barney
Palmer and the gangsters Barney had put upon his trail all still
believed him somewhere in the West.

Accordingly, a few nights after they had settled at Cedar Crest, he
motored into New York in a roadster Miss Sherwood had placed at his
disposal, and after the necessary precautions he entered Hunt's
studio. The room was dismantled, and Hunt sat among his packed
belongings smoking his pipe.

"Well, young fellow," growled Hunt after they had shaken hands, "you
see you've driven me from my happy home."

"Then Mr. Graham has been to see you?"

"Yes. And he put up to me your suggestion about a private exhibition.
And I fell for it. And I've got to go back among the people I used to
know. And wear good clothes and put on a set of standardized good
manners. Hell!"

"You don't like it?"

"I suppose, if the exhibition is a go, I'll like grinning at the bunch
that thought I couldn't paint. You bet I'll like that! You, young
fellow--I suppose you're here to gloat over me and to try to collect
your five thousand."

"I never gloat over doing such an easy job as that was. And I'm not
here to collect my bet. As far as money is concerned, I'm here to give
you some." And he handed Hunt the check made out to "cash" which Mr.
Graham had sent him for the Italian mother.

"Better keep that on account of what I owe you," advised Hunt.

"I'd rather you'd hold it for me. And better still, I'd rather call
the bet off in favor of a new bargain."

"What's the new proposition for swindling me?"

"You need a business nursemaid. What commission do you pay dealers?"

"Been paying those burglars forty per cent."

"That's too much for doing nothing. Here's my proposition. Give me ten
per cent to act as your personal agent, and I'll guarantee that your
total percentage for commissions will be less than at present, and
that your prices will be doubled. Of course I can't do much while the
police and others are so darned interested in me, so if you accept
we'll just date the agreement from the time I'm cleared."

"You're on, son--and we'll just date the agreement from the present
moment, A.D." Again Hunt gripped Larry's hand. "You're all to the
good, Larry--and I'm not giving you half enough."

That provided Larry with the opening he had desired. "You can make it
up to me."

"How?"

"By helping me out with a proposition of my own. To come straight to
the point, it's Maggie."

"Maggie?"

"I guess you know how I feel there. She's got a wrong set of ideas,
and she's fixed in them--and you know how high-spirited she is. She's
out in the world now, trying to put something crooked over which she
thinks is big. I know what it is. I want to stop her, and change her.
That's my big aim--to change her. The only way I can at this moment
stop what she is now doing is by exposing her. And mighty few people
with a wrong twist are ever set right by merely being exposed."

"I guess you're right there, Larry."

"What I want is a chance to try another method on Maggie. If she's
handled right I think she may turn out a very different person from
what she seems to be--something that may surprise both of us."

Hunt nodded. "That was why I painted her picture. Since I first saw
her I've been interested in how she was going to come out. She might
become anything. But where do I fit in?"

"She's flying in high company. It occurred to me that, when you got
back to your own world, you might meet her, and in your surprise you
might speak to her in a manner which would be equivalent in its effect
to an intentional exposure. I wanted to put you on your guard and to
ask you to treat her as a stranger."

"That's promised. I won't know her."

"Don't promise till you know the rest."

"What else is there to know?"

"Who the sucker is they're trying to trim." Larry regarded the other
steadily. "You know him. He's Dick Sherwood."

"Dick Sherwood!" exploded Hunt. "Are you sure about that?"

"I was with Maggie the other night when Dick came to have supper with
her; he didn't see me. Besides, Dick has told me about her."

"How did they ever get hold of Dick?"

"Dick's the easiest kind of fish for two such smooth men as Barney and
Old Jimmie when they've got a clever, good-looking girl as bait, and
when they know how to use her. He's generous, easily impressed, thinks
he is a wise man of the world and is really very gullible."

"Have they got him hooked?"

"Hard and fast. It won't be his fault if they don't land him."

The painter gazed at Larry with a hard look. Then he demanded
abruptly:

"Show Miss Sherwood that picture of Maggie I painted?"

"No. I had my reasons."

"What you going to do with it?"

"Keep it, and pay you your top price for it when I've got the money."

"H'm! Told Miss Sherwood what's doing about Dick?"

"No."

"Why not?"

"I thought of doing it, then I decided against it. For the same reason
I just gave you--that it might lead to exposure, and that exposure
would defeat my plans."

"You seem to be forgetting that your plan leaves Dick in danger. Dick
deserves some consideration."

"And I'm giving it to him," argued Larry. "I'm thinking of him as much
as of Maggie. Or almost as much. His sister and friends have pulled
him out of a lot of scrapes. He's not a bit wiser or better for that
kind of help. And it's not going to do him any good whatever to have
some one step in and take care of him again. He's been a good friend
to me, but he's a dear fool. I want to handle this so he'll get a jolt
that will waken him up--make him take his responsibilities more
seriously--make him able to take care of himself."

"Huh!" grunted Hunt. "You've certainly picked out a few man-sized jobs
for yourself: to make a success of the straight life for yourself--to
come out ahead of the police and your old pals--to make Maggie love
the Ten Commandments--to put me across--to make Dick into a level-
headed citizen. Any other little item you'd like to take on?"

Larry ignored the irony of the question. "Some of those things I'm
going to do," he said confidently. "And any I see I'm going to fail
in, I'll get warning to the people involved. But to come back to your
promise: are you willing to give your promise now that you know all
the facts?"

Hunt pulled for a long moment at his pipe. Then he said almost
gruffly:

"I guess you've guessed that Isabel Sherwood is about the most
important person in the world to me?"

That was the nearest Hunt had ever come to telling that he loved Miss
Sherwood. Larry nodded.

"I'm in bad there already. Suppose your foot slips and everything
about Dick goes wrong. What'll be my situation when she learns I've
known all along and have just stood by quietly and let things happen?
See what I'll be letting myself in for?"

"I do," said Larry, his spirits sinking. "And of course I can
understand your decision not to give your promise."

"Who said I wouldn't give my promise?" demanded Hunt. "Of course I
give my promise! All I said was that the weather bureau of my bad toe
predicts that there's likely to be a storm because of this--and I
want you to use your brain, son, I want you to use your brain!"

He upreared his big, shag-haired figure and gripped Larry's hand.
"You're all right, Larry--and here's wishing you luck! Now get to
hell out of here before Gavegan and Casey drop in for a cup of tea, or
your old friends begin target practice with their hip artillery. I
want a little quiet in which to finish my packing.

"And say, son," he added, as he pushed Larry through the door, "don't
fall dead at the sight of me when you see me next, for I'm likely to
be walking around inside all the finery and vanity of Fifth Avenue."




CHAPTER XXI


Larry came down the stairway from Hunt's studio in a mood of high
elation. Through Hunt's promise of cooperation he had at least made a
start in his unformed plan regarding Maggie. Somehow, he'd work out
and put across the rest of it.

Then Hunt's prediction of the trouble that might rise through his
silence recurred to Larry. Indeed, that was a delicate situation!--
containing all kinds of possible disasters for himself as well as for
Hunt. He would have to be most watchful, most careful, or he would
find himself entangled in worse circumstances than at present.

As he came down into the little back room, his grandmother was sitting
over her interminable accounts, each of which represented a little
profit to herself, some a little relief to many, some a tragedy to a
few; and many of which were in code, for these represented
transactions of a character which no pawnshop, particularly one
reputed to be a fence, wishes ever to have understood by those
presumptive busy-bodies, the police. When Larry had first entered, she
had merely given him an unsurprised "good-evening" and permitted him
to pass on. But now, as he told her good-night and turned to leave,
she said in her thin, monotonous voice:

"Sit down for a minute, Larry. I want to talk to you."

Larry obeyed. "Yes, grandmother."

But the Duchess did not at once speak. She held her red-rimmed,
unblinking eyes on him steadily. Larry waited patiently. Though she
was so composed, so self-contained, Larry knew her well enough to know
that what was passing in her mind was something of deep importance, at
least to her.

At length she spoke. "You saw Maggie that night you hurried away from
here?"

"Yes, grandmother. Have you heard from her since the?--or from Barney
or Old Jimmie?"

The Duchess shook her head. "Do you mind telling me what happened that
night--and what Maggie's doing?"

Larry told her of the scene in Maggie's suite at the Grantham, told of
the plan in which Maggie was involved and of his own added
predicament. This last the Duchess seemingly ignored.

"Just about what I supposed she was doing," she said. "And you tried
again to get her to give it up?"

"Yes."

"And she refused?"

"Yes." And he added: "Refused more emphatically than before."

The Duchess studied him a long moment. Then: "You're not trying to
make her give that up just because you think she's worth saving. You
like her a lot, Larry?"

"I love her," Larry admitted.

"I'm sorry about that, Larry." There was real emotion in the old voice
now. "I've told you that you're all I've got left. And now that you've
at last started right, I want everything to go right with you.
Everything! And Maggie will never help things go right with you. Your
love for her can only mean misery and misfortune. You can't change
her."

Larry came out with the questions he had asked himself so frequently
these last days. "But why did her manner change so when she heard
Barney and the others? Why did she help me escape?"

"That was because, deep down, she really loves you. That's the worst
part of it: you both love each other." The Duchess slowly nodded her
head. "You both love each other. If it wasn't for that I wouldn't care
what you tried to do. But I tell you again you can't change her. She's
too sure of herself. She'll always try to make you go _her way_--and
if you don't, you'll never get a smile from her. And because you love
each other, I'm afraid you'll give in and go her way. That's what I'm
afraid of. Won't you just cut her out of your life, Larry?"

It had been a prodigiously long speech for the Duchess. And Larry
realized that the emotion behind it was a thousand times what showed
in the thin voice of the bent, gestureless figure.

"For your sake I'm sorry, grandmother. But I can't."

"Then it's only fair to tell you, Larry," she said in a more composed
tone which expressed a finality of decision, "that if there's ever
anything I can do to stop this, I'll do it. For she's bad for you--
what with her stiff spirit--and the ideas Old Jimmie has put into
her--and the way Old Jimmie has brought her up. I'll stop things if
I can."

Larry made no reply. The Duchess continued looking at him steadily for
a long space. He knew she was thinking; and he was wondering what was
passing through that shrewd old brain, when she remarked:

"By the way, Larry, I just remembered what you told me of that old
Sing Sing friend--Joe Ellison. Have you heard from him recently?"

"He's out, and he's working where I am."

"Yes? What's he doing?"

"He's working there as a gardener."

Again she was silent a space, her sunken eyes steady With thought.
Then she said:

"From the time he was twenty till he was thirty I knew Joe Ellison
well--better than I've ever told you. He knew your mother when she
was a girl, Larry. I wish you'd ask him to come in to see me. As soon
as he can manage it."

Larry promised. His grandmother said no more about Maggie, and
presently Larry bade her good-night and made his cautious way, ever on
the lookout for danger, to where he had left his roadster, and thence
safely out to Cedar Crest. But the Duchess sat for hours exactly as he
had left her, her accounts unheeded, thinking, thinking, thinking over
an utterly impossible possibility that had first presented itself
faintly to her several days before. She did not see how the thing
could be; and yet somehow it might be, for many a strange thing did
happen in this border world where for so long she had lived. When
finally she went to bed she slept little; her busy conjectures would
not permit sleep. And though the next day she went about her shop
seemingly as usual, she was still thinking.

That night Joe Ellison came. They met as though they had last seen
each other but yesterday.

"Good-evening, Joe."

"Glad to see you, Duchess."

She held out to him a box of the best cigars, which she had bought
against his coming, for she had remembered Joe Ellison's once
fastidious taste regarding tobacco. He lit one, and they fell into the
easy silence of old friends, taking up their friendship exactly where
it had been broken off. As a matter of fact, Joe Ellison might have
been her son-in-law but for her own firm attitude. He had known her
daughter very much better than her words to Larry the previous evening
had indicated. Not only had Joe known her while a girl down here, but
much later he had learned in what convent she was going to school and
there had been surreptitious love-making despite convent rules and
boundaries--till the Duchess had learned what was going on. She had
had a square out-and-out talk with Joe; the romance had suddenly
ended; and later Larry's mother had married elsewhere. But the
snuffed-out romance had made no difference in the friendship between
the Duchess and Joe; each had recognized the other as square, as that
word was understood in their border world.

To Joe Ellison the Duchess was changed but little since twenty-odd
years ago. She had seemed old even then; though as a youth he had
known old men who had talked of her beauty when a young woman and of
how she had queened it among the reckless spirits of that far time.
But to the Duchess the change in Joe Ellison was astounding. She had
last seen him in his middle thirties: black-haired, handsome, careful
of dress, powerful of physique, dominant, fiery-tempered, fearless of
any living thing, but with these hot qualities checked into a surface
appearance of unruffled equanimity by his self-control and his
habitual reticence. And now to see him thin, white-haired, bent, his
old fire seemingly burned to gray ashes--the Duchess, who had seen
much in her generations, was almost appalled at the transformation.

At first the Duchess skillfully guided the talk among commonplaces.

"Larry tells me you're out with him."

"Yes," said Joe. "Larry's been a mighty good pal."

"What're you going to do when you get back your strength?"

"The same as I'm doing now--if they'll let me."

And after a pause: "Perhaps later, if I had the necessary capital, I'd
like to start a little nursery. Or else grow flowers for the market."

"Not going back to the old thing, then?"

Joe shook his white head. "I'm all through there. Flowers are a more
interesting proposition."

"Whenever you get ready to start, Joe, you can have all the capital
you want from me. And it will cost you nothing. Or if you'd rather
pay, it'll cost you the same as at a bank--six per cent."

"Thanks. I'll remember." Joe Ellison could not have spoken his
gratitude more strongly.

The Duchess now carefully guided the talk in the direction of the
thing of which she had thought so constantly.

"By the way, Joe, Larry told me something about you I'd never heard
before--that you had been married, and had a child."

"Yes. You didn't hear because I wasn't telling anybody about it when
it happened, and it never came out."

"Mind telling me about it, Joe?"

He pulled at his perfecto while assembling his facts; and then he made
one of the longest speeches Joe Ellison--"Silent Joe" some of his
friends had called him in the old days--was ever known to utter. But
there was reason for its length; it was an epitome of the most
important period of his life.

"I had a nice little country place over in Jersey for three or four
years. It all happened there. No one knew me for what I was; they took
me for what I pretended to be, a small capitalist whose interests
required his taking occasional trips. Nice neighbors. That's where I
met my wife. She was fine every way. That's why I kept all that part
of my life from my pals; I was afraid they might leak and the truth
would spoil everything. My wife was an orphan, niece of the widow of a
broker who lived out there. She never knew the truth about me. She
died when the baby was born. When the baby was a year and a half my
big smash came, and I went up the river. But I was never connected up
with the man who lived over in Jersey and who suddenly cancelled his
lease and moved away."

The Duchess drew nearer to the heart of her thoughts.

"Was the baby a boy or girl, Joe?"

"Girl."

The Duchess did not so much as blink. "How old would she be by this
time?"

"Eighteen."

"What was her name?"

"Mary--after her mother. But of course I ordered it to be changed. I
don't know what her name is now."

The Duchess pressed closer.

"What became of her, Joe?"

A glow began to come into the somber eyes of Joe Ellison. "I told you
her mother was a fine woman, and she never knew anything bad about me.
I wanted my girl to grow up like her mother. I wanted her to have as
good a chance as any of those nice girls over in Jersey--I wanted her
never to know any of the lot I've known--I wanted her never to have
the stain of knowing her father was a crook--I wanted her never to
know even who her father was."

"How did you manage it?"

"Her mother had left a little fortune, about twenty-five thousand--
twelve or fifteen hundred a year. I turned the money and the girl over
to my best pal--and the squarest pal a man ever had--the only one I'd
let know about my Jersey life. I told him what to do. She was an
awfully bright little thing; at a year and a half, when I saw her
last, she was already talking. She was to be brought up among nice,
simple people--go to a good school--grow up to be a nice, simple girl.
And especially never to know anything about me. She was to believe
herself an orphan. And my pal did just as I ordered. He wrote me how
she was getting on till about four years ago, then I had news that he
was dead and that the trust fund had been transferred to a firm of
lawyers, though I wasn't given the name of the lawyers. That doesn't
make any difference since she's getting the money just the same."

"What was your pal's name, Joe?"

"Jimmie Carlisle."

The Duchess had been certain what this name would be, but nevertheless
she could not repress a start.

"What's the matter?" Joe asked sharply. "Did you know him?"

"Not in those days," said the Duchess, recovering her even tone.
"Though I got to know him later. By the way," she added casually, "did
Jimmie Carlisle have any children of his own?"

"Not before I went away. He wasn't even married."

There was now no slightest doubt left in the Duchess's mind. Maggie
was really Joe Ellison's daughter.

Joe Ellison went on, the glow of his sunken eyes becoming yet more
exalted. He was almost voicing his thoughts to himself alone, for his
friendship with the Duchess was so old that her presence was no
inhibition. His low words were almost identical in substance with what
Larry had told--a summary of what had come to be his one great hope
and dream, the nearest thing he had to a religion.

"Somewhere, in a nice place, my girl is now growing up like her
mother. Clean of everything I was and I knew. She must be practically
a woman now. I don't know where she is--there's now no way for me to
learn. And I don't want to know. And I don't want her ever to know
about me. I don't ever want to be the cause of making her feel
disgraced, or of dragging her down from among the people where she
belongs."

The Duchess gave no visible sign of emotion, but her ancient heart-
strings were set vibrating by that tense, low-pitched voice. She had a
momentary impulse to tell him the truth. But just then the Duchess was
a confusion of many conflicting impulses, and the balance of their
strength was for the moment against telling. So she said nothing.

Their talk drifted back to commonplaces, and presently Joe Ellison
went away. The Duchess sat motionless at her desk, again thinking--
thinking--thinking; and when Joe Ellison was back in his gardener's
cottage at Cedar Crest and was happily asleep, she still sat where he
had left her. During her generations of looking upon life from the
inside, she had seen the truth of many strange situations of which the
world had learned only the wildest rumors or the most respectable
versions; but during the long night hours, perhaps because the affair
touched her so closely, this seemed to her the strangest situation she
had ever known. A father believing with the firm belief of established
certainty that his daughter had been brought up free from all taint of
his own life, carefully bred among the best of people. In reality the
girl brought up in a criminal atmosphere, with criminal ideas
implanted in her as normal ideas, and carefully trained in criminal
ways and ambitions. And neither father nor daughter having a guess of
the truth.

Indeed it was a strange situation! A situation charged with all kinds
of unforeseeable results.

The Duchess now understood the unfatherly disregard Old Jimmie had
shown for the ordinary welfare of Maggie. Not being her father, he had
not cared. Superficially, at least, Jimmie Carlisle must have been a
much more plausible individual twenty years earlier, to have won the
implicit trust of Joe Ellison and to have become his foremost friend.
She understood one reason why Old Jimmie had always boarded Maggie in
the cheapest and lowest places; his hidden cupidity had thereby been
pocketing about a thousand dollars a year of trust money for over
sixteen years.

But there was one queer problem here to which the Duchess could not at
this time see the answer. If Jimmie Carlisle had wished to gratify his
cupidity and double-cross his friend, why had he not at the very start
placed Maggie in an orphanage where she would have been neither charge
nor cost to him, and thus have had the use of every penny of the trust
fund? Why had he chosen to keep her by him, and train her carefully to
be exactly what her father had most wished her not to be? There must
have been some motive in the furtive, tortuous mind of Old Jimmie,
that now would perhaps forever remain a mystery.

Of course she saw, or thought she saw, the reason for the report of
Old Jimmie's death to Joe Ellison. That report had been sent to escape
an accounting.

As she sat through the night hours the Duchess for the first time felt
warmth creep over her for Maggie. She saw Maggie in the light of a
victim. If Maggie had been brought up as her father had planned, she
might now be much the girl her father dreamed her. But Old Jimmie had
entered the scheme of things. Yes, the audacious, willful, confident
Maggie, bent on conquering the world in the way Old Jimmie and later
Barney Palmer had taught her, was really just a poor misguided victim
who should have had a far different fate.

And now the Duchess came to one of the greatest problems of her life.
What should she do? Considering the facts that Joe Ellison wished the
life of a recluse and desired to avoid all talk of the old days, the
chances were that he would never happen upon the real state of
affairs. Only she and Old Jimmie knew the essentials of the situation--
and very likely Jimmie did not yet know that the friend who had once
trusted him was now a free man. She felt as though she held in her
hands the strings of destiny. Should she tell the truth?

She pondered long. All her considerations were given weight according
to what she saw as their possible effect upon Larry; for Larry was the
one person left whom she loved, and on him were fixed the aspirations
of these her final years. Therefore her thoughts and arguments were
myopic, almost necessarily specious. She wanted to see justice done,
of course. But most of all she wanted what was best for Larry. If she
told the truth, it might result in some kind of temporary breakdown in
Maggie's attitude which would bring her and Larry together. That would
be disastrous. If not disastrous at once, certainly in the end. Maggie
was a victim, and undoubtedly deserved sympathy. But others should not
be sacrificed merely because Maggie had suffered an injury. She had
been too long under the tutelage of Old Jimmie, and his teachings were
now too thoroughly the fiber of her very being, for her to alter
permanently. She might change temporarily under the urge of an
emotional revelation; but she would surely revert to her present self.
There was no doubt of that.

And the Duchess gave weight to other considerations--all human, yet
all in some measure specious. Joe Ellison was happy in his dream, and
would be happy in it all the rest of his life. Why tell the truth and
destroy his precious illusion?--especially when there was no chance to
change Maggie?

And further, she recalled the terrific temper that had lived within
the composed demeanor of Joe Ellison. The fires of that temper could
not yet be all burned out. If she told the truth, told that Jimmie
Carlisle was still alive, that might be just touching the trigger of a
devastating tragedy--might be disaster for all. What would be the use
when no one would have been benefited?

And so, in the wisdom of her old head and the entanglements of her old
heart, the Duchess decided she would never tell. And that loving,
human decision she was to cling to through the stress of times to
come.

But even while she was thus deciding upon a measure to checkmate them
both, Larry was pacing his room at Cedar Crest, at last excitedly
evolving the elusive plan which was to bring Maggie to her senses and
also to him; and Maggie, all unconscious of this new element which had
entered as a potential factor in her existence, all unconscious of how
far she had been guided from the course which had been charted for
her, was lying awake at the Grantham after a late party at which Dick
Sherwood had been her escort, and was exulting pridefully over the
seemingly near consummation of the plan that was to show Larry
Brainard how wrong he was and that was to establish her as the
cleverest woman in her line--better even than Barney or Old Jimmie
believed her.

And thus separate wills each strove to direct their own lives and
other lives according to their own separate plans; little thinking to
what extent they were all entangled in a common destiny; and thinking
not at all of the further seed that was being sown for the harvest-
time of the whirlwind.




CHAPTER XXII


After Larry's many days and nights of futile searching of his brain
for a plan that would accord with his fundamental idea for awakening
the unguessed other self of Maggie, the plan, which finally came to
him complete in all its details in a single moment, was so simple and
obvious that he marveled it could have been plainly before his eyes
all this while without his ever seeing it. Of course the plan was
dangerous and of doubtful issue. It had to be so, because it involved
the reactions of strong-tempered persons as yet unacquainted who would
have no foreknowledge of the design behind their new relationship; and
because its success or failure, which might also mean his own complete
failure, the complete loss of all he had thus far gained, depended
largely upon the twist of events which he could not foresee and
therefore could not guide.

Briefly, his plan was so to manage as to have Maggie received in the
Sherwood household as a guest, to have her receive the frank,
unquestioning hospitality (and perhaps friendship) of such a gracious,
highly placed, unpretentious woman as Miss Sherwood, so distinctly a
native of, and not an immigrant to, the great world. To be received as
a friend by those against whom she plotted, to have the generous,
unsuspecting friendship of Miss Sherwood--if anything just then had a
chance to open the blinded Maggie's eyes to the evil and error of what
she was engaged upon, if anything had a chance to appeal to the finer
things he believed to exist unrecognized or suppressed in Maggie, this
was that thing.

And best part of this plan, its effect would be only within Maggie's
self. No one need know that anything had happened. There would be no
exposure, no humiliation.

Of course there was the great question of how to get Miss Sherwood to
invite Maggie; and whether indeed Miss Sherwood would invite her at
all. And there was the further question, the invitation being sent, of
whether Maggie would accept.

Larry decided to manipulate his design through Dick Sherwood. Late
that afternoon, when Dick, just returned from the city, dropped into,
as was his before-dinner custom, the office-study which had been set
aside for Larry's use, Larry, after an adroit approach to his subject,
continued:

"And since I've been wished on you as a sort of step-uncle, there's
something I'd like to suggest--if I don't seem to be fairly jimmying
my way into your affairs."

"Door's unlocked and wide open, Captain," said Dick. "Walk right in
and take the best chair."

"Thanks. Remember telling me about a young woman you recently met? A
Miss Maggie--Maggie--"

"Miss Cameron," Dick prompted. "Of course I remember."

"And remember your telling me that this time it's the real thing?"

"And it IS the real thing!"

"You haven't--excuse me--asked her to marry you yet?"

"No. I've been trying to get up my nerve."

"Here's where you've got to excuse me once more, Dick--it's not my
business to tell you what should be your relations with your family--
but have you told your sister?"

"No." Dick hesitated. "I suppose I should. But I hadn't thought of
it--yet. You see--" Again Dick hesitated.

"Yes?" prompted Larry.

"There are her relatives--that cousin and uncle. I guess it must have
been my thinking of them that prevented my thinking of what you
suggest."

"But you told me they hadn't interfered much, and never would
interfere." Larry gently pressed his point: "And look at it from Miss
Cameron's angle of view. If it's the real thing, and you're behaving
that way toward her, hasn't she good grounds for thinking it strange
that you haven't introduced her to your family?"

"By George, you're right, Captain! I'll see to that at once."

"Of course, Dick," Larry went on, carefully feeling his way, "you know
much better than I the proper way to do such things--but don't you
think it would be rather nice, when you tell your sister, that you
suggest to her that she invite Miss Cameron out here for a little
visit? If they are to meet, I know Miss Cameron, or any girl, would
take it as more of a tribute to be received in your own home than
merely to meet in a big commonplace hotel."

"Right again, Captain! I'd tell Isabel to-night, and ask her to send
the invitation--only I'm booked to scoot right back to the city for a
little party as soon as I get some things together, and I'll stay
overnight in the apartment. But I'll attend to the thing to-morrow
night, sure."

"May I ask just one favor in the meantime?"

"One favor? A dozen, Captain!"

"I'll take the other eleven later. Just now I only ask, since you
haven't proposed, that you won't--er--commit yourself any further, in
any way, with Miss Cameron until after you've told your sister and
until after Miss Cameron has been out here."

"Oh, I say now!" protested Dick.

"I am merely suggesting that affairs remain in statu quo until after
Miss Cameron's visit with your sister. That's not asking much of you,
Dick--nor asking it for a very long time."

"Oh, of course I'll do it, Captain," grumbled Dick affectionately.
"You've got me where I'll do almost anything you want me to do."

But Dick did not speak to his sister the following evening. The next
morning news came to Miss Sherwood of a friend's illness, and she and
her novel-reading aunt hurried off at once on what was to prove to be
a week's absence. But this delay in his plan did not worry Larry
greatly as it otherwise would have done, for Dick repeated his promise
to hold a stiff rein upon himself until after he should have spoken to
his sister. And Larry believed he could rely upon Dick's pledged word.

During this week of waiting and necessary inactivity Larry
concentrated upon another phase of his many-sided plan--to make of
himself a business success. As has been said, he saw his chance of
this in the handling of Miss Sherwood's affairs; and saw it
particularly in an idea that had begun to grow upon him since he
became aware, through statements and letters from the agents turned
over to him, of the extent of the Sherwood real-estate holdings and
since he had got some glimmering of their condition. His previous
venturings about the city had engendered in him a sense of moderate
security; so he now began to make flying trips into New York in the
smart roadster Miss Sherwood had placed at his disposal.

On each trip Larry made swift visits to several of the properties,
until finally he had covered the entire list Miss Sherwood had
furnished him through the agents. His survey corroborated his surmise.
The property, mostly neglected apartment and tenement houses, was in
an almost equally bad way whether one regarded it from the standpoint
of sanitation, comfort, or cold financial returns. The fault for this
was due to the fact that the Sherwoods had left the property entirely
in the care of the agents, and the agents, being old, old-fashioned,
and weary of business to the point of being almost ready to retire,
had left the property to itself.

Prompted by these bad conditions, and to some degree by the then
critical housing famine, with its records of some thousands of
families having no place at all to go and some thousands of families
being compelled for the sake of mere shelter to pay two and three
times what they could afford for a few poor rooms, and with its
records of profiteering landlords, Larry began to make notes for a
plan which he intended later to elaborate--a plan which he
tentatively entitled: "Suggestions for the Development of Sherwood
Real-Estate Holdings." Larry, knowing from the stubs of Miss
Sherwood's checkbook what would be likely to please her, gave as much
consideration to Service as to Profit. The basis of his growing plan
was good apartments at fair rentals. That he saw as the greatest of
public services in the present crisis. But the return upon the
investment had to be a reasonable one. Larry did not believe in
Charity, except for extreme cases. He believed, and his belief had
grown out of a wide experience with many kinds of people, that
Charity, of course to a smaller extent, was as definitely a source of
social evil as the then much-talked-of Profiteering.

In the meantime he was seeing his old friend, Joe Ellison, every day;
perhaps smoking with Ellison in his cottage after he had finished his
day's work among the roses, perhaps walking along the bluff which hung
above the Sound, whose cool, clear waters splashed with vacation
laziness upon the shingle. The two men rarely spoke, and never of the
past. Larry was well acquainted with, and understood, the older man's
deep-rooted wish to avoid all talk bearing upon deeds and associates
of other days; that was a part of his life and a phase of existence
that Joe Ellison was trying to forget, and Larry by his silence
deferred to his friend's desire.

On the day after Joe Ellison's visit to the Duchess, Larry had
received a note from his grandmother, addressed, of course, to "Mr.
Brandon." There was no danger in her writing Larry if she took
adequate precautions: mail addressed to Cedar Crest was not bothered
by postal and police officials; it was only mail which came to the
house of the Duchess which received the attention of these gentlemen.

The note was one which the Duchess, after that night of thought which
had so shaken her old heart, had decided to be a necessity if her plan
of never telling of her discovery of Maggie's real paternity were to
be a success. The major portion of her note dwelt upon a generality
with which Larry already was acquainted: Joe's desire to keep clear of
all talk touching upon the deeds and the people of his past. And then
in a careless-seeming last sentence the Duchess packed the carefully
calculated substance of her entire note:

"It may not be very important--but particularly avoid ever mentioning
the mere name of Jimmie Carlisle. They used to know each other, and
their acquaintance is about the bitterest thing Joe Ellison has to
remember."

Of course he'd never mention Old Jimmie Carlisle, Larry said to
himself as he destroyed the note--never guessing, in making this
natural response to what seemed a most natural request, that he had
become an unconscious partner in the plan of the warm-hearted,
scheming Duchess.

There was one detail of Joe Ellison's behavior which aroused Larry's
mild curiosity. Directly beneath one of Joe's gardens, hardly a
hundred yards away, was a bit of beach and a pavilion which were used
in common by the families from the surrounding estates. The girls and
younger women were just home from schools and colleges, and at high
tide were always on the beach. At this period, whenever he was at
Cedar Crest, Larry saw Joe, his work apparently forgotten, gazing
fixedly down upon the young figures splashing about the water in their
bright bathing-suits or lounging about the pavilion in their smart
summer frocks.

This interest made Larry wonder, though to be sure not very seriously.
For he had never a guess of how deep Joe's interest was. He did not
know, could not know, that that tall, fixed figure, with its one
absorbing idea, was thinking of his daughter. He could not know that
Joe Ellison, emotionally elated and with a hungry, self-denying
affection that reached out toward them all, was seeing his daughter as
just such a girl as one of these--simple, wholesome, well-brought-up.
He could not know that Joe, in a way, perceived his daughter in every
nice young woman he saw.

Toward evening of the seventh day of her visit, Miss Sherwood
returned. Larry was on the piazza when the car bearing her swept into
the white-graveled curve of the drive. The car was a handsome,
powerful roadster. Larry had started out to be of such assistance as
he could, when the figure at the wheel, a man, sprang from the car and
helped Miss Sherwood alight. Larry saw that the man was Hunt--such a
different Hunt!--and he had begun a quick retreat when Hunt's voice
called after him:

"You there--wait a minute! I want a little chin-chin with you."

Larry halted. He could not help overhearing the few words that passed
between Hunt and Miss Sherwood.

"Thank you ever so much," she said in her even voice. "Then you're
coming?"

"I promised, didn't I?"

"Then good-bye."

"Good-bye."

They shook hands friendly enough, but rather formally, and Miss
Sherwood turned to the house. Hunt called to Larry:

"Come here, son."

Larry crossed to the big painter who was standing beside the power-
bulged hood of his low-swung car.

"Happened to drop in where she was--brought her home--aunt
following in that hearse with its five-foot cushions she always rides
in," Hunt explained. And then: "Well, I suppose you've got to give me
the once-over. Hurry up, and get it done with."

Larry obeyed. Hunt's wild hair had been smartly barbered, he had on a
swagger dust-coat, and beneath it flannels of the smartest cut.
Further, he bore himself as if smart clothes and smart cars had always
been items of his equipment.

"Well, young fellow, spill it," he commanded. "What do I look like?"

"Like Solomon in all his glory. No, more like the he-dressmaker of the
Queen of Sheba."

"I'm going to run you up every telephone post we come to for that
insult! Hop in, son, and we'll take a little voyage around the earth
in eighty seconds."

Larry got in. Once out of the drive the car leaped away as though
intent upon keeping to Hunt's time-table. But after a mile or two Hunt
quieted the roaring monster to a conversational pace.

"Get one of the invitations to my show?" he asked.

"Yes. Several days ago. That dealer certainly got it up in great
shape."

"You must have hypnotized Graham. That old paint pirate is giving the
engine all the gas she'll stand--and believe me, he's sure getting up
a lot of speed." Hunt grinned. "That private pre-exhibition show you
suggested is proving the best publicity idea Graham ever had in his
musty old shop. Everywhere I go, people are talking about the darned
thing. Every man, woman and child, also unmarried females of both
sexes, who got invitations are coming--and those who didn't get 'em
are trying to bribe the traffic cop at Forty-Second Street to let 'em
in."

Hunt paused for a chuckle. "And I'm having the time of my young life
with the people who always thought I couldn't paint, and who are now
trying to sidle up to me on the suspicion that possibly after all I
can paint. What's got that bunch buffaloed is the fact that Graham has
let it leak out that I'm likely to make bales of money from my
painting. The idea of any one making money out of painting, that's too
much for their heads. Oh, this is the life, Larry!"

Larry started to congratulate him, but was instantly interrupted with:

"I admit I'm a painter, and always will admit it. But this present
thing is all your doing. We'll try to square things sometime. But I
didn't ask you to come along to hear verbostical acrobatics about
myself. I asked you to learn if you'd worked out your plan yet
regarding Maggie?"

"Yes." And Larry proceeded to give the details of his design.

"Regular psychological stuff!" exclaimed Hunt. And then: "Say, you're
some stage-manager! Or rather same playwright! Playwrights that know
tell me it's one of their most difficult tricks--to get all their
leading characters on the stage at the same time. And here you've got
it all fixed to bring on Miss Sherwood, Dick, Maggie, yourself, and
the all-important me--for don't forget I shall be slipping out to
Cedar Crest occasionally."

"As for myself," remarked Larry, "I shall remain very much behind the
scenes. Maggie'll never see me."

"Well, here's hoping you're good enough playwright to manage your
characters so they won't run away from you and mix up an ending you
never dreamed of!"
