hat do you say?"

Larry could not say anything at once. The suddenness of her offer, the
largeness of his opportunity, bewildered him for the moment. And his
bewilderment was added to by his swift realization of quite another
element involved in her frank proposition. He was now engaged in the
enterprise of foisting a bogus article, Maggie, upon this woman who
was offering him her complete confidence--an enterprise of most
questionable ethics and very dubious issue. If he accepted her offer,
and the result of this enterprise were disaster, what would Miss
Sherwood then think of him?

He took refuge in evasion. "I'm not going to try to tell you how much
I appreciate your proposition, Miss Sherwood. But do you mind if I
hold back my answer for the present and think it over? Anyhow, to do
all that is required I must be able to work in the open--and I can't
do that until I get free of my entanglements with the police and my
old acquaintances."

Thus it was agreed upon. Miss Sherwood turned to another subject. The
pre-public show of Hunt's pictures had opened the previous day.

"When you were in the city yesterday, did you get in to see Mr. Hunt's
exhibition?"

"No," he answered. "Although I wanted to. But you know I've already
seen all of Mr. Hunt's pictures that Mr. Graham has in his gallery.
How was the opening?"

"Crowded with guests. And since they had been told that the pictures
were unusual and good, of course the people were enthusiastic."

"What kind of prices was Mr. Graham quoting?"

"He wasn't quoting any. He told me he wasn't going to sell a picture,
or even mention a price, until the public exhibition. He's very
enthusiastic. He thinks Mr. Hunt is already made--and in a big way."

And then she added, her level gaze very steady on Larry:

"Of course Mr. Hunt is really a great painter. But he needed a jolt to
make him go out and really paint his own kind of stuff. And he needed
some one like you to put him across in a business way."

When she left, she left Larry thinking: thinking of her saying that
Hunt "needed a jolt to make him go out and really paint his own kind
of stuff." Hidden behind that remark somewhere could there be the
explanation for the break between these two? Larry began to see a
glimmer of light. It was entirely possible that Miss Sherwood, in so
finished and adroit a manner that Hunt had not discerned her purpose,
had herself given him this jolt or at least contributed to its force.
It might all have been diplomacy on her part, applied shrewdly to the
man she understood and loved. Yes, that might be the explanation. Yes,
perhaps she had been doing in a less trying way just what he was
seeking to do under more stressful circumstances with Maggie: to
arouse him to his best by indirectly working at definite psychological
reactions.

That afternoon Hunt appeared at Cedar Crest, and while there dropped
in on Larry. The big painter, in his full-blooded, boyish fashion,
fairly gasconaded over the success of his exhibit. Larry smiled at the
other's exuberant enthusiasm. Hunt was one man who could boast without
ever being offensively egotistical, for Hunt, added to his other
gifts, had the divine gift of being able to laugh at himself.

Larry saw here an opportunity to forward that other ambition of his:
the bringing of Hunt and Miss Sherwood together. And at this instant
it flashed upon him that Miss Sherwood's seemingly casual remarks
about Hunt had not been casual at all. Perhaps they had been carefully
thought out and spoken with a definite purpose. Perhaps Miss Sherwood
had been very subtly appointing him her ambassador. She was clever
enough for that.

"Stop declaiming those self-written press notices of your
unapproachable superiority," Larry interrupted. "If you use your
breath up like that you'll drown on dry land. Besides, I just heard
something better than this mere articulated air of yours. Better
because from a person in her senses."

"Heard it from whom?"

"Miss Sherwood."

"Miss Sherwood! What did she say?"

"That you were a really great painter."

"Huh!" snorted Hunt. "Why shouldn't she say that? I've proved it!"

"Hunt," said Larry evenly, "you are the greatest painter I ever met,
but you also have the distinction of being the greatest of all damned
fools."

"What's that, young fellow?"

"You love Miss Sherwood, don't you? At least you've the same as told
me that in words, and you've told me that in loud-voiced actions every
time you've seen her."

"Well--what if I do?"

"If you had the clearness of vision that is in the glassy eye of a
cold boiled lobster you would see that she feels the same way about
you."

"See here, Larry"--all the boisterous quality had gone from Hunt's
voice, and it was low-pitched and a bit unsteady--"I don't mind your
joshing me about myself or my painting, but don't fool with me about
anything that's really important."

"I'm not fooling you. I'm sure Miss Sherwood feels that way."

"How do you know?"

"I've got a pair of eyes that don't belong to a cold boiled lobster.
And when I see a thing, I know I see it."

"You're all wrong, Larry. If you'd heard what she said to me less than
a year ago--"

"You make me tired!" interrupted Larry. "You two were made for each
other. She's waiting for you to step up and talk man's talk to her--
and instead you sulk in your tent and mumble about something you think
she might have thought or said a year ago! You're too sensitive;
you're too proud; you've got too few brains. It's a million dollars to
one that in your handsome, well-bred way you've fallen out with her
over something that probably never existed and certainly doesn't exist
now. Forget it all, and walk right up and ask her!"

"Larry, if I thought there was a chance that you are right--"

"A single question will prove whether I'm right!"

Hunt did not speak for a moment. "I guess I've never seen my part of
it all in the way you put it, Larry." He stood up, his whole being
subdued yet tense. "I'm going to slide back into town and think it all
over."

Larry followed him an hour later, bent on routine business of the
Sherwood estate. Toward seven o'clock he was studying the present
decrepitude and future possibilities of a row of Sherwood apartment
houses on the West Side, when, as he came out of one building and
started into another, a firm hand fell upon his shoulder and a voice
remarked:

"So, Larry, you're in New York?"

Larry whirled about. For the moment he felt all the life go out of
him. Beside him stood Detective Casey, whom he had last seen on the
night of his wild flight when Casey had feigned a knockout in order to
aid Larry's escape from Gavegan. Any other man affiliated with his
enemies Larry would have struck down and tried to break away from. But
not Casey.

"Hello, Casey. Well, I suppose you're going to invite me to go along
with you?"

"Where were you going?"

"Into this house."

"Then I'll invite myself to go along with you."

He quickly pushed Larry before him into the hallway, which was empty
since all the tenants were at their dinner. Larry remembered the scene
down in Deputy Police Commissioner Barlow's office, when the Chief of
Detectives had demanded that he become a stool-pigeon working under
Gavegan and Casey, and the grilling and the threats, more than
fulfilled, which had followed.

"Going to give me a little private quiz first, Casey," he asked, "and
then call in Gavegan and lead me down to Barlow?"

"Not unless Gavegan or some one else saw and recognized you, which I
know they didn't since I was watching for that very thing. And not
unless you yourself feel hungry for a visit to Headquarters."

"If I feel hungry, it's an appetite I'm willing to make wait."

"You know I don't want to pinch you. My part in this has been a dirty
job that was just pushed my way. You know that I know you've been
framed and double-crossed, and that I won't run you in unless I can't
get out of it."

"Thanks, Casey. You're too white to have to run with people like
Barlow and Gavegan. But if it wasn't to pinch me, why did you stop me
out there in the street?"

"Been hoping I might some day run into you on the quiet. There are
some things I've learned--never mind how--that I wanted to slip you
for your own good."

"Go to it, Casey."

"First, I've got a hunch that it was Barney Palmer who tipped off the
police about Red Hannigan and Jack Rosenfeldt, and then spread it
among all the crooks that you were the stool and squealer."

"Yes, I'd guessed that much."

"Second, I've got a hunch that it really was from Barney Palmer that
Barlow got his idea of making you become a stool-pigeon. Barney is a
smooth one all right, and he figured what would happen. He knew you
would refuse, and he knew Barlow would uncork hell beneath you. Barney
certainly called every turn."

"What--what--" stammered Larry. "Why, then Barney must be--" He
paused, utterly astounded by the newness of the possibility that had
just risen in his mind.

"You've got it, Larry," Casey went on. "Barney is a police stool. Has
been one for years. Works directly for Barlow. We're not supposed to
know anything about it. He's turned up a lot of big ones. That's why
it's safe for Barney to pull off anything he likes."

"Barney a police stool!" Larry repeated in the stupor of his
amazement.

"Guess that's all the news I wanted to hand you, Larry, so I'll be on
my way. Here's wishing you luck--and for God's sake, don't let
yourself be pinched by us. So-long." And with that Casey slipped out
of the hallway.

For a moment Larry stood moveless where Casey had left him. Then
fierce purpose, and a cautious recklessness, surged up and took
mastery of him. It had required what Casey had told him to end his
irksome waiting and wavering. No longer could he remain in his hiding-
place, safe himself, trying to save Maggie by slow, indirect endeavor.
The time had now come for very different methods. The time had come to
step forth into the open, taking, of course, no unnecessary risk, and
to have it out face to face with his enemies, who were also Maggie's
real enemies, though she counted them her friends--to save Maggie
against her own will, if he could save her in no other way.

And having so decided, Larry walked quickly out of the hallway into
the street.




CHAPTER XXVII


On the sidewalk Larry glanced swiftly around him. Half a block down
the street on the front of a drug-store was a blue telephone flag. A
minute later he was inside a telephone booth in the drug-store, asking
first for the Hotel Grantham, and then asking the Grantham operator to
be connected with Miss Maggie Cameron.

There was a long wait. While he listened for Maggie's voice he blazed
with terrible fury against Barney Paler. For Maggie to be connected
with a straight crook, that idea had been bad enough. But for her to
be under the influence of the worst crook of all, a stool, a cunning
traitor to his own friends--that was more than could possibly be
stood! In his rage in Maggie's behalf he forgot for the moment the
many evils Barney had done to himself. He thought of wild, incoherent,
vaguely tremendous plans. First he would get Maggie away from Barney
and Old Jimmie--somehow. Then he would square accounts with those
two--again by an undefined somehow.

Presently the tired, impersonal voice of the Grantham operator
remarked against his ear-drum: "Miss Cameron don't answer."

"Have her paged, please," he requested.

Larry, of course, could not know that his telephone call was the very
one which had rung in Maggie's room while Barney and Old Jimmie were
with her, and which Barney had harshly forbidden her to answer.
Therefore he could not know that any attempt to get Maggie by
telephone just then was futile.

When he came out of the booth, the impersonal voice having informed
him that Miss Cameron was not in, it was with the intention of calling
Maggie up between eight and nine when she probably would have returned
from dinner where he judged her now to be. He knew that Dick Sherwood
had no engagement with her, for Dick was to be out at Cedar Crest that
evening, so he judged it almost certain Maggie would be at home and
alone later on.

Having nothing else to do for an hour and a half, he thought of a note
he had received from the Duchess in that morning's mail asking him to
come down to see her when he was next in town. Thirty minutes later he
was in the familiar room behind the pawnshop. The Duchess asked him if
he had eaten, and on his reply that he had not and did not care to,
instead of proceeding to the business of her letter she mumbled
something and went into the pawnshop.

She left Larry for the very simple reason that now that she had him
here she was uncertain what she should say, and how far she should go.
Unknown to either, one thread of the drama of Larry and Maggie was
being spun in the brain and heart of the Duchess; and being spun with
pain to her, and in very great doubt. True, she had definitely
decided, for Larry's welfare, that the facts about Maggie's parentage
should never be known from her--and since the only other person who
could tell the truth was Jimmie Carlisle, and his interests were all
apparently in favor of silence, then it followed that the truth would
never be known from any one. But having so decided, and decided
definitely and finally, the Duchess had proceeded to wonder if she had
decided wisely.

Day and night this had been the main subject of her thought. Could she
be wrong in her estimate of Maggie's character, and what she might
turn out to be? Could she be wrong in her belief that, given enough
time, Larry would outgrow his infatuation for Maggie? And since she
was in such doubt about these two points, had she any right, and was
it for the best, to suppress a fact that might so gravely influence
both matters? She did not know. What she wanted was whatever was best
for Larry--and so in her doubt she had determined to talk again to
Larry, hoping that the interview might in some way replace her
uncertainty with stability of purpose.

Presently she returned to the inner room, and in her direct way and
using the fewest possible words, which had created for her her
reputation of a woman who never spoke and who was packed with strange
secrets, she asked Larry what he had done concerning Maggie. He told
her of the plan he had evolved, of Maggie's visit to Cedar Crest, of
his ignorance of Maggie's reactions. To all this his grandmother made
response neither by word nor by change of expression. He then went on
to tell her of what he had just learned from Casey of Barney's
maneuvering his misfortunes.

The old head nodded. "Yes, Barney's just that sort," she said in her
flat monotone.

And then she came to the purpose of her sending for him. "How do you
feel about Maggie now?"

"The same as before."

"You love her?"

"Yes--and always will," he said firmly.

She was silent once more. Then, "What are you going to do next?"

"Break things up between her and Barney and her father. Get her away
from them."

She asked no further questions. Larry was as settled as a man could
be. But was Maggie worth while?--that was the great question still
unanswered.

"Just what did you want me for, grandmother?" he asked her finally.

"Something which I thought might have developed, but which hasn't."

And so she let him go away without telling him. And wishing to shape
things for the best for him, she was troubled by the same doubts as
before.

His visit with his grandmother had had no meaning to Larry, since he
had no guess of the struggle going on within that ancient, inscrutable
figure. The visit had for him merely served to fill in a nervous,
useless hour. His rage against Barney had all the while possessed him
too thoroughly for him to give more than the mere surface of his mind
to what had passed between his grandmother and himself. And when he
had left her, his rage at Barney's treachery and his impetuous desire
to snatch Maggie away from her present influences, so stormed within
him that his usually cautious judgment was blown away and recklessness
swept like a gale into control of him.

When he called up the Grantham a second time, at nine o'clock,
Maggie's voice came to him:

"Hello. Who this, please?"

"Mr. Brandon."

He heard a stilted "Oh!" at the other end of the line "I'm coming
right up to see you," he said.

"I--I don't think you--"

"I'll be there in then minutes," Larry interrupted the startled voice
and hung up.

He counted that Maggie, after his sparing her at Cedar Crest, would
receive him and treat him at least no worse than an enemy with whom
there was a half hour's truce. Sure enough, when he rang the bell of
her suite, Maggie herself admitted him to her sitting-room. She was
taut and pale, her look neither friendly nor unfriendly.

"Don't you know the risk you're running," she whispered when the door
was closed--"coming here like this, in the open?"

"The time has come for risks, Maggie," he announced.

"But you were safe enough where you were. Why take such risks?"

"For your sake."

"My sake?"

"To take you away from these people you're tied up with. Take you away
now."

At an earlier time this would have been a fuse to a detonation of
defiance from her. But now she said nothing at all, and that was
something.

"Since I've come out into the open, everything's going to be in the
open. Listen, Maggie!" The impulse had suddenly come upon him, since
his plan to awaken Maggie by her psychological reactions had
apparently failed, to tell her everything. "Listen, Maggie! I'm going
to lay all my cards on the table, and show you every card I've played.
You were invited to come out to Cedar Crest because I schemed to have
you come. And the reason I schemed to have you invited was, I reasoned
that being received in such a frank, generous, unsuspecting way, by a
woman like Miss Sherwood, would make you sick of what you were doing
and you would drop it of your own accord. But it seems I reasoned
wrong."

"So--you were behind that!" she breathed.

"I was. Though I couldn't have done it if Dick Sherwood hadn't been
honestly infatuated with you. But now I'm through with working under
cover, through with indirect methods. From now on every play's in the
open, and it's straight to the point with everything. So get ready.
I'm going to take you away from Barney and Old Jimmie."

The mention of these two names had a swift and magical effect upon
her. But instead of arousing belligerency, they aroused an almost
frantic agitation.

"You must leave at once, Larry. Barney and my father were here before
dinner, and they've just telephoned they were coming back!"

"Coming back! That's the best argument you could make for my staying!"

"But, Larry--they both have keys, and Barney always carries a gun!"

"I stay here, unless you leave with me. Listen to some more, Maggie. I
laid all the cards on the table. Do you know the kind of people you're
tied up with? I'll not say anything about your father, for I guess you
know all there is to know. But Barney Palmer! He's the lowest kind of
crook that breathes. There's been a lot of talk about squealers and
police stools. Well, the big squealer, the big stool, is Barney
Palmer!"

"I don't believe it!" she cried involuntarily.

"It's true! I've got it straight. Barney wanted to smash me, because
I'd made up my mind to quit the old game and because he wanted to get
me out of his way with you. So he framed it up so that I appeared to
be a squealer, and started the gangmen after me. And he put Barlow up
to the idea of forcing me to be a stool, and then framing me when I
refused. It was Barney who fixed things so I had to go to jail, or be
shot up, or run away. It was Barney Palmer who squealed on Red
Hannigan and Jack Rosenfeldt, and who's been squealing on his other
pals. And that's the sort you're stringing along with!"

She gazed at him in appalled half conviction. He remained silent to
let his truth sink in.

They were standing so, face to face, when a key grated in the outer
door of the little hallway as on the occasion of Larry's first visit
here. And as on that occasion, Maggie sprang swiftly forward and shot
home the bolt of the inner door. Then she turned and caught Larry's
arm.

"It's Barney--I told you he was coming!" she whispered. "Oh, why
didn't you go before? Come on!"

She tried to drag him toward her bedroom door, through which she had
once helped him escape. But this time he was not to be moved.

"I stay right here," he said to her.

There was the sound of a futile effort to turn the lock of the inner
door; then Barney's voice called out: "What's the matter, Maggie? Open
the door."

Maggie, still clutching Larry's resisting arm, stood gasping in wide-
eyed consternation.

"Open the door for them, Maggie," Larry whispered.

"I'll not do it!" she whispered back.

"Open it, or I will," he ordered.

Their gazes held a moment longer while Barney rattled at the lock.
Then slowly, falteringly, her amazed eyes over her shoulder upon him,
Maggie crossed and unlocked the door. Barney entered, Old Jimmie just
bend him.

"I say, Maggie, what was the big idea in keeping us--" he was
beginning in a grumbling tone, when he saw Larry just beyond her. His
complaint broke off in mid-breath; he stopped short and his dark face
twitched with his surprise.

"Larry Brainard!" he finally exclaimed. Old Jimmie, suddenly tense,
blinked and said nothing.

"Hello, Barney; hello, Jimmie," Larry greeted his former allies,
putting on an air of geniality. "Been a long time since we three met.
Don't stand there in the door. Come right in."

Barney was keen enough to see, though Larry's attitude was careless
and his tone light, that his eyes were bright and hard. Barney moved
forward a couple of paces, alert for anything, and Old Jimmie
followed. Maggie looked on at the three men, her girlish figure taut
and hardly breathing.

"Didn't know you were in New York," said Barney.

"Well, here I am all right," returned Larry with his menacing
cheerfulness.

By now Barney had recovered from his first surprise. He felt it time
to assert his supremacy.

"How do you come to be here with Maggie?" he demanded abruptly.

"Happened to catch sight of her on the street to-day. Trailed her here
to the Grantham, and to-night I just dropped in."

Barney's tone grew more authoritative, more ugly. "We told you long
ago we were through with you. So why did you come here?"

"That's easy answered, Barney. The last time we were all together,
you'd come to take Maggie away. This is that same scene reproduced--
only this time I've come to take Maggie away."

"What's that?" snapped Barney.

Larry's voice threw off its assumed geniality, and became drivingly
hard. "And to get Maggie to come, I've been telling her the kind of a
bird you are, Barney Palmer! Oh, I've got the straight dope on you!
I've been telling her how you framed me, and were able to frame me
because you are Chief Barlow's stool."

Barney went as near white as it was possible for him to become, and
his mouth sagged. "What--what--" he stammered.

"I've been telling her that you are the one who really squealed on Red
Hannigan and Jack Rosenfeldt."

"You're a damned liar!" Barney burst out, and instantly from beneath
his left arm he whipped an automatic which he thrust against Larry's
stomach. "Take that back, damn you, or I'll blow you straight to
hell!"

"Barney!--Larry!" interjected Maggie in sickened fright.

"This is nothing to worry over, Maggie," Larry said. He looked back at
Barney. "Oh, I knew you would flash a gun on me at some stage of the
game. But you're not going to shoot."

"You'll see, if you don't take that back!"

Larry realized that his hot blood had driven him into an enterprise of
daring, in which only bluff and the playing of his highest cards could
help him through.

"You don't think I was such a fool as to walk into this place without
taking precautions," he said contemptuously. "You won't shoot, Barney,
because since I knew I might meet you and you'd pull a gun, I had
myself searched by two friends just before I came up here. They'll
testify I was not armed. They know you, and know you so well that
they'll be able to identify the thing in your hand as your gun. So no
matter what Maggie and Jimmie may testify, the verdict will be cold-
blooded murder and the electric chair will be your finish. And that's
why I know you won't shoot. So you might as well put the gun away."

Barney neither spoke nor moved.

"I've called your bluff, Barney," Larry said sharply. "Put that gun
away, or I'll take it from you!"

Barney's glare wavered. The pistol sank from its position. With a
lightning-swift motion Larry wrenched it from Barney's hand.

"Guess I'd better have it, after all," he said, slipping it into a
pocket. "Keep you out of temptation."

And then in a subdued voice that was steely with menace: "I'm too busy
to attend to you now, Barney--but, by God, I'm going to square things
with you for the dirt you've done me, and I'm going to show you up for
a stool and a squealer!" He wheeled on Old Jimmie. "And the only
reason I'll be easy with you, Jimmie Carlisle, is because you are
Maggie's father--though you're the rottenest thing as a father God
ever let breathe!"

Old Jimmie shrank slightly before Larry's glower, and his little eyes
gleamed with the fear of a rat that is cornered. But he said nothing.

Larry turned his back upon the two men. "We're through with this
bunch, Maggie. Put on a hat and a wrap, and let's go. We can send for
your things."

"No you don't, Maggie," snarled Barney, before Maggie could speak.

Old Jimmie made his first positive motion since entering the room. He
shifted quickly to Maggie's side and seized her arm.

"You're my daughter, and you stay with me!" he ordered. "I brought you
up, and you do exactly what I tell you to! You're not going with
Larry--he's lying about Barney. You stay with me!"

"Come on, let's go, Maggie," repeated Larry.

"You stay with me!" repeated Jimmie.

Thus ordered and appealed to, Maggie was areel with contradicting
thoughts and impulses while the three men awaited her action. In fact
she had no clear thought at all. She never knew later what determined
her course at this bewildered moment: perhaps it was partly a
continuance of her doubt of Larry, perhaps partly once more sheer
momentum, perhaps her instinctive feeling that her place was with the
man she believed to be her father.

"Yes, I'll stay with you," she said to Old Jimmie.

"That's the signal for you to be on your way, Larry Brainard!" Barney
snapped at him triumphantly.

Larry realized, all of a sudden, that his coming here was no more than
a splendid gesture to which his anger had excited him. Indeed there
was nothing for him but to be on his way.

"I've told you the truth, Maggie; and you'll be sorry that you have
not left--if not sorry soon, then sorry a little later."

He turned to Barney with a last shot; he could not leave the gloating
Barney Palmer his unalloyed triumph. "I told you I had the straight
dope on you, Barney. Here's some more of it. I know exactly what your
game is, and I know exactly who your sucker is. We'll see if you put
it over--you squealer! Good-night, all."

With that Larry walked out. Old Jimmie regarded his partner with
suspicion.

"How about that, Barney--you being a stool and a squealer?" he
demanded.

"I tell you it's all a lie--a damned lie!" cried Barney with feverish
emphasis.

"I hope it is!" breathed Old Jimmie.

This was a subject Barney wanted to get away from. "Maggie," he
demanded, "is what Larry Brainard said about how he came here the
truth?--his seeing you on the street and then following you here?"

"How do I know where he first saw me?"

"But is to-night the first time you've seen him?"

"It is."

"Sure you haven't been seeing him?" demanded Barney's quick jealousy.

"I have not."

"Did he tell you where he came from?--where he hangs out?"

"No."

Old Jimmie interrupted this cross-examination.

"You're wasting good time asking these questions. Barney, do you
realize the cold fact that it's not a good thing for you, nor for us,
for Larry Brainard to be back in New York, floating around as he
pleases?"

"I should say not!" Barney saw he was facing a sudden crisis, and in
the need for quick action he spoke without thought of Maggie. "We've
got to look after him at once!"

"Tell the bunch he's back, and let them take care of him?" suggested
Old Jimmie.

Barney considered rapidly. If Larry knew of his arrangement with the
police, then perhaps his secret was beginning to leak through to
others. He decided that for the present it would be wiser to keep from
these old friends and allies.

"Not the bunch--the police!" he said inspiredly. "They're after him,
anyhow, and are sore. All we've got to do is slip them word--they'll
do the rest!" And then with the sharper emphasis of an immediate plan:
"We don't want to lose a minute. I know where Gavegan hangs out at
this time of night. Come on!"

With a bare "Good-night" to Maggie the two men hurried forth on their
pressing mission. Left to herself, Maggie sank into a chair and wildly
considered the many elements of this new situation. Presently two
thoughts emerged to dominance: Whether Larry was right or wrong, he
had risked coming out of his safety for her sake--perhaps had risked
all he had won for her sake. And now the police were to be set after
him, with that Gavegan heading the pack.

Perhaps the further thinking Maggie did did not result in cool, mature
wisdom--for her thoughts were the operations of a panicky mind.
Somehow she had to get warning to Larry of this imminent police hunt!
Without doubt Larry would return to Cedar Crest sometime that night.
Word should be sent to him there. A letter was too uncertain in such a
crisis. Of course she had an invitation to go to Cedar Crest the
following afternoon, and she might warn him then--but that might be
too late. She dared not telephone or telegraph--for that might somehow
direct dangerous attention to the exact spot where Larry was hidden.
Also she had an instinct, operating unconsciously long before she had
any thought of what she was eventually to do, not to let Barney or Old
Jimmie find out, or even guess, that she had warned Larry--not yet.

There seemed nothing that she herself could do. Then she thought of
the Duchess. That was the way out! The Duchess would know some way in
which to get Larry word.

Five minutes later, in her plainest suit and hat, Maggie in a taxicab
was rolling down toward the Duchess's--from where, only a few months
back, she had started forth upon her great career.




CHAPTER XXVIII


Old Jimmie did not like meeting the police any oftener than a meeting
was forced upon him, and so he slipped away and allowed Barney Palmer
to undertake alone the business of settling Larry. Barney found
Gavegan exactly where he had counted: lingering over his late dinner
in the cafe of a famous Broadway restaurant--a favorite with some of
the detectives and higher officials of the Police Department--in which
cafe, in happier days now deeply mourned, Gavegan had had all the
exhilaration he wanted to drink at the standing invitation of the
proprietor, and where even yet on occasion a bit of the old
exhilaration was brought to Gavegan's table in a cup or served him in
a room above to which he had had whispered instructions to retire. The
proprietor had in the old days liked to stand well with the police;
and though his bar was now devoted to legal drinks--or at least
obliging Federal officers reported it to be--he still liked to stand
well with the police.

Gavegan was at a table with a minor producer of musical shows, to whom
Barney had been of occasional service in securing the predominant
essential of such music--namely, shapely young women. Barney nodded to
Gavegan, chatted for a few minutes with his musical-comedy friend,
during which he gave Gavegan a signal, then crossed to the once-
crowded bar, now sunk to isolation and the lowly estate of soft
drinks, and ordered a ginger ale. Not until then did he notice Barlow,
chief of the Detective Bureau, at a corner table. Barney gave no sign
of recognition, and Barlow, after a casual glance at him, returned to
his food.

Barney, in solitude at one end of the bar, slowly sipped with a sort
of indignation against his kickless purchase. Presently Gavegan was
beside him, having most convincing ill-luck in his attempts to light
his cigar from a box of splintering safety matches which stood at that
end of the bar.

"Well, what is it?" Gavegan whispered out of that corner of his mouth
which was not occupied by his cigar. He did not look at Barney.

"Any clue to Larry Brainard yet?" Barney whispered also out of a
corner of his mouth, glass at his lips. Like-wise he seemed not to
notice the man beside him.

"Naw! Still out West somewhere. Them Chicago bums couldn't catch a
crook if he walked along State Street with a sign-board on him!"

"Saw Larry Brainard to-night."

Gavegan had difficulty in maintaining his attitude of non-awareness of
his bar-mate.

"Where?"

"Right here in New York."

"What! Where'd you see him?"

"Coming out of the Grantham."

"When?"

"Fifteen minutes ago."

"Know where he went to?--where he hangs out?--know anything else?"

"That's everything. Thought I'd better slip it to you as quick as I
could."

"This time that bird'll not get away!" growled Gavegan, still in a
whisper. "Twenty-four hours and he'll be in the cooler!"

Finally Gavegan managed to get a flame from one of those irritatingly
splintery Swedish matches made in Japan. Cigar alight he walked over
to Barlow's table. He conversed with his Chief a moment or two, then
went out. After a minute Barney saw Chief Barlow crossing toward the
bar. Barney seemed not to notice this movement. Barlow likewise paused
beside him to light a cigar; and from the side of the Chief's mouth
there issued: "Room 613."

Barlow passed on. Presently Barney finished the dreary drudgery of
drink and sauntered out. Five minutes later, having exercised the
proper caution, he was in Room 613, and the door was locked.

"What's this dope you just handed Gavegan about Larry Brainard?"
demanded Barlow.

Barney gave his information, again, but this time more fully. Of
course he omitted all mention of Maggie and the enterprise which Larry
had sought to interrupt; it was part of the tacit understanding
between these two that Barlow should have no knowledge of Barney's
professional doings, unless such knowledge should be forced upon him
by events or people too strong to be ignored.

"Did Brainard drop any clue that might give us a lead as to where he's
hiding out?"

Barney remembered something Larry had said half an hour before, which
he had considered mere boasting. "He said he knew I had some game on,
and he said he knew who the sucker was I was planning to trim."

"Did he say who the sucker was?"

"No."

"If Larry Brainard really did know, then who would he be having in
mind?"

Barney hesitated; but he perceived that this was a question which had
to be answered. "Young Dick Sherwood, of the swell Sherwood family--
you know."

Barlow did not pursue the subject. According to his arrangement with
Barney, the latter's private activities were none of his business.

"I'll get busy with the drag-net; we'll land Brainard this time," said
Barlow. And then with a grim look at Barney: "But Larry Brainard's not
what I got you up here to talk about, Palmer. I wanted to talk about
two words to you--and say 'em to you right between your eyes."

"Go ahead, Chief."

"First, you ain't been worth a damn to me for several months. You've
given me no value received for me keeping my men off of you. You
haven't turned up a single thing."

"Come, now, Chief--you're forgetting about Red Hannigan and Jack
Rosenfeldt."

"Chicken feed! They're out on bail, and when their cases come up,
they'll beat them! Besides, you didn't give me that tip to help me;
you gave it to me so that you could fix things to put Larry Brainard
in bad with all his old friends. You did that to help yourself. Shut
up! Don't try to deny it. I know!"

Barney did not attempt denial. Barlow went on:

"And the second thing I want to tell you, and tell you hard, is this:
You gotta turn in some business! The easy way you've been going makes
it look like you've forgot I've got hold of you where the hair's long.
Young man, you'd better remember that I've got you cold for that
Gregory stock business--you and Old Jimmie Carlisle. Got all the
papers in a safety-deposit vault, and got three witnesses doing
stretches in Sing Sing. Keep on telling yourself all that! and keep on
telling yourself that, if you don't come across, some day soon I'll
suddenly discover that you're the guilty party in that Gregory affair,
and I'll bring down those witnesses I've got cached in Sing Sing."

Barney moved uneasily in his chair. He knew the bargain he had made,
and did not like to dwell upon the conditions under which he was a
licensed adventurer.

"No need to rag me like this, Chief," he protested. "Sure I remember
all you've said. And you're not going to have cause to be sore much
longer. There'll be plenty doing."

"See that there is! And see that you don't pull any raw work. And see
that you don't let your foot slip. For if you do, you know what'll
happen to you. Now get out!"

Barney got out, again protesting that he would not be found failing.
He was not greatly disturbed by what Barlow had said. Every so often
there had to be just such sessions, and every so often Barlow had to
let off just such steam.

Barney's errand was done. The police of the city were on Larry's trail
and his share in the matter was and would remain unknown. Thus far all
was well. He had no doubt of Larry's early capture, now that he was
back in New York, and now that the whole police force had been
promptly warned and were hotly after him, and now that all avenues of
exit would instantly be, in fact by this time were, under surveillance
and closed against him--and now that every refuge of the criminal
world was only a trap for him. No, there wasn't a doubt of Larry's
early capture. There couldn't be. And once Larry was locked up, things
would be much better. Barlow would see that Larry didn't talk
undesirable things, or at least that such talk was not heard. It
wasn't exactly pleasant or safe having Larry at large, free to blurt
out to the wrong persons those things about Barney's being a stool and
a squealer.

Greatly comforted, though eager for news of the chase, Barney started
on his evening's routine of visiting the gayer restaurants. Business
is business, and a man suffers when he neglects it. True, this was a
neat proposition which he had in hand; but that would soon be cleaned
up, and Businessman Barney desired to be all ready to move forward
into further enterprises.



In the meanwhile there had been a session between Maggie and the
Duchess. At about the time Barney had whispered his unlipped news to
Gavegan, Maggie, breathless with her frantic haste though she had made
the journey in a taxicab, entered the familiar room behind the
pawnshop.

"Good-evening, Maggie." The voice was casual, indifferent, though at
that moment there was no person that the Duchess, pondering her
problems, more wished to see. "Sit down. What's the matter?"

"The police know Larry is in New York and are after him!"

"How do you know?"

Rapidly Maggie told of the happenings in her sitting-room, and of
Barney and Old Jimmie starting out to warn Gavegan. The Duchess heard
every word, but most of her faculties were concentrated upon a
reexamination of Maggie and upon those questions which had been
troubling her all evening and for these many days. Was there good in
Maggie? Was she justified in longer suppressing the truth of Maggie's
parentage?

"Why are you telling me all this?" the Duchess asked, when Maggie had
finished her rapid recital.

"Why! Isn't it plain? I want you to get warning to Larry that the
police are after him!"

"Why not do it yourself?"

"I'm going out where he is to-morrow, but that may be too late."

Maggie gave her other reasons, such as they were. The old woman's eyes
never left Maggie's flushed face, and yet never showed any interest.

"I thought you were tied up with Barney and Old Jimmie," the Duchess
commented. "Why are you going against them in this, and trying to help
Larry?"

"What's the difference why I'm doing it," Maggie cried with feverish
impatience, "so long as I'm trying to help him out of this!"

"Don't you realize," continued the calm old voice, "that Larry must
already know, as a matter of course, that the police and all the old
crowd are after him?"

"Perhaps he does, and perhaps he doesn't. All the same, he should know
for certain! The big point is, will you get Larry word?"

A moment passed and the Duchess did not speak. In fact this time she
had not heard Maggie, so intent was she in trying to look through
Maggie's dark, eager eyes to the very core of Maggie's being.

"Will you get Larry word?" Maggie repeated impatiently.

The Duchess came out of her study. There was a sudden thrill within
her, but it did not show in her voice.

"Yes."

"At once?"

"As soon as telling him will do any good. And now you better hurry
back to your hotel, if you don't want Barney and Old Jimmie to suspect
what you've been up to. Though why you still want to hang on to that
pair, knowing what they are, is more than I can guess."

She stood up. "Wait a minute," she said as Maggie started for the
door. Maggie turned back, and for another moment the Duchess silently
peered deep into Maggie's eyes. Then she said shortly, almost sharply:
"At your age I was twice as pretty as you are--and twice as clever--
and I played much the same game. Look what I got out of life! . . .
Good-night." And abruptly the Duchess wheeled about and mounted the
stairway.

Twenty minutes later Maggie was back at the Grantham, her absence
unobserved. Though palpitant over Larry's fate, she had the
satisfaction of having achieved with Larry's grandmother what she had
set forth to achieve. She did not know, could not know, that what she
had accepted as her achievement was inconsequential compared to what
had actually been achieved by her spontaneous appearance before the
troubled Duchess.




CHAPTER XXIX


As the Duchess had gazed into Maggie's excited, imploring eyes, it had
been borne in upon her carefully judging and painfully hesitant mind
that there was better than a fifty per cent chance that Larry was
right in his estimate of Maggie; that Maggie's inclination toward
criminal adventure, her supreme self-confidence, all her bravado, were
but the superficial though strong tendencies developed by her
unfortunate environment; that within that cynical, worldly shell there
were the vital and plastic makings of a real woman.

And so the long-troubled Duchess, who to her acquaintances had always
seemed as unemotional as the dust-coated, moth-eaten parrot which
stood in mummified aloofness upon her safe, had made a momentous
decision that had sent through her old veins the thrilling sap of a
great crisis, a great suspense. She had tried to guide destiny. She
was now through with such endeavor. She had no right, because of her
love for Larry, to withhold longer the facts of Maggie's parentage.
She was now going to tell the truth, and let events work out as they
would.

But the events--what were they going to be?

For a moment the Duchess had been impelled to tell the truth straight
out to Maggie. But she had caught herself in time. This whole affair
was Larry's affair, and the truth belonged to him to be used as he saw
fit. So when she had told Maggie that she would get word to Larry, it
was this truth which she had had in mind, and only in a very minor way
the news which Maggie had brought.

This was, of course, such a truth as could be safely communicated only
by word of mouth. The Duchess realized that Larry no longer dared come
to her, and that therefore she must manage somehow to get to him. And
get to him without betraying his whereabouts.

There was little chance that the police would search her place or
greatly bother her. To the police mind, now that Larry was aware he
was known to be in New York, the pawnshop would obviously be the last
place in which he would seek refuge or through which he would have
dealings. Nevertheless, the Duchess deemed it wise to lose no moment
and to neglect no possible caution. Therefore, while Barney was still
with Chief Barlow and before the general order regarding Larry had
more than reached the various police stations, the Duchess, in cape,
hat, and veil, was out of her house. A block up the street lived the
owner of two or three taxicabs, concerning whom the Duchess, who was
almost omniscient in her own world, knew much that the said owner
ardently desired should be known no further. A few sentences with this
gentleman, and fifteen minutes later, huddled back in the darkened
corner of a taxicab, she rolled over the Queensboro Bridge out upon
Long Island on her mission of releasing a fact whose effect she could
not foresee.



An hour and a half after that Larry was leading her to a bench in the
scented darkness of the Sherwoods' lawn. She had telephoned "Mr.
Brandon" from a drug-store booth in Flushing, and Larry had been
waiting for her near the entrance to Cedar Crest.

"What brought you out here like this, grandmother?" Larry whispered in
amazement as he sat down beside her.

"To tell you that the police are after you," she whispered back.

"I knew that already."

"Yes, I knew that you would."

"But how did you find out?"

"Maggie told me."

"Maggie!"

"She came down to see me, told me what had just happened at her place,
told me about Barney hurrying away to slip the news to that Gavegan,
and begged me to warn you at once. She was terribly nervous and
wrought up."

"Maggie did that!" he breathed. His heart leaped at her unexpected
concern for him. "Maggie did that!" And then: "There wasn't any need;
she should have known that I would know."

"It was rather foolish in a way--but Maggie was too excited to use
cool reason."

His grandmother did not speak for a moment. "Her losing her head and
coming shows that she cares for you, Larry."

He could make no response. This was indeed the clearest evidence
Maggie had yet given that possibly she might care.

"Maggie may have lost her head in her excitement," he managed to say;
"but, grandmother, there was no reason for you to lose your head so
far as to come away out here to tell me about the police."

"I didn't come away out here to tell you about the police," she
replied. "I came to tell you something else."

"Yes?"

"You're sure you really care for Maggie?"

"I told you that when I was down to see you this evening."

Though the Duchess had decided, the desire to protect Larry remained
tenaciously in her and made it hard for her jealous love to take a
risk. "You're sure she might turn out all right--that is, under better
influences?"

"I'm sure, grandmother." He recalled how a few hours earlier at the
Grantham the demand of Old Jimmie that she remain with him had seemed
the force that had controlled her decision. "There would be no doubt
of it if it were not for Old Jimmie, and the people he's kept her
among, and the ideas he's been feeding her since she was a baby. I
don't think she has any love for her father; but they say blood is
mighty thick and I guess with her it's just the usual instinct of a
child to stand with her father and do what he says. Yes, if she were
not held back and held down by having Old Jimmie for a father, I'm
sure she'd be all right."

The Duchess felt that the moment had now arrived for her to unloose
her secret. But despite her fixed purpose to tell, her words had to be
forced out, and were halting, bald.

"Jimmie Carlisle--is not her father."

"What's that?" exclaimed Larry.

"Not so loud. I said Jimmie Carlisle is not her father."

"Grandmother!"

"Her father is Joe Ellison."

"Grandmother!" He caught her hands. "Why--why--" But for a moment his
utter dumbfoundment paralyzed his speech. "You're--you're sure of
that?" he finally got out.

"Yes." She went on and told of how her suspicion had been aroused, of
her interview with Joe Ellison which had transmuted suspicion into
certainty, of her theory of the motives which had actuated Jimmie
Carlisle in so perverting the directions of the man who had held
Jimmie as his most trusted friend.

Larry was fairly stunned by this recital of what had been done. And he
was further stunned as he realized the fullness of what now seemed to
be the circumstances.

"God, think of it!" he breathed. "Maggie trying to be a great
adventuress because she was brought up that way, because she thinks
her father wants her to be that--and having never a guess of the
truth! And Joe Ellison believing that his daughter is a nice, simple
girl, happily ignorant of the life he tried to shield her from--and
having never a guess of the truth! What a situation! And if they
should ever find out--"

He broke off, appalled by the power and magnitude of what he vaguely
saw. Presently he said in a numbed, awed voice:

"They should know the truth. But how are they to find out?"

"I'm leaving all that to you, Larry. Maggie and Joe Ellison are your
affair. It's up to you to decide what you think best to do."

Larry was silent for several moments. "You've known this for some
time, grandmother?"

"For several weeks."

"Why didn't you tell me before?"

"I was afraid it might somehow bring you closer to Maggie, and I
didn't want that," she answered honestly. "Now I think a little better
of Maggie. And you've proved to me I can trust a great deal more to
your judgment. Yes, I guess that's the chief reason I've come out here
to tell you this: you've proved to me I've got to respect your
judgment. And so whatever you may do--about Maggie or anything else--
will be all right with me."

She did not wait for a response, but stood up. Her voice which had
been shot through with emotion these last few minutes was now that
flat, mechanical monotone to which the habitants of her little street
were accustomed.

"I must be getting back to the city. Good-night."

He started to accompany her to her car, but she forbade him, saying
that it would not help matters to have him seen and possibly
recognized by the taxicab driver; and so she went out of the grounds
alone. Within another hour and a half she was set down unobserved in a
dim side street in Brooklyn. Thence she made her way on foot to the
Subway and rode home. If the police had noticed her absence and should
question her, she could refuse to answer, or say that she had been
visiting late with a friend in Brooklyn.

Larry sat long out in the night after his grandmother had left him.
What should he do with this amazing information placed at his
disposal? Tell Joe Ellison? Or tell Maggie? Or tell both? Or himself
try to meet Jimmie Carlisle and pay that traitor to Joe Ellison and
that malformer of Maggie the coin he had earned?

But for hours the situation itself was still too bewildering in its
many phases for Larry to give concentrated thought to what should be
its attempted solution. Not until dawn was beginning to awaken dully,
as with a protracted yawn, out of the shadowy Sound, was he able
really to hold his mind with clearness upon the problem of what use he
should make of these facts of which he had been appointed guardian. He
decided against telling Joe Ellison--at least he would not tell him
yet. He recalled the rumors of Joe Ellison's repressed volcano of a
temper; if Joe Ellison should learn how he had been defrauded, all the
man's vital forces would be instantly transformed into destructive,
vengeful rage that would spare no one and count no cost. The result
would doubtless be tragedy, with no one greatly served, and with Joe
very likely back in prison. If he himself should go out to give Old
Jimmie his deserts, his action would be just good powder wasted--it
likewise would serve no constructive purpose. Larry realized that it
is only human nature for a wronged man to wish for and attempt
revenge; but that in the economy of life revenge has no value, serves
no purpose; that it usually only makes a bad situation worse.

A tremendous wrong had been done here, a wrong which showed a
malignant, cunning, patient mind. But as Larry finally saw the matter,
the point for fi