aggie had sought only to excite his vanity. But unknowingly she had
also appealed to something else in him: his very deep concern in the
hostile activities of the District Attorney's office. If this girl
told the truth, then here might be his chance to display such devotion
to duty as to turn up some such sensational case as would make this
investigation from the District Attorney's office seem to the public
an unholy persecution and make the chagrined District Attorney, who
was very sensitive to public opinion, think it wiser to drop the whole
matter.

"How do I know you're not trying to string me?--or get me out of the
way of something bigger?--or hand me the double-cross?"

"I shall be there all the time, and if you don't like the way the
thing develops you can arrest me. I suppose you've got some kind of
law, with a stiff punishment attached, about conspiracy against an
officer."

"Well--give me all the dope, and tell me where I'm to come," he
yielded ungraciously.

"I've told you all I am going to tell. All the important 'dope' you'll
get first-hand by being present when the thing happens. The place to
come is the Hotel Grantham--room eleven-forty-two--at eight-thirty
sharp."

To this Barlow grudgingly agreed. He might have exulted inwardly, but
he would have shown no outer graciousness if a committee of citizens
had handed him a reward of a million dollars and an engrossed
testimonial to his unprecedented services. Barlow did not know how to
thank any one.

Five minutes after she left Headquarters Maggie was in the back room
of the Duchess's pawnshop, which her rapid planning had fixed upon as
the next station at which she should stop. She did not waste a moment
in coming to the point with the Duchess.

"Red Hannigan is really the most important of Larry's old friends who
are out to get him, isn't he?" she asked.

"Yes--in a way. I mean among those who honestly think Larry has turned
stool and squealer. He trusted Larry more than any one else--and now
he hates Larry more than any one else. Rather natural, since he was
two months in the Tombs before he could get bail--because he thinks
Larry squealed on him."

"How's he stand with his crowd?"

"No one higher. They'd all take his word for anything."

"Can you find him at once?" Maggie pursued breathlessly.

That was a trifling question to ask the Duchess; since all the news of
her shadowy world came to her ears in some swift obscure manner.

"Yes. If it is necessary."

"It's terribly necessary! If I can't get him, the whole thing may
fail!"

"What thing?" demanded the Duchess.

"It might all sound impossibly foolish!" cried the excited, desperate
Maggie. "You might tell me so--and discourage me--and I simply must go
ahead! I feel rather like--like a juggler who's trying for the first
time to keep a lot of new things going in the air all at once. But I
think there's a chance that I may succeed! I'll tell you just one
thing. It all has to do with Larry. I think I may help Larry."

"I'll get Red Hannigan," the Duchess said briefly. "What do you want
with him?"

"Have him come to the Hotel Grantham--room eleven-forty-two--at
eight-fifteen sharp!"

"He'll be there," said the Duchess.

There followed a swirling taxi-ride back to the Grantham, and a rapid
change into her most fetching evening gown (she had not even a thought
of dinner) to play her bold part in the drama which she was excitedly
writing in her mind and for which she had just engaged her cast. She
was on fire with terrible suspense: would the other actors play their
parts as she intended they should?--would her complicated drama have
the ending she was hoping for?

Had she been in a more composed, matter-of-fact state of mind, this
play which she was staging would have seemed the crudest, most
impossible melodrama--a thing both too absurd and too dangerous for
her to risk. But Maggie was just then living through one of the
highest periods of her life; she cared little what happened to her.
And it is just such moods that transform and elevate what otherwise
would be absurd to the nobly serious; that changes the impossible into
the possible; just as an exalted mood or mind is, or was, the primary
difference between Hamlet, or Macbeth, or Lear, and any of the
forgotten Bowery melodramas of a generation now gone.

She had been dressed for perhaps ten nervous minutes when the bell
rang. She admitted a slight, erect, well-dressed, middle-aged man with
a lean, thin-lipped face and a cold, hard, conservative eye: a man of
the type that you see by the dozens in the better hotels of New York,
and seeing them you think, if you think of them at all, that here is
the canny president of some fair-sized bank who will not let a client
borrow a dollar beyond his established credit, or that here is the
shrewd but unobtrusive power behind some great industry of the Middle
West.

"I'm Hannigan," he announced briefly. "I know you're Old Jimmie
Carlisle's girl. The Duchess told me you wanted me on something big.
What's the idea?"

"You want to get Larry Brainard, don't you?--or whoever it was that
squealed on you?"

There was a momentary gleam in the hard, gray eyes. "I do."

"That's why you're here. In a little over an hour, if you stay quiet
in the background, you'll have what you want."

"You've got a swell-looking lay-out here. What's going to be pulled
off?"

"It's not what I might tell you that's going to help you. It's what
you hear and see."

"All right," said the thin-lipped man. "I'll pass the questions, since
the Duchess told me to do as you said. She's square, even if she does
have a grandson who's a stool. I suppose I'm to be out of sight during
whatever happens?"

"Yes."

In the room there were two spacious closets, as is not infrequent  in
the better class of modern hotels; and it had been these two closets
which had been the practical starting-point of Maggie's development of
Dick Sherwood's proposition. To one of these she led Hannigan.

"You'll be out of sight here, and you'll get every word."

He stepped inside, and she closed the door. Also she took the
precaution of locking it. She wished Hannigan to hear, but she wished
no such contretemps as Hannigan bursting forth and spoiling her play
when it had reached only the middle of its necessary action.

Barlow came promptly at half-past eight. He brought news which for a
few moments almost completely upset Maggie's delicately balanced
structure.

"I know who you are now," he said brusquely. "And part of your game's
cold before you start."

"Why?--What part?"

"Just after you left Headquarters Officer Gavegan showed up. He had
this Larry Brainard in tow--had pinched him out on Long Island."

This announcement staggered Maggie; for the moment made all her
strenuous planning seem to have lost its purpose. In her normal
condition she might either have given up or betrayed her real intent.
But just now, in her super-excited state, in which she felt she was
fighting desperately for others, she was acting far above her ordinary
capacity; and she was making decisions so swift that they hardly
seemed to proceed from conscious thought. So Barlow, vigilant watcher
of faces that he was, saw nothing unusual in her expression or manner.

"What did you do with him?" she asked.

"Left him with Gavegan--and with Casey, who had just come in. Trailing
with Brainard was a swell named Hunt, cussing mad. He was snorting
around about being pals with most of the magistrates, and swore he'd
have Brainard out on bail inside an hour. But what he does don't make
any difference to me. Your proposition seems to me dead cold, since
I've already got Brainard, and got him right. I wouldn't have bothered
to have come here at all except for something you let drop about the
pals he might have been working with these last few months."

"That's exactly it," she caught him up. "I never thought that you'd
catch Larry Brainard here. How could I, when, if you know me as you
say, you also know that he and I are in different camps--are fighting
each other? What's going to happen here is something that will show
you the people Larry Brainard's been mixed up with--that will turn up
for you the people you want."

"But what's going to happen?" Barlow demanded.

To this Maggie answered in much the same strain she had used with
Hannigan a few minutes earlier. "I told you down at Headquarters that
everything that's important you'll learn by being present when the
thing actually happened. What I tell you doesn't count for much--it
might not be true. It's what you see and hear for yourself when things
begin to happen. You're to wait in here." She led him to the second
large closet and opened the door.

"See here," he demanded, "are you framing something on me?"

"How can I, in a big hotel like this? And even if I were to try, you'd
certainly make me pay for it later. Besides, you've got a gun. Please
go in quick; I'm expecting the people here any minute. And don't make
a sound that might arouse their suspicions and queer everything."

He entered, and she closed the door. So carefully that he did not hear
it, she locked the door; no more than in Hannigan's case did she want
Barlow to come bungling into a scene before it had reached its climax.

All was now ready for the curtain to rise. Quivering all through she
waited for Barney Palmer, whose entrance was to open her drama. She
glanced at her wrist-watch which she had left upon the little
lacquered writing-table. Ten minutes of nine. Ten more minutes to
wait. She felt far more of sickening suspense than ever did any young
playwright on the opening night of his first play. For she was more
than merely playwright. In her desperate, overwrought determination
Maggie had assumed for herself the super-mortal role of dea ex
machina. And in those moments of tense waiting Maggie, who so
feverishly loathed all she had been, was not at all sure whether she
was going to succeed in her part of goddess from the machine.

At five minutes to nine there was a ring. She gave a little jump at
the sound. That was Barney. Though generally when Barney came he used
the latch-key which his assumed dear cousinship, and the argued
possibility of their being out and thus causing him to wait around in
discomfort, Miss Grierson's sense of propriety had unbent far enough
to permit him to possess. The truth was, of course, that Barney had
desired the key so that he might have most private conferences with
Maggie, at any time necessity demanded, without the stolidly
conscientious Miss Grierson ever knowing what had happened and being
therefore unable to give dangerous testimony.

Maggie crossed and opened the door. But instead of Barney Palmer, it
was Larry who stepped in. He quickly closed the door behind him.

"Larry!" she cried startled. "Why--why, I thought the police had you!"

"They did. But Hunt was with me, and he got hold of a magistrate who
would have made Hunt a present of the Tombs and Police Headquarters if
he had owned them."

"Then you're out on bail?"

"Got out about ten minutes ago. Hunt didn't have any property he could
put up as security, so he 'phoned my grandmother. She walked in with
an armload of deeds. Why, she must own as much property in New York as
the Astor Estate."

"Larry, I'm so glad!" And then, remembering what, according to her
plan, was due to begin to happen almost any moment, she exclaimed in
dismay: "But, Larry, oh, why did you come here now!"

"I wanted to know--you understand--what you had decided to do after
learning about your father. And I wanted to tell you that, after all
my great boasts to you, I seem to have failed in every boast. Item
one, the police have got me. Item two, since the police have got me,
my old pals will also most likely get me. Item three, when I was
arrested at Cedar Crest Miss Sherwood learned that I had known you all
along and believes I was part of a conspiracy to clean out the family;
so she chucked me--and I've lost what I believed my big chance to make
good. So, you see, Maggie, it looks as if you were right when you
predicted that I was going to fail in everything I said I was going to
do."

"Larry--Miss Sherwood believes that!" she breathed. And then she
remembered again, and caught his arm with sudden energy. "Larry, you
mustn't stay here!"

"Why not?"

Her answer was almost identical with one she had given the previous
evening. "Because Barney Palmer may be here the next minute!"

His response was in sense also identical. "Then I'll stay right here.
There's no one I want to see as much as Barney Palmer. And this time
I'll have it out with him!"

Maggie was in consternation at this unexpected twist which was not in
the brain-manuscript of her play at all--which indeed threatened to
take her play right out of her hands. "Please go, Larry!" she cried
desperately. "And please give me a chance! You'll spoil it all if you
stay!"

"I'm going to stay right here," was his grim response.

She realized there was no changing him. She glimpsed a closet door
behind him, and caught at the chance of saving at least a fragment of
her drama.

"Stay, then but, Larry, please give me a chance to do what I want to
do! Please!" By this time she had dragged him across the room and had
started to unlock the closet. "Just wait in here--and keep quiet!
Please!"

He took the key from her fumbling hands, unlocked the door, and
slipped the key into his pocket. "All right--I'll give you your
chance," he promised.

He stepped through the door and closed it upon himself, entombing
himself in blackness. The next moment the glare of a pocket flash was
in his face, blinding him.

"Larry Brainard!" gritted a low voice in the darkness.

Larry could see nothing, but there was no mistaking that voice. "Red
Hannigan!" he exclaimed.

"Yes--you damned squealer! And I'm going to finish you off right
here!"

The light clicked out, and a pair of lean hands almost closed on
Larry's wind-pipe. But Larry caught the wrists of the older man in a
grip the other could not break. There was a brief struggle in the
blackness of the closet, then the slighter man stood still with his
wrists manacled by Larry's hands.

"Evidently you haven't a gun on you, Red, or you, wouldn't have tried
this," Larry commented. "Anyhow, you couldn't have got away with
killing in a big hotel, whether you had strangled me or shot me. I
don't blame you for being sore at me, Red--only you've got me all
wrong. But you and I are evidently here for the same purpose: to get
next to something that's going to happen out in the room. What do you
say, Red?--let's suspend hostilities for the present. You've got me
where you can follow me, and you can get me any time."

"You bet I'll get you!" declared Hannigan. And then after a few more
words an armistice was agreed upon between the two men in the closet
and silently, tensely, they stood in the dark awaiting whatever was to
happen.

Outside Maggie, that amateur playwright who had tried so desperately
to prearrange events, that inexperienced goddess from the machine,
stood in a panic of fear and suspense the like of which she had never
known.




CHAPTER XXXIV


But when Barney's latch-key slid into the door and Barney, in a smart
dinner jacket, came in, Maggie was herself again. Indeed she was
better than herself, for there rushed to her support that added power
which she had just been despairing of, which carries some people
through an hour of crisis, and which may occasionally lift an actor
above himself when fortune gives him a difficult yet splendid part
which is the great chance of his career.

And Maggie showed to the eye that she was better than her best, for
Barney exclaimed the instant he was beside her: "Gee, Maggie, you look
like the Queen of Sheba, whoever that dame was! Any guy would fall for
you to-night--and fall so hard that he'd break, or go broke!"

But Barney was too eager to await any response. "What's behind the
hurry-up call you sent in? Anything broken yet?"

"Something big! But sit down. There's a lot to tell. And I must tell
it quick--before my"--she could not force herself to say "father"--
"before Old Jimmie comes, and Dick."

"Then Dick's coming?"

"Yes. Things have taken a twist so that everything breaks to-night.
But sit down, and I'll tell you everything."

She had noted that the door behind which Larry stood, and to which he
had captured the key, was open a bare half-inch. It looked no more
suspicious than any closet door that by accident had swung free of its
latch, but by deft maneuvering Maggie managed so that Barney sat at
the table with his back toward both closets.

"Go to it, Maggie," he urged.

The plan which had swiftly developed from Dick Sherwood's idea
required that she should tell much that was the truth and much that
was not truth, and required that she should play with every faculty
and every attraction she possessed upon Barney's tremendous vanity and
upon his jealous admiration of her. She had to make him believe more
in her as a pal than ever before; she had to make him want her more as
a woman than ever before. And at this moment she felt herself
thrillingly equal to this vampire role her over-stimulated sense of
justice had commanded her to undertake.

"Things have gone great," she began, speaking concisely, yet trying
not in this eager brevity to lose the convincing effect that she would
be the complete mistress of any enterprise to which she yielded her
interest. "Dick Sherwood proposed to me again, and this time I said
`yes.' I saw that he was ready for anything, so I took some things
into my hands. I had to, for I saw we had to act quick even at the
risk of losing a bit of the maximum figure we had counted on. You see
I realized the danger to us in Larry Brainard suddenly showing up, and
his knowing, as he told us he did, who the sucker is that we've been
stringing along. Anything might happen, any minute, from Larry
Brainard that would upset everything. So I reasoned that we had to
collect quick or run the risk of never getting a nickel."

"Some bean you've got, Maggie," he said admiringly. "Keep your foot on
the gas pedal."

"What I did was only, the carrying-out of the plan you had decided
on--of course carrying it out quicker, and with a few little changes
that the urgent situation demanded. After he proposed I broke down, as
per schedule, and confessed that I had deceived him to the extent that
I was already married. Married to a man I didn't love, and who didn't
love me, but who was a tight-wad and who wouldn't let me go unless he
saw a lot of money in it for him. And I gave Dick all the rest of the
story, just as we had doped it out."

"Great work, Maggie! How did he take it?"

"Exactly as we figured he would. He was sorry for me; it didn't make
any difference at all in his feelings for me. He'd buy my husband off--
give him any price he wanted--and just so I wouldn't have to feel
myself bound to such a man a minute longer than necessary he'd make a
bargain with him at once and pay him part of the money right down. To-
night, if he could get in touch with my husband. And so, Barney, since
we had to act quick and there was no time to bring in another man that
I could pass off as my husband, I confessed to him that I was married
to you."

"To me!" exclaimed Barney.

"And he's coming here in less than an hour, with real money in his
pockets, to see if he can't fix a deal with you."

"Me!" exclaimed the startled Barney again. His beady eyes glowed at
her ardently. "Gee, you know I wish I really was married to you,
Maggie! If I was, you bet money couldn't ever pry you loose from me!"

"Well, there's the whole lay-out, Barney. It's up to you to be my
grasping, bargaining, unloving husband for about an hour."

"I hadn't thought of myself in that part," he objected. "I'd figured
that we'd bring in a new man to be the husband. It's pretty dangerous
for me, my stringing Dick along all this while and then suddenly to
enter the act as your husband--and to take the money."

"Dangerous!" There was sudden contempt in her voice and in her eyes.
"So you're that kind of man, Barney--afraid! And afraid after my
telling Dick you were my husband, and his swallowing the thing without
a suspicion! Well, right this minute is when we call this deal off--
and every other deal!"

"Oh, don't be so quick with that temper of yours, Maggie! I merely
said it was dangerous. Of course I'll do it."

And then Barney asked, with a cunning he tried to hide: "But why did
you ask me to have Old Jimmie show up here right after me? We don't
need him."

"Just what's behind your saying that, Barney?" she demanded sharply.

He squirmed a little, then spoke the truth. "You don't love your
father any too much, and he doesn't love you any too much--I know
that. He needn't really know how much we take off Sherwood; if he
wasn't here, he'd have to take our word for what we got and we'd tell
him we got mighty little. Then the real money would be divided fifty-
fifty between just you and me."

"I may not love my father, but he's in this on the same basis as you
are, or I'm out of it," she declared. "I thought you might suggest
something like this; that's one reason I asked you to have him come.
Another reason--and this is something I forgot to tell you awhile
ago--when I broke down and confessed everything to Dick Sherwood, I
told Dick that Old Jimmie was really my guardian; and we both agreed
that he should be present as a witness to any agreement, and to
protect my interests. Still another reason is that since we had to
work so fast, the thing to do was to split the money on the spot in
three ways, and then each of us shoot off in a different direction to-
night before any bad luck had a chance to break. In fact, Barney, this
present minute is when you and I say our good-byes."

He forgot his scheme to defraud Old Jimmie in the far greater concern
aroused by her last words. He leaned across the table and tried to
take her hand, an attempt she deftly thwarted.

"But listen, Maggie," he asked with husky eagerness, "you and I are
going to have an understanding to join up with each other soon, aren't
we? You know what I mean--belong to each other. You know how I feel
about: you!"

This was the principal point Maggie had been maneuvering toward.
Before her was the most difficult scene of the many which she had
planned, on her successful management of which the success of
everything seemed to depend. Within she was palpitant with the strain
and suspense of it all; but on Barney she held cool, appraising eyes.
In this splendid composure, her momentary withdrawal from him, she
seemed to Barney more beautiful, more desirable, more indispensable,
than at any time since he had discovered back at the Duchess's that
Maggie was a find.

"Of course I know exactly what you mean, Barney," she responded with
deliberation, bewitchingly alluring in her air of superiority. "I've
known for a long time you and I would have to have a real talk. Are
you ready for a straight talk now?"

"As straight as you can talk it!"

"I'll probably fall for some man and marry him. Every woman does. But
if I marry him, it'll be because I love him. But my marrying a man
doesn't mean I'm going to go into business with him. I'm not going to
mix love with business--not unless the man is the right sort of man.
Of course it would be better if the man I marry and the man I take on
as a business partner were the same man--but I'm not going to take any
risks. You understand me so far."

"Surest thing you know. And every word you've said proves that your
head isn't just something to look pretty with. Let me slip this over
to you right at the start--I'm the right sort of man!"

"That's exactly what I want to find out," she continued, with her
deliberation, with the air of sitting secure upon the highest level.
"I know now what I can do. I've proved it. Now I'm going right ahead
putting over big things. You once told me I had it in me to be the
best ever--and I now know I can be. I know I've got to tie up with a
man, and the man has got to be just as good in his way as I am in
mine. Right there's where I'm in doubt about you. I said I was going
to talk straight--and I'm handing it to you straight. I don't know how
good you are."

"You mean you think I'm not big enough to work with you?"

"I mean exactly what I said. I said that I didn't really know how good
you are, and that I wasn't going to tie up with any man except the
best in the business. You've hinted now and then at a lot of big
things you've put across and how strong you were in certain quarters
where it paid to be strong--but I really know mighty little about you,
Barney. This present job hasn't required you to do anything special,
and all the really hard work I've done myself. Of course I know you
are a good dancer, and clever with the ladies, and know how to pick up
a sucker and string him along. But that's everything I do know. And,
there are hundreds of men who are good at these things. The man I tie
up with has got to be good at a lot of other things--and I've got to
know he's good!"

"Good at what other things, Maggie?" he asked with suppressed
eagerness.

"He's got to be good at putting over all kinds of situations. I don't
care how he does it. So clever at putting things over that no one ever
guesses he's the man who did it. And he's got to be able to give me
protection. You know what I mean. A woman in the game I'm going in for
is absolutely through, as far as doing anything big is concerned, the
minute she gets a police record. I've got to have a man who's able to
stand between me and the police. And I've got to know from past
performances that the man can do these things. Just large words about
what he can do, or hints about what he has done, don't count for a
nickel with me. This is plain, hard business I'm talking, Barney, and
I don't mean to hurt your feelings when I tell you that you don't
measure up in any way to the man I need."

It had been difficult for Barney to hold himself until she had
finished. To start with, he had the vain man's constant itch to tell
of his exploits, his dislike for the anonymity of his cleverness
unjustly ascribed to some other man. And then Maggie had played upon
him even more skillfully than she imagined.

"I'm exactly the man you need in every way!" he exploded.

"Those are just words," she said evenly. "I said I had to have
something more than mere words."

"I'm ace-high with Chief Barlow!"

"You've got to be more explicit."

Barney was now all excitement. "Don't you get what that means? I've
never been locked up once, and yet I've been pulling stuff all the
time! And yet look how Larry Brainard, that the bunch thought was so
clever, got hooked and was sent away. I guess you know the answer!"

"Again, Barney, I've got to ask you to be more explicit."

"Then the answer is that all the while I've been working on an
understanding with Barlow. I guess that's explicit!"

"You mean," she said in her cool voice, "that you've been a stool-
pigeon for Barlow?"

"Sure!--though I don't like the word. That's the only safe way of
staying steady in the game--an understanding with the police. All
there is to it is now and then to tip the police off about some dub of
a crook: of course you've got to be smooth enough not to let anyone
guess your game."

"That doesn't seem to me such a strong talking point in your favor,"
she said thoughtfully.

"But don't you get the idea? I'm so strong with Barlow that I can get
away with anything I want to. That means I can give you the protection
from the police you just spoke about. See?"

"Yes I see." Again she spoke thoughtfully. "But I told you I had to be
shown. You must have done some pretty big things to have got such a
standing with Barlow. For example?"

"I could write you a book!" He laughed in his excited pride. "You ask
for an example. I could hardly hold myself in awhile ago when you said
you'd practically swung the present deal alone, and that I'd done
almost nothing. Why, Maggie, I did just one smooth little thing
without which there couldn't have been any deal."

"What?"

"You'll admit that nothing would have been safe with Larry Brainard
determined to butt in on what you did?"

"Yes."

"Well, I'm the little guy that fixed Larry Brainard so he wouldn't
hurt anyone!"

"You did that?" For the first time Maggie showed what seemed to be a
live interest. "How?"

"How? You'll say it was clever when you learn how. And you'll say that
I'm the man you want on that count of being able to put over a
situation so that no one will ever guess I'm the man who did it.
You'll admit that putting Larry Brainard out of business, so he'd stay
out, was certainly a stiff job--for though I don't like him, I admit
that Larry is one wise bird. One thing I did was to suggest to Barlow
that he force Larry to become a police stool. I knew Larry would
refuse, and I figured out everything else exactly as it has happened.
I ask you, wasn't that putting something clever over?"

"It certainly was clever!" admired Maggie.

"Wait! That's only half. To finish Larry off so that he wouldn't have
a chance I had to finish him off not only with the cops, but also with
his pals. So I tipped off Barlow to the game Red Hannigan and Jack
Rosenfeldt were pulling and--"

"Then Larry Brainard really didn't do that?"

"No; I did it! Listen--there's some more to it. I spread the word, so
that it seemed to be a leak from the Police Department, that it was
Larry who had squealed on Red Hannigan and Jack Rosenfeldt. Did his
old pals start out to get Larry? Well, now, did they! If I do say it
myself, that was smooth work!"

"It was wonderful!" agreed Maggie.

"And there's still more, Maggie! You remember that charge of stick-up
and attempted murder of a Chicago guy that the police are trying to
land Larry on? I put that over! I'm the party that was messed up in
that. I was trying to put over a neat little job all on my own; but
something went wrong just as I thought I was cleaning out the sucker,
and I had to be rough with that Chicago guy in order to make a get-
away from him. I beat it straight to Barlow, and said that right here
was the chance to fasten something on Larry. Barlow took my tip. My
foot may have slipped on the original job, but my bean certainly did
act quick, and you've got to admit I turned an apparent failure into
something bigger than success would have been. And that's certainly
traveling!"

"It certainly is!"

"And now, Maggie "--Barney pressed her eagerly--"I've shown you I'm
just the sort you said a man had to be for you to tie up with him.
I've shown you I can guarantee you police protection. And I've shown
you I'm able to put over clever situations without any one ever
guessing I'm the party who put 'em over. I fit all your
specifications! How about our settling right now to join up some
place--Toronto's the best bet--say three days after we make our get-
away after to-night's clean-up? Let's be quick about this, Maggie--
before Old Jimmie comes in. He's due any minute now!"

"Isn't that him at the door now?" breathed Maggie.

Both waited intently for a moment. But though she pretended so,
Maggie's interest was not upon the outer door. Her attention was
fixed, as it had been with sickening fear this last minute, upon that
half-inch crack in the closet door behind Barney. Why had she, in her
dismayed urgence, allowed Larry to possess himself of that closet
key?--when her plan had been to keep Hannigan as well as Barlow
forcibly behind the scenes until she had acted out her play? She now
hoped almost against hope that Hannigan would not burst forth and ruin
what was yet to come. Since that door unluckily had to be unlocked,
her one chance was given her by the presence of Larry. Perhaps Larry
could perceive the larger things she was striving for, and in some way
restrain Hannigan.

These thoughts were but an instant in passing through her brain.
Barney's eyes came back from the outer door to her face. "That's not
Old Jimmie yet."

"No," her lips said. But her brain was saying, since the crack still
remained a half-inch crack, "Larry understands--he's holding back Red
Hannigan!"

Barney returned swiftly to his charge. "How about Toronto, Maggie--say
exactly seventy-two hours from now--the Royal Brunswick Hotel?"

Maggie realized she could no longer put him off if she were to keep
him unsuspicious for the next hour. Besides, in her desperate
disillusionment concerning herself, she did not care what happened to
her, or what people might think of her, if only she could keep this
play going till its final moment.

"Yes," she said--"if we each feel the same way toward each other when
this evening's ended."

"Maggie!" he cried. "Maggie!" This time, when he exultantly caught at
her hand, she dared not refuse it to him. And she felt an additional
loathing for Barney's caress because she knew that Larry was a witness
to it.

Indeed, it was difficult for Larry, at the sight of Maggie's hand in
Barney's too eager palms, to hold himself in check; and to do this in
addition to holding in check the slight, quivering Red Hannigan, whose
collar and whose right wrist he had been gripping these last three
minutes. For Larry, as Maggie had hoped, had dimly apprehended
something of Maggie's plan, and he felt himself bound by the promise
she had extracted from him, to let her go through with whatever she
had under way; though he had no conception of her plan's extent, and
could, of course, not know of the intention of her overwrought mind to
give her plan its final touch in what amounted to her own self-
destruction, and in her vanishing utterly out of the knowledge of all
who knew her.

Another minute passed; then Larry heard three peculiar rings of the
bell of the outer door--an obvious signal. Maggie answered the
summons, and Larry saw Old Jimmie enter. There followed a rapid and
compact conference between the three, the substance of which was the
telling of Old Jimmie of the developments against Dick Sherwood which
Maggie had a little earlier recited to Barney, together with
instructions to Old Jimmie concerning his new role as Maggie's
guardian. It seemed to Larry that he caught signs of uneasiness in
Jimmie, but to all the older man nodded his head.

Presently there was a loud ring. "That's Dick!" exclaimed Barney in a
whisper. "And mighty eager, too--shows that by being ahead of the
time you set! Let him in, Maggie."

Maggie was startled by the ring, though she did not show it. She
thought rapidly. She had definitely asked Dick to telephone before
coming. Why hadn't he telephoned? Perhaps something had happened to
prevent it, or perhaps an idea had come to him by which their plan
could be bettered without a telephone message. In either case, she and
Dick might have to improvise and deftly catch cues tossed to each
other, as experienced actors sometimes do without the audience ever
knowing that a hiatus in the play has been skillfully covered.

Maggie stood up. "You both understand what you're to do?"

Both whispered "yes." Larry watched Maggie start across the room, his
whole figure quivering with suspense as to what was going to happen
when Dick entered. He was quite sure there was more here than appeared
upon the surface, quite sure that Maggie did not intend that the
business with Dick should work out as she had outlined. What could
Maggie possibly be up to? he asked himself in feverish wonderment, and
could find no answer. For of course Larry had no knowledge of that
most important fact: that Maggie had actually made a confession to
Dick--not the fraudulent confession she had told Barney of--but an
honest and complete confession, and that in consequence she and Dick
were working in cooperation.

From his crack Larry could not quite see the outer door. But after she
opened the door he saw Maggie fall back with an inarticulate cry, her
face suddenly blanched with astounded fright. And then Larry
experienced one of the greatest surprises of his life--a surprise so
unnerving that he almost loosed his hold upon Red Hannigan. For
instead of Dick there walked into the room the tall, white-haired
figure of Joe Ellison, and Joe's lean, prison-blanched face was
aquiver with a devastating purpose. How in the name of God had Joe
come to be here?--and what did that terrible look portend?

But Larry's surprise was but an unperturbing emotion compared to the
effect of her father's appearance, with his terrible face, upon
Maggie. Life seemed suddenly to go out of her. She realized that the
clever play which she had constructed so rapidly, and upon which she
had counted to clear the tangle for which she was in part responsible,
and to bring her back in time as the seeming fulfillment of the dream
of a happy and undisillusioned father--she realized that her poor,
brilliant play had come to an instant end before it was fairly
started, and that the control of events had passed into other hands.




CHAPTER XXXV


At the entrance of Joe Ellison instead of the expected Dick, Barney
and Old Jimmie had sprung up from the table in amazement. Joe strode
past Maggie, hardly heeding his daughter, and faced the two men.

"I guess you know me, Jimmie Carlisle!" said Joe with a terrifying
restraint of tone. "The pal I trusted--the pal I turned everything
over to--the pal who double-crossed me in every way!"

"Joe Ellison!" gasped Jimmie, suddenly as ghastly as a dead man. "I--I
didn't know you were out."

"I'm out, all right. But I'll probably go in again for what I'm going
to do to you! And you there"--turning on Barney--"you're got up enough
like a professional dancer to be the Barney Palmer I've heard of!"

"What business is it of yours who I am?" Barney tried to bluster.
"Perhaps you won't mind introducing yourself."

"I'm the man who's going to settle with you and Old Jimmie Carlisle!
Is that introduction enough. If not, then I'm Joe Ellison, the father
of this girl here you call Maggie Carlisle and Maggie Cameron, that
you two have made into a crook."

"Your daughter!" exclaimed Barney in stupefaction. "Why, she's Jimmie
Carlisle's--"

"He's always passed her off as such; that much I've learned. Speak up,
Jimmie Carlisle! Whose daughter is this girl you've turned into a
crook?"

"Your daughter, Joe," stammered Old Jimmie. "But about my making her
into a crook--you're--you're all wrong there."

"So she's not a crook, and you didn't make her one?" demanded Joe with
the calm of unexploded dynamite whose fuse is sputtering. "I left you
about twelve or fifteen hundred a year to bring her up on--as a
decent, respectable girl. That's twenty-five or thirty a week. If
she's not a crook, how can she on twenty-five a week have all the
swell clothes I've seen her in, and be living in a suite like this
that costs from twenty-five to fifty a day? And if she isn't a crook,
why is she mixed up with two such crooks as you? And if she isn't a
crook, why is she in a game to trim young Dick Sherwood?"

The two men started and wilted at these driving questions. "But--but,
Joe," stammered Old Jimmie, "you've gone out of your head. She's not
in any such game. She never even heard of any Dick Sherwood."

"Cut out your lies, Jimmie Carlisle!" Joe ordered harshly. "We've got
something more to do here, the four of us, than to waste any time on
lies. And just to prove to you that your lies will be wasted, I'll lay
all my cards face up on the table. Since I got out I've been working
for the Sherwoods. Larry Brainard was working there before me, and got
me my job. I've seen this girl here--my daughter that you've made into
a crook--out there twice. Dick Sherwood was supposed to be in love
with her. At the end of this afternoon some officers came to the
Sherwoods' and arrested Larry Brainard. I was working outside,
overheard what was happening, and crept up on the porch. Officer
Gavegan, who was in charge, found a painting among Larry Brainard's
things. Miss Sherwood said that it was a picture of Miss Maggie
Cameron who had been visiting there, and I could see that it was.
Officer Gavegan said it was a picture of Maggie Carlisle, daughter of
Jimmie Carlisle, and that she was a crook. Larry Brainard, cornered,
had to admit that Gavegan was right. I guessed at once who Maggie
Carlisle was, since she was just the age my girl would have been and
since you never had any children. And that's how, Jimmie Carlisle,
standing there outside the window," concluded the terrible voice of
Joe Ellison, "I learned for the first time that the baby I'd trusted
with you to be brought up straight, and that I believed was now happy
somewhere as a nice, decent girl, you had really brought up as your
own daughter and trained to be a crook!"


Old Jimmie shrank back from Joe's blazing eyes; his mouth opened
spasmodically, but no words came therefrom. There was stupendous
silence in the room. Within the closet, Larry now understood that low,
strange sound he had heard on the Sherwoods' porch and which Gavegan
and Hunt had investigated. It had been the suppressed cry of Joe
Ellison when he had learned the truth--the difference between his
dreams and the reality. He could not imagine what that moment had been
to Joe: the swift, unbelievable knowledge that had seemed to be
tearing his very being apart.

Larry had an impulse to step out to Joe's side. But just as a little
earlier he had felt the scene had belonged to Maggie, he now felt that
this situation, the greatest in Joe's life, belonged definitely to
Joe, was almost sacredly Joe's own property. Also he felt that he was
about to learn many things which had puzzled him. Therefore he held
himself back, at the same time keeping his hold upon Red Hannigan.

During this moment of silence, while Larry was wondering what was
going to happen, his eyes also took in the figure of Maggie, all her
powers of action and expression still paralyzed by appalling
consternation. He understood, at least to a degree, what she was going
through. He knew this much of her plan: that she had intended to cut
loose in some way from Barney and Old Jimmie, and that she had
intended that her father should continue to cherish the dream that had
been his happiness for so long. And now her father had come upon her
in the company of Barney and Old Jimmie and in a situation whose every
superficial circumstance was such as to make him believe the worst of
her!

Joe turned on the smartly dressed Barney. "I'll take you first, you
imitation swell, because I'm saving Jimmie Carlisle to the last!" went
on Joe's crunching voice. "I'm going to twist your damned neck for
what you've helped do to my girl, but if you want to say anything
first, say it."

Barney's response was a swift movement of his right hand toward his
left armpit. But Barney Palmer, like almost all his kind, was a very
indifferent gunman; and he had no knowledge of the reputation for
masterful quickness that had been Joe Ellison's twenty years earlier.
Before his compact automatic was fairly out of its holster beneath his
armpit, it was in Joe Ellison's hands.

"I sized you up for that kind of rat and was watching you," continued
Joe in his same awful grimness. "I'm not going to shoot you, unless
you make me. I'm going to twist that pretty neck of yours. But first,
out with anything you've got to say for yourself!"

"I haven't had anything to do with this business," said Barney, trying
to affect a bold manner.

"You lie! I know that in this game against Dick Sherwood, in which you
used my girl, you were the real leader!"

"Well--even if I did use your girl, I only used her the way I found
her."

"You lie again! I know how your kind work: cleverly putting crooked
ideas into girls' minds, and exciting their imagination, so they'll
work with you. Your case is closed." He turned to his one-time friend.
"What have you got to say for yourself, Jimmie Carlisle?"

Old Jimmie believed that his last hour was come. He showed something
of the defiant, almost maniacal courage of a coward who realizes he
can retreat no farther.

"What I got to say, Joe Ellison," he snarled in a sudden rage which
bared his yellow teeth, "is that I'm even with you at last!"

"Even with me? What for?"

"For the way you double-crossed me in nineteen-one in that Gordon
business. You never gave me a dime--said the thing had fallen down--
yet I know there was a big haul!"

"I told you the truth. That Gordon thing was a fizzle."

"There's where you're lying! It was a clean-up! And I knew you'd been
cheating me out of my share in other deals!"

"You're absolutely wrong, Jimmie Carlisle. But if you thought that,
why didn't you have it out with me at the time?"

"Because I knew you would lie! You were a better talker than I was,
and since our outfit always sided with you, I knew I wouldn't have a
chance then. But I reasoned that if I kept quiet and kept on being
your friend, I'd get my chance to get even if I waited awhile. I
waited--and I certainly got my chance!"

"Go on, Jimmie Carlisle!"

And Old Jimmie went on--a startlingly different Old Jimmie, his pent-
up evil now loosed into quivering, malignant triumph; went on with the
feverish exultation of a twisted, perverted mind that has brooded long
over an imagined injustice, that has brooded greedily and long in
private over his revenge, and at last has his chance to gloat in the
open.

"When you were sent away, Joe Ellison, and turned over your daughter
to me with those orders about seeing that she was brought up as a
decent girl, I began to see the big chance I'd been waiting for. I
asked myself, What is the dearest thing in the world to Joe Ellison?
The answer was, this idea he'd got about his girl. I asked myself,
What is the biggest way I can get even with Joe Ellison? The answer
was, to make Joe Ellison believe all the time he's in stir that his
girl is growing up the way he wants her to be and yet to bring her up
the exact thing he didn't want her to be. And that's exactly what I
did!"

"You--did--such a thing?" breathed Joe Ellison, almost incredulous.

"That's exactly what I did!" Old Jimmie went on, gloatingly. "It was
easy. No one knew you had a daughter, so I passed her off as my own
baby by a marriage I'd not told any one about. I saw that she always
lived among crooks, looked at things the way crooks do, and grew up
with no other thought than to be a crook. I never had an idea of using
her myself, till she began to look like such a good performer this
last year; and then my idea, no matter what Barney Palmer may have
planned, was to use her only in a couple of stunts. My main idea
always was, when you came out with your grand idea of what your girl
had grown up to be, for you suddenly to see your girl, and know her as
your girl, and know her to be a crook. That smash to you was the big
thing to me--what I'd planned for, and waited for. I didn't expect the
blow-off to come like this; I didn't expect to be caught in it when it
did happen. But since it has happened, well--There's your daughter,
Joe Ellison! Look at her! Look at what I've made her! I guess I'm even
all right!"

"My God!" breathed Joe Ellison, staring at the lean face twisting with
triumphant malignancy. "I didn't think there could be such a man!"

He slowly turned upon Maggie. This was the first direct recognition he
had taken of her since his entrance.

"I don't suppose you can guess what your being what you are has meant
to me," he began in a numbed tone which grew accusingly harsh as he
continued. "But I'd think that a daughter of mine, with such a mother,
would have had more instinctive sense than to have gone into such a
game with such a pair of crooks!"

"It's true--I have been what you think me--I did go into this thing
against Dick Sherwood," Maggie responded in a voice that at first was
faltering, then that stumbled rapidly on in her eagerness to pour out
all the facts. "But--but Larry Brainard had kept after me--and
finally he made me see how wrong I was headed. And then, this
afternoon, before I spoke to you, Larry told me that you were my real
father. When I learned the truth--how I had been cheated out of being
something else--how I was the exact opposite of what you had wanted me
to be and believed me to be--I felt about it almost exactly as you
feel about it. I--I made up my mind to clear up at once all the wrong
I was responsible for--and then disappear in such a way that you'd
never have your dream of me spoiled. And so--and so this afternoon,
after I left Cedar Crest, I confessed the whole truth to Dick
Sherwood--about our plan to cheat him. And like the really splendid
fellow he is, Dick Sherwood offered to help me set straight the things
I wanted to set straight. Particularly to clear Larry Brainard. And so
my being here as you find me is part of a plan between Dick Sherwood
and myself. It's really a frame-up. A frame-up to catch Barney Palmer
and Jimmie Carlisle."

"A frame-up!" ejaculated these two in startled unison.

"How a frame-up?" demanded her father, no bit of the accusing
harshness gone out of his voice.

"Our plan against Dick Sherwood was to have him propose to me, then
for me to confess that I was really married to a mean sort of man I
didn't love--the idea being that Dick would be infatuated enough to
pay a big sum to a dummy husband, and the three of us would disappear
as soon as we got Dick's money. Dick offered to go through with the
plan as Barney Palmer and Jimmie Carlisle had shaped it up--go through
with it to-night--and then after money had passed, we'd have a
criminal case against them. By reminding him that Larry Brainard knew
just what we were up to, and might spoil everything if we didn't act
at once, I got Barney Palmer worked up to the point where he was going
to pose as my husband and take the money. Dick Sherwood was to come a
little later, after he'd first telephoned me, with a big roll of
marked money."

There were stuttered exclamations from Barney and Old Jimmie, which
were cut off by the dominant incisiveness of Joe Ellison's words to
his daughter:

"I think you're lying to me! Besides, even if you're telling the
truth, it's a pretty way you've taken to clear things up! Don't you
see that by letting Dick Sherwood come here and play such a part,
you'd be dead sure to involve him and his family in a dirty police
story that the papers of the whole country would play up as a
sensation? It's plain to any one that that's no way a person who
wanted to square things would use Dick Sherwood. And that's why I
think you're lying!"

"I had thought of that--you're right," said Maggie. "And so I wasn't
going to do it. He was going to telephone me--just about this time--
and when he called up I was going to fake his message. I was going to
tell Barney Palmer and Old Jimmie that Dick had just telephoned he
wasn't coming, because one of the two had just sold him a tip for ten
thousand dollars that this was a crooked game. I thought this would
have started a quarrel between the two; they are suspicious of each
other, anyhow. Each would have accused the other, and in their quarrel
they would have been likely to have let out a lot of truth that would
have completely given each other away."

"Not a bad plan at all," commented Joe Ellison. He tried to peer deep
into his daughter for a moment, his inflamed face relaxing neither in
its harshness nor its doubt of her. "But since you are the clever
crook I actually know you to be from your work on Dick Sherwood, and
since Jimmie Carlisle says he has trained you to be a crook, I believe
that everything you've told me is just something you've cleverly
invented on the spur of the moment--just so many lies."

"But--but--"

She broke off before the harsh, accusing doubt of his pale face. For a
fraction of a moment no one spoke. Then the telephone bell began to
ring.

"Dick!" breathed Maggie, and started for the telephone.

"Stay right where you are!" her father ordered. "I'll answer that
telephone myself, and see whether you're lying to me about Dick
Sherwood! . . . No, we'll do this together. I'll hold the receiver and
hear what he says. You'll do the talking and you'll answer just what I
tell you to, and you'll keep your hand tight over the mouthpiece while
I'm giving you your orders. You two"--to Barney and Old Jimmie, with a
significant movement of Barney's automatic--"you'd better behave while
this telephone business is going on."

The next moment Larry was hearing, or rather witnessing, the strangest
telephone conversati