on of his experience. Maggie was holding the
transmitter, and Joe had the receiver at his ears, grimly covering the
two men with the automatic. Maggie obediently kept her palm tight over
the mouthpiece during Joe's brief whispered directions, and no one in
the room except Joe, not even Maggie, had the slightest idea of what
was really passing over the wires.

What Larry heard was no more than a dozen most commonplace words in
the world, transformed into the most absorbing words in the language.
Joe ordered Maggie to answer with "hello" in her usual tone, which she
did, and Joe, after a startled expression at the first words that came
over the wire, listened with immobile face for four or five seconds.
Then he nodded imperatively to Maggie and she put her hand over the
mouthpiece.

"Ask him how much, and when he wanted it to be paid," he ordered.

"How much, and when does he want it to be paid?" repeated Maggie.

Again Joe listened for several moments; and then ordered as before:
"Say 'Yes.'"

"Yes," said Maggie.

Another period of waiting, and Joe ordered: "Say, 'I've got a much
better plan that supersedes the old.'"

"I've got a much better plan that supersedes the old."

There was yet another period of waiting, then Joe commanded: "Tell him
he really mustn't and say good-bye quick."

"You really mustn't! Good-bye!"

The instant her "Good-bye" was out of her mouth Joe clicked the
receiver upon its hook, and stood regarding the breathless Maggie. His
pale, stern face was not quite so severe as before. Presently he
spoke: "I know now that you really were sick of what you'd been trying
to do--that you'd really broken away from these two--that you'd really
confessed to Dick, and are now all square with him."

The word "Father!" struggled chokingly toward her lips. But she only
said:

"I'm glad--you know."

"And you were shrewd in that guess you made of what one of these two
would do." Joe crossed back to Barney and Old Jimmie. "You two must
have been almighty afraid, because of Larry Brainard, that your game
was suddenly collapsing, and each must have been trying to grab a
piece for himself before he ran away."

"What you talking about?" gruffly demanded Barney.

"Perhaps I'm talking about you. But more particularly about Jimmie
Carlisle. For just now Dick Sherwood said when he telephoned, that an
hour or two ago Jimmie Carlisle had hunted him up, had hinted that he
was going to lose a lot of money unless he was properly advised, and
offered to give him certain valuable information for five thousand
cash."

Barney turned upon his partner. "You damned thief!" he snarled, tensed
as if about to spring upon the other.

Old Jimmie, turned greenishly pale, shrank away from Barney, his every
expression proclaiming his guilt. Then Maggie again found her voice:

"And at about the same time Barney was trying to double-cross Jimmie
Carlisle, Barney proposed to me that, after we'd got Dick Sherwood's
money, we'd tell Jimmie Carlisle we'd got very little, and divide the
real money fifty-fifty between just us two."

"You damned thief!" snarled Old Jimmie back at his partner.

The next moment Barney and Old Jimmie were upon each other, striking
wildly, clawing. But the moment after Joe Ellison, his repressed rage
now unloosed, and with the super-strength of his supreme fury, had
torn the two apart.

"You don't do that to each other--that job belongs to me!" he cried.
His right arm flung Barney backward so that Barney went staggering
over himself and sprawled upon the floor. Joe gripped Old Jimmie's
collar, and his right hand painfully twisted Jimmie's arm. "And I
finish you off first, Jimmie Carlisle, for what you've done to me and
my girl! But for Larry Brainard you, Jimmie Carlisle, would have
succeeded in your scheme to make my girl a crook! I'd like to give you
a thousand years of agony, you damned rat--but that's beyond me!" His
right hand shifted swiftly from Old Jimmie's arm to his throat. "But
I'm going to choke your rat's life out of you!--your lying, sneaking
devil's life out of you!"

Old Jimmie squirmed and twisted with those long fingers clamped
mercilessly around his throat, his eyes rolling, and his mouth gaping
with voiceless cries. He was indeed being shaken as a rat might be
shaken.

"Don't!--Don't!" cried the frantic Maggie, and started to seize her
father to pull him away. But she was halted by her arm being caught by
Barney.

"Let Jimmie have it!" he said fiercely to her, and flung her to the
farthest corner of the room. And grimly exultant over what seemed to
be Old Jimmie's doom, he started for the door to make his own escape.

Up to the moment of Joe Ellison's eruption Larry had felt bound to
remain a mere spectator where he was: long as the time had seemed to
him, it had in fact been less than half an hour. He had felt bound at
first by his promise to Maggie to let her work out her plan; and bound
later by his sense that this situation belonged to Joe Ellison. But
now this swift crisis dissolved all such obligations. He sprang from
his closet to take his part in the drama that was so swiftly
unfolding.




CHAPTER XXXVI


Larry caught and whirled around Barney Palmer just as the hand of the
escaping Barney was on the knob of the outer door.

"No, you don't, Barney Palmer!" he cried. "You stay right here!"

Startled as Barney was by this appearance of his dearest enemy, he
wasted no precious time on mere words. He swung a vicious blow at
Larry, intended to remove this barrier to his freedom. But the
experienced Larry let it glance off his forearm, and with the need of
an instantaneous conclusion he sent a terrific right to Barney's chin.
Barney staggered back, fell in a crumpled heap, and lay motionless.

Sparing only the fraction of a second to see that Barney was
momentarily out of it, Larry sprang upon Joe Ellison and tried to
break the deadly grips Joe held upon Old Jimmie.

"Stop, Joe--stop!" he cried peremptorily. "Your killing Jimmie
Carlisle isn't going to help things!"

Without relaxing his holds, Joe turned upon this interferer.

"Larry Brainard! How'd you come in here?"

"I've been here all the time. But, Joe--don't kill Jimmie Carlisle!"

"You keep out--this is my business!" Joe fiercely replied. "If you've
been here all the time, then you know what he's done to me, and what
he's done to my girl! You know he deserves to have his neck twisted
off--and I'm going to twist it off!"

Larry perceived that Joe's sense of tremendous injury had made him for
the moment a madman in his rage. Only the most powerful appeal had a
chance to bring him back to sanity.

"Listen, Joe--listen!" he cried desperately, straining to hold back
the other's furious strength from its destructive purpose. "After
what's happened, every one is bound to know that Maggie is your
daughter! Understand that, Joe?--every one will know that Maggie is
your daughter! It's not going to help you to be charged with murder.
And think of this, Joe--what's it going to do to your daughter to have
her father a murderer?"

"What's that?" Joe Ellison asked dazedly.

Larry saw that his point had penetrated to the other's reason. So he
drove on, repeating what he had said.

"Understand this, Joe?--every one will now know that Maggie is your
daughter! You simply can't prevent their knowing that now! Remember
how for over fifteen years you've been trying to do the best you could
for her! Do you now want to do the worst thing you can do? The worst
thing you can do for Maggie is to make her father a murderer!"

"I guess that's right Larry," he said huskily. "Thanks."

He pushed the half-strangled Jimmie Carlisle away from him. "You'll
get yours in some other way!" he said grimly.

Old Jimmie, staggering, caught the back of a chair for support. He
tenderly felt his throat and blinked at Larry and Joe and Maggie. He
did not try to say anything. In the meantime Barney had recovered
consciousness, had struggled up, and was standing near Old Jimmie.
Their recognition that they were sharers of defeat had served to
restore something of the sense of alliance between the two.

"Well, anyhow, Larry Brainard," snarled Barney, "you haven't had
anything to do with putting this across!"

It was Joe Ellison who replied. "Larry Brainard has had everything to
do with putting this across. He's been beating you all the time from
the very beginning, though you may not have known it. And though he's
seemed to be out of things for the last few hours, he's been the
actual power behind everything that's happened up to this minute. So
don't fool yourself--Larry Brainard has beaten you out at every
point!"

A sense of triumph glowed within Larry at this. There had been a time
when he had wanted the animal satisfaction which would have come from
his giving violent physical punishment to these two--particularly to
Barney. But he had no desire now for such empty vengeance.

"Well, I guess you've got nothing on me," Barney growled at them, "so
I'll be moving along. Better come, too, Jimmie."

While he spoke a figure had moved from Larry's closet with the silence
of a swift shadow. It's thin hand gripped Barney's shoulder.

"I guess _I've_ got something on you!" it said.

Barney whirled. "Red Hannigan!" he gasped.

"Yes, Red Hannigan!--you stool--you squealer!" said Red Hannigan. "I
heard you brag about being Barlow's stool, and I heard everything else
you bragged about to Joe Ellison's girl. I'd bump you off right now if
I had my gat with me and if I had any chance at a get-away. But I'll
be looking after you, and the gang will be looking after you, till you
die--the same as you set us after Larry Brainard! No matter what else
happens to you, you'll always have that as something extra waiting for
you! And when the time comes, we'll get you!"

As silently as he had appeared from the closet, as silently he let
himself out of the room. The glowering features of Barney had faded to
a pasty white while Hannigan had spoken, and now the hand which tried
to bring a handkerchief to his lips shook so that he could hardly find
his face. For none knew so well as Barney Palmer how inescapable was
this thing which would be hanging over him until the end of his days.

Before any one in the room could speak there came a loud pounding from
within the door of the closet Larry and Red Hannigan had not occupied.
"Oh, I'd completely forgotten!" exclaimed Maggie--and indeed she had
forgotten all that was not immediately connected with the situation
created by her father's unexpected entrance. She crossed and unlocked
the door, and Barlow stepped out.

"Chief Barlow!" exclaimed the astonished Larry, and all the other men
gazed at the Chief of Detectives with an equal surprise.

"He is part of my frame-up," Maggie explained at large. "I wanted both
the police and Larry's old friends to know the truth at first hand--
and clear him before I went away."

"Wasn't that Red Hannigan who just spoke?" were Barlow's first words.

"Yes," said Larry.

Barney, and Old Jimmie as well, had perked up at the appearance of
Barlow, as though at aid which had come just in time. But Barlow
turned upon Barney a cold police eye.

"I heard you brag that you were my stool. That's a lie."

"Why--why--Chief--" Barney stammered. He had counted upon help here,
where there had existed mutually advantageous relations for so long.

"I heard you say you had my protection. That's another lie. You've
squealed on a few people, but I've never given you a thing."

Barney gasped at this. He knew, as every one in the room also knew,
that Barlow was lying. But Barlow held all the cards. Rough and
ruthless police politician that he was, he made it his business always
to hold the highest cards. As sick of soul as a man can be, Barney
realized that Barlow was doing exactly what Barlow always did--was
swinging to the side that had the most evidence and that would prove
most advantageous to him. And Barney realized that he was suffering
the appointed fate of all stool-pigeons who are found out by their
fellow criminals to be stool-pigeons. Such informers are of no further
use, and according to the police code they must be given punishment so
severe as to dissipate any unhealthy belief on the public's part that
there could ever have been any alliance between the two.

"I've used this young lady who seems to have been Jimmie Carlisle's
daughter and now seems to be the daughter of this old-timer Joe
Ellison, for a little private sleuthing on my own hook," Barlow went
on--for it was the instinct of the man to claim the conception and
leadership of any idea in whose development he had a part. He spoke in
a brusque tone--as why should he not, since he was addressing an
audience he lumped together as just so many crooks? "Through this
little stunt I pulled to-night, I've got on to your curves, Barney
Palmer. And yours, too, Jimmie Carlisle. And I'm going to run the pair
of you in."

This was too much for Barney Palmer. Even though he knew that his
position as a stool, who was known to be a stool, was without hope
whatever, he went utterly to pieces.

"For God's sake, Chief," he burst out frantically, "you're not going
to treat me like that! You could get me out of this easy! Think of all
I've done for you! For God's sake, Chief--for God's sake--"

"Shut up!" ordered Barlow, doubling a big fist.

Chokingly Barney obeyed. Old Jimmie, coward though he was, and lacking
entirely Barney's quality of a bravo, had accepted the situation with
the twitching calm of one to whom the worst has often happened. "Shut
up," repeated Barlow, "and get it fixed in your beans that I'm going
to run you two in."

"Run them in because of this Sherwood affair?" asked Larry.

"Surest thing you know. I've got all the evidence I seed."

"But--" Larry was beginning protestingly, when the doorbell rang
again. Maggie opened the door, and there entered Miss Sherwood, with
Hunt just behind her, and Dick just behind him, and Casey and Gavegan
following these three. All in the room were surprised at this invasion
with the sole exception of Joe Ellison.

"When Mr. Dick spoke over the 'phone about your coming," he said to
Miss Sherwood, "I asked you not to do it."

Barlow was prompt to speak, and the sudden change in his voice would
have been amazing to those who do not know how the little great men of
the Police Department, and other little great men, can alter their
tones. He had recognized Miss Sherwood at once, as would any one else
at all acquainted with influential New York.

"Miss Sherwood, I believe," he said, essaying a slight bow.

"Yes. Though I fear I have not the pleasure of knowing you."

"Deputy Barlow, head of the Detective Bureau of the Police
Department," he informed her. "Entirely at your service."

"Just what is going on here?" she queried. "I know a part of what has
happened"--she was addressing herself particularly to Maggie and
Larry--"for Dick telephoned me about seven, and I came right into
town. He told me everything he knew--which threw a different light on
a lot of events--and Dick telephoned at about nine that I was coming
over. But something more seems to have happened."

"Miss Sherwood, it's like--" began Barlow.

"Just a second, Chief," Larry interrupted. Larry knew what a
sensational story this would be as it had developed--and he knew in
advance just how it would be seized upon and played up by the
newspapers. And Larry did not want unpleasant publicity for his
friends (three in that room were trying to make a fresh start in
life), nor for those who had been his friends. "Chief, do you want to
make an arrest on a charge which will involve every person in this
room in a sensational story? Of course I know most of us here don't
weigh anything with you. But why drag Miss Sherwood, who is innocent
in every way, into a criminal story that will serve to cheapen her and
every decent person involved? Besides, it can only be a conspiracy
charge, and there's more than a probability that you can't prove your
case. So why make an arrest that will drag in Miss Sherwood?"

Barlow had a mind which functioned with amazing rapidity on matters
pertaining to his own interest. He realized on the instant how it
might count for him in the future if he were in a position to ask a
favor of a person of Miss Sherwood's standing; and he spoke without
hesitation:

"I don't know anything about this Sherwood matter. If anyone ever asks
me, they'll not get a word."

There was swift relief on the faces of Barney and Old Jimmie; to be
instantly dispelled by Chief Barlow's next statement which followed
his last with only a pause for breath:

"The main thing we want is to stick these two crooks away." He turned
on Barney and Old Jimmie. "I've just learned you two fellows are the
birds I want for that Gregory stock business. I've got you for fair on
that. It'll hold you a hundred times tighter than any conspiracy
charge. Casey, Gavegan--hustle these two crooks out of here."

The next moment Casey and Gavegan had handcuffs on the prisoners and
were leading them out.

"Good for you, Larry," Casey whispered warmly as he went by with
Barney. "I knew you were going to win out, though it might be an
extra-inning game!"

At the door Barlow paused. "I hope I've done everything all right,
Miss Sherwood?"

"Yes--as far as I know, Mr. Barlow."

Again Barlow started out, and again turned. "And you, Brainard," he
said, rather grudgingly, "I guess you needn't worry any about that
charge against you. It'll be dropped."

And with that Barlow followed his men and his prisoners out of the
room.

Then for a moment there was silence. As Larry saw and felt that
moment, it was a moment so large that words would only make a
faltering failure in trying to express it. He himself was suddenly
free of all clouds and all dangers. He had succeeded in what he had
been trying to do with Maggie. A father and a daughter were meeting,
with each knowing their relationship, for the first time. There was so
much to be said, among all of them, that could only be said as souls
relaxed and got acquainted with each other.

It was so strained, so stupendous a moment that it would quickly have
become awkward and anti-climacteric but for the tact of Miss Sherwood.

"Mr. Brainard," she began, in her smiling, direct manner, with a touch
of brisk commonplace in it which helped relieve the tension, "I want
to apologize to you for the way I treated you late this afternoon. As
I said, I've just had a talk with Dick and he's told me everything--
except some things we may all have to tell each other later. I was
entirely in the wrong, and you were entirely in the right. And the way
you've handled things seems to have given Dick just that shock which
you said he needed to awaken him to be the man it's in him to be. I'm
sure we all congratulate you."

She gave Larry no chance to respond. She knew the danger, in such an
emotional crisis as this, of any let-up. So she went right on in her
brisk tone of ingratiating authority.

"I guess we've all been through too much to talk. You are all coming
right home with me. Mr. Brainard and Mr. Ellison live there, I'm their
boss, and they've got to come. And you've got to come, Miss Ellison,
if you don't want to offend me. I won't take 'no.' Besides, your place
is near your father. Wear what you have on; in a half a minute you can
put enough in a bag to last until to-morrow. To-morrow we'll send in
for the rest of your things--whatever you want--and send a note to
your Miss Grierson, paying her off. You and your father will have my
car," she concluded, "Mr. Brainard and Dick will ride in Dick's car,
and Mr. Hunt will take me."

And as she ordered, so was it.

For fifteen minutes--perhaps half an hour--after it rolled away from
the Grantham Hotel there was absolute stillness in Miss Sherwood's
limousine, which she had assigned to Maggie and her father. Maggie was
near emotional collapse from what she had been through; and now she
was sitting tight in one corner, away from the dark shadow in the
other corner that was her newly discovered father who had cared for
her so much that he had sought to erase from her mind all knowledge of
his existence. She wanted to say something--do something; she was torn
with a poignant hunger. But she was so filled with pulsing desires and
fears that she was impotent to express any of the million things
within her.

And so they rode on, dark shadows, almost half the width of the deeply
cushioned seat between them. Thus they had ridden along Jackson
Avenue, almost into Flushing, when the silence was broken by the first
words of the journey. They were husky words, yearning and afraid of
their own sound, and were spoken by Maggie's father.

"I--I don't know what to call you. Will--will Maggie do?"

"Yes," she whispered.

"I'm--I'm not much," the husky voice ventured on; "but what you said
about going away--for my sake--do you think you need to do it?"

"I've made--such a mess of myself," she choked out.

"Other people were to blame," he said. "And out of it all, I think
you're going to be what--what I dreamed you were. And--and--"

There was another stifling silence. "Yes?" she prompted.

"I wanted to keep out of your life--for your sake," he went on in his
strained, suppressed voice. "But--but if you're not ashamed of me now
that you know all"--in the darkness his groping hand closed upon
hers--"I wish you wouldn't--go away from me, Maggie."

And then the surging, incoherent thing in her that bad been struggling
to say itself this last half-hour, suddenly found its voice in a
single word:

"Father!" she cried, and flung her arms around his neck.

"Maggie!" he sobbed, crushing her to him.

All the way to Cedar Crest they said not another word; just clung to
each other in the darkness, sobbing--the first miraculous embrace of a
father and daughter who had each found that which they had never
expected to have.




CHAPTER XXXVII


It was ten the next morning at Cedar Crest, and Larry Brainard sat in
his study mechanically going over his figures and plans for the
Sherwood housing project.

For Larry the storms of the past few weeks, and the whirlwind of last
night, had cleared away. There was quiet in the house, and through the
open windows he could glimpse the broad lawn almost singing in its
sun-gladdened greenness, and farther on he could glimpse the Sound
gleaming placidly. Once for perhaps ten minutes he had seen the
overalled and straw-hatted figure of Joe Ellison busy as usual among
the flowers. He had strained his eyes for a glimpse of Maggie, but he
had looked in vain.

Despite all that had come to pass at the Grantham the previous
evening, Larry was just now feeling restless and rather forlorn. His
breakfast had been brought to him in his room, and he had not seen a
single member of last night's party at the Grantham since they had all
divided up according to Miss Sherwood's orders and driven away; that
is he had really seen no one except Dick.

Dick had gripped his hand when he had slipped in beside Dick in the
low seat of the roadster. "You're all right, Captain Nemo!--only I'm
going to be so brash as to call you Larry after this," Dick had said.
"If you'll let me, you and I are going to be buddies."

He was all right, Dick was. Dick Sherwood was a thoroughbred.

And there was another matter which had pleased him. The Duchess had
called him up that morning, had congratulated him in terms so brief
that they sounded perfunctory, but which Larry realized had all his
grandmother's heart in them, and had said she wanted him to take over
the care of all her houses--those she had put up as bail for him. When
could he come in to see her about this? . . . He understood this
dusty-seeming, stooped, inarticulate grandmother of his as he had not
before. Considering what her life had been, she also was a brick.

But notwithstanding all this, Larry was lonely--hungrily lonely--and
was very much in doubt. Miss Sherwood had spoken to him fair enough
the night before--yet he really did not know just how he stood with
her. And then--Maggie. That was what meant most to him just now. True,
Maggie had emerged safe through perils without and within; and to get
her through to some such safety as now was hers had been his chief
concern these many months. He wanted to see her, to speak to her. But
he did not know what her attitude toward him would now be. He did not
know how to go about finding her. He was not even certain where she
had spent the night. He wanted to see her, yet was apulse with fear of
seeing her. She would not be hostile, he knew that much; but she might
not love him; and at the best a meeting would be awkward, with so wide
a gap in their lives to be bridged. . . .

He was brooding thus when there was a loud knocking at his door.
Without waiting for his invitation to enter, the door was flung open,
and Hunt strode in leaving the door wide behind him. His face was just
one great, excited grin. He gave Larry a thump upon the back, which
almost knocked Larry over, and then pulled him back to equilibrium by
seizing a hand in both of his, and then almost shook it off.

"Larry, my son," exploded the big painter, "I've just done it! And I
did it just as you ordered me to! Forgot that Miss Sherwood and I had
had a falling out, and as per your orders I walked straight up to her
and asked her. And Larry, you son-of-a-gun, you were right! She said
'yes'!"

"You're lucky, old man!" exclaimed Larry, warmly returning the
painter's grip.

"And, Larry, that's not all. You told me I had the clearness of vision
of a cold boiled lobster--said I was the greatest fool that ever had
brains enough not to paint with the wrong end of an umbrella. Paid me
some little compliment like that."

"Something like that," Larry agreed.

"Well, Larry, old son, you were right again! I've been a worse fool
than all you said. Been blinder than one of those varnished skulls
some tough-stomached people use for paper-weights. After she'd said
'yes' she gave me the inside story of why we had fallen out. And guess
why it was?"

"You don't want me to guess. You want to tell me. So go to it."

"Larry, we men will never know how clever women really are!" Hunt
shook his head with impressive emphasis. "Nor how they understand our
natures--the clever women--nor how well they know how to handle us.
She confessed that our quarrel was, on her part, carefully planned
from the beginning with a definite result in view. She told me she'd
always believed me a great painter, if I'd only break loose from the
pretty things people wanted and paid me so much for. The trouble, as
she saw it, was to get me to cut loose from so much easy money and
devote myself entirely to real stuff. The only way she could see was
for her to tell me I couldn't paint anything worth while, and tell it
so straight-out as to make me believe that she believed it--and thus
make me so mad that I'd chuck everything and go off to prove to her
that I damned well could paint! I certainly got sore--I ducked out of
sight, swearing I'd show her--and, oh, well, you know the rest! Tell
me now, can you think of anything cleverer than the way she handled
me?"

"It's just about what I would expect of Miss Sherwood," Larry
commented.

"Excuse me," said a voice behind them. "I found the door open; may I
come in?"

Both men turned quickly. Entering was Miss Sherwood.

"Isabel!" exclaimed the happy painter. "I was just telling Larry
here--you know!"

Miss Sherwood's tone tried to be severe, and she tried not to smile--
and she succeeded in being just herself.

"I came to talk business with Mr. Brainard. And I'm going to stay to
talk business with Mr. Brainard. But I'll give him five seconds for
congratulations--provided at the end of the five seconds Mr. Hunt gets
out of the room."

Larry congratulated the two; congratulated them as warmly as he felt
his as yet dubious position in this company warranted. At the end of
the five seconds Hunt was closing the door upon his back.

"I've always loved him--and I want to thank you, Mr. Brainard," she
said with her simple directness. And before Larry could make response
of any kind, she shifted the subject.

"I really came in to see you on business, Mr. Brainard. I hope I made
my attitude toward you clear enough last night. If I did not, let me
say now that I think you have made good in every particular--and that
I trust you in every particular. What I wished especially to say now,"
she went on briskly, giving Larry no chance to stammer out his
appreciation, "is that I wish to go ahead without any delay with your
proposition for developing the Sherwood properties in New York City
which we discussed some time ago. A former objection you raised is now
removed: you are cleared, and are free to work in the open. I want you
to take charge of affairs, with Dick working beside you. I think it
will be Dick's big chance. I've talked it over with him this morning,
and he's eager for the arrangement. I hope you are not going to refuse
the offer this time."

"I can't--not such an offer as that," Larry said huskily. "But, Miss
Sherwood, I didn't expect--"

"Then it's settled," she interrupted with her brisk tone. "There'll be
a lot of details, but we'll have plenty of time to talk them over
later." She stood up. "There are some changes here at Cedar Crest
which I want begun at once and which I want you to supervise. If you
don't mind we'll look things over now."

He followed beside her along the curving, graveled walks. She headed
toward the cliff, but he had no idea where she was leading until a
sharp turn brought them almost upon the low cottage which these last
few weeks had been Joe Ellison's home.

"Here is where we start our changes," said the business-like Miss
Sherwood. "The door's open, so we might as well go right in."

They stepped into a tiny entry, and from thence into a little sitting-
room. The room was filled with cut flowers, but Larry did not even see
them. For as they entered, Maggie sprang up, startled, from a chair,
and, whiter than she had been before in all her life, gazed at him as
if she wanted to run away. She stood trembling and slender in a linen
frock of most simple and graceful lines. It was Miss Sherwood's frock,
though Larry did not know this; already it had been decided that all
those showy Grantham gowns were never to be worn again.

Once more Miss Sherwood came to the rescue of a stupendous situation,
just as her tact had rescued a situation too great for words the night
before.

"Of course you two people now perceive that I'm a fraud--that I've got
you together by base trickery. So much being admitted, let's proceed."
She turned on Larry. "Maggie--we've agreed that I am to call her that--
Maggie stayed with me last night. There are two beds in my room. But
we didn't sleep much. Mostly we talked. If there's anything Maggie
didn't tell me about herself, I can't guess what there's left to tell.
According to herself, she's terrible. But that's for us to judge;
personally I don't believe her. She confessed that she really loved
you, but that after the way she'd treated you, of course she wasn't
fit for you. Which, of course, is just a girl's nonsense. I suppose
you, Mr. Brainard, are thinking something of the sort regarding your
own self. It is equally nonsense. You both love each other--you've
both been through a lot--nothing of importance now stands between
you--so don't waste any of your too short lives in coming together."

She took a deep breath and went on. "You might as well know, Mr.
Brainard, that Maggie is going to live with me for the present--that,
of course, she is going to be a very great burden to me--and it will
be a great favor to me if you'll marry her soon and take her off my
hands." And then the voice that had tried to keep itself brisk and
even, quavered with a sudden sob. "For Heaven's sake, dear children--
don't be fools!"

And with that she was gone.

For an instant Larry continued to gaze at Maggie's slender, trembling
figure. But something approaching a miracle--a very human miracle--had
just happened. All those doubts, fears, indecisions, unexpressed
desires, agonies of self-abasement, which might have delayed their
understanding and happiness for weeks and months, had been swept into
nothingness by the incisive kindliness of Miss Sherwood. In one minute
she had said all they might have said in months; there was nothing
more to say. There was nothing left of the past to discuss. Before
them was only the fact of that immediate moment, and the future.

Tremblingly, silently, Larry crossed to that trembling, silent figure
in white. She did not retreat. Tremblingly he took her hands and
looked down into her dark eyes. They were now flowing tears, but they
met his squarely, holding back nothing. The look in her eyes answered
all he desired to know just then, for he gathered her tight into his
arms. Wordlessly, but with a sharp, convulsive sob, she threw her arms
about his neck--and thus embracing, shaken with sharp sobs, they stood
while the minutes passed, not a single word having been spoken. And so
it was that these two, both children of the storm, at last came
together. . . .

Presently Joe Ellison chanced to step unsuspectingly into the room.
Seeing what he did, he silently tiptoed out. There was a garden chair
just outside his door. Into this he sank and let his thin face fall
into his hands. His figure shook and hot tears burned through his
fingers. For his heart told him that his great dream was at last come
true.










This etext was produced by Donald Lainson, charlie@idirect.com.





CY WHITTAKER'S PLACE

by JOSEPH C. LINCOLN




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I.--THE PERFECT BOARDING HOUSE

II.--THE WANDERER'S RETURN

III.--"FIXIN' OVER"

IV.--BAILEY BANGS'S EXPERIMENT

V.--A FRONT DOOR CALLER

VI.--ICICLES AND DUST

VII.--CAPTAIN CY PROVES DELINQUENT

VIII.--THE "COW LADY"

IX.--POLITICS AND BIRTHDAYS

X.--A LETTER AND A VISITOR

XI.--A BARGAIN OFF

XII.--"TOWN MEETIN'"

XIII.--THE REPULSE

XIV.--A CLEW

XV.--DEBBY BEASLEY TO THE RESCUE

XVI.--A REMARKABLE DRIVE AND WHAT FOLLOWED

XVII.--THE CAPTAIN REMEMBERS HIS AGE

XVIII.--CONGRESSMAN EVERDEAN

XIX.--THE TOPPLING OF A MONUMENT

XX.--DIVIDED HONORS

XXI.--CAPTAIN CY'S "PICTURE"




CY WHITTAKER'S PLACE



CHAPTER I

THE PERFECT BOARDING HOUSE


It is queer, but Captain Cy himself doesn't remember whether the
day was Tuesday or Wednesday.  Asaph Tidditt's records ought to
settle it, for there was a meeting of the board of selectmen that
day, and Asaph has been town clerk in Bayport since the summer
before the Baptist meeting house burned.  But on the record the
date, in Asaph's handwriting, stands "Tuesday, May 10, 189-" and,
as it happens, May 10 of that year fell on Wednesday, not Tuesday
at all.

Keturah Bangs, who keeps "the perfect boarding house," says it was
Tuesday, because she remembers they had fried cod cheeks and
cabbage that day--as they have every Tuesday--and neither Mr.
Tidditt nor Bailey Bangs, Keturah's husband, was on hand when the
dinner bell rang.  Keturah says she is certain it was Tuesday,
because she remembers smelling the boiled cabbage as she stood at
the side door, looking up the road to see if either Asaph or Bailey
was coming.  As for Bailey, he says he remembers being late to
dinner and his wife's "startin' to heave a broadsides into him"
because of it, but he doesn't remember what day it was.  This isn't
surprising; Keturah's verbal cannonades are likely to make one
forgetful of trifles.

At any rate, whether Tuesday or Wednesday, it is certain that it
was quarter past twelve, according to the clock presented to the
Methodist Society by the Honorable Heman Atkins, when Asaph Tidditt
came down the steps of the townhall, after the selectmen's meeting,
and saw Bailey Bangs waiting for him on the opposite side of the
road.

"Hello, Ase!" hailed Mr. Bangs.  "You'll be late to dinner, if you
don't hurry.  I was headin' for home, all sail sot, when I see you.
What kept you?"

"Town business, of course," replied Mr. Tidditt, with the
importance pertaining to his official position.  "What kept YOU,
for the land sakes?  Won't Ketury be in your wool?"

Bailey hasn't any "wool" worth mentioning now, and he had very
little more then, but he mopped his forehead, or the extension
above it, taking off his cap to do so.

"I cal'late she will," he said, uneasily.  "Tell you the truth,
Ase, I was up to the store, and Cap'n Josiah Dimick and some more
of 'em drifted in and we got talkin' about the chances of the
harbor appropriation, and one thing or 'nother, and 'twas later'n
I thought 'twas 'fore I knew it."

The appropriation from the government, which was to deepen and
widen our harbor here at Bayport, was a very vital topic among us
just then.  Heman Atkins, the congressman from our district, had
promised to do his best for the appropriation, and had for a time
been very sanguine of securing it.  Recently, however, he had not
been quite as hopeful.

"What's Cap'n Josiah think about the chances?" asked Asaph eagerly.

"Well, sometimes he thinks 'Yes' and then again he thinks 'No,'"
replied Bailey.  "He says, of course, if Heman is able to get it he
will, but if he ain't able to, he--he--"

"He won't, I s'pose.  Well, _I_ can think that myself, and I don't
set up to be no inspired know-it-all, like Joe Dimick.  He ain't
heard from Heman lately, has he?"

"No, he ain't.  Neither's anybody else, so fur as I can find out."

"Oh, yes, they have. _I_ have, for one."

Mr. Bangs stopped short in his double-quick march for home and
dinner, and looked his companion in the face.

"Ase Tidditt!" he cried.  "Do you mean to tell me you've had a
letter from Heman Atkins, from Washin'ton?"

Asaph nodded portentously.

"Yes, sir," he declared.  "A letter from the Honorable Heman G.
Atkins, of Washin'ton, D. C., come to me last night.  I read it
afore I turned in."

"You did!  And never said nothin' about it?"

"Why should I say anything about it?  'Twas addressed to me as town
clerk, and was concernin' a matter to be took up with the board of
s'lectmen.  I ain't in the habit of hollerin' town affairs through
a speakin' trumpet.  Folks that vote for me town-meetin' day know
that, I guess.  Angie Phinney says to me only yesterday, 'Mr.
Tidditt,' says she, 'there's one thing I'll say for you--you don't
talk.'"

Miss Phinney boarded with the Bangses, and Bailey was acquainted
with her personal peculiarities; for that matter so were most of
Bayport's permanent residents.

"Humph!" he snorted indignantly.  "She thought 'twas a good thing
not to talk, hey?  SHE did?  Well, by mighty! you never get no
CHANCE to talk when she's around.  Angie Phinney!  Why, when that
poll parrot of hers died, Alph'us Smalley declared up and down that
what killed it was jealousy and disapp'inted ambition; he said it
broke its heart tryin' to keep up with Angie.  Her ma was the same
breed of cats.  I remember--"

The talking proclivities of females is the one topic upon which
Keturah's husband is touchiest.  Asaph knew this, but he delighted
to stir up his chum occasionally.  He chuckled as he interrupted
the flow of reminiscence.

"There, there, Bailey!" he exclaimed.  "I know as much about
Angie's tribe as you do, I cal'late.  Ain't we a little mite off
the course?  Seems to me we was talkin' about Heman's letter."

"Is that so?  I judged from what you said we wa'n't goin' to talk
about it.  Aw, don't be so mean, Ase!  Showin' off your importance
like a young one!  What did Heman say about the appropriation?  Is
he goin' to get it?"

Mr. Tidditt paused before replying.  Then, bending over, he
whispered in his chum's ear:

"He never said one word about the appropriation, Bailey; not one
word.  He wanted to know if we'd got this year's taxes on the
Whittaker place.  And, if we hadn't, what was we goin' to do about
it?  Bailey, between you and me and the mizzenmast, Heman Atkins
wants to get ahold of that place the worst way."

"He does?  He DOES?  For the land sakes, ain't he got property
enough already?  Ain't a--a palace like that enough for one man,
without wantin' to buy a rattletrap like THAT?"

The first "that" was emphasized by a brandished but reverent left
hand; the second by a derisively pointing right.  The two friends
had reached the crest of the long slope leading up from the
townhall.  On one side of the road stretched the imposing frontage
of the "Atkins estate," with its iron fence and stone posts; on the
other slouched the weed-grown, tumble-down desolation of the "Cy
Whittaker place."  The contrast was that of opulent prosperity and
poverty-stricken neglect.

If our village boasted one of those horseless juggernauts, such as
are used to carry sightseers in Boston from the old North Church to
the Public Library and other points of interest--that is, if there
was a "seeing Bayport" car, it is from this hill that its occupants
would be given their finest view of the village and its surroundings.
As Captain Josiah Dimick always says:  "Bayport is all north and
south, like a codfish line.  It puts me in mind of Seth Higgins's
oldest boy.  He was so tall and thin that when they bought a suit of
clothes for him, they used to take reefs in the sides of the jacket
and use the cloth to piece onto the bottoms of the trousers' legs."
What Captain Joe means is that the houses in the village are all
built beside three roads running longitudinally.  There is the
"main road" and the "upper road"--or "Woodchuck Lane," just as you
prefer--and the "lower road," otherwise known as "Bassett's Holler."

The "upper road" is sometimes called the "depot road," because the
railroad station is conveniently located thereon--convenient for
the railroad, that is--the station being a full mile from Simmons's
"general store," which is considered the center of the town.  The
upper road enters the main road at the corner by the store, and
there also are the Methodist meetinghouse and the schoolhouse.  The
townhall is in the hollow farther on.  Then comes the big hill--
"Whittaker's Hill"--and from the top of this hill you can, on a
clear day, see for miles across the salt marshes and over the bay
to the eastward, and west as far as the church steeple in Orham.
If there happens to be a fog, with a strong easterly wind, you
cannot see the marshes or the bay, but you can smell them, wet and
salty and sweet.  It is a smell that the born Bayporter never
forgets, but carries with him in memory wherever he goes; and that,
in the palmy days of the merchant marine, was likely, to be far,
for every male baby in the village was born with web feet, so
people said, and was predestined to be a sailor.

When Heman Atkins came back from the South Seas early in the '60's,
"rich as dock mud," though still a young man, he promptly tore down
his father's old house, which stood on the crest of Whittaker's
Hill, and built in its place a big imposing residence.  It was by
far the finest house in Bayport, and Heman made it finer as the
years passed.  There were imitation brownstone pillars supporting
its front porch, iron dogs and scroll work iron benches bordering
its front walk, and a pair of stone urns, in summer filled with
flowers, beside its big iron front gate.

Heman was our leading citizen, our representative in Washington,
and the town's philanthropist.  He gave the Atkins memorial window
and the Atkins tower clock to the Methodist Church.  The Atkins
town pump, also his gift, stood before the townhall.  The Atkins
portrait in the Bayport Ladies' Library was much admired; and the
size of the Atkins fortune was the principal subject of conversation
at sewing circle, at the table of "the perfect boarding house,"
around the stove in Simmons's store, or wherever Bayporters were
used to gather.  We never exactly worshipped Heman Atkins, perhaps,
but we figuratively doffed our hats when his name was mentioned.

The "Cy Whittaker place" faced the Atkins estate from the opposite
side of the main road, but it was the general opinion that it ought
to be ashamed to face it.  Almost everybody called it "the Cy
Whittaker place," although some of the younger set spoke of it as
the "Sea Sight House."  It was a big, old-fashioned dwelling,
gambrel-roofed and brown and dilapidated.  Originally it had
enjoyed the dignified seclusion afforded by a white picket fence
with square gateposts, and the path to its seldom-used front door
had been guarded by rigid lines of box hedge.  This, however, was
years ago, before the second Captain Cy Whittaker died, and before
the Howes family turned it into the "Sea Sight House," a hotel for
summer boarders.

The Howeses "improved" the house and grounds.  They tore down the
picket fence, uprooted the box hedges, hung a sign over the sacred
front door, and built a wide veranda under the parlor windows.

They took boarders for five consecutive summers; then they gave up
the unprofitable undertaking, returned to Concord, New Hampshire,
their native city, and left the Cy Whittaker place to bear the
ravages of Bayport winters and Bayport small boys as best it might.

For years it stood empty.  The weeds grew high about its foundations;
the sparrows built nests behind such of its shutters as had not been
ripped from their hinges by February no'theasters; its roof grew
bald in spots as the shingles loosened and were blown away; the
swallows flew in and out of its stone-broken windowpanes.  Year by
year it became more of a disgrace in the eyes of Bayport's neat and
thrifty inhabitants--for neat and thrifty we are, if we do say it.
The selectmen would have liked to tear it down, but they could not,
because it was private property, having been purchased from the
Howes heirs by the third Cy Whittaker, Captain Cy's only son, who
ran away to sea when he was sixteen years old, and was disinherited
and cast off by the proud old skipper in consequence.  Each March,
Asaph Tidditt, in his official capacity as town clerk, had been
accustomed to receive an envelope with a South American postmark,
and in that envelope was a draft on a Boston banking house for the
sum due as taxes on the "Cy Whittaker place."  The drafts were
signed "Cyrus M. Whittaker."

But this particular year--the year in which this chronicle begins--
no draft had been received.  Asaph waited a few weeks and then
wrote to the address indicated by the postmark.  His letter was
unanswered.  The taxes were due in March and it was now May.  Mr.
Tidditt wrote again; then he laid the case before the board of
selectmen, and Captain Eben Salters, chairman of that august body,
also wrote.  But even Captain Eben's authoritative demand was
ignored.  Next to the harbor appropriation, the question of what
should be done about the "Cy Whittaker place" filled Bayport's
thoughts that spring.  No one, however, had supposed that the
Honorable Heman might wish to buy it.  Bailey Bangs's surprise was
excusable.

"What in the world," repeated Bailey, "does Heman want of a shebang
like that?  Ain't he got enough already?"

His friend shook his head.

"'Pears not," he said.  "I judge it's this way, Bailey: Heman, he's
a proud man--"

"Well, ain't he got a right to be proud?" broke in Mr. Bangs,
hastening to resent any criticism of the popular idol.  "Cal'late
you and me'd be proud if we was able to carry as much sail as he
does, wouldn't we?"

"Yes, I guess like we would.  But you needn't get red in the face
and strain your biler just because I said that.  I ain't finding
fault with Heman; I'm only tellin' you.  He's proud, as I said, and
his wife--"

"She's dead this four year.  What are you resurrectin' her for?"

"Land! you're peppery as a West Injy omelet this mornin'.  Let me
alone till I've finished.  His wife, when she was alive, she was
proud, too.  And his daughter, Alicia, she's eight year old now,
and by and by she'll be grown up into a high-toned young woman.
Well, Heman is fur-sighted, and I s'pose likely he's thinkin' of
the days when there'll be young rich fellers--senators and--and--
well, counts and lords, maybe--cruisin' down here courtin' her.  By
that time the Whittaker place'll be a worse disgrace than 'tis now.
I presume he don't want those swells to sit on his front piazza and
see the crows buildin' nests in the ruins acrost the road.  So--"

"Crows!  Did you ever see a crow build a nest in a house?  I never
did!"

"Oh, belay!  Crows or canary birds, what difference does it make?
SOMETHIN' 'll nest there, if it's only A'nt Sophrony Hallett's
hens.  So Heman he writes to the board, askin' if the taxes is
paid, if we've heard any reason why they ain't paid, and what we're
goin' to do about it.  If there's a sale for taxes he wants to be
fust bidder.  Then, when the place is his, he can tear down or
rebuild, just as he sees fit.  See?"

"Yes, I see.  Well, I feel about that the way Joe Dimick felt when
he heard the doctor had told Elviry Pepper she must stop singin' in
the choir or lose her voice altogether.  'Whichever happens 'll be
an improvement,' says Cap'n Joe; and whatever Heman does 'll help
the Whittaker place.  What did you decide at the meetin'?"

"Nothin'.  We can't decide yet.  We ain't sure about the law and we
want to wait a spell, anyhow.  But I know how 'twill end:  Atkins
'll get the place.  He always gets what he wants, Heman does."

Bailey turned and looked back at the old house, forlorn amidst its
huddle of blackberry briers and weeds, and with the ubiquitous
"silver-leaf" saplings springing up in clusters everywhere about it
and closing in on its defenseless walls like squads of victorious
soldiery making the final charge upon a conquered fort.

"Well," sighed Mr. Bangs, "so that 'll be the end of the old
Whittaker place, hey?  Sho! things change in a feller's lifetime,
don't they?  You and me can remember, Ase, when Cap'n Cy Whittaker
was one of the biggest men we had in this town.  So was his dad
afore him, the Cap'n Cy that built the house.  I wonder the looks
of things here now don't bring them two up out of their graves.  Do
you remember young Cy--'Whit' we used to call him--or 'Reddy Whit,'
'count of his red hair?  I don't know's you do, though; guess you'd
gone to sea when he run away from home."

Mr. Tidditt shook his head.

"No, no!" he said.  "I was to home that year.  Remember 'Whit'?
Well, I should say I did.  He was a holy terror--yes, sir!  Wan't
no monkey shines or didos cut up in this town that young Cy wan't
into.  Fur's that goes, you and me was in 'em, too, Bailey.  We was
all holy terrors then.  Young ones nowadays ain't got the spunk we
used to have."

His friend chuckled.

"That's so," he declared.  "That's so.  Whit was a good-hearted
boy, too, but full of the Old Scratch and as sot in his ways as his
dad, and if Cap'n Cy wan't sot, then there ain't no sotness.
'You'll go to college and be a parson,' says the Cap'n.  'I'll go
to sea and be a sailor, same as you done,' says Whit.  And he did,
too; run away one night, took the packet to Boston, and shipped
aboard an Australian clipper.  Cap'n Cy didn't go after him to
fetch him home.  No, sir--ee! not a fetch.  Sent him a letter plumb
to Melbourne and, says he:  'You've made your bed; now lay in it.
Don't you never dast to come back to me or your ma,' he says.  And
Whit didn't, he wan't that kind."

"Pretty nigh killed the old lady--Whit's ma--that did," mused
Asaph.  "She died a little spell afterwards.  And the old man pined
away, too, but he never give in or asked the boy to come back.
Stubborn as all get-out to the end, he was, and willed the place,
all he had left, to them Howes folks.  And a nice mess THEY made of
it.  Young Cy, he--"

"Young Cy!" interrupted Bailey.  "We're always callin' him 'young
Cy,' and yet, when you come to think of it, he must be pretty nigh
fifty-five now; 'most as old as you and I be.  Wonder if he'll ever
come back here."

"You bet he won't!" was the oracular reply.  "You bet he won't!
From what I hear he got to be a sea cap'n himself and settled down
there in Buenos Ayres.  He's made all kinds of money, they say, out
of hides and such.  What he ever bought his dad's old place for,
_I_ can't see.  He'll never come back to these common, one-horse
latitudes, now you mark my word on that!"

It was a prophecy Mr. Tidditt was accustomed to make each year to
the crowd at the post office, when the receipt for the draft for
taxes caused him to wax reminiscent.  The younger generation here
in Bayport regard their t