cerning matrimony that such
a proposal seemed to him lunacy, pure and simple.  He had liked and
admired his friend "Whit" in the old days, when the latter led them
into all sorts of boyish scrapes; now he regarded him with a liking
that was close to worship.  The captain was so jolly and outspoken;
so brave and independent--witness his crossing of the great Atkins
in the matter of the downstairs teacher.  That was a reckless piece
of folly which would, doubtless, be rewarded after its kind, but
Bailey, though he professed to condemn it, secretly wished he had
the pluck to dare such things.  As it was, he didn't dare contradict
Keturah.

With the exception of one voyage as cabin boy to New Orleans, a
voyage which convinced him that he was not meant for a seaman, Mr.
Bangs had never been farther from his native village than Boston.
Captain Cy had been almost everywhere and seen almost everything.
He could spin yarns that beat the serial stories in the patent
inside of the Bayport Breeze all hollow.  Bailey had figured that,
when the "fixin' over" was ended, the Cy Whittaker place would be
for him a delightful haven of refuge, where he could put his boots
on the furniture, smoke until dizzy without being pounced upon, be
entertained and thrilled with tales of adventure afloat and ashore,
and even express his own opinion, when he had any, with the voice
and lung power of a free-born American citizen.

And now Asaph Tidditt, who should know better, even though he was a
bachelor, wanted to bring a wife into this paradise; not a paid
domestic who could be silenced, or discharged, if she became a
nuisance, but a WIFE!  Bailey guessed not; not if he could prevent
it.

So he lay awake nights thinking of possible housekeepers for
Captain Cy, and carefully rejecting all those possessing dangerous
attractions of any kind.  Each morning, after breakfast, he ran
over the list with the captain, taking care that Asaph was not
present.  Captain Cy, who was very busy with the finishing touches
at the new old house, wearied on the third morning.

"There, there, Bailey!" he said.  "Don't bother me now.  I've got
other things on my mind.  How do I know who all these women folks
are you're stringing off to me?  Let me alone, do."

"But you must have a housekeeper, Cy.  You'll move in Monday and
you won't have nobody to--"

"Oh, dry up!  I want to think who I must see this morning.  There's
Lem and old lady Penniman, and--"

"But the housekeeper, Cy!  Don't you see--"

"Hire one yourself, then.  You know 'em; I don't."

"Hey?  Hire one myself?  Do you mean you'll leave it in my hands?"

"Yes, yes!  I guess so.  Run along, that's a good feller."

He departed hurriedly.  Mr. Bangs scratched his head.  A weighty
responsibility had been laid upon him.

Monday morning after breakfast Captain Cy's trunk was put aboard
the depot wagon, and Dan'l Webster drew it to its owner's home.
The farewells at the perfect boarding house were affecting.  Mrs.
Tripp said that she had spoken to the Reverend Mr. Daniels, and he
would be sure to call the very first thing.  Keturah affirmed that
the captain's stay had been a real pleasure.

"You never find fault, Cap'n Whittaker," she said.  "You're such a
manly man, if you'll excuse my sayin' so.  I only wish there was
more like you," with a significant glance at her husband.  As for
Miss Phinney, she might have been saying good-by yet if the captain
had not excused himself.

Asaph accompanied his friend to the house on the hill.  The trunk
was unloaded from the wagon and carried into the bedroom on the
first floor, the room which had been Captain Cy's so long ago.
Gabe shrieked at Dan'l Webster, and the depot wagon crawled away
toward the upper road.

"Got to meet the up train," grumbled the driver.  "Not that anybody
ever comes on it, but I cal'late I'm s'posed to be there.  Be more
talk than a little if I wan't.  Git dap, Dan'l! you're slower'n the
moral law."

"So you're goin' to do your own cookin' for a spell, Cy?" observed
Asaph, a half hour later, "Well, I guess that's a good idea, till
you can find the right housekeeper.  I ain't been able to think of
one that would suit you yet."

"Nor I, either.  Neither's Bailey, I judge, though for a while he
was as full of suggestions as a pine grove is of woodticks.  He
started to say somethin' about it to me last night, but Ketury hove
in sight and yanked him off to prayer meetin'."

"Yes, I know.  She cal'lates to get him into heaven somehow."

"I guess 'twouldn't BE heaven for her unless he was round to pick
at.  There he comes now.  How'd he get out of wipin' dishes?"

Mr. Bangs strolled into the yard.

"Hello!" he hailed.  "I was on my way to Simmons's on an errand and
I thought I'd stop in a minute.  Got somethin' to tell you, Whit."

"All right.  Overboard with it!  It won't keep long this hot
weather."

Bailey smiled knowingly.  "Didn't I hear the up train whistle as I
was comin' along?" he asked.  "Seems to me I did.  Yes; well, if I
ain't mistaken somebody's comin' on that train.  Somebody for you,
Cy Whittaker."

"Somebody for ME?"

"Um--hum!  I can gen'rally be depended on, I cal'late, and when you
says to me:  'Bailey, you get me a housekeeper,' I didn't lose much
time.  I got her."

Mr. Tidditt gasped.

"GOT her?" he repeated.  "Got who?  Got what?  Bailey Bangs, what
in the world have--"

"Belay, Ase!" ordered Captain Cy.  "Bailey, what are you givin'
us?"

"Givin' you a housekeeper, and a good one, too, I shouldn't wonder.
She may not be one of them ten-thousand-dollar prize museum
beauties," with a scornful wink at Asaph, "but if what I hear's
true she can keep house.  Anyhow she's kept one for forty odd year.
Her name's Deborah Beasley, she's a widow over to East Trumet, and
if I don't miss my guess, she's in the depot wagon now headed in
this direction."

Captain Cy whistled.  Mr. Tidditt was too much surprised to do even
that.

"I was speakin' to the feller that drives the candy cart," continued
Bailey, "and I asked him if he'd run acrost anybody, durin' his
trips 'round the country, who'd be likely to hire out for a
housekeeper.  He thought a spell and then named over some.  Among 'em
was this Beasley one.  I asked some more questions and, the answers
bein' satisfactory to ME, though they might not be to some folks--"
another derisive wink at Asaph--"I set down and wrote her, tellin'
what you'd pay, Cy, what she'd have to do, and when she'd have to
come.  Saturday night I got a letter, sayin' terms was all right,
and she'd be on hand by this mornin's train.  Course she's only on
trial for a month, but you had to have SOMEBODY, and the candy-cart
feller said--"

The town clerk slapped his knee.

"Debby Beasley!" he cried.  "I know who she is!  I've got a cousin
in Trumet.  Debby Beasley!  Aunt Debby, they call her.  Why! she's
old enough to be Methusalem's grandmarm, and--"

"If I recollect right," interrupted Bailey, with dignity, "Cy never
said he wanted a YOUNG woman--a frivolous, giddy critter, always
riggin' up and chasin' the fellers.  He wanted a sot, sober
housekeeper."

"Godfrey!  Aunt Debby ain't frivolous!  She couldn't chase a lame
clam--and catch it.  And DEEF!  Godfrey--scissors! she's deefer 'n
one of them cast-iron Newfoundlands in Heman's yard!  Do you mean
to say, Bailey Bangs, that you went ahead, on your own hook, and
hired that old relic to--"

"I did.  And I had my authority, didn't I, Whit?  You told me you'd
leave it in my hands, now didn't you?"

The captain smiled somewhat ruefully, and scratched his head.
"Why, to be honest, Bailey, I believe I did," he admitted.  "Still,
I hardly expected--Humph! is she deef, as Ase says?"

"I understand she's a little mite hard of hearin'," replied Mr.
Bangs, with dignity; "but that ain't any drawback, the way I look
at it.  Fact is, I'd call it an advantage, but you folks seem to be
hard to please.  I ruther imagined you'd thank me for gettin' her,
but I s'pose that was too much to expect.  All right, pitch her
out!  Don't mind MY feelin's!  Poor homeless critter comin' to--"

"Homeless!" repeated Asaph.  "What's that got to do with it?  Cy
ain't runnin' the Old Woman's Home."

"Well, well!" observed the captain resignedly.  "There's no use in
rowin' about what can't be helped.  Bailey says he shipped her for
a month's trial, and here comes the depot wagon now.  That's her on
the aft thwart, I judge.  She AIN'T what you'd call a spring
pullet, is she!"

She certainly was not.  The occupant of the depot wagon's rear seat
was a thin, not to say scraggy, female, wearing a black, beflowered
bonnet and a black gown.  A black knit shawl was draped about her
shoulders and she wore spectacles.

"Whoa!" commanded Mr. Lumley, piloting the depot wagon to the side
door of the Whittaker house.  Dan'l Webster came to anchor
immediately.  Gabe turned and addressed his passenger.

"Here we be!" he shouted.

"Hey?" observed the lady in black.

"Here--we--be!" repeated Gabe, raising his voice.

"See?  See what?"

"Oh, heavens to Betsey!  I'm gettin' the croup from howlin'.  I--
say--HERE--WE--BE!  GET OUT!"

He accompanied the final bellow with an expressive pantomime
indicating that the passenger was expected to alight.  She seemed
to understand, for she opened the door of the carriage and slowly
descended.  Mr. Bangs advanced to meet her.

"How d'ye do, Mrs. Beasley!" he said.  "Glad to see you all safe
and sound."

Mrs. Beasley shook his hand; hers were covered, as far as the
knuckles, by black mitts.

"How d'ye do, Cap'n Whittaker?" she said, in a shrill voice.  "You
pretty smart?"

Bailey hastened to explain.

"I ain't Cap'n Whittaker," he roared.  "I'm Bailey Bangs, the one
that wrote to you."

"Hey?"

Mr. Lumley and Asaph chuckled.  Bailey colored and tried again.

"I ain't the cap'n," he whooped.  "Here he is--here!"

He led her over to her prospective employer and tapped the latter
on the chest.

"How d'ye do, sir?" said the housekeeper.  "I don't know's I just
caught your name."

In five minutes or so the situation was made reasonably clear.
Mrs. Beasley then demanded her trunk and carpet bag.  The grinning
Lumley bore them into the house.  Then he drove away, still
grinning.  Bailey looked fearfully at Captain Cy.

"She IS kind of hard of hearin', ain't she?" he said reluctantly.
"You remember I said she was."

The captain nodded.

"Yes," he answered, "you're a truth-tellin' chap, Bailey, I'll say
that for you.  You don't exaggerate your statements."

"Hard of hearin'!" snapped Mr. Tidditt.  "If the last trump ain't a
steam whistle she'll miss Judgment Day.  I'll stop into Simmons's
on my way along and buy you a bottle of throat balsam, Cy; you're
goin' to need it."

The captain needed more than throat balsam during the fortnight
which followed.  The widow Beasley's deafness was not her only
failing.  In fact she was altogether a failure, so far as her
housekeeping was concerned.  She could cook, after a fashion, but
the fashion was so limited that even the bill of fare at the
perfect boarding house looked tempting in retrospect.

"Baked beans again, Cy!" exclaimed Asaph, dropping in one evening
after supper.  "'Tain't Saturday night so soon, is it?"

"No," was the dismal rejoinder.  "It's Tuesday, if my almanac ain't
out of joint.  But we had beans Saturday and they ain't all gone
yet, so I presume we'll have 'em till the last one's swallowed.
Aunt Debby's got what the piece in the Reader used to call a
'frugal mind.'  She don't intend to waste anything.  Last Thursday
I spunked up courage enough to yell for salt fish and potatoes--
fixed up with pork scraps, you know, same's we used to have when I
was a boy.  We had 'em all right, and if beans of a Saturday hadn't
been part of her religion we'd be warmin' 'em up yet.  I took in a
cat for company 'tother day, but the critter's run away.  To see it
look at the beans in its saucer and then at me was pitiful; I felt
like handin' myself over to the Cruelty to Animals' folks."

"Is she neat?" inquired Mr. Tidditt.

"I don't know.  I guess so--on the installment plan.  It takes her
a week to scrub up the kitchen, and then one end of it is so dirty
she has to begin again.  Consequently the dust is so thick in the
rest of the house that I can see my tracks.  If 'twan't so late in
the season I'd plant garden stuff in the parlor--nice soil and lots
of shade, with the curtains down."

From the rooms in the rear came the words of a gospel hymn sung in
a tremulous soprano and at concert pitch.

"Music with my meals, just like a high-toned restaurant," commented
Captain Cy.

"But what makes her sing so everlastin' LOUD?"

"Can't hear herself if she don't.  I could stand her deefness,
because that's an affliction and we may all come to it; but--"

The housekeeper, still singing, entered the room and planted
herself in a chair.

"Good evenin', Mr. Tidditt," she said, smiling genially.  "Nice
weather we've been havin'."

Asaph nodded.

"Sociable critter, ain't she!" observed the captain.  "Always
willin' to help entertain.  Comes and sets up with me till bedtime.
Tells about her family troubles.  Preaches about her niece out
West, and how set the niece and the rest of the Western relations
are to have her make 'em a visit.  I told her she better go--I
thought 'twould do her good.  I know 'twould help ME consider'ble
to see her start.

"She's got so now she finds fault with my neckties," he added,
"says I must be careful and not get my feet wet.  Picks out what I
ought to wear so's I won't get cold.  She'll adopt me pretty soon.
Oh, it's all right!  She can't hear what you say.  Are your dishes
done?" he shrieked, turning to the old lady.

"One?  One what?" inquired Mrs. Beasley.

"They won't BE done till you go, Ase," continued the master of the
house.  "She'll stay with us till the last gun fires.  T'other day
Angie Phinney called and I turned Debby loose on her.  I didn't
believe anything could wear out Angie's talkin' machinery, but she
did it.  Angeline stayed twenty minutes and then quit, hoarse as a
crow."

Here the widow joined in the conversation, evidently under the
impression that nothing had been said since she last spoke.
Continuing her favorable comments on the weather she observed that
she was glad there was so little fog, because fog was hard for
folks with "neuralgy pains."  Her brother's wife's cousin had
"neuralgy" for years, and she described his sufferings with
enthusiasm and infinite detail.  Mr. Tidditt answered her questions
verbally at first; later by nods and shakes of the head.  Captain
Cy fidgeted in his chair.

"Come on outdoor, Ase," he said at last.  "No use to wait till she
runs down, 'cause she's a self-winder, guaranteed to keep goin' for
a year.  Good-night!" he shouted, addressing Mrs. Beasley, and
heading for the door.

"Where you goin'?" asked the old lady.

"No.  Yes.  Who said so?  Hooray!  Three cheers for Gen'ral Scott!
Come on, Ase!"  And the captain, seizing his friend by the arm,
dragged him into the open air, and slammed the door.

"Are you crazy?" demanded the astonished town clerk.  "What makes
you talk like that?"

"Might as well.  She wouldn't understand it any better if 'twas
Scripture, and it saves brain work.  The only satisfaction I get is
bein' able to give my opinion of her and the grub without hurtin'
her feelin's.  If I called her a wooden-headed jumpin' jack she'd
only smile and say No, she didn't think 'twas goin' to rain, or
somethin' just as brilliant."

"Well, why don't you give her her walkin' papers?"

"I shall, when her month's up."

"I wouldn't wait no month.  I'd heave her overboard to-night.  You
hear ME!"

Captain Cy shook his head.

"I can't, very well," he replied.  "I hate to make her feel TOO
bad.  When the month's over I'll have some excuse ready, maybe.
The joke of it is that she don't really need to work out.  She's
got some money of her own, owns cranberry swamps and I don't know
what all.  Says she took up Bailey's offer 'cause she cal'lated I'd
be company for her.  I had to laugh, even in the face of those
beans, when she said that."

"Humph! if I don't tell Bailey what I think of him, then--"

"No, no!  Don't you say a word to Bailey.  It's principally on his
account that I'm tryin' to stick it out for the month.  Bailey did
his best; he thought he was helpin'.  And he feels dreadfully
because she's so deef.  Only yesterday he asked me if I believed
there was anything made that would fix her up and make it more
comfortable for me.  I could have prescribed a shotgun, but I
didn't.  You see, he thinks her deefness is the only trouble; I
haven't told him the rest, and don't you do it, either.  Bailey's a
good-hearted chap."

"Humph! his heart may be good, but his head's goin' to seed.  I'll
keep quiet if 'twill please you, though."

"Yes.  And, see here, Ase!  I don't care to be the laughin' stock
of Bayport.  If any of the folks ask you how I like my new
housekeeper, you tell 'em there's nothin' like her anywhere.
That's no lie."

So Mrs. Beasley stayed on at the Whittaker place and, thanks to Mr.
Tidditt, the general opinion of inquisitive Bayport was that the
new housekeeper was a grand success.  Only Captain Cy and Asaph
knew the whole truth, and Mr. Bangs a part.  That part, Deborah's
deafness, troubled him not a little and he thought much concerning
it.  As a result of this thinking he wrote a letter to a relative
in Boston.  The answer to this letter pleased him and he wrote
again.

One afternoon, during the third week of Mrs. Beasley's stay, Asaph
called and found Captain Cy in the sitting room, reading the
Breeze.  The captain urged his friend to remain and have supper.
"We've run out of beans, Ase," he explained, "and are just startin'
in on a course of boiled cod.  Do stay and eat a lot; then there
won't be so much to warm over."

Mr. Tidditt accepted the invitation, also a section of the Breeze.
While they were reading they heard the back door slam.

"It's the graven image," explained the captain.  "She's been on a
cruise down town somewheres.  Be a lot of sore throats in that
direction to-morrow mornin'."

The town clerk looked up.

"There now!" he exclaimed.  "I believe 'twas her I saw walkin' with
Bailey a spell ago.  I thought so, but I didn't have my specs and I
wan't sure."

"With Bailey, hey?  Humph! this is serious.  Hope Ketury didn't see
'em.  We mustn't have any scandal."

The housekeeper entered the dining room.  She was singing "Beulah
Land," but her tone was more subdued than usual.  They heard her
setting the table.

"How's she gettin' along?" asked Asaph.

"Progressin' backwards, same as ever.  She's no better, thank you,
and the doctor's given up hopes."

"When you goin' to tell her she can clear out?"

"What?"  Captain Cy had returned to his paper and did not hear the
question.

"I say when is she goin' to be bounced?  Deefness ain't catchin',
is it?"

"I wouldn't wonder if it might be.  If 'tis, mine ought to be
developin' fast.  What makes her so still all at once?"

"Gone to the kitchen, I guess.  Wonder she hasn't sailed in and set
down with us.  Old chromo!  You must be glad her month's most up?"

Asaph proceeded to give his opinion of the housekeeper, raising his
voice almost to a howl, as his indignation grew.  If Mrs. Beasley's
ears had been ordinary ones she might have heard the unflattering
description in the kitchen; as it was Mr. Tidditt felt no fear.

"Comin' here so's you could be company for her!  The idea!  Good to
herself, ain't she!  Godfrey scissors!  And Bailey was fool enough
to--"

"There, there!  Don't let it worry you, Ase.  I've about decided
what to say when I let her go.  I'll tell her she is gettin' too
old to be slavin' herself to death.  You see, I don't want to make
the old critter cry, nor I don't want her to get mad.  Judgin' by
the way she used to coax the cat outdoors with the broom handle
she's got somethin' of a temper when she gets started.  I'll give
her an extry month's wages, and--"

"You will, hey?  You WILL?"

The interruption came from behind the partially closed dining-room
door.  Mr. Tidditt sank back in his chair.  Captain Cy sprang from
his and threw the door wide open.  Behind it crouched Mrs. Deborah
Beasley.  Her eyes snapped behind her spectacles, her lean form was
trembling all over, and in her right hand she held a mammoth
trumpet, the smaller end of which was connected with her ear.

"You will, hey? " she screamed, brandishing her left fist, but
still keeping the ear trumpet in place with her right.  "You WILL?
Well, I don't want none of your miser'ble money!  Land knows how
you made it, anyhow, and I wouldn't soil my hands with it.  After
all I've put up with, and the way I've done my work, and the things
I've had to eat, and--and--"

She paused for breath.  Captain Cy scratched his chin.  Asaph,
gazing open-mouthed at the trumpet, stirred in his chair.  Mrs.
Beasley swooped down upon him like a gull on a minnow.

"And you!" she shrieked.  "You! a miserable little, good-for-
nothin', lazy, ridiculous, dried-up-- . . . Oo--oo--OH!  You call
yourself a town clerk!  YOU do!  I--I wouldn't have you clerk for a
hen house!  I'm an old chromo, be I?  Yes! that's nice talk, ain't
it, to a woman old enough to be--that is--er--er--'most as old as
you be!  You sneakin', story-tellin', little, fat THING, you!  You--
oh, I can't lay my tongue to words to tell you WHAT you are."

"You're doin' pretty well, seems to me," observed Captain Cy dryly.
"I wouldn't be discouraged if I was you."

The only effect of this remark was to turn the wordy torrent in his
direction.  The captain bore it for a while; then he rose to his
feet and commanded silence.

"That's enough!  Stop it!" he ordered, and, strange to say, Mrs.
Beasley did stop.  "I'm sorry, Debby," he went on, "but you had no
business to be listenin' even if--" and he smiled grimly, "you have
got a new fog horn to hear with.  You can go and pack your things
as soon as you want to.  I made up my mind the first day you come
that you and me wouldn't cruise together long, and this only
shortens the trip by a week or so.  I'll pay you for this month and
for the next, and I guess, when you come to think it over, you'll
be willin' to risk soilin' your hands with the money.  It's your
own fault if anybody knows that you didn't leave of your own
accord.  _I_ shan't tell, and I'll see that Tidditt doesn't.  Now
trot!  Ase and I'll get supper ourselves."

It was evident that the ex-housekeeper had much more which she
would have liked to say.  But there was that in her late employer's
manner which caused her to forbear.  She slammed out of the room,
and they heard her banging things about on the floor above.

"But where--WHERE," repeated Mr. Tidditt, over and over, "did she
get that trumpet?"

The puzzle was solved soon after, when Bailey Bangs entered the
house in a high state of excitement.

"Well," he demanded, expectantly.  "Did they help her?  Has
anything happened?"

"HAPPENED!" began Asaph, but Captain Cy silenced him by a wink.

"Yes," answered the captain; "something's happened.  Why?"

"Hurrah!  I thought 'twould.  She can hear better, can't she?"

"Yes, I guess it's safe to say she can."

"Good!  You can thank me for it.  When I see how dreadful deef she
was I wrote my cousin Eddie T, who's an optician up to Boston--you
know him, Ase--and I says:  'Ed, you know what's good for folks who
can't see?  Ain't there nothin',' says I, 'that'll help them who
can't hear?  How about ear trumpets?'  And Ed wrote that an ear
trumpet would probably help some, but why didn't I try a pair of
them patent fixin's that are made to put inside deef people's ears?
He'd known of cases where they helped a lot.  So I sent for a pair,
and the biggest ear trumpet made, besides.  And when I met Debby
to-day I give 'em to her and told her to put the patent things IN
her ears and couple on the trumpet outside 'em.  And not to say
nothin' to you, but just surprise you.  And it did surprise you,
didn't it?"

The wrathful Mr. Tidditt could wait no longer.  He burst into a
vivid description of the "surprise."  Bailey was aghast.  Captain
Cy laughed until his face was purple.

"I declare, Cy!" exclaimed the dejected purchaser of the "ear
fixin's" and the trumpet.  "I do declare I'm awful sorry! if you'd
only told me she was no good I'd have let her alone; but I thought
'twas just the deefness.  I--I--"

"I know, Bailey; you meant well, like the layin'-on-of-hands doctor
who rubbed the rheumatic man's wooden leg.  All right; _I_ forgive
you.  'Twas worth it all to see Asaph's face when Marm Beasley was
complimentin' him.  Ha! ha!  Oh, dear me!  I've laughed till I'm
sore.  But there's one thing I SHOULD like to do, if you don't
mind: I should like to pick out my next housekeeper myself."



CHAPTER V

A FRONT-DOOR CALLER


Mrs. Beasley departed next morning, taking with her the extra
month's wages, in spite of fervid avowals that she wouldn't touch a
cent of it.  On the way to the depot she favored Mr. Lumley with
sundry hints concerning the reasons for her departure.  She
"couldn't stand it no longer"; if folks only knew what she'd had to
put up with she cal'lated they'd be some surprised; she could "tell
a few things" if she wanted to, and so on.  Incidentally she was
kind of glad she didn't like the place, because now she cal'lated
she should go West and visit her niece; they'd been wanting her to
come for so long.

Gabe was much interested and repeated the monologue, with imaginative
additions, to the depot master, who, in turn, repeated it to his
wife when he went home to dinner.  That lady attended sewing circle
in the afternoon.  Next day a large share of Bayport's conversation
dealt with the housekeeper's leaving and her reasons therefor.  The
reasons differed widely, according to the portion of the town in
which they were discussed, but it was the general opinion that the
whole affair was not creditable to Captain Whittaker.

Only at the perfect boarding house was the captain upheld.  Miss
Phinney declared that she knew he had made a mistake as soon as she
heard the Beasley woman talk; nobody else, so Angeline declared,
could "get a word in edgeways."  Mrs. Tripp sighed and affirmed
that going out of town for a woman to do housework was ridiculous
on the face of it; there were plenty of Bayport ladies, women of
capability and sound in their religious views, who might be hired
if they were approached in the right way.  Keturah gave, as her
opinion, that if the captain knew when he was well off, he would
"take his meals out."  Asaph snorted and intimated that that Debby
Beasley wasn't fit to "keep house in a pigsty, and anybody but a
born gump would have known it."  Bailey, the "born gump," said
nothing, but looked appealingly at his chum.

As for Captain Cy, he did not take the trouble to affirm or deny
the rumors.  Peace and quiet dominated the Whittaker house for the
first time in three weeks and its owner was happier.  He cooked his
own food and washed his own dishes.  The runaway cat ventured to
return, found other viands than beans in its saucer, and decided to
remain, purring thankful contentment.  The captain made his own
bed, after a fashion, when he was ready to occupy it, but he was
conscious that it might be better made.  He refused, however, to
spend his time in sweeping and dusting, and the dust continued to
accumulate on the carpets and furniture.  This condition of affairs
troubled him, but he kept his own counsel.  Asaph and Bailey called
often, but they offered no more suggestions as to hiring a
housekeeper.  Mr. Tidditt might have done so, but the captain gave
him no encouragement.  Mr. Bangs, recent humiliation fresh in his
mind, would as soon have suggested setting the house on fire.

One evening Asaph happened in, on his way to Simmons's.  He desired
the captain to accompany him to that gathering place of the wise
and talkative.  Captain Cy was in the sitting room, a sheet of note
paper in his hand.  The town clerk entered without ceremony and
tossed his hat on the sofa.

"Evenin', Ase," observed the captain, folding the sheet of paper
and putting it into his pocket.  "Glad you come.  Sit down.  I
wanted to ask you somethin'."

"All right!  Here I be.  Heave ahead and ask."

Captain Cy puffed at his pipe.  He seemed about to speak and then
to think better of it, for he crossed his legs and smoked on in
silence, gazing at the nickel work of the "base-burner" stove.  It
was badly in need of polishing.

"Well?" inquired Asaph, with impatient sarcasm.  "Thinkin' of
askin' me to build a fire for you, was you?  Nobody else but you
would have set up a stove in summer time, anyhow."

"Hey?  No, you needn't start a fire yet awhile.  That necktie of
yours 'll keep us warm till fall, I shouldn't wonder.  New one,
ain't it?  Where'd you get it?"

Mr. Tidditt was wearing a crocheted scarf of a brilliant crimson
hue, particularly becoming to his complexion.  The complexion now
brightened until it was almost a match for the tie.

"Oh!" he said, with elaborate indifference.  "That?  Yes, it's new.
Yesterday was my birthday, and Matildy Tripp she knew I needed a
necktie, so she give me this one."

"Oh!  One she knit purpose for you, then?  Dear me!  Look out, Ase.
Widow women are dangerous, they say; presents are one of the first
baits they heave out."

"Don't be foolish, now!  I couldn't chuck it back at her, could I?
That would be pretty manners.  You needn't talk about widders--not
after Debby!  Ho! ho!"

Captain Cy chuckled.  Then he suddenly became serious.

"Ase," he said, "you remember the time when the Howes folks had
this house?  Course you do.  Yes; well, was there any of their
relations here with 'em?  A--a cousin, or somethin'?"

"No, not as I recollect.  Yes, there was, too, come to think.  A
third cousin, Mary Thayer her name was.  I THINK she was a third
cousin of Betsy Howes, Seth Howes's second wife.  Betsy's name was
Ginn afore she married, and the Ginns was related on their ma's
side to a Richards--Emily Richards, I think 'twas--and Emily
married a Thayer.  Would that make this Mary a third cousin?  Now
let's see; Sarah Jane Ginn, she had an aunt who kept a boardin'
house in Harniss.  I remember that, 'count of her sellin' my Uncle
Bije a pig.  Seems to me 'twas a pig, but I ain't sure that it
mightn't have been a settin' of Plymouth Rock hens' eggs.  Anyhow,
Uncle Bije KEPT hens, because I remember one time--"

"There! there! we'll be out of sight of land in a minute.  This
Mary Thayer--old, was she?"

"No, no!  Just a young girl, eighteen or twenty or so.  Pretty and
nice and quiet as ever I see.  By Godfrey, she WAS pretty!  I wan't
as old as I be now, and--"

"Ase, don't tell your heart secrets, even to me.  I might get
absent-minded and mention 'em to Matildy.  And then--whew!"

"If you don't stop tryin' to play smarty I'll go home.  What's
Matildy Tripp to me, I'd like to know?  And even when Mary Thayer
was here I was old enough to be her dad.  But I remember what a
nice girl she was and how the boarders liked her.  They used to say
she done more than all the Howes tribe put together to make the Sea
Sight House a good hotel.  Young as she was she done most of the
housekeepin' and done it well.  If the rest of 'em had been like
her you mightn't have had the place yet, Whit.  But what set you to
thinkin' about her?"

"Oh, I don't know!  Nothin' much; that is--well, I'll tell you some
other time.  What became of her?"

"She went up to New Hampshire along with the Howes folks and I
ain't seen her since.  Seems to me I did hear she was married.  See
here, Whit, what is it about her?  Tell a feller; come!"

But Captain Cy refused to gratify his chum's lively curiosity.
Also he refused to go to Simmons's that evening, saying that he was
tired and guessed he'd stay at home and "turn in early."  Mr.
Tidditt departed grumbling.  After he had gone the captain drew his
chair nearer the center table, took from his pocket a sheet of
notepaper, and proceeded to read what was written on its pages.  It
was a letter which he had received nearly a month before and had
not yet answered.  During the past week he had read it many times.
The writing was cramped and blotted and the paper cheap and dingy.
The envelope bore the postmark of a small town in Indiana, and the
inclosure was worded as follows:


CAPTAIN CYRUS WHITTAKER.

DEAR SIR:  I suppose you will be a good deal surprised to hear from
me, especially from way out West here.  When you bought the old
house of Seth, he and I was living in Concord, N. H.  He couldn't
make a go of his business there, so we came West and he has been
sick most of the time since.  We ain't well off like you, and times
are hard with us.  What I wanted to write you about was this.  My
cousin Mary Thomas, Mary Thayer that was, is still living in
Concord and she is poor and needs help, though I don't suppose she
would ask for it, being too proud.  False pride I call it.  Me and
Seth would like to do something for her, but we have a hard enough
job to keep going ourselves.  Mary married a man by the name of
Henry Thomas, and he turned out to be a miserable good-for-nothing,
as I always said he would.  She wouldn't listen to me though.  He
run off and left her seven year ago last April, and I understand
was killed or drowned somewheres up in Montana.  Mary and [several
words scratched out here] got along somehow since, but I don't know
how.  While we lived in Concord Seth sort of kept an eye on her,
but now he can't of course.  She's a good girl, or woman rather,
being most forty, and would make a good housekeeper if you should
need one as I suppose likely you will.  If you could help her it
would be an act of charity and you will be rewarded Above.  Seth
says why not write to her and tell her to come and see you?  He
feels bad about her, because he is so sick I suppose.  And he knows
you are rich and could do good if you felt like it.  Her father's
name was John Thayer.  I wouldn't wonder if you used to know her
mother.  She was Emily Richards afore she married and they used to
live in Orham.

Yours truly,

ELIZABETH HOWES.

P.S.--Mary's address is Mrs. Mary Thomas, care Mrs. Oliver, 128
Blank Street, Concord, N. H.

N.B.--Seth won't say so, but I will: we are very hard up ourselves
and if you could help him and me with the loan of a little money it
would be thankfully received.


Captain Cy read the letter, folded it, and replaced it in his
pocket.  He knew the Howes family by reputation, and the reputation
was that of general sharpness in trade and stinginess in money
matters.  Betsy's personal appeal did not, therefore, touch his
heart to any great extent.  He surmised also that for Seth Howes
and his wife to ask help for some person other than themselves
premised a darky in the woodpile somewhere.  But for the daughter
of Emily Richards to be suggested as a possible housekeeper at the
Cy Whittaker place--that was interesting, certainly.

When the captain was not a captain--when he was merely "young Cy,"
a boy, living with his parents, a dancing school was organized in
Bayport.  It was an innovation for our village, and frowned upon by
many of the older and stricter inhabitants.  However, most of the
captain's boy friends were permitted to attend; young Cy was not.
His father considered dancing a waste of time and, if not wicked,
certainly frivolous and nonsensical.  So the boy remained at home,
but, in spite of the parental order, he practiced some of the
figures of the quadrilles and the contra dances in his comrades'
barns, learning them at second hand, so to speak.

One winter there was to be a party in Orham, given by the
Nickersons, wealthy people with a fifteen-year-old daughter.  It
was to be a grand affair, and most of the boys and girls in the
neighboring towns were invited.  Cy received an invitation, and,
for a wonder, was permitted to attend.  The Bayport contingent went
over in a big hayrick on runners and the moonlight ride was jolly
enough.  The Nickerson mansion was crowded and there were music and
dancing.

Young Cy was miserable during the dancing.  He didn't dare attempt
it, in spite of his lessons in the barn.  So, while the rest of his
boy friends sought partners for the "Portland Fancy" and "Hull's
Victory" he sat forlorn in a corner.

As he sat there he was approached by a young lady, radiant in
muslin and ribbons.  She was three or four years older than he was,
and he had worshipped her from afar as she whirled up and down the
line in the Virginia Reel.  She never lacked partners and seemed to
be a great favorite with the young men, especially one good-looking
chap with a sunburned face, who looked like a sailor.

They were forming sets for "Money Musk"; it was "ladies' choice,"
and there was a demand for more couples.  The young lady came ever
to Cy's corner and laughingly dropped him a courtesy.

"If you please," she said, "I want a partner.  Will you do me the
honor?"

Cy blushingly avowed that he couldn't dance any to speak of.

"Oh, yes, you can!  I'm sure you can.  You're the Whittaker boy,
aren't you?  I've heard about your barn lessons.  And I want you to
try this with me.  Please do.  No, John," she added, turning to the
sunburned young fellow who had followed her across the room; "this
is my choice and here is my partner.  Susie Taylor is after you and
you mustn't run away.  Come, Mr. Whittaker."

So Cy took her arm and they danced "Money Musk" together.  He made
but a few mistakes, and these she helped him to correct so easily
that none noticed.  His success gave him courage and he essayed
other dances; in fact, he had a very good time at the party after
all.

On the way home he thought a great deal about the pretty young
lady, whose name he discovered was Emily Richards.  He decided that
if she would only wait for him, he might like to marry her when he
grew up.  But he was thirteen and she was seventeen, and the very
next year she married John Thayer, the sailor in the blue suit.
And two years after that young Cy ran away to be a sailor himself.

In spite of his age and his lifetime of battering about the world,
Captain Cy had a sentimental streak in his makeup; his rejuvenation
of the old home proved that.  Betsy's letter interested him.  He
had made guarded inquiries concerning Mary Thayer, now Mary Thomas,
of others besides Asaph, and the answers had been satisfactory so
far as they went; those who remembered her had liked her very much.
The captain had even begun a letter to Mrs. Thomas, but laid it
aside unfinished, having, since Bailey's unfortunate experience
with the widow Beasley, a prejudice against experiments.

But this evening, before Mr. Tidditt called, he had been thinking
that something would have to be done and done soon.  The generally
shiftless condition of his domestic surroundings was getting to be
unbearable.  Dust and dirt did not fit into his mental picture of
the old home as it used to be and as he had tried to restore it.
There had been neither dust nor dirt in his mother's day.

He meditated and smoked for another hour.  Then, his mind being
made up, he pulled down the desk lid of the old-fashioned
secretary, resurrected from a pile of papers the note he had begun
to Mrs. Thomas, dipped a sputtering pen into the ink bottle and
proceeded to write.

His letter was a short one and rather noncommittal.  As Mrs. Thomas
no doubt knew he had come back to live in his father's house at
Bayport.  He might possibly need some one to keep house for him.
He understood that she, Mary Thayer that was, was a good housekeeper
and that she was open to an engagement if everything was mutually
satisfactory.  He had known her mother slightly when the latter
lived in Orham.  He thought an interview might be pleasant, for they
could talk over old times if nothing more.  Perhaps, on the whole,
she might care to risk a trip to Bayport, therefore he inclosed
money for her railroad fare.  "You understand, of course," so he
wrote in conclusion, "that nothing may come of our meeting at all.
So please don't say a word to anybody when you strike town.  You've
lived here yourself, and you know that three words hove overboard in
Bayport will dredge up gab enough to sink a dictionary.  So just
keep mum till the business is settled one way or the other."

He put on his hat and went down to the post office, where he
dropped his letter in the slot of the box fastened to the front
door.  Then he returned home and retired at exactly eleven o'clock.
In spite of his remarks to Asaph, he had not "turned in" so early
after all.

If the captain expected a prompt reply to his note he was
disappointed.  A week passed and he heard nothing.  Then three more
days and still no word from the New Hampshire widow.  Meanwhile
fresh layers of dust spread themselves over the Whittaker
furniture, and the gaudy patterns of the carpets blushed dimly
beneath a grimy fog.  The situation was desperate; even Matilda
Tripp, Come-Outer sermons and all, began to be thinkable as a
possibility.

The eleventh day began with a pouring rain that changed, later on,
to a dismal drizzle.  The silver-leaf tree in the front yard
dripped, and the overflowing gutters gurgled and splashed.  The bay
was gray and lonely, and the fish weirs along the outer bar were
lost in the mist.  The flowers in the Atkins urns were draggled and
beaten down.  Only the iron dogs glistened undaunted as the wet ran
off their newly painted backs.  The air was heavy, and the salty
flavor of the flats might almost be tasted in it.

Captain Cy was in the sitting room, as usual.  His spirits were as
gray as the weather.  He was actually lonesome for the first time
since his return home.  He had kindled a wood fire in the stove,
just for the sociability of it, and the crackle and glow behind the
isinglass panes only served to remind him of other days and other
fires.  The sitting room had not been lonesome then.

He heard the depot wagon rattle by and, peering from the window,
saw that, except for Mr. Lumley, it was empty.  Not even a summer
boarder had come to brighten our ways and lawns with reckless
raiment and the newest slang.  Summer boarding season was almost
over now.  Bayport would soon be as dull as dish water.  And the
captain admitted to himself that it WAS dull.  He had half a mind
to take a flying trip to Boston, make the round of the wharves, and
see if any of the old shipowners and ship captains whom he had once
known were still alive and in harness.

"JINGLE!  Jingle!  JINGLE!  Jingle!  Jingle!  Jing!  Jing!  Jing!"

Captain Cy bounced in his chair.  That was the front-door bell.
The FRONT-door bell!  Who on earth, or, rather, who in Bayport,
would come to the FRONT door?

He hurried through the dim grandeur of the best parlor and entered
the little dark front hall.  The bell was still swinging at the end
of its coil of wire.  The dust shaken from it still hung in the
air.  The captain unbolted and unlocked the big front door.

A girl was standing on the steps between the lines of box hedge--a
little girl under a big "grown-up" umbrella.  The wet dripped from
the umbrella top and from the hem of the little girl's dress.

Captain Cy stared hard at his visitor; he knew most of the children
in Bayport, but he didn't know this one.  Obviously she was a
stranger.  Portuguese children from "up Harniss way" sometimes
called to peddle huckleberries, but this child was no "Portugee."

"Hello!" exclaimed the captain wonderingly.

"Did you ring the bell?"

"Yes, sir," replied the girl.

"Humph!  Did, hey?  Why?"

"Why?  Why, I thought--  Isn't it a truly bell?  Didn't it ought to
ring?  Is anybody sick or dead?  There isn't any crape."

"Dead?  Crape?"  Captain Cy gasped.  "What in the world put that in
your head?"

"Well, I didn't know but maybe that was why you thought I hadn't
ought to have rung it.  When mamma was sick they didn't let people
ring our bell.  And when she died they tied it up with crape."

"Did, hey?  Hum!"  The captain scratched his chin and gazed at the
small figure before him.  It was a self-poised, matter-of-fact
figure for such a little one, and, out there in the rain under the
tent roof of the umbrella, it was rather pitiful.

"Please, sir," said the child, "are you Captain Cyrus Whittaker?"

"Yup!  That's me.  You've guessed it the first time."

"Yes, sir.  I've got a letter for you.  It's pinned inside my
dress.  If you could hold this umbrella maybe I could get it out."

She extended the big umbrella at arm's length, holding it with both
hands.  Captain Cy woke up.

"Good land!" he exclaimed, "what am I thinkin' of?  You're soakin'
wet through, ain't you?"

"I guess I'm pretty wet.  It's a long ways from the depot, and I
tried to come across the fields, because a boy said it was nearer,
and the bushes were--"

"Across the FIELDS?  Have you walked all the way from the depot?"

"Yes, sir.  The man said it was a quarter to ride, and auntie said
I must be careful of my money because--"

"By the big dipper!  Come in!  Come in out of that this minute!"

He sprang down the steps, furled the umbrella, seized her by the
arm and led her into the house, through the parlor and into the
sitting room, where the fire crackled invitingly.  He could feel
that the dress sleeve under his hand was wet through, and the worn
boots and darned stockings he could see were soaked likewise.

"There!" he cried.  "Set down in that chair.  Put your feet up on
that h'ath.  Sakes alive!  Your folks ought to know better than to
let you stir out this weather, let alone walkin' a mile--and no
rubbers!  Them shoes ought to come off this minute, I s'pose.  Take
'em off.  You can dry your stockings better that way.  Off with
'em!"

"Yes, sir," said the child, stooping to unbutton the shoes.  Her
wet fingers were blue.  It can be cold in our village, even in
early September, when there is an easterly storm.  Unbuttoning the
shoes was slow work.

"Here, let me help you!" commanded the captain, getting down on one
knee and taking a foot in his lap.  "Tut! tut! tut! you're wet!
Been some time sence I fussed with button boots; lace or long-
legged cowhides come handier.  Never wore cowhides, did you?"

"No, sir."

"I s'pose not.  I used to when I was little.  Remember the first
pair I had.  Copper toes on 'em--whew!  The copper was blacked over
when they come out of the store and that wouldn't do, so we used to
kick a stone wall till they brightened up.  There! there she comes.
Humph! stockin's soaked, too.  Wish I had some dry ones to lend
you.  Might give you a pair of mine, but they'd be too scant fore
and aft and too broad in the beam, I cal'late.  Humph! and your
top-riggin's as wet as your hull.  Been on your beam ends, have
you?"

"I don't know, sir.  I fell down in the bushes coming across.
There were vines and they tripped me up.  And the umbrella was so
heavy that--"

"Yes, I could see right off you was carryin' too much canvas.  Now
take off your bunnit and I'll get a coat of mine to wrap you up
in."

He went into his bedroom and returned with a heavy "reefer" jacket.
Ordering his caller to stand up he slipped her arms into the
sleeves and turned the collar up about her neck.  Her braided
"pigtail" of yellow hair stuck out over the collar and hung down
her back in a funny way.  The coat sleeves reached almost to her
knees and the coat itself enveloped her like a bed quilt.

"There!" said Captain Cy approvingly.  "Now you look more as if you
was under a storm rig.  Set down and toast your toes.  Where's that
letter you said you had?"

"It's inside here.  I don't know's I can get at it; these sleeves
are so long."

"Reef 'em.  Turn 'em up.  Let me show you.  That's better!  Hum!
So you come from the depot, hey?  Live up that way?"

"No, sir!  I used to live in Concord, but--"

"Concord?  CONCORD?  Concord where?"

"Concord, New Hampshire.  I came on the cars.  Auntie knew a man
who was going to Boston, and he said he'd take care of me as far as
that and then put me on the train to come down here.  I stopped at
his folks' house in Charlestown last night, and this morning we got
up early and he bought me a ticket and started me for here.  I had
a box with my things in it, but it was so heavy I couldn't carry
it, so I left it up at the depot.  The man there said it would be
all right and you could send for it when--"

"I could SEND for it?  _I_ could?  What in the world--  Say, child,
you've made a mistake in your bearin's.  'Taint me you want to see,
it's some of your folks, relations, most likely.  Tell me who they
are; maybe I know 'em."

The girl sat upright in the big chair.  Her dark eyes opened wide
and her chin quivered.

"Ain't you Captain Cyrus Whittaker?" she demanded.  "You said you
was."

"Yes, yes, I am.  I'm Cy Whittaker, but what--"

"Well, auntie told me--"

"Auntie!  Auntie who?"

"Auntie Oliver.  She isn't really my auntie, but mamma and me lived
in her house for ever so long and so--"

"Wait! wait! wait!  I'm hull down in the fog.  This is gettin' too
thick for ME.  Your auntie's name's Oliver and you lived in
Concord, New Hampshire.  For--for thunder sakes, what's YOUR name?"

"Emily Richards Thomas."

"Em--Emily--Richards--Thomas"

"Yes, sir."

"Emily Richards Thomas!  What was your ma's name?"

"Mamma was Mrs. Thomas.  Her front name was Mary.  She's dead.
Don't you want to see your letter?  I've got it now."

She lifted one of the flapping coat sleeves and extended a crumpled,
damp envelope.  Captain Cy took it in a dazed fashion and drew a
long breath.  Then he tore open the envelope and read the following:


DEAR CAPTAIN WHITTAKER:

The bearer of this is Emily Richards Thomas.  She is seven, going
on eight, but old for her years.  Her mother was Mary Thomas that
used to be Mary Thayer.  It was her you wrote to about keeping
house for you, but she had been dead a fortnight before your letter
come.  She had bronchial pneumonia and it carried her off, having
always been delicate and with more troubles to bear than she could
stand, poor thing.  Since her husband, who I say was a scamp even
if he is dead, left her and the baby, she has took rooms with me
and done sewing and such.  When she passed away I wrote to Seth
Howes, a relation of hers out West, and, so far as I know, the only
one she had.  I told the Howes man that Mary had gone and Emmie was
left.  Would they take her? I wrote.  And Seth's wife wrote they
couldn't, being poorer than poverty themselves.  I was afraid she
would have to go to a Home, but when your letter came I wrote the
Howeses again.  And Mrs. Howes wrote back that you was rich, and a
sort of far-off relation of Mary's, and probably you would be glad
to take the child to bring up.  Said that she had some correspondence
with you about Mary before.  So I send Emmie to you. Somebody's got
to take care of her and I can't afford it, though I would if I
could, for she's a real nice child and some like her mother.  I do
hope she can stay with you.  It seems a shame to send her to the
orphan asylum.  I send along what clothes she's got, which ain't
many.

Respectfully yours,

SARAH OLIVER.


Captain Cy read the letter through.  Then he wiped his forehead.

"Well!" he muttered.  "WELL!  I never in my life!  I--I never did!
Of all--"

Emily Richards Thomas looked up from the depths of the coat collar.

"Don't you think," she said, "that you had better send to the depot
for my box?  I can get dry SOME this way, but mamma always made me
change my clothes as soon as I could.  She used to be afraid I'd
get cold."



CHAPTER VI

ICICLES AND DUST


Captain Cy did not reply to the request for the box.  It is
doubtful if he even heard it.  Mrs. Oliver's astonishing letter
had, as he afterwards said, left him "high and dry with no tug in
sight."  Mary Thomas was dead, and her daughter, her DAUGHTER! of
whose very existence he had been ignorant, had suddenly appeared
from nowhere and been dropped at his door, like an out-of-season
May basket, accompanied by the modest suggestion that he assume
responsibility for her thereafter.  No wonder the captain wiped his
forehead in utter bewilderment.

"Don't you think you'd better send for the box?" repeated the
child, shivering a little under the big coat.

"Hey?  What say?  Never mind, though.  Just keep quiet for a spell,
won't you.  I want to let this soak in.  By the big dipper!  Of all
the solid brass che