r performances of the previous term.  But the very
first "spitball" which spattered upon the blackboard proved a
disastrous missile for its thrower.

"She made him clean the board," proclaimed Bos'n, big-eyed and
awestruck, "and then he had to stand in the corner.  He was Bennie
Edwards, and he's most thirteen.  Miss Seabury, they said, couldn't
do anything with him, but teacher said 'Go,' as quiet as could be
and just looked at him, and he went.  And he's most as tall as she
is.  He did look so silly!"

The Edwards youth was not the only one who was made to "look silly"
by little Miss Dawes during the first days of her stay in Bayport.
She dealt with the unruly members of her classes as bravely as she
had faced the Cahoon cow, and the results were just as satisfactory.
She was strict, but she was impartial, and Alicia Atkins found, to
her great surprise, that the daughter of a congressman was expected
to study as faithfully and behave herself as well as freckled-faced
Noah Hamlin, whose father peddled fish and whose everyday costume
was a checkered "jumper" and patched overalls.

The school committee, that is, the majority of it, was delighted
with the new teacher.  Lemuel Myrick boasted loudly of his good
judgment in voting for her.  But Tad Simpson and Darius Ellis and
others of the Atkins following still scoffed and hinted at trouble
in the future.

"A new broom sweeps fine," quoted Mr. Simpson.  "She's doin' all
right now, maybe.  Anyway, the young ones are behavin' themselves,
but disCIPline ain't the whole thing.  Heman told me that the
teacher he wanted could talk French language and play music and all
kinds of accomplishments.  Phoebe--not findin' any fault with her,
you understand--don't know no more about music than a hen; my wife
says she don't even sing in church loud enough for anybody to hear
her.  And as for French! why everybody knows she uses the commonest
sort of United States, just as easy to understand as what I'm
sayin' now."

Miss Dawes boarded at the perfect boarding house.  There opinion
was divided concerning her.  Bailey and Mr. Tidditt liked her, but
the feminine boarders were not so favorably impressed.

"I think she's altogether too pert about what don't concern her,"
commented Angeline Phinney.  "Sarah Emma Simpson dropped in t'other
day to dinner, and we church folks got to talkin' about the
minister's preachin' such 'advanced' sermons.  And Sarah Emma told
how she'd heard he said he'd known some real moral Universalists in
his time, or some such unreligious foolishness.  And I said I
wondered he didn't get a new tail coat; the one he preached in
Sundays was old as the hills and so outgrown it wouldn't scurcely
button acrost him.  'A man bein' paid nine hundred a year,' I says,
'ought to dress decent, anyhow.'  And that Phoebe Dawes speaks up,
without bein' asked, and says for her part she'd ruther hear a
broad man in a narrer coat than t'other way about.  'Twas a regular
slap in the face for me, and Sarah Emma and I ain't got over it
yet."

Captain Cy heard the gossip concerning the new teacher and it
rather pleased him.  She appeared to be independent, and he liked
independence.  He met her once or twice on the street, but she
merely bowed and passed on.  Once he tried to thank her again for
her part in the cow episode, but she would not listen to him.

Bos'n was making good progress with her studies.  She was naturally
a bright child--not the marvel the captain and the "Board of
Strategy" considered her, but quick to learn.  She was not a saint,
however, and occasionally misbehaved in school and was punished for
it.  One afternoon she did not return at her usual hour.  Captain
Cy was waiting at the gate when Asaph Tidditt happened along.
Bailey, too, was with him.

"Waitin' for Bos'n, was you?" asked the town clerk.  "Well, you'll
have to wait quite a spell, I cal'late.  She's been kept after
school."

"Yes; and she's got to write fifty lines of copy," added Bailey.

Captain Cy was highly indignant.

"Get out!" he cried.  "She ain't neither."

"Yes, she has, too.  One of the Salters young ones told me.  I knew
you'd be mad, though I s'pose folks that didn't know her's well's
we do would say she's no different from other children."

This was close to heresy, according to the captain's opinion.

"She ain't!" he cried.  "I'd like to know why not!  If she ain't
twice as smart as the run of young ones 'round here then--  Humph!
And she's kept after school!  Well, now; I won't have it!  There's
enough time for studyin' without wearin' out her brains after
hours.  Oh, I guess you're mistaken."

"No, we ain't.  I tell you, Whit, if I was you I'd make a fuss
about this.  She's a smart child, Bos'n is; I never see a smarter.
And she ain't any too strong."

"That's so, she ain't."  The idea that Emily's health was "delicate"
had become a fixed fact in the minds of the captain and the "Board."
It made a good excuse for the systematic process of "spoiling" the
girl, which the indulgent three were doing their best to carry on.

"I wouldn't let her be kept, Cy," urged Bailey.  "Why don't you go
right off and see Phoebe and settle this thing?  You've got a right
to talk to her.  She wouldn't be teacher if it wasn't for you."

Asaph added his arguments to those of Mr. Bangs.  Captain Cy,
carried away by his firm belief that Bos'n was a paragon of all
that was brilliant and good, finally yielded.

"All right!" he exclaimed.  "Come on!  That poor little thing
shan't be put upon by nobody."

The trio marched majestically down the hill.  As they neared the
schoolhouse Bailey's courage began to fail.  Miss Dawes was a
boarder at his house, and he feared consequences should Keturah
learn of his interference.

"I--I guess you don't need me," he stammered.  "The three of us 'll
scare that teacher woman most to death.  And she's so little and
meek, you know.  If I should lose my temper and rare up I might say
somethin' that would hurt her feelin's.  I'll set on the fence and
wait for you and Ase, Whit."

Mr. Tidditt's scornful comments concerning "white feathers" and
"backsliders" had no effect.  Mr. Bangs perched himself on the
fence.

"Give it to her, fellers!" he called after them.

"Talk Dutch to her!  Let her know that there's one child she can't
abuse."

At the foot of the steps Asaph paused.

"Say, Cy," he whispered, "don't you think I better not go in?  It
ain't really my business, you know, and--and--  Well, I'm on the
s'lectmen and she might be frightened if she see me pouncin' down
on her.  'Tain't as if I was just a common man.  I'll go and set
along of Bailey and you go in and talk quiet to her.  She'd feel so
sort of ashamed if there was anyone else to hear the rakin' over--
hey?"

"Now, see here, Ase," expostulated the captain, "I don't like to do
this all by myself!  Besides, 'twas you chaps put me up to it.  You
ain't goin' to pull out of the race and leave me to go over the
course alone, are you?  Come on! what are, you afraid of?"

His companion hotly denied that he was "afraid" of anything.  He
had all sorts of arguments to back his decision.  At last Captain
Cy lost patience.

"Well, BE a skulk, if you want to!" he declared.  "I've set out to
see this thing through, and I'm goin' to do it.  Only," he muttered,
as he entered the downstairs vestibule, "I wish I didn't feel quite
so much as if I was stealin' hens' eggs."

Miss Dawes herself opened the door in response to his knock.

"Oh, it's you, Cap'n Whittaker," she said.  "Come in, please."

Captain Cy entered the schoolroom.  It was empty, save for the
teacher and himself and one little girl, who, seated at a desk, was
writing busily.  She looked up and blushed a vivid red.  The little
girl was Bos'n.

"Sit down, Cap'n," said Miss Phoebe, indicating the visitor's
chair.  "What was it you wanted to see me about?"

The captain accepted the invitation to be seated, but he did not
immediately reply to Miss Dawes's question.  He dropped his hat on
the floor, crossed his legs, uncrossed them, and then observed that
it was pretty summery weather for so late in the fall.  The teacher
admitted the truth of his assertion and waited for him to continue.

"I--I s'pose school's pretty full, now that cranb'ryin' 's over,"
said Captain Cy.

"Yes, pretty full."

"Gettin' along first rate with the scholars, I hear."

"Yes."

This was a most unpromising beginning, really no beginning at all.
The captain cleared his throat, set his teeth, and, without looking
at his companion, dove headlong into the business which had brought
him there.

"Miss Dawes," he said, "I--I s'pose you know that Bos'n--I mean
Emily there--is livin' at my house and that I'm taking care of her
for--for the present."

The lady smiled.

"Yes," she said.  "I gathered as much from what you said when we
first met."

She herself had said one or two things on that occasion.  Captain
Cy remembered them distinctly.

"Yes, yes," he said hastily.  "Well, my doin's that time wasn't
exactly the best sample of the care, I will say.  Wan't even a fair
sample, maybe.  I try to do my best with the child, long as she
stays with me, and--er--and--er--I'm pretty particular about her
health."

"I'm glad to hear it."

"Yes.  Now, Miss Phoebe, I appreciate what you did for Bos'n and me
that Sunday, and I'm thankful for it.  I've tried to thank--"

"I know.  Please don't say any more about it.  I imagine there is
something else you want to say, isn't there?"

"Why, yes, there is.  I--I heard that Emmie had been kept after
school.  I didn't believe it, of course, but I thought I'd run up
and see what--"

He hesitated.  The teacher finished the sentence for him.

"To see if it was true?" she said.  "It is.  I told her to stay and
write fifty lines."

"You did?  Well, now that's what I wanted to speak to you about.
Course I ain't interferin' in your affairs, you know, but I just
wanted to explain about Bos'n--Emmie, I mean.  She ain't a common
child; she's got too much head for the rest of her.  If you'd lived
with her same as I have you'd appreciate it.  Her health's delicate."

"Is it?  She seems strong enough to me.  I haven't noticed any
symptoms."

"Course not, else you wouldn't have kept her in.  But _I_ know, and
I think it's my duty to tell you.  Never mind if she can't do quite
so much writin'.  I'd rather she wouldn't; she might bust a blood
vessel or somethin'.  Such things HAVE happened, to extry smart
young ones.  You just let her trot along home with me now and--"

"Cap'n Whittaker," Miss Dawes had risen to her feet with a
determined expression on her face.

"Yes, ma'am," said the captain, rising also.

"Cap'n Whittaker," repeated the teacher, "I'm very glad that you
called.  I've been rather expecting you might, because of certain
things I have heard."

"You heard?  What was it you heard--if you don't mind my askin'?"

"No, I don't, because I think we must have an understanding about
Emily.  I have heard that you allow her to do as she pleases at
home; in other words, that you are spoiling her, and--"

"SPOILIN' her!  _I_ spoilin' her?  Who told you such an unlikely
yarn as that?  I ain't the kind to spoil anybody.  Why, I'm so
strict that I'm ashamed of myself sometimes."

He honestly believed he was.  Miss Phoebe calmly continued.

"Of course, what you do at home is none of my business.  I shouldn't
mention it anyhow, if you hadn't called, because I pay very little
attention to town talk, having lived in this county all my life and
knowing what gossip amounts to.  I like Emily; she's a pretty good
little girl and well behaved, as children go.  But this you must
understand.  She can't be spoiled here.  She whispered this
afternoon, twice.  She has been warned often, and knows the rule.  I
kept her after school because she broke that rule, and if she breaks
it again, she will be punished again.  I kept the Edwards boy two
hours yesterday and--"

"Edwards boy!  Do you mean to compare that--that young rip of a Ben
Edwards with a girl like Bos'n?  I never heard--"

"I'm not comparing anybody.  I'm trying to be fair to every scholar
in this room.  And, so long as Emily behaves herself, she shall be
treated accordingly.  When she doesn't, she shall be punished.  You
must understand that."

"But Ben Edwards!  Why, he's a wooden-head, same as his dad was a
fore him!  And Emmie's the smartest scholar in this town."

"Oh, no, she isn't!  She's a good scholar, but there are others
just as good and even quicker to learn."

This was piling one insult upon another.  Other children as
brilliant as Bos'n!  Captain Cy was bursting with righteous
indignation.

"Well!" he exclaimed.  "Well! for a teacher that we've called to--"

"And that's another thing," broke in Miss Dawes quickly.  "I've
been told that you, Cap'n Whittaker, are the one directly
responsible for my being chosen for this place.  I don't say that
you are presuming on that, but--"

"I ain't!  I never thought of such a thing!"

"But if you are you mustn't, that's all.  I didn't ask for the
position and, now that I've got it, I shall try to fill it without
regard to one person more than another.  Emily stays here until her
lines are written.  I don't think we need to say any more.  Good
day."

She opened the door.  Captain Cy picked up his hat, swallowed hard,
and stepped across the threshold.  Then Miss Phoebe added one more
remark.

"Cap'n," she said, "when you were in command of a ship did you
allow outsiders to tell you how to treat the sailors?"

The captain opened his mouth to reply.  He wanted to reply very
much, but somehow he couldn't find a satisfying answer to that
question.

"Ma'am," he said, "all I can say is that if you'd been in South
America, same as I have, and seen the way them half-breed young
ones act, you'd--"

The teacher smiled, in spite of an apparent effort not to.

"Perhaps so," she said, "but this is Massachusetts.  And--well,
Emily isn't a half-breed."

Captain Cy strode through the vestibule.  Just before the door
closed behind him he heard a stifled sob from poor Bos'n.

The Board of Strategy was waiting at the end of the yard.  Its
members were filled with curiosity.

"Did you give it to her good?" demanded Asaph.  "Did you let her
understand we wouldn't put up with such cruelizin'?"

"Where's Bos'n?" asked Mr. Bangs.

Their friend's answers were brief and tantalizingly incomplete.  He
walked homeward at a gait which caused plump little Bailey to puff
in his efforts to keep up, and he would say almost nothing about
the interview in the schoolroom.

"Well," said Mr. Tidditt, when they reached the Whittaker gate, "I
guess she knows her place now; hey, Cy?  I cal'late she'll be
careful who she keeps after school from now on."

"Didn't use no profane language, did you, Cy?" asked Bailey.  "I
hope not, 'cause she might have you took up just out of spite.  Did
she ask your pardon for her actions?"

"No!" roared the captain savagely.  Then, banging the gate behind
him, he strode up the yard and into the house.

Bos'n came home a half hour later.  Captain Cy was alone in the
sitting room, seated in his favorite rocker and moodily staring at
nothing in particular.  The girl gazed at him for a moment and then
climbed into his lap.

"I wrote my fifty lines, Uncle Cyrus," she said.  "Teacher said I'd
done them very nicely, too."

The captain grunted.

"Uncle Cy," whispered Bos'n, putting her arms around his neck, "I'm
awful sorry I was so bad."

"Bad?  Who--you?  You couldn't be bad if you wanted to.  Don't talk
that way or I'll say somethin' I hadn't ought to."

"Yes, I could be bad, too.  I was bad.  I whispered."

"Whispered!  What of it?  That ain't nothin'.  When I was a young
one in school I used to whis-- . . .  Hum!  Well, anyhow, don't you
think any more about it.  'Tain't worth while."

They rocked quietly for a time.  Then Bos'n said:

"Uncle Cyrus, don't you like teacher?"

"Hey?  LIKE her?  Well, if that ain't a question?  Yes, I like her
about as well as Lonesome likes Eben Salter's dog."

"I'm sorry.  I like her ever so much."

"You DO?  Go 'long!  After the way she treated you, poor little
thing!"

"She didn't treat me any worse than she does the other girls and
boys when they're naughty.  And I did know the rule about
whispering."

"Well, that's different.  Comparin' you with that Bennie Edwards--
the idea!  And then makin' you cry!"

"She didn't make me cry."

"Did, too.  I heard you."

The child looked up at him and then hid her face in his waistcoat.

"I wasn't crying about her," she whispered.  "It was you."

"ME!"  The captain gasped.  "Good land!" he muttered.  "It's just
as I expected.  She's studied too hard and it's touchin' her
brain."

"No, sir, it isn't.  It isn't truly.  I did cry about you because I
didn't like to hear you talk so.  And I was so sorry to have you
come there."

"You WAS!"

"Yes, sir.  Other children's folks don't come when they're bad.
And I kept feeling so sort of ashamed of you."

"Ashamed of ME?"

Bos'n nodded vigorously.

"Yes, sir.  Everything teacher said sounded so right, and what you
said didn't.  And I like to have you always right."

"Do, hey?  Hum!"  Captain Cy didn't speak again for some few
minutes, but he held the little girl very tight in his arms.  At
length he drew a long breath.

"By the big dipper, Bos'n!" he exclaimed.  "You're a wonder, you
are.  I wouldn't be surprised if you grew up to be a mind reader,
like that feller in the show we went to at the townhall a spell
ago.  To tell you the honest Lord's truth, I've been ashamed of
myself ever since I come out of that schoolhouse door.  When that
teacher woman sprung that on me about my fo'mast hands aboard ship
I was set back about forty fathom.  I never wanted to answer
anybody so bad in MY life, and I couldn't 'cause there wasn't
anything to say.  I cal'late I've made a fool of myself."

Bos'n nodded again.

"We won't do so any more, will we?" she said.

"You bet we won't!  _I_ won't, anyhow.  You haven't done anything."

"And you'll like teacher?"

The captain stamped his foot.

"No, SIR!" he declared.  "She may be all right in her way--I s'pose
she is; but it's too Massachusettsy a way for me.  No, sir!  I
don't like her and I WON'T like her.  No, sir-ee, never!  She--she
ain't my kind of a woman," he added stubbornly.  "That's what's the
matter!  She ain't my kind of a woman."



CHAPTER IX

POLITICS AND BIRTHDAYS


"Town meeting" was called for the twenty-first of November.

With the summer boarders gone, the cranberry picking finished,
state election over, school begun and under way, and real winter
not yet upon us, Bayport, in the late fall, distinctly needs
something to enliven it.  The Shakespeare Reading Society and the
sewing circle continue, of course, to interest the "women folks,"
there is the usual every evening gathering at Simmons's, and the
young people are looking forward to the "Grand Ball" on Thanksgiving
eve.  But for the men, on week days, there is little to do except to
"putter" about the house, banking its foundations with dry seaweed
as a precaution against searching no'theasters, whitewashing the
barns and outbuildings, or fixing things in the vegetable cellar
where the sticks of smoked herring hang in rows above the barrels of
cabbages, potatoes, and turnips.  The fish weirs, most of them, are
taken up, lest the ice, which will be driven into the bay later on,
tear the nets to pieces.  Even the hens grow lazy and lay less
frequently.  Therefore, away back in the "airly days," some
far-sighted board of selectmen arranged that "town meeting" should
be held during this lackadaisical season.  A town meeting--and
particularly a Bayport town meeting, where everything from personal
affairs to religion is likely to be discussed--can stir up excitement
when nothing else can.

This year there were several questions to be talked over and
settled at town meeting.  Two selectmen, whose terms expired, were
candidates for re-election.  Lem Myrick had resigned from the
school committee, not waiting until spring, as he had announced
that he should do.  Then there was the usual sentiment in favor of
better roads and the usual opposition to it.  Also there was the
ever-present hope of the government appropriation for harbor
improvement.

Mr. Tidditt was one of the selectmen whose terms expired.  In his
dual capacity as selectman and town clerk Asaph felt himself to be
a very important personage.  To elect some one else in his place
would be, he was certain, a calamity which would stagger the
township.  Therefore he was a busy man and made many calls upon his
fellow citizens, not to influence their votes--he was careful to
explain that--but just, as he said, "to see how they was gettin'
along," and because he "thought consider'ble of 'em" and "took a
real personal interest, you understand," in their affairs.

To Captain Cy he came, naturally, for encouragement and help,
being--as was his habit at such times--in a state of gloom and
hopeless despair.

"No use, Whit," he groaned.  "'Tain't no use at all.  I'm licked.
I'm gettin' old and they don't want me no more.  I guess I'd better
get right up afore the votin' begins and tell 'em my health ain't
strong enough to be town clerk no longer.  It's better to do that
than to be licked.  Don't you think so?"

"Sure thing!" replied his friend, with sarcasm.	 "If I was you I'd
be toted in on a bed so they can see you're all ready for the
funeral.  Might have the doctor walkin' ahead, wipin' his eyes, and
the joyful undertaker trottin' along astern.  What's the particular
disease that's got you by the collar just now--facial paralysis?"

"No.  What made you think of that?"

"Oh, nothin'!  Only I heard you stopped in at ten houses up to the
west end of the town yesterday, and talked three quarters of an
hour steady at everyone.  That would fit me for the scrap heap
inside of a week, and you've been goin' it ever since September
nearly.  What does ail you--anything?"

"Why, no; nothin' special that way.  Only there don't seem to be
any enthusiasm for me, somehow.  I just hint at my bein' a
candidate and folks say, 'Yes, indeed.  Looks like rain, don't it?'
and that's about all."

"Well, that hadn't ought to surprise you.  If anybody came to me
and says, 'The sun's goin' to rise to-morrer mornin',' I shouldn't
dance on my hat and crow hallelujahs.  Enthusiasm!  Why, Ase,
you've been a candidate every two years since Noah got the ark off
the ways, or along there.  And there ain't been any opposition to
you yet, except that time when Uncle 'Bial Stickney woke up in the
wrong place and hollered 'No,' out of principle, thinkin' he was to
home with his wife.  If I was you I'd go and take a nap.  You'll
read the minutes at selectmen's meetings for another fifty year,
more or less; take my word for it.  As for the school committee,
that's different.  I ain't made up my mind about that."

There had been much discussion concerning the school committee.
Who should be chosen to replace Mr. Myrick on the board was the
gravest question to come before the meeting.  Many names had been
proposed at Simmons's and elsewhere, but some of those named had
refused to run, and others had not, after further consideration,
seemed the proper persons for the office.  In the absence of Mr.
Atkins, Tad Simpson was our leader in the political arena.  But Tad
so far had been mute.

"Wait a while," he said.  "There's some weeks afore town meetin'
day.  This is a serious business.  We can't have no more--I mean no
unsuitable man to fill such an important place as that.  The
welfare of our posterity," he added, and we all recognized the
quotation, "depends upon the choice that's to be made."

A choice was made, however, on the very next day but one after this
declaration.  A candidate announced himself.  Asaph and Bailey
hurried to the Cy Whittaker place with the news.  Captain Cy was in
the woodshed building a doll house for Bos'n.  "Just for my own
amusement," he hastily explained.  "Somethin' for her to take along
when she goes out West to Betsy."

Mr. Tidditt was all smiles.

"What do you think, Cy?" he cried.  "The new school committee man's
as good as elected.  'Lonzo Snow's goin' to take it."

The captain laid down his plane.

"'Lonzo Snow!" he repeated.  "You don't say!  Humph!  Well, well!"

"Yes, sir!" exclaimed Bailey.  "He's come forward and says it's his
duty to do so.  He--"

"Humph!  His duty, hey?  I wonder who pointed it out to him?"

"Well, I don't know.  But even Tad Simpson's glad; he says that he
knows Heman will be pleased with THAT kind of a candidate and so he
won't have to do any more huntin'.  He thinks 'Lonzo's comin' out
by himself this way is a kind of special Providence."

"Yes, yes!  I shouldn't wonder.  Did you ever notice how dead sure
Tad and his kind are that Providence is workin' with 'em?  Seems to
me 'twould be more satisfactory if we could get a sight of the
other partner's signature to the deed."

"What's the matter with you?" demanded Asaph.  "You ain't findin'
fault with 'Lonzo, are you?  Ain't he a good man?"

"Good!  Sure thing he's good!  Nobody can say he isn't and tell the
truth."

No one could truthfully speak ill of Alonzo Snow, that was a fact.
He lived at the lower end of the village, was well to do, a leading
cranberry grower, and very prominent in the church.  A mild,
easygoing person was Mr. Snow, with an almost too keen fear of doing
the wrong thing and therefore prone to be guided by the opinion of
others.  He was distinctly not a politician.

"Then what ails you?" asked Asaph hotly.

"Why, nothin', maybe.  Only I'm always suspicious when Tad pats
Providence on the back.  I generally figure that I can see through
a doughnut, when there's a light behind the hole.  Who is 'Lonzo's
best friend in this town?  Who does he chum with most of anybody?"

"Why, Darius Ellis, I guess.  You know it."

"Um--hum.  And Darius is on the committee--why?"

"Well, I s'pose 'cause Heman Atkins thought he'd be a good feller
to have there.  But--"

"Yes, and 'Lonzo's pew in church is right under the Atkins memorial
window.  The light from it makes a kind of halo round his bald head
every Sunday."

"Well, what of it?  Heman, nor nobody else, could buy 'Lonzo Snow."

"Buy him?  Indeed they couldn't.  But there are some things you get
without buyin'--the measles, for instance.  And the one that's
catchin' 'em don't know he's in danger till the speckles break out.
Fellers, this committee voted in Phoebe Dawes by just two votes to
one, and one of the two was Lem Myrick.  Darius was against her.
Now with Tad and his 'Providence' puttin' in 'Lonzo Snow, and Heman
Atkins settin' behind the screen workin' his Normal School music
box so's they can hear the tune--well, Phoebe MAY stay this term
out, but how about next?"

"Hey?  Why, I don't know.  Anyhow, you're down on Phoebe as a
thousand of brick.  I don't see why you worry about HER.  After the
way she treated poor Bos'n and all."

Captain Cy stirred uneasily and kicked a chip across the floor.

"Well," he said, "well, I--I don't know's that's--  That is,
right's right and wrong's wrong.  I've seen bullfights down yonder--"
jerking his thumb over his shoulder in the vague direction of
Buenos Ayres, "and every time my sympathy's been with the bull.
Not that I loved the critter for his own sake, but because all
Greaserdom was out to down him.  From what I hear, this Phoebe
Dawes--for all her pesky down-East stubbornness--is teachin' pretty
well, and anyhow she's one little woman against Tad Simpson and
Heman Atkins and--and Tad's special brand of Providence.  She
deserves a fair shake and, by the big dipper, she's goin' to have
it!  Look here, you two! how would I look on the school committee?"

"You?" repeated the pair in concert.  "YOU?"

"Yes, me.  I ain't a Solomon for wisdom, but I cal'late I'd be as
near the top of the barrel as Darius Ellis, and only one or two
layers under Eben Salters or 'Lonzo Snow.  I'm a candidate--see?"

"But--but, Whit," gasped the town clerk, "are you popular enough?
Could you get elected?"

"I don't know, but I can find out.  You and Bailey 'll vote for me,
won't you?"

"Course we will, but--"

"All right.  There's two votes.  A hundred and odd more'll put me
in.  Here goes for politics and popularity.  I may be president
yet; you can't tell.  And say! this town meetin' won't be DULL,
whichever way the cat jumps."

This last was a safe prophecy.  All dullness disappeared from
Bayport the moment it became known that Captain Cyrus Whittaker was
"out" for the school committee.  The captain began his electioneering
at once.  That very afternoon he called upon three people--Eben
Salters, Josiah Dimick, and Lemuel Myrick.

Captain Salters was chairman of selectmen as well as chairman of
the committee.  He was a hard-headed old salt, who had made money
in the Australian packet service.  He had common sense, independence,
and considerable influence in the town.  Next to Congressman Atkins
he was, perhaps, our leading citizen.  And, more than all, he was
not afraid, when he thought it necessary, to oppose the great Heman.

"Well," he said reflectively, after listening to Captain Cy's brief
statement of his candidacy, "I cal'late I'll stand in with you, Cy.
I ain't got anything against 'Lonzo, but--but--well, consarn it!
maybe that's the trouble.  Maybe he's so darned good it makes me
jealous.  Anyhow, I'll do what I can for you."

Joe Dimick laughed aloud.  He was an iconoclast, seldom went to
church, and was entirely lacking in reverence.  Also he really
liked the captain.

"Ho, ho!" he crowed.  "Whit, do you realize that you're underminin'
this town's constitution?  Oh, sartin, I'm with you, if it's only
to see the fur fly!  I do love a scrap."

With Lem Myrick Captain Cy's policy was different.  He gently
reminded that gentleman of the painting contract, intimated that
other favors might be forthcoming, and then, as a clincher, spoke
of Tad Simpson's comment when Mr. Myrick voted for Phoebe Dawes.

"Of course," he added, "if you think Tad's got a right to boss all
hands and the cook, why, I ain't complainin'.  Only, if _I_ was a
painter doin' a good, high-class trade, and a one-hoss barber tried
to dictate to me, I shouldn't bow down and tell him to kick easy as
he could.  Seems to me I'd kick first.  But I'M no boss; I mustn't
influence you."

Lemuel was indignant.

"No barber runs me," he declared.  "You stand up for me when that
townhall paintin's to be done and I'll work hard for you now, Cap'n
Whittaker.  'Lonzo Snow's an elder and all that, but I can't help
it.  Anyway, his place was all fixed up a year ago and I didn't get
the job.  A feller has to look after himself these days."

With these division commanders to lead their forces into the
enemy's country and with Asaph and Bailey doing what they could to
help, Captain Cy's campaign soon became worthy of respectful
consideration.  For a while Tad Simpson scoffed at the opposition;
then he began to work openly for Mr. Snow.  Later he marshaled his
trusted officers around the pool table in the back room of the
barber shop and confided to them that it was anybody's fight and
that he was worried.

"It's past bein' a joke," he said.  "It's mighty serious.  We've
got to hustle, we have.  Heman trusted me in this job, and if I
fall down it 'll be bad for me and for you fellers, too.  I wish he
was home to run things himself, but he's got business down South
there--some property he owns or somethin'--and says he can't leave.
But we must win!  By mighty! we've GOT to.  So get every vote you
can.  Never mind how; just get 'em, that's all."

Captain Cy was thoroughly enjoying himself.  The struggle suited
him to perfection.  He was young, in spite of his fifty-five years,
and this tussle against odds, reminding him of other tussles during
his first seasons in business, aroused his energies and, as he
expressed it, "stirred up his vitals and made him hop round like a
dose of 'pain killer.'"

He did not, however, forget Bos'n.  He and she had their walks and
their pleasant evenings together in spite of politics.  He took the
child into his confidence and told her of the daily gain, or loss,
in votes, as if she were his own age.  She understood a little of
all this, and tried hard to understand the rest, preaching between
times to Georgianna how "the bad men were trying to beat Uncle
Cyrus because he was gooder than they, but they couldn't, 'cause
everybody loved him so."  Georgianna had some doubts, but she kept
them to herself.

Among the things in Bos'n's "box" was a long envelope, sealed with
wax and with a lawyer's name printed in one corner.  The captain
opened it, at Emily's suggestion, and was astonished to find that
the inclosure was a will, dated some years back, in which Mrs. Mary
Thomas, the child's mother, left to her daughter all her personal
property and also the land in Orham, Massachusetts, which had been
willed to her by her own mother.  There was a note with the will in
which Mrs. Thomas stated that no one save herself had known of this
land, not even her husband.  She had not told him because she
feared that, like everything else, it would be sold and the money
wasted in dissipation.  "He suspected something of the sort," she
added, "but he did not find out the secret, although he--"  She had
evidently scratched out what followed, but Captain Cy mentally
filled in the blank with details of abuse and cruelty.  "If
anything happens to me," concluded the widow, "I want the land sold
and the money used for Emily's maintenance as long as it lasts."

The captain went over to Orham and looked up the land.  It was a
strip along the shore, almost worthless, and unsalable at present.
The taxes had been regularly paid each year by Mary Thomas, who had
sent money orders from Concord.  The self-denial represented by
these orders was not a little.

"Never mind, Bos'n," said Captain Cy, when he returned from the
Orham trip.  "Your ancestral estates ain't much now but a sand-flea
menagerie.  However, if this section ever does get to be the big
summer resort folks are prophesying for it, you may sell out to
some millionaire and you and me'll go to Europe.  Meantime, we'll
try to keep afloat, if the Harniss Bank don't spring a leak."

On the day following this conversation he took a flying trip to
Ostable, the county seat, returning the same evening, and saying
nothing to anyone about his reasons for going nor what he had done
while there.

Bos'n's birthday was the eighteenth of November.  The captain, in
spite of the warmth of his struggle for committee honors, determined
to have a small celebration on the afternoon and evening of that
day.  It was to be a surprise for Emily, and, after school was over,
some of her particular friends among the scholars were to come in,
there was to be a cake with eight candles on it, and a supper at
which ice cream--lemon and vanilla, prepared by Mrs. Cahoon--was to
be the principal feature.  Also there would be games and all sorts
of fun.

Captain Cy was tremendously interested in the party.  He spent
hours with Georgianna and the Board of Strategy, preparing the list
of guests.  His cunning in ascertaining from the unsuspecting child
who, among her schoolmates, she would like to invite, was deep and
guileful.

"Now, Bos'n," he would say, "suppose you was goin' to clear out and
leave this town for a spell, who--"

"But, Uncle Cyrus--"  Bos'n's eyes grew frightened and moist in a
moment, "I ain't going, am I?  I don't want to go."

"No, no!  Course you ain't goin'--that is, not for a long while,
anyhow," with a sidelong look at the members of the "Board," then
present.  "But just suppose you and me was startin' on that Europe
trip.  Who'd you want to say good-by to most of all?"

Each name given by the child was surreptitiously penciled by Bailey
on a scrap of paper.  The list was a long one and, when the great
afternoon came, the Whittaker house was crowded.

The supper was a brilliant success.  So was the cake, brought in
with candles ablaze, by the grinning Georgianna.  Beside the
children there were some older people present, Bailey and Asaph, of
course, and the "regulars" from the perfect boarding house, who had
been invited because it was fairly certain that Mr. Bangs wouldn't
be allowed to attend if his wife did not.  Miss Dawes had also been
asked, at Bos'n's well-understood partiality, but she had declined.

Toward the end of the meal, when the hilarity at the long table was
at its height, an unexpected guest made his appearance.  There was
a knock at the dining-room door, and Georgianna, opening it, was
petrified to behold, standing upon the step, no less a personage
than the Honorable Heman Atkins, supposed by most of us to be then
somewhere in that wide stretch of territory vaguely termed "the
South."

"Good evening, all," said the illustrious one, removing his silk
hat and stepping into the room.  "What a charming scene!  I trust I
do not intrude."

Georgianna was still speechless, in which unwonted condition she
was not alone, Messrs. Bangs and Tidditt being also stricken dumb.
But Captain Cy rose to the occasion grandly.

"Intrude?" he repeated.  "Not a mite of it!  Mighty glad to see
you, Heman.  Here, give us your hat.  Pull up to the table.  When
did you get back?  Thought you was in the orange groves somewheres."

"Ahem!  I was.  Yes, I was in that neighborhood.  But it is hard to
stay away from dear old Bayport.  Home ties, you know, home ties.
I came down on the morning train, but I stopped over at Harniss on
business and drove across.  Ahem!  Yes.  The housekeeper informed
me that my daughter was here, and, seeing the lights and hearing
the laughter, I couldn't resist making this impromptu call.  I'm
sure as an old friend and neighbor, Cyrus, you will pardon me.
Alicia, darling, come and kiss papa."

Darling Alicia accepted the invitation with a rustle of silk and
an ecstatic squeal of delight.  During this affecting scene Asaph
whispered to Bailey that he "cal'lated" Heman had had a hurry-up
distress signal from Simpson; to which sage observation Mr. Bangs
replied with a vigorous nod, showing that Captain Cy's example had
had its effect, in that they no longer stood in such awe of their
representative at Washington.

However true Asaph's calculation might have been, Mr. Atkins made
no mention of politics.  He was urbanity itself.  He drew up to the
table, partook of the ice cream and cake, and greeted his friends
and neighbors with charming benignity.

"Wan't it sweet of him to come?" whispered Miss Phinney to Keturah.
"And him so nice and everyday and sociable.  And when Cap'n
Whittaker's runnin' against his friend, as you might say."

Keturah replied with a dubious shake of the head.

"I think Captain Cyrus is goin' to get into trouble," she said.
"I've preached to Bailey more 'n a little about keepin' clear, but
he won't."

"Games in t'other room now," ordered Captain Cy.  But Mr. Atkins
held up his hand.

"Pardon me, just a moment, Cyrus, if you please," he said.  "I feel
that on this happy occasion, it is my duty and pleasure to propose
a toast."  He held his lemonade glass aloft.  "Permit me," he
proclaimed, to wish many happy birthdays and long life to Miss--  I
beg pardon, Cyrus, but what is your little friend's name?"

"Emily Richards Thayer," replied the captain, carried away by
enthusiasm and off his guard for once.

"To Em--" began Heman.  Then he paused and for the first time in
his public life seemed at a loss for words.  "What?" he asked, and
his hand shook.  "I fear I didn't catch the name."

"No wonder," laughed Mr. Tidditt.  "Cy's so crazy to-night he'd
forget his own name.  Know what you said, Cy?  You said she was
Emily Richards THAYER!  Haw! haw!  She ain't a Thayer, Heman; her
last name's Thomas.  She's Emily Richards Thayer's granddaughter
though.  Her granddad was John Thayer, over to Orham.  Good land!
I forgot.  Well, what of it, Cy?  'Twould have to be known some
time."

Everyone looked at Captain Cy then.  No one observed Mr. Atkins for
the moment.  When they did turn their gaze upon the great man he
had sunk back in his chair, the glass of lemonade was upset upon
the cloth before him, and he, with a very white face, was staring
at Emily Richards Thomas.

"What's the matter, Heman?" asked the captain anxiously.  "Ain't
sick, are you?"

The congressman started.

"Oh, no!" he said hurriedly.  "Oh, no! but I'm afraid I've soiled
your cloth.  It was awkward of me.  I--I really, I apologize--I--"

He wiped his face with his handkerchief.  Captain Cy laughed.

"Oh, never mind the tablecloth," he said.  "I cal'late it's too
soiled already to be hurt by a bath, even a lemon one.  Well,
you've all heard the toast.  Full glasses, now.  Here's TO you,
Bos'n!  Drink hearty, all hands, and give the ship a good name."

If the heartiness with which they drank is a criterion, the good
name of the ship was established.  Then the assembly adjourned to
the sitting room and--yes, even the front parlor.  Not since the
days when that sacred apartment had been desecrated by the
irreverent city boarders, during the Howes regime, had its walls
echoed to such whoops and shouts of laughter.  The children played
"Post Office" and "Copenhagen" and "Clap in, Clap out," while the
grown folks looked on.

"Ain't they havin' a fine time, Cap?" gushed Miss Phinney.  "Don't
it make you wish you was young again?"

"Angie," replied Captain Cy solemnly, "don't tempt me; don't!  If
they keep on playin' that Copenhagen and you stand right alongside
of me, there's no tellin' what 'll happen."

Angeline declared that he was "turrible," but she faced the
threatened danger nevertheless, and bravely remained where she was.

Mr. Atkins went home early in the evening, taking Alicia with him.
He explained that his long railroad journey had--er--somewhat
fatigued him and, though he hated to leave such a--er--delightful
gathering, he really felt that, under the circumstances, his
departure would be forgiven.  Captain Cy opened the door for him
and stood watching as, holding his daughter by the hand, he marched
majestically down the path.

"Hum!" mused the captain aloud.  "I guess he has been travelin'
nights.  Thought he ought to be here quick, I shouldn't wonder.  He
does look tired, that's a fact, and kind of pale, seemed to me."

"Well, there, now!" exclaimed Mrs. Tripp, who was looking over his
shoulder.  "Did you see that?"

"No; what was it?"

"Why, when he went to open his gate, one of them arbor vity bushes
he set out this spring knocked his hat off.  And he never seemed to
notice, but went right on.  If 'Licia hadn't picked it up, that
nice new hat would have been layin' there yet.  That's the most
undignified thing ever I see Heman Atkins do.  He MUST be tired
out, poor man!"



CHAPTER X

A LETTER AND A VISITOR


"Whit," asked Asaph next day, "wan't you surprised to see Heman
last night?"

Captain Cy nodded.  He was once more busy with the doll house, the
construction of which had progressed slowly of late, owing to the
demands which the party and politics made upon its builder's time.

"Yup," he said, "I sartinly was.  Pretty good sign, I shouldn't
wonder.  Looks as if friend Tad had found the tide settin' too
strong against him and had whistled for a tug.  All right; the more
scared the other side get, the better for us."

"But what in the world made Heman come over and have supper?  He
never so much as stepped foot in the house afore, did he?  That's
the biggest conundrum of all."

"Well, I guess I've got the answer.  Strikes me that Heman's
sociableness is the best sign yet.  Heman's a slick article, and
when he sees there's danger of losin' the frostin' on the cake he
takes care to scrape the burnt part off the bottom.  I may be
school committeeman after town meetin'.  He'll move all creation to
stop me, of course--in his quiet, round-the-corner way--but, if I
do win out, he wants to be in a position to take me one side and
tell me that he's glad of it; he felt all along I was the right
feller for the job, and if there's anything he can do to make
things easier for me just call on him.  That's the way I size it
up, anyhow."

"Cy, I never see anybody like you.  You're dead set against Heman,
and have been right along.  And he's never done anything to you,
fur's I see.  He's given a lot to the town, and he's always been
the most looked-up-to man we've got.  Joe Dimick and two or three
more chronic growls have been the only ones to sling out hints
against him, till you come.  Course I'm working for you, tooth and
nail, and I will say that you seem to be gettin' the votes some way
or other.  But if Heman SHOULD step right out and say:  'Feller
citizens, I'm behind Tad Simpson in this fight, and as a favor to
me and 'cause I think it's right and best, I want 'Lonzo Snow
elected'--well, _I_ don't believe you'd have more'n one jack and a
ten spot to count for game."

"Probably not, Ase; I presume likely not.  But you take a day off
some time and see if you can remember that Heman EVER stepped right
out and said things.  Blame it! that's just it.  As for WHY he
riles me up and makes me stubborn as a balky mule, I don't know
exactly.  All I'm sure is that he does.  Maybe it's 'cause I don't
like the way he wears his whiskers.  Maybe it's because he's so
top-lofty and condescendin'.   A feller can whistle to me and say:
'Come on, Bill,' and I'll trot at his heels all day.  But when he
pats me on the head and says:  'There there! nice doggie.  Go under
the bed and lay down,' my back bristles up and I commence to growl
right off.  There's consider'ble Whittaker in me, as I've told you
before."

The town clerk pondered over this rather unsatisfactory line of
reasoning for some minutes.  His companion fitted a wooden chimney
on the doll house, found it a trifle out of plumb, and proceeded to
whittle a shaving off the lower edge.  Then Asaph sighed, as one
who gives up a perplexing riddle, put his hand in his pocket, and
produced a bundle of papers.

"I made out a list of fellers down to the east'ard that I'm goin'
to see this afternoon," he said.  "Some of 'em I guess 'll vote for
you, but most of 'em are pretty sartin' for 'Lonzo.  However, I--
Where is that list?  I had it somewhere's.  And--well, I swan!  I
come pretty near forgettin' it myself.  I'm 'most as bad as
Bailey."

From the bundle of papers he produced a crumpled envelope.

"That Bailey," he observed, "must be in love, I cal'late, though I
don't know who with.  Ketury, I s'pose, 'cordin' to law and order,
but--  Well, anyhow, he's gettin' more absent-minded all the time.
Here's a letter for you, Cy, that he got at the post-office a week
ago Monday.  'Twas the night of the church sociable, and he had on
his Sunday cutaway, and he ain't worn it sence, till the party
yesterday.  When he took off the coat, goin' to bed, the letter
fell out of it.  I guess he was ashamed to fetch it round himself,
so he asked me to do it.  Better late than never, hey?  Here's that
list at last."

He produced the list and handed it to the captain for inspection.
The latter looked it over, made a few comments and suggestions, and
told his friend to heave ahead and land as many of the listed as
possible.  This Mr. Tidditt promised to do, and, replacing the
papers in his pocket, started for the gate.

"Oh!  Say, Ase!"

The town clerk, his hand on the gate latch, turned.

"Well, what is it?" he asked.  "Don't keep me no longer'n you can
help.  I got work to do, I have."

"All right, I won't stop you.  Only fallin' in love is kind of
epidemic down at the boardin' house, I guess.  Who is it that's got
you in tow--Matildy?"

"What are you talkin' about?  Didn't I tell you to quit namin' me
with Matildy Tripp?  I like a joke as well as most folks, but when
it's wore into the ground I--"

"Sho, sho!  Don't get mad.  It's your own fault.  You said that
absent-mindedness was a love symptom, so I just got to thinkin',
that's all.  That letter that Bailey forgot--you haven't given it
to me yet."

Asaph turned red and hastily snatched the papers from his pocket.
He strode back to the door of the woodshed, handed his friend the
crumpled envelope, and stalked off without another word.  The
captain chuckled, laid the letter on the bench beside him and went
on with his work.  It was perhaps ten minutes later when, happening
to glance at the postmark on the envelope, he saw that it was
"Concord, N. H."

Asaph's vote-gathering trip "to the east'ard" made a full day for
him.  He returned to the perfect boarding house just at supper
time.  During the meal he realized that Mr. Bangs seemed to be
trying to attract his attention.  Whenever he glanced in that
gentleman's direction his glance was met by winks and mystifying
shakes of the head.  Losing patience at last, he demanded to know
what was the matter.

"Want to say somethin' to me, do you?" he inquired briskly.  "If
you do, out with it!  Don't set there workin' your face as if 'twas
wound up, like a clockwork image."

This remark had the effect of turning all the other faces toward
Bailey's.  He was very much upset.

"No, no!" he stammered.  "No, no!  I don't want you for nothin'.
Was I makin' my face go?  I--I didn't know it.  I've been washin'
carriages and cleanin' up the barn all day and I cal'late I've
overdone.  I'm gettin' old, and hard work's likely to bring on
shakin' palsy to old folks."

His wife tartly observed that, if WORK was the cause of it, she
guessed he was safe from palsy for quite a spell yet.  At any rate,
a marked recovery set in and he signaled no more during the meal.
But when it was over, and his task as dish-wiper completed, he
hurried out of doors and found Mr. Tidditt, shivering in the
November wind, on the front porch.

"Now what is it?" asked Asaph sharply.  "I know there's somethin'
and I've froze to death by sections waitin' to hear it."

"Have you seen Cy?" whispered Bailey, glancing fearfully over his
shoulder at the lighted windows of the house.

"No, not sence mornin'.  Why?"

"Well, there's somethin' the matter with him.  Somethin' serious.
I was swabbin' decks in the barn about eleven o'clock, when he come
postin' in, white and shaky, and so nervous he couldn't stand
still.  Looked as if he had had a stroke almost.  I--"

"Godfrey scissors!  You don't s'pose Heman's comin' back has
knocked out his chances for the committee, do you?"

"No, sir-ee! 'twan't that.  Cy's anxious to be elected and all, but
you know his politics are more of a joke with him than anything
else.  And any rap Heman or Tad could give him would only make him
fight harder.  And he wouldn't talk politics at all; didn't seem to
give a durn about 'em, one way or t'other.  No, 'twas somethin'
about that letter, the one I forgot so long.  He wanted to know why
in time I hadn't given it to him when it fust come.  He was real
ugly about it, for him, and kept pacin' up and down the barn floor
and layin' into me, till I begun to think he was crazy.  I guess he
see my feelin's were hurt, 'cause, just afore he left, he held out
his hand and said I mustn't mind his talk; he'd been knocked on his
beam ends, he said, and wan't really responsible."

"Wouldn't he say what had knocked him?"

"No, couldn't get nothin' out of him.  And when he quit he went off
toward home, slappin' his fists together and actin' as if he didn't
see the road across his bows.  Now, you know how cool and easy
goin' Whit generally is.  I swan to man, Ase! he made me so sorry
for him I didn't know what to do."

"Ain't you been up to see him sence?"

"No, Ketury was sot on havin' the barn cleaned, and she stood over
me with a rope's end, as you might say.  I couldn't get away a
minute, though I made up more'n a dozen errands at Simmons's and
the like of that.  You hold on till I sneak into the entry and get
my cap and we'll put for there now.  I won't be but a jiffy.  I'm
worried."

They entered the yard of the Cy Whittaker place together and
approached the side door.  As they stood on the steps Asaph touched
his chum on the arm and pointed to the window beside them.  The
shade was half drawn and beneath it they had a clear view of the
interior of the sitting room.  Captain Cy was in the rocker before
the stove, holding Bos'n in his arms.  The child was sound asleep,
her yellow braid hanging over the captain's broad shoulder.  He was
gazing down into her face with a