 look which was so full of yearning
and love that it brought a choke into the throats of the pair who
saw it.

They entered the dining room.  The captain sprang from his chair
and, still holding the little girl close against his breast, met
them at the sitting-room door.  When he saw who the visitors were,
he caught his breath, almost with a sob, and seemed relieved.

"S-s-h-h!" he whispered warningly.  "She's asleep."

The members of the Board of Strategy nodded understandingly and sat
down upon the sofa.  Captain Cy tiptoed to the bedroom, turned back
the bedclothes with one hand and laid Bos'n down.  They saw him
tuck her carefully in and then stoop and kiss her.  He returned to
the sitting room and closed the door behind him.

"We see she was asleep afore we come in," explained Asaph.  "We see
you and her through the window."

The captain looked hurriedly at the window indicated.  Then he
stepped over and pulled the shade down to the sill, doing the same
with the curtains of the other two windows.

"What's the matter?" inquired Bailey, trying to be facetious.
"'Fraid of 'Lonzo's crowd spyin' on us?"

Captain Cy did not reply.  He did not even sit down, but remained
standing, his back to the stove.

"Well?" he asked shortly.  "Did you fellers want to see me for
anything 'special?"

"Wanted to see what had struck you all to once," replied Mr. Tidditt.
"Bailey says you scared him half to death this forenoon.  And you
look now as if somebody's ghost had riz and hollered 'Boo!' at you.
For the land sakes, Whit, what IS it?"

The captain drew his hand across his forehead.

"Ghost?" he repeated absently.  "No, I haven't SEEN a ghost.
There! there! don't mind me.  I ain't real well to-day, I guess."
He smiled crookedly.

"Don't you want to hear about my vote-grabbin' cruise?" asked
Tidditt.  "I was flatterin' myself you'd be tickled to hear I'd
done so well.  Why, even Marcellus Parker says he may vote for
you--if he makes up his mind that way."

Marcellus was a next-door neighbor of Alonzo Snow's.  But Captain
Cy didn't seem to care.

"Hey?" he murmured.  "Yes.  Well?"

"WELL!  Is that all you've got to say?  Are you really sick, Cy?
Or is Bos'n sick?"

"No!" was the answer, almost fierce in its utterance.  "She isn't
sick.  Don't be a fool."

"What's foolish about that?  I didn't know but she might be.
There's mumps in town and--"

"She's all right; so shut up, will you!  There, Ase!" he added.
"I'm the fool myself.  Don't mind my barkin'; I don't mean it.  I
am about sick, I cal'late.  Be better to-morrer, maybe."

"What's got into you?  Was that letter of Bailey's--"

"Hush!"  The captain held up his hand.  "I thought I heard a team."

"Depot wagon, most likely," said Bailey.  "About time for it!
Humph! seems to be stoppin', don't it?  Was you expectin' anybody?
Shall I go and--"

"No!  Set still."

The pair on the sofa sat still.  Captain Cy stood like a statue in
the middle of the floor.  He squared his shoulders and jammed his
clenched fists into his pockets.  Steps crunched the gravel of the
walk.  There came a knock at the door of the dining room.

Walking steadily, but with a face set as the figurehead on one of
his own ships, the captain went to answer the knock.  They heard
the door open, and then a man's voice asked:

"Is this Cap'n Whittaker?"

"Yes," was the short answer.

"Well, Cap, I guess you don't know me, though maybe you know some
of my family.  Ha, ha!  Don't understand that, hey?  Well, you let
me in and I'll explain the joke."

The captain's reply was calm and deliberate.

"I shouldn't wonder if I understood it," he said.  "Come in.
Don't--"  The remainder of the sentence was whispered and the
listeners on the sofa could not hear it.  A moment later Captain Cy
entered the sitting room, followed by his caller.

The latter was a stranger.  He was a broad-shouldered man of medium
height, with a yellowish mustache and brown hair.  He was dressed
in rather shabby clothes, without an overcoat, and he had a soft
felt hat in his hand.  The most noticeable thing about him was a
slight hesitancy in his walk.  He was not lame, he did not limp,
yet his left foot seemed to halt for an instant as he brought it
forward in the step.  They learned afterwards that it had been hurt
in a mine cave-in.  He carried himself with a swagger, and, after
his entrance, there was a perceptible aroma of alcohol in the room.

He stared at the Board of Strategy and the stare was returned in
full measure.  Bailey and Asaph were wildly curious.  They, of
course, connected the stranger's arrival with the mysterious letter
and the captain's perturbation of the day.

But their curiosity was not to be satisfied, at least not then.

"How are you, gents?" hailed the newcomer cheerfully.  "Like the
looks of me, do you?"

Captain Cy cut off further conversation.

"Ase," he said, "this--er--gentleman and I have got some business
to talk over.  I know you're good enough friends of mine not to
mind if I ask you to clear out.  You'll understand.  You WILL
understand, boys, won't you?" he added, almost entreatingly.

"Sartin sure!" replied Mr. Tidditt, rising hurriedly.  "Don't say
another word, Whit."  And the mystified Bangs concurred with a
"Yes, yes!  Why, of course!  Didn't have nothin' that amounts to
nothin' to stay for anyhow.  See you to-morrer, Cy."

Outside and at the gate they stopped and looked at each other.

"Well!" exclaimed Asaph.  "If that ain't the strangest thing!  Who
was that feller?  Where'd he come from?  Did you notice how Cy
acted?  Seemed to be holdin' himself in by main strength."

"Did you smell the rum on him?" returned Bailey.  "On that t'other
chap, I mean?  Didn't he look like a reg'lar no-account to you?
And say, Ase, didn't he remind you of somebody you'd seen
somewheres--kind of, in a way?"

They walked home in a dazed state, asking unanswerable questions
and making profitless guesses.  But Asaph's final remark seemed to
sum up the situation.

"There's trouble comin' of this, Bailey," he declared.  "And it's
trouble for Cy Whittaker, I'm afraid.  Poor old Cy!  Well, WE'LL
stand by him, anyhow.  I don't believe he'll sleep much to-night.
Didn't look as though he would, did he?  Who IS that feller?"

If he had seen Captain Cy, at two o'clock the next morning, sitting
by Bos'n's bedside and gazing hopelessly at the child, he would
have realized that, if his former predictions were wiped off the
slate and he could be judged by the one concerning the captain's
sleepless night, he might thereafter pose as a true prophet.



CHAPTER XI

A BARGAIN OFF


"Mornin', Georgianna," said Captain Cy to his housekeeper as the
latter unlocked the back door of the Whittaker house next morning.
"I'm a little ahead of you this time."

Miss Taylor, being Bayport born and bred, was an early riser.  She
lodged with her sister, in Bassett's Hollow, a good half mile from
the Cy Whittaker place, but she was always on hand at the latter
establishment by six each morning, except Sundays.  Now she glanced
quickly at the clock.  The time was ten minutes to six.

"Land sakes!" she exclaimed.  "I should say you was!  What in the
world got you up so early?  Ain't sick, are you?"

"No," replied the captain wearily.  "I ain't sick.  I didn't sleep
very well last night, that's all."

Georgianna looked sharply at him.  His face was haggard and his
eyes had dark circles under them.

"Humph!" she grunted.  "No, I guess you didn't.  Looks to me as if
you'd been up all night."  Then she added an anxious query:
"'Tain't Bos'n--she ain't sick, I hope?"

"No.  She's all right.  I say, Georgianna, you put on an extry
plate this mornin'.  Got company for breakfast."

The housekeeper was surprised.

"For breakfast?" she repeated.  "Land of goodness! who's comin' for
breakfast?  I never heard of company droppin' in for breakfast.
That's one meal folks generally get to home.  Who is it?  Mr.
Tidditt?  Has Ketury turned him out door because he's too bad an
example for her husband?"

"No, 'tain't Ase.  It's a--a friend of mine.  Well, not exactly a
friend, maybe, but an acquaintance from out of town.  He came last
evenin'.  He's up in the spare bedroom."

"Well, I never!  Come unexpected, didn't he?  I wish I'd known he
was comin'.  That spare room bed ain't been aired I don't know
when."

"I guess he can stand it.  I cal'late he's slept in consider'ble
worse--Hum!  Yes, he did come kind of sudden."

"What's his name?"

"What difference does that make?  I don't know's his name makes any
odds about gettin' his breakfast for him."

Georgianna was hurt.  Her easy-going employer had never used this
tone before when addressing her.

"Oh!" she sniffed.  "Is THAT the way you feel?  All right!  I can
mind my own business, thank you.  I only asked because it's
convenient sometimes to know whether to call a person Bill Smith or
Sol Jones.  But I don't care if it's Nebuchadnezzar.  I know when
to keep my tongue still, I guess."

She flounced over to the range.  Captain Cy looked ashamed of
himself.

"I'm kind of out of sorts to-day," he said.  "Got some headache.
Why, his name is--is--yes, 'tis Smith, come to think of it--John
Smith.  Funny you should guess right, wan't it?"

"Humph!" was the ungracious answer.  "Names don't interest me, I
tell you."

The captain was in the dining room when Bos'n appeared.

"Good morning, Uncle Cyrus," she said.  "You've been waiting,
haven't you?  Am I late?  I didn't mean to be."

"No, no! you ain't late.  Early, if anything.  Breakfast ain't
quite ready yet.  Come here and set in my lap.  I want to talk to
you."

He took her on his knee.  She looked up into his face.

"What's the matter, Uncle Cy?" she asked.  "What makes you so
sober?"

"Sober?  If you ain't the oldest young one for eight years I ever
saw!  Why, I ain't sober.  No, no!  Say, Bos'n, do you like your
school as well as ever?"

"Yes, sir.  I like it better all the time."

"Do, hey?  And that teacher woman--go on likin' her?"

The child nodded emphatically.  "Yes, sir," she said.  "And I
haven't been kept after since that once."

"Sho! sho!  Course you ain't'!  So you think Bayport's as nice as
Concord, do you?"

"Oh! lots nicer!  If mamma was only here I'd never want to be
anywhere else.  And not then, maybe, unless you was there, too."

"Hum!  Want to know!  Say, Bos'n, how would you feel if you had to
go somewheres else?"

"To live?  Have we got to?  I'd feel dreadful, of course.  But if
you've got to go, Uncle Cyrus, why--"

"Me?  No; I ain't got to go anywheres.  But 'twas you I was thinkin'
of.  Wouldn't want to leave the old man, hey?"

"To leave YOU!  Oh, Uncle Cyrus!"

She was staring at him now and her chin was trembling.

"Uncle," she demanded, "you ain't going to send me away?  Haven't I
been a good girl?"

The captain's lips shut tight.  He waited a moment before replying.
"'Deed you've been a good girl!" he said brusquely.  "I never saw a
better one.  No, I ain't goin' to SEND you away.  Don't you worry
about that."

"But Alicia Atkins said one time you told somebody you was going to
send me out West, after a while.  I didn't believe it, then, she's
so mean, but she said you said--"

"SAID!"  Captain Cy groaned.  "The Lord knows what I ain't said!
I've been a fool, dearie, and it's a judgment on me, I guess."

"But ain't you goin' to keep me?  I--I--"

She sobbed.  The captain stroked her hair.

"Keep you?" he muttered.  "Yes, by the big dipper!  I'm goin' to
keep you, if I can--if I can."

"Hello!" said a voice.  The pair looked up.  The man who had
arrived on the previous night stood in the sitting-room doorway.
How long he had been standing there the captain did not know.  What
he did know was that Mr. John Smith by daylight was not more
prepossessing than the same individual viewed by the aid of a lamp.

Emily saw the stranger and slid from Captain Cy's knees.  The
captain rose.

"Bos'n," he said, "this is Mr.--er--Smith, who's goin' to make us a
little visit.  I want you to shake hands with him."

The girl dutifully approached Mr. Smith and extended her hand.  He
took it and held it in his own.

"Is this the--" he began.

Captain Cy bowed assent.

"Yes," he said, his eyes fixed on the visitor's face.  "Yes.  Don't
forget what you said last night."

Smith shook his head.

"No," he replied.  "I ain't the kind that forgets, unless it pays
pretty well.  There's some things I've remembered for quite a few
years."

He looked the child over from head to foot and his brows drew
together in an ugly frown.

"So this is her, hey?" he muttered musingly.  "Humph!  Well, I
don't know as I'd have guessed it.  Favors the other side of the
house more--the respectable side, I should say.  Still, there's a
little brand of the lost sheep, hey?  Enough to prove property,
huh?  Mark of the beast, I s'pose the psalm-singin' relations would
call it.  D--n em!  I--"

"Steady!" broke in the captain.  Mr. Smith started, seemed to
remember where he was, and his manner changed.

"Come and see me, honey," he coaxed, drawing the girl toward him by
the hand he was holding.  "Ain't you got a nice kiss for me this
fine mornin'?  Don't be scared.  I won't bite."

Bos'n looked shrinkingly at Mr. Smith's unshaven cheeks and then at
Captain Cy.  The latter's face was absolutely devoid of expression.
He merely nodded.

So Emily kissed one of the bristling cheeks.  The kiss was returned
full upon the mouth.  She wiped her lips and darted away to her
chair by the table.

"What's your hurry?" inquired the visitor.  "Don't I do it right?
Been some time since I kissed a girl--a little one, anyhow," he
added, winking at his host.  "Never mind, we'll know each other
better by and by."

He looked on in wondering disgust as Bos'n said her "grace."

"What in blazes!" he burst out when the little blessing was
finished.  "Who put her up to that?  A left-over from the psalm-
singers, is it?"

"I don't know," answered the captain, speaking with deliberation.
"I do know that I like to have her do it and that she shall do it
as long's she's at this table."

"Oh! she shall, hey?  Well, I reckon--"

"She shall--AS LONG AS SHE'S AT THIS TABLE.  Is that real plain and
understandable, or shall I write it down?"

There was an icy clearness in the captain's tone which seemed to
freeze further conversation on the part of Mr. Smith.  He merely
grunted and ate his breakfast in silence.  He ate a great deal and
ate it rapidly.

Bos'n departed for school when the meal was over.  Captain Cy
helped her on with her coat and hood.  Then, as he always did of
late, he kissed her good-by.

"Hi!" called Mr. Smith from the sitting room.  "Ain't I in on that?
If there's any kisses goin' I want to take a hand before the deal's
over."

"Must I?" whispered Bos'n pleadingly.  "Must I, Uncle Cy?  I don't
want to.  I don't like him."

"Come on!" called Mr. Smith.  "I'm gettin' over my bashfulness
fast.  Hurry up!"

"Must I kiss him, Uncle Cyrus?" whispered Bos'n.  "MUST I?"

"No!" snapped the captain sharply.  "Trot right along now, dearie.
Be a good girl.  Good-by."

He entered the sitting room.  His guest had found the Sunday box
and was lighting one of his host's cigars.

"Well," he inquired easily, "what's next on the bill?  Anything
goin' on in this forsaken hole?"

"There's a barber shop down the road.  You might go there first, I
should say.  Not that you need it, but just as a novelty like."

"Humph!  I don't know.  What's the matter with your razor?"

"Nothin'.  At least I ain't found anything wrong with it yet."

"Oh!  Say, look here! you're a queer guy, you are.  I ain't got you
right in my mind yet.  One minute butter wouldn't melt in your
mouth, and the next you're fresh as a new egg.  What IS your little
game, anyway?  You've got one, so don't tell me you ain't."

Captain Cy was plainly embarrassed.  He gazed at the "Shore to
Shore" picture on the wall as he answered.

"No game about it," he said.  "Last night you and I agreed that
nothin' was to be said for a few days.  You was to stay here and
I'd try to make you comfort'ble, that's all.  Then we'd see about
that other matter, settle on a fair price, and--"

"Yes, I know.  That's all right.  But you're too willin'.  There's
something else.  Say!"  The ugly scowl was in evidence again.
"Say, look here, you! you ain't got somethin' up your sleeve, have
you?  There ain't somethin' more that I don't know about, is there?
No more secrets than that--"

"No!  You hear me?  No!  You'll get your rights, and maybe a little
more than your rights, if you're decent.  And it'll pay you to be
decent."

"Humph!"  Mr. Smith seemed to be thinking.  Then he added, looking
up keenly under his brows:  "How about the--the incumbrance on the
property?  Of course, when I go I'll have to take that with me,
and--"

Captain Cy interrupted.

"There! there!" he exclaimed, and there was a shake in his voice,
"there! there!  Don't let's talk about such things now.  I--I--
Let's wait a spell.  We'll have some more plans to make, maybe.  If
you want to use my razor it's right in that drawer.  Just help
yourself."

The visitor laughed aloud.  He nodded as if satisfied.  "Ho! ho!"
he chuckled.  "I see!  Humph! yes--I see.  The fools ain't all
dead, and there's none to beat an old one.  Well! well!  All right,
pard!  I guess you and me'll get along fine.  I've changed my mind;
I WILL go to the barber shop, after all.  Only I'm a little shy of
dust just at present.  So, to oblige a friend, maybe you'll hand
over, huh?"

The captain reached into his pocket, extracted a two-dollar bill,
and passed it to the speaker.  Mr. Smith smiled and shook his head.

"You can't come in on that, pard," he said.  "The limit's five."

Captain Cy took back the bill and exchanged it for one with a V in
each corner.  The visitor took it and turned toward the door.

"Ta! ta!" he said, taking his hat from the peg in the dining room.
"I'm off for the clippers.  When I come back I'll be the sweetest
little Willie in the diggin's.  So long."

Bos'n and the captain sat down to the dinner at noon alone.  Mr.
Smith had not returned from his trip to the barber's.  He came in,
however, just before the meal was over, still in an unshorn
condition, somewhat flushed and very loquacious.

"Say!" he exclaimed genially.  "That Simpson's the right sort,
ain't he?  Him and me took a shine to each other from the go-off.
He's been West himself and he's got some width to him.  He's no
psalm singer."

"Humph!" commented the captain, with delicate sarcasm.  "He don't
seem to be much of a barber, either.  What's the matter?  Gone out
of business, has he?  Or was you so wild or woolly he got discouraged
before he begun?"

"Great snakes!" exclaimed the visitor.  "I forgot all about the
clippers!  Well, that's one on me, pard!  I'll make a new try
soon's grub's over.  Don't be so tight-fisted with the steak; this
is a plate I'm passin', not a contribution box."

He winked at Bos'n and would have chucked her under the chin if she
had not dodged.  She seemed to have taken a great aversion to Mr.
Smith and was plainly afraid of him.

"Is he going to stay very long, Uncle Cyrus?" she whispered, when
it was school time once more.  "Do you think he's nice?"

Captain Cy did not answer.  When she had gone and the guest had
risen from the table and put on his hat, the captain said
warningly:

"There's one little bit of advice I want to give you, Mister Man:
A bargain's a bargain, but it takes two to keep it.  Don't let your
love for Tad Simpson lead you into talkin' too much.  Talk's cheap,
they say, but too much of it might be mighty dear for you.
Understand?"

Smith patted him on the back.  "Lord love you, pard!" he chuckled,
"I'm no spring chicken.  I'm as hard to open as a safe, I am.  It
takes a can opener to get anything out of me."

"Yes; well, you can get inside some folks easier with a corkscrew.
I've been told that Tad's a kind of a medium sometimes.  If he
raises any spirits in that back room of his, I'd leave 'em alone,
if I was you.  So long as you're decent, I'll put up with--"

But Mr. Smith was on his way to the gate, whistling as if he hadn't
a care in the world.  Captain Cy watched him go down the road, and
then, with the drawn, weary look on his face which had been there
since the day before, he entered the sitting room and threw himself
into a chair.

Miss Phoebe Dawes, the school teacher, worked late that evening.
There were examination papers to be gone over, and experience had
demonstrated that the only place where she could be free from
interruptions was the schoolroom itself.  At the perfect boarding
house the shrill tones of Keturah's voice and those of Miss Phinney
and Mrs. Tripp penetrated through shut doors.  It is hard to figure
percentages when the most intimate details of Bayport's family life
are being recited and gloated over on the other side of a thin
partition.  And when Matilda undertook to defend the Come-Outer
faith against the assaults of the majority, the verbal riot was, as
Mr. Tidditt described it, "like feedin' time in a parrot shop."

So Miss Phoebe came to the boarding house for supper and then
returned to the schoolroom, where, with a lighted bracket lamp
beside her on the desk, she labored until nine o'clock.  Then she
put on her coat and hat, extinguished the light, locked the door,
and started on her lonely walk home.

"The main road" in our village is dark after nine o clock.  There
is a street light--a kerosene lamp--on a post in front of the
Methodist meeting house, but the sexton forgets it, generally
speaking, or, at any rate, neglects to fill it except at rare
intervals.  Simmons's front windows are ablaze, of course, and so
are the dingy panes of Simpson's barber shop.  But these two
centers of sociability are both at the depot road corner, and when
they are passed the only sources of illumination are the scattered
gleams from the back windows of dwellings.  As most of us retire by
half-past eight, the glow along the main road is not dazzling, to
say the very least.

Miss Dawes was not afraid of the dark.  She had been her own escort
for a good many years.  She walked briskly on, heard the laughter
and loud voices in the barber shop die away behind her, passed the
schoolhouse pond, now bleak and chill with the raw November wind
blowing across it, and began to climb the slope of Whittaker's
Hill.  And here the wind, rushing in unimpeded over the flooded
salt meadows from the tumbled bay outside, wound her skirts about
her and made climbing difficult and breath-taking.

She was, perhaps, half way up the long slope, when she heard, in
the intervals between the gusts, footsteps behind her.  She knew
most of the village people by this time and the thought of company
was not unpleasant.  So she paused and pantingly waited for whoever
was coming.  She could not see more than a few yards, but the
footsteps sounded nearer and nearer, and, a moment later, a man's
voice began singing "Annie Rooney," a melody then past its prime in
the cities, but popularized in Bayport by some departed batch of
summer boarders.

She did not recognize the voice and she did not particularly
approve of singing in the streets, especially such loud singing.
So she decided not to wait longer, and was turning to continue her
climb, when the person behind stopped his vocalizing and called.

"Hi!" he shouted.  "Hello, ahead there!  Who is it?  Hold on a
minute, pard!  I'm comin'."

She disobeyed the order to "hold on," and began to hurry.  The
hurry was of no avail, however, for the follower broke into a run
and soon was by her side.  He was a stranger to her.

"Whee!  Wow!" he panted.  "This is no race track, pard.  Pull up,
and let's take it easy.  My off leg's got a kink in it, and I don't
run so easy as I used to.  Great snakes; what's your rush?  Ain't
you fond of company?  Hello!  I believe it's a woman!"

She did not answer.  His manner and the smell of liquor about him
were decidedly unpleasant.  The idea that he might be a tramp
occurred to her.  Tramps are our bugaboos here in Bayport.

"A woman!" exclaimed the man hilariously.  "Well, say!  I didn't
believe there was one loose in this tail-end of nowhere.  Girlie,
I'm glad to see you.  Not that I can see you much, but never mind.
All cats are gray in the dark, hey?  You can't see me, neither, so
we'll take each other on trust.  'She's my sweetheart, I'm her
beau.'  Say, Maud, may I see you home?"

She was frightened now.  The Whittaker place on the hilltop was the
nearest house, and that was some distance off.

"What's the matter, Carrie?" inquired the man.  "Don't be scared.
I wouldn't hurt you.  I'm just lonesome, that's all, and I need
society.  Don't rush, you'll ruin your complexion.  Here! come
under my wing and let's toddle along together.  How's mamma?"

He seized her arm and pulled her back beside him.  She tried to
free herself, but could not.  Her unwelcome escort held her fast
and she was obliged to move as slowly as he did.  It was very dark.

"Say, what IS your name?" coaxed the man.  "Is is Maud, hey?  Or
Julia?  I always liked Julia.  Don't be peevish.  Tell us, that's a
good girl."

She gave a quick jerk and managed to pull her arm from his grasp,
giving him a violent push as she did so.  He, being unsteady on his
feet, tumbled down the low bank which edged the sidewalk.  Then she
ran on up the hill as fast as she could.  She heard him swear as he
fell.

She had nearly reached the end of the Whittaker fence when he
caught her.  He was laughing, and that alarmed her almost as much
as if he had been angry.

"Naughty! naughty!" he chuckled, holding her fast.  "Tryin' to
sneak, was you?  Not much!  Not this time!  Did you ever play
forfeits when you was little?  Well, this is a forfeit game and
you're It.  You must bow to the prettiest, kneel to the wittiest,
and kiss the one you love best.  And I'll let you off on the first
two.  Come now!  Pay up!"

Then she screamed.  And her scream was answered at once.  A gate
swung back with a bang and she heard some one running along the
walk toward her.

"O Cap'n Whittaker!" she called.  "Come!  Come quick, please!"

How she knew that the person running toward her was Captain Cy has
not been satisfactorily explained even yet.  She cannot explain it
and neither can the captain.  And equally astonishing was the
latter's answer.  He certainly had not heard her voice often enough
to recognize it under such circumstances.

"All right, teacher!" he shouted.  "I'm comin'!  Let go of that
woman, you--  Oh, it's you, is it?"

He had seized Mr. Smith by the coat collar and jerked him away from
his victim.  Miss Dawes took refuge behind the captain's bulky
form.  The two men looked at each other.  Smith was recovering his
breath.

"It's you, is it?" repeated Captain Cy.  Then, turning to Miss
Phoebe, he asked:  "Did he hurt you?"

"No!  Not yet.  But he frightened me dreadfully.  Who is he?  Do
you know him?"

Her persecutor answered the question.

"You bet your life he knows me!" he snarled.  "He knows me mighty
well!  Pard, you keep your nose out of this, d'you see!  You mind
your own business.  I wan't goin' to hurt her any."

The captain paid no attention to him.

"Yup, I know him," he said grimly.  Then he added, pointing toward
the lighted window of the house ahead:  "You--Smith, you go in
there and stay there!  Trot!  Don't make me speak twice."

But Mr. Smith was too far gone with anger and the "spirits" raised
by Tad Simpson to heed the menace in the words.

"Smith, hey?" he sneered.  "Oh, yes, SMITH!  Well, Smith ain't
goin', d'you see!  He's goin' to do what he pleases.  I reckon I'm
on top of the roost here!  I know what's what!  You can't talk to
me.  I've got rights, I have, and--"

"Blast your rights!"

"What?  WHAT?  Blast my rights, hey?  Oh, yes!  Think because
you've got money you can cheat me out of 'em, do you?  Well, you
can't!  And how about the other part of those rights?  S'pose I
walk right into that house and--"

"Stop it!  Shut up!  You'd better not--"

"And into that bedroom and just say:  'Emmie, here's your--'"

He didn't finish the sentence.  Captain Cy's big fist struck him
fairly between the eyes, and the back of his head struck the walk
with a "smack!"  Then, through the fireworks which were
illuminating his muddled brain, he heard the captain's voice.

"You low - down, good - for - nothin' scamp!" growled Captain Cy.
"All this day I've been hatin' myself for the way I've acted to
you.  I've hated myself and been tryin' to spunk up courage to say
'It's all off!'  But I was too much of a coward, I guess.  And now
the Lord A'mighty has MADE me say it.  You want your rights, do
you?  So?  Then get 'em if you can.  It's you and me for it, and
we'll see who's the best man.  Teacher, if you're ready I'll walk
home with you now."

Mr. Smith was not entirely cowed.

"You go!" he yelled.  "Go ahead!  And I'll go to a lawyer's to-
morrow.  But to-night, and inside of five minutes, I'll walk into
that house of yours and get my--"

The captain dropped Miss Dawes's arm and strode back to where his
antagonist was sitting in the dust of the walk.  Stooping down, he
shook a big forefinger in the man's face.

"You've been out West, they tell me," he whispered sternly.  "Yes!
Well, out West they take the law into their own hands, sometimes, I
hear.  I've been in South America, and they do it there, too.  Just
so sure as you go into my house to-night and touch--well, you know
what I mean--just so sure I'll kill you like a dog, if I have to
chase you to Jericho.  Now you can believe that or not.  If I was
you I'd believe it."

Taking the frightened schoolmistress by the arm once more he walked
away.  Mr. Smith said nothing till they had gone some distance.
Then he called after them.

"You wait till to-morrow!" he shouted.  "You just wait and see
what'll happen to-morrow!"

Captain Cy was silent all the way to the gate of the perfect
boarding house.  Miss Dawes was silent likewise, but she thought a
great deal.  At the gate she said:

"Captain Whittaker, I'm EVER so much obliged to you.  I can't thank
you enough."

"Don't try, then.  That's what you said to me about the cow."

"But I'm almost sorry you were the one to come.  I'm afraid that
man will get you into trouble.  Has he--can he--  What did he mean
about to-morrow?  Who IS he?"

The captain pushed his cap back from his forehead.

"Teacher," he said, "there's a proverb, ain't there, about lettin'
to-morrow take care of itself?  As for trouble--well, I did think
I'd had trouble enough in my life to last me through, but I
cal'late I've got another guess.  Anyhow, don't you fret.  I did
just the right thing, and I'm glad I did it.  If it was only me I
wouldn't fret, either.  But there's--"  He stopped, groaned, and
pulled the cap forward again.  "Good night," he added, and turned
to go.

Miss Dawes leaned forward and detained him.

"Just a minute, Cap'n Whittaker," she said.  "I was a little
prejudiced against you when I came here.  I was told that you got
me the teacher's position, and there was more than a hint that you
did it for selfish reasons of your own.  When you called that
afternoon at the school I was--"

"Don't say a word!  I was the biggest fool in town that time, and
I've been ashamed to look in the glass ever since.  I ain't always
such an idiot."

"But I've had to judge people for myself in my lifetime," continued
the schoolmistress, " and I've made up my mind that I was mistaken
about you.  I should like to apologize.  Will you shake hands?"

She extended her hand.  Captain Cy hesitated.

"Hadn't you better wait a spell?" he asked.  "You've heard that
swab call me partner.  Hadn't--"

"No; I don't know what your trouble is, of course, and I certainly
shan't mention it to anyone.  But whatever it is I'm sure you are
right and it's not your fault.  Now will you shake hands?"

The captain did not answer.  He merely took the proffered hand,
shook it heartily, and strode off into the dark.



CHAPTER XII

"TOWN-MEETIN'"


"This is goin' to be a meMOriable town meetin'!" declared Sylvanus
Cahoon, with unction, rising from the settee to gaze about him over
the heads of the voters in the townhall.  "I bet you every able-
bodied man in Bayport 'll be here this forenoon.  Yes, sir! that's
what I call it, a me-MO-riable meetin'!"

"See anything of Cy?" inquired Josiah Dimick, who sat next to
Sylvanus.

"No, he ain't come yet.  And Heman ain't here, neither.  Hello!
there's Tad.  Looks happy, seems to me."

Captain Dimick stood up to inspect Mr. Simpson.

"Humph!" he muttered.  "Well, unless my count's wrong, he ain't got
much to be happy about.  'Lonzo Snow's with him.  Tad does look
sort of joyful, don't he?  Them that laughs last laughs best.  When
the vote for school committee's all in we'll see who does the
grinnin'.  But I can't understand--  Hello! there's Tidditt.
Asaph!  Ase!  S-s-t-t!  Come here a minute."

Mr. Tidditt, trembling with excitement, and shaking hands effusively
with everyone he met, pushed his way up the aisle and bent over
his friend.

"Say, Ase," whispered Josiah, "where's Whit?  Why ain't he on hand?
Nothin's happened, has it?"

"No," replied the town clerk.  "Everything seems to be all right.
I stopped in on the way along and Cy said not to wait; he'd be here
on time.  He's been kind of off his feed for the last day or so,
and I cal'late he didn't feel like hurryin'.  Say, Joe, now honest,
what do you think of my chances?"

Such a confirmed joker as Dimick couldn't lose an opportunity like
this.  With the aid of one trying to be cheerful under discouragement
he answered that, so far, Asaph's chances looked fair, pretty fair,
but of course you couldn't always sometimes tell.  Mr. Tidditt
rushed away to begin the handshaking all over again.

From this round of cordiality he was reluctantly torn and conducted
to the platform.  After thumping the desk with his fist he announced
that the gathering would "come to order right off, as there was
consider'ble business to be done and it ought to be goin' ahead."
He then proceeded to read the call for the meeting.  This ceremony
was no sooner over than Abednego Small, "Uncle Bedny," was on his
feet loudly demanding to be informed why the town "hadn't done
nothin'" toward fixing up the Bassett's Hollow road.  Uncle Bedny's
speech had proceeded no further than "Feller citizens, in the name
of an outrageous--I should say outraged portion of our community
I--" when he was choked off by a self-appointed committee who knew
Mr. Small of old and had seated themselves near him to be ready for
just such emergencies.  The next step, judged by meetings of other
years, should have been to unanimously elect Eben Salters moderator;
but as Captain Eben refused to serve, owing to his interest in the
Whittaker campaign, Alvin Knowles was, by a small majority, chosen
for that office.  Mr. Knowles was a devout admirer of the great
Atkins, and his election would have been considered a preliminary
victory for the opposition had it not been that many of Captain Cy's
adherents voted for Alvin from a love of mischief, knowing from
experience his ignorance of parliamentary law and his easy-going
rule.  "Now there'll be fun!" declared one delighted individual.
"Anything's in order when Alvin's chairman."

The proceedings of the first half hour were disappointingly tame.
Most of us had come there to witness a political wrestling match
between Tad Simpson and Cyrus Whittaker.  Some even dared hope that
Congressman Atkins might direct his fight in person.  But neither
the Honorable nor Captain Cy was in the hall as yet.  Solon
Eldridge was re-elected selectman and so also was Asaph Tidditt.
Nobody but Asaph seemed surprised at this result.  His speech of
acceptance would undoubtedly have been a triumph of oratory had it
not been interrupted by Uncle Bedny, who rose to emphatically
protest against "settin' round and wastin' time" when the Bassett's
Hollow road "had ruts deep enough to drown a cat in whenever there
was a more'n average heavy dew."

The Bassett's Hollow delegate being again temporarily squelched,
Moderator Knowles announced that nominations for the vacant place
on the school committee were in order.  There was a perceptible
stir on the settees.  This was what the meeting had been waiting
for.

"No sign of Cy or Heman yet," observed Mr. Cahoon, craning his neck
in the direction of the door.  "It's the queerest thing ever I
see."

"Queer enough about Cy, that's a fact," concurred Captain Dimick.
"I ain't so surprised about Heman's not comin'.  Looks as if Whit
was right; he always said Atkins dodged a row where folks could
watch it.  Does most of his fightin' from round the corner.  Hello!
there's Tad.  Now you'll see the crown of glory set on 'Lonzo
Snow's head.  Hope the crown's padded nice and soft.  Anything with
sharp edges would sink in."

But Mr. Simpson, it seemed, was not yet ready to proceed with the
coronation.  He had risen to ask permission of the meeting to defer
the school committee matter for a short time.  Persons, important
persons, who should be present while the nominating was going on,
had not yet arrived.  He was sure that the gathering would wish to
hear from these persons.  He asked for only a slight delay.
Matters such as this, affecting the welfare of our posterity, ought
not to be hurried, etc., etc.

Mr. Simpson's request was unexpected.  The meeting, apparently,
didn't know how to take it.  Uncle Bedny was firmly held in his
seat by those about him.  Lemuel Myrick took the floor to protest.

"I must say," he declared, "that I don't see any reason for waitin'.
If folks ain't here, that's their own fault.  Mr. Moderator, I
demand that the nominatin' go ahead."

Tad was on his feet instantly.

"I'm goin' to appeal," he cried, "to the decency and gratitude of
the citizens of the town of Bayport.  One of the persons I'm--that
is, we're waitin' for has done more for our beautiful village than
all the rest of us put together.  There ain't no need for me to
name him.  A right up-to-date town pump, a lovely memorial window,
a--"

"How about that harbor appropriation?" cried a voice from the
settees.

Mr. Simpson was taken aback.  His face flushed and he angrily
turned toward the interrupter.

"That's you, Joe Dimick!" he shouted, pointing an agitated
forefinger.  "You needn't scooch down.  I know your tongue.  The
idea of you findin' fault because a big man like Congressman Atkins
don't jump when you holler 'Git up!'  What do YOU know about doin's
at Washington?  That harbor appropriation 'll go through if anybody
on earth can get it through.  There's other places besides Bayport
to be provided for and--"

"And their congressmen provide for 'em," called another voice.  Tad
whirled to face his new tormentor.

"Huh!" he grunted with sarcasm.  "That's Lem Myrick, _I_ know.
Lem, the great painter, who votes where he paints and gets paid
accordin'."

"Order!" cried several.

"Oh, all right, Mr. Moderator!  I'll keep order all right.  But I
say to you, Lem, and you, Joe Dimick, that I know who put these
smart notions into your heads.  We all know, unless we're born
fools.  Who is it that's been sayin' the Honorable Heman Atkins
was shirkin' that appropriation?  Who was it said if HE was
representative the thing would have gone through afore this?  Who's
been makin' his brags that he could get it through if he had the
chance?  You know who!  So do I!  I wish he was here.  I only wish
he was here!  I'd say it to his face."

"Well, he is.  Heave ahead and say it."

Everyone turned toward the door.  Captain Cy had entered the hall.
He was standing in the aisle, and with him was Bailey Bangs.  The
captain looked very tired, almost worn out, but he nodded coolly to
Mr. Simpson, who had retired to his seat with surprising quickness
and apparent discomfiture.

"Here I am, Tad," continued the captain.  "Say your piece."

But Tad, it appeared, was not anxious to "say his piece."  He was
whispering earnestly with a group of his followers.  Captain Cy
held up his hand.

"Mr. Moderator," he asked, "can I have the floor a minute?  All I
want to say is that I cal'late I'm the feller the last speaker had
reference to.  I HAVE said that I didn't see why that appropriation
was so hard to get.  I say it again.  Other appropriations are got,
and why not ours?  I DID say if I was a congressman I'd get it.
Yes, and I'll say more," he added, raising his voice, "I'll say
that if I was sent to Washin'ton by this town, congressman or not,
I'd move heaven and earth, and all creation from the President down
till I did get it.  That's all.  So would any live man, I should
think."

He sat down.  There was some applause.  Before it had subsided Abel
Leonard, one of the quickest-witted of Mr. Simpson's workers, was
on his feet, gesticulating for attention.

"Mr. Moderator," he shouted, "I want to make a motion.  We've all
heard the big talk that's been made.  All right, then!  I move you,
sir, that Captain Cyrus Whittaker be appointed a committee of one
to GO to Washin'ton, if he wants to, or anywheres else, and see
that we get the appropriation.  And if we don't get it the blame's
his!  There, now!"

There was a roar of laughter.  This was exactly the sort of "tit-
for-tat" humor that appeals to a Yankee crowd.  The motion was
seconded half a dozen times.  Moderator Knowles grinned and shook
his head.

"A joke's a joke," he said, "and we all like a good one.  However,
this meetin' is supposed to be for business, not fun, so--"

"Question!  Question!  It's been seconded!  We've got to vote on
it!" shouted a chorus.

"Don't you think--seems to me that ain't in order," began the
moderator, but Captain Cy rose to his feet.  The grim smile had
returned to his face and he looked at the joyous assemblage with
almost his old expression of appreciative alertness.

"Never mind the vote," he said.  "I realize that Brother Leonard
has rather got one on me, so to speak.  All right, I won't dodge.
I'll BE a committee of one on the harbor grab, and if nothin' comes
of it I'll take my share of kicks.  Gentlemen, I appreciate your
trustfulness in my ability."

This brief speech was a huge success.  If, for a moment, the
pendulum of public favor had swung toward Simpson, this trumping of
the latter's leading card pushed it back again.  The moderator had
some difficulty in restoring order to the hilarious meeting.

Then Mr. Myrick was accorded the privilege of the floor, in spite
of Tad's protests, and proceeded to nominate Cyrus Whittaker for
the school committee.  Lem had devoted hours of toil and wearisome
mental struggle to the preparation of his address, and it was
lengthy and florid.  Captain Cy was described as possessing all the
virtues.  Bailey, listening with a hand behind his ear, was moved
to applause at frequent intervals, and even Asaph forgot the
dignity of his exalted position on the platform and pounded the
official desk in ecstasy.  The only person to appear uninterested
was the nominee himself.  He sat listlessly in his seat, his eyes
cast down, and his thoughts apparently far away.

Josiah Dimick seconded the captain's nomination.  Then Mr. Simpson
stepped to the front and, after a wistful glance at the door, began
to speak.

"Feller citizens," he said, "it is my privilege to put in nomination
for school committee a man whose name stands for all that's good and
clean and progressive in this township.  But afore I do it I'm goin'
to ask you to let me say a word or two concernin' somethin' that
bears right on this matter, and which, I believe, everyone of you
ought to know.  It's somethin' that most of you don't know, and
it'll be a surprise, a big surprise.  I'll be as quick as I can, and
I cal'late you'll thank me when I'm done."

He paused.  The meeting looked at each other in astonishment.
There was whispering along the settees.  Moderator Knowles was
plainly puzzled.  He looked inquiringly at the town clerk, but
Asaph was evidently quite as much in the dark as he concerning the
threatened disclosure.

"Feller Bayporters," went on Tad, "there's one thing we've all
agreed on, no matter who we've meant to vote for.  That is, that a
member of our school committee should be an upright, honest man,
one fit morally to look out for our dear children.  Ain't that so?
Well, then, I ask you this:  Would you consider a man fit for that
job who deliberately came between a father and his child, who
pizened the mind of that child against his own parent, and when
that parent come to claim that child, first tried to buy him off
and then turned him out of the house?  Yes, and offered violence to
him.  And done it--mark what I say--for reasons which--which--well,
we can only guess 'em, but the guess may not be so awful bad.  Is
THAT the kind of man we want to honor or to look out for our own
children's schoolin'?"

Mr. Simpson undoubtedly meant to cause a sensation by his opening
remarks.  He certainly did so.  The stir and whispering redoubled.
Asaph, his mouth open, stared wildly down at Captain Cy.  The
captain rose to his feet, then sank back again.  His listlessness
was gone and, paying no attention to those about him, he gazed
fixedly at Tad.

"Gentlemen," continued the speaker, "last night I had an experience
that I shan't forget as long as I live.  I met a poor man, a poor,
lame man who'd been away out West and got hurt bad.  Folks thought
he was dead.  His wife thought so and died grievin' for him.  She
left a little baby girl, only seven or eight year old.  When this
man come back, well again but poor, to look up his family, he found
his wife had passed away and the child had been sent off, just to
get rid of her, to a stranger in another town.  That stranger fully
meant to send her off, too; he said so dozens of times.  A good
many of you folks right here heard him say it.  But he never sent
her--he kept her.  Why?  Well, that's the question.  _I_ shan't
answer it.  _I_ ain't accusin' nobody.  All I say is, what's easy
enough for any of you to prove, and that is that it come to light
the child had property belongin' to her.  Property! land, wuth
money!"

He paused once more and drew his sleeve across his forehead.  Most
of his hearers were silent now, on tiptoe of expectation.  Dimick
looked searchingly at Captain Cy.  Then he sprang to his feet.

"Order!" he shouted.  "What's all this got to do with nominatin'
for school committee?  Ain't he out of order, Alvin?"

The moderator hesitated.  His habitual indecision was now complicated
by the fact that he was as curious as the majority of those before
him.  There were shouts of, "Go ahead, Tad!"  "Tell us the rest!"
"Let him go on, Mr. Moderator!"

Cy Whittaker slowly rose.

"Alvin," he said earnestly, "don't stop him yet.  As a favor to me,
let him spin his yarn."

Simpson was ready and evidently eager to spin it.

"This man," he proclaimed, "this father, mournin' for his dead wife
and longin' for his child, comes to the town where he was to find
and take her.  And when he meets the man that's got her, when he
comes, poor and down on his luck, what does this man--this rich
man--do?  Why; fust of all, he's sweeter'n sirup to him, takes him
in, keeps him overnight, and the next day he says to him:  'You
just be quiet and say nothin' to nobody that she's your little
girl.  I'll make it wuth your while.  Keep quiet till I'm ready for
you to say it.'  And he gives the father money--not much, but some.
All right so fur, maybe; but wait!  Then it turns out that the
father knows about this land--this property.  And THEN the kind,
charitable man--this rich man with lots of money of his own--turns
the poor father out, tellin' him to get the girl and the land if he
can, knowin'--KNOWIN', mind you--that the father ain't got a cent
to hire lawyers nor even to pay for his next meal.  And when the
father says he won't go, but wants his dear one that belongs to
him, the rich feller abuses him, knocks him down with his fist!
Knocks down a poor, weak, lame invalid, just off a sick bed!  Is
THAT the kind of a man we want on our school committee?"

He asked the question with both hands outspread and the perspiration
running down his cheeks.  The meeting was in an uproar.

"No need for me to tell you who I mean," shouted Tad, waving his
arms.  "You know who, as well as I do.  You've just heard him
praised as bein' all that's good and great.  But _I_ say--"

"You've said enough!  Now let me say a word!"

It was Captain Cy who interrupted.  He had pushed his way through
the crowd, down the aisle, and now stood before the gesticulating
Mr. Simpson, who shrank back as if he feared that the treatment
accorded the "poor weak invalid" might be continued with him.

"Knowles," said Captain Cy, turning to the moderator, "let me
speak, will you?  I won't be but a minute.  Friends," he continued,
facing the excited gathering--"for some of you are my friends, or
I've come to think you are--a part of what this man says is so.
The girl at my house is Emily Thomas; her mother was Mary Thomas,
who some of you know, and her father's name is Henry Thomas.  She
came to me unexpected, bein' sent by a Mrs. Oliver up to Concord,
because 'twas either me or an orphan asylum.  I took her in meanin'
to keep her a little while, and then send her away.  But as time
went on I kept puttin' off and puttin' off, and at last I realized
I couldn't do it; I'd come to think too much of her.

"Fellers," he went on, slowly, "I--I hardly know how to tell you
what that little girl's come to be to me.  When I first struck
Bayport, after forty years away from it, all I thought of was
makin' over the old place and livin' in it.  I cal'lated it would
be a sort of Paradise, and HOW I was goin' to live or whether or
not I'd be lonesome with everyone of my folks dead and gone, never
crossed my mind.  But the longer I lived there alone the less like
Paradise it got to be; I realized more and more that it ain't
furniture and fixin's that make a home; it's them you love that's
in it.  And just as I'd about reached the conclusion that 'twas a
failure, the whole business, why, then, Bos'n--Emily, that is--
dropped in, and inside of a week I knew I'd got what was missin' in
my life.

"I never married and children never meant much to me till I got
her.  She's the best little--little . . .  There!  I mustn't talk
this way.  I bluffed a lot about not keepin' her permanent, bein'
kind of ashamed, I guess, but down inside me I'd made up my mind to
bring her up like a daughter.  She and me was to live together till
she grew up and got married and I . . .  Well, what's the use?  A
few days ago come a letter from the Oliver woman in Concord sayin'
that this Henry Thomas, Bos'n's father, wan't dead at all, but had
turned up there, havin' learned somehow or 'nother that his wife
was gone and that his child had been willed a little bit of land
which belonged to her mother.  He had found out that Emmie was with
me, and the letter said he would likely come after her--and the
land.

"That letter was like a flash of lightnin' to me.  I was dismasted
and on my beam ends.  I didn't know what to do.  I'd learned enough
about this Henry Thomas to know that he was no use, a drunken,
good-for-nothin' scamp who had cruelized his wife and then run off
and left her and the baby.  But when he come, the very night I got
the letter, I gave him a chance.  I took him in; I was willin' to
give him a job on the place; I was willin' to pay for his keep, and
more.  I DID ask him to keep his mouth shut and even to use another
name.  'Twas weak of me, maybe, but you want to remember this had
come on me sudden.  And last night--the very second night, mind
you--he went out somewhere, perhaps we can guess where, bought
liquor with the money I gave him, got drunk, and then insulted one
of the best women in this town.  Yes, sir!  I say it right here,
one of the best, pluckiest little women anywhere, although she and
I ain't always agreed on certain matters.  I DID tell him to clear
out, and I DID knock him down.  Yes, and by the big dipper, I'd do
it again under the same circumstances!

"As for the property," he added fiercely, "why, darn the property,
I say!  It ain't wuth much, anyhow, and, if 'twas anybody's else,
he should have it and welcome.  But it's Bos'n's, and, bein' what
he is, he SHAN'T have it.  And he shan't have HER to cruelize,
neither!  By the Almighty! he shan't, so lo