ng as I've got a dollar
to fight him with.  I say that to you, Tad Simpson, and to the man--
to whoever put you up to this.  There!  I've said my say.  Now,
gentlemen, you can choose your side."

He strode back to his seat.  There was silence for a moment.  Then
Josiah Dimick sprang up and waved his hat.

"That's the way to talk!" he shouted.  "That's a MAN!  Three cheers
for Cap'n Whittaker!  Come on, everybody!"

But everybody did not "come on."  The cheers were feeble.  It was
evident that the majority of those present did not know how to meet
this unexpected contingency.  It had taken them by surprise and
they were undecided.  The uproar of argument and question began
again, louder than ever.  The bewildered moderator thumped his desk
and shouted feebly for order.  Tad Simpson took the floor and, in a
few words and at the top of his lungs, nominated Alonzo Snow.  Abel
Leonard seconded the nomination.  There were yells of "Question!
Question!" and "Vote!  Vote!"

Eben Salters was recognized by the chair.  Captain Salters made few
speeches, and when he did make one it was because he had something
to say.

"Mr. Moderator," he said, "I, for one, hate to vote just now.  It
isn't that the school committee is so important of itself.  But I
do think that the rights of a father with his child IS pretty
important, and our vote for Cap'n Whittaker--and most of you know I
intended votin' for him and have been workin' for him--might seem
like an indorsement of his position.  This whole thing is a big
surprise to me.  I don't feel yet that we know enough of the inside
facts to give such an indorsement.  I'd like to see this Thomas man
before I decide to give it--or not to give it, either.  It's a
queer thing to come up at town meetin', but it's up.  Hadn't we
better adjourn until next week?"

He sat down.  The meeting was demoralized.  Some were shouting for
adjournment, others to "Vote it out."  A straw would turn the scale
and the straw was forthcoming.  While Captain Cy was speaking the
door had silently opened and two men entered the hall and sought
seclusion in a corner.  Now one of these men came forward--the
Honorable Heman Atkins.

Mr. Atkins walked solemnly to the front, amidst a burst of
recognition.  Many of the voters rose to receive him.  It was
customary, when the great man condescended to attend such
gatherings, to offer him a seat on the platform.  This the
obsequious Knowles proceeded to do.  Asaph was too overcome by
the disclosure of "John Smith's" identity and by Mr. Simpson's
attack on his friend to remember even his manners.  He did not
rise, but sat stonily staring.

The moderator's gavel descended "Order!" he roared.  "Order, I say!
Congressman Atkins is goin' to talk to us."

The Honorable Heman faced the excited crowd.  One hand was in the
breast of his frock coat; the other was clenched upon his hip.  He
stood calm, benignant, dignified--the incarnation of wisdom and
righteous worth.  The attitude had its effect; the applause began
and grew to an ovation.  Men who had intended voting against his
favored candidate forgot their intention, in the magnetism of his
presence, and cheered.  He bowed and bowed again.

"Fellow townsmen," he began, "far be it from me to influence your
choice in the matter of the school committee.  Still further be it
from me to influence you against an old boyhood friend, a neighbor,
one whom I believe--er--had believed to be all that was sincere and
true.  But, fellow townsmen, my esteemed friend, Captain Salters,
has expressed a wish to see Mr. Thomas, the father whose story you
have heard to-day.  I happen to be in a position to gratify that
wish.  Mr. Thomas, will you kindly come forward?"

Then from the rear of the hall Mr. Thomas came.  But the drunken
rowdy of the night before had been transformed.  Gone was the
scrubby beard and the shabby suit.  Shorn was the unkempt mop of
hair and vanished the impudent swagger.  He was dressed in clean
linen and respectable black, and his manner was modest and subdued.
Only a discoloration of one eye showed where Captain Cy's blow had
left its mark.

He stepped upon the platform beside the congressman.  The latter
laid a hand upon his shoulder.

"Gentlemen and friends," said Heman, "my name has been brought into
this controversy, by Mr. Simpson directly, and in insinuation by--
er--another.  Therefore it is my right to make my position clear.
Mr. Thomas came to me last evening in distress, both of mind and
body.  He told me his story--substantially the story which has just
been told to you by Mr. Simpson--and, gentlemen, I believe it.  But
if I did not believe it, if I believed him to have been in the past
all that his opponent has said; even if I believed that, only last
evening, spurned, driven from his child, penniless and hopeless, he
had yielded to the weakness which has been his curse all his life--
even if I believed that, still I should demand that Henry Thomas,
repentant and earnest as you see him now, should be given his
rightful opportunity to become a man again.  He is poor, but he is
not--shall not be--friendless.  No! a thousand times, no!  You may
say, some of you, that the affair is not my business.  I affirm
that it IS my business.  It is my business as a Christian, and that
business should come before all others.  I have not allowed
sympathy to influence me.  If that were the case, my regard for my
neighbor and friend of former days would have held me firm.  But,
gentlemen, I have a child of my own.  I know what a father's love
is, as only a father can know it.  And, after a sleepless night, I
stand here before you to-day determined that this man shall have
his own, if my money--which you will, I'm sure, forgive my
mentioning--and my unflinching support can give it to him.  That
is my position, and I state it regardless of consequences."  He
paused, and with raised right hand, like the picture of Jove in the
old academy mythology, launched his final thunderbolt.  "Whom God
hath joined," he proclaimed, "let no one put asunder!"

That settled it.  The cheers shook the walls.  Amidst the tumult
Dimick and Bailey Bangs seized Captain Cy by the shoulders and
endeavored to lift him from his seat.

"For the love of goodness, Whit!" groaned Josiah, desperately,
"stand up and answer him.  If you don't, we'll founder sure."

The captain smiled grimly and shook his head.  He had not taken his
eyes from the face of the great Atkins since the latter began
speaking.

"What?" he replied.  "After that 'put asunder' sockdolager?  Man
alive! do you want me to add Sabbath breakin' to my other crimes?"

The vote, by ballot, followed almost immediately.  It was pitiful
to see the erstwhile Whittaker majority melt away.  Alonzo Snow was
triumphantly elected.  But a handful voted against him.

Captain Cy, still grimly smiling, rose and left the hall.  As he
closed the door, he heard the shrill voice of Uncle Bedny demanding
justice for the Bassett's Hollow road.

It had, indeed, been a "memoriable" town meeting.



CHAPTER XIII

THE REPULSE


When Deacon Zeb Clark--the same Deacon Zeb who fell into the
cistern, as narrated by Captain Cy--made his first visit to the
city, years and years ago, he stayed but two days.  As he had
proudly boasted that he should remain in the metropolis at least a
week, our people were much surprised at his premature return.  To
the driver of the butcher cart who found him sitting contentedly
before his dwelling, amidst his desolate acres, the nearest
neighbor a half mile away, did Deacon Zeb disclose his reason for
leaving the crowded thoroughfares.  "There was so many folks
there," he said, "that I felt lonesome."

And Captain Cy, returning from the town meeting to the Whittaker
place, felt lonesome likewise.  Not for the Deacon's reason--he met
no one on the main road, save a group of school children and Miss
Phinney, and, sighting the latter in the offing, he dodged behind
the trees by the schoolhouse pond and waited until she passed.  But
the captain, his trouble now heavy upon him, did feel the need of
sympathy and congenial companionship.  He knew he might count upon
Dimick and Asaph, and, whenever Keturah's supervision could be
evaded, upon Mr. Bangs.  But they were not the advisers and
comforters for this hour of need.  All the rest of Bayport, he felt
sure, would be against him.  Had not King Heman the Great from the
steps of the throne, banned him with the royal displeasure!  "If
Heman ever SHOULD come right out and say--" began Asaph's warning.
Well, strange as it might seem, Heman had "come right out."

As to why he had come out there was no question in the mind of the
captain.  The latter had left Mr. Thomas, the prodigal father,
prostrate and blasphemous in the road the previous evening.  His
next view of him was when, transformed and sanctified, he had been
summoned to the platform by Mr. Atkins.  No doubt he had returned
to the barber shop and, in his rage and under Mr. Simpson's cross
examination, had revealed something of the truth.  Tad, the
politician, recognizing opportunity when it knocked at his door,
had hurried him to the congressman's residence.  The rest was plain
enough, so Captain Cy thought.

However, war was already declared, and the reasons for it mattered
little.  The first skirmish might occur at any moment.  The
situation was desperate.  The captain squared his shoulders, thrust
forward his chin, and walked briskly up the path to the door of the
dining room.  It was nearly one o'clock, but Bos'n had not yet
gone.  She was waiting, to the very last minute, for her "Uncle
Cyrus."

"Hello, shipmate," he hailed.  "Not headed for school yet?  Good!
I cal'late you needn't go this afternoon.  I'm thinkin' of hirin' a
team and drivin' to Ostable, and I didn't know but you'd like to go
with me.  Think you could, without that teacher woman havin' you
brought up aft for mutiny?"

Bos'n thought it over.

"Yes, sir," she said; "I guess so, if you wrote me an excuse.  I
don't like to be absent, 'cause I haven't been before, but there's
only my reading lesson this afternoon and I know that ever so well.
I'd love to go, Uncle Cy."

The captain removed his coat and hat and pulled a chair forward to
the table.

"Hello!" he exclaimed.  "What's this--the mail?"

Bos'n smiled delightedly.

"Yes, sir," she replied.  "I knew you was at the meeting and so I
brought it from the office.  Ain't you glad?"

"Sure!  Yes, indeed!  Much obliged.  Tryin' to keep house without
you would be like steerin' without a rudder."

Even as he said it there came to him the realization that he might
have to steer without that rudder in the near future.  His smile
vanished.  He smothered a groan and picked up the mail.

"Hum!" he mused, "the Breeze, a circular, and one letter.  Hello!
it isn't possible that--  Well! well!"

The letter was in a long envelope.  He hastily tore it open.  At
the inclosure he glanced in evident excitement.  Then his smile
returned.

"Bos'n," he said, after a moment's reflection, "I guess you and me
won't have to go to Ostable after all."  Noticing the child's look
of disappointment, he added:  "But you needn't go to school.  Maybe
you'd better not.  You and me'll take a tramp alongshore.  What do
you say?"

"Oh, yes, Uncle Cy!  Let's--shall we?"

"Why, I don't see why not.  We'll cruise in company as long as we
can, hey, little girl?  The squall's likely to strike afore night,"
he muttered half aloud.  "We'll enjoy the fine weather till it's
time to shorten sail."

They walked all that afternoon.  Captain Cy was even more kind and
gentle with his small companion than usual.  He told her stories
which made her laugh, pointed out spots in the pines where he had
played Indian when a boy, carried her "pig back" when she grew
tired, and kissed her tenderly when, at the back door of the
Whittaker place, he set her on her feet again.

"Had a good time, dearie?" he asked.

"Oh, splendid!  I think it's the best walk we ever had, don't you,
Uncle Cy?"

"I shouldn't wonder.  You won't forget our cruises together when
you are a big girl and off somewheres else, will you?"

"I'll NEVER forget 'em.  And I'm never going anywhere without you."

It was after five as they entered the kitchen.

"Anybody been here while I was out?" asked the captain of Georgianna.
The housekeeper's eyes were red and swollen, and she hugged Bos'n
as she helped her off with her jacket and hood.

"Yes, there has," was the decided answer.  "First Ase Tidditt, and
then Bailey Bangs, and then that--that Angie Phinney."

"Humph!" mused Captain Cy slowly.  "So Angie was here, was she?
Where the carcass is the vultures are on deck, or words similar.
Humph!  Did our Angelic friend have much to say?"

"DID she?  And _I_ had somethin' to say, too!  I never in my life!"

"Humph!"  Her employer eyed her sharply.  "So?  And so soon?  Talk
about the telegraph spreadin' news!  I'd back most any half dozen
tongues in Bayport to spread more news, and add more trimmin' to
it, in a day than the telegraph could do in a week.  Especially if
all the telegraph operators was like the one up at the depot.
Well, Georgianna, when you goin' to leave?"

"Leave?  Leave where?  What are you talkin' about?"

"Leave here.  Of course you realize that this ship of ours,"
indicating the house by a comprehensive wave of his hand around the
room, "is goin' to be a mighty unpopular craft from now on.  We may
be on a lee shore any minute.  You've got your own well-bein' to
think of."

"My own well-bein'!  What do you s'pose I care for my well-bein'
when there's--Cap'n Whittaker, you tell me now!  Is it so?"

"Some of it is--yes.  He's come back and he's who he says he is.
You've seen him.  He was here all day yesterday."

"So Angie said, but I couldn't scarcely believe it.  That toughy!
Cap'n Whittaker, do you intend to hand over that poor little
innocent thing to--to such a man as THAT?"

"No.  There'll be no handin' over about it.  But the odds are
against us, and there's no reason why you should be in the rumpus,
Georgianna.  You may not understand what we're facin'."

The housekeeper drew herself up.  Her face was very red and her
small eyes snapped.

"Cy Whittaker," she began, manners and deference to employer alike
forgotten, "don't you say no more of that wicked foolishness to me.
I'll leave the minute you're mean-spirited enough to let that child
go and not afore.  And when THAT happens I'll be GLAD to leave.
Land sakes! there's somebody at the door; and I expect I'm a
perfect sight."

She rubbed her face with her apron, thereby making it redder than
ever, and hurried into the dining room.

"Bos'n," said Captain Cy quickly, "you stay here in the kitchen."

Emmie looked at him in surprised bewilderment, but she suppressed
her curiosity concerning the identity of the person who had
knocked, and obeyed.  The captain pulled the kitchen door almost
shut and listened at the crack.

The first spoken words by the visitor appeared to relieve Captain
Cy's anxiety; but they seemed to astonish him greatly.

"Why!" he exclaimed in a whisper.  "Ain't that--  It sounds like--"

"It's teacher," whispered Bos'n, who also had been listening.
"She's come to find out why I wasn't at school.  You tell her,
Uncle Cy."

Georgianna returned to announce:

"It's Miss Dawes.  She says she wants to see you, Cap'n.  She's in
the settin' room."

The captain drew a long breath.  Then, repeating his command to
Emmie to stay where she was, he left the room, closing the door
behind him.  The latter procedure roused Bos'n's indignation.

"What made him do that?" she demanded.  "I haven't been bad.  He
NEVER shut me up before!"

The schoolmistress was standing by the center table in the sitting
room when Captain Cy entered.

"Good evenin'," he said politely.  "Won't you sit down?"

But Miss Dawes paid no attention to trivialities.  She seemed much
agitated.

"Cap'n Whittaker," she began, "I just heard something that--"

The captain interrupted her.

"Excuse me," he said, "but I think we'll pull down the curtains and
have a little light on the subject.  It gets dark early now,
especially of a gray day like this one."

He drew the shades at the windows and lit the lamp on the table.
The red glow behind the panes of the stove door faded into
insignificance as the yellow radiance brightened.  The ugly
portraits and the stiff old engravings on the wall retired into a
becoming dusk.  The old-fashioned room became more homelike.

"Now won't you sit down?" repeated Captain Cy.  "Take that rocker;
it's the most comf'table one aboard--so Bos'n says, anyhow."

Miss Phoebe took the rocker, under protest.  Her host remained
standing.

"It's been a nice afternoon," he said.  "Bos'n--Emmie, of course--
and I have been for a walk.  'Twan't her fault, 'twas mine.  I kept
her out of school.  I was--well, kind of lonesome."

The teacher's gray eyes flashed in the lamplight.

"Cap'n Whittaker," she cried, "please don't waste time.  I didn't
come here to talk about the weather nor Emily's reason for not
attending school.  I don't care why she was absent.  But I have
just heard of what happened at that meeting.  Is it true that--"
She hesitated.

"That Emmie's dad is alive and here?  Yes, it's true."

"But--but that man last night?  Was he THAT man?"

The captain nodded.

"That's the man," he said briefly.

Miss Dawes shuddered.

"Cap'n Whittaker," she asked earnestly, "are you sure he is really
her father?  Absolutely sure?"

"Sure and sartin."

"Then she belongs to him, doesn't she?  Legally, I mean?"

"Maybe so."

"Are--are you going to give her up to him?"

"No."

"Then what I heard was true.  You did say at the meeting that you
were going to do your best to keep him from getting her."

"Um--hum!  What I said amounts to just about that."

"Why?"

Captain Cy was surprised and a little disappointed apparently.

"Why?" he repeated.

"Yes.  Why?"

"Well, for reasons I've got."

"Do you mind telling me the reasons?"

"I cal'late you don't want to hear 'em.  If you don't understand
now, then I can't make it much plainer, I'm afraid."

The little lady sprang to her feet.

"Oh, you are provoking!" she cried indignantly.  "Can't you see
that I want to hear the reasons from you yourself?  Cap'n Whittaker,
I shook hands with you last night."

"You remember I told you you'd better wait."

"I didn't want to wait.  I believed I knew something of human
nature, and I believed I had learned to understand you.  I made up
my mind to pay no more attention to what people said against you.
I thought they were envious and disliked you because you did things
in your own way.  I wouldn't believe the stories I heard this
afternoon.  I wanted to hear you speak in your own defense and you
refuse to do it.  Don't you know what people are saying?  They say
you are trying to keep Emily because--  Oh, I'm ashamed to ask it,
but you make me:  HAS the child got valuable property of her own?"

Captain Cy had been, throughout this scene, standing quietly by the
table.  Now he took a step forward.

"Miss Dawes," he said sharply, "sit down."

"But I--"

"Sit down, please."

The schoolmistress didn't mean to obey the order, but for some
reason she did.  The captain went on speaking.

"It's pretty plain," he said, "that what you heard at the boardin'
house--for I suppose that's where you did hear it--was what you
might call a Phinneyized story of the doin's at the meetin'.  Well,
there's another yarn, and it's mine; I'm goin' to spin it and I
want you to listen."

He went on to spin his yarn.  It was practically a repetition of
his reply to Tad Simpson that morning.  Its conclusion was also
much the same.

"The land ain't worth fifty dollars," he declared, "but if it was
fifty million he shouldn't have it.  Why?  Because it belongs to
that little girl.  And he shan't have her until he and those back
of him have hammered me through the courts till I'm down forty
fathom under water.  And when they do get her--and, to be honest, I
cal'late they will in the end--I hope to God I won't be alive to
see it!  There!  I've answered you."

He was walking up and down the room, with the old quarter-deck
stride, his hands jammed deep in his pockets and his face working
with emotion.

"It's pretty nigh a single-handed fight for me," he continued, "but
I've fought single-handed before.  The other side's got almost all
the powder and the men.  Heman and Tad and that Thomas have got
seven eighths of Bayport behind 'em, not to mention the 'Providence'
they're so sure of.  My crowd is a mighty forlorn hope: Dimick and
Ase Tidditt, and Bailey, as much as his wife 'll let him.  Oh, yes!"
and he smiled whimsically, "there's another one.  A new recruit's
just joined; Georgianna's enlisted.  That's my army.  Sort of
rag-jacketed cadets, we are, small potatoes, and few in a hill."

The teacher rose and laid a hand on his arm.  He turned toward her.
The lamplight shone upon her face, and he saw, to his astonishment,
that there were tears in her eyes.

"Cap'n Whittaker," she said, "will you take an other recruit?  I
should like to enlist, please."

"You?  Oh, pshaw!  I'm thick-headed to-night.  I didn't see the
joke of it at first."

"There isn't any joke.  I want you to know that I admire you for
the fight you're making.  Law or no law, to let that dear little
girl go away with that dreadful father of hers is a sin and a
crime.  I came here to tell you so.  I did want to hear your story,
and you made me ask that question; but I was certain of your answer
before you made it.  I don't suppose I can do anything to help, but
I'm going to try.  So, you see, your army is bigger than you
thought it was--though the new soldier isn't good for much, I'm
afraid," she added, with a little smile.

Captain Cy was greatly disturbed.

"Miss Phoebe," he said, "I--I won't say that it don't please me to
have you talk so, for it does, more'n you can imagine.  Sympathy
means somethin' to the under dog, and it gives him spunk to keep on
kickin'.  But you mustn't take any part in the row; you simply
mustn't.  It won't do."

"Why not?  Won't I be ANY help?"

"Help?  You'd be more help than all the rest of us put together.
You and me haven't seen a great deal of each other, and my part in
the few talks we have had has been a mean one, but I knew the first
time I met you that you had more brains and common sense than any
woman in this county--though I was too pig-headed to own it.  But
that ain't it.  I got you the job of teacher.  It's no credit to
me; 'twas just bull luck and for the fun of jarrin' Heman.  But I
did it.  And, because I did it, the Atkins crowd--and that means
most everybody now--haven't any love for you.  My tryin' for school
committee was really just to give you a fair chance in your
position.  I was licked, so the committee's two to one against you.
Don't you see that you mustn't have anything to do with me?  Don't
you SEE it?"

She shook her head.

"I see that common gratitude alone should be reason enough for my
trying to help you," she said.  "But, beside that, I know you are
right, and I SHALL help, no matter what you say.  As for the
teacher's position, let them discharge me.  I--"

"Don't talk that way.  The youngsters need you, and know it, no
matter what their fool fathers and mothers say.  And you mustn't
wreck your chances.  You're young--"

She laughed.

"Oh, no! I'm not," she said.  "Young!  Cap'n Whittaker, you
shouldn't joke about a woman's age."

"I ain't jokin'.  You ARE young."  As she stood there before him he
was realizing, with a curiously uncomfortable feeling, how much
younger she was than he.  He glanced up at the mirror, where his
own gray hairs were reflected, and repeated his assertion.  "You're
young yet," he said, "and bein' discharged from a place might mean
a whole lot to you.  I'm glad you take such an interest in Bos'n,
and your comin' here on her account--"

He paused.  Miss Dawes colored slightly and said:

"Yes."

"Your comin' here on her account was mighty good of you.  But
you've got to keep out of this trouble.  And you mustn't come here
again.  That's owner's orders.  Why, I'm expectin' a boardin' party
any minute," he added.  "I thought when you knocked it was 'papa'
comin' for his child.  You'd better go."

But she stood still.

"I shan't go," she declared.  "Or, at least, not until you promise
to let me try to help you.  If they come, so much the better.
They'll learn where my sympathies are."

Captain Cy scratched his head.

"See here, Miss Phoebe," he said.  "I ain't sure that you fully
understand that Scripture and everything else is against us.  Did
Angie turn loose on you the 'Whom the Lord has joined' avalanche?"

The schoolmistress burst into a laugh.  The captain laughed, too,
but his gravity quickly returned.  For steps sounded on the walk,
there was a whispering outside, and some one knocked on the dining-
room door.

The situation was similar to that of the evening when the Board of
Strategy called and "John Smith" made his first appearance.  But
now, oddly enough, Captain Cy seemed much less troubled.  He looked
at Miss Dawes and there was a dancing twinkle in his eye.

"Is it--" began the lady, in an agitated whisper.

"The boardin' party?  I presume likely."

"But what can you do?"

"Stand by the repel, I guess," was the calm reply.  "I told you
that they had most of the ammunition, but ours ain't all blank
cartridges.  You stay below and listen to the broadsides."

They heard Georgianna cross the dining room.  There was a murmur of
voices at the door.  The captain nodded.

"It's them," he said.  "Well, here goes.  Now don't you show
yourself."

"Do you think I am afraid?  Indeed, I shan't stay 'below' as you
call it!  I shall let them see--"

Captain Cy held up his hand.

"I'm commodore of this fleet," he said; "and that bein' the case, I
expect my crew to obey orders.  There's nothin' you can do, and--
Why, yes! there is, too.  You can take care of Bos'n.  Georgianna,"
to the housekeeper who, looking frightened and nervous, had
appeared at the door, "send Bos'n in here quick."

"They're there," whispered Georgianna.  "Mr. Atkins and Tad and
that Thomas critter, and lots more.  And they've come after her.
What shall we do?"

"Jump when I speak to you, that's the first thing.  Send Bos'n in
here and you stay in your galley."

Emily came running.  Miss Dawes put an arm about her.  Captain Cy,
the battle lanterns still twinkling under his brows, stepped forth
to meet the "boarding party."

They were there, as Georgianna had said.  Mr. Thomas on the top
step, Heman and Simpson on the next lower, and behind them Abel
Leonard and a group of interested volunteers, principally recruited
from the back room of the barber shop.

"Evenin', gentlemen," said the captain, opening the door so briskly
that Mr. Thomas started backward and came down heavily upon the
toes of the devoted Tad.  Mr. Simpson swore, Mr. Thomas clawed
about him to gain equilibrium, and the dignity of the group was
seriously impaired.

"Evenin'," repeated Captain Cy.  "Quite a surprise party you're
givin' me.  Come in."

"Cyrus," began the Honorable Atkins, "we are here to claim--"

"Give me my daughter, you robber!" demanded Thomas, from his new
position in the rear of the other two.

"Mr. Thomas," said Heman, "please remember that I am conducting
this affair.  I respect the natural indignation of an outraged
father, but--ahem!  Cyrus, we are here to claim--"

"Then do your claimin' inside.  It's kind of chilly to-night,
there's plenty of empty chairs, and we don't need to hold an
overflow meetin'.  Come ahead in."

The trio looked at each other in hesitation.  Then Mr. Atkins
majestically entered the dining room.  Thomas and Simpson followed
him.

"Abe," observed Captain Cy to Leonard, who was advancing toward the
steps, "I'm sorry not to be hospitable, but there's too many of you
to invite at once, and 'tain't polite to show partiality.  You and
the rest are welcome to sit on the terrace or stroll 'round the
deer park.  Good night."

He closed the door in the face of the disappointed Abel and turned
to the three in the room.

"Well," he said, "out with it.  You've come to claim somethin', I
understand."

"I come for my rights," shouted Mr. Thomas.

"Yes?  Well, this ain't State's prison or I'd give 'em to you with
pleasure.  Heman, you'd better do the talkin'.  We'll probably get
ahead faster."

The Honorable cleared his throat and waved his hand.

"Cyrus," he began, "you are my boyhood friend and my fellow
townsman and neighbor.  Under such circumstances it gives me pain--"

"Then don't let us discuss painful subjects.  Let's get down to
business.  You've come to rescue Bos'n--Emily, that is,--from the
'robber'--I'm quotin' Deacon Thomas here--that's got her, so's to
turn her over to her sorrowin' father.  Is that it?  Yes.  Well,
you can't have her--not yet."

"Cyrus," said Mr. Atkins, "I'm sorry to see that you take it this
way.  You haven't the shadow of a right.  We have the law with us,
and your conduct will lead us to invoke it.  The constable is
outside.  Shall I call him in?"

"Uncle Bedny" was the town constable and had been since before the
war.  The purely honorary office was given him each year as a joke.
Captain Cy grinned broadly, and even Tad was obliged to smile.

"Don't be inhuman, Heman," urged the captain.  "You wouldn't turn
me over to be man-handled by Uncle Bedny, would you?"

"This is not a humorous affair--" began the congressman, with
dignity.  But the "bereaved father" had been prospecting on his own
hook, and now he peeped into the sitting room.

"Here she is!" he shouted.  "I see her.  Come on, Emmie!  Your
dad's come for you.  Let go of her, you woman!  What do you mean by
holdin' on to her?"

The situation which was "not humorous" immediately became much less
so.  The next minute was a lively one.  It ended as Mr. Thomas was
picked up by Tad from the floor, where he had fallen, having been
pushed violently over a chair by Captain Cy.  Bos'n, frightened and
sobbing, was clinging wildly to Miss Dawes, who had clung just as
firmly to her.  The captain's voice rang through the room.

"That's enough," he said.  "That's enough and some over.  Atkins,
take that feller out of this house and off my premises.  As for the
girl, that's for us to fight out in the courts.  I'm her guardian,
lawfully appointed, and you nor nobody else can touch her while
that appointment's good.  Here it is--right here.  Now look at it
and clear out."

He held, for the congressman's inspection, the document which,
inclosed in the long envelope, had been received that morning.  His
visit to Ostable, made some weeks before, had been for the purpose
of applying to the probate court for the appointment as Emily's
guardian.  He had applied before the news of her father's coming to
life reached him.  The appointment itself had arrived just in time.

Mr. Atkins studied the document with care.  When he spoke it was
with considerable agitation and without his usual diplomacy.

"Humph!" he grunted.  "Humph!  I see.  Well, sir, I have some
influence in this section and I shall see how long your--your TRICK
will prevent the child's going where she belongs.  I wish you to
understand that I shall continue this fight to the very last.  I--I
am not one to be easily beaten.  Simpson, you and Thomas come with
me.  This night's despicable chicanery is only the beginning.  This
is bad business for you, Cy Whittaker," he snarled, his self-control
vanishing, "and"--with a vindictive glance at the schoolmistress--
"for those who are with you in it.  That appointment was obtained
under false pretenses and I can prove it. Your tricks don't scare
me.  I've had experience with TRICKS before."

"Yup.  So I've heard.  Well, Heman, I ain't as well up in tricks as
you claim to be, nor my stockin' isn't as well padded as yours,
maybe.  But while there's a ten-cent piece left in the toe of it
I'll fight you and the skunk whose 'rights' you seem to have taken
such a shine to.  And, after that, while there's a lawyer that 'll
trust me.  And, meantime, that little girl stays right here, and
you touch her if you dare, any of you!  Anything more to say?"

But the Honorable's dignity had returned.  Possibly he thought he
had said too much already.  A moment later the door banged behind
the discomforted boarding party.

Captain Cy pulled his beard and laughed.

"Well, we repelled 'em, didn't we?" he observed.  "But, as friend
Heman says, the beginnin's only begun.  I wish he hadn't seen you
here, teacher."

Miss Dawes looked up from the task of stroking poor Bos'n's hair.

"I don't," she said, "I'm glad of it."  Then she added, laughing
nervously:  "Cap'n Whittaker, how could you be so cool?  It was
like a play.  I declare, you were just splendid!"



CHAPTER XIV

A CLEW


Josiah Dimick has a unique faculty of grasping a situation and
summing it up in an out-of-the-ordinary way.

"I think," observed Josiah to the excited group at Simmons's, "that
this town owes Cy Whittaker a vote of thanks."

"Thanks!" gasped Alpheus Smalley, so shocked and horrified that he
put the one-pound weight on the scales instead of the half pound.
"THANKS!  After what we've found out?  Well, I must say!"

"Ya-as," drawled Captain Josiah, "thanks was what I said.  If it
wan't for him this gang and the sewin' circle wouldn't have nothin'
to talk about but their neighbors.  Our reputations would be as
full of holes as a skimmer by this time.  Now all hands are so busy
jumpin' on Whit, that the rest of us can feel fairly safe.  Ain't
that so, Gabe?"

Mr. Lumley, who had stopped in for a half pound of tea, grinned
feebly, but said nothing.  If he noticed the clerk's mistake in
weights he didn't mention it, but took his package and hurried out.
After his departure Mr. Smalley himself discovered the error and
charged the Lumley account with "1 1/4 lbs. Mixed Green and Black."
Meanwhile the assemblage about the stove had put Captain Cy on the
anvil and was hammering him vigorously.

Bayport was boiling over with rumor and surmise.  Heman had
appealed to the courts asking that Captain Cy's appointment as
Bos'n's guardian be rescinded.  Cy had hired Lawyer Peabody, of
Ostable, to look out for his interests.  Mr. Atkins and the captain
had all but come to blows over the child.  Thomas, the poor father,
had broken down and wept, and had threatened to commit suicide.
Mrs. Salters had refused to speak to Captain Cy when she met the
latter after meeting on Sunday.  The land in Orham had been sold
and the captain was using the money.  Phoebe Dawes had threatened
to resign if Bos'n came to school any longer.  No, she had
threatened to resign if she didn't come to school.  She hadn't
threatened to resign at all, but wanted higher wages because of the
effect the scandal might have on her reputation as a teacher.
These were a few of the reports, contradicted and added to from day
to day.

To quote Josiah Dimick again:  "Sortin' out the truth from the lies
is like tryin' to find a quart of sardines in a schooner load of
herrin'.  And they dump in more herrin' every half hour."

Angeline Phinney was having the time of her life.  The perfect
boarding house hummed like a fly trap.  Keturah and Mrs. Tripp had
deserted to the enemy, and the minority, meaning Asaph and Bailey,
had little opportunity to defend their friend's cause, even if they
had dared.  Heman Atkins, his Christian charity and high-mindedness,
his devotion to duty, regardless of political consequences, and the
magnificent speech at town meeting were lauded and exalted.  The
Bayport Breeze contained a full account of the meeting, and it was
read aloud by Keturah, amidst hymns of praise from the elect.

"'Whom the Lord hath joined,'" read Mrs. Bangs, "'let no man put
asunder.'  Ain't that splendid?  Ain't that FINE?  The paper says:
'When Congressman Atkins delivered this noble sentiment a hush fell
upon the excited throng.'  I should think 'twould.  I remember when
I was married the minister said pretty nigh the same thing, and I
COULDN'T speak.  I couldn't have opened my mouth to save me.  Don't
you remember I couldn't, Bailey?"

Mr. Bangs nodded gloomily.  It is possible that he wished the
effect of the minister's declaration might have been more lasting.
Asaph stirred in his chair.

"I don't care," he said.  "This puttin' asunder business is all
right, but there's always two sides to everything.  I see this
Thomas critter when he fust come, and he didn't look like no saint
then--nor smell like one, neither, unless 'twas a specimen pickled
in alcohol."

Here was irreverence almost atheistic.  Keturah's face showed her
shocked disapproval.  Matilda Tripp voiced the general sentiment.

"Humph!" she sniffed.  "Well, all I can say is that I've met Mr.
Thomas two or three times, and _I_ didn't notice anything but
politeness and good manners.  Maybe my nose ain't so fine for
smellin' liquor as some folks's--p'raps it ain't had the
experience--but all _I_ saw was a poor lame man with a black eye.
I pitied him, and I don't care who hears me say it."

"Yes," concurred Miss Phinney, "and if he was a drinkin' man, do
you suppose Mr. Atkins would have anything to do with him?  Cyrus
Whittaker made a whole lot of talk about his insultin' some woman
or other, but nobody knows who the woman was.  'Bout time for her
to speak up, I should think.  Teacher," turning to Miss Dawes, "you
was at the Whittaker place when Mr. Atkins and Emily's father come
for her, I understand.  I wish I'd have been there.  It must have
been wuth seein'."

"It was," replied Miss Dawes.  She had kept silent throughout the
various discussions of the week following the town meeting, but
now, thus appealed to, she answered promptly.

Angeline's news created a sensation.  The schoolmistress immediately
became the center of interest.

"Is that so?  Was you there, teacher?  Well, I declare!"  The
questions and exclamations flew round the table.

"Tell us, teacher," pleaded Keturah.  "Wasn't Heman grand?  I
should so like to have heard him.  Didn't Cap'n Whittaker look
ashamed of himself?"

"No, he did not.  If anyone looked ashamed it was Mr. Atkins and
his friends.  Perhaps I ought to tell you that my sympathies are
entirely with Captain Whittaker in this affair.  To give that
little girl up to a drunken scoundrel like her father would, in my
opinion, be a crime."

The boarders and the landlady gasped.  Asaph grinned and nudged
Bailey under the table.  Keturah was the first to recover.

"Well!" she exclaimed.  "Everybody's got a right to their opinion,
of course.  But I can't see the crime, myself.  And as for the
drunkenness, I'd like to know who's seen Mr. Thomas drunk.  Cyrus
Whittaker SAYS he has, but--"

She waved her hand scornfully.  Phoebe rose from her chair.

"I have seen him in that condition," she said.  "In fact, I am the
person he insulted.  I saw Captain Whittaker knock him down, and I
honored the captain for it.  I only wished I were a man and could
have done it myself."

She left the room, and, a few moments later, the house.  Mr.
Tidditt chuckled aloud.  Even Bailey dared to look pleased.

"There!" sneered the widow Tripp.  "Ain't that--  Perhaps you
remember that Cap'n Whittaker got her the teacher's place?"

"Yes," put in Miss Phinney, "and nobody knows WHY he got it for
her.  That is, nobody has known up to now.  Maybe we can begin to
guess a little after this."

"She was at his house, was she?" observed Keturah.  "Humph!  I
wonder why?  Seems to me if _I_ was a young--that is, a single
woman like her, I'd be kind of careful about callin' on bachelors.
Humph! it looks funny to me."

Asaph rose and pushed back his chair.

"I cal'late she called to see Emily," he said sharply.  "The child
was her scholar, and I presume likely, knowin' the kind of father
that has turned up for the poor young one, she felt sorry for her.
Of course, nobody's hintin' anything against Phoebe Dawes's
character.  If you want a certificate of that, you've only got to
go to Wellmouth.  Folks over there are pretty keen on that subject.
I guess the town would go to law about it rather'n hear a word
against her.  Libel suits are kind of uncomf'table things for them
that ain't sure of their facts.  I'D hate to get mixed up in one,
myself.  Bailey, I'm going up street.  Come on, when you can, won't
you?"

As if frightened at his own display of spirit, he hurried out.
There was silence for a time; then Miss Phinney spoke concerning
the weather.

Up at the Cy Whittaker place the days were full ones.  There, also,
legal questions were discussed, with Georgianna, the Board of
Strategy, Josiah Dimick occasionally, and, more infrequently still,
Miss Dawes, as participants with Captain Cy in the discussions.
Rumors were true in so far as they related to Mr. Atkins's appeal
to the courts, and the captain's retaining Lawyer Peabody, of
Ostable.  Mr. Peabody's opinion of the case was not encouraging.

"You see, captain," he said, when his client visited him at his
office, "the odds are very much against us.  The court appointed
you as guardian with the understanding that this man Thomas was
dead.  Now he is alive and claims his child.  More than that, he
has the most influential politician in this county back of him.
We wouldn't stand a fighting chance except for one thing--Thomas
himself.  He left his wife and the baby; deserted them, so she
said; went to get work, HE says.  We can prove he was a drunken
blackguard BEFORE he went, and that he has been drunk since he came
back.  But THEY'LL say--Atkins and his lawyer--that the man was
desperate and despairing because of your refusal to give him his
child.  They'll hold him up as a repentant sinner, anxious to
reform, and needing the little girl's influence to help keep him
straight.  That's their game, and they'll play it, be sure of that,
It sounds reasonable enough, too, for sinners have repented before
now.  And the long-lost father coming back to his child is the one
sure thing to win applause from the gallery, you know that."

Captain Cy nodded.

"Yup," he said, "I know it.  The other night, when Miss Ph--when a
friend of mine was at the house, she said this business was like a
play.  I didn't say so to her, but all the same I realize it ain't
like a play at all.  In a play dad comes home, havin' been snaked
bodily out of the jaws of the tomb by his coat collar, and the
young one sings out 'Papa! Papa!' and he sobs, 'Me child! Me
child!' and it's all lovely, and you put on your hat feelin' that
the old man is goin' to be rich and righteous for the rest of his
days.  But here it's different; dad's a rascal, and anybody who's
seen anything of the world knows he's bound to stay so; and as for
the poor little girl, why--why--"

He stopped, rose, and, striding over to the window, stood looking
out.  After an interval, during which the good-natured attorney
read a dull business letter through for the second time, he spoke
again.

"I hope you understand, Peabody," he said.  "It ain't just
selfishness that makes me steer the course I'm runnin'.  Course,
Bos'n's got to be the world and all to me, and if she's taken away
I don't know's I care a tinker's darn what happens afterwards.
But, all the same, if her dad was a real man, sorry for what he's
done and tryin' to make up for it--why, then, I cal'late I'm decent
enough to take off my hat, hand her over, and say:  'God bless you
and good luck.'  But to think of him carryin' her off the Lord
knows where, to neglect her and cruelize her, and to let her grow
up among fellers like him, I--I--by the big dipper, I can't do it!
That's all; I can't!"

"How does she feel about it, herself?" asked Peabody.

"Her?  Bos'n?  Why, that's the hardest of all.  Some of the
children at school pester her about her father.  I don't know's you
can blame 'em; young ones are made that way, I guess--but she comes
home to me cryin', and it's 'O Uncle Cy, he AIN'T my truly father,
is he?' and 'You won't let him take me away from you, will you?'
till it seems as if I should fly out of the window.  The poor
little thing!  And that puffed-up humbug Atkins blowin' about his
Christianity and all!  D--n such Christianity as that, I say!  I've
seen heathen Injuns, who never heard of Christ, with more of His
spirit inside 'em.  There!  I've shocked you, I guess.  Sometimes
I think this place is too narrer and cramped for me.  I've been
around, you know, and my New England bringin' up has wore thin in
spots.  Seem's if I must get somewheres and spread out, or I'll
bust."

He threw himself into a chair.  The lawyer clapped him on the
shoulder.

"There, there, captain," he said.  "Don't 'bust' yet awhile.  Don't
give up the ship.  If we lose in one court, we can appeal to
another, and so on up the line.  And meantime we'll do a little
investigating of friend Thomas's career since he left Concord.
I've written to a legal acquaintance of mine in Butte, giving him
the facts as we know them, and a description of Thomas.  He will
try to find out what the fellow did in his years out West.  It's
our best chance, as I told you.  Keep your pluck up and wait and
see."

The captain repeated this conversation to the Board of Strategy
when he returned to Bayport.  Miss Dawes had walked home from
school with Bos'n, and had stopped at the house to hear the report.
She listened, but it was evident that something else was on her
mind.

"Captain Whittaker," she asked, "has it ever struck you as queer
that Mr. Atkins should take such an interest in this matter?  He is
giving time and counsel and money to help this man Thomas, who is a
perfect stranger to him.  Why does he do it?"

Captain Cy smiled.

"Why?" he repeated.  "Why, to down me, of course.  I was gettin'
too everlastin' prominent in politics to suit him.  I'd got you in
as teacher, and I had 'Lonzo Snow as good as licked for school
committee.  Goodness knows what I might have run for next, 'cordin'
to Heman's reasonin', and I simply had to be smashed.  It worked
all right.  I'm so unhealthy now in the sight of most folks in this
town, that I cal'late they go home and sulphur-smoke their clothes
after they meet me, so's not to catch my wickedness."

But the teacher shook her head.

"That doesn't seem reason enough to me," she declared.  "Just see
what Mr. Atkins has done.  He never openly advocated anything in
town meeting before; you said so yourself.  Even when he must have
realized that you had the votes for committeeman he kept still.
He might have taken many of them from you by simply coming out and
declaring for Mr. Snow; but he didn't.  And then, all at once, he
takes this astonishing stand.  Captain Whittaker, Mr. Tidditt says
that, the night of Emily's birthday party, you and he told who she
was, by accident, and that Mr. Atkins seemed very much surprised
and upset.  Is that so?"

Captain Cy laughed.

"His lemonade was upset; that's all I noticed special.  Oh! yes,
and he lost his hat off, goin' home.  But what of it?  What are you
drivin' at?"

"I was wondering if--if it could be that, for some reason, Mr.
Atkins had a spite against Emily or her people.  Or if he had any
reason to fear her."

"Fear?  Fear Bos'n?  Oh, my, that's funny!  You've been readin'
novels, I'm 'fraid, teacher, 'though I didn't suspect it of you."

He laughed heartily.  Miss Dawes smiled, too, but she still
persisted.

"Well," she said, "I don't know.  Perhaps it is because I'm a
woman, and politics don't mean as much to me as to you men, but to
me political reasons don't seem strong enough to account for such
actions as those of Mr. Atkins.  Emily's mother was a Thayer,
wasn't she? and the Thayers once lived in Orham.  I wish we could
find out more about them while they lived there."

Asaph Tidditt pulled his beard thoughtfully.

"Well," he observed, "maybe we can, if we want to, though I don't
think what we find out 'll amount to nothin'.  I was kind of
cal'latin' to go to Orham next week on a little visit.  Seth
Wingate over there--Barzilla Wingate's cousin, Whit--is a sort of
relation of mine, and we visit back and forth every nine or ten
year or so.  The ten year's most up, and he's been pesterin' me to
come over.  Seth's been Orham town clerk about as long as I've been
the Bayport one, and he's lived there all his life.  What he don't
know about Orham folks ain't wuth knowin'.  If you say so, I'll
pump him about the Thayers and the Richards.  'Twon't do no harm,
and the old fool likes to talk, anyhow.  I don't know's I ought to
speak that way about my relations," he added doubtfully, "but Seth
IS sort of stubborn and unlikely at odd times.  We don't always
agree as to which is the best town to live in, you understand."

So it was settled that Mr. Wingate should be subjected to the
"pumping" process when Asaph visited him.  He departed for this
visit the following week, and remained away for ten days.
Meanwhile several things happened in Bayport.

One of these things was the farewell of the Honorable Heman Atkins.
Congress was to open at Washington, and the Honorable heeded the
call of duty.  Alicia and the housekeeper went with him, and the
big house was closed for the winter.  At the gate between the stone
urns, and backed by the iron dogs, the great man bade a group of
admiring constituents good-by.  He thanked them for their trust in
him, and promised that it should not be betrayed.

"I leave you, my fellow townsmen, er--ladies and friends," he said,
"with regret, tempered by pride--a not inexcusable pride, I
believe.  In the trying experience which my self-respect and
sympathy has so recently forced upon me, you have stood firm and
cheered me on.  The task I have undertaken, the task of restoring
to a worthy man his own, shall be carried on to the bitterest
extremity.  I have put my hand to the plow, and it shall not be
withdrawn.  And, furthermore, I go to my work at Washington
determined to secure for my native town the appropriation which it
so sorely needs.  I shall secure it if I can, even though--" and
the sarcasm was hugely enjoyed by his listeners--"I am, as I seem
likely to be, deprived of the help of the 'committee,' self-
appointed at our recent town meeting.  If I fail--and I do not
conceal the fact that I may fail--I am certain you will not blame
me.  Now I should like to shake each one of you by the hand."

The hands were shaken, and the train bore the Atkins delegation
away.  And, on the day following, Mr. Thomas, the prodigal father,
also left town.  A position in Boston had been offered him, he
said, and he felt that he must accept it.  He would come back some
of these days, with the warrant from the court, and get his little
girl.

"Position offered him!  Um--ya-as!" quoth Dimick the cynical, in
conversation with Captain Cy.  "Inspector of sidewalks, I shouldn't
wonder.  Well, please don't ask me if I think Heman sent him to
Boston so's to have him out of the way, and 'cause he'd feel
consider'ble safer than if he was loose down here.  Don't ask me
that, for, with my strict scruples against the truth I might say,
No.  As it is, I say nothin'--and wink my port eye."

The ten-day visit ended, Mr. Tidditt returned to Bayport.  On the
afternoon of his return he and Bailey called at the Whittaker
place, and there they were joined by Miss Dawes, who had been
summoned to the conclave by a note intrusted to Bos'n.

"Now, Ase," ordered Captain Cy, as the quartet gathered in the
sitting room, "here we are, hangin' on your words, as the feller
said.  Don't keep us strung up too long.  What did you find out?"

The town clerk cleared his throat.  When he spoke, there was a
trace of disappointment in his tone.  To have been able to
electrify his audience with the news of some startling discovery
would have been pure joy for Asaph.

"Well," he began, "I don't know's I found out anything much.  Yet I
did find out somethin', too; but it don't really amount to nothin'.
I hoped 'twould be somethin' more'n 'twas, but when nothin' come of
it except the little somethin' it begun with, I--"

"For the land sakes!" snapped Bailey Bangs, who was a trifle
envious of his friend's position in the center of the stage, "stop
them 'nothin's' and 'somethin's,' won't you?  You keep whirlin' 'em
round and over and over till my head's FULL of 'nothin',' and--"

"That's what it's full of most of the time," interrupted Asaph
tartly.  Captain Cy hastened to act as peacemak