er.

"Never mind, Bailey," he said; "you let Ase alone.  Tell us what
you did find out, Ase, and cut out the trimmin's."

"Well," continued Mr. Tidditt, with a glare at Bangs, "I asked Seth
about the Thayers and the Richards folks the very fust night I
struck Orham.  He remembered 'em, of course; he can remember Adam,
if you let him tell it.  He told me a whole mess about old man
Thayer and old man Richards and their granddads and grandmarms, and
what houses they lived in, and how many hens they kept, and what
their dog's name was, and how they come to name him that, and
enough more to fill a hogshead.  'Twas ten o'clock afore he got out
of Genesis, and down so fur as John and Emily.  He remembered their
bein' married, and their baby--Mary Thayer, Bos'n's ma--bein' born.

"Folks used to call John Thayer a smart young feller, so Seth said.
They used to cal'late that he'd rise high in the seafarin' and
ship-ownin' line.  Maybe he would, only he died somewheres in
Californy 'long in '54 or thereabouts.  'Twas the time of the gold
craziness out there, and he left his ship and went gold huntin'.
And the next thing they knew he was dead and buried."

"When was that?" inquired the schoolmistress.

"In '54, I tell you.  So Seth says."

"What ship was he on?" asked Bailey.

"Wan't on any ship.  Why don't you listen, instead of settin' there
moonin'?  He was gold diggin', I tell you."

"He'd BEEN on a ship, hadn't he?  What was the name of her?"

"I didn't ask.  What diff'rence does that make?"

"Wasn't Mr. Atkins at sea in those days?" put in the teacher.  The
captain answered her.

"Yes, he was," he said.  "That is, I think he was.  He was away
from here when I skipped out, and he didn't get back till '61 or
thereabouts."

"Well, anyhow," went on Asaph, "that's all I could find out.  Seth
and me went rummagin' through town records from way back to glory,
him gassin' away and stringin' along about this old settler and
that, till I 'most wished he'd choke himself with the dust he was
raisin'.  We found John's grandad's will, and Emily's dad's will,
and John's own will, and that's all.  John left everything he had
and all he might become possessed of to his wife and baby and their
heirs forever.  He died poorer'n poverty.  What's the use of a will
when you ain't got nothin' to leave?"

"Why!" exclaimed Captain Cy.  "The answer to that's easy.  John was
goin' to sea, and, more'n likely, intended to have a shy at the
diggin's afore he got back.  So, if he did make any money, he
wanted his wife and baby to have it."

"Well, what they got wan't wuth havin'.  Emily had to scrimp along
and do dressmakin' till she died.  She done fairly well at that,
though, and saved somethin' and passed it over to Mary.  And Mary
married Henry Thomas, after she went with the Howes tribe to
Concord, and he got rid of it for her in double quick time--all but
the Orham land."

"So that was all you could find out, hey, Ase?" asked the captain.
"Well, it's at least as much as I expected.  You see, teacher,
these story-book notions don't work out when it comes to real
life."

Miss Dawes was plainly disappointed.

"I wish we knew more," she said.  "Who was on this ship with Mr.
Thayer?  And who sent the news of his death home?"

"Oh, I can tell you that," said Asaph.  "'Twas some one-hoss doctor
out there, gold minin' himself, he was.  John died of a quick
fever.  Got cold and went off in no time.  Seth remembered that
much, though he couldn't remember the doctor's name.  He said, if I
wanted to learn more about the Thayers, I might go see--  Humph,
well, never mind that.  'Twas just foolishness, anyhow."

But Phoebe persisted.

"To see whom?" she asked.  "Some one you knew?  A friend of yours?"

Asaph turned red.

"Friend of mine!" he snarled.  "No, SIR! she ain't no friend of
mine, I'm thankful to say.  More a friend of Bailey's, here, if
she's anybody's.  One of his pets, she was, for a spell.  A patient
of his, you might say; anyhow, he prescribed for her.  'Twas that
deef idiot, Debby Beasley, Cy; that's who 'twas.  Her name was
Briggs afore she married Beasley, and she was hired help for Emily
Thayer, when Mary was born, and until John died."

Captain Cy burst into a roar of laughter.  Bailey sprang out of his
chair.

"De--Debby Beasley!" he stammered.  "Debby Beasley!"

"She was that deef housekeeper Bailey hired for me, teacher,"
explained the captain.  "I've told you about her.  Ho! ho! so
that's the end of the mystery huntin'.  We go gunnin' for Heman
Atkins, and we bring down Debby!  Well, Ase, goin' to see the old
lady?"

Mr. Tidditt's retort was emphatic.

"Goin' to SEE her?" he repeated.  "I guess not!  Godfrey scissors!
I told Seth, says I, 'I've had all the Debby Beasley _I_ want, and
I cal'late Cy Whittaker feels the same way.'  Go to see her!  I
wouldn't go to see her if she was up in Paradise a-hollerin' for
me."

"Nobody up there's goin' to holler for YOU, Ase Tidditt," remarked
Bailey, with sarcasm; "so don't let that worry you none."

"Are YOU going to see her, Captain Whittaker?" asked Phoebe.

The captain shook his head.

"Why, no, I guess not," he said.  "I don't take much stock in what
she'd be likely to know; besides, I'm a good deal like Ase--I've
had about all the Debby Beasley I want."



CHAPTER XV

DEBBY BEASLEY TO THE RESCUE


"Mrs. Bangs," said the schoolmistress, as if it was the most casual
thing in the world, "I want to borrow your husband to-morrow."

It was Friday evening, and supper at the perfect boarding house
had advanced as far as the stewed prunes and fruit-cake stage.
Keturah, who was carefully dealing out the prunes, exactly four to
each saucer, stopped short, spoon in air, and gazed at Miss Dawes.

"You--you want to WHAT?" she asked.

"I want to borrow your husband.  I want him all day, too, because
I'm thinking of driving over to Trumet, and I need a coachman.
You'll go, won't you, Mr. Bangs?"

Bailey, who had been considering the advisability of asking for a
second cup of tea, brightened up and looked pleased.

"Why, yes," he answered, "I'll go.  I can go just as well as not.
Fact is, I'd like to.  Ain't been to Trumet I don't know when."

Miss Phinney and the widow Tripp looked at each other.  Then they
both looked at Keturah.  That lady's mouth closed tightly, and she
resumed her prune distribution.

"I'm sorry," she said crisply, "but I'm 'fraid he can't go.  It's
Saturday, and I'll need him round the house.  Do you care for cake
to-night, Elviry?  I'm 'fraid it's pretty dry; I ain't had time to
do much bakin' this week."

"Of course," continued the smiling Phoebe, "I shouldn't think of
asking him to go for nothing.  I didn't mean borrow him in just
that way.  I was thinking of hiring your horse and buggy, and, as
I'm not used to driving, I thought perhaps I might engage Mr. Bangs
to drive for me.  I expected to pay for the privilege.  But, as you
need him, I suppose I must get my rig and driver somewhere else.
I'm so sorry."

The landlady's expression changed.  This was the dull season, and
opportunities to "let" the family steed and buggy--"horse and
team," we call it in Bayport--were few.

"Well," she observed, "I don't want to be unlikely and disobligin'.
Far's he's concerned, he'd rather be traipsin' round the country
than stay to home, any day; though it's been so long sence he took
ME to ride that I don't know's I'd know how to act."

"Why, Ketury!" protested her husband.  "How you talk!  Didn't I
drive you down to the graveyard only last Sunday--or the Sunday
afore?"

"Graveyard!  Yes, I notice our rides always fetch up at the
graveyard.  You're always willin' to take me THERE.  Seems
sometimes as if you enjoyed doin' it."

"Now, Keturah! you know yourself that 'twas you proposed goin'
there.  You said you wanted to look at our lot, 'cause you was
afraid 'twan't big enough, and you didn't know but we'd ought to
add on another piece.  You said that it kept you awake nights
worryin' for fear when I passed away you wouldn't have room in that
lot for me.  Land sakes! don't I remember?  Didn't you give me the
blue creeps talkin' about it?"

Mrs. Bangs ignored this outburst.  Turning to the school teacher,
she said with a sigh:

"Well, I guess he can go.  I'll get along somehow.  I hope he'll be
careful of the buggy; we had it painted only last January."

Mrs. Tripp ventured a hinted question concerning the teacher's
errand at Trumet.  The reply being noncommittal, the widow
cheerfully prophesied that she guessed 'twas going to rain or snow
next day.  "It's about time for the line storm," she added.

But it did not storm, although a brisk, cold gale was blowing when,
after breakfast next morning, the "horse and team," with Bailey in
his Sunday suit and overcoat, and Miss Dawes on the buggy seat
beside him, turned out of the boarding-house yard and started on
the twelve-mile journey to Trumet.

It was a bleak ride.  Denboro, the village adjoining Bayport on the
bay side, is a pretty place, with old elms and silverleafs shading
the main street in summer, and with substantial houses set each in
its trim yard.  But beyond Denboro the Trumet road winds out over
rolling, bare hills, with cranberry bogs, now flooded and skimmed
with ice, in the hollows between them, clumps of bayberry and
beach-plum bushes scattered over their rounded slopes, and white
scars in their sides showing where the cranberry growers have cut
away the thin layer of coarse grass and moss to reach the sand
beneath, sand which they use in preparing their bogs for the new
vines.

And the wind!  There is always a breeze along the Trumet road,
even in summer--when the mosquitoes lie in wait to leeward like
buccaneers until, sighting the luckless wayfarer in the offing,
they drive down before the wind in clouds, literally to eat him
alive.  They are skilled navigators, those Trumet road mosquitoes,
and they know the advantage of snug harbors under hat brims and
behind spreading ears.  And each individual smashed by a frantic
palm leaves a thousand blood relatives to attend his funeral and
exact revenge after the Corsican fashion.

Now, in December, there were, of course, no mosquitoes, but the
wind tore across those bare hilltops in gusts that rocked the buggy
on its springs.  The bayberry bushes huddled and crouched before
it.  The sky was covered with tumbling, flying clouds, which
changed shape continually, and ripped into long, fleecy ravelings,
that broke loose and pelted on until merged into the next billowy
mass.  The bay was gray and white, and in the spots where an
occasional sunbeam broke through and struck it, flashed like a
turned knife blade.

Bailey drove with one hand and held his hat on his head with the
other.  The road had been deeply rutted during the November rains,
and now the ruts were frozen.  The buggy wheels twisted and scraped
as they turned in the furrows.

"What's the matter?" asked the schoolmistress, shouting so as to be
heard above the flapping of the buggy curtains.  "Why do you watch
that wheel?"

"'Fraid of the axle," whooped Mr. Bangs in reply.  "Nut's kind of
loose, for one thing, and the way the wheel wobbles I'm scart
she'll come off.  Call this a road!" he snorted indignantly.  "More
like a plowed field a consider'ble sight.  Jerushy, how she blows!
No wonder they raise so many deef and dumb folks in Trumet.  I'd
talk sign language myself if I lived here.  What's the use of
wastin' strength pumpin' up words when they're blowed back down
your throat fast enough to choke you?  Git dap, Henry!  Don't you
see the meetin' house steeple?  We're most there, thank the
goodness."

In Trumet Center, which is not much of a center, Miss Dawes
alighted from the buggy and entered a building bearing a sign with
the words "Metropolitan Variety Store, Joshua Atwood, Prop'r,
Groceries, Coal, Dry Goods, Insurance, Boots and Shoes, Garden
Seeds, etc."  A smaller sign beneath this was lettered "Justice of
the Peace," and one below that read "Post Office."

She emerged a moment later, followed by an elderly person in a red
cardigan jacket and overalls.

"Take the fust turnin' to the left, marm," he said pointing.  "It's
pretty nigh to East Trumet townhall.  Fust house this side of the
blacksmith shop.  About two mile, I'd say.  Windy day for drivin',
ain't it?  That horse of yours belongs in Bayport, I cal'late.
Looks to me like--  Hello, Bailey!"

"Hello, Josh!" grunted Mr. Bangs, adding an explanatory aside to
the effect that he knew Josh Atwood, the latter having once lived
in Bayport.

"But say," he asked as they moved on once more, "have we got to go
to EAST Trumet?  Jerushy! that's the place where the wind COMES
from.  They raise it over there; anyhow, they don't raise much
else.  Whose house you goin' to?"

He had asked the same question at least ten times since leaving
home, and each time Miss Dawes had evaded it.  She did so now,
saying that she was sure she should know the house when they got to
it.

The two miles to East Trumet were worse than the twelve which they
had come.  The wind fairly shrieked here, for the road paralleled
the edge of high sand bluffs close by the shore, and the ruts and
"thank-you-marms" were trying to the temper.  Bailey's was
completely wrecked.

"Teacher," he snapped as they reached the crest of a long hill, and
a quick grab at his hat alone prevented its starting on a balloon
ascension, "get out a spell, will you?  I've got to swear or bust,
and 'long's you're aboard I can't swear.  What you standin' still
for, you?" he bellowed at poor Henry, the horse, who had stopped to
rest.  "I cal'late the critter thinks that last cyclone must have
blowed me sky high, and he's waitin' to see where I light.  Git
dap!"

"I guess I shall get out very soon now," panted Phoebe.  "There's
the blacksmith shop over there near the next hill, and this house
in the hollow must be the one I'm looking for."

They pulled up beside the house in the hollow.  A little, story-
and-a-half house it was, and, judging by the neglected appearance
of the weeds and bushes in the yard, it had been unoccupied for
some time.  However, the blinds were now open, and a few fowls
about the back door seemed to promise that some one was living
there.  The wooden letter box by the gate had a name stenciled upon
it.  Miss Dawes sprang from the buggy and looked at the box.

"Yes," she said.  "This is the place.  Will you come in, Mr. Bangs?
You can put your horse in that barn, I'm sure, if you want to."

But Bailey declined to come in.  He declared he was going on to the
blacksmith's shop to have that wheel fixed.  He would not feel safe
to start for home with it as it was.  He drove off, and Miss Dawes,
knowing from lifelong experience that front doors are merely for
show, passed around the main body of the house and rapped on the
door in the ell.  The rap was not answered, though she could hear
some one moving about within, and a shrill voice singing "The Sweet
By and By."  So she rapped again and again, but still no one came
to the door.  At last she ventured to open it.

A thin woman, with her head tied up in a colored cotton handkerchief,
was in the room, vigorously wielding a broom.  She was singing in a
high cracked voice.  The opening of the door let in a gust of cold
wind which struck the singer in the back of the neck, and caused her
to turn around hastily.

"Hey?" she exclaimed.  "Land sakes! you scare a body to death!
Shut that door quick!  I ain't hankering for influenzy.  Who are
you?  What do you want?  Why didn't you knock?  Where's my specs?"

She took a pair of spectacles from the mantel shelf, rubbed them
with her apron, and set them on the bridge of her thin nose.  Then
she inspected the schoolmistress from head to foot.

"I beg pardon for coming in," shouted Phoebe.  "I knocked, but you
didn't hear.  You are Mrs. Beasley, aren't you?"

"I don't want none," replied Debby, with emphasis.  "So there's no
use your wastin' your breath."

"Don't want--" repeated the astonished teacher.  "Don't want what?"

"Hey?  I say I don't want none."

"Don't want WHAT?"

"Whatever 'tis you're peddlin'.  Books or soap or tea, or whatever
'tis.  I don't want nothin'."

After some strenuous minutes, the visitor managed to make it clear
to Mrs. Beasley's mind that she was not a peddler.  She tried to
add a word of further explanation, but it was effort wasted.

"'Tain't no use," snapped Debby, "I can't hear you, you speak so
faint.  Wait till I get my horn; it's in the settin' room."

Phoebe's wonder as to what the "horn" might be was relieved by the
widow's appearance, a moment later, with the biggest ear trumpet
her caller had ever seen.

"There, now!" she said, adjusting the instrument and thrusting the
bell-shaped end under the teacher's nose.  "Talk into that.  If you
ain't a peddler, what be you--sewin' machine agent?"

Phoebe explained that she had come some distance on purpose to see
Mrs. Beasley.  She was interested in the Thayers, who used to live
in Orham, particularly in Mr. John Thayer, who died in 1854.  She
had been told that Debby formerly lived with the Thayers, and
could, no doubt, remember a great deal about them.  Would she mind
answering a few questions, and so on?

Mrs. Beasley, her hearing now within forty-five degrees of the
normal, grew interested.  She ushered her visitor into the
adjoining room, and proffered her a chair.  That sitting room was a
wonder of its kind, even to the teacher's accustomed eyes.  A gilt-
framed crayon enlargement of the late Mr. Beasley hung in the
center of the broadest wall space, and was not the ugliest thing
in the apartment.  Having said this, further description is
unnecessary--particularly to those who remember Mr. Beasley's
personal appearance.

"What you so interested in the Thayers for?" inquired Debby.  "One
of the heirs, be you?  They didn't leave nothin'."

No, the schoolmistress was not an heir.  Was not even a relative of
the family.  But she was--was interested, just the same.  A friend
of hers was a relative, and--

"What is your friend?" inquired the inquisitor.  "A man?"

There was no reason why Miss Dawes should have changed color, but,
according to Debby's subsequent testimony, she did; she blushed, so
the widow declares.

"No," she protested.  "Oh, no! it's a--she's a child, that's all--a
little girl.  But--"

"Maybe you're gettin' up one of them geographical trees," suggested
Mrs. Beasley.  "I've seen 'em, fust settlers down in the trunk, and
children and grandchildren spreadin' out in the branches.  Is that
it?"

Here was an avenue of escape.  Phoebe stretched the truth a trifle,
and admitted that that, or something of the sort, was what she was
engaged in.  The explanation seemed to be satisfactory.  Debby
asked her visitor's name, and, misunderstanding it, addressed her
as "Miss Dorcas" thereafter.  Then she proceeded to give her
reminiscences of the Thayers, and it did not take long for the
disappointed teacher to discover that, for all practical purposes,
these reminiscences were valueless.  Mrs. Beasley remembered many
things, but nothing at all concerning John Thayer's life in the
West, nor the name of the ship he sailed in, nor who his shipmates
were.

"He never wrote home but once or twice afore he died," she said.
"And when he did Emily, his wife, never told me what was in his
letters.  She always burnt 'em, I guess.  I used to hunt around for
'em when she was out, but she burnt 'em to spite me, I cal'late.
Her and me didn't get along any too well.  She said I talked too
much to other folks about what was none of their business.  Now,
anybody that knows me knows THAT ain't one of my failin's.  I told
her so; says I--"

And so on for ten minutes.  Then Phoebe ventured to repeat the
words "out West," and her companion went off on a new tack.  She
had just been West herself.  She had been on a visit to her
husband's niece, who lived in Arizona.  In Blazeton, Arizona.
"It's the nicest town ever you see," she continued.  "And the
smartest, most up-to-date place.  Talk about the West bein'
oncivilized!  My land! you ought to see that town!  Electric
lights, and telephones, and--and--I don't know what all!  Why, Miss
What's-your-name--Miss Dorcas, marm, you just ought to see the
photygraphs I've got that was took out there.  My niece, she took
'em with one of them little mites of cameras.  You wouldn't believe
such a little box of a thing could take such photygraphs.  I'm
goin' to get 'em and show 'em to you.  No, sir! you ain't got to
go, neither.  Set right still and let me fetch them photygraphs.
'Twon't be a mite of trouble.  I'd love to do it."

Protests were unavailing.  The photographs, at least fifty of them,
were produced, and the suffering caller was shown the Blazeton City
Hall, and the Blazeton "Palace Hotel," and the home of the Beasley
niece, taken from the front, the rear, and both sides.  With each
specimen Debby delivered a descriptive lecture.

"You see that house?" she asked.  "Well, 'tain't much of a one to
look at, but it's got the most interestin' story tagged on to it.
I made Eva, that's my niece, take a picture of it just on that
account.  The woman that lives there's had the hardest time.  Her
fust name's Desire, and that kind of made me take an interest in
her right off, 'cause I had an Aunt Desire once, and it's a name
you don't hear very often.  Afterwards I got to know her real well.
She was a widder woman, like me, only she didn't have as much sense
as I've got, and went and married a second time.  'Twas 'long in
1886 she done it.  This man Higgins, he went to work for her on
her place, and pretty soon he married her.  They lived together,
principally on her fust husband's insurance money, I cal'late,
until a year or so ago.  Then the insurance money give out, and Mr.
Higgins he says:  'Old woman,' he says--I'D never let a husband of
mine call me 'old woman,' but Desire didn't seem to mind--'Old
woman,' he says, 'I'm goin' over to Phoenix'--that's another city
in Arizona--'to look for a job.'  And he went, and she ain't heard
hide--I mean seen hide nor heard hair--What DOES ail me?  She ain't
seen nor heard of him since.  And she advertised in the weekly
paper, and I don't know what all.  She thinks he was murdered, you
know; that's what makes it so sort of creepy and interestin'.
Everybody was awful kind to her, and we got to be real good
friends.  Why, I--"

This was but the beginning.  It was evident that Mrs. Beasley had
thoroughly enjoyed herself in Blazeton, and that the sorrows of the
bereaved Desire Higgins had been one of the principal sources of
that enjoyment.  The schoolmistress endeavored to turn the subject,
but it was useless.

"I fetched home a whole pile of them newspapers," continued Debby.
"They was awful interestin'; full of pictures of Blazeton buildin's
and leadin' folks and all.  And in some of the back numbers was the
advertisement about Mr. Higgins.  I do wish I could show 'em to
you, but I lent 'em to Mrs. Atwood up to the Center.  If 'twan't
such a ways I'd go and fetch 'em.  Mrs. Atwood's been awful nice to
me.  She took care of my trunks and things when I went West--yes,
and afore that when I went to Bayport to keep house for that
miser'ble Cap'n Whittaker.  I ain't told you about that, but I will
by and by.  Them trunks had lots of things in 'em that I didn't
want to lose nor have anybody see.  My diaries--I've kept a diary
since 1850--and--"

"Diaries?" interrupted Phoebe, grasping at straws.  "Did you keep a
diary while you were at the Thayers?"

"Yes.  Now, why didn't I think of that afore?  More'n likely
there'd be somethin' in that to help you with that geographical
tree.  I used to put down everything that happened, and--  Where
you goin'?"

Miss Dawes had risen and was peering out of the window.

"I was looking to see if my driver was anywhere about," she
replied.  "I thought perhaps he would drive over to Mrs. Atwood's
and get the diary for you.  But I don't see him."

Just then, from around the corner of the house, peeped an agitated
face; an agitated forefinger beckoned.  Debby stepped to the window
beside her visitor, and the face and finger went out of sight as if
pulled by a string.

Miss Phoebe smiled.

"I think I'll go out and look for him," she said.  "He must be near
here.  I'll be right back, Mrs. Beasley."

Without stopping to put on her jacket, she hurried through the
dining room, out of the door, and around the corner.  There she
found Mr. Bangs in a highly nervous state.

"Why didn't you tell me 'twas Debby Beasley you was comin' to see?"
he demanded.  "If you'd mentioned that deef image's name you'd
never got ME to drive you, I tell you that!"

"Yes," answered the teacher sweetly.  "I imagined that.  That's why
I didn't tell you, Mr. Bangs.  Now I want you to do me a favor.
Will you drive over to Trumet Center, and deliver a note and get a
package for me?  Then you can come back here, and I shall be ready
to start for home."

"Drive!  Drive nothin'!  The blacksmith's out, and won't be back
for another hour.  His boy's there, but he's a big enough lunkhead
to try bailin' out a dory with a fork, and that buggy axle is bent
so it's simply got to be fixed.  I'd no more go home to Ketury with
that buggy as 'tis than I'd--  Oh! my land of love!"

The ejaculation was almost a groan.  There at the corner, ear
trumpet adjusted, and spectacles glistening, stood Debby Beasley.
Bailey appeared to wilt under her gaze as if the spectacles were
twin suns.  Miss Dawes looked as if she very much wanted to laugh.
The widow stared in silence.

"How--how d'ye do, Mrs. Beasley?" faltered Mr. Bangs, not
forgetting to raise his voice.  "I hope you're lookin' as well as
you feel.  I mean, I hope you're smart."

Mrs. Beasley nodded decisively.

"Yes," she answered.  "I'm pretty toler'ble, thank you.  What was
the matter, Mr. Bangs?  Why didn't you come in?  Do you usually
make your calls round the corner?"

The gentleman addressed seemed unable to reply.  The schoolmistress
came to the rescue.

"You mustn't blame Mr. Bangs, Mrs. Beasley," she explained.  "He
wasn't responsible for what happened at Captain Whittaker's.  He is
the gentleman who drove me over here.  I was going to send him to
Mrs. Atwood's for the diary."

"Who said I was blamin' him?" queried the widow.  "If 'twas that
little Tidditt thing I might feel different.  But, considerin' that
I got this horn from Mr. Bangs, I'm willin' to let bygones be past.
It helps my hearin' a lot.  Them ear-fixin's was good while they
lasted, but they got out of kilter quick.  _I_ shan't bother Mr.
Bangs.  If he can square his own conscience, I'm satisfied."

Bailey's conscience was not troubling him greatly, and he seemed
relieved.  Phoebe told of the damaged buggy.

"Humph!" grunted the widow.  "The horse didn't get bent, too, did
he?"

Mr. Bangs indignantly declared that the horse was all right.

"Um--hum.  Well, then, I guess I can supply a carriage.  My fust
cousin Ezra that died used to be doctor here, and he give me his
sulky when he got a new one.  It's out in the barn.  Go fetch your
horse, and harness him in.  I'll be ready time the harnessin's
done."

"You?" gasped the teacher.  "You don't need to go, Mrs. Beasley.  I
wouldn't think of giving you that trouble."

"No trouble at all.  I wouldn't trust nobody else with them trunks.
And besides, I always do enjoy ridin'.  You could go, too, Miss
Dorcas, but the sulky seat's too narrer for three.  You can set in
the settin' room till we get back.  'Twon't take us long.  Don't
say another word; I'm A-GOIN'."



CHAPTER XVI

A REMARKABLE DRIVE AND WHAT FOLLOWED


The number of reasons given by Mr. Bangs one after the other, to
prove that it would be quite impossible for him to be Mrs.
Beasley's charioteer was a credit to the resources of his
invention.  The blacksmith might be back any minute; it was dinner
time, and he was hungry; Henry, the horse, was tired; it wasn't a
nice day for riding, and he would come over some other time and
take the widow out; he--  But Debby had a conclusive answer for
each protest.

"You said yourself the blacksmith wouldn't be back for an hour,"
she observed.  "And you can leave word with the boy what he's to do
when he does come.  As for dinner, I'll be real glad to give you
and Miss Dorcas a snack soon's we get back.  I don't mind if it
ain't a pleasant day; a little fresh air 'll do me good.  I been
shut up here house-cleanin' ever since I got back from out West.
Now, hurry right along, and fetch your horse.  I'll unlock the
barn."

"But, Mrs. Beasley," put in the schoolmistress, "why couldn't you
give us a note to Mrs. Atwood and let us stop for the diary on our
way home?  I could return it to you by mail.  Or you might get it
yourself some other day and mail it to me."

"No, no!  Never put off till to-morrer what you can do to-day.  My
husband was a great hand to put off and put off.  For the last
eight years of his life I was at him to buy a new go-to-meetin'
suit of clothes.  The one he had was blue to start with, but it
faded to a brown, and, toward the last of it, I declare if it
didn't commence to turn green.  Nothin' I could say would make him
heave it away even then.  Seemed to think more of it than ever.
Said he wanted to hang to it a spell and see what 'twould turn
next.  But he died and was laid out in that same suit, and I was so
mortified at the funeral I couldn't think of nothin' else.  No,
I'll go after them papers and the diary while they're fresh in my
mind.  And besides, do you s'pose I'd let Sarah Ann Atwood rummage
through my trunks?  I guess not!"

Phoebe began to be sorry she had thought of sending for the diary,
particularly as the chance of its containing valuable information
was so remote.  Mrs. Beasley went into the house to dress for the
ride.  The schoolmistress went with her as far as the sitting room.
The perturbed Bailey stalked off, muttering, to the blacksmith's.

In a little while he returned, leading Henry by the bridle.  Debby,
adorned with the beflowered bonnet she had worn when she arrived at
the Cy Whittaker place, and with a black cloth cape over her lean
shoulders, was waiting for him by the open door of the barn.  The
cape had a fur collar--"cat fur," so Mr. Bangs said afterwards in
describing it.

"Pull the sulky right out," commanded the widow.

Bailey stared into the black interior of the barn.

"Which is it?" he shouted.

Mrs. Beasley pointed with her ear trumpet.

"Why, that one there, of course.  'Tother's a truck cart.  You
wouldn't expect me to ride in that, would you?"

Mr. Bangs entered the barn, seized the vehicle indicated by the
shafts, and drew it out into the yard.  He inspected it deliberately,
and then sat weakly down on the chopping block near by.  Apparently
he was overcome by emotion.

The "sulky" bequeathed by the late doctor had been built to order
for its former owner.  It was of the "carryall" variety, except
that it had but a single narrow seat.  Its top was square and was
curtained, the curtains being tightly buttoned down.  Altogether it
was something of a curiosity.  Miss Dawes, who had come out to see
the start, looked at the "sulky," then at Mr. Bangs's face, and
turned her back.  Her shoulders shook:

"It used to be a real nice carriage when Ezra had it," commented
the widow admiringly.  "It needs ilin' and sprucin' up now, but I
guess 'twill do.  Come!" to Bailey, who had not risen from the
chopping block.  "Hurry up and harness or we'll never get started.
Thought you wanted to get back for dinner?"

Mr. Bangs stood up and heaved a sigh.

"I did," he answered slowly, "but," with a glance at the sulky,
"somethin' seems to have took away my appetite.  Teacher, do you
mean to--"

But Miss Dawes had withdrawn to the corner of the house, from which
viewpoint she seemed to be inspecting the surrounding landscape.
Bailey seized Henry by the bridle and backed him into the shafts.

"Back up!" he roared.  "Back up, I tell you!  You needn't look at
me that way," he added, in a lower tone.  "_I_ can't help it.  You
ain't any worse ashamed than I am.  There! the ark's off the ways.
All aboard!"

Turning to the expectant widow, he "boosted" her, not too tenderly,
up to the narrow seat.  Then he climbed in himself.  Two on that
seat made a tight fit.  Bailey took up the reins.  Debby leaned
forward and peered around the edge of the curtains.

"You!" she shouted.  "You, Miss What's-your-name--Dorcas!  Come
here a minute.  I want to tell you somethin'."

The schoolmistress, her face red and her eyes moist, approached.

"I just wanted to say," explained Debby, "that I ain't real sure as
that diary's there.  I burnt up a lot of my old letters and things
a spell ago, and seems to me I burnt some old diaries, too, but
maybe that wan't one of 'em.  Anyhow, I can get them Arizona
papers, and I do want you to see 'em.  They're the most INTERESTIN'
things.  Now," she added, turning to her companion on the seat,
"you can git dap just as soon as you want to."

Whether or not Mr. Bangs wanted to "git dap" is a doubtful
question.  But at all events he did.  Before the astonished Miss
Dawes could think of an answer to the observation concerning the
diary, the carriage, its long unused axles shrieking protests,
moved out of the yard.  The schoolmistress watched it go.  Then she
returned to the sitting room and collapsed in a rocking chair.

Once out from the shelter of the house and on the open road, the
sulky received the full force of the wind.  The first gust that
howled in from the bay struck its curtained side with a sudden
burst of power that caused Mrs. Beasley to clutch her driver's arm.

"Good land of mercy!" she screamed.  "It blows real hard, don't
it?"

Mr. Bangs's answer was in the form of delicate sarcasm, bellowed
into the ear trumpet.

"Sho!" he exclaimed.  "I want to know!  You don't say!  Now you
mention it, seems as if I had noticed a little air stirrin'."

Another gust tilted the carriage top.  Debby clutched the arm still
tighter.

"Why, it blows awful hard!" she cried.  "I'd no idee it blew like
this."

"Want to 'bout ship and go home again?" whooped Bailey, hopefully.
But the widow didn't intend to give up the rare luxury of a "ride"
which a kind Providence had cast in her way.

"No, no!" she answered.  "I guess if you folks come all the way
from Bayport I can stand it as fur's the Center.  But hurry all you
can, won't you?  I'm kind of 'fraid of the springs."

"Springs?  What springs?  Let go my arm, will you?  It's goin' to
sleep."

Mrs. Beasley let go of the arm momentarily.

"I mean the springs on this carriage," she explained.  "Last time
I lent it to anybody--Solon Davis, 'twas--he said the bolts
underneath was pretty nigh rusted out, and about all that held the
wagon part on was its own weight.  So we'll have to be kind of
careful."

"Well--I--swan--to--MAN!" was Mr. Bangs's sole comment on the
amazing disclosure; however, as an expression of concentrated and
profound disgust it was quite sufficient.  He spoke but once during
the remainder of the trip to the "Center."  Then, when his
passenger begged to know if "that Whittaker man" had been well
since she left, he shouted:  "Yes--EVER since," and relapsed into
his former gloomy silence.

The widow's stop at the Atwood house, which was in the immediate
rear of the Atwood store, was of a half hour's duration.  Bailey
refused to leave the seat of the sulky and sat there, speaking to
no one; not even replying to the questions of a group of loungers
who gathered to inspect the ancient vehicle, and professed to be
in doubt as to whether it had been washed in with the tide or been
"left" to him in a will.

At last Debby made her appearance, her arms filled with newspapers.
The latter she piled under the carriage seat, and then climbed to
her former place beside the driver.  Henry, in response to a slap
from the reins, got under way once more.  The axles squeaked and
screamed.

"Gee!" cried one youngster, from the steps of the store.  "It's the
steam calliope.  When's the rest of the show comin'?"

"Hi!" yelled another.  "See how close they're hugged up together.
Ain't they lovin'!  It's a weddin'!"

"Shut up!" roared the tortured Bailey, whose hat had blown back
into the body of the sulky, leaving his bald head exposed to the
cutting wind.

The audience begged him to give them a lock of his hair, and added
other remarks of a personal nature concerning the youth and beauty
of the bridal couple and their chariot.  Mr. Bangs was in a state
of dumb frenzy.  Debby, who, without her trumpet, had heard nothing
of all this, was smiling and garrulous.

"I found all the papers," she said.  "They're right under the seat.
I'm goin' to look 'em over so's to have the interestin' parts all
ready to show Miss Dorcas when we get home.  Ain't it nice I found
'em?"

In spite of her driver's remonstrances, unheard because of the
nonadjustment of the trumpet, she reached under the seat and
brought out the pile of Blazeton weeklies.  With her feet upon the
pile to keep it from blowing away, she proceeded to unfold one of
the papers.  It crackled and snapped in the wind like a loose
mainsail.

"Keep that dratted thing out of my face, won't you?" shrieked the
agonized Bailey.  "How'm I goin' to see to steer with that smackin'
me between the eyes every other second?"

"Hey?  Did you speak to me?" asked the widow sweetly.

"Did I SPEAK?  No, I screeched!  What in tunket--"

"I want you to see this picture of the mayor's house in Blazeton.
Eva, my husband's niece, lives right acrost the road from him.
Many's the time I've set on their piazza and seen him come out and
go to the City Hall."

"Keep it out of my face, I tell you!  Reef it!  Furl it, you--you
woman!  I wish to thunder the piazza had caved in on you!  I never
see such an old fool in my born days.  TAKE IT AWAY!"

Mrs. Beasley removed the paper, but only to substitute another.

"Here's Eva's brother-in-law," she screamed.  "He's one of the
prominent business men out there, so they put him in the paper.
Ain't he nice lookin'?"

Bailey's comments on the prominent business man's appearance were
anything but flattering.  Debby continued to reach for more papers,
carefully replacing those she had inspected in the pile beneath her
feet.  The wind blew as hard as ever; even harder, for it was now
almost dead ahead.  Henry plodded along.  They were in the hollow
at the foot of the last long hill, that from which the blacksmith
shop had first been sighted.

"I know what I'll do," declared the passenger.  "I'll hunt for that
missin' husband advertisement of Desire Higgins's.  Let's see now!
'Twill be down at the bottom of the pile, 'cause the paper it's in
is a last year one."

She bobbed down behind the high dashboard.  Mr. Bangs stood up in
order that her gymnastics might interfere, to a lesser degree, with
his driving.  The equipage began to move up the slope of the hill,
bouncing and twisting in the frozen ruts.

"Here 'tis!" exclaimed Debby.  "I remember it's in this number,
'cause there's a picture of the Palace Hotel on the front page.
Let's see--'Dog lost'--no, that ain't it.  'Corner lot for sale'--
wish I had money enough to buy it; I'd like nothin' better than to
live out there.  'Information wanted of my husband'--Here 'tis!
Um--hum!"

She straightened up and eagerly began reading the advertisement.
The hill was very steep just at its top, and the sulky slanted
backward at a sharp angle.  A terrific burst of wind tore around
the corner of the bluff.  It eddied through the sulky between the
dashboard and the curtained sides.  The widow, in her excitement at
finding the advertisement, had inadvertently removed her feet from
the pile of papers.  In an instant the air was filled with whirling
copies of the Blazeton Weekly Courier.

Henry, the horse, was a sober animal who had long ago reached the
age of discretion.  But to have his old ears and eyes suddenly
blanketed with a flapping white thing swooping apparently from
nowhere was too much even for his sedate nerves.  He jumped
sidewise.  The reins were jerked from the driver's hands and fell
in the road.

"Mercy on us!" shrieked Debby, clutching her companion about the
waist.  "What--"

"Let go of me!" howled Bailey, pushing her violently aside.  "Whoa!
Stand still!"

But Henry refused to stand still.  The flapping paper still clung
to his agitated head.  He reared and pranced, jerking the sulky
back and forth, its wheels still wedged in the ruts.  Bailey sprang
to the ground to pick up the reins.  He seized them, but fell as he
did so.  The tug at his bits turned Henry's head, literally and
figuratively.  He reared and whirled about.  The sulky rose on two
wheels.  The screaming Mrs. Beasley collapsed against its downward
side.  Another moment, and the whole upper half of the sulky--body,
seat, curtains, and Debby--tilted over the lower wheels, and, the
rusted bolts failing to hold, slid with a thump to the frozen road.
The wind, catching it underneath as it slid, tipped it backward.
Then Henry ran away.



Miss Dawes, left alone in the house at the foot of the hill, had
amused herself for a time with the Beasley library, which partially
filled a shelf in the sitting room.  But "The Book of Martyrs" and
"A Believer's Thoughts on Death" were not cheering literature,
particularly as the author of the latter volume "thought" so
dismally concerning the future of all who did not believe precisely
as he did.  So the teacher laid down the book, with a shudder, and
wandered about the room, inspecting the late Mr. Beasley's
portrait, the photographs in splintwork frames, the "alum basket"
on the mantel, the blue castles, blue trees, and blue people
pictured on the window shades, and other works of art in the
apartment.  She even peeped into the parlor, but the musty, shut-up
smell of that dusky tomb was too much for her, and she sat down by
the sitting-room window, under the empty bird cage, to look up the
road and watch for the return of the sulky and its occupants.

Sitting there, she was a witness of the alarming catastrophe on the
hilltop, and reached the front gate just in time to see Henry go
galloping by, dragging the four wheels and springs of the sulky,
while, sprawled across the rear axle and still clinging to the
reins, hung a familiar, howling, and most wickedly profane
individual by the name of Bangs.

The runaway dashed on toward the blacksmith shop.  Phoebe,
bareheaded and coatless, ran up the hill.  Before she reached the
crest, she was aware of muffled screams, which sounded as if the
screamer was shut up in a trunk.

"O-o-oh!" screamed Mrs. Beasley.  "O-o-oh!  Ow!  Let me out!  Help!
I'm stuck!  My back's broke!  He-e-lp!"

The upper part of the sulky, with its boxlike curtained top, lay on
its side in the road.  From somewhere within the box came the
groans and screams.  The gale swept the hilltop, and, for a quarter
mile to leeward, the scenery was animated by soaring, fluttering
copies of the Blazeton Courier, that swooped and ducked like
mammoth white butterflies.

The panting and alarmed teacher stooped and peered into the dark
shadow between the dashboard and the back curtain.  All she could
make out at first were a pair of thin ankles and "Congress" shoes
in agitated motion.  These bobbed up and down behind the overturned
seat and its displaced cushion.

"O Mrs. Beasley!" screamed Phoebe.  "Are you hurt?"

Debby, of course, did not hear the question.  She continued to
groan and scream for help.  Her lungs were not injured, at all
events.  The schoolmistress, dropping on her knees, reached into
the sulky top and tugged at the seat.  It was rather tightly
wedged, but she managed to loosen it and pull it toward her.

The widow raised herself on an elbow and looked out between the
flowers of her smashed bonnet.

"Who is it?" she demanded.  "Oh, is that you, Miss Dorcas?  Oh, my
soul and body!  Oh, my stars!  Oh, my goodness me!"

"Are you hurt?" shrieked Phoebe.

"Hey?  I don't know!  I don't know WHAT I be!  I don't know
nothin'!"

"Can you help yourself?  Can you get up?"

"Hey?  I don't know.  Maybe I can if you haul that everlastin' seat
out of the way.  Oh, my sakes alive!"

Her rescuer pulled the seat forward, and, with an effort, tumbled
it clear of the curtains.  Debby raised herself still higher.

"Oh!" she groaned.  "Talk about--  Land sakes! who's comin'?  Men,
ain't it?  Let me out of here quick! QUICK!"

She scrambled out of her prison on hands and knees, and jumped to
her feet with reassuring alacrity.  Her fur-collared cape was
draped in a roll about her neck, and her bonnet hung jauntily over
her left eye.

"I'm a sight, ain't I?" she asked.  "Haul this bunnet straight,
quick's ever you can.  Hurt?  No, no!  I ain't hurt none but my
feelin's.  Hurry UP!  S'pose I want them men folks to see me with
everything all hind side to?"

Miss Dawes, relieved to find that the accident had had no serious
consequences, and trying her hardest not to laugh, assisted the
widow to rearrange her wearing apparel.  The blacksmith and his
helper came running up the hill.

"Hello, Debby!" hailed the former.  "What's the matter?  Hurt, be
you?"

Mrs. Beasley, whether she heard or not, did not deign to reply.

"Get my horn out of that carriage," she ordered.  "Don't stand
there gapin'.  Get it."

The ear trumpet was resurrected from the interior of the vehicle.
The widow adjusted it with dignity.

"Had a spill, didn't you, Debby?" inquired the blacksmith.  "Upset,
didn't you?"

Debby glared at him.

"No," she replied with sarcasm.  "Course I didn't upset!  Just
thought I'd roll round in the road for the fun of it.  Smart
question, that is!  Where's that Bailey Bangs gone to with the rest
of my carriage?"

The blacksmith pointed to his shop in the hollow.  Before it stood
Mr. Bangs, holding Henry by the bridle, and staring in their
direction.

"He's all right," volunteered the "helper."  "The horse stopped
runnin' soon's he got to the foot of the next hill."

Mrs. Beasley was not, apparently, overjoyed at the news.

"Humph!" she grunted.  "I 'most wish he'd broke his neck!  Pesky,
careless thing! gettin' us run away with and upset.  Who's goin' to
pay for fixin' my sulky, I want to know?"

"Mr. Bangs will pay for it, I'm sure," said Phoebe soothingly.  "If
he doesn't, I will.  Oh, Mrs. Beasley! did you find the diary?"

"Diary?  No, no!  I told you I was afraid I'd burnt it up.  Well, I
had, and a whole lot more of them old ones.  But I did get all them
Arizona papers, and took the trouble to tote 'em all the way here
so's you could look at 'em.  And now"--she shook with indignation
and waved her hand toward a section of horizon where little white
dots indicated the whereabouts of the Couriers--"now look where
they be!  Blowed from Dan to Beersheby!  Come on to the house and
let me set down.  I been standin' on my head till I'm tired.  Here,
Jabez," to the blacksmith, "you tend to that carriage, will you?"

She stalked off down the hill.  The schoolmistress turning to
follow her, caught a glimpse of the "helper" doubled up with silent
laughter, and the blacksmith grinning broadly as he stooped toward
the capsized sulky.

Phoebe was downcast and disappointed.  She was convinced, in her
own mind, that the Honorable Atkins had some hidden motive for his
espousal of the Thomas cause.  Asaph's fruitless quest in Orham had
not shaken her faith.  Captain Cy had refused to seek Debby Beasley
for information concerning the Thayers, and so she, on her own
responsibility, had done so.  And this was the ridiculous ending of
her journey.  The diary had been a forlorn hope; now that was
burned.  Poor Bos'n! and poor--some one else!

Debby marching down the hill, continued to sputter about the lost
weeklies.

"It's an everlastin' shame!" she declared.  "I'd just found the one
with that advertisement in it and was readin' it.  I remember the
part I read, plain as could be.  While we're eatin' dinner I'll
tell you about it."

But Miss Dawes did not care for dinner.  Like Mr. Tidditt and the
captain, she had had about all the Debby Beasley she wanted.

"Yes, yes, you will stop, too," affirmed the widow.  "I want to
tell you more about Blazeton.  I can see that advertisement this
minute, right afore my eyes--'Information wanted of my husband,
Edward Higgins.  Five foot eight inches tall, sandy complected,
brown hair, and yellowish mustache; not lame, but has a peculiar
slight limp with his left foot--'"

"What?" asked the schoolmistress, stopping short.

"Hey?  'Has a peculiar limp with his left foot.'  I remember how
Desire used to talk about that limp.  She said 'twas almost as if
he stuttered with his leg.  He hurt it when he was up in Montana,
and--"

"Oh!" cried Miss Dawes.  The color had left her face.

"Yes.  You see he used to be a miner or somethin' up there.  He'd
never say much about his younger days, but one time he did tell
that.  I'd just got as far as that limp when the sulky upset.  Talk
about bein' surprised!  I never was so surprised in my life as when
that horse critter rared up and--"

Phoebe interrupted.  Her color had come back, and her eyes were
shining.

"Mrs. Beasley," she cried, "I think I shall change my mind.  I
believe I will stay to dinner after all.  I'm EVER so much
interested in Arizona."



Bailey and the teacher began their long drive home about four
o'clock.  The buggy axle had been fixed, and the wind was less
violent.  Mr. Bangs was glum and moody.  He seemed to be thinking.

"Say, teacher," he said at length, "I'd like to ask a favor of you.
If it ain't necessary, I wish you wouldn't say nothin' about that
upsettin' business to the folks to home.  It does sound so dum
foolish!  I'll never hear the last of it."

Miss Dawes, who had been in high spirits, now took a moment for
reflection.

"All right!" she said, nodding vigorously.  "We won't mention it,
then.  We won't tell a soul.  You can say that I called at the
Atwoods', if you want to; that will be true, because I did.  And
we'll have Mrs. Beasley for our secret--yours and mine--until we
decide to tell.  It's a bargain, Mr. Bangs.  We must shake hands on
it."

They shook hands, and Bailey, looking in her face, thought he never
saw her look so well or as young.  She was pretty, he decided.
Then he thought of his own choice of a wife, and--well, if he had
any regrets, he hasn't mentioned them, not even to his fellow-
member of the Board of Strategy.



CHAPTER XVII

THE CAPTAIN REMEMBERS HIS AGE


December was nearly over.  Christmas had come.  Bos'n had hung up
her stocking by the base-burner stove, and found it warty and
dropsical the next morning, with a generous overflow of gifts piled
on the floor beneath it.  The Board of Strategy sent presents; so
did Miss Dawes and Georgianna.  As for Captain Cy he spent many
evening hours, after the rest of his household was in bed, poring
over catalogues of toys and books, and the orders he sent to the
big shops in Boston were lengthy and costly.  The little girl's
eyes opened wide when she saw the stocking and the treasures heaped
on the floor.  She sat in her "nighty" amidst the wonders, books,
and playthings in a circle about her, and the biggest doll of all
hugged close in her arms.  Captain Cy, who had arisen at half past
five in order to be with her on the great occasion, was at least as
happy as she.

"Like 'em, do you?" he asked, smiling.

"like 'em!  O Uncle Cy!  What makes everybody so good to me?"

"I don't know.  Strange thing, ain't it--considerin' what a hard
little ticket you are."

Bos'n laughed.  She understood her "Uncle Cy," and didn't mind
being called a "hard ticket" by him.

"I--I--didn't believe anybody COULD have such a nice Christmas.  I
never saw so many nice things."

"Humph!  What do you like best?"

The answer was a question, and was characteristic.

"Which did you give me?" asked Bos'n.

The captain would have dodged, but she wouldn't let him.  So one by
one the presents he had given were indicated and put by themselves.
The remainder were but few, but she insisted that the givers of
these should be named.  When the sorting was over she sat silently
hugging her doll and, apparently, thinking.

"Well?" inquired the amused captain.  "Made up your mind yet?
Which do you like best?"

The child nodded.

"Why, these, of course," she declared with emphasis, pointing with
her dollie's slippered foot at Captain Cy's 