oes of Comorin, the most
precious of woods. And now I would charge thee with a charge the
which must thou most diligently observe." Asked the other, "Thou
wilt see in that boat a boatman[FN#31] whose fashion is the
reverse of man's; but beware, and again I say beware, lest thou
utter a word, otherwise he will at once drown us.[FN#32] Learn
also that this stead belongeth to the King of the Jinns and that
everything thou beholdest is the work of the Jann."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Third Night, 

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Mubarak and Zayn al-Asnam
came upon a lake where, behold, they found a little craft whose
planks were of chaunders and lign-aloes of Comorin and therein
stood a ferryman with the head of an elephant while the rest of
his body wore the semblance of a lion.[FN#33] Presently he
approached them and winding his trunk around them[FN#34] lifted
them both into the boat and seated them beside himself: then he
fell to paddling till he passed through the middle of the lake
and he ceased not so doing until he had landed them on the
further bank. Here the twain took ground and began to pace
forwards, gazing around them the while and regarding the trees
which bore for burthen ambergris and lign-aloes, sandal, cloves,
and gelsamine,[FN#35] all with flowers and fruits bedrest whose
odours broadened the breast and excited the sprite. There also
the birds warbled, with various voices, notes ravishing and
rapturing the heart by the melodies of their musick. So Mubarak
turned to the Prince and asked him saying, "How seest thou this
place, O my lord?" and the other answered, "I deem, O Mubarak,
that in very truth this be the Paradise promised to us by the
Prophet (whom Allah save and assain!)." Thence they fared
forwards till they came upon a mighty fine palace all builded of
emeralds and rubies with gates and doors of gold refined: it was
fronted by a bridge one hundred and fifty cubits long to a
breadth of fifty, and the whole was one rib of a fish.[FN#36] At
the further end thereof stood innumerous hosts of the Jann, all
frightful of favour and fear-inspiring of figure and each and
every hent in hand javelins of steel which flashed to the sun
like December leven. Thereat quoth the Prince to his companion,
"This be a spectacle which ravisheth the wits;" and quoth
Mubarak, "It now behoveth that we abide in our places nor advance
further lest there happen to us some mishap; and may Allah
vouchsafe to us safety!" Herewith he brought forth his pouch four
strips of a yellow silken stuff and zoning himself with one threw
the other over his shoulders;[FN#37] and he gave the two
remaining pieces to the Prince that he might do with them on like
wise. Next he dispread before either of them a waist shawl[FN#38]
of white sendal and then he pulled out of his poke sundry
precious stones and scents and ambergris and eagle-wood;[FN#39]
and, lastly, each took his seat upon his sahs, and when both were
ready Mubarak repeated the following words to the Prince and
taught him to pronounce them before the King of the Jann, "O my
lord, Sovran of the Spirits, we stand within thy precincts and we
throw ourselves on thy protection;" whereto Zayn al-Asnam added,
"And I adjure him earnestly that he accept of us." But Mubarak
rejoined, "O my lord, by Allah I am in sore fear. Hear me! An he
determine to accept us without hurt or harm he will approach us
in the semblance of a man rare of beauty and comeliness but, if
not, he will assume a form frightful and terrifying. Now an thou
see him in his favourable shape do thou arise forthright and
salam to him and above all things beware lest thou step beyond
this thy coth." The Prince replied, "To hear is to obey," and the
other continued, "And let thy salam to him be thy saying, O King
of the Sprites and Sovran of the Jann and Lord of Earth, my sire,
the whilome Sultan of Bassorah, whom the Angel of Death hath
removed (as is not hidden from thy Highness) was ever taken under
thy protection and I, like him, come to thee sueing the same
safeguard."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Mubarak fell to lessoning
Zayn al-Asnam how he should salute the King of the Jinns, and
pursued, "Likewise, O my lord, if he hail us with gladsome face
of welcome he will doubtless say thee, 'Ask whatso thou wantest
of me!' and the moment he giveth thee his word do thou at once
prefer thy petition saying, O my lord, I require of thy Highness
the Ninth Statue than which is naught more precious in the world,
and thou didst promise my father to vouchsafe me that same." And
after this Mubarak instructed his master how to address the King
and crave of him the boon and how to bespeak him with pleasant
speech. Then he began his conjurations and fumigations and
adjurations and recitations of words not understanded of any and
but little time elapsed before cold rain down railed and
lightning flashed and thunder roared and thick darkness veiled
earth's face. Presently came forth a mighty rushing wind and a
voice like an earthquake, the quake of earth on Judgment
Day.[FN#40] The Prince, seeing these horrors and sighting that
which he had never before seen or heard, trembled for terror in
every limb; but Mubarak fell to laughing at him and saying, "Fear
not, O my lord: for that which thou dreadest is what we seek, for
to us it is an earnest of glad tidings and success; so be thou
satisfied and hold thyself safe."[FN#41] After this the skies
waxed clear and serene exceedingly while perfumed winds and the
purest scents breathed upon them; nor did a long time elapse ere
the King of the Jann presented himself under the semblance of a
beautiful man who had no peer in comeliness save and excepting
Him who lacketh likeness and to Whom be honour and glory! He
gazed at Zayn al-Asnam with a gladsome aspect and a riant,
whereat the Prince arose forthright and recited the string of
benedictions taught to him by his companion and the King said to
him with a smiling favour, "O Zayn al-Asnam, verily I was wont to
love thy sire, the Sultan of Bassorah and, when he visited me
ever, I used to give him an image of those thou sawest, each cut
of a single gem; and thou also shalt presently become to me
honoured as thy father and yet more. Ere he died I charged him to
write upon the silken curtain the writ thou readest and eke I
gave promise and made covenant with him to take thee like thy
parent under my safeguard and to gift thee as I gifted him with
an image, to wit, the ninth, which is of greater worth than all
those viewed by thee. So now 'tis my desire to stand by my word
and to afford thee my promised aid."--And Shahrazad was surprised
by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

         When it was the Five Hundred and Fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the Lord of the Jann said to
the Prince, "I will take thee under my safeguard and the Shaykh
thou sawest in thy swevens was myself and I also 'twas who bade
thee dig under thy palace down to the souterrain wherein thou
sawest the crocks of gold and the figures of fine gems. I also
well know wherefore thou art come hither and I am he who caused
thee to come and I will give thee what thou seekest, for all that
I would not give it to thy sire. But 'tis on condition that thou
return unto me bringing a damsel whose age is fifteen, a maiden
without rival or likeness in loveliness; furthermore she must be
a pure virgin and a clean maid who hath never lusted for male nor
hath ever been solicited of man;[FN#42] and lastly, thou must
keep faith with me in safeguarding the girl whenas thou returnest
hither and beware lest thou play the traitor with her whilst thou
bringest her to me." To this purport the Prince sware a mighty
strong oath adding, "O my lord, thou hast indeed honoured me by
requiring of me such service, but truly 'twill be right hard for
me to find a fair one like unto this; and, grant that I find one
perfectly beautiful and young in years after the requirement of
thy Highness, how shall I weet if she ever longed for mating with
man or that male ever lusted for her?" Replied the King, "Right
thou art, O Zayn al-Asnam, and verily this be a knowledge
whereunto the sons of men may on no wise attain. However, I will
give thee a mirror[FN#43] of my own whose virtue is this. When
thou shalt sight a young lady whose beauty and loveliness please
thee, do thou open the glass,[FN#44] and, if thou see therein her
image clear and undimmed, do thou learn forthright that she is a
clean maid without aught of defect or default and endowed with
every praiseworthy quality. But if, contrariwise, the figure be
found darkened or clothed in uncleanness, do thou straightway
know that damsel is sullied by soil of sex. Shouldst thou find
her pure and gifted with all manner good gifts, bring her to me
but beware not to offend with her and do villainy, and if thou
keep not faith and promise with me bear in mind that thou shalt
lose thy life." Hereupon the Prince made a stable and solemn pact
with the King, a covenant of the sons of the Sultans which may
never be violated.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

         When it was the Five Hundred and Sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, tell
us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the Prince Zayn al-Asnam made
a stable and trustworthy compact to keep faith with the King of
the Jann and never to play traitor thereto, but to bring the maid
en tout bien et tout honneur to that potentate who made over to
him the mirror saying, "O my son, take this looking-glass whereof
I bespake thee and depart straightway." Thereupon the Prince and
Mubarak arose and, after blessing him, fared forth and journeyed
back until they made the lakelet, where they sat but a little ere
appeared the boat which had brought them bearing the Jinni with
elephantine head and leonine body, and he was standing up ready
for paddling.[FN#45] The twain took passage with him (and this by
command of the King of the Jann) until they reached Cairo and
returned to their quarters, where they abode whilst they rested
from the travails of travel. Then the Prince turned to his
companion and said, "Arise with us and wend we to
Baghdad[FN#46]-city that we may look for some damsel such as the
King describeth!" and Mubarak replied, "O my lord, we be in
Cairo, a city of the cities, a wonder of the world, and here no
doubt there is but that I shall find such a maiden, nor is there
need that we fare therefor to a far country." Zayn al-Asnam
rejoined, "True for thee, O Mubarak, but what be the will and the
way whereby to hit upon such a girl, and who shall go about to
find her for us?" Quoth the other, "Be not beaten and broken
down, O my lord, by such difficulty: I have by me here an ancient
dame (and cursed be the same!) who maketh marriages, and she is
past mistress in wiles and guiles; nor will she be hindered by
the greatest of obstacles."[FN#47] So saying, he sent to summon
the old trot, and informed her that he wanted a damsel perfect of
beauty and not past her fifteenth year, whom he would marry to
the son of his lord; and he promised her sumptuous Bakhshish and
largesse if she would do her very best endeavour. Answered she,
"O my lord, be at rest: I will presently contrive to satisfy thy
requirement even beyond thy desire; for under my hand are damsels
unsurpassable in beauty and loveliness, and all be the daughters
of honourable men." But the old woman, O Lord of the Age, knew
naught anent the mirror. So she went forth to wander about the
city and work on her well-known ways.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

        When it was the Five Hundred and Seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the old woman went forth to
work on her well-known ways, and she wandered about town to find
a maiden for the Prince Zayn al-Asnam. Whatever notable beauty
she saw she would set before Mubarak; but each semblance as it
was considered in the mirror showed exceedingly dark and dull,
and the inspector would dismiss the girl. This endured until the
crone had brought to him all the damsels in Cairo, and not one
was found whose reflection in the mirror showed clear-bright and
whose honour was pure and clean, in fact such an one as described
by the King of the Jann. Herewith Mubarak, seeing that he had not
found one in Cairo to please him, or who proved pure and
unsullied as the King of the Jann had required, determined to
visit Baghdad: so they rose up and equipped them and set out and
in due time they made the City of Peace where they hired them a
mighty fine mansion amiddlemost the capital. Here they settled
themselves in such comfort and luxury that the Lords of the land
would come daily to eat at their table, even the thirsty and
those who went forth betimes,[FN#48] and what remained of the
meat was distributed to the mesquin and the miserable; also every
poor stranger lodging in the Mosques would come to the house and
find a meal. Therefore the bruit of them for generosity and
liberality went abroad throughout the city and won for them
notable name and the fairest of fame; nor did any ever speak of
aught save the beneficence of Zayn al-Asnam and his generosity
and his opulence. Now there chanced to be in one of the
cathedral-mosques and Imam,[FN#49] Abu Bakr hight, a ghostly man
passing jealous and fulsome, who dwelt hard by the manion wherein
the Prince and Mubarak abode; and he, when he heard of their
lavish gifts and alms deeds, and honourable report, smitten by
envy and malice and hatred, fell to devising how he might draw
them into some calamity that might despoil the goods they enjoyed
and destroy their lives, for it is the wont of envy to fall not
save upon the fortunate. So one day of the days, as he lingered
in the Mosque after mid-afternoon prayer, he came forwards amidst
the folk and cried, "O ye, my brethren of the Faith which is true
and who bear testimony to the unity of the Deity, I would have
you to weet that housed in this our quarter are two men which be
strangers, and haply ye have heard of them how they lavish and
waste immense sums of money, in fact moneys beyond measure, and
for my part I cannot but suspect that they are cutpurses and
brigands who commit robberies in their own country and who came
hither to expend their spoils."--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the Imam in his jealousy of
Zayn al-Asnam and Mubarak said to the congregation, "Verily they
be brigands and cutpurses;" adding, "O believers of Mohammed, I
counsel you in Allah's name that ye guard yourselves against such
accurseds; for haply the Caliph shall in coming times hear of
these twain and ye also shall fall with them into
calamity.[FN#50] I have hastened to caution you, and having
warned you I wash my hands of your business, and after this do ye
as ye judge fit." All those present replied with one voice,
"Indeed we will do whatso thou wishest us to do, O Abu Bakr!" But
when the Imam heard this from them he arose and, bringing forth
ink-case and reed-pen and a sheet of paper, began inditing an
address to the Commander of the Faithful, recounting all that was
against the two strangers. However, by decree of Destiny, Mubarak
chanced to be in the Mosque amongst the crowd when he heard the
address of the blameworthy Imam and how he purposed applying by
letter to the Caliph. So he delayed not at all but returned home
forthright and, taking an hundred dinars and packing up a parcel
of costly clothes, silverwrought all, repaired in haste to the
reverend's quarters and knocked at the door. The preacher came
and opened to him, but sighting Mubarak he asked him in anger,
"What is't thou wantest and who art thou?" Whereto the other
answered, "I am Mubarak and at thy service, O my master the Imam
Abu Bakr; and I come to thee from my lord the Emir Zayn al-Asnam
who, hearing of and learning thy religious knowledge and right
fair repute in this city, would fain make acquaintance with thy
Worship and do by thee whatso behoveth him. Also he hath sent me
to thee with these garments and this spending-money, hoping
excuse of thee for that this be a minor matter compared with your
Honour's deserts; but, Inshallah, after this he will not fail in
whatever to thee is due." As soon as Abu Bakr saw the coin and
gold[FN#51] and the bundle of clothes, he answered Mubarak
saying, "I crave pardon, O my lord, of thy master the Emir for
that I have been ashamed of waiting upon him and repentance is
right hard upon me for that I have failed to do my devoir by him;
wherefore I hope that thou wilt be my deputy in imploring him to
pardon my default and, the Creator willing, to-morrow I will do
what is incumbent upon me and fare to offer my services and
proffer the honour which beseemeth me." Rejoined Mubarak, "The
end of my master's wishes is to see thy worship, O my lord Abu
Bakr, and be exalted by thy presence and therethrough to win a
blessing." So saying he bussed the reverend's hand and returned
to his own place. On the next day, as Abu Bakr was leading the
dawn-prayer of Friday, he took his station amongst the folk
amiddlemost the Mosque and cried, "O, our brethren the Moslems
great and small and folk of Mohammed one and all, know ye that
envy falleth not save upon the wealthy and praiseworthy and never
descendeth upon the mean and miserable. I would have you wot, as
regards the two strangers whom yesterday I misspake, that one of
them is an Emir high in honour and son of most reputable parents,
in lieu of being (as I was informed by one of his enviers) a
cutpurse and a brigand. Of this matter I have made certain that
'tis a lying report, so beware lest any of you say aught against
him or speak evil in regard to the Emir even as I heard
yesterday; otherwise you will cast me and cast yourselves into
the sorest of calamities with the Prince of True Believers. For a
man like this of exalted degree may not possibly take up his
abode in our city of Baghdad unbeknown to the Caliph."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Abu Bakr the Imam uprooted on
such wise from the minds of men the evil which he had implanted
by his own words thrown out against the Emir Zayn al-Asnam. But
when he had ended congregational prayers and returned to his
home, he donned his long gaberdine[FN#52] and made weighty his
skirts and lengthened his sleeves, after which he took the road
to the mansion of the Prince; and, when he went in, he stood up
before the stranger and did him honour with the highmost
distinction. Now Zayn al-Asnam was by nature conscientious albeit
young in years; so he returned the Imam Abu Bakr's civilities
with all courtesy and, seating himself beside him upon his
high-raised divan, bade bring for him ambergris'd[FN#53] coffee.
Then the tables were spread for breakfast and the twain ate and
drank their sufficiency, whereafter they fell to chatting like
boon companions. Presently the Imam asked the Prince, saying, "O
my lord Zayn al-Asnam, doth thy Highness design residing long in
this our city of Baghdad?" and the other answered, "Yes
indeed,[FN#54] O our lord the Imam; 'tis my intention to tarry
here for a while until such time as my requirement shall be
fulfilled." The Imam enquired, "And what may be the requirement
of my lord the Emir? Haply when I hear it I may devote my life
thereto until I can fulfil it." Quoth the Prince, "My object is
to marry a maiden who must be comely exceedingly, aged fifteen
years; pure, chaste, virginal, whom man hath never soiled and who
during all her days never lusted for male kind: moreover, she
must be unique for beauty and loveliness." The Imam rejoined, "O
my lord, this be a thing hard of finding indeed, hard
exceedingly; but I know a damsel of that age who answereth to thy
description. Her father, a Wazir who resigned succession and
office of his own freewill, now dwelleth in his mansion jealously
overwatching his daughter and her education; and I opine that
this maiden will suit the fancy of thy Highness, whilst she will
rejoice in an Emir such as thyself and eke her parents will be
equally well pleased." The Prince replied, "Inshallah, this
damsel whereof thou speakest will suit me and supply my want, and
the furtherance of my desire shall be at thy hands. But, O our
lord the Imam, 'tis my wish first of all things to look upon her
and see if she be pure or otherwise; and, as regarding her
singular comeliness, my convicion is that thy word sufficeth and
thine avouchment is veridical. Of her purity, however, even thou
canst not bear sure and certain testimony in respect to that
condition." Asked the Imam, "How is it possible for you, O my
lord the Emir, to learn from her face aught of her and her
honour; also whether she be pure or not: indeed, if this be known
to your Highness you must be an adept in physiognomy.[FN#55]
However, if your Highness be willing to accompany me, I will bear
you to the mansion of her sire and make you acquainted with him,
so shal he set her before you."--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

         When it was the Five Hundred and Tenth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith me may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad: --It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the Imam Abu Bakr took the
Prince and passed with him into the mansion of the Wazir; and,
when they entered, both salam'd to the housemaster and he rose
and received them with greetings especially when he learned that
an Emir had visited him and he understood from the Imam that Zayn
al-Asnam inclined to wed his daughter. So he summoned her to his
presence and she came, whereupon he bade her raise her face-veil;
and, when she did his bidding, the Prince considered her and was
amazed and perplexed at her beauty and loveliness, he never
having seen aught that rivalled her in brightness and brilliancy.
So quoth he in his mind, "Would to Heaven I could win a damsel
like this, albeit this one be to me unlawful." Thinking thus he
drew forth the mirror from his pouch and considered her image
carefully when, lo and behold! the crystal was bright and clean
as virgin silver and when he eyed her semblance in the glass he
saw it pure as a white dove's. THen sent he forthright for the
Kazi and witnesses and they knotted the knot and wrote the writ
and the bride was duly throned. Presently the Prince took the
Wazir his father-in-law into his own mansion, and to the young
lady he sent a present of costly jewels and it was a notable
marriage-festival, none like it was ever seen; no, never. Zayn
al-Asnam applied himself to inviting the folk right royally and
did honour due to Abu Bakr the Imam, giving him abundant gifts,
and forwarded to the bride's father offerings of notable
rarities. As soon as the wedding ended, Mubarak said to the
Prince, "O my lord, let us arise and wend our ways lest we lose
our time in leisure, for that we sought is now found." Said the
Prince, "Right thou art;" and, arising with his companion, the
twain fell to equipping them for travel and gat ready for the
bride a covered litter[FN#56] to be carried by camels and they
set out. Withal Mubarak well knew that the Prince was deep in
love to the young lady. So he took him aside and said to him, "O
my lord Zayn al-Asnam, I would warn thee and enjoin thee to keep
watch and ward upon thy senses and passions and to observe and
preserve the pledge by thee plighted to the King of the Jann." "O
Mubarak," replied the Prince, "an thou knew the love-longing and
ecstasy which have befallen me of my love to this young lady,
thou wouldst feel ruth for me! indeed I never think of aught else
save of taking her to Bassorah and of going in unto her." Mubarak
rejoined. "O my lord, keep thy faith and be not false to thy
pact, lest a sore harm betide thee and the loss of thy life as
well as that of the young lady.[FN#57] Remember the oath thou
swarest nor suffer lust[FN#58] to lay thy reason low and despoil
thee of all thy gains and thine honour and thy life." "Do thou, O
Mubarak," retorted the Prince, "become warden over her nor allow
me ever to look upon her."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Eleventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Mubarak, after warning Zayn
al-Asnam to protect the virgin-bride against himself, fell also
to defending her as his deputy: also he prevented the Prince from
even looking upon her. They then travelled along the road unto
the Island of the Jann, after[FN#59] they had passed by the line
leading unto Misr.[FN#60] But when the bride saw that the wayfare
had waxed longsome nor had beheld her bridegroom for all that
time since the wedding-night, she turned to Mubarak and said,
"Allah upon thee; inform me, O Mubarak, by the life of thy lord
the Emir, have we fared this far distance by commandment of my
bridegroom Prince Zayn al-Asnam?" Said he, "Ah, O my lady, sore
indeed is thy case to me, yet must I disclose to thee the secret
thereof which be this. Thou imaginest that Zayn al-Asnam, the
King of Bassorah, is thy bridegroom; but, alas! 'tis not so. He
is no husband of thine; nay, the deed he drew up was a mere
pretext in the presence of thy parents and thy people; and now
thou art going as a bride to the King of the Jann who required
thee of the Prince." When the young lady heard these words, she
fell to shedding tears and Zayn al-Asnam wept for her, weeping
bitter tears from the excess of his love and affection. Then
quoth the young lady, "Ye have nor pity in you nor feeling for
me; neither fear ye aught of Allah that, seeing in me a stranger
maiden ye cast me into a calamity like this. What reply shall ye
return to the Lord on the Day of Reckoning for such treason ye
work upon me?" However her words and her weeping availed her
naught, for that they stinted not wayfaring with her until they
reached the King of the Jann, to whom they forthright on arrival
made offer of her. When he considered the damsel she pleased him,
so he turned to Zayn al-Asnam and said to him, "Verily the bride
thou broughtest me is exceeding beautiful and passing of
loveliness; yet lovelier and more beautiful to me appear thy true
faith and the mastery of thine own passions, thy marvellous
purity and valiance of heart. So hie thee to thy home and the
Ninth Statue, wherefor thou askedst me, by thee shall be found
beside the other images, for I will send it by one of my slaves
of the Jann." Hereupon Zayn al-Asnam kissed his hand and marched
back with Mubarak to Cairo, where he would not abide long with
his companion, but, as soon as he was rested, of his extreme
longing and anxious yearning to see the Ninth Statue, he hastened
his travel homewards. Withal he ceased not to be thoughtful and
sorrowful concerning his maiden-wife and on account of her beauty
and loveliness, and he would fall to groaning and crying, "O for
my lost joys whose cause wast thou, O singular in every charm and
attraction, thou whom I bore away from thy parents and carried to
the King of the Jann. Alas, and woe worth the day!"--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say. 

        When it was the Five Hundred and Twelfth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Zayn al-Asnam fell to chiding
himself for the deceit and treason which he had practised upon
the young lady's parents and for bringing and offering her to the
King of the Jann. Then he set out nor ceased travelling till such
time as he reached Bassorah, when he entered his palace; and,
after saluting his mother, he apprised her of all things that had
befallen him. She replied, "Arise, O my son, that we may look
upon the Ninth Statue, for I rejoice with extreme joy at its
being in our possession." So both descended into the pavilion
where stood the eight images of precious gems and here they found
a mighty marvel. 'Twas this. In lieu of seeing the Ninth Statue
upon the golden throne, they found seated thereon the young lady
whose beauty suggested the sun. Zayn al-Asnam knew her at first
sight and presently she addressed him saying, "Marvel not for
that here thou findest me in place of that wherefor thou askedst;
and I deem that thou shalt not regret nor repent when thou
acceptest me instead of that thou soughtest." Said he, "No, by
Allah, O life-blood of my heart, verily thou art the end of every
wish of me nor would I exchange thee for all the gems of the
universe. Would thou knew what was the sorrow which surcharged me
on account of our separation and of my reflecting that I took
thee from thy parents by fraud and I bore thee as a present to
the King of the Jann. Indeed I had well nigh determined to
forfeit all my profit of the Ninth Statue and to bear thee away
to Bassorah as my own bride, when my comrade and councillor
dissuaded me from so doing lest I bring about my death and thy
death." Nor had Zayn al-Asnam ended his words ere they heard the
roar of thunderings that would rend a mount and shake the earth,
whereat the Queen-mother was seized with mighty fear and
affright. But presently appeared the King of the Jinns who said
to her, "O my lady, fear not! 'Tis I, the protector of thy son
whom I fondly affect for the affection borne to me by his sire. I
also am he who manifested myself to him in his sleep; and my
object therein was to make trial of his valiance and to learn an
he could do violence to his passions for the sake of his promise,
or whether the beauty of this lady would so tempt and allure him
that he could not keep his promise to me with due regard."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the King of the Jann said to
the Queen-mother, "Indeed Zayn al-Asnam hath not kept faith and
covenant with all nicety as regards the young lady, in that he
longed for her to become his wife. However, I am assured that
this lapse befel him from man's natural and inherent frailty
albeit I repeatedly enjoined him to defend and protect her until
he concealed from her his face. I now accept[FN#61] this man's
valour and bestow her upon him to wife, for she is the Ninth
Statue by me promised to him and she is fairer than all these
jewelled images, the like of her not being found in the whole
world of men save by the rarest of chances." Then the King of the
Jann turned to the Prince and said to him, "O Emir Zayn al-Asnam,
this is thy bride: take her and enjoy her upon the one condition
that thou love her only nor choose for thyself another one in
addition to her; and I pledge myself that her faith theewards
will be of the fairest." Hereupon the King of the Jann
disappeared and the Prince, gladdened and rejoicing, went forth
with the maiden and for his love and affection to her he paid to
her the first cermonious visit that same night[FN#62] and he made
bride-feasts and banquets throughout his realm and in due time he
formally wedded her and went in unto her. Then he stablished
himself upon the throne of his kingship and ruled it, bidding and
forbidding, and his consort became Queen of Bassorah. His mother
left this life a short while afterwards and they both mourned and
lamented their loss. Lastly he lived with his wife in all joyance
of life till there came to them the Destroyer of delights and the
Separator of societies.--And Shahrazad ceased to say her
pleasant[FN#63] say. Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, how rare is
thy tale and delectable!" whereto quoth Shahrazad, "And what is
this compared with that I would relate to you on the coming night
concerning Alaeddin[FN#64] and the Enchanted Lamp, an this my
lord the King leave me on life?" The King said to himself, "By
Allah, I will not slay her until she tell me the whole tale." 

       When it was the Five Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad,[FN#65] to Shahrazad, "O sister mine, an thou be
other than sleepy, do tell us some of thy pleasant tales;" and
Shahrazad began to relate the story of




               ALAEDDIN; OR, THE WONDERFUL LAMP.



It hath reached me, O King of the Age, that there dwelt in a city
of the cities of China a man which was a tailor, withal a pauper,
and he had one son, Alaeddin hight. Now this boy had been from
his babyhood a ne'er-do-well, a scapegrace; and, when he reached
his tenth year, his father inclined to teach him his own trade;
and, for that he was over indigent to expend money upon his
learning other work or craft or apprenticeship, he took the lad
into his shop that he might be taught tailoring. But, as Alaeddin
was a scapegrace and a ne'er-do-well and wont to play at all
times with the gutter boys of the quarter, he would not sit in
the shop for a single day; nay, he would await his father's
leaving it for some purpose, such as to meet a creditor, when he
would run off at once and fare forth to the gardens with the
other scapegraces and low companions, his fellows. Such was his
case; counsel and castigation were of no avail, nor would he obey
either parent in aught or learn any trade; and presently, for his
sadness and sorrowing because of his son's vicious indolence, the
tailor sickened and died. Alaeddin continued in his former ill
courses and, when his mother saw that her spouse had deceased,
and that her son was a scapegrace and good for nothing at
all[FN#66] she sold the shop and whatso was to be found therein
and fell to spinning cotton yarn. By this toilsome industry she
fed herself and found food for her son Alaeddin the scapegrace
who, seeing himself freed from bearing the severities of his
sire, increased in idleness and low habits; nor would he ever
stay at home save at meal-hours while his miserable wretched
mother lived only by what her hands could spin until the youth
had reached his fifteenth year.--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when Alaeddin had come to his fifteenth year, it befel,
one day of the days, that as he was sitting about the quarter at
play with the vagabond boys behold, a Darwaysh from the Maghrib,
the Land of the Setting Sun, came up and stood gazing for solace
upon the lads and he looked hard at Alaeddin and carefully
considered his semblance, scarcely noticing his companions the
while. Now this Darwaysh was a Moorman from Inner Marocco and he
was a magician who could upheap by his magic hill upon hill, and
he was also an adept in astrology. So after narrowly considering
Alaeddin he said in himself, "Verily, this is the lad I need and
to find whom I have left my natal land." Presently he led one of
the children apart and questioned him anent the scapegrace
saying, "Whose[FN#67] son is he?" And he sought all information
concerning his condition and whatso related to him. After this he
walked up to Alaeddin and drawing him aside asked, "O my son,
haply thou art the child of Such-an-one the tailor?" and the lad
answered, "Yes, O my lord, but 'tis long since he died." The
Maghrabi,[FN#68] the Magician, hearing these words threw himself
upon Alaeddin and wound his arms around his neck and fell to
bussing him, weeping the while with tears trickling adown his
cheeks. But when the lad saw the Moorman's case he was seized
with surprise thereat and questioned him, saying, "What causeth
thee weep, O my lord: and how camest thou to know my father?"
"How canst thou, O my son," replied the Moorman, in a soft voice
saddened by emotion, "question me with such query after informing
me that thy father and my brother is deceased; for that he was my
brother-german and now I come from my adopted country and after
long exile I rejoiced with exceeding joy in the hope of looking
upon him once more and condoling with him over the past; and now
thou hast announced to me his demise. But blood hideth not from
blood[FN#69] and it hath revealed to me that thou art my nephew,
son of my brother, and I knew thee amongst all the lads, albeit
thy father, when I parted from him, was yet unmarried."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say,

       When it was the Five Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, the Magician, said to the tailor's
orphan, "O my son Alaeddin and I have now failed in the mourning
ceremonies and have lost the delight I expected from meeting thy
father, my brother, whom after my long banishment I had hoped to
see once more ere I die; but far distance wrought me this trouble
nor hath the creature aught of asylum from the Creator or
artifice against the commandments of Allah Al-mighty." Then he
again clasped Alaeddin to his bosom crying, "O my son, I have
none to condole with now save thyself; and thou standest in stead
of thy sire, thou being his issue and representative and 'whoso
leaveth issue dieth not,'[FN#70] O my child!" So saying, the
Magician put hand to purse and pulling out ten gold pieces gave
them to the lad asking, "O my son, where is your house and where
dwelleth she, thy mother, and my brother's widow?" Presently
Alaeddin arose with him and showed him the way to their home and
meanwhile Quoth the Wizard, "O my son, take these moneys and give
them to thy mother, greeting her from me, and let her know that
thine uncle, thy father's brother, hath reappeared from his exile
and that Inshallah  God willing  on the morrow I will visit her
to salute her with the salam and see the house wherein my brother
was homed and look upon the place where he lieth buried."
Thereupon Alaeddin kissed the Maghrabi's hand, and, after running
in his joy at fullest speed to his mother's dwelling, entered to
her clean contrariwise to his custom, inasmuch as he never came
near her save at meal-times only. And when he found her, the lad
exclaimed in his delight, "O my mother, I give thee glad tidings
of mine uncle who hath returned from his exile and who now
sendeth me to salute thee." "O my son," she replied, "meseemeth
thou mockest me! Who is this uncle and how canst thou have an
uncle in the bonds of life?" He rejoined, "How sayest thou, O my
mother, that I have nor living uncles nor kinsmen, when this man
is my father's own brother? Indeed he embraced me and bussed me,
shedding tears the while, and bade me acquaint thee herewith."
She retorted, "O my son, well I wot thou haddest an uncle, but he
is now dead nor am I ware that thou hast other eme."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say,

      When it was the Five Hundred and Seventeenth Night,


Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maroccan Magician fared forth next morning and fell
to finding out Alaeddin, for his heart no longer permitted him to
part from the lad; and, as he was to-ing and fro-ing about the
city-highways, he came face to face with him disporting himself,
as was his wont, amongst the vagabonds and the scapegraces. So he
drew near to him and, taking his hand, embraced him and bussed
him, then pulled out of his poke two dinars and said, "Hie thee
to thy mother and give her these couple of ducats and tell her
that thine uncle would eat the evening-meal with you; so do thou
take these two gold pieces and prepare for us a succulent supper.
But before all things show me once more the way to your home."
"On my head and mine eyes be it, O my uncle," replied the lad and
forewent him, pointing out the street leading to the house. Then
the Moorman left him and went his ways and Alaeddin ran home and,
giving the news and the two sequins to his parent, said, "My
uncle would sup with us." So she arose straightway and going to
the market-street bought all she required; then, returning to her
dwelling she borrowed from the neighbours whatever was needed of
pans and platters and so forth and when the meal was cooked and
supper time came she said to Alaeddin "O my child, the meat is
ready  but peradventure thine uncle wotteth not the way to our
dwelling; so do thou fare forth and meet him on the road." He
replied, "To hear is to obey," and before the twain ended talking
a knock was heard at the door. Alaeddin went out and opened when,
behold, the Maghrabi, the Magician, together with an eunuch
carrying the wine and the dessert fruits; so the lad led them in
and the slave went about his business. The Moorman on entering
saluted his sister-in-law with the salami then began to shed
tears and to question her saying, "Where be the place whereon my
brother went to sit?" She showed it to him, whereat he went up to
it and prostrated himself in prayer[FN#71] and kissed the floor
crying, "Ah, how scant is my satisfaction and how luckless is my
lot, for that I have lost thee, O my brother, O vein of my eye!"
And after such fashion he continued weeping and wailing till he
swooned away for excess of sobbing and lamentation; wherefor
Alaeddin's mother was certified of his soothfastness. So coming
up to him she raised him from the floor and said, "What gain is
there in slaying thyself?"--And Shahrazad was surprised by the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was ad the Five Hundred and Eighteenth Night,


Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin's mother began consoling the Maghrabi, the
Magician, and placed him upon the divan; and, as soon as he was
seated at his ease and before the food-trays were served up, he
fell to talking with her and saying, "O wife of my brother, it
must be a wonder to thee how in all thy days thou never sawest me
nor learnedst thou aught of me during the life-time of my brother
who hath found mercy.[FN#72] Now the reason is that forty years
ago I left this town and exiled myself from my birth-place and
wandered forth over all the lands of Al-Hind and Al-Sind and
entered Egypt and settled for a long time in its magnificent
city,[FN#73] which is one of the world-wonders, till at last I
fared to the regions of the Setting Sun and abode for a space of
thirty years in the Maroccan interior. Now one day of the days, O
wife of my brother, as I was sitting alone at home, I fell to
thinking of mine own country and of my birth place and of my
brother (who hath found mercy); and my yearning to see him waxed
excessive and I bewept and bewailed my strangerhood and distance
from him. And at last my longings drave me home-wards until I
resolved upon travelling to the region which was the falling-
place of my head[FN#74] and my homestead, to the end that I might
again see my brother. Then Quoth I to myself, 'O man,[FN#75] how
long wilt thou wander like a wild Arab from thy place of birth
and native stead? Moreover, thou hast one brother and no more; so
up with thee and travel and look upon him[FN#76] ere thou die;
for who wotteth the woes of the world and the changes of the
days?  'Twould be saddest regret an thou lie down to die without
beholding thy brother and Allah (laud be to the Lord!) hath
vouchsafed thee ample wealth; and belike he may be straitened and
in poor case, when thou wilt aid thy brother as well as see him.'
So I arose at once and equipped me for wayfare and recited the
Fatihah; then, whenas Friday prayers ended, I mounted and
travelled to this town, after suffering manifold toils and
travails which I patiently endured whilst the Lord (to whom be
honour and glory!) veiled me with the veil of His protection. So
I entered and whilst wandering about the streets, the day before
yesterday, I beheld my brother's son Alaeddin disporting himself
with the boys and, by God the Great, O wife of my brother, the
moment I saw him this heart of mine went forth to him (for blood
yearneth unto blood!), and my soul felt and informed me that he
was my very nephew. So I forgot all my travails and troubles at
once on sighting him and I was like to fly for joy; but, when he
told me of the dear one's departure to the ruth of Allah
Almighty, I fainted for stress of distress and disappointment.
Perchance, however, my nephew hath informed thee of the pains
which prevailed upon me; but after a fashion I am consoled by the
sight of Alaeddin the legacy bequeathed to us by him who hath
found mercy for that 'whoso leaveth issue is not wholly
dead.'"[FN#77]--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Nineteenth Night,


Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, the Magician, said to Alaeddin's mother,
"Whoso leaveth issue is not wholly dead." And when he looked at
his sister-in-law she wept at these his words; so he turned to
the lad that he might cause her forget the mention of her mate,
as a means of comforting her and also of completing his deceit,
and asked him, saying, "O my son Alaeddin what hast thou learned
in the way of work and what is thy business? Say me, hast thou
mastered any craft whereby to earn a livelihood for thyself and
for thy mother?" The lad was abashed and put to shame and he hung
down his head and bowed his brow groundwards; but his parent
spake out, "How, forsooth? By Allah, he knoweth nothing at all, a
child so ungracious as this I never yet saw; no, never! All the
day long he idleth away his time with the sons of the quarter,
vagabonds like himself, and his father (O regret of me!) died not
save of dolour for him. And I also am now in piteous plight: I
spin cotton and toil at my distaff, night and day, that I may
earn a couple of scones of bread which we eat together. This is
his condition, O my brother-in-law; and, by the life of thee, he
cometh not near me save at meal-times and none other. Indeed, I
am thinking to lock the house-door nor ever open to him again but
leave him to go and seek a livelihood whereby he can live, for
that I am now grown a woman in years and have no longer strength
to toil and go about for a maintenance after this fashion. O
Allah, I am compelled to provide him with daily bread when I
require to be provided!" Hereat the Moorman turned to Alaeddin
and said, "Why is this, O son of my brother, thou goest about in
such ungraciousness? 'tis a disgrace to thee and unsuitable for
men like thyself. Thou art a youth of sense, O my son, and the
child of honest folk, so 'tis for thee a shame that thy mother, a
woman in years, should struggle to support thee. And now that
thou hast grown to man's estate it becometh thee to devise thee
some device whereby thou canst live, O my child. Look around thee
and Alhamdolillah--praise be to Allah--in this our town are many
teachers of all manner of crafts and nowhere are they more
numerous; so choose thee some calling which may please thee to
the end that I establish thee therein; and, when thou growest up,
O my son, thou shalt have some business whereby to live. Haply
thy father's industry may not be to thy liking; and, if so it be,
choose thee some other handicraft which suiteth thy fancy; then
let me know and I will aid thee with all I can, O my son." But
when the Maghrabi saw that Alaeddin kept silence and made him no
reply, he knew that the lad wanted none other occupation than a
scapegrace-life, so he said to him, "O son of my brother, let not
my words seem hard and harsh to thee, for, if despite all I say,
thou still dislike to learn a craft, I will open thee a
merchant's store[FN#78] furnished with costliest stuffs and thou
shalt become famous amongst the folk and take and give and buy
and sell and be well known in the city." Now when Alaeddin heard
the words of his uncle the Moorman, and the design of making him
a Khwajah[FN#79]--merchant and gentleman,--he joyed exceedingly
knowing that such folk dress handsomely and fare delicately. So
he looked at the Maghrabi smiling and drooping his head
groundwards and saying with the tongue of the case that he was
content.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Twentieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, the Magician, looked at Alaeddin and saw
him smiling, whereby he understood that the lad was satisfied to
become a trader. So he said to him, "Since thou art content that
I open thee a merchant's store and make thee a gentleman, do
thou, O son of my brother, prove thyself a man and Inshallah--God
willing--to-morrow I will take thee to the bazar in the first
place and will have a fine suit of clothes cut out for thee, such
gear as merchants wear; and, secondly, I will look after a store
for thee and keep my word." Now Alaeddin's mother had somewhat
doubted the Maroccan being her brother-in-law; but as soon as she
heard his promise of opening a merchant's store for her son and
setting him up with stuffs and capital and so forth, the woman
decided and determined in her mind that this Maghrabi was in very
sooth her husband's brother, seeing that no stranger man would do
such goodly deed by her son. So she bega