used over the house,
she marvelled and rejoiced. Thereupon Quoth he, "Look, O my
mother! Thou badest me throw away the Lamp, see now its virtues;"
and Quoth she, "O my son, Allah increase his[FN#120] weal, but I
would not look upon him." Then the lad sat down with his parent
to the tray and they ate and drank until they were satisfied;
after which they removed what remained for use on the morrow. As
soon as the meats had been consumed, Alaeddin arose and stowed
away under his clothes a platter of the platters and went forth
to find the Jew, purposing to sell it to him; but by fiat of Fate
he passed by the shop of an ancient jeweller, an honest man and a
pious who feared Allah. When the Shaykh saw the lad, he asked him
saying, "O my son, what dost thou want? for that times manifold
have I seen thee passing hereby and having dealings with a Jewish
man; and I have espied thee handing over to him sundry articles;
now also I fancy thou hast somewhat for sale and thou seekest him
as a buyer thereof. But thou wottest not, O my child, that the
Jews ever hold lawful to them the good of Moslems,[FN#121] the
Confessors of Allah Almighty's unity, and, always defraud them;
especially this accursed Jew with whom thou hast relations and
into whose hands thou hast fallen. If then, O my son, thou have
aught thou wouldest sell show the same to me and never fear, for
I will give thee its full price by the truth of Almighty Allah."
Thereupon Alaeddin brought out the platter which when the ancient
goldsmith saw, he took and weighed it in his scales and asked the
lad saying, "Was it the fellow of this thou soldest to the Jew?"
"Yes, its fellow and its brother," he answered, and Quoth the old
man, "What price did he pay thee?" Quoth the lad, "One diner."--
And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the ancient goldsmith, hearing from Alaeddin how the
Jew used to give only one diner as the price of the platter,
cried, "Ah! I take refuge from this Accursed who cozeneth the
servants of Allah Almighty!" Then, looking at the lad, he
exclaimed, "O my son, verily yon tricksy Jew hath cheated thee
and laughed at thee, this platter being pure silver and virginal.
I have weighed it and found it worth seventy diners; and, if thou
please to take its value, take it." Thereupon the Shaykh counted
out to him seventy gold pieces, which he accepted and presently
thanked him for his kindness in exposing the Jew's rascality. And
after this, whenever the price of a platter was expended, he
would bring another, and on such wise he and his mother were soon
in better circumstances; yet they ceased not to live after their
olden fashion as middle class folk[FN#122] without spending on
diet overmuch or squandering money. But Alaeddin had now thrown
off the ungraciousness of his boyhood; he shunned the society of
scapegraces and he began to frequent good men and true, repairing
daily to the market-street of the merchants and there companying
with the great and the small of them, asking about matters of
merchandise and learning the price of investments and so forth;
he likewise frequented the Bazars of the Goldsmiths and the
Jewellers[FN#123] where he would sit and divert himself by
inspecting their precious stones and by noting how jewels were
sold and bought therein. Accordingly, he presently became ware
that the tree-fruits, wherewith he had filled his pockets what
time he entered the Enchanted Treasury, were neither glass nor
crystal but gems rich and rare; and he understood that he had
acquired immense wealth such as the Kings never can possess. He
then considered all the precious stones which were in the
Jewellers' Quarter, but found that their biggest was not worth
his smallest. On this wise he ceased not every day repairing to
the Bazar and making himself familiar with the folk and winning
their loving will;[FN#124] and enquiring anent selling and
buying, giving and taking, the dear and the cheap, until one day
of the days when, after rising at dawn and donning his dress he
went forth, as was his wont, to the Jewellers' Bazar; and, as he
passed along it he heard the crier crying as follows: "By command
of our magnificent master, the King of the Time and the Lord of
the Age and the Tide, let all the folk lock up their shops and
stores and retire within their houses, for that the Lady Badr al-
Budur,[FN#125] daughter of the Sultan, designeth to visit the
Hammam; and whoso gainsayeth the order shall be punished with
death-penalty and be his blood upon his own neck!" But when
Alaeddin heard the proclamation, he longed to look upon the
King's daughter and said in his mind, "Indeed all the lieges talk
of her beauty and loveliness and the end of my desires is to see
her."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Fortieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin fell to contriving some means whereby he might
look upon the Princess Badr al-Budur and at last judged best to
take his station behind the Hammam door whence he might see her
face as she entered.[FN#126] Accordingly, without stay or delay
he repaired to the Baths before she was expected and stood a-rear
of the entrance, a place whereat none of the folk happened to be
looking. Now when the Sultan's daughter had gone the rounds of
the city and its main streets and had solaced herself by sight-
seeing, she finally reached the Hammam and whilst entering she
raised her veil, when her face rose before sight as it were a
pearl of price or a sheeny sun, and she was as one of whom the
describer sang,

"Magic Kohl enchanteth the glances so bright of her: * We pluck
     roses in posies from cheeks rosy bright of her: 
Of night's gloomiest hue is the gloom of the hair of her * And
     her bright brow uplighteth the murks of the night of
     her."[FN#127]

(Quoth the reciter) when the Princess raised from her face the
veil and Alaeddin saw her favour he said, "In very truth her
fashion magnifieth her Almighty Fashioner and glory be to Him who
created her and adorned her with this beauty and loveliness." His
strength was struck down from the moment he saw her and his
thoughts were distraught; his gaze was dazed, the love of her get
hold of the whole of his heart; and, when he returned home to his
mother, he was as one in ecstasy. His parent addressed him, but
he neither replied nor denied; and, when she set before him the
morning meal he continued in like case; so Quoth she, "O my son,
what is't may have befallen thee? Say me, doth aught ail thee?
Let me know what ill hath betided thee for, unlike thy custom,
thou speakest not when I bespeak thee." Thereupon Alaeddin (who
used to think that all women resembled his mother[FN#128] and
who, albeit he had heard of the charms of Badr al-Budur, daughter
of the Sultan, yet knew not what "beauty" and "loveliness" might
signify) turned to his parent and exclaimed, "Let me be!"
However, she persisted in praying him to come forwards and eat,
so he did her bidding but hardly touched food; after which he lay
at full length on his bed all the night through in cogitation
deep until morning morrowed. The same was his condition during
the next day, when his mother was perplexed for the case of her
son and unable to learn what had happened to him. So, thinking
that belike he might be ailing she drew near him and asked him
saying, "O my son, an thou sense aught of pain or such like, let
me know that I may fare forth and fetch thee the physician; and
to-day there be in this our city a leech from the Land of the
Arabs whom the Sultan hath sent to summon and the bruit abroad
reporteth him to be skillful exceedingly. So, an be thou ill let
me go and bring him to thee."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the Age,
that Alaeddin, hearing his parent's offer to summon the
mediciner, said, "O my mother, I am well in body and on no wise
ill. But I ever thought that all women resembled thee until
yesterday, when I beheld the Lady Badr al-Budur daughter of the
Sultan, as she was faring for the Baths." Then he related to her
all and everything that had happened to him adding, "Haply thou
also hast heard the crier a-crying, 'Let no man open shop or
stand in street that the Lady Badr al-Budur may repair to the
Hammam without eye seeing her.' But I have looked upon her even
as she is, for she raised her veil at the door and, when I viewed
her favour and beheld that noble work of the Creator, a sore fit
of ecstasy, O my mother, fell upon me for love of her and firm
resolve to win her hath opened its way into every limb of me, nor
is repose possible for me except I win her. Wherefor I purpose
asking her to wife from the Sultan her sire in lawful wedlock."
When Alaeddin's mother heard her son's words, she belittled his
wits and cried, "O my child, the name of Allah upon thee!
meseemeth thou hast lost thy senses. But be thou rightly guided,
O my son, nor be thou as the men Jinn-maddened!" He replied,
"Nay, O mother mine, I am not out of my mind nor am I of the
maniacs; nor shall this thy saying alter one jot of what is in my
thoughts, for rest is impossible to me until I shall have won the
dearling of my heart's core, the beautiful Lady Badr al-Budur.
And now I am resolved to ask her of her sire the Sultan." She
rejoined, "O my son, by my life upon thee speak not such speech,
lest any overhear thee and say thou be insane: so cast away from
thee such nonsense! Who shall undertake a matter like this or
make such request to the King? Indeed, I know not how, supposing
this thy speech to be soothfast, thou shalt manage to crave such
grace of the Sultan or through whom thou desirest to propose it."
He retorted, "Through whom shall I ask it, O my mother, when thou
art present? And who is there fonder and more faithful to me than
thyself? So my design is that thou thy self shalt proffer this my
petition." Quoth she, "O my son, Allah remove me far therefrom!
What! have I lost my wits like thyself? Cast the thought away and
a long way from thy heart. Remember whose son thou art, O my
child, the orphan boy of a tailor, the poorest and meanest of the
tailors toiling in this city; and I, thy mother, am also come of
pauper folk and indigent. How then durst thou ask to wife the
daughter of the Sultan, whose sire would not deign marry her with
the sons of the Kings and the Sovrans, except they were his peers
in honour and grandeur and majesty; and, were they but one degree
lower, he would refuse his daughter to them."--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin took patience until his parent had said her
say, when Quoth he, "O my mother, everything thou hast called to
mind is known to me; moreover 'tis thoroughly well known to me
that I am the child of pauper parents; withal do not these words
of thee divert me from my design at all, at all Nor the less do I
hope of thee, an I be thy son and thou truly love me, that thou
grant me this favour, otherwise thou wilt destroy me; and present
Death hovereth over my head except I win my will of my heart's
dearling; and I, O my mother, am in every case thy child."
Hearing these words, his parent wept of her sorrow for him and
said, "O my child! Yes, in very deed I am thy mother, nor have I
any son or life's blood of my liver except thyself, and the end
of my wishes is to give thee a wife and rejoice in thee. But
suppose that I would seek a bride of our likes and equals, her
people will at once ask an thou have any land or garden,
merchandise or handicraft, wherewith thou canst support her; and
what is the reply I can return? Then, if I cannot possibly answer
the poor like ourselves, how shall I be bold enough, O my son, to
ask for the daughter of the Sultan of China-land who hath no peer
or behind or before him? Therefore do thou weigh this matter in
thy mind. Also who shall ask her to wife for the son of a snip?
Well indeed I wot that my saying aught of this kind will but
increase our misfortunes; for that it may be the cause of our
incurring mortal danger from the Sultan; peradventure even death
for thee and me. And, as concerneth myself, how shall I venture
upon such rash deed and perilous, O my son? and in what way shall
I ask the Sultan for his daughter to be thy wife; and, indeed,
how ever shall I even get access to him? And should I succeed
therein, what is to be my answer an they ask me touching thy
means? Haply the King will hold me to be a madwoman. And, lastly,
suppose that I obtain audience of the Sultan, what offering is
there I can submit to the King's majesty?"[FN#129]--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say,

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-third Night,
 
Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales;" whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin's mother continued to her son, " 'tis true, O
my child, that the Sultan is mild and merciful, never rejecting
any who approach him to require justice or ruth or protection,
nor any who pray him for a present; for he is liberal and
lavisheth favour upon near and far. But he dealeth his boons to
those deserving them, to men who have done some derring-do in
battle under his eyes or have rendered as civilians great service
to his estate. But thou! do thou tell me what feat thou hast
performed in his presence or before the public that thou meritest
from him such grace? And, secondly, this boon thou ambitionest is
not for one of our condition, nor is it possible that the King
grant to thee the bourne of thine aspiration; for whoso goeth to
the Sultan and craveth of him a favour, him it besitteth to take
in hand somewhat that suiteth the royal majesty, as indeed I
warned thee aforetime. How, then, shalt thou risk thyself to
stand before the Sultan and ask his daughter in marriage, when
thou hast with thee naught to offer him of that which beseemeth
his exalted station?" Hereto Alaeddin replied, "O my mother, thou
speakest to the point and hast reminded me aright and 'tis meet
that I revolve in mind the whole of thy remindings. But, O my
mother, the love of Princess Badr al-Budur hath entered into the
core of my heart; nor can I rest without I win her. However, thou
hast also recalled to me a matter which I forgot and 'tis this
emboldeneth me to ask his daughter of the King. Albeit thou, O my
mother, declarest that I have no gift which I can submit to the
Sultan, as is the wont of the world, yet in very sooth I have an
offering and a present whose equal, O my mother, I hold none of
the Kings to possess; no, nor even aught like it."--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin said to his mother, "Because verily that which
I deemed glass or crystal was nothing but precious stones and I
hold that all the Kings of the World have never possessed any
thing like one of the smallest thereof. For, by frequenting the
jeweller-folk, I have learned that they are the costliest gems
and these are what I brought in my pockets from the Hoard,
whereupon, an thou please, compose thy mind. We have in our house
a bowl of China porcelain; so arise thou and fetch it, that I may
fill it with these jewels, which thou shalt carry as a gift to
the King, and thou shalt stand in his presence and solicit him
for my requirement. I am certified that by such means the matter
will become easy to thee; and, if thou be unwilling, O my mother,
to strive for the winning of my wish as regards the lady Badr al-
Budur, know thou that surely I shall die. Nor do thou imagine
that this gift is of aught save the costliest of stones and be
assured, O my mother, that in my many visits to the Jewellers'
Bazar I have observed the merchants selling for sums man's
judgment may not determine jewels whose beauty is not worth one
quarter carat of what we possess; seeing which I was certified
that ours are beyond all price. So arise, O my mother, as I bade
thee and bring me the porcelain bowl aforesaid, that I may
arrange therein some of these gems and we will see what semblance
they show." So she brought him the China bowl saying in herself,
"I shall know what to do when I find out if the words of my child
concerning these jewels be soothfast or not;" and she set it
before her son who pulled the stones out of his pockets and
disposed them in the bowl and ceased not arranging therein gems
of sorts till such time as he had filled it. And when it was
brimful she could not fix her eyes firmly upon it; on the
contrary, she winked and blinked for the dazzle of the stones and
their radiance and excess of lightning like glance; and her wits
were bewildered thereat; only she was not certified of their
value being really of the enormous extent she had been told.
Withal she reflected that possibly her son might have spoken
aright when he declared that their like was not to be found with
the Kings. Then Alaeddin turned to her and said, "Thou hast seen,
O my mother, that this present intended for the Sultan is
magnificent, and I am certified that it will procure for thee
high honour with him and that he will receive thee with all
respect. And now, O my mother, thou hast no excuse; so compose
thy thoughts and arise; take thou this bowl and away with it to
the palace." His mother rejoined, "O my son, 'tis true that the
present is high-priced exceedingly and the costliest of the
costly; also that according to thy word none owneth its like. But
who would have the boldness to go and ask the Sultan for his
daughter, the Lady Badr al-Badur? I indeed dare not say to him,
'I want thy daughter!' when he shall ask me, 'What is thy want?'
for know thou, O my son, that my tongue will be tied. And,
granting that Allah assist me and I embolden myself to say to
him, 'My wish is to become a connection of thine through the
marriage of thy daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur, to my son
Alaeddin,' they will surely decide at once that I am demented and
will thrust me forth in disgrace and despised. I will not tell
thee that I shall thereby fall into danger of death, for 'twill
not only be I but thou likewise. However, O my son, of my regard
for thine inclination, I needs must embolden myself and hie
thither; yet, O my child, if the King receive me and honour me on
account of the gift and enquire of me what thou desirest,"--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin's mother said to her son, "And in reply I ask
of him that which thou desirest in the matter of thy marriage
with his daughter, how shall I answer him an he ask me, as is
man's wont, What estates hast thou, and what income? And
perchance, O my son, he will question me of this before
questioning me of thee." Alaeddin replied, " 'tis not possible
that the Sultan should make such demand what time he considereth
the jewels and their magnificence; nor is it meet to think of
such things as these which may never occur. Now do thou but arise
and set before him this present of precious stones and ask of him
his daughter for me, and sit not yonder making much of the
difficulty in thy fancy. Ere this thou hast learned, O mother
mine, that the Lamp which we possess hath become to us a stable
income and that whatso I want of it the same is supplied to me;
and my hope is that by means thereof I shall learn how to answer
the Sultan should he ask me of that thou sayest."[FN#130] Then
Alaeddin and his mother fell to talking over the subject all that
night long and when morning morrowed, the dame arose and
heartened her heart, especially as her son had expounded to her
some little of the powers of the Lamp and the virtues thereof; to
wit, that it would supply all they required of it. Alaeddin,
however, seeing his parent take courage when he explained to her
the workings of the Lamp, feared lest she might tattle to the
folk thereof;[FN#131]  so he said to her, "O my mother, beware
how thou talk to any of the properties of the Lamp and its
profit, as this is our one great good. Guard thy thoughts lest
thou speak over much concerning it before others, whoso they be;
haply we shall lose it and lose the boon fortune we possess and
the benefits we expect, for that 'tis of him."[FN#132]  His
mother replied, "Fear not, therefor, O my son," and she arose and
took the bowl full of jewels, which she wrapped up in a fine
kerchief, and went forth betimes that she might reach the Divan
ere it became crowded. When she passed into the Palace, the levee
not being fully attended, she saw the Wazirs and sundry of the
Lords of the land going into the presence-room and after a short
time, when the Divan was made complete by the Ministers and high
Officials and Chieftains and Emirs and Grandees, the Sultan
appeared and the Wazirs made their obeisance and likewise did the
Nobles and the Notables. The King seated himself upon the throne
of his kingship, and all present at the levee stood before him
with crossed arms awaiting his commandment to sit; and, when they
received it, each took his place according to his degree; then
the claimants came before the Sultan who delivered sentence,
after his wonted way, until the Divan was ended, when the King
arose and withdrew into the palace[FN#133] and the others all
went their ways.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin's mother, having come the earliest of all,
found means of entering without any addressing her or offering to
lead her to the presence; and she ceased not standing there until
the Divan ended, when the Sultan arose and withdrew into the
palace and the others all went about their business. And when she
saw the throne empty and the King passing into his Harem, she
also wended her ways and returned home. But as soon as her son
espied her, bowl in hand, he thought that haply something
untoward had befallen her, but he would not ask of aught until
such time as she had set down the bowl, when she acquainted him
with that which had occurred and ended by adding,
"Alhamdolillah,--laud to the Lord!--O my child, that I found
courage enough and secured for myself standing place in the levee
this day; and, albe I dreaded to bespeak the King yet
(Inshallah!) on the morrow I will address him. Even to-day were
many who, like myself, could not get audience of the Sultan. But
be of good cheer, O my son, and to-morrow needs must I bespeak
him for thy sake; and what happened not may happen." When
Alaeddin heard his parent's words, he joyed with excessive joy;
and, although he expected the matter to be managed hour by hour,
for excess of his love and longing to the Lady Badr al-Budur, yet
he possessed his soul in patience. They slept well that night and
betimes next morning the mother of Alaeddin arose and went with
her bowl to the King's court which she found closed. So she asked
the people and they told her that the Sultan did not hold a levee
every day but only thrice in the se'nnight; wherefor she
determined to return home; and, after this, whenever she saw the
court open she would stand before the King until the reception
ended and when it was shut she would go to make sure thereof; and
this was the case for the whole month. The Sultan was wont to
remark her presence at every levee, but, on the last day when she
took her station, as was her wont, before the Council, she
allowed it to close and lacked boldness to come forwards and
speak even a syllable. Now as the King having risen was making
for his Harem accompanied by the Grand Wazir, he turned to him
and said, "O Wazir, during the last six or seven levee days I see
yonder old woman present herself at every reception and I also
note that she always carrieth a something under her mantilla. Say
me, hast thou, O Wazir, any knowledge of her and her intention?"
"O my lord the Sultan, said the other, "verily women be weakly of
wits, and haply this goodwife cometh hither to complain before
thee[FN#134] against her goodman or some of her people." But this
reply was far from satisfying the Sultan; nay, be bade the Wazir,
in case she should come again, set her before him; and forthright
the Minister placed hand on head and exclaimed, "To hear is to
obey, O our lord the Sultan!"--And Shahrazad was surprised by the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the mother of Alaeddin, as she made a practice of
repairing to the Divan every day and passing into the room and
standing opposite the King, albeit she was sorrowful and sore
aweary, withal for her son's sake she endeavored to make easy all
her difficulties. Now one day of the days, when she did according
to her custom, the Sultan cast his eyes upon her as she stood
before him, and said to his Grand Wazir, "This be the very woman
whereof I spake to thee yesterday, so do thou straightway bring
her before me, that I may see what be her suit and fulfil her
need." Accordingly, the Minister at once introduced her and when
in the presence she saluted the King by kissing her finger tips
and raising them to her brow;[FN#135] and, praying for the
Sultan's glory and continuance and the permanence of his
prosperity, bussed ground before him. Thereupon, Quoth he "O
woman,[FN#136] for sundry days I have seen thee attend the levee
sans a word said; so tell me an thou have any requirement I may
grant." She kissed ground a second time and after blessing him,
answered, "Yea, verily, as thy head liveth, O King of the Age, I
have a want; but first of all, do thou deign grant me a promise
of safety that I may prefer my suit to the ears of our lord the
Sultan; for haply thy Highness[FN#137] may find it a singular."
The King, wishing to know her need, and being a man of unusual
mildness and clemency, gave his word for her immunity and bade
forthwith dismiss all about him, remaining without other but the
Grand Wazir. Then he turned towards his suppliant and said,
"Inform me of thy suit: thou hast the safeguard of Allah Al-
mighty." "O King of the Age," replied she, "I also require of
thee pardon;" and Quoth he, "Allah pardon thee even as I do."
Then, Quoth she, "O our lord the Sultan, I have a son, Alaeddin
hight; and he, one day of the days, having heard the crier
commending all men to shut shop and shun the streets, for that
the Lady Badr al-Budur, daughter of the Sultan, was going to the
Hammam, felt an uncontrollable longing to look upon her, and hid
himself in a stead whence he could sight her right well, and that
place was behind the door of the Baths. When she entered he
beheld her and considered her as he wished, and but too well;
for, since the time he looked upon her, O King of the Age, unto
this hour, life hath not been pleasant to him. And he hath
required of me that I ask her to wife for him from thy Highness,
nor could I drive this fancy from his mind because love of her
hath mastered his vitals and to such degree that he said to me,
'Know thou, O mother mine, that an I win not my wish surely I
shall die.' Accordingly I hope that thy Highness will deign be
mild and merciful and pardon this boldness on the part of me and
my child and refrain to punish us therefor." When the Sultan
heard her tale he regarded her with kindness and, laughing aloud,
asked her, "What may be that thou carriest and what be in yonder
kerchief?" And she seeing the Sultan laugh in lieu of waxing
wroth at her words, forthright opened the wrapper and set before
him the bowl of jewels, whereby the audience-hall was illumined
as it were by lustres and candelabra;[FN#138] and he was dazed
and amazed at the radiance of the rare gems, and he fell to
marvelling at their size and beauty and excellence.--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, if thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the King saw the gems he was seized by surprise
and cried, "Never at all until this day saw I anything like these
jewels for size and beauty and excellence: nor deem I that there
be found in my treasury a single one like them." Then he turned O
Wazir? Tell me hast thou to his Minister and asked, "What sayest
thou, seen in thy time such mighty fine jewels as these?" The
other answered, "Never saw I such, O our lord the Sultan, nor do
I think that there be in the treasures of my lord the Sultan the
fellow of the least thereof." The King resumed, "Now indeed whoso
hath presented to me such jewels meriteth to become bridegroom to
my daughter, Badr al-Budur; because, as far as I see, none is
more deserving of her than he." When the Wazir heard the Sultan's
words he was tongue-tied with concern and he grieved with sore
grief, for the King had promised to give the Princess in marriage
to his son; so after a little while he said, "O King of the Age,
thy Highness deigned promise me that the Lady Badr al-Budur
should be spouse to my son; so 'tis but right that thine exalted
Highness vouchsafe us a delay of three months, during which time,
Inshallah! my child may obtain and present an offering yet
costlier than this." Accordingly the King, albeit he knew that
such a thing could not be done, or by the Wazir or by the
greatest of his Grandees, yet of his grace and kindness granted
him the required delay. Then he turned to the old woman,
Alaeddin's mother, and said, "Go to thy son and tell him I have
pledged my word that my daughter shall be in his name;[FN#139]
only 'tis needful that I make the requisite preparations of
nuptial furniture for her use; and 'tis only meet that he take
patience for the next three months." Receiving this reply,
Alaeddin's mother thanked the Sultan and blessed him; then, going
forth in hottest haste, as one flying for joy, she went home; and
when her son saw her entering with a smiling face, he was
gladdened at the sign of good news, especially because she had
returned without delay as on the Fast days, and had not brought
back the bowl. Presently he asked her saying, "Inshallah, thou
bearest me, O my mother, glad tidings; and peradventure the
jewels and their value have wrought their work and belike thou
hast been kindly received by the King and he hath shown thee
grace and hath given ear to thy request?" So she told him the
whole tale, how the Sultan had entreated her well and had
marvelled at the extraordinary size of the gems and their
surpassing water as did also the Wazir, adding, "And he promised
that his daughter should be thine. Only, O my child, the Wazir
spake of a secret contract made with him by the Sultan before he
pledged himself to me and, after speaking privily, the King put
me off to the end of three months: therefore I have become
fearful lest the Wazir be evilly disposed to thee and perchance
he may attempt to change the Sultan's mind." And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when Alaeddin heard his mother's words and how the
Sultan had promised him his daughter, deferring, however, the
wedding until after the third month, his mind was gladdened and
he rejoiced exceedingly and said, "Inasmuch as the King hath
given his word after three months (well, it is a long time!), at
all events my gladness is mighty great." Then he thanked his
parent, showing her how her good work had exceeded her toil and
travail; and said to her, "By Allah, O my mother, hitherto I was
as 'twere in my grave and therefrom thou hast withdrawn me; and I
praise Allah Almighty because I am at this moment certified that
no man in the world is happier than I or more fortunate." Then he
took patience until two of the three months had gone by. Now one
day of the days his mother fared forth about sundown to the Bazar
that she might buy somewhat of oil; and she found all the market
shops fast shut and the whole city decorated, and the folk
placing waxen tapers and flowers at their casements; and she
beheld the soldiers and household troops and Aghas[FN#140] riding
in procession and flambeaux and lustres flaming and flaring, and
she wondered at the marvellous sight and the glamour of the
scene. So she went in to an oilman's store which stood open still
and bought her need of him and said, "By thy life, O uncle, tell
me what be the tidings in town this day, that people have made
all these decorations and every house and market-street are
adorned and the troops all stand on guard?" The oilman asked her,
"O woman, I suppose thou art a stranger and not one of this
city?" and she answered, "Nay, I am thy townswoman." He rejoined,
"Thou a towns-woman, and yet wottest not that this very night the
son of the Grand Wazir goeth in to the Lady Badr al-Budur,
daughter of the Sultan! He is now in the Hammam and all this
power of soldiery is on guard and standing under arms to await
his coming forth, when they will bear him in bridal procession to
the palace where the Princess expecteth him." As the mother of
Alaeddin heard these words, she grieved and was distraught in
thought and perplexed how to inform her son of this sorrowful
event, well knowing that the poor youth was looking, hour by
hour, to the end of the three months. But she returned
straightway home to him and when she had entered she said, "O my
son, I would give thee certain tidings, yet hard to me will be
the sorrow they shall occasion thee." He cried, "Let me know what
be thy news;" and she replied, "Verily the Sultan hath broken his
promise to thee in the matter of the Lady Badr al-Budur, and this
very night the Grand Wazir's son goeth in to her. And for some
time, O my son, I have suspected that the Minister would change
the King's mind, even as I told thee how he had spoken privily to
him before me." Alaeddin[FN#141] asked, "How learnedst thou that
the Wazir's son is this night to pay his first visit to the
Princess?" So she told him the whole tale, how when going to buy
oil she had found the city decorated and the eunuch-officials and
Lords of the land with the troops under arms awaiting the
bridegroom from the Baths; and that the first visit was appointed
for that very night. Hearing this Alaeddin was seized with a
fever of jealousy brought on by his grief: however, after a short
while he remembered the Lamp and, recovering his spirits said,
"By thy life, O my mother, do thou believe that the Wazir's son
will not enjoy her as thou thinkest. But now leave we this
discourse and arise thou and serve up supper[FN#142] and after
eating let me retire to my own chamber and all will be well and
happy." And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin after he had supped retired to his chamber
and, locking the door, brought out the Lamp and rubbed it, whenas
forthright appeared to him its Familiar who said, "Ask whatso
thou wantest, for I am thy Slave and Slave to him who holdeth the
Lamp in hand; I and all the Slaves of the Lamp." He replied,
"Hear me! I prayed the Sultan for his daughter to wife and he
plighted her to me after three months; but he hath not kept his
word; nay, he hath given her to the son of the Wazir and this
very night the bridegroom will go in to her. Therefore I command
thee (an thou be a trusty Servitor to the Lamp) when thou shalt
see bride and bridegroom bedded together this night,[FN#143] at
once take them up and bear them hither abed; and this be what I
want of thee." The Marid replied, "Hearing and obeying; and if
thou have other service but this, do thou demand of me all thou
desirest." Alaeddin "At the present time I require naught save
that I bade thee do." Here upon the Slave disappeared and
Alaeddin returned to pass the rest of the evening with his
mother. But at the hour when he knew that the Servitor would be
coming, he arose and refired to his chamber and after a little
while, behold, the Marid came bringing to him the newly-wedded
couple upon their bridal-bed. Alaeddin rejoiced to see them with
exceeding joy; then he cried to the Slave, "Carry yonder gallows-
bird hence and lay him at full length in the privy."[FN#144] His
bidding was done straightway; but, before leaving him, the Slave
blew upon the bridegroom a blast so cold that it shrivelled him
and the plight of the Wazir's son became piteous. Then the
Servitor returning to Alaeddin said to him, "An thou require
aught else, inform me thereof;" and said the other, "Return a-
morn that thou mayest restore them to their stead;" whereto, "I
hear and obey," Quoth the Marid and evanished. Presently Alaeddin
arose, hardly believing that the affair had been such a success
for him; but whenas he looked upon the Lady Badr al-Budur lying
under his own roof, albeit he had long burned with her love yet
he preserved respect for her and said, "O Princess of fair ones,
think not that I brought thee hither hither to minish thy honour.
Heaven forfend! Nay 'twas only to prevent the wrong man enjoying
thee, for that thy sire the Sultan promised thee to me. So do
thou rest in peace."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales." whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Lady Badr al-Budur, daughter of the Sultan,
saw herself in that mean and darksome lodging, and heard
Alaeddin's words, she was seized with fear and trembling and
waxed clean distraught; nor could she return aught of reply.
Presently the youth arose and stripping off his outer dress
placed a scymitar between them and lay upon the bed beside the
Princess;[FN#145] and he did no villain deed, for it sufficed him
to prevent the consummation of her nuptials with the Wazir's son.
On the other hand the Lady Badr al-Budur passed a night the
evillest of all nights; nor in her born days had she seen a
worse; and the same was the case with the Minister's son who lay
in the chapel of ease and who dared not stir for the fear of the
Jinni which overwhelmed him. As soon as it was morning the Slave
appeared before Alaeddin, without the Lamp being rubbed, and said
to him, "O my lord, an thou require aught, command me therefor,
that I may do it upon my head and mine eyes." Said the other,
"Go, take up and carry the bride and bridegroom to their own
apartment;" so the Servitor did his bidding in an eye-glance and
bore away the pair, and placed them in the palace as whilome they
were and without their seeing any one; but both died of affright
when they found themselves being transported from stead to
stead.[FN#146] And the Marid had barely time to set them down and
wend his ways ere the Sultan came on a visit of congratulation to
his daughter; and, when the Wazir's son heard the doors thrown
open, he sprang straightway from his couch and donned his
dress[FN#147] for he knew that none save the King could enter at
that hour. Yet it was exceedingly hard for him to leave his bed
wherein he wished to warm himself a trifle after his cold night
in the water closet which he had lately left.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Sultan went in to his daughter Badr al-Budur and
kissing her between the eyes gave her good morning and asked her
of her bridegroom and whether she was pleased and satisfied with
him. But she returned no reply whatever and looked at him with
the eye of anger and, although he repeated his words again and
again, she held her peace nor bespake him with a single syllable.
So the King quitted her and, going to the Queen, informed her of
what had taken place between him and his daughter; and the
mother, unwilling to leave the Sultan angered with their child,
said to him, "O King of the Age, this be the custom of most
newly-married couples at least during their first days of
marriage, for that they are bashful and somewhat coy. So deign
thou excuse her and after a little while she will again become
herself and speak with the folk as before, whereas now her shame,
O King of the Age, keepeth her silent. However 'tis my wish to
fare forth and see her." Thereupon the Queen arose and donned her
dress; then, going to her daughter, wished her good morning and
kissed her between the eyes. Yet would the Princess make no
answer at all, whereat Quoth the Queen to herself, "Doubtless
some strange matter hath occurred to trouble her with such
trouble as this." So she asked her saying "O my daughter, what
hath caused this thy case? Let me know what hath betided thee
that, when I come and give thee good morning, thou hast not a
word to say to me?" Thereat the Lady Badr al-Budur raised her
head and said, "Pardon me O my mother, 'twas my duty to meet thee
with all respect and worship, seeing that thou hast honoured me
by this visit. However, I pray thee to hear the cause of this my
condition and see how the night I have just spent hath been to me
the evillest of the nights. Hardly had we lain down, O my mother,
than one whose form I wot not uplifted our bed and transported it
to a darksome place, fulsome and mean." Then the Princess related
to the Queen-mother all that had befallen her that night; how
they had taken away her bridegroom, leaving her lone and
lonesome, and how after a while came another youth who lay beside
her, in lieu of her bridegroom, after placing his scymitar
between her and himself; "and in the morning" (she continued) "he
who carried us off returned and bore us straight back to our own
stead. But at once when he arrived hither he left us and suddenly
my sire the Sultan entered at the hour and moment of our coming
and I I had nor heart nor tongue to speak him withal, for the
stress of the terror and trembling which came upon me. Haply such
lack of duty may have proved sore to him, so I hope, O my mother,
that thou wilt acquaint him with the cause of this my condition
and that he will pardon me for not answering him and blame me
not, but rather accept my excuses."--And Shahrazad was surprised
by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Queen heard these words of Princess Badr al-
Budur, she said to her, "O my child, compose thy thoughts. An
thou tell such tale before any, haply shall he say, 'Verily, the
Sultan's daughter hath lost her wits.' And thou hast done right
well in not choosing to recount thine adventure to thy father;
and beware and again I say beware, O my daughter, lest thou
inform him thereof." The Princess replied, "O my mother, I have
spoken to thee like one sound in senses nor have I lost my wits:
this be what befel me and, if thou believe it not because coming
from me, ask my bridegroom." To which the Queen replied, "Rise up
straightway, O my daughter, and banish from thy thoughts such
fancies as these; and robe thyself and come forth to glance at
the bridal feasts and festivities they are making in the city for
the sake of thee and thy nuptials; and listen to the drumming and
the singing and look at the decorations all intended to honour
thy marriage, O my daughter." So saying, the Queen at once
summoned the tirewomen who dressed and prepared the Lady Badr al-
Budur; and presently she went in to the Sultan and assured him
that their daughter had suffered during all her wedding-night
from swevens and nightmare and said to him, "Be not severe with
her for not answering thee." Then the Queen sent privily for the
Wazir's son and asked of the matter, saying, "Tell me, are these
words of the Lady Badr al-Budur soothfast or not?" But he, in his
fear of losing his bride out of hand, answered, "O my lady, I
have no knowledge of that whereof thou speakest." Accordingly the
mother made sure that her daughter had seen visions and dreams.
The marriage-feasts lasted throughout that day with
Almahs[FN#148] and singers and the smiting of all manner
instruments of mirth and merriment, while the Queen and the Wazir
and his son strave right strenuously to enhance the festivities
that the Princess might enjoy herself; and that day they left
nothing of what exciteth to pleasure unrepresented in her
presence, to the end that she might forget what was in her
thoughts and derive increase of joyance. Yet did naught of this
take any effect upon her; nay, she sat in silence, sad of
thought, sore perplexed at what had befallen her during the last
night. It is true that the Wazir's son had suffered even more
because he had passed his sleeping hours lying in the water-
closet: he, however, had falsed the story and had cast out
remembrance of the night in the first place for his fear of
losing his bride and with her the honour of a connection which
brought him such excess of consideration and for which men envied
him so much; and, secondly, on account of the wondrous loveliness
of the Lady Badr al-Budur and her marvellous beauty. Alaeddin
also went forth that day and looked at the merry-makings which
extended throughout the city as well as the palace and he fell a-
laughing, especially when he heard the folk prating of the high
honour which had accrued to the son of the Wazir and the
prosperity of his fortunes in having become son-in-law to the
Sultan and the high consideration shown by the wedding fetes. And
he said in his mind, "Indeed ye wot not, O ye miserables, what
befel him last night that ye envy him!" But after darkness fell
and it was time for sleep, Alaeddin arose and, retiring to his
chamber, rubbed the Lamp, whereupon the Slave incontinently
appeared.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Slave appeared in presence of Alaeddin, he was
bidden to bring him the Sultan's daughter together with her
bridegroom as on the past night ere the Wazir's son could abate
her maidenhead. So the Marid without stay or delay evanished for
a little while until the appointed time, when he returned
carrying the bed whereon lay the Lady Badr al-Budur and the
Wazir's son; and he did with the bridegroom as he had done
before, to wit, he took him up and lay him at full length in the
jakes and there left him dried up for excess of fear and
trembling. Then Alaeddin arose, and placing the scymitar between
himself and the Princess, lay down beside her; and when day broke
the Slave restored the pair to their own place, leaving Alaeddin
filled with delight at the state of the Minister's son. Now when
the Sultan woke up amorn he resolved to visit his daughter and
see if she would treat him as on the past day; so shaking off his
sleep he sprang up and arrayed himself in his raiment and, going
to the apartment of the Princess bade open the door. Thereat the
son of the Wazir arose forthright and came down from his bed and
began donning his dress whilst his ribs were wrung with cold; for
when the King entered the Slave had but just brought him back.
The Sultan, raising the arras,[FN#149] drew near his daughter as
she lay abed and gave her good morning; then kissing her between
the eyes, he asked her of her case. But he saw her looking sour
and sad and she answered him not at all, only glowering at him as
one in anger and her plight was pitiable. Hereat the Sultan waxed
wroth with her for that she would not reply and he suspected that
something evil had befallen her,[FN#150] whereupon he bared his
blade and cried to her, brand in hand, saying, "What be this hath
betided thee? Either acquaint me with what happened or this very
moment I will take thy life! Is such conduct the token of honour
and respect I expect of thee, that I address thee and thou
answerest me not a word?" When the Lady Badar al- Badur saw her
sire in high dudgeon and the naked glaive in his grip, she was
freed from her fear of the past, so she raised her head and said
to him, "O my beloved father, be not wroth with me nor be hasty
in thy hot passion for I am excusable in what thou shalt see of
my case. So do thou lend an ear to what occurred to me and well I
wot that after hearing my account of what befel to me during
these two last nights, thou wilt pardon me and thy Highness will
be softened to pitying me even as I claim of thee affection for
thy child." Then the Princess informed her father of all that had
betided her adding, "O my sire, an thou believe me not, ask my
bridegroom and he will recount to thy Highness the whole
adventure, nor did I know either what they would do with him when
they bore him away from my side or where they would place him."--
And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day, and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan heard his daughter's words, he was
saddened and his eyes 