brimmed with tears, then he sheathed his
sabre and kissed her saying, "O my daughter wherefore[FN#151]
didst thou not tell me what happened on the past night that I
might have guarded thee from this torture and terror which
visited thee a second time? But now 'tis no matter. Rise and cast
out all such care and to-night I will set a watch to ward thee
nor shall any mishap again make thee miserable." Then the Sultan
returned to his palace and straightway bade summon the Grand
Wazir and asked him, as he stood before him in his service, "O
Wazir how dost thou look upon this matter? Haply thy son hath
informed thee of what occurred to him and to my daughter." The
Minister replied, "O King of the Age, I have not seen my son or
yesterday or to-day." Hereat the Sultan told him all that had
afflicted the Princess, adding, " 'tis my desire that thou at
once seek tidings of thy son concerning the facts of the case:
peradventure of her fear my daughter may not be fully aware of
what really befel her; withal I hold all her words to be
truthful." So the Grand Wazir arose and, going forth, bade summon
his son and asked him anent all his lord had told him whether it
be true or untrue. The youth replied, "O my father the Wazir,
Heaven forbid that the Lady Badr al-Budur speak falsely: indeed
all she said was sooth and these two nights proved to us the
evillest of our nights instead of being nights of pleasure and
marriage-joys. But what befel me was the greater evil because,
instead of sleeping abed with my bride, I lay in the wardrobe, a
black hole, frightful, noisome of stench, truly damnable; and my
ribs were bursten with cold." In fine the young man told his
father the whole tale, adding as he ended it, "O dear father
mine, I implore thee to speak with the Sultan that he may set me
free from this marriage. Yes, indeed 'tis a high honour for me to
be the Sultan's son-in-law and especially the love of the
Princess hath gotten hold of my vitals; but I have no strength
left to endure a single night like unto these two last."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Wazir, hearing the words of his son, was saddened
and sorrowful exceedingly, for it was his design to advance and
promote his child by making him son-in-law to the Sultan. So he
became thoughtful and perplexed about the affair and the device
whereby to manage it, and it was sore grievous for him to break
off the marriage, it having been a rare enjoyment to him that he
had fallen upon such high good fortune. Accordingly he said,
"Take patience, O my son, until we see what may happen this
night, when we will set watchmen to ward you; nor do thou give up
the exalted distinction which hath fallen to none save to
thyself." Then the Wazir left him and, returning to the sovran,
reported that all told to him by the Lady Badr al-Budur was a
true tale; whereupon Quoth the Sultan, "Since the affair is on
this wise, we require no delay," and he at once ordered all the
rejoicings to cease and the marriage to be broken off. This
caused the folk and the citizen to marvel at the matter,
especially when they saw the Grand Wazir and his son leaving the
palace in pitiable plight for grief and stress of passion; and
the people fell to asking, "What hath happened and what is the
cause of the wedding being made null and void?" Nor did any know
aught of the truth save Alaeddin the lover who claimed the
Princess's hand, and he laughed in his sleeve. But even after the
marriage was dissolved, the Sultan forgot nor even recalled to
mind his promise made to Alaeddin's mother; and the same was the
case with the Grand Wazir, while neither had any inkling of
whence befel them that which had befallen. So Alaeddin patiently
awaited the lapse of the three months after which the Sultan had
pledged himself to give him to wife his daughter; but, as soon as
ever the term came, he sent his mother to the Sultan for the
purpose of requiring him to keep his covenant. So she went to the
palace and when the King appeared in the Divan and saw the old
woman standing before him, he remembered his promise to her
concerning the marriage after a term of three months, and he
turned to the Minister and said "O Wazir, this be the ancient
dame who presented me with the jewels and to whom we pledged our
word that when the three months had elapsed we would summon her
to our presence before all others." So the Minister went forth
and fetched her[FN#152] and when she went in to the Sultan's
presence she saluted him and prayed for his glory and permanence
of prosperity. Hereat the King asked her if she needed aught, and
she answered, "O King of the Age, the three months' term thou
assignedst to me is finished, and this is thy time to marry my
son Alaeddin with thy daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur." The
Sultan was distraught at this demand, especially when he saw the
old woman's pauper condition, one of the meanest of her kind; and
yet the offering she had brought to him was of the most
magnificent, far beyond his power to pay the price. Accordingly,
he turned to the Grand Wazir and said, "What device is there with
thee? In very sooth I did pass my word, yet meseemeth that they
be pauper folk and not persons of high condition."--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Grand Wazir who was dying of envy and who was
especially saddened by what had befallen his son, said to
himself, "How shall one like this wed the King's daughter and my
son lose this highmost honour?" Accordingly, he answered his
Sovran speaking privily, "O my lord, 'tis an easy[FN#153] matter
to keep off a poor devil such as this, for he is not worthy that
thy Highness give his daughter to a fellow whom none knoweth what
he may be." "By what means," enquired the Sultan, "shall we put
off the man when I pledged my promise; and the word of the Kings
is their bond?" Replied the Wazir, "O my lord, my rede is that
thou demand of him forty platters made of pure sand-gold[FN#154]
and full of gems (such as the woman brought thee aforetime), with
forty white slave-girls to carry the platters and forty black
eunuch-slaves." The King rejoined, "By Allah, O Wazir, thou hast
spoken to the purpose, seeing that such thing is not possible and
by this way we shall be freed." Then Quoth he to Alaeddin's
mother, "Do thou go and tell thy son that I am a man of my word
even as I plighted it to him, but on condition that he have power
to pay the dower of my daughter; and that which I require of him
is a settlement consisting of two score platters of virgin gold,
all brimming with gems the like of those thou broughtest to me,
and as many white handmaids to carry them and two score black
eunuch-slaves to serve and escort the bearers. An thy son avail
hereto I will marry him with my daughter." Thereupon she returned
home wagging her head and saying in her mind, "Whence can my poor
boy procure these platters and such jewels? And granted that he
return to the Enchanted Treasury and pluck them from the trees
which, however, I hold impossible; yet given that he bring them
whence shall he come by the girls and the blacks?" Nor did she
leave communing with herself till she reached her home, where she
found Alaeddin awaiting her, and she lost no time in saying "O my
son, did I not tell thee never to fancy that thy power would
extend to the Lady Badr al-Budur, and that such a matter is not
possible to folk like ourselves?" "Recount to me the news," Quoth
he; so Quoth she, "O my child, verily the Sultan received me with
all honour according to his custom and, meseemeth his intentions
towards us be friendly. But thine enemy is that accursed Wazir;
for, after I addressed the King in thy name as thou badest me
say, 'In very sooth the promised term is past,' adding ' 'Twere
well an thy Highness would deign issue commandment for the
espousals of thy daughter the Lady Badr al-Budur to my son
Alaeddin he turned to and addressed the Minister who answered
privily, after which the Sultan gave me his reply." Then she
enumerated the King's demands and said, "O my son, he indeed
expecteth of thee an instant reply but I fancy that we have no
answer for him." And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when Alaeddin heard these words he laughed and said, "O
my mother, thou affirmeth that we have no answer and thou deemest
the case difficult exceedingly; but compose thy thoughts and
arise and bring me somewhat we may eat; and, after we have dined,
an the Compassionate be willing, thou shalt see my reply. Also
the Sultan thinketh like thyself that he hath demanded a
prodigious dower in order to divert me from his daughter, whereas
the fact is that he hath required of me a matter far less than I
expected. But do thou fare forth at once and purchase the
provision and leave me to procure thee a reply." So she went out
to fetch her needful from the Bazar and Alaeddin retired to his
chamber and taking the Lamp rubbed it, when forthright appeared
to him its Slave and said, "Ask, O my lord, whatso thou wantest."
The other replied, "I have demanded of the Sultan his daughter to
wife and he hath required of me forty bowls of purest gold each
weighing ten pounds[FN#155] and all to be filled with gems such
as we find in the Gardens of the Hoard; furthermore, that they be
borne on the heads of as many white handmaids, each attended by
her black eunuch-slave, also forty in full rate; so I desire that
thou bring all these into my presence." "Hearkening and obeying,
O my lord," Quoth the Slave and, disappearing for the space of an
hour or so, presently returned bringing the platters and jewels,
handmaids and eunuchs; then, setting them before him the Marid
cried, "This be what thou demandest of me: declare now an thou
want any matter or service other than this." Alaeddin rejoined,
"I have need of naught else; but, an I do, I will summon thee and
let thee know." The Slave now disappeared and, after a little
while, Alaeddin's mother returned home and, on entering the
house, saw the blacks and the handmaids.[FN#156] Hereat she
wondered and exclaimed, "All this proceedeth from the Lamp which
Allah perpetuate to my son!" But ere she doffed her mantilla
Alaeddin said to her, "O my mother, this be thy time before the
Sultan enter his Serraglio-palace;[FN#157] do thou carry to him
what he required and wend thou with it at once, so may he know
that I avail to supply all he wanteth and yet more; also that he
is beguiled by his Grand Wazir and the twain imagined vainly that
they would baffle me." Then he arose forthright and opened the
house-door, when the handmaids and blackamoors paced forth in
pairs, each girl with her eunuch beside her, until they crowded
the quarter, Alaeddin's mother foregoing them. And when the folk
of that ward sighted such mighty fine sight and marvellous
spectacle, all stood at gaze and they considered the forms and
figures of the handmaids marvelling at their beauty and
loveliness, for each and every wore robes inwrought with gold and
studded with jewels, no dress being worth less than a thousand
dinars.[FN#158] They stared as intently at the bowls and albeit
these were covered with pieces of brocade, also orfrayed and
dubbed with precious stones, yet the sheen outshot from them
dulled the thine of sun.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the folk and especially the people of the quarter stood
a marvelling at this singular scene. Then Alaeddin's mother
walked forwards and all the handmaids and eunuchs paced behind
her in the best of ordinance and disposition, and the citizens
gathered to gaze at the beauty of the damsels, glorifying God the
Most Great, until the train reached the palace and entered it
accompanied by the tailor's widow. Now when the Aghas and
Chamberlains and Army-officers beheld them, all were seized with
surprise, notably by seeing the handmaids who each and every
would ravish the reason of an anchorite. And albeit the royal
Chamberlains and Officials were men of family, the sons of
Grandees and Emirs, yet they could not but especially wonder at
the costly dresses of the girls and the platters borne upon their
heads; nor could they gaze at them open eyed by reason of the
exceeding brilliance and radiance. Then the Nabobs went in and
reported to the King who forthright bade admit them to the
presence chamber, and Alaeddin's mother went in with them. When
they stood before the Sultan, all saluted him with every sign of
respect and worship and prayed for his glory and prosperity; then
they set down from their heads the bowls at his feet and, having
removed the brocade covers, rested with arms crossed behind them.
The Sultan wondered with exceeding wonder and was distraught by
the beauty of the handmaids and their loveliness which passed
praise; and his wits were wildered when he considered the golden
bowls brimful of gems which captured man's vision, and he was
perplexed at the marvel until he became, like the dumb, unable to
utter a syllable for the excess of his wonder. Also his sense was
stupefied the more when he bethought him that within a hour or so
all these treasures had been collected. Presently he commended
the slave-girls to enter, with what loads they bore, the dower of
the Princess; and, when they had done his bidding Alaeddin's
mother came forward and said to the Sultan, "O my lord, this be
not much wherewith to honour the Lady Badr al-Budur, for that she
meriteth these things multiplied times manifold." Hereat the
Sovran turned to the Minister and asked, "What sayest thou, O
Wazir? is not he who could produce such wealth in a time so
brief, is he not, I say, worthy to become the Sultan's son-in-law
and take the King's daughter to wife?" Then the Minister
(although he marvelled at these riches even more than did the
Sultan), whose envy was killing him and growing greater hour by
hour, seeing his liege lord satisfied with the moneys and the
dower and yet being unable to fight against fact, made answer, "
'tis not worthy of her." Withal he fell to devising a device
against the King that he might withhold the Lady Badr al-Budur
from Alaeddin and accordingly he continued, "O my liege, the
treasures of the universe all of them are not worth a nail-paring
of thy daughter: indeed thy Highness hath prized these things
overmuch in comparison with her."--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the King heard the words of his Grand Wazir, he
knew that the speech was prompted by excess of envy; so turning
to the mother of Alaeddin he said, "O woman, go to thy son and
tell him that I have accepted of him the dower and stand to my
bargain, and that my daughter be his bride and he my son-in-law:
furthermore, bid him at once make act of presence that I may
become familiar with him: he shall see naught from me save all
honour and consideration, and this night shall be the beginning
of the marriage-festivities. Only, as I said to thee, let him
come to me and tarry not." Thereupon Alaeddin's mother returned
home with the speed of the stormwinds that she might hasten her
utmost to congratulate her son; and she flew with joy at the
thought that her boy was about to become[FN#159] son-in-law to
the Sultan. After her departure the King dismissed the Divan and,
entering the palace of the Princess, bade them bring the bowls
and the handmaids before him and before her, that she also might
inspect them. But when the Lady Badr al-Budur considered the
jewels, she waxed distraught and cried, "Meseemeth that in the
treasuries of the world there be not found one jewel rivalling
these jewels." Then she looked at the handmaids and marvelled at
their beauty and loveliness, and knew that all this came from her
new bridegroom who had sent them in her service. So she was
gladdened, albeit she had been grieved and saddened on account of
her former husband, the Wazir's son, and she rejoiced with
exceeding joy when she gazed upon the damsels and their charms;
nor was her sire, the Sultan, less pleased and inspirited when he
saw his daughter relieved of all her mourning and melancholy and
his own vanished at the sight of her enjoyment. Then he asked
her, "O my daughter, do these things divert thee? Indeed I deem
that this suitor of thine be more suitable to thee than the son
of the Wazir; and right soon (Inshallah!), O my daughter, shalt
thou have fuller joy with him." Such was the case with the King;
but as regards Alaeddin, as soon as he saw his mother entering
the house with face laughing for stress of joy he rejoiced at the
sign of glad tidings and cried, "To Allah alone be lauds!
Perfected is all I desired." Rejoined his mother, "Be gladdened
at my good news, O my son, and hearten thy heart and cool thine
eyes for the winning of thy wish. The Sultan hath accepted thine
offering, I mean the moneys and the dower of the Lady Badr al-
Budur, who is now thine affianced bride; and, this very night, O
my child, is your marriage and thy first visit to her; for the
King, that he might assure me of his word, hath proclaimed to the
world thou art his son-in-law and promised this night to be the
night of going in. But he also said to me, 'Let thy son come
hither forthright that I may become familiar with him and receive
him with all honour and worship.' And now here am I, O my son, at
the end of my labours; happen whatso may happen the rest is upon
thy shoulders." Thereupon Alaeddin arose and kissed his mother's
hand and thanked her, enhancing her kindly service: then he left
her and entering his chamber took the Lamp and rubbed it when, lo
and behold! its Slave appeared and cried, "Adsum! Ask whatso thou
wantest." The young man replied, " 'tis my desire that thou take
me to a Hammam whose like is not in the world; then, fetch me a
dress so costly and kingly that no royalty ever owned its
fellow." The Marid replied, "I hear and I obey," and carried him
to Baths such as were never seen by the Kings of the Chosroes,
for the building was all of alabaster and carnelian and it
contained marvellous limnings which captured the sight; and the
great hall[FN#160] was studded with precious stones. Not a soul
was therein but, when Alaeddin entered, one of the Jann in human
shape washed him and bathed[FN#161] him to the best of his
desire.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin, after having been washed and bathed, left the
Baths and went into the great hall where he found that his old
dress had been removed and replaced by a suit of the most
precious and princely. Then he was served with sherbets and
ambergris'd coffee[FN#162] and, after drinking, he arose and a
party of black slaves came forwards and clad him in the costliest
of clothing, then perfumed and fumigated him. It is known that
Alaeddin was the son of a tailor, a pauper, yet now would none
deem him to be such; nay, all would say, "This be the greatest
that is of the progeny of the Kings: praise be to Him who
changeth and who is not changed!" Presently came the Jinni and
lifting him up bore him to his home and asked, "O my lord, tell
me hast thou aught of need?" He answered, "Yes, 'tis my desire
that thou bring me eight and forty Mamelukes, of whom two dozen
shall forego me and the rest follow me, the whole number with
their war-chargers and clothing and accoutrements; and all upon
them and their steeds must be of naught save of highest worth and
the costliest, such as may not be found in treasuries of the
Kings. Then fetch me a stallion fit for the riding of the
Chosroes and let his furniture, all thereof, be of gold crusted
with the finest gems:[FN#163] fetch me also eight and forty
thousand dinars that each white slave may carry a thousand gold
pieces. 'tis now my intent to fare to the Sultan, so delay thou
not, for that without all these requisites whereof I bespake thee
I may not visit him. Moreover set before me a dozen slave-girls
unique in beauty and dight with the most magnificent dresses,
that they wend with my mother to the royal palace; and let every
handmaid be robed in raiment that befitteth Queen's wearing." The
Slave replied, "To hear is to obey;" and, disappearing for an
eye-twinkling, brought all he was bidden bring and led by hand a
stallion whose rival was not amongst the Arabian Arabs,[FN#164]
and its saddle cloth was of splendid brocade gold-inwrought.
Thereupon, without stay or delay, Alaeddin sent for his mother
and gave her the garments she should wear and committed to her
charge the twelve slave-girls forming her suite to the palace.
Then he sent one of the Mamelukes, whom the Jinni had brought, to
see if the Sultan had left the Serraglio or not. The white slave
went forth lighter than the lightning and returning in like
haste, said, "O my lord, the Sultan awaiteth thee!" Hereat
Alaeddin arose and took horse, his Mamelukes riding a-van and a-
rear of him, and they were such that all must cry, "Laud to the
Lord who created them and clothed them with such beauty and
loveliness." And they scattered gold amongst the crowd in front
of their master who surpassed them all in comeliness and
seemlihead nor needst thou ask concerning the sons of the Kings,-
-praise be to the Bountiful, the Eternal! All this was of the
virtues of the Wonderful Lamp,[FN#165] which, whoso possessed,
him it gifted with fairest favour and finest figure, with wealth
and with wisdom. The folk admired Alaeddin's liberality and
exceeding generosity and all were distraught seeing his charms
and elegance, his gravity and his good manners, they glorified
the Creator for this noble creation, they blessed him each and
every and, albeit they knew him for the son of Such-an-one, the
tailor, yet no man envied him; nay, all owned that he deserved
his great good fortune.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the people were bewildered at Alaeddin and his
liberality and generosity; and all blessed and prayed for him,
high and low, as he rode palace-wards with the Mamelukes before
and behind him, scattering gold upon the heads of the folk. Now
the Sultan had assembled the Lords of the land and, informing
them of the promise he had passed to Alaeddin, touching the
marriage of his daughter, had bidden them await his approach and
then go forth, one and all, to meet him and greet him. Hereupon
the Emirs and Wazirs, the Chamberlains, the Nabobs and the Army-
officers took their stations expecting him at the palace gate.
Alaeddin would fain have dismounted at the outer entrance; but
one of the Nobles, whom the King had deputed for such duty,
approached him and said, "O my lord, 'tis the Royal Command that
thou enter riding thy steed nor dismount except at the Divan-
door."[FN#166] Then they all forewent him in a body and conducted
him to the appointed place where they crowded about him, these to
hold his stirrup and those supporting him on either side whilst
others took him by the hands and helped him dismount; after which
all the Emirs and Nobles preceded him into the Divan and led him
close up to the royal throne. Thereupon the Sultan came down
forthright from his seat of estate and, forbidding him to buss
the carpet, embraced and kissed and seated him to the
right[FN#167] of and beside himself. Alaeddin did whatso is
suitable, in the case of the Kings, of salutation and offering of
blessings, and said, "O our lord the Sultan, indeed the
generosity of thy Highness demanded that thou deign vouchsafe to
me the hand of thy daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur, albeit I
undeserve the greatness of such gift, I being but the humblest of
thy slaves I pray Allah grant thee prosperity and perpetuance;
but in very sooth, O King, my tongue is helpless to thank thee
for the fullness of the favour, passing all measure, which thou
hast bestowed upon me. And I hope of thy Highness that thou wilt
give me a piece of ground fitted for a pavilion which shall besit
thy daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur." The Sultan was struck with
admiration when he saw Alaeddin in his princely suit and looked
upon him and considered his beauty and loveliness, and noted the
Mamelukes standing to serve him in their comeliness and
seemlihead; and still his marvel grew when the mother of Alaeddin
approached him in costly raiment and sumptuous, clad as though
she were a Queen, and when he gazed upon the twelve handmaids
standing before her with crossed arms and with all worship and
reverence doing her service. He also considered the eloquence of
Alaeddin and his delicacy of speech and he was astounded thereat,
he and all his who were present at the levee. Thereupon fire was
kindled in the Grand Wazir's heart for envy of Alaeddin until he
was like to die: and it was worse when the Sultan, after hearing
the youth's succession of prayers and seeing his high dignity of
demeanour, respectful withal, and his eloquence and elegance of
language, clasped him to his bosom and kissed him and cried,
"Alas, O my son, that I have not enjoyed thy converse before this
day!" And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan  beheld Alaeddin after such fashion, he
rejoiced in him with mighty great joy and straightway bade the
music[FN#168] and the bands strike up; then he arose and, taking
the youth led him into the palace where supper had been prepared
and the Eunuchs at once laid the tables. So the Sovran sat down
and seated his son-in-law on his right side and the Wazirs and
high officials and Lords of the land took places each according
to his degree, whereupon the bands played and a mighty fine
marriage-feast was dispread in the palace. The King now applied
himself to making friendship with Alaeddin and conversed with the
youth, who answered him with all courtesy and eloquence, as
though he had been bred in the palaces of the kings or he had
lived with them his daily life. And the more the talk was
prolonged between them, the more did the Sultan's pleasure and
delight increase, hearing his son-in-law's readiness of reply and
his sweet flow of language. But after they had eaten and drunken
and the trays were removed, the King bade summon the Kazis and
witnesses who presently attended and knitted the knot and wrote
out the contract-writ between Alaeddin and the Lady Badr al-
Budur. And presently the bridegroom arose and would have fared
forth, when his father in law withheld him and asked, "Whither
away, O my child? The bride-fetes have begun and the marriage is
made and the tie is tied and the writ is written." He replied, "O
my lord the King, 'tis my desire to edify, for the Lady Badr al-
Budur, a pavilion befitting her station and high degree, nor can
I visit her before so doing. But, Inshallah! the building shall
be finished within the shortest time, by the utmost endeavor of
thy slave and by the kindly regard of thy Highness, and, although
I do (yes indeed!) long to enjoy the society of the Lady Badr al-
Budur, yet 'tis incumbent on me first to serve her and it
becometh me to set about the work forthright." "Look around thee,
O my son," replied the Sultan, "for what ground thou deemest
suitable to thy design and do thou take all things into thy
hands; but I deem the best for thee will be yonder broad plain
facing my palace; and, if it please the build thy pavilion
thereupon." "And this," answered Alaeddin "is the sum of my
wishes that I may be nearhand to thy Highness. So saying he
farewelled the King and took horse, with his Mamelukes riding
before him and behind him, and all the world blessed him and
cried, "By Allah he is deserving," until such time as he reached
his home. Then he alighted from his stallion and repairing to his
chamber, rubbed the Lamp and be hold, the Slave stood before him
and said, "Ask, O my lord whatso thou wantest;" and Alaeddin
rejoined, "I require thee of a service grave and important which
thou must do for me, and 'tis that thou build me with all urgency
a pavilion fronting the palace of the Sultan; and it must be a
marvel for it shall be provided with every requisite, such as
royal furniture and so forth." The Slave replied, "To hear is to
obey."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fourth  Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Slave evanished and, before the next dawn brake,
returned to Alaeddin and said, "O my lord, the pavilion is
finished to the fullest of thy fancy; and, if thou wouldst
inspect it, arise forthright and fare with me." Accordingly, he
rose up and the Slave carried him in the space of an eye-glance
to the pavilion which, when Alaeddin looked upon it struck him
with surprise at such building, all its stones being of jasper
and alabaster, Sumaki[FN#169]  marble and mosaic-work. Then the
Slave led him into the treasury which was full of all manner of
gold and silver and costly gems, not to be counted or computed,
priced or estimated. Thence to another place, where Alaeddin saw
all requisites for the tables, plates and dishes, spoons and
ladles, basins and covers, cups and tasses, the whole of precious
metal: thence to the kitchen, where they found the kitcheners
provided with their needs and cooking batteries, likewise golden
and silvern; thence to a warehouse piled up with chests full-
packed of royal raiment, stuffs that captured the reason, such as
gold-wrought brocades from India and China and kimcobs[FN#170] or
orfrayed cloths; thence to many apartments replete with
appointments which beggar description; thence to the stables
containing coursers whose like was not to be met with amongst the
kings of the universe; and, lastly, they went to the harness-
rooms all hung with housings, costly saddles and other furniture,
everywhere studded with pearls and precious stones. And all this
was the work of one night. Alaeddin was wonder-struck and
astounded by that magnificent display of wealth which not even
the mightiest monarch on earth could produce; and more so to see
his pavilion fully provided with eunuchs and handmaids whose
beauty would seduce a saint. Yet the prime marvel of the pavilion
was an upper kiosque or belvedere of four-and-twenty windows all
made of emeralds and rubies and other gems; [FN#171]  and one
window remained unfinished at the requirement of Alaeddin that
the Sultan might prove him impotent to complete it. When the
youth had inspected the whole edifice, he was pleased and
gladdened exceedingly: then, turning to the Slave he said, "I
require of thee still one thing which is yet wanting and whereof
I had forgotten to tell thee." "Ask, O my lord, thy want," Quoth
the Servitor; and Quoth the other, "demand of thee a carpet of
the primest brocade all gold-inwrought which, when unrolled and
outstretched, shall extend hence to the Sultan's palace in order
that the Lady Badr al-Budur may, when coming hither, pace upon
it[FN#172]  and not tread common earth." The Slave departed for a
short while and said on his return, "O my lord verily that which
thou demandest is here." Then he took him and showed him a carpet
which wildered the wits, and it extended from palace to pavilion;
and after this the Servitor bore off Alaeddin and set him down in
his own home. And Shahrazed was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine; an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the Age,
that the Slave, after displaying the Carpet to Alaeddin, bore him
home. Now day was brightening so the Sultan rose from his sleep
and throwing open the casement looked out[FN#173] and espied,
opposite his palace, a palatial pavilion ready edified. Thereupon
he fell to rubbing his eyes and opening them their widest and
considering the scene, and he soon was certified that the new
edifice was mighty fine and grand enough to be-wilder the wits.
Moreover, with amazement as great he saw the carpet dispread
between palace and pavilion: like their lord also the royal door-
keepers and the household, one and all, were dazed and amazed at
the spectacle. Meanwhile[FN#174]  the Wazir came in and, as he
entered, espied the newly builded pavilion and the carpet,
whereat he also wondered; and, when he went in to the Sultan the
twain fell to talking on this marvellous matter with great
surprise at a sight which distracted the gazer and attracted the
heart. They said finally, "In very truth, of this pavilion we
deem that none of the royalties could build its fellow;" and the
King, turning to the Minister, asked him, "Hast thou seen now
that Alaeddin is worthy to be the husband of the Princess my
daughter? Hast thou looked upon and considered this right royal
building, this magnificence of opulence, which thought of man can
not contain?" But the Wazir in his envy of Alaeddin replied, 'O
King of the Age, indeed this foundation and this building and
this opulence may not be save by means of magic nor can any man
in the world, be he the richest in good or the greatest in
governance, avail to found and finish in a single night such
edifice as this." The Sultan rejoined, "I am surprised to see in
thee how thou dost continually harp on evil opinion of Alaeddin;
but I hold that 'tis caused by thine envy and jealousy. Thou west
present when I gave him the ground at his own prayer for a place
whereon he might build a pavilion wherein to lodge my daughter,
and I myself favoured him with a site for the same and that too
before thy very face. But however that be, shall one who could
send me as dower for the Princess such store of such stones
whereof the kings never obtained even a few, shall he, I say, be
unable to edify an edifice like this?"--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Wazir heard the Sultan's words, he knew that
his lord loved Alaeddin exceedingly; so his envy and malice
increased; only, as he could do nothing against the youth, he sat
silent and impotent to return a reply. But Alaeddin seeing that
it was broad day, and the appointed time had come for his
repairing to the palace (where his wedding was being celebrated
and the Emirs and Wazirs and Grandees were gathered together
about the Sultan to be present at the ceremony), arose and rubbed
the Lamp, and when its Slave appeared and said, O my lord, ask
whatso thou wantest, for I stand before thee and at thy service,"
said he, "I mean forthright to seek the palace, this day being my
wedding-festival and I want thee to supply me with ten thousand
dinars." The Slave evanished for an eye-twinkling and returned
bringing the moneys, when Alaeddin took horse with his Mamelukes
a-van and a-rear and passed on his way, scattering as he went
gold pieces upon the lieges until all were fondly affected
towards him and his dignity was enhanced. But when he drew near
the palace, and the Emirs and Aghas and Army-officers who were
standing to await him noted his approach, they hastened
straightway to the King and gave him the tidings thereof;
whereupon the Sultan rose and met his son-in-law and after
embracing and kissing him, led him still holding his hand into
his own apartment where he sat down and seated him by his right
side. The city was all decorated and music rang through the
palace and the singers sang until the King bade bring the noon-
meal, when the eunuchs and Mamelukes hastened to spread the
tables and trays which are such as are served to the kings. Then
the Sultan and Alaeddin and the Lords of the land and the
Grandees of the realm took their seats and ate and drank until
they were satisfied. And it was a mighty fine wedding in city and
palace and the high nobles all rejoiced therein and the commons
of the kingdom were equally gladdened, while the Governors of
provinces and Nabobs of districts flocked from far regions to
witness Alaeddin's marriage and its processions and festivities.
The Sultan also marvelled in his mind to look at Alaeddin's
mother[FN#175] and recall to mind how she was wont to visit him
in pauper plight, while her son could command all this opulence
and magnificence. And when the spectators, who crowded the royal
palace to enjoy the wedding-feasts, looked upon Alaeddin's
pavilion and the beauties of the building, they were seized with
an immense surprise that so vast an edifice as this could be
reared on high during a single night; and they blessed the youth
and cried, "Allah gladden him! By Allah, he deserveth all this!
Allah bless his days!"--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her per misted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when dinner was done, Alaeddin rose and, farewelling
the Sultan, took horse with his Mamelukes and rode to his own
pavilion that he might prepare to receive therein his bride, the
Lady Badr al-Budur. And as he passed, all the folk shouted their
good wishes with one voice and their words were, "Allah gladden
thee! Allah increase thy glory. Allah grant thee length of life!"
while immense crowds of people gathered to swell the marriage
procession and they conducted him to his new home, he showering
gold upon them during the whole time. When he reached his
pavilion, he dismounted and walked in and sat him down on the
divan, whilst his Mamelukes stood before him with arms afolded;
also after a short delay they brought him sherbets and, when
these were drunk, he ordered his white slaves and handmaids and
eunuchs and all who were in the pavilion to make ready for
meeting the Lady Badr al-Budur. Moreover, as soon as mid-
afternoon came and the air had cooled and the great heat of the
sun was abated, the Sultan bade his Army-officers and Emirs and
Wazirs go down into the Maydan plain[FN#176] whither he likewise
rode. And Alaeddin also took horse with his Mamelukes, he
mounting a stallion whose like was not among the steeds of the
Arab al-Arba,[FN#177] and he showed his horsemanship in the
hippodrome and so played with the Jarid[FN#178]  that none could
withstand him, while his bride sat gazing upon him from the
latticed balcony of her bower and, seeing in him such beauty and
cavalarice, she fell headlong in love of him and was like to fly
for joy. And after they had ringed their horses on the Maydan and
each had displayed whatso he could of horsemanship, Alaeddin
proving himself the best man of all, they rode in a body to the
Sultan's palace and the youth also returned to his own pavilion.
But when it was evening, the Wazirs and Nobles took the
bridegroom and, falling in, escorted him to the royal Hammam
(known as the Sultani), when he was bathed and perfumed. As soon
as he came out he donned a dress more magnificent than the former
and took horse with the Emirs and the soldier-officers riding
before him and forming a grand cortege, wherein four of the
Wazirs bore naked swords round about him.[FN#179] All the
citizens and the strangers and the troops marched before him in
ordered throng carrying wax-candles and kettle drums and pipes
and other instruments of mirth and merriment, until they
conducted him to his pavilion. Here he alighted and walking in
took his seat and seated the Wazirs and Emirs who had escorted
him, and the Mamelukes brought sherbets and sugared drinks, which
they also passed to the people who had followed in his train. It
was a world of folk whose tale might not be told; withal Alaeddin
bade his Mamelukes stand without the pavilion-doors and shower
gold upon the crowd.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan returned from the Maydan-plain to his
palace he ordered the household, men as well as women,
straightway to form a cavalcade for his daughter, with all
ceremony, and bear her to her bridegroom's pavilion. So the
nobles and soldier-officers, who had followed and escorted the
bridegroom, at once mounted, and the handmaids and eunuchs went
forth with wax-candles and made a mighty fine procession for the
Lady Badr al-Budur and they paced on preceding her till they
entered the pavilion of Alaeddin whose mother walked beside the
bride. In front of the Princess also fared the wives of the
Wazirs and Emirs, Grandees and Notables, and in attendance on her
were the eight and forty slave-girls presented to her aforetime
by her bridegroom, each hending in hand a huge cierge scented
with camphor and ambergris and set in a candlestick of gem-
studded gold. And reaching Alaeddin's pavilion they led her to
her bower in the upper storey and changed her robes and enthroned
her; then, as soon as the displaying was ended, they accompanied
her to Alaeddin's apartments and presently he paid her the first
visit. Now his mother was with the bride and, when the bridegroom
came up and did off her veil, the ancient dame fell to
considering the beauty of the Princess and her loveliness; and
she looked around at the pavilion which was all litten up by gold
and gems besides the manifold candelabra of precious metals
encrusted with emeralds and jacinths; so she said in her mind,
"Once upon a time I thought the Sultan's palace mighty fine, but
this pavilion is a thing apart; nor do I deem that any of the
greatest Kings of Chosroes attained in his day to aught like
thereof; also am I certified that all the world could not build
anything evening it." Nor less did the lady Badr al-Budur fall to
gazing at the pavilion and marvelling for its magnificence. Then
the tables were spread and they all ate and drank and were
gladdened; after which fourscore damsels came before them each
holding in hand an instrument of mirth and merriment; then they
deftly moved their finger tips and touched the strings smiting
them into song, most musical, most melancholy, till they rent the
hearts of the hearers. Hereat the Princess increased in marvel
and Quoth she to herself, "In all my life ne'er heard I songs
like these,''[FN#180] till she forsook food, the better to
listen. And at last Alaeddin poured out for her wine and passed
it to her with his own hand; so great joy and jubilee went round
amongst them and it was a notable night, such an one as Iskander,
Lord of the Two Horns,[FN#181] had never spent in his time. When
they had finished eating and drinking and the tables were removed
from before them, Alaeddin arose and went in to his
bride.[FN#182] As soon as morning morrowed he left his bed and
the treasurer brought him a costly suit and a mighty fine, of the
most sumptuous robes worn by the kings. Then, after drinking
coffee devoured with ambergris, he ordered the horses be saddled
and, mounting with his Mamelukes before and behind him, rode to
the Sultan's palace and on his entering its court the eunuchs
went in and reported his coming to their lord.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
'With love and good will."---It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan heard of Alaeddin's approach, he rose
up forthright to receive him and embraced and kissed him as
though he were his own son: then, seating him on his right, he
blessed and prayed for him, as did the Wazirs and Emirs, the
Lords of the land and the Grandees of the realm. Presently, the
King commanded bring the morning-meal which the attendants served
up and all broke their fast together, and when they had eaten and
drunken their sufficiency and the tables were removed by the
eunuchs, Alaeddin turned to the Sultan and said, "O my lord,
would thy Highness deign honour me this day at dinner, in the
house of the Lady Badr al-Budur thy beloved daughter, and come
accompanied by all thy Ministers and Grandees of the reign?" The
King replied (and he was delighted with his son-in-law), "Thou
art surpassing in liberality, O my son!" Then he gave orders to
all invited and rode forth with them (Alaeddin also riding beside
him) till they reached the pavilion and as he entered it and
considered its construction, its architecture and its stonery,
all jasper and carnelian, his sight was dazed and his wits were
amazed at such grandeur and magnificence of opulence. Then
turning to the Minister he thus addressed him, "What sayest thou?
Tell me hast thou seen in all thy time aught like this amongst
the mightiest of earth's monarchs for the abundance of gold and
gems we are now beholding?" The Grand Wazir replied, "O my lord
the King, this be a feat which cannot be accomplished by might of
monarch amongst Adam's sons; [FN#183] nor could the collected
peoples of the universal world build a palace like unto this;
nay, even builders could not be found to make aught resembling
it, save (as I said to thy Highness) by force of sorcery." These
words certified the King that his Minister spake not except in
envy end jealousy of Alaeddin, and would stablish in the royal
mind that all this splendour was not made of man but by means of
magic and with the aid of the Black Art. So Quoth he to him,
"Suffice thee so much, O Wazir: thou hast none other word to
speak and well I know what cause urgeth thee to say this say."
Then Alaeddin preceded the Sultan till he conducted him to the
upper Kiosque where he saw its skylights, windows and latticed
casements and jalousies wholly made of emeralds and rubies and
other costly gems; whereat his mind was perplexed and his wits
were bewildered and his thoughts were distraught. Presently he
took to strolling round the Kiosque and solacing himself with
these sights which captured the vision, till he chanced to cast a
glance at the window which Alaeddin by design had left unwrought
and not finished like the rest; and, when he noted its lack of
completion, he cried, "Woe and well away for thee, O window,
because of thine imperfection;"[FN#184] and, turning to his
Minister he asked, "Knowest thou the reason of leaving incomplete
this window and its framework?"--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Seventieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Wazir said to the Sultan, "O my lord, I conceive
that the want of finish in this window resulteth from thy
Highness having pushed on Alaeddin's marriage and he lacked the
leisure to complete it." Now at that time, Alaeddin had gone in
to his bride, the Lady Badr al-Budur, to inform her of her
father's presence; and, when he returned, the King asked him, "O
my son what is the reason why the window of this Kiosque was not
made perfect?" "O King of the Age, seeing the suddenness of my
wedding," answered he, "I failed to find artists for finishing
it." Quoth the Sultan, "I have a mind to complete it myself;" and
Quoth Alaeddin, "Allah perpetuate thy glory, O thou the King; so
shall thy memory endure in thy daughter's pavilion." The Sultan
forthright bade summon jewellers and goldsmiths and ordered them
be supplied from the treasury with all their needs of gold and
gems and noble ores; and, when they were gathered together he
commanded them to complete the work still wanting in the Kiosque-
window. Meanwhile the Princess came forth to meet her sire the
Sultan who noticed, as she drew near, her smiling face; so he
embraced her and kissed her, then led her to the pavilion and all
entered in a body. Now this was the time of the noon day meal and
one table had been spread for the Sovran, his daughter and his
son-in-law and a second for the Wazirs, the Lords of the land,
the Grandees of the realm, the Chief Officers of the host, the
Chamberlains and the Nabobs. The King took seat between the
Princess and her husband; and, when he put forth his hand to the
food and tasted it, he was struck with surprise by the flavour of
the dishes and their savoury and sumptuous cooking. Moreover,
there stood before him the fourscore damsels each and every
saying to the full moon, "Rise that I may seat myself in thy
stead!"[FN#185] All held instruments of mirth and merriment and
they tuned the same and deftly moved their finger-tips and smote
the strings into song most musical, most melodious, which
expanded the mourner's heart. Hereby the Sultan was gladdened and
time was good to him and for high enjoyment he exclaimed, "In
very sooth the thing is beyond the compass of King and Kaysar."
Then they fell to eating and drinking; and the cup went round
until they had drunken enough, when sweetmeats and fruits of
sorts and other such edibles were served, the dessert being laid
out in a different salon whither they removed and enjoyed of
these pleasures their sufficiency. Presently the Sultan arose
that he might see if the produce of his jewellers and goldsmiths
favoured that of the pavilion; so he went upstairs to them and
inspected their work and how they had wrought; but he noted a
mighty great difference and his men were far from being able to
make anything like the rest of Alaeddin's pavilion.