 And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that after the King had inspected the work of his jewellers
and goldsmiths, they informed him how all the gems stored in the
Lesser Treasury had been brought to them and used by them but
that the whole had proved insufficient; wherefor he bade open the
Greater Treasury and gave the workmen all they wanted of him.
Moreover he allowed them, an it sufficed not, to take the jewels
wherewith Alaeddin had gifted him. They carried off the whole and
pushed on their labours but they found the gems fail them, albeit
had they not yet finished half the part wanting to the Kiosque-
window. Herewith the King commended them to seize all the
precious stones owned by the Wazirs and Grandees of the realm;
but, although they did his bidding, the supply still fell short
of their requirements. Next morning Alaeddin arose to look at the
jeweller's work and remarked that they had not finished a moiety
of what was wanting to the Kiosque-window: so he at once ordered
them to undo all they had done and restore the jewels to their
owners. Accordingly, they pulled out the precious stones and sent
the Sultan's to the Sultan and the Wazirs' to the Wazirs. Then
the jewellers went to the King and told him of what Alaeddin had
bidden; so he asked them, "What said he to you, and what was his
reason and wherefore was he not content that the window be
finished and why did he undo the work ye wrought?" They answered,
"O our lord, we know not at all, but he bade us deface whatso we
had done." Hereupon the Sultan at once called for his horse, and
mounting, took the way pavilion-wards, when Alaeddin, after
dismissing the goldsmiths and jewellers had retired into his
closet and had rubbed the Lamp. Hereat straightway its Servitor
appeared to him and said, "Ask whatso thou wantest: thy Slave is
between thy hands;" and said Alaeddin, " 'tis my desire that thou
finish the window which was left unfinished." The Marid replied,
"On my head be it and also upon mine eyes!" then he vanished and
after a little while returned saying, "O my lord, verily that
thou commandedst me do is completed." So Alaeddin went upstairs
to the Kiosque and found the whole window in wholly finished
state; and, whilst he was still considering it, behold, a
castrato came in to him and said, "O my lord, the Sultan hath
ridden forth to visit thee and is passing through the pavilion-
gate." So Alaeddin at once went down and received his father-in-
law. And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."---It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Sultan, on sighting his son-in-law, cried to him,
"Wherefore, O my child, hast thou wrought on this wise and
sufferedst not the jewellers to complete the Kiosque-window
leaving in the pavilion an unfinished place?" Alaeddin replied "O
King of the Age, I left it not imperfect save for a design of
mine own; nor was I incapable of perfecting it nor could I
purpose that thy Highness should honour me with visiting a
pavilion wherein was aught of deficiency. And, that thou mayest
know I am not unable to make it perfect, let thy Highness deign
walk upstairs with me and see if anything remain to be done
therewith or not." So the Sultan went up with him and, entering
the Kiosque, fell to looking right and left, but he saw no
default at all in any of the windows; nay, he noted that all were
perfect. So he marvelled at the sight and embraced Alaeddin and
kissed him, saying, "O my son, what be this singular feat? Thou
canst work in a single night what in months the jewellers could
not do. By Allah, I deem thou hast nor brother nor rival in this
world." Quoth Alaeddin, "Allah prolong thy life and preserve thee
to perpetuity! thy slave deserveth not this encomium;" and Quoth
the King, "By Allah, O my child, thou meritest all praise for a
feat whereof all the artists of the world were incapable." Then
the Sultan came clown and entered the apartments of his daughter
the Lady Badr al-Budur, to take rest beside her, and he saw her
joyous exceedingly at the glory and grandeur wherein she was;
then, after reposing awhile he returned to his palace. Now
Alaeddin was wont every day to thread the city-streets with his
Mamelukes riding a-van and a-rear of him showering rightwards and
leftwards gold upon the folk; and all the world, stranger and
neighbour, far and near, were fulfilled of his love for the
excess of his liberality and generosity. Moreover he increased
the pensions of the poor Religious and the paupers and he would
distribute alms to them with his own hand; by which good deed, he
won high renown throughout the realm and most of the Lords of the
land and Emirs would eat at his table; and men swore not at all
save by his precious life. Nor did he leave faring to the chase
and the Maydan-plain and the riding of horses and playing at
javelin-play[FN#186] in presence of the Sultan; and, whenever the
Lady Badr al-Budur beheld him disporting himself on the backs of
steeds, she loved him much the more, and thought to herself that
Allah had wrought her abundant good by causing to happen whatso
happened with the son of the Wazir and by preserving her
virginity intact for her true bridegroom, Alaeddin.--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales." whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin won for himself day by day a fairer fame and a
rarer report, while affection for him increased in the hearts of
all the lieges and he waxed greater in the eyes of men. Moreover
it chanced that in those days certain enemies took horse and
attacked the Sultan, who armed and accoutred an army to repel
them and made Alaeddin commander thereof. So he marched with his
men nor ceased marching until he drew near the foe whose forces
were exceeding many; and, presently, when the action began he
bared his brand and charged home upon the enemy. Then battle and
slaughter befel and violent was the hurry-burly, but at last
Alaeddin broke the hostile host and put all to flight, slaying
the best part of them and pillaging their coin and cattle,
property and possessions; and he despoiled them of spoils that
could not be counted nor computed. Then he returned victorious
after a noble victory and entered the capital which had decorated
herself in his honour, of her delight in him; and the Sultan went
forth to meet him and giving him joy embraced him and kissed him;
and throughout the kingdom was held high festival with great joy
and gladness. Presently, the Sovran and his son-in-law repaired
to the pavilion where they were met by the Princess Badr al-Budur
who rejoiced in her husband and, after kissing him between the
eyes, led him to her apartments. After a time the Sultan also
came and they sat down while the slave-girls brought them
sherbets and confections which they ate and drank. Then the
Sultan commanded that the whole kingdom be decorated for the
triumph of his son-in-law and his victory over the invader; and
the subjects and soldiery and all the people knew only Allah in
heaven and Alaeddin on earth; for that their love, won by his
liberality, was increased by his noble horsemanship and his
successful battling for the country and putting to flight the
foe. Such then was the high fortune of Alaeddin; but as regards
the Maghrabi, the Magician, after returning to his native
country, he passed all this space of time in bewailing what he
had borne of toil and travail to win the Lamp and mostly that his
trouble had gone vain and that the morsel when almost touching
his lips had flown from his grasp. He pondered all this and
mourned and reviled Alaeddin for the excess of his rage against
him and at times he would exclaim, "For this bastard's death
underground I am well satisfied and hope only that some time or
other I may obtain the Lamp, seeing how 'tis yet safe." Now one
day of the days he struck a table of sand and dotted down the
figures and carefully considered their consequence; then he
transferred them to paper that he might study them and make sure
of Alaeddin's destruction and the safety of the Lamp preserved
beneath the earth. Presently, he firmly stablished the sequence
of the figures, mothers as well as daughters,[FN#187]  but still
he saw not the Lamp. Thereupon rage overrode him and he made
another trial to be assured of Alaeddin's death; but he saw him
not in the Enchanted Treasure. Hereat his wrath still grew, and
it waxed greater when he ascertained that the youth had issued
from underground and was now upon earth's surface alive and
alert: furthermore, that he had become owner of the Lamp, for
which he had himself endured such toil and travail and troubles
as man may not bear save for so great an object. Accordingly
Quoth he to himself, "I have suffered sore pains and penalties
which none else could have endured for the Lamp's sake in order
that other than I may carry it off; and this Accursed hath taken
it without difficulty. And who knoweth an he wot the virtues of
the Lamp, than whose owner none in the world should be
wealthier?" And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, the Magician, having considered and
ascertained that Alaeddin had escaped from the souterrain and had
gotten the boon of the Lamp, said to himself, "There is no help
but that I work for his destruction." He then struck another
geomantic table and examining the figures saw that the lad had
won for himself unmeasurable riches and had wedded the daughter
of his King; so of his envy and jealousy he was fired with the
flame of wrath; and, rising without let or stay, he equipped
himself and set forth for China-land, where he arrived in due
season. Now when he had reached the King's capital wherein was
Alaeddin, he alighted at one of the Khans; and, when he had
rested from the weariness of wayfare, he donned his dress and
went down to wander about the streets, where he never passed a
group without hearing them prate about the pavilion and its
grandeur and vaunt the beauty of Alaeddin and his lonesomeness,
his liberality and generosity, his fine manners and his good
morals. Presently he entered an establishment wherein men were
drinking a certain warm beverage;[FN#188] and, going up to one of
those who were loud in their lauds, he said to him, "O fair
youth, who may be the man ye describe and commend?" "Apparently
thou art a foreigner, O man," answered the other, "and thou
comest from a far country; but, even this granted, how happeneth
it thou hast not heard of the Emir Alaeddin whose renown, I
fancy, hath filled the universe and whose pavilion, known by
report to far and near, is one of the Wonders of the World? How,
then, never came to thine ears aught of this or the name of
Alaeddin (whose glory and enjoyment our Lord increase!) and his
fame?" The Moorman replied, "The sum of my wishes is to look upon
this pavilion and, if thou wouldest do me a favour, prithee guide
me thereunto, for I am a foreigner." The man rejoined, "To hear
is to obey;" and, foregoing him pointed out Alaeddin's pavilion,
whereupon the Maroccan fell to considering it and at once
understood that it was the work of the Lamp. So he cried, "Ah!
Ah! needs must I dig a pit for this Accursed, this son of a snip,
who could not earn for himself even an evening meal: and, if the
Fates abet me, I will assuredly destroy his life and send his
mother back to spinning at her wheel, e'en as she was wont
erewhiles to do." So saying, he returned to his caravanserai in a
sore state of grief and melancholy and regret bred by his envy
and hate of Alaeddin.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the, Five Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Maghrabi, the Magician, reached his
caravanserai, he took his astrological gear[FN#189] and geomantic
table to discover where might be the Lamp; and he found that it
was in the pavilion and not upon Alaeddin's person. So he
rejoiced thereat with joy exceeding and exclaimed, "Now indeed
'twill be an easy task to take the life of this Accursed and I
see my way to getting the Lamp." Then he went to a coppersmith
and said to him, "Do thou make me a set of lamps and take from me
their full price and more; only I would have thee hasten to
finish them." Replied the smith, "Hearing and obeying," and fell
aworking to keep his word; and when they were ready the Moorman
paid him what price he required; then taking them he carried them
to the Khan and set them in a basket. Presently he began
wandering about the highways and market-streets of the capital
crying aloud, "Ho! who will exchange old lamps for new
lamps?''[FN#190] But when the folk heard him cry on this wise,
they derided him and said, "Doubtless this man is Jinn-mad, for
that he goeth about offering new for old;" and a world followed
him and the children of the quarter caught him up from place to
place, laughing at him the while, nor did he forbid them or care
for their maltreatment. And he ceased not strolling about the
streets till he came under Alaeddin's pavilion,[FN#191] where he
shouted with his loudest voice and the boys screamed at him, "A
madman! A madman!" Now Destiny had decreed that the Lady Badr al-
Budur be sitting in her Kiosque whence she heard one crying like
a crier, and the children bawling at him; only she understood not
what was going on; so she gave orders to one of her slave-girls
saying,[FN#192] "Go thou and see who 'tis that crieth and what be
his cry?" The girl fared forth and looked on when she beheld a
man crying, "Ho! who will exchange old lamps for new lamps?" and
the little ones pursuing and laughing at him; and as loudly
laughed the Princess when this strange case was told to her. Now
Alaeddin had carelessly left the Lamp in his pavilion without
hiding it and locking it up in his strong box;[FN#193] and one of
the slave-girls who had seen it said, "O my lady, I think to have
noticed, in the apartment of my lord Alaeddin, an old lamp: so
let us give it in change for a new lamp to this man, and see if
his cry be truth or lie."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
'With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that hereupon the Princess said to the slave-girl, 'Bring
the old lamp which thou saidst to have seen in thy lord's
apartment." Now the Lady Badr al-Budur knew naught of the Lamp
and of the specialties thereof which had raised Alaeddin her
spouse to such high degree and grandeur; and her only end and aim
was to understand by experiment the mind of a man who would give
in exchange the new for the old. So the handmaid fared forth and
went up to Alaeddin's apartment and returned with the Lamp to her
lady who, like all the others, knew nothing of the Maghrabi's
cunning tricks and his crafty device. Then the Princess bade an
Agha of the eunuchry go down and barter the old Lamp for a new
lamp. So he obeyed her bidding and, after taking a new lamp from
the man, he returned and laid it before his lady who looking at
it and seeing that it was brand-new, fell to laughing at the
Moorman's wits. But the Maroccan, when he held the article in
hand and recognised it for the Lamp of the Enchanted
Treasury,[FN#194] at once placed it in his breast-pocket and left
all the other lamps to the folk who were bartering of him. Then
he went forth running till he was clear of the city, when he
walked leisurely over the level grounds and he took patience
until night fell on him in desert ground where was none other but
himself. There he brought out the Lamp when suddenly appeared to
him the Marid who said, "Adsum! thy slave between thy hands is
come: ask of me whatso thou wantest." " 'tis my desire," the
Moorman replied, "that thou upraise from its present place
Alaeddin's pavilion with its inmates and all that be therein, not
forgetting myself, and set it down upon my own land, Africa. Thou
knowest my town and I want the building placed in the gardens
hard by it." The Marid-slave replied, "Hearkening and obedience:
close thine eyes and open thine eyes whenas thou shalt find
thyself together with the pavilion in thine own country." This
was done; and, in an eye-twinkling, the Maroccan and the pavilion
with all therein were transported to the African land. Such then
was the work of the Maghrabi, the Magician; but now let us return
to the Sultan and his son-in-law. It was the custom of the King,
because of his attachment to and his affection for his daughter,
every morning when he had shaken off sleep, to open the latticed
casement and look out therefrom that he might catch sight of her
abode. So that day he arose and did as he was wont.--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan drew near the latticed casement of his
palace and looked out at Alaeddin's pavilion he saw naught; nay,
the site was smooth as a well-trodden highway and like unto what
it had been aforetime; and he could find nor edifice nor offices.
So astonishment clothed him as with a garment, and his wits were
wildered and he began to rub his eyes, lest they be dimmed or
darkened, and to gaze intently; but at last he was certified that
no trace of the pavilion remained nor sign of its being; nor wist
he the why and the wherefore of its disappearance. So his
surprise increased and he smote hand upon hand and the tears
trickled down his cheeks over his beard, for that he knew not
what had become of his daughter. Then he sent out officials
forthright and summoned the Grand Wazir who at once attended;
and, seeing him in this piteous plight said, 'Pardon, O King of
the Age, may Allah avert from thee every ill! Wherefore art thou
in such sorrow?" Exclaimed the Sovran, "Methinketh thou wottest
not my case?" and Quoth the Minister, "On no wise. O our lord: by
Allah, I know of it nothing  at all." "Then," resumed the Sultan,
" 'tis manifest thou hast not looked this day in the direction of
Alaeddin's pavilion." "True, O my lord," Quoth the Wazir, "it
must still be locked and fast shut;" and Quoth the King,
"Forasmuch as thou hast no inkling of aught,[FN#195] arise and
look out at the window and see Alaeddin's pavilion whereof thou
sayest 'tis locked and fast shut." The Minister obeyed his
bidding but could not see anything, or pavilion or other place;
so with mind and thoughts sore perplexed he returned to his liege
lord who asked him, "Hast now learned the reason of my distress
and noted yon locked-up palace and fast shut?" Answered the
Wazir, "O King of the Age erewhile I represented to thy Highness
that this pavilion and these matters be all magical." Hereat the
Sultan, fired with wrath, cried, "Where be Alaeddin?" and the
Minister replied, "He hath gone a-hunting," when the King
commanded without stay or delay sundry of his Aghas and Army-
officers to go and bring to him his son-in-law chained and with
pinioned elbows. So they fared forth until they found Alaeddin
when they said to him, "O our lord Alaeddin, excuse us nor be
thou wroth with us; for the King hath commanded that we carry
thee before him pinioned and fettered, and we hope pardon from
thee because we are under the royal orders which we cannot
gainsay." Alaeddin, hearing these words, was seized with surprise
and not knowing the reason of this remained tongue-tied for a
time, after which he turned to them and asked, "O assembly, have
you naught of knowledge concerning the motive of the royal
mandate? Well I wot my soul to be innocent and that I never
sinned against king or against kingdom." "O our lord," answered
they, "we have no inkling whatever." So Alaeddin alighted from
his horse and said to them, "Do ye whatso the Sultan bade you do,
for that the King's command is upon the head and the
eyes."[FN#196]--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Aghas, having bound Alaeddin in bonds and pinioned
his elbows behind his back, haled him in chains and carried him
into the city. But when the lieges saw him pinioned and ironed,
they understood that the Sultan purposed to strike off his head;
and, forasmuch as he was loved of them exceedingly, all gathered
together and seized their weapons; then, swarming out of their
houses, followed the soldiery to see what was to do. And when the
troops arrived with Alaeddin at the palace, they went in and
informed the Sultan of this, whereat he forthright commanded the
Sworder to cut off the head of his son-in-law. Now as soon as the
subjects were aware of this order, they barricaded the gates and
closed the doors of the palace and sent a message to the King
saying, "At this very moment we will level thine abode over the
heads of all it containeth and over thine own,[FN#197] if the
least hurt or harm befal Alaeddin." So the Wazir went in and
reported to the Sultan, "O King of the Age, thy commandment is
about to seal the roll of our lives; and 'twere more suitable
that thou pardon thy son-in-law lest there chance to us a sore
mischance; for that the lieges do love him far more than they
love us." Now the Sworder had already dispread the carpet of
blood and, having seated Alaeddin thereon, had bandaged his eyes;
moreover he had walked round him several times awaiting the last
orders of his lord, when the King looked out of the window and
saw his subjects, who had suddenly attacked him, swarming up the
walls intending to tear them down. So forthright he bade the
Sworder stay his hand from Alaeddin and commanded the crier fare
forth to the crowd and cry aloud that he had pardoned his son-in-
law and received him back into favour. But when Alaeddin found
himself free and saw the Sultan seated on his throne, he went up
to him and said, "O my lord, inasmuch as thy Highness hath
favoured me throughout my life, so of thy grace now deign let me
know the how and the wherein I have sinned against thee?" "O
traitor, cried the King, "unto this present I knew not any sin of
thine;" then, turning to the Wazir he said, "Take him and make
him look out at the window and after let him tell us where be his
pavilion." And when the royal order was obeyed Alaeddin saw the
place level as a well trodden road, even as it had been ere the
base of the building was laid, nor was there the faintest trace
of edifice. Hereat he was astonished and perplexed knowing not
what had occurred; but, when he returned to the presence, the
King asked him, "What is it thou hast seen? Where is thy pavilion
and where is my daughter, the core of my heart, my only child,
than whom I have none other?" Alaeddin answered "O King of the
Age, I wot naught thereof nor aught of what hath befallen," and
the Sultan rejoined, "Thou must know, O Alaeddin, I have pardoned
thee only that thou go forth and look into this affair and
enquire for me concerning my daughter; nor do thou ever show
thyself in my presence except she be with thee; and, if thou
bring her not, by the life of my head, I will cut off the head of
thee." The other replied, "To hear is to obey: only vouchsafe me
a delay and respite of some forty days; after which, an I produce
her not, strike off my head[FN#198] and do with me whatso thou
wishes"."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say,

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Sultan said to Alaeddin, "Verily I have granted
thee thy request, a delay of forty days; but think not thou canst
fly from my hand, for I would bring thee back even if thou wert
above the clouds instead of being only upon earth's surface."
Replied Alaeddin, "O my lord the Sultan, as I said to thy
Highness, an I fail to bring her within the term appointed, I
will present myself for my head to be stricken off." Now when the
folk and the lieges all saw Alaeddin at liberty, they rejoiced
with joy exceeding and were delighted for his release; but the
shame of his treatment and bashfulness before his friends and the
envious exultation of his foes had bowed down Alaeddin's head; so
he went forth a wandering through the city ways and he was
perplexed concerning his case and knew not what had befallen him.
He lingered about the capital for two days, in saddest state,
wotting not what to do in order to find his wife and his
pavilion, and during this time sundry of the folk privily brought
him meat and drink. When the two days were done he left the city
to stray about the waste and open lands outlying the walls,
without a notion as to whither he should wend; and he walked on
aimlessly until the path led him beside a river where, of the
stress of sorrow that overwhelmed him, he abandoned himself to
despair and thought of casting himself into the water. Being,
however, a good Moslem who professed the unity of the God-head,
he feared Allah in his soul; and, standing upon the margin he
prepared to perform the Wuzu-ablution. But as he was baling up
the water in his right hand and rubbing his fingers,[FN#199] it
so chanced that he also rubbed the Ring. Hereat its Marid
appeared and said to him, "Adsum! thy thrall between thy hands is
come: ask of me whatso thou wantest." Seeing the Marid, Alaeddin
rejoiced with exceeding joy and cried,[FN#200] "O Slave, I desire
of thee that thou bring before me my pavilion and therein my
wife, the Lady Badr al-Budur, together with all and everything it
containeth." "O my lord," replied the Marid, " 'tis right hard
upon me that thou demandest a service whereto I may not avail:
this matter dependeth upon the Slave of the Lamp nor dare I even
attempt it." Alaeddin rejoined, "Forasmuch as the matter is
beyond thy competence, I require it not of thee, but at least do
thou take me up and set me down beside my pavilion in what land
soever that may be." The Slave exclaimed, "Hearing and obeying, O
my lord ;" and, uplifting him high in air, with in the space of
an eye-glance set him down beside his pavilion in the land of
Africa and upon a spot facing his wife's apartment. Now this was
at fall of night yet one look enabled him to recognise his home;
whereby his cark and care were cleared away and he recovered
trust in Allah after cutting off all his hope to look upon his
wife once more. Then he fell to pondering the secret and
mysterious favours of the Lord (glorified be His omnipotence!);
and how, after despair had mastered him, the Ring had come to
gladden him and how, when all his hopes were cut off Allah had
deigned bless him with the services of its Slave. So he rejoiced
and his melancholy left him; then, as he had passed four days
without sleep for the excess of his cark and care and sorrow and
stress of thought, he drew near his pavilion and slept under a
tree hard by the building which (as we mentioned) had been set
down amongst the gardens outlying the city of Africa.--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Eightieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin lay that night under a tree beside his
pavilion in all restfulness; but whoso weareth head hard by the
headsman may not sleep o' nights save whenas slumber prevail over
him. He slumbered till Morning showed her face and, when awakened
by the warbling of the small birds, he arose and went down to the
bank of the river which flowed thereby into the city; and here he
again washed hands and face [FN#201] and after finished his Wuzu-
ablution. Then he prayed the dawn-prayer, and when he had ended
his orisons he returned and sat down under the windows of the
Princess's bower. Now the Lady Badr al-Budur, of her exceeding
sorrow for severance from her husband and her sire the Sultan,
and for the great mishap which had happened to her from the
Maghrabi, the Magician, the Accursed, was wont to rise during the
murk preceding dawn and to sit in tears inasmuch as she could not
sleep o' nights, and had forsworn meat and drink. Her favourite
slave-girl would enter her chamber at the hour of prayer-
salutation in order to dress her; and this time, by decree of
Destiny, when she threw open the window to let her lady comfort
and console herself by looking upon the trees and rills, and she
herself peered out of the lattice, she caught sight of her master
sitting below, and informed the Princess of this, saying, "O my
lady! O my lady! here's my lord Alaeddin seated at the foot of
the wall." So her mistress arose hurriedly and gazing from the
casement saw him; and her husband raising his head saw her; so
she saluted him and he saluted her, both being like to fly for
joy. Presently Quoth she, "Up and come in to me by the private
postern, for now the Accursed is not here;" and she gave orders
to the slave-girl who went down and opened for him. Then Alaeddin
passed through it and was met by his wife, when they embraced and
exchanged kisses with all delight until they wept for overjoy.
After this they sat down and Alaeddin said to her, "O my lady,
before all things 'tis my desire to ask thee a question. 'Twas my
wont to place an old copper lamp in such a part of my pavilion,
what became of that same?" When the Princess heard these words
she sighed and cried, "O my dearling, 'twas that very Lamp which
garred us fall into this calamity!" Alaeddin asked her, "How
befel the affair?" and she answered by recounting to him all that
passed, first and last, especially how they had given in exchange
an old lamp for a new lamp, adding, "And next day we hardly saw
one another at dawn before we found ourselves in this land, and
he who deceived us and took the lamp by way of barter informed me
that he had done the deed by might of his magic and by means of
the Lamp; that he is a Moorman from Africa, and that we are now
in his native country."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Lady Badr al-Budur ceased speaking, Alaeddin
resumed, "Tell me the intent of this Accursed in thy respect,
also what he sayeth to thee and what be his will of thee?" She
replied, "Every day he cometh to visit me once and no more: he
would woo me to his love and he sueth that I take him to spouse
in lieu of thee and that I forget thee and be consoled for the
loss of thee. And he telleth me that the Sultan my sire hath cut
off my husband's head, adding that thou, the son of pauper
parents, wast by him enriched. And he sootheth me with talk, but
he never seeth aught from me save weeping and wailing; nor hath
he heard from me one sugar-sweet word."[FN#202] Quoth Alaeddin,
"Tell me where he hath placed the Lamp an thou know anything
thereof:" and Quoth she, "He beareth it about on his body alway,
nor is it possible that he leave it for a single hour; moreover
once when he related what I have now recounted to thee, he
brought it out of his breast-pocket and allowed me to look upon
it." When Alaeddin heard these words, he joyed with exceeding joy
and said, "O my lady, do thou lend ear to me. 'Tis my design to
go from thee forthright and to return only after doffing this my
dress; so wonder not when thou see me changed, but direct one of
thy women to stand by the private pastern alway and, whenever she
espy me coming, at once to open. And now I will devise a device
whereby to slay this damned loon." Herewith he arose and, issuing
from the pavilion door, walked till he met on the way a Fellah to
whom he said, "O man, take my attire and give me thy garments."
But the peasant refused, so Alaeddin stripped him of his dress
perforce[FN#203] and donned it, leaving to the man his own rich
gear by way of gift. Then he followed the highway leading to the
neighbouring city and entering it went to the Perfumers' Bazar
where he bought of one some rarely potent Bhang, the son of a
minute,[FN#204] paying two dinars for two drachms thereof and he
returned in disguise by the same road till he reached the
pavilion. Here the slave-girl opened to him the private pastern
wherethrough he went in to the Lady Badr al-Budur.--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

     When it Was the Five Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when Alaeddin went in disguised to his wife he said,
"Hear me! I desire of thee that thou dress and dight thyself in
thy best and thou cast off all outer show and semblance of care;
also when the Accursed, the Maghrabi, shall visit thee, do thou
receive him with a 'Welcome and fair welcome,' and meet him with
smiling face and invite him to come and sup with thee. Moreover,
let him note that thou hast forgotten Alaeddin thy beloved,
likewise thy father; and that thou hast learned to love him with
exceeding love, displaying to him all manner joy and pleasure.
Then ask him for wine which must be red and pledge him to his
secret in a significant draught; and, when thou hast given him
two to three cups full and hast made him wax careless, then drop
these drops into his cup and fill it up with wine: no sooner
shall he drink of it than he will fall upon his back senseless as
one dead." Hearing these words, the Princess exclaimed," 'Tis
exceedingly sore to me that I do such deed;[FN#205] withal must I
do it that we escape the defilement of this Accursed who tortured
me by severance from thee and from my sire. Lawful and right
therefore is the slaughter of this Accursed." Then Alaeddin ate
and drank with his wife what hindered his hunger; then, rising
without stay or delay, fared forth the pavilion. So the Lady Badr
al-Budur summoned the tirewoman who robed and arrayed her in her
finest raiment and adorned her and perfumed her; and, as she was
thus, behold, the accursed Maghrabi entered. He joyed much seeing
her in such case and yet more when she confronted him, contrary
to her custom, with a laughing face; and his love-longing
increased and his desire to have her. Then she took him and,
seating him beside her, said, "O my dearling, do thou (an thou be
willing) come to me this night and let us sup together.
Sufficient to me hath been my sorrow for, were I to sit mourning
through a thousand years or even two thousand, Alaeddin would not
return to me from the tomb; and I depend upon thy say of
yesterday, to wit, that my sire the Sultan slew him in his stress
of sorrow for severance from me. Nor wonder thou an I have
changed this day from what I was yesterday; and the reason
thereof is I have determined upon taking thee to friend and
playfellow in lieu of and succession to Alaeddin, for that now I
have none other man but thyself. So I hope for thy presence this
night, that we may sup together and we may carouse and drink
somewhat of wine each with other; and especially 'tis my desire
that thou cause me taste the wine of thy natal soil, the African
land, because belike 'tis better than aught of the wine of China
we drink: I have with me some wine but 'tis the growth of my
country and I vehemently wish to taste the wine produced by
thine." And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Maghrabi saw the love lavisht upon him by the
Lady Badr al-Budur, and noted her change from the sorrowful,
melancholy woman she was wont to be, he thought that she had cut
off her hope of Alaeddin and he joyed exceedingly and said to
her, "I hear and obey, O my lady, whatso thou wishest and all
thou biddest. I have at home a jar of our country wine, which I
have carefully kept and stored deep in earth for a space of eight
years; and I will now fare and fill from it our need and will
return to thee in all haste." But the Princess, that she might
wheedle him the more and yet more, replied "O my darling, go not
thou, leaving me alone, but send one of the eunuchs to fill for
us thereof and do thou remain sitting beside me, that I may find
in thee my consolation." He rejoined, "O my lady, none wotteth
where the jar be buried save myself nor will I tarry from thee."
So saying, the Moorman went out and after a short time he brought
back as much wine as they wanted whereupon Quoth the Princess to
him, "Thou hast been at pains and trouble to serve me and I have
suffered for thy sake, O my beloved." Quoth he, "On no wise, O
eyes of me; I hold myself enhonoured by thy service." Then the
Lady Badr al-Budur sat with him at table, and the twain fell to
eating and presently the Princess expressed a wish to drink, when
the handmaid filled her a cup forthright and then crowned another
for the Maroccan. So she drank to his long life and his secret
wishes and he also drank to her life; then the Princess, who was
unique in eloquence and delicacy of speech, fell to making a cup
companion of him and beguiled him by addressing him in the
sweetest terms full of hidden meaning. This was done only that he
might become more madly enamoured of her, but the Maghrabi
thought that it resulted from her true inclination for him; nor
knew that it was a snare set up to slay him. So his longing for
her increased, and he was dying of love for her when he saw her
address him in such tenderness of words and thoughts, and his
head began to swim and all the world seemed as nothing in his
eyes. But when they came to the last of the supper and the wine
had mastered his brains and the Princess saw this in him, she
said, "With us there be a custom throughout our country, but I
know not an it be the usage of yours or not." The Moorman
replied, "And what may that be?" So she said to him, "At the end
of supper each lover in turn taketh the cup of the beloved and
drinketh it off;" and at once she crowned one with wine and bade
the handmaid carry to him her cup wherein the drink was blended
with the Bhang. Now she had taught the slave-girl what to do and
all the handmaids and eunuchs in the pavilion longed for the
Sorcerer's slaughter and in that matter were one with the
Princess. Accordingly the damsel handed him the cup and he, when
he heard her words and saw her drinking from his cup and passing
hers to him noted all that show of love, fancied himself
Iskander, Lord of the Two Horns. Then said she to him, the while
swaying gracefully to either side and putting her hand within his
hand, "O my life, here is thy cup with me and my cup with thee,
and on this wise [FN#206] do lovers drink from each other's
cups." Then she bussed the brim and drained it to the dregs and
again she kissed its lip and offered it to him. Thereat he hew
for joy and meaning to do the like, raised her cup to his mouth
and drank off the whole contents, without considering whether
there was therein aught harmful or not. And forthright he rolled
upon his back in deathlike condition and the cup dropped from his
grasp, whereupon the Lady Badr al-Budur and the slave-girls ran
hurriedly and opened the pavilion door to their lord Alaeddin
who, disguised as a Fellah, entered therein.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin entering his pavilion, went up to the
apartment of his wife, whom he found still sitting at table; and
facing her lay the Maghrabi as one slaughtered; so he at once
drew near to her and kissed her and thanked her for this. Then
rejoicing with joy exceeding he turned to her and said "Do thou
with thy handmaids betake thyself to the inner-rooms and leave me
alone for the present that I may take counsel touching mine
affair." The Princess hesitated not but went away at once, she
and her women; then Alaeddin arose and after locking the door
upon them, walked up to the Moorman and put forth his hand to his
breast-pocket and thence drew the Lamp; after which he unsheathed
his sword and slew the villain.[FN#207] Presently he rubbed the
Lamp and the Marid-slave appeared and said, "Adsum, O my lord,
what is it thou wantest?" "I desire of thee," said Alaeddin,
"that thou take up my pavilion from this country and transport it
to the land of China and there set it down upon the site where it
was whilome, fronting the palace of the Sultan." The Marid
replied, "Hearing and obeying, O my lord.' The Alaeddin went and
sat down with his wife and throwing his arms round her neck
kissed her and she kissed him, and they sat in converse, what
while the Jinni transported the pavilion and all therein to the
place appointed. Presently Alaeddin bade the handmaids spread the
table before him and he and the Lady Badr al-Budur took seat
thereat and fell to eating and drinking, in all joy and gladness,
till they had their sufficiency when, removing to the chamber of
wine and cup-converse, they sat there and caroused in fair
companionship and each kissed other with all love-liesse. The
time had been long and longsome since they enjoyed aught of
pleasure; so they ceased not doing thus until the wine-sun arose
in their heads and sleep get hold of them, at which time they
went to their bed in all ease and comfort.[FN#208] Early on the
next morning Alaeddin woke and awoke his wife, and the slave-
girls came in and donned her dress and prepared her and adorned
her whilst her husband arrayed himself in his costliest raiment
and the twain were ready to fly for joy at reunion after parting.
Moreover the Princess was especially joyous and gladsome because
on that day she expected to see her beloved father. Such was the
case of Alaeddin and the Lady Badr al-Budur; but as regards the
Sultan, after he drove away his son-in-law he never ceased to
sorrow for the loss of his daughter; and every hour of every day
he would sit and weep for her as women weep, because she was his
only child and he had none other to take to heart. And as he
shook off sleep, morning after morning, he would hasten to the
window and throw it open and peer in the direction where formerly
stood Alaeddin's pavilion and pour forth tears until his eyes
were dried up and their lids were ulcered. Now on that day he
arose at dawn and, according to his custom, looked out when, lo
and behold! he saw before him an edifice; so he rubbed his eyes
and considered it curiously when he became certified that it was
the pavilion of his son-in-law. So he called for a horse [FN#209]
without let or delay; and as soon as his beast was saddled, he
mounted and made for the place; and Alaeddin, when he saw his
father-in-law approaching, went down and met him half way: then,
taking his hand, aided him to step upstairs to the apartment of
his daughter. And the Princess, being as earnestly desirous to
see her sire, descended and greeted him at the door of the
staircase fronting the ground-floor hall. Thereupon the King
folded her in his arms and kissed her, shedding tears of joy; and
she did likewise till at last Alaeddin led them to the upper
saloon where they took seats and the Sultan fell to asking her
case and what had betided her.--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.
 
      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

   Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
do tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad
replied, With love and good will."---It hath reached me, O King
of the Age, that the Lady Badr al-Budur began to inform the
Sultan of all which had befallen her, saying, "O my father, I
recovered not life save yesterday when I saw my husband, and he
it was who freed me from the thraldom of that Maghrabi, that
Magician, that Accursed, than whom I believe there be none viler
on the face of earth; and, but for my beloved, I had never
escaped him nor hadst thou seen me during the rest of my days.
But mighty sadness and sorrow get about me, O my father, not only
for losing thee but also for the loss of a husband, under whose
kindness I shall be all the length of my life, seeing that he
freed me from that fulsome sorcerer." Then the Princess began
repeating to her sire every thing that happened to her, and
relating to him how the Moorman had tricked her in the guise of a
lamp-seller who offered in exchange new for old; how she had
given him the Lamp whose worth she knew not, and how she had
bartered it away only to laugh at the lampman's folly. "And next
morning, O my father," she continued, "we found ourselves and
whatso the pavilion contained in Africa-land, till such time as
my husband came to us and devised a device whereby we escaped:
and, had it not been for Alaeddin's hastening to our aid, the
Accursed was determined to enjoy me perforce." Then she told him
of the Bhang-drops administered in wine to the African and
concluded, "Then my husband returned to me and how I know not,
but we were shifted from Africa land to this place." Alaeddin in
his turn recounted how, finding the wizard dead drunken, he had
sent away his wife and her women from the polluted place into the
inner apartments; how he had taken the Lamp from the Sorcerer's
breast-pocket whereto he was directed by his wife; how he had
slaughtered the villain and, finally how, making use of the Lamp,
he had summoned its Slave and ordered him to transport the
pavilion back to its proper site, ending his tale with, "And, if
thy Highness have any doubt anent my words, arise with me and
look upon the accursed Magician." The King did accordingly and,
having considered the Moorman, bade the carcase be carried away
forthright and burned and its ashes scattered in air. Then he
took to embracing Alaeddin and kissing him said, "Pardon me, O my
son, for that I was about to destroy thy life through the foul
deeds of this damned enchanter, who cast thee into such pit of
peril; and I may be excused, O my child, for what I did by thee,
because I found myself forlorn of my daughter; my only one, who
to me is dearer than my very kingdom. Thou knowest how the hearts
of parents yearn unto their offspring, especially when like
myself they have but one and none other to love." And on this
wise the Sultan took to excusing himself and kissing his son-in-
law.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say,

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin said to the Sultan, "O King of the Time, thou
didst naught to me contrary to Holy Law, and I also sinned not
against thee; but all the trouble came from that Maghrabi, the
impure, the Magician." Thereupon the Sultan bade the city be
decorated and they obeyed him and held high feast and
festivities. He also commanded the crier to cry about the streets
saying, "This day is a mighty great fete, wherein public
rejoicings must be held throughout the realm, for a full month of
thirty days, in honour of the Lady Badr al-Budur and her husband
Alaeddin's return to their home." On this wise befel it with
Alaeddin and the Maghrabi; but withal the King's son-in-law
escaped not wholly from the Accursed, albeit the body had been
burnt and the ashes scattered in air. For the villain had a
brother yet more villainous than himself, and a greater adept in
necromancy, geomancy and astromancy; and, even as the old saw
saith "A bean and 'twas split;"[FN#210] so each one dwelt in his
own quarter of the globe that he might fill it with his sorcery,
his fraud and his treason.[FN#211] Now, one day of the days it
fortuned that the Moorman's brother would learn how it fared with
him, so he brought out his sandboard and dotted it and produced
the figures which, when he had considered and carefully studied
them, gave him to know that the man he sought was dead and housed
in the tomb. So he grieved and was certified of his decease, but
he dotted a second time seeking to learn the manner of the death
and where it had taken place; so he found that the site was the
China-land and that the mode was the foulest of slaughter;
furthermore, that he who did him die was a young man Alaeddin
hight. Seeing this he straightway arose and equipped himself for
wayfare; then he set out and cut across the wilds and words and
heights for the space of many a month until he reached China and
the capital of the Sultan wherein was the slayer of his brother.
He alighted at the so-called Strangers' Khan and, hiring himself
a cell, took rest therein for a while; then he fared forth and
wandered about the highways that he might discern some path which
would aid him unto the winning of his ill-minded wish, to wit, of
wreaking upon Alaeddin blood-revenge for his brother.[FN#212]
Presently he entered a coffee-house, a fine building which stood
in the market-place and which collected a throng of folk to play,
some at the mankalah,[FN#213] others at the backgammon[FN#214]
and others at the chess and what not else. There he sat down and
listened to those seated beside him and they chanced to be
conversing about an ancient dame and a holy, by name
Fatimah,[FN#215] who dwelt alway at her devotions in a hermitage
without the town, and this she never entered save only two days
each month. They mentioned also that she had performed many
saintly miracles[FN#216] which, when the Maghrabi, the
Necromancer, heard he said in himself, "Now have I found that
which I sought: Inshallah--God willing--by means of t