his crone
will I win to my wish."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, the Necromancer, went up to the folk who
were talking of the miracles performed by the devout old woman
and said to one of them, "O my uncle, I heard you all chatting
about the prodigies of a certain saintess named Fatimah: who is
she and where may be her abode? "Marvellous!"[FN#217] exclaimed
the man: "How canst thou be in our city and yet never have heard
about the miracles of the Lady Fatimah? Evidently, O thou poor
fellow, thou art a foreigner, since the fastings of this devotee
and her asceticism in worldly matters and the beauties of her
piety never came to thine ears." The Moorman rejoined, " 'tis
true, O my lord: yes, I am a stranger and came to this your city
only yesternight; and I hope thou wilt inform me concerning the
saintly miracles of this virtuous woman and where may be her
wone, for that I have fallen into a calamity, and 'tis my wish to
visit her and crave her prayers, so haply Allah (to whom be
honour and glory!) will, through her blessings, deliver me from
mine evil." Hereat the man recounted to him the marvels of
Fatimah the Devotee and her piety and the beauties of her
worship; then, taking him by the hand went with him without the
city and showed him the way to her abode, a cavern upon a
hillock's head. The Necromancer acknowledged his kindness in many
words and, thanking him for his good offices, returned to his
cell in the caravanserai. Now by the fiat of Fate on the very
next day Fatimah came down to the city, and the Maghrabi, the
Necromancer, happened to leave his hostelry a-morn, when he saw
the folk swarming and crowding; wherefore he went up to discover
what was to do and found the Devotee standing amiddlemost the
throng, and all who suffered from pain or sickness flocked to her
soliciting a blessing and praying for her prayers; and each and
every she touched became whole of his illness.[FN#218] The
Maroccan, the Necromancer, followed her about until she returned
to her antre; then, awaiting till the evening evened, he arose
and repaired to a vintner's store where he drank a cup of wine.
After this he fared forth the city and finding the Devotee's
cavern, entered it and saw her lying prostrate[FN#219] with her
back upon a strip of matting. So he came for ward and mounted
upon her belly; then he drew his dagger and shouted at her; and,
when she awoke and opened her eyes, she espied a Moorish man with
an unsheathed poniard sitting upon her middle as though about to
kill her. She was troubled and sore terrified, but he said to
her, "Hearken! an thou cry out or utter a word I will slay thee
at this very moment: arise now and do all I bid thee." Then he
sware to her an oath that if she obeyed his orders, whatever they
might be, he would not do her die. So saying, he rose up from off
her and Fatimah also arose, when he said to her, "Give me thy
gear and take thou my habit ;" whereupon she gave him her
clothing and head-fillets, her face-kerchief and her mantilla.
Then Quoth he, " 'tis also requisite that thou anoint me with
somewhat shall make the colour of my face like unto thine."
Accordingly she went into the inner cavern and, bringing out a
gallipot of ointment, spread somewhat thereof upon her palm and
with it besmeared his face until its hue favoured her own; then
she gave him her staff[FN#220] and, showing him how to walk and
what to do when he entered the city, hung her rosary around his
neck. Lastly she handed to him a mirror and said, "Now look! Thou
differest from me in naught;" and he saw himself Fatimah's
counterpart as though she had never gone or come.[FN#221] But
after obtaining his every object he falsed his oath and asked for
a cord which she brought to him; then he seized her and strangled
her in the cavern; and presently, when she was dead, haled the
corpse outside and threw it into a pit hard by.--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, after murthering Fatimah, threw her body
into a pit and went back to sleep in her cavern; and, when broke
the day, he rose and repairing to the town took his stand under
the walls of Alaeddin's pavilion. Hereupon flocked the folk about
him, all being certified that he was Fatimah the Devotee and he
fell to doing whatso she was wont to do: he laid hands on these
in pain and recited for those a chapter of the Koran and made
orisons for a third. Presently the thronging of the folk and the
clamouring of the crowd were heard by the Lady Badr al-Budur, who
said to her handmaidens, "Look what is to do and what be the
cause of this turmoil!" Thereupon the Agha of the eunuchry fared
forth to see what might be the matter and presently returning
said, "O my lady, this clamour is caused by the Lady Fatimah, and
if thou be pleased to command, I will bring her to thee; so shalt
thou gain through her a blessing." The Princess answered, "Go
bring her, for since many a day I am always hearing of her
miracles and her virtues, and I do long to see her and get a
blessing by her intervention, for the folk recount her
manifestations in many cases of difficulty." The Agha went forth
and brought in the Maroccan, the Necromancer, habited in
Fatimah's clothing; and, when the wizard stood before the Lady
Badr al-Budur, he began at first sight to bless her with a string
of prayers; nor did any one of those present doubt at all but
that he was the Devotee herself. The Princess arose and salam'd
to him then seating him beside her, said, "O my Lady Fatimah,
'tis my desire that thou abide with me alway, so might I be
blessed through thee, and also learn of thee the paths[FN#222] of
worship and piety and follow thine example making for salvation."
Now all this was a foul deceit of the accursed African and he
designed furthermore to complete his guile, so he continued, "O
my Lady, I am a poor woman and a religious that dwelleth in the
desert; and the like of me deserveth not to abide in the palaces
of the kings." But the Princess replied, "Have no care whatever,
O my Lady Fatimah; I will set apart for thee an apartment of my
pavilion, that thou mayest worship therein and none shall ever
come to trouble thee; also thou shalt avail to worship Allah in
my place better than in thy cavern." The Maroccan rejoined,"
Hearkening and obedience, O my lady; I will not oppose thine
order for that the commands of the children of the kings may not
be gainsaid nor renounced. Only I hope of thee that my eating and
drinking and sitting may be within my own chamber which shall be
kept wholly private; nor do I require or desire the delicacies of
diet, but do thou favour me by sending thy handmaid every day
with a bit of bread and a sup of water;[FN#223] and, when I feel
fain of food, let me eat by myself in my own room." Now the
Accursed hereby purposed to avert the danger of haply raising his
face-kerchief at meal-times, when his intent might be baffled by
his beard and mustachios discovering him to be a man. The
Princess replied, "O my Lady Fatimah, be of good heart; naught
shall happen save what thou wishest. But now arise and let me
show thee the apartment in the palace which I would prepare for
thy sojourn with us."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Lady Badr al-Budur arose and taking the Necromancer
who had disguised himself as the Devotee, ushered him in to the
place which she had kindly promised him for a home and said, "O
my Lady Fatimah, here thou shalt dwell with every comfort about
thee and in all privacy and repose; and the place shall be named
after thy name;" whereupon the Maghrabi acknowledged her kindness
and prayed for her. Then the Princess showed him the jalousies
and the jewelled Kiosque with its four and twenty windows[FN#224]
and said to him, "What thinkest thou, O my Lady Fatimah, of this
marvellous pavilion?" The Moorman replied, "By Allah, O my
daughter, 'tis indeed passing fine and wondrous exceedingly; nor
do I deem that its fellow is to be found in the whole universe;
but alas for the lack of one thing which would enhance its beauty
and decoration !" The Princess asked her, "O my Lady Fatimah,
what lacketh it and what be this thing would add to its
adornment? Tell me thereof, inasmuch as I was wont to believe it
wholly perfect." The Maroccan answered, "O my lady, all it
wanteth is that there be hanging from the middle of the dome the
egg of a fowl called the Rukh;[FN#225] and, were this done, the
pavilion would lack its peer all the world over." The Princess
asked, "What be this bird and where can we find her egg?" and the
Maroccan answered, "O my lady, the Rukh is indeed a giant fowl
which carrieth off camels and elephants in her pounces and flieth
away with them, such is her stature and strength; also this fowl
is mostly found in Mount Kaf; and the architect who built this
pavilion is able to bring thee one of her eggs." They then left
such talk as it was the hour for the noon day meal and, when the
handmaid had spread the table, the Lady Badr al-Budur sent down
to invite the Accursed African to eat with her. But he accepted
not and for a reason he would on no wise consent; nay, he rose
and retired to the room which the Princess had assigned to him
and whither the slave-girls carried his dinner. Now when evening
evened, Alaeddin returned from the chase and met his wife who
salam'd to him and he clasped her to his bosom and kissed her.
Presently, looking at her face he saw thereon a shade of sadness
and he noted that contrary to her custom, she did not laugh; so
he asked her, "What hath betided thee, O my dearling? tell me,
hath aught happened to trouble thy thoughts!" "Nothing whatever,"
answered she, "but, O my beloved, I fancied that our pavilion
lacked naught at all; however, O eyes of me, O Alaeddin, were the
dome of the upper story hung with an egg of the fowl called Rukh,
there would be naught like it in the universe." Her husband
rejoined, "And for this trifle thou art saddened when 'tis the
easiest of all matters to me! So cheer thyself; and, whatever
thou wantest, 'tis enough thou inform me thereof, and I will
bring it from the abysses of the earth in the quickest time and
at the earliest hour."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin after refreshing the spirits of his Princess
by promising her all she could desire, repaired straight way to
his chamber and taking the Lamp[FN#226] rubbed it, when the Marid
appeared without let or delay saying, "Ask whatso thou wantest."
Said the other, "I desire thee to fetch me an egg of the bird
Rukh and do thou hang it to the dome-crown of this my pavilion."
But when the Marid heard these words, his face waxed fierce and
he shouted with a mighty loud voice and a frightful, and cried,
"O denier of kindly deeds, sufficeth it not for thee that I and
all the Slaves of the Lamp are ever at thy service, but thou must
also require me to bring thee our Liege Lady[FN#227] for thy
pleasure, and hang her up at thy pavilion dome for the enjoyment
of thee and thy wife! Now by Allah, ye deserve, thou and she,
that I reduce you to ashes this very moment and scatter you upon
the air; but, inasmuch as ye twain be ignorant of this matter,
unknowing its inner from its outer significance, I will pardon
you for indeed ye are but innocents. The offence cometh from that
accursed Necromancer, brother to the Maghrabi, the Magician, who
abideth here representing himself to be Fatimah, the Devotee,
after assuming her dress and belongings and murthering her in the
cavern: indeed he came hither seeking to slay thee by way of
blood-revenge for his brother; and 'tis he who taught thy wife to
require this matter of me.''[FN#228] So saying the Marid
evanished. But when Alaeddin heard these words, his wits fled his
head and his joints trembled at the Marid's terrible shout; but
he empowered his purpose and, rising forthright, issued from his
chamber and went into his wife's. There he affected an ache of
head, for that he knew how famous was Fatimah for the art and
mystery of healing all such pains; and, when the Lady Badr al-
Budur saw him sitting hand to head and complaining of unease, she
asked him the cause and he answered, "I know of none other save
that my head acheth exceedingly." Hereupon she straightway bade
summon Fatimah that the Devotee might impose her hand upon his
head;[FN#229] and Alaeddin asked her, "Who may this Fatimah be?"
So she informed him that it was Fatimah the Devotee to whom she
had given a home in the pavilion. Meanwhile the slave-girls had
fared forth and summoned the Maghrabi, and when the Accursed made
act of presence, Alaeddin rose up to him and, acting like one who
knew naught of his purpose, salam'd to him as though he had been
the real Fatimah and, kissing the hem of his sleeve, welcomed him
and entreated him with honour and said, "O my Lady Fatimah, I
hope thou wilt bless me with a boon, for well I wot thy practice
in the healing of pains: I have gotten a mighty ache in my head."
The Moorman, the Accursed, could hardly believe that he heard
such words, this being all that he desired.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, the Necromancer, habited as Fatimah the
Devotee, came up to Alaeddin that he might place hand upon his
head and heal his ache; so he imposed one hand and, putting forth
the other under his gown, drew a dagger wherewith to slay him.
But Alaeddin watched him and, taking patience till he had wholly
unsheathed the weapon, seized him with a forceful grip; and,
wrenching the dagger from his grasp plunged it deep into his
heart. When the Lady Badr al-Budur saw him do on this wise, she
shrieked and cried out, "What hath this virtuous and holy woman
done that thou hast charged thy neck with the heavy burthen of
her blood shed wrongfully? Hast thou no fear of Allah that thou
killest Fatimah, this saintly woman, whose miracles are far-
famed?" "No," replied Alaeddin "I have not killed Fatimah. I have
slain only Fatimah's slayer, he that is the brother of the
Maghrabi, the Accursed, the Magician, who carried thee off by his
black art and transported my pavilion to the Africa-land; and
this damnable brother of his came to our city and wrought these
wiles, murthering Fatimah and assuming her habit, only that he
might avenge upon me his brother's blood; and he also 'twas who
taught thee to require of me a Rukh's egg, that my death might
result from such requirement. But, an thou doubt my speech, come
forwards and consider the person I have slain." Thereupon
Alaeddin drew aside the Moorman's face-kerchief and the Lady Badr
al-Budur saw the semblance of a man with a full beard that well
nigh covered his features. She at once knew the truth and said to
her husband, "O my beloved, twice have I cast thee into death-
risk!" but he rejoined, "No harm in that, O my lady, by the
blessing of your loving eyes: I accept with all joy all things
thou bringest me." The Princess, hearing these words, hastened to
fold him in her arms and kissed him saying, "O my dearling, all
this is for my love to thee and I knew naught thereof; but indeed
I do not deem lightly of thine affection." So Alaeddin kissed her
and strained her to his breast; and the love between them waxed
but greater. At that moment the Sultan appeared and they told him
all that had happened, showing him the corpse of the Maghrabi,
the Necromancer, when the King commanded the body to be burned
and the ashes scattered on air, even as had befallen the Wizard's
brother. And Alaeddin abode with his wife, the Lady Badr al-
Budur, in all pleasure and joyance of life and thenceforward
escaped every danger; and, after a while, when the Sultan
deceased, his son-in-law was seated upon the throne of the
Kingdom; and he commanded and dealt justice to the lieges so that
all the folk loved him, and he lived with his wife in all solace
and happiness until there came to him the Destroyer of delights
and the Severer of societies.[FN#230] Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister
mine, how rare is thy tale and delectable!" and Quoth Shahrazad,
"And what is this compared with that I could relate to you after
the coming night, an this my lord the King deign leave me on
life?" So Shahryar said to himself, "Indeed I will not slay her
until she tell me the whole tale."

 When it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-second Night,[FN#231]

Shahrazad began to relate the adventures of




               KHUDADAD[FN#232] AND HIS BROTHERS.



Said she, O auspicious King, this my tale relateth to the Kingdom
of Diyar Bakr[FN#233] in whose capital-city of Harran[FN#234]
dwelt a Sultan of illustrious lineage, a protector of the people,
a lover of his lieges, a friend of mankind and renowned for being
gifted with every good quality. Now Allah Almighty had bestowed
upon him all that his heart could desire, save boon of child, for
though he had lovely wives within his Harem-door and fair
concubines galore, he had been not blessed with a son; wherefor
he offered up incessant worship to the Creator. One night there
appeared to him in a dream a man of comely visage and holy of
semblance like unto a prophet, who addressed him, saying, "O
puissant King, thy vows are at length heard. Arise to-morrow at
day-dawn, pray a two-bow prayer and offer up thy petitions; then
haste thee to the Chief Gardener of thy palace and require of him
a pomegranate whereof do thou eat as many seeds as seemeth best
to thee; after which perform another two-bow prayer, and Allah
will shower favours and graces upon thy head." The King, awaking
at peep of day, called to mind the vision of the night, and
returning thanks to the Almighty, made his orisons and kneeling
invoked a benedicite. Then he rose and repaired to the garth, and
receiving a pomegranate from the Head-Gardener, counted out and
ate fifty grains thereof; to wit, one for each of his wives.
After this he lay the night in turn with them all and by the
omnipotence of the Creator all gave in due time signs of
pregnancy, save one Firuzah[FN#235] hight. So the King conceived
a grudge against her, saying in his soul, "Allah holdeth this
woman vile and accursed and He willeth not that she become the
mother of a Prince, and on this wise hath the curse of barrenness
become her lot." He would have had her done to death but the
Grand Wazir made intercession for her and suggested to the Sultan
that perchance Firuzah might prove with child and withal not show
outward signal thereof, as is the manner of certain women;
wherefore to slay her might be to destroy a Prince with the
mother. Quoth the King, "So be it! slay her not, but take heed
that she abide no longer or at court or in the city, for I cannot
support the sight of her." Replied the Minister, "It shall be
done even as thy Highness biddeth: let her be conveyed to the
care of thy brother's son, Prince Samir." The King did according
to the counsel of his Wazir and despatched his loathed Queen to
Samaria[FN#236] accompanied by a writ with the following purport,
to his nephew, "We forward this lady to thy care: entreat her
honourably and, shouldest thou remark tokens of pregnancy in her,
see that thou acquaint us therewith without stay or delay." So
Firuzah journeyed to Samaria, and when her time was fulfilled she
gave birth to a boy babe, and became the mother of a Prince who
in favour was resplendent as the sheeny day. Hereat the lord of
Samaria sent message by letter to the Sultan of Harran saying, "A
Prince hath been borne by the womb of Firuzah: Allah Almighty
give thee permanence of prosperity!" By these tidings the King
was filled with joy; and presently he replied to his cousin,
Prince Samir, "Each one of my forty-and-nine spouses hath been
blessed with issue and it delighteth me beyond bounds that
Firuzah hath also given me a son. Let him be named
Khudadad--God's gift--do thou have due care of him and whatsoever
thou mayest need for his birth-ceremonies shall be counted out to
thee without regard to cost." Accordingly Prince Samir took in
hand with all pleasure and delight the charge of Prince Khudadad;
and, as soon as the child reached the age for receiving
instruction, he caused him to be taught cavalarice and archery
and all such arts and sciences which it behoveth the sons of the
Kings to learn, so that he became perfect in all manner
knowledge. At eighteen years of age he waxed seemly of semblance
and such were his strength and valiance that none in the whole
world could compare with him. Presently, feeling himself gifted
with unusual vigour and virile character he addressed one day of
the days Firuzah his parent, saying, "O mother mine, grant me thy
leave to quit Samaria and fare in quest of fortune, especially of
some battle-field where I may prove the force and prowess of me.
My sire, the Sultan of Harran, hath many foes, some of whom are
lusting to wage war with him; and I marvel that at such time he
doth not summon me and make me his aid in this mightiest of
matters. But seeing that I possess such courage and Allah-given
strength it behoveth me not to remain thus idly at home. My
father knoweth not of my lustihood, nor forsooth doth he think of
me at all; nevertheless 'tis suitable that at such a time I
present myself before him, and tender my services until my
brothers be fit to fight and to front his foes." Hereto his
mother made answer, "O my dear son, thine absence pleaseth me
not, but in truth it becometh thee to help thy father against the
enemies who are attacking him on all sides, provided that he send
for thine aidance."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Khudadad
replied to his mother Firuzah, "Indeed I am unable to brook
delay; moreover such longing have I in heart to look upon the
Sultan, my sire, that an I go not and visit him and kiss his feet
I shall assuredly die. I will enter his employ as a stranger and
all unknown to him, nor will I inform him that I am his son; but
I shall be to him as a foreigner or as one of his hired knaves,
and with such devotion will I do him suit and service that, when
he learneth that I am indeed his child, he may grant me his
favour and affection." Prince Samir also would not suffer him to
depart and forbade him therefrom; but one day of the days the
Prince suddenly set out from Samaria under pretext that he was
about to hunt and chase. He mounted a milk-white steed, whose
reins and stirrups were of gold and the saddle and housings were
of azure satin dubbed with jewels and fringed with pendants of
fresh pearls. His scymitar was hilted with a single diamond, the
scabbard of chaunders-wood was crested with rubies and emeralds
and it depended from a gemmed waist-belt; while his bow and
richly wrought quiver hung by his side. Thus equipped and
escorted by his friends and familiars he presently arrived at
Harran-city after the fairest fashion; and, when occasion offered
itself, he made act of presence before the King and did his
obeisance at Darbar. The Sultan, remarking his beauty and
comeliness, or haply by reason of an outburst of natural
affection, was pleased to return his salam; and, graciously
calling him to his side, asked of him his name and pedigree,
whereto Khudadad answered, "O my liege, I am the son of an Emir
of Cairo. A longing for travel hath made me quit my native place
and wander from clime to clime till at length I have come hither;
and, hearing that thou hast matters of importance in hand, I am
desirous of approving to thee my valiancy." The King joyed with
exceeding joy to hear this stout and doughty speech, and
forthwith gave him a post of command in his army; and Khudadad by
careful supervision of the troops soon won the esteem of his
officers by his desire to satisfy them and the hearts of his
soldiers by reason of his strength and courage, his goodly nature
and his kindly disposition. He also brought the host and all its
equipments and munitions of warfare into such excellent order and
method that the King on inspecting them was delighted and created
the stranger Chief Commandant of the forces and made him an
especial favourite; while the Wazirs and Emirs, also the Nabobs
and the Notables, perceiving that he was highly reputed and
regarded, showed him abundant good will and affection. Presently,
the other Princes, who became of no account in the eyes of the
King and the lieges, waxed envious of his high degree and
dignity. But Khudadad ceased not to please the Sultan his sire,
at all times when they conversed together, by his prudence and
discretion, his wit and wisdom, and gained his regard ever more
and more; and when the invaders, who had planned a raid on the
realm, heard of the discipline of the army and of Khudadad's
provisions for materials of war, they abstained from all hostile
intent. After a while the King committed to Khudadad the custody
and education of the forty-nine Princes, wholly relying on his
sagesse and skill; and thus, albeit Khudadad was of age like his
brothers, he became their master by reason of his sapience and
good sense. Whereupon they hated him but the more; and, when
taking counsel one day, quoth one to the other, "What be this
thing our sire hath done that he should make a stranger-wight his
cup-companion and set him to lord it over us? We can do naught
save by leave of this our governor, and our condition is past
bearing; so contrive we to rid ourselves of this foreigner and at
least render him vile and contemptible in the eyes of our sire
the Sultan." Said one, "Let us gather together and slay him in
some lonely spot;" and said another, "Not so! to kill him would
benefit us naught, for how could we keep the matter hidden from
the King? He would become our enemy and Allah only wotteth what
evil might befal us. Nay, rather let us crave permission of him
and fare a-hunting and then tarry we in some far-off town; and
after a while the King will marvel at our absence, then grief
will be sore upon him and at length, waxing displeased and
suspicious, he will have this fellow expelled the palace or haply
done to death. This is the only sure and safe way of bringing
about his destruction."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
forty-and-nine brothers agreed to hold this plan wisest and,
presently going together to Khudadad, asked leave of him to ride
about the country awhile or fare to the chase, promising they
would return by set of sun. He fell into the snare and allowed
them to go; whereupon they sallied forth a-hunting but did not
come back that day or the next. On the third morning the King who
missed them asked Khudadad wherefore it was that none of his sons
were to be seen; and he answered that three days before they had
gotten leave from him to go a-hunting and had not returned.
Hereat the father was perplexed with sore perplexity; and, when
sundry days more had passed by and still the Princes appeared
not, the old Sultan was much troubled in mind and hardly
restraining his rage summoned Khudadad and in hot wrath
exclaimed, "O thou neglectful stranger, what courage and
over-daring is this of thine that thou didst suffer my sons fare
to the chase and didst not ride with them! And now 'tis but right
that thou set out and search for them and bring them back;
otherwise thou shalt surely die." Khudadad, hearing these harsh
words, was startled and alarmed; however he got him ready and
mounted his horse forthwith and left the city in quest of the
Princes his brethren, wandering about from country to country,
like unto a herd seeking a straying flock of goats. Presently,
not finding any trace of them in homestead or on desert-ground,
he became sad and sorrowful exceedingly, saying in his soul, "O
my brothers, what hath befallen you and where can ye be dwelling?
Perchance some mighty foeman hath made you prisoners so that ye
cannot escape; and I may never return unto Harran till I find
you; for this will be a matter of bitter regret and repine to the
King." So he repented more and more having suffered them to go
without his escort and guidance. At length whilst searching for
them from plain to plain and forest to forest he chanced come
upon a large and spacious prairie in the middlemost whereof rose
a castle of black marble; so he rode on at a foot pace and when
close under the walls he espied a lady of passing beauty and
loveliness who was seated at a window in melancholy plight and
with no other ornament than her own charms. Her lovely hair hung
down in dishevelled locks; her raiment was tattered and her
favour was pale and showed sadness and sorrow. Withal she was
speaking under her breath and Khudadad, giving attentive ear,
heard her say these words, "O youth, fly this fatal site, else
thou wilt fall into the hands of the monster who dwelleth here: a
man-devouring Ethiopian[FN#237] is lord of this palace; and he
seizeth all whom Fate sendeth to this prairie and locketh them up
in darksome and narrow cells that he may preserve them for food."
Khudadad exclaimed, "O my lady, tell me I pray thee who thou art
and whereabouts was thy home;" and she answered, "I am a daughter
of Cairo and of the noblest thereof. But lately, as I wended my
way to Baghdad, I alighted upon this plain and met that Habashi,
who slew all my servants and carrying me off by force placed me
in this palace. I no longer cared to live, and a thousand times
better were it for me to die; for that this Abyssinian lusteth to
enjoy me and albeit to the present time I have escaped the
caresses of the impure wretch, to-morrow an I still refuse to
gratify his desire he will surely ravish me and do me dead. So I
have given up all hope of safety; but thou, why hast thou come
hither to perish? Escape without stay or delay, for he hath gone
forth in quest of wayfarers and right soon will he return.
Moreover he can see far and wide and can descry all who traverse
this wold." Now hardly had the lady spoken these words when the
Abyssinian drew in sight; and he was as a Ghul of the Wild, big
of bulk, and fearsome of favour and figure, and he mounted a
sturdy Tartar steed, brandishing, as he rode, a weighty blade
which none save he could wield. Prince Khudadad seeing this
monstrous semblance was sore amazed and prayed Heaven that he
might be victorious over that devil: then unsheathing his sword
he stood awaiting the Abyssinian's approach with courage and
steadfastness; but the blackamoor when he drew near deemed the
Prince too slight and puny to fight and was minded to seize him
alive. Khudadad, seeing how his foe had no intent to combat,
struck him with his sword on the knee a stroke so dour that the
negro foamed with rage and yelled a yell so loud that the whole
prairie resounded with the plaint. Thereupon the brigand, fiery
with fury, rose straight in his shovel-stirrups and struck
fiercely at Khudadad with his huge sword and, but for the
Prince's cunning of fence and the cleverness of his courser, he
would have been sliced in twain like unto a cucumber. Though the
scymitar whistled through the air, the blow was harmless, and in
an eye-twinkling Khudadad dealt him a second cut and struck off
his right hand which fell to the ground with the sword hilt it
gripped, when the blackamoor losing his balance rolled from the
saddle and made earth resound with the fall. Thereupon the Prince
sprang from his steed and deftly severing the enemy's head from
his body threw it aside. Now the lady had been looking down at
the lattice rigid in prayer for the gallant youth; and, seeing
the Abyssinian slain and the Prince victorious, she was overcome
with exceeding joy and cried out to her deliverer, "Praise be to
Almighty Allah, O my lord, who by thy hand hath defeated and
destroyed this fiend. Come now to me within the castle, whose
keys are with the Abyssinian; so take them and open the door and
deliver me." Khudadad found a large bunch of keys under the dead
man's girdle wherewith he opened the portals of the fort and
entered a large saloon in which was the lady; and, no sooner did
she behold him than running to meet him she was about to cast
herself at his feet and kiss them when Khudadad prevented her.
She praised him with highest praise and extolled him for valiancy
above all the champions of the world, and he returned the salam
to her who, when seen near hand seemed endued with more grace and
charms than had appeared from afar. So the Prince joyed with
extreme joy and the twain sat down in pleasant converse.
Presently, Khudadad heard shrieks and cries and weeping and
wailing with groans and moans and ever loudening lamentations; so
he asked the lady, saying, "whence are these clamours and from
whom come these pitiful complaints?" And, she pointing to a
wicket in a hidden corner of the court below, answered, saying,
"O my lord, these sounds come therefrom. Many wretches driven by
Destiny have fallen into the clutches of the Abyssinian Ghul and
are securely locked up in cells, and each day he was wont to
roast and eat one of the captives." "'Twill please me vastly,"
quoth Khudadad, "to be the means of their deliverance: come, O my
lady, and show me where they are imprisoned." Thereupon the twain
drew near to the place and the Prince forthright tried a key upon
the lock of the dungeon but it did not fit; then he made essay of
another wherewith they opened the wicket. As they were so doing
the report of the captives' moaning and groaning increased yet
more and more until Khudadad, touched and troubled at their
impatience, asked the cause of it. The lady replied, "O my lord,
hearing our footsteps and the rattling of the key in the lock
they deem that the cannibal, according to his custom, hath come
to supply them with food and to secure one of them for his
evening meal. Each feareth lest his turn for roasting be come, so
all are affrighted with sore affright and redouble their shouts
and cries."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the sounds
from that secret place seemed to issue from under ground or from
the depths of a draw-well. But when the Prince opened the dungeon
door, he espied a steep staircase and descending thereby found
himself in a deep pit, narrow and darksome, wherein were penned
more than an hundred persons with elbows pinioned and members
chained; nor saw he aught of light save through one bull's-eye.
So he cried to them, "O ye unfortunates, fear ye no more! I have
slain the Abyssinian; and render ye praise to Allah Almighty who
hath rid you of your wrong-doer: also I come to strike off your
fetters and return you to freedom." Hearing these glad tidings
the prisoners were in raptures of delight and raised a general
cry of joy and jubilee. Hereupon Khudadad and the lady began to
loose their hands and feet; and each, as he was released from his
durance, helped to unchain his fellows: brief, after a moment of
time all were delivered from their bonds and bondage. Then each
and every kissed Khudadad's feet and gave thanks and prayed for
his welfare; and when those whilom prisoners entered the
court-yard whereupon the sun was shining sheen, Khudadad
recognised amongst them his brothers, in quest of whom he had so
long wandered. He was amazed with exceeding amazement and
exclaimed, "Laud be to the Lord, that I have found you one and
all safe and sound: your father is sorely sad and sorrowful at
your absence; and Heaven forfend that this devil hath devoured
any from amongst you." He then counted their number,
forty-and-nine, and set them apart from the rest; and all in
excess of joy fell upon one another's necks and ceased not to
embrace their saviour. After this the Prince spread a feast for
the captives, each and every, whom he had delivered; and, when
they had eaten and drunken their full, he restored to them the
gold and silver, the Turkey carpets and pieces of Chinese silk
and brocade and other valuables innumerable which the Abyssinian
had plundered from the caravans, as also their own personal goods
and chattels, directing each man to claim his own; and what
remained he divided equally amongst them. "But," quoth he, "by
what means can ye convey these bales to your own countries, and
where can ye find beasts of burden in this wild wold?" Quoth
they, "O our Lord, the Abyssinian robbed us of our camels with
their loads and doubtless they are in the stables of the castle."
Hereupon Khudadad fared forth with them to the stables and there
found tethered and tied not only the camels but also the
forty-nine horses of his brothers the princes, and accordingly he
gave to each one his own animal. There were moreover in the
stables hundreds of Abyssinian slave-boys who, seeing the
prisoners released, were certified that their lord the cannibal
was slain and fled in dismay to the forest and none thought of
giving chase to them. So the merchants loaded their merchandise
upon the camels' backs and farewelling the Prince set out for
their own countries. Then quoth Khudadad to the lady, "O thou
rare in beauty and chastity, whence camest thou when the
Abyssinian seized thee and whither now wouldst thou wend? Inform
me thereof that I may restore thee to thy home; haply these
Princes, my brethren, sons of the Sultan of Harran, know thine
abode; and doubtless they will escort thee thither." The lady
turning to Khudadad presently made answer, "I live far from here
and my country, the land of Egypt, is over distant for travel.
But thou, O valorous Prince, hast delivered mine honour and my
life from the hands of the Abyssinian and hast shown me such
favour that 'twould ill become me to conceal from thee my
history. I am the daughter of a mighty king; reigning over the
Sa'id or upper Nile-land; and when a tyrant foeman seized him
and, reaving him of life as well as of his realm, usurped his
throne and seized his kingdom, I fled away to preserve my
existence and mine honour." Thereupon Khudadad and his brothers
prayed the lady to recount all that had befallen her and
reassured her, saying, "Henceforth thou shalt live in solace and
luxury: neither toil nor trouble shall betide thee." When she saw
that there was no help for her but to tell all her tale, she
began in the following words to recount the




          History of the Princess of Daryabar.[FN#238]



In an island of the islands standeth a great city called
Daryabar, wherein dwelt a king of exalted degree. But despite his
virtue and his valour he was ever sad and sorrowful having naught
of offspring, and he offered up without surcease prayers on that
behalf. After long years and longsome supplications a half boon
was granted to him; to wit, a daughter (myself) was born. My
father who grieved sore at first presently rejoiced with joy
exceeding at the unfortunate ill-fated birth of me; and, when I
came of age to learn, he bade me be taught to read and write; and
caused me to be instructed in court-ceremonial and royal duties
and the chronicles of the past, to the intent that I might
succeed him as heiress to his throne and his kingship. Now it
happened one day that my sire rode out a-hunting and gave chase
to a wild ass[FN#239] with such hot pursuit that he found himself
at eventide separated from his suite; so, wearied with the chase,
he dismounted from his steed and seating himself by the side of a
forest-path, he said to himself "The onager will doubtless seek
cover in this copse." Suddenly he espied a light shining bright
amidst the trees and, thinking that a hamlet might be hard by, he
was minded to night there and at day-dawn to determine his
further course. Hereupon he arose and walking towards the light
he found that it issued from a lonely hut in the forest; then
peering into the inside he espied an Abyssinian burly of bulk and
in semblance like unto a Satan, seated upon a divan. Before him
were ranged many capacious jars full of wine and over a fire of
charcoal he was roasting a bullock whole and eating the flesh and
ever and anon drinking deep draughts from one of the pitchers.
Furthermore the King sighted in that hut a lady of exquisite
beauty and comeliness sitting in a corner direly distressed: her
hands were fast bound with cords, and at her feet a child of two
or three years of age lay beweeping his mother's sorry
plight.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that seeing the
doleful state of these twain, my sire was filled with ruth and
longed to fall upon the ogre sword in hand; however, not being
able to cope with him he restrained his wrath and remained on
stealthy watch. The giant having drained all the pitchers of wine
and devoured half of the barbacued bullock presently addressed
himself to the lady and said, "O loveliest of Princesses, how
long wilt thou prove thee coy and keep aloof from me? Dost thou
not see how desirous I am of winning thy heart and how I am dying
for the love of thee? 'Tis therefore only right that thou also
shouldst return my affection and know me as thine own, when I
will become to thee the kindest of mankind." "O thou Ghul of the
waste," cried the lady, "what be this whereof thou pratest?
Never; no, never shalt thou win thy wish of me, however much thou
mayest lust therefor. Torment me or, an thou wilt, destroy me
downright, but for my part I will on no wise yield me to thy
lusts." At these words the infuriated savage roared aloud, "'Tis
enough and more than enough: thy hate breedeth hatred in me and
now I desire less to have and hold thee than to do thee die."
Then he seized her with one hand, and drawing his sabre with the
other, would have struck off her head from her body when my
father shot at him a shaft so deftly that it pierced his heart
and came out gleaming at his back and he fell to the ground and
found instant admission into Jahannam. Hereupon my sire entered
the hut and unbinding the lady's bonds enquired of her who she
was and by what means that ogre had brought her thither. Answered
she, "Not far from this site there liveth on the sea-shore a race
of Saracens, like unto the demons of the desert. Sorely against
my will I was wedded to their Prince and the fulsome villain thou
hast now slain was one of my husband's chief officers. He fell
madly in love to me and he longed with excessive longing to get
me into his power and to carry me off from my home. Accordingly,
one day of the days when my husband was out of the way and I was
in privacy, he carried me off with this my babe from the palace
to this wild wood wherein is none save He[FN#240] and where well
he wot that all search and labour would be baffled; then, hour
after hour he designed guilty designs against me, but by the
mercy of Almighty Allah I have ever escaped all carnal soil of
that foul monster. This evening, in despair of my safety, I was
rejecting his brutal advances when he attempted to take my life
and in the attempt he was slain by thy valorous hand. This is
then my story which I have told thee." My father reassured the
Princess, saying, "O my lady, let thy heart be at ease; at
day-break I will take thee away from this wilderness and escort
thee to Daryabar, of which city I am the Sultan; and, shouldst
thou become fain of that place, then dwell therein until thy
husband shall come in quest of thee." Quoth the lady, "O my lord,
this plan doth not displease me." So with the earliest light next
morning my father took mother and child away from that forest and
set forth homewards when suddenly he fell in with his Sirdars and
officers who had been wandering hither and thither during the
livelong night in search of him. They rejoiced with great joy on
seeing the King and marvelled with exceeding marvel at the sight
of a veiled one with him, admiring much that so love-some a lady
should be found dwelling in a wold so wild. Thereupon the King
related to them the tale of the ogre and of the Princess and how
he had slain the blackamoor. Presently they set forth on their
homeward way; one of the Emirs seating the dame behind him on his
horse's crupper while another took charge of the child. They
reached the royal city, where the King ordered a large and
splendid mansion to be built for his guest, the babe also
received a suitable education; and thus the mother passed her
days in perfect comfort and happiness. After the lapse of some
months, when no tidings, however fondly expected, came of her
husband, she resigned herself to marrying my father whom she had
captivated by her beauty and loveliness and amorous
liveliness,[FN#241] whereupon he wedded her, and when the
marriage-contract was drawn up (as was customary in those days),
they sojourned together in one stead. As time went on the lad
grew up to be a lusty youth of handsome mien; moreover he became
perfect in courtly ceremonial and in every art and science that
befit Princes. The King and all the Ministers and Emirs highly
approved of him, and determined that I should be married to him,
and that he should succeed the sovereign as heir to throne and
kingship. The youth also was well pleased with such tokens of
favour from my father, but chiefly he rejoiced with exceeding joy
to hear talk of his union with his protector's only daughter. One
day my sire desired to place my hand in his to the intent that
the marriage ceremony should at once take place, but first he
would impose upon my suitor certain conditions, whereof one was
that he should wed none other but his wife's daughter, that is,
myself. This pledge displeased the haughty youth, who forthwith
refused his consent thereto, deeming himself by the demand of
such condition a despised and contemptible suitor of villain
birth.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

     The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that, the lady
continued:--On this wise the wedding was deferred, and this delay
became a matter of sore displeasure to the young man, who thought
in his heart that my father was his foe. Therefore he ever strove
to lure him into his power till one day in a frenzy of rage he
slew him and proclaimed himself King of Daryabar. Moreover the
murtherer would have entered my chamber to kill me also had not
the Wazir, a true and faithful servant of the crown, at the
tidings of his liege lord's death speedily taken me away, and
hidden me in the house of a friend where he bade me remain
concealed. Two days afterwards, having fitted out a ship, he
embarked me therein with a Kahramanah--an old duenna--and set
sail for a country whose King was of my father's friends, to the
intent that he might consign me to his charge, and obtain from
him the aid of an army wherewith he might avenge himself upon the
ungrateful and ungracious youth who had proved himself a traitor
to the salt.[FN#242] But a few days after our weighing anchor a
furious storm began to blow making the captain and crew sore
confounded and presently the waves beat upon the vessel with such
exceeding violence that she brake up, and the Wazir and the
duenna and all who were therein (save myself) were drowned in the
billows. But I, albeit well nigh a-swoon, clung to a plank and
was shortly after washed ashore by the send of the sea, for Allah
of His mighty power had preserved me safe and sound from
death-doom by the raging of the ocean, to the end that further
troubles might befal me. When I returned to sense and
consciousness, I found myself alive on the strand and offered up
grateful thanks to Almighty Allah; but not seeing the Wazir or
any one of the company I knew that they had perished in the
waters.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Princess of Daryabar continued:--Presently, calling to
remembrance the murther of my father I cried aloud with an
exceeding bitter cry and was sore afraid at my lonesome plight,
insomuch that I would fain have cast myself again into the sea,
when suddenly the voice of man and tramp of horse-hooves fell
upon my ears. Then looking about I descried a band of cavaliers
in the midst of whom was a handsome prince: he was mounted upon a
steed of purest Rabite[FN#243] blood and was habited in a
gold-embroidered surcoat; a girdle studded with diamonds girt his
loins and on his head was a crown of gold; in fine it was evident
from his garb as from his aspect that he was a born ruler of
mankind. Thereupon, seeing me all alone on the sea-shore, the
knights marvelled with exceeding marvel; then the Prince detached
one of his captains to ascertain my history and acquaint him
there-with; but albeit the officer plied me with questions I
answered him not a word and shed a flood of tears in the deepest
silence. So noting the waifage on the sand they thought to
themselves, "Perchance some vessel hath been wrecked upon this
shore and its planks and timber have been cast upon the land, and
doubtless this lady was in that ship and hath been floated ashore
on some plank." Whereupon the cavaliers crowded around me and
implored me to relate unto them what had befallen me;
nevertheless I still answered them not a word. Presently the
Prince himself drew near to me and, much amazed, sent away his
suite from about me and addressed me in these words, "O my lady,
fear naught of ill from me nor distress thyself by needless
affright. I would convey thee to my home and under my mother's
care; wherefore I am curious to know of thee who thou art. The
Queen will assuredly befriend thee and keep thee in comfort and
happiness." And now understanding that his heart was drawn
towards me, I told him all that had betided me, and he on hearing
the story of my sad destiny became moved with the deepest emotion
and his eyes brimmed with tears. Then he comforted me and carried
me with him and committed me to the Queen his mother, who also
lent kindly ear to my tale of the past, first and last, and
hearing it she also was greatly grieved, and wearied not day or
night in tending me and (as far as in her lay) striving to make
me happy. Seeing, moreover, that her son was deeply enamoured of
me and love-distraught she agreed to my becoming his wife, while
I also consented when I looked upon his handsome and noble face
and figure and to his proved affection for me and his goodness of
heart. Accordingly, in due time the marriage was celebrated with
royal pomp and circumstance. But what escape is there from Fate?
On that very night, the night of the wedding, a King of Zanzibar
who dwelt hard by that island, and had erewhile practised against
the kingdom, seizing his opportunity