, attacked us with a mighty
army, and having put many to death, bethought him to take me and
my husband alive. But we escaped from his hands and fleeing under
the murks of night to the sea-shore found there a fisherman's
boat, which we entered thanking our stars and launched it and
floated far away on the current, unknowing whither Destiny was
directing us. On the third day we espied a vessel making us,
whereat we rejoiced with joy excessive, deeming her to be some
merchantman coming to our aidance. No sooner had it lain
alongside, however, than up there sprang five or six
pirates,[FN#244] each brandishing a naked brand in hand, and
boarding us tied our arms behind us and carried us to their
craft. They then tare the veil from my face and forthwith desired
to possess me, each saying to other, "I will enjoy this wench."
On this wise wrangling and jangling ensued till right soon it
turned to battle and bloodshed, when moment by moment and one by
one the ravishers fell dead until all were slain save a single
pirate, the bravest of the band. Quoth he to me, "Thou shalt fare
with me to Cairo where dwelleth a friend of mine and to him will
I give thee, for erewhile I promised him that on this voyage I
would secure for him a fair woman for handmaid." Then seeing my
husband, whom the pirates had left in bonds he exclaimed, "Who
may be this hound? Is he to thee a lover or a friend?" and I made
answer, "He is my wedded husband." "'Tis well," cried he: "in
very sooth it behoveth me to release him from the bitter pangs of
jealousy and the sight of thee enfolded in another's fond
embrace." Whereat the ruffian raised aloft the ill-fated Prince,
bound foot and hand, and cast him into the sea, while I shrieked
aloud and implored his mercy, but all in vain. Seeing the Prince
struggling and drowning in the waves I cried out and screamed and
buffetted my face and tare my hair and would fain have cast
myself into the waters but I could not, for he held me fast and
lashed me to the mainmast. Then, pursuing our course with
favouring winds we soon arrived at a small port-village where he
bought camels and boy-slaves and journeyed on towards Cairo; but
when several stages of the road were left behind us, the
Abyssinian who dwelt in this castle suddenly overtook us. From
afar we deemed him to be a lofty tower, and when near us could
hardly believe him to be a human being.-- And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Princess of Daryabar continued:--At once unsheathing his huge
sword the Habashi made for the pirate and ordered him to
surrender himself prisoner, with me and all his slaves, and with
pinioned elbows to accompany him. Hereat the robber with hot
courage and heading his followers rushed fiercely on the
Abyssinian, and for a long time the fight raged thick and fast,
till he and his lay dead upon the field; whereupon the Abyssinian
led off the camels and carried me and the pirate's corpse to this
castle, and devoured the flesh of his foe at his evening meal.
Then turning to me as I wept with bitter weeping he said, "Banish
from thy breast this woe and this angry mood; and abide in this
castle at perfect ease and in comfort, and solace thyself with my
embraces. However, since thou appearest at this present to be in
dire distress, I will excuse thee for to-night, but without fail
I shall require thee of thyself on the morrow." He then led me
into a separate chamber and locking fast the gates and doors,
fell asleep alone in another place. Arising early on the next
morning he searched the castle round about, unlocked the wicket
which he closed again and sallied forth, according to his custom,
in quest of wayfarers. But the caravan escaped him and anon he
returned empty-handed when thou didst set upon him and slay him."
On this wise the Princess of Daryabar related her history to
Prince Khudadad who was moved with ruth for her: then comforting
her he said, "Henceforth fear naught nor be on any wise dismayed.
These princes are the sons of the King of Harran; and if it
please thee, let them lead thee to his court and stablish thee in
comfort and luxury: the King also will guard thee from all evil.
Or, shouldest thou be loath to fare with them, wilt thou not
consent to take for spouse him who hath rescued thee from so
great calamity?" The Princess of Daryabar consented to wed with
him and forthwith the marriage was celebrated with grand display
in the castle and here they found meats and drinks of sundry
sorts, and delicious fruits and fine wines wherewith the cannibal
would regale himself when a-weary of man's flesh. So Khudadad
made ready dishes of every colour and feasted his brothers. Next
day taking with them such provaunt as was at hand, all set forth
for Harran, and at the close of each stage they chose a suitable
stead for nighting; and, when but one day's journey lay before
them, the Princes supped that night off what was left to them of
their viaticum and drained all the wine that remained. But when
the drink had mastered their wits, Khudadad thus addressed his
brothers, saying, "Hitherto have I withheld from you the secret
of my birth, which now I must disclose. Know ye then that I am
your brother, for I also am a son of the King of Harran, whom the
Lord of Samaria-land brought up and bade educate; and lastly, my
mother is the Princess Firuzah." Then to the Princess of
Daryabar, "Thou didst not recognize my rank and pedigree and, had
I discovered myself erewhile, haply thou hadst been spared the
mortification of being wood by a man of vulgar blood. But now
ease thy mind for that thy husband is a Prince." Quoth she,
"Albeit thou discoveredst to me naught until this time, still my
heart felt assured that thou wast of noble birth and the son of
some potent sovereign." The Princes one and all appeared
outwardly well pleased and offered each and every warm
congratulations whilst the wedding was celebrating; but inwardly
they were filled with envy and sore annoy at such unwelcome issue
of events, so much so that when Khudadad retired with the
Princess of Daryabar to his tent and slept, those ingrates,
forgetful of the service rendered to them by their brother in
that he had rescued them when prisoners in the hands of the
man-devouring Abyssinian, remained deep in thought and seeking a
safe place took counsel one with other to kill him. Quoth the
foremost of them, "O my brethren, our father showed him the
liveliest affection when he was to us naught save a vagrant and
unknown, and indeed made him our ruler and our governor; and now,
hearing of his victory won from the ogre and learning that the
stranger is his son, will not our sire forthwith appoint this
bastard his only heir and give him dominion over us so that we
must all be forced to fall at his feet and bear his yoke? My rede
is this that we make an end of him in this very spot."
Accordingly they stole softly into his tent and dealt him from
every side strokes with their swords, so that they slashed him in
every limb and fondly thought that they had left him dead on the
bed without their awaking the Princess. Next morning they entered
the city of Harran and made their salams to the King, who
despaired of sighting them again, so he rejoiced with exceeding
joy on seeing them restored to him safe and sound and sane, and
asked why they had tarried from him so long. In reply they
carefully concealed from him their being thrown into the dungeon
by the Ghul of Abyssinia and how Khudadad had rescued them: on
the contrary all declared that they had been delayed whilst
a-hunting and a-visiting the adjacent cities and countries. So
the Sultan gave full credence to their account and held his
peace. Such was their case; but as regards Khudadad, when the
Princess of Daryabar awoke in the morning she found her
bridegroom lying drowned in blood gashed and pierced with a score
of wounds.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

            The end of the full Six Hundredth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that, the
Princess, deeming her bridegroom dead, wept at this sight right
sore; and, calling to mind his youth and beauty, his valour and
his many virtues, she washed his face with her tears and
exclaimed, "Well-away and woe is me, O my lover, O Khudadad, do
these eyes look upon thee in sudden and violent death? Are these
thy brothers (the devils!) whom thy courage hath saved, the
destroyers of thee? Nay 'tis I am thy murtheress; I who suffered
thee to ally thy Fate with my hapless destiny, a lot that doometh
to destruction all who befriend me." Then considering the body
attentively she perceived that breath was slowly coming and going
through his nostrils, and that his limbs were yet warm. So she
made fast the tent-door and ran city-wards to seek a surgeon, and
anon having found a skilful leech, she returned with him, but lo
and behold! Khudadad was missing. She wist not what had become of
him, but thought in her mind that some wild beast had carried him
off; then she wept bitterly and bemoaned her mishap, so that the
surgeon was moved to ruth and with words of comfort and
consolation offered her house and service; and lastly he bore her
to the town and assigned to her a separate dwelling. He also
appointed two slave-girls to wait upon her, and albeit he knew
naught of her condition he was ever in attendance on her with the
honour and homage due to the kings. One day, she being somewhat
less sad of heart, the surgeon, who had now informed himself of
her condition, asked her, saying, "O my lady, be pleased to
acquaint me with thine estate and thy misfortunes, and as far as
in me lieth I will strive to aid and succour thee." And she,
observing the leech to be shrewd and trustworthy withal, made
known to him her story. Quoth the surgeon, "An it be thy wish, I
would gladly escort thee to thy father-in-law the King of Harran,
who is indeed a wise sovereign and a just; and he will rejoice to
see thee and will take vengeance on the unnatural Princes, his
sons, for the blood of thy husband unjustly shed." These words
pleased well the Princess; so the surgeon hired two dromedaries
which they mounted and the twain set forth for the city of
Harran. Alighting that same evening at a caravanserai the leech
asked what news had come from town; and the Keeper answered, "The
King of Harran had a son passing valiant and accomplished who
abode with him for some years as a stranger; but lately he was
lost, nor doth any know of him whether he be dead or alive. The
Princess Firuzah his mother hath sent allwheres in search of him,
yet hath she found nor trace nor tidings of him. His parents and
indeed all the folk, rich and poor, weep and wail for him and
albeit the Sultan hath other forty and nine sons, none of them
can compare with him for doughty deeds and skilful craft, nor
from any one of them deriveth he aught of comfort or consolation.
Full quest and search have been made but hitherto all hath been
in vain." The surgeon thereupon made known these words to the
Princess of Daryabar, who was minded to go straightway and
acquaint the mother of Khudadad with everything that had befallen
her husband; but the surgeon, after full reflection, said, "O
Princess, shouldst thou fare with this intent, haply ere thou
arrive thither the forty-nine Princes may hear of thy coming; and
they, by some means or other, will assuredly do thee die, and thy
life will be spent to no purpose. Nay, rather let me go first to
Prince Khudadad's mother: I will tell her all thy tale and she
doubtless will send for thee. Until such time do thou remain
secret in this Serai." Accordingly the leech rode on leisurely
for the city and on the road he met a lady mounted upon a
she-mule[FN#245] whose housings were of the richest and finest,
while behind her walked confidential servants, followed by a band
of horsemen and foot- soldiers and Habashi slaves; and, as she
rode along, the people formed espalier, standing on either side
to salute her while she passed. The leech also joined the throng
and made his obeisance, after which quoth he to a bystander,
which was a Darwaysh, "Methinks this lady must be a queen?" "'Tis
even so," quoth the other, "she is the consort of our Sultan and
all the folk honour and esteem her above her sister-wives for
that in truth she is the mother of Prince Khudadad and of him
thou surely hast heard." Hereupon the surgeon accompanied the
cavalcade; and, when the lady dismounted at a cathedral-mosque
and gave alms of Ashrafis[FN#246] and gold coins to all around
(for the King had enjoined her that until Khudadad's return she
should deal charity to the poor with her own hand, and pray for
the youth's being restored to his home in peace and safety), the
mediciner also mingled with the throng which joined in
supplications for their favourite and whispered to a slave
saying, "O my brother, it behoveth me that I make known without
stay or delay to Queen Firuzah a secret which is with me."
Replied he, "An it be aught concerning Prince Khudadad 'tis well:
the King's wife will surely give ear to thee; but an it be other,
thou wilt hardly win a hearing, for that she is distraught by the
absence of her son and careth not for aught beside." The surgeon,
still speaking low, made reply, "My secret concerneth that which
is on her mind." "If this be so," returned the slave, "do thou
follow her train privily till it arrive at the palace gate."
Accordingly, when the Lady Firuzah reached her royal apartments,
the man made petition to her, saying, "A stranger would fain tell
somewhat to thee in private;" and she deigned give permission and
command, exclaiming, "'Tis well, let him be brought hither."
Hereupon the slave presented to her the surgeon whom the Queen
with gracious mien bade approach; and he, kissing ground between
her hands, made his petition in these words: "I have a long tale
to tell thy Highness whereat thou shalt greatly marvel." Then he
described to her Khudadad's condition, the villainy of his
brothers and his death at their hands and of his corpse having
been carried off by wild beasts. Queen Firuzah hearing of her
son's murther fell straight- way a-swooning to the ground, and
the attendants ran up and, raising her, besprinkled her face with
rose-water until she recovered sense and consciousness. Then she
gave orders to the surgeon saying, "Hie thee straightway to the
Princess of Daryabar and convey to her greetings and expressions
of sympathy both from myself and from his sire;" and as the leech
departed she called to mind her son and wept with sore weeping.
By chance the Sultan, who was passing by that way, seeing Firuzah
in tears and sobs and breaking out into sore and bitter
lamentation, asked of her the reason thereof.--And as the morn
began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and First Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that when her
husband enquired of Queen Firuzah why and wherefore she wept and
wailed, and moaned and groaned, she told him all she had heard
from the leech, and her husband was filled with hot wrath against
his sons. So he rose up and went straightway to the
audience-chamber, where the townsfolk had gathered together to
petition him and to pray for justice and redress; and they,
seeing his features working with rage, were all sore afraid.
Presently the Sultan seated himself on the throne of his kingship
and gave an order to his Grand Wazir, saying, "O Wazir Hasan,
take with thee a thousand men of the guard which keepeth watch
and ward over the palace and do thou bring hither the forty-and-
nine Princes, my unworthy sons, and cast them into the prison
appointed unto man-slayers and murtherers; and have a heed that
none of them escape." The Wazir did as he was bidden, and seizing
the Princes one and all cast them into gaol with the murtherers
and other criminals, then reported his action to his liege lord.
Hereat the Sultan dismissed sundry claimants and suppliants,
saying, "For the space of one full-told month henceforth it
besitteth me not to sit in the justice-hall. Depart hence, and,
when the thirty days shall have passed away, do ye return hither
again." After this rising from the throne he took with him the
Wazir Hasan, and entering the apartment of Queen Firuzah, gave
command to the Minister that he bring in all haste and with royal
state and dignity from the caravanserai, the Princess of Daryabar
and the mediciner. The Wazir straightway took horse accompanied
by the Emirs and soldiers; and, leading a fine white she-mule
richly adorned with jewelled trappings from out of the royal
stables, he rode to the caravanserai wherein abode the Princess
of Daryabar. Having told her all that the King had done, he
seated her upon the animal and, mounting the surgeon upon a steed
of Turcoman[FN#247] blood, all three proceeded with pomp and
grandeur to the palace. The shop-keepers and townsfolk ran out to
greet the lady as the cavalcade wound its way through the
streets; and, when they heard say that she was the wife of Prince
Khudadad, they rejoiced with exceeding joy for that they should
now receive tidings of his whereabouts. As soon as the procession
reached the palace gates the Princess of Daryabar saw the Sultan,
who had come forth to greet her, and she alighted from the mule
and kissed his feet. The King then raised her by the hand and
conducted her to the chamber wherein sat Queen Firuzah awaiting
her visit, and all three fell on one another's necks and wept
sore and could on no wise control their grief. But whenas their
sorrow was somewhat assuaged, the Princess of Daryabar said to
the King, "O my lord the Sultan, I would proffer humble petition
that full vengeance may fall upon those, one and all, by whom my
husband hath been so foully and cruelly murthered." Replied the
King, "O my lady, rest assured that I will assuredly put to death
all those villains in requital for the blood of Khudadad;"
presently adding, "'Tis true that the dead body of my brave son
hath not been found, still it seemeth but right to me that a tomb
be built, a cenotaph whereby his greatness and goodness may be
held in everlasting remembrance." Thereupon he summoned the Grand
Wazir and bade that a great Mausoleum of white marble be edified
amiddlemost the city and the Minister straightway appointed
workmen and made choice of a suitable spot in the very centre of
the capital. So there they built a gorgeous cenotaph crowned with
a noble dome under which was sculptured a figure of Khudadad;
and, when the news of its completion reached the King, he
appointed a day for ceremonious mourning and perlections of the
Koran. At the appointed time and term the townsfolk gathered
together to see the funeral procession and the obsequies for the
departed; and the Sultan went in state to the Mausoleum together
with all the Wazirs, the Emirs and Lords of the land, and took
seat upon carpets of black satin purfled with flowers of gold
which were dispread over the marble floor. After a while a bevy
of Knights rode up, with downcast heads and half-closed eyes; and
twice circuiting the dome[FN#248] they halted the third time in
front of the door, and cried out aloud, "O Prince, O son of our
Sultan, could we by the sway of our good swords and the strength
of our gallant arms restore thee to life, nor heart nor force
would fail us in the endeavour; but before the fiat of Almighty
Allah all must bow the neck." Then the horsemen rode away to the
place whence they came, followed by one hundred hermits hoar of
head and dwellers of the caves who had passed their lives in
solitude and abstinence nor ever held converse with man or
womankind, neither did they appear in Harran at any time save for
the obsequies of the reigning race. In front came one of these
greybeards steadying with one hand a huge and ponderous tome
which he bore upon his head. Presently all the holy men thrice
compassed the Mausoleum, then standing on the highway the eldest
cried with a loud voice, "O Prince, could we by dint of orisons
and devotions bring thee back to life, these hearts and souls of
ours would be devoted to quickening thee, and on seeing thee
arise once again we would wipe thy feet with our own age-white
beards." And when they also retired came one hundred maidens of
wondrous beauty and loveliness, mounted on white barbs whose
saddles were richly embroidered and set with jewels: their faces
were bare and on their heads they bore golden canisters filled
with precious stones, rubies and diamonds. They also rode in
circuit round the cenotaph and, halting at the door, the youngest
and fairest of them, speaking in the name of her sisterhood,
exclaimed, "O Prince, could our youth and our charms avail thee
aught, we would present ourselves to thee and become thy
handmaids; but alas! thou knowest full well that our beauties are
here all in vain nor can our love now warm thy clay." Then they
also departed in the deepest grief. As soon as they had
disappeared the Sultan and all with him rose up and walked thrice
round the figure that had been set up under the dome; then
standing at its feet the father said, "O my beloved son,
enlighten these eyes which tears for the stress of separation
have thus bedimmed." He then wept bitterly and all his Ministers
and Courtiers and Grandees joined in his mourning and
lamentations; and, when they had made an end of the obsequies,
the Sultan and his suite returned palace-wards and the door of
the dome was locked.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Sultan
commanded congregational prayers in all the mosques for a full
told week and he ceased not to mourn and weep and wail before the
cenotaph of his son for eight days. And as soon as this term was
passed he commanded the Grand Wazir that vengeance be meted out
for the murther of Prince Khudadad, and that the Princes be
brought out from their dungeons and be done to death. The tidings
were bruited about the city, and preparations were made for
executing the assassins and crowds of folk collected to gaze upon
the scaffold, when suddenly came a report that an enemy whom the
King had routed in bygone times was marching upon the city with a
conquering army. Hereat the Sultan was sore troubled and
perplexed and the ministers of state said one to other, "Alas!
had Prince Khudadad been on life he would forthwith have put to
flight the forces of the foe however fierce and fell." Natheless
the Sovran set out from the city with his suite and host, and eke
he made ready for flight to some other land by way of the river
should the enemy's force prove victorious. Then the two powers
met in deadly combat; and the invader, surrounding the King of
Harran's many on every side, would have cut him to pieces with
all his warriors, when behold, an armed force hitherto unseen
rode athwart the plain at a pace so swift and so sure that the
two hostile Kings gazed upon them in uttermost amazement, nor
wist any one whence that host came. But when it drew near, the
horsemen charged home on the enemies and in the twinkling of an
eye put them to flight; then hotly pursuing felled them with the
biting sword and the piercing spear. Seeing this onslaught the
King of Harran marvelled greatly and rendering thanks to heaven
said to those around him, "Learn ye the name of the Captain of
yonder host, who he may be and whence came he." But when all the
foemen had fallen upon the field save only a few who escaped
hither and thither and the hostile sultan who had been taken
prisoner, the Captain of the friendly forces returned from
pursuit well pleased to greet the King. And, lo and behold! as
the twain drew near one to other the Sultan was certified that
the Captain was none other than his beloved child, Khudadad,
whilome lost and now found. Accordingly, he rejoiced with joy
unspeakable that his enemy had thus been vanquished and that he
had again looked upon his son, Khudadad, who stood before him
alive and safe and sound. "O my sire," presently exclaimed the
Prince, "I am he whom thou deemest to have been slain; but Allah
Almighty hath kept me on life that I might this day stand thee in
good stead and destroy these thine enemies." "O my beloved son,"
replied the King, "surely I had despaired and never hoped again
to see thee with these mine eyes." So father and son dismounted
and fell upon each other's necks and quoth the Sultan, clasping
the youth's hand, "Long since have I known of thy valiant deeds,
and how thou didst save thine ill-omened brothers from the hands
of the man-devouring Abyssinian, and of the evil wherewith they
requited thee. Go now to thy mother, of whom naught remaineth,
through bitter tears for thee, save skin and bone: be thou the
first to gladden her heart and give her the good tidings of this
thy victory." As they rode along, the Prince enquired of the
Sultan, his sire, how he had heard tell of the Habashi and of the
rescue of the Princes from the cannibal's clutches. "Hath one of
my brothers," added he, "informed thee of this adventure?" "Not
so, O my son," replied the King, "not they, but the Princess of
Daryabar told me the miserable tale thereof: she hath dwelt for
many days with me and 'twas she who first and foremost demanded
vengeance for thy blood." when Khudadad heard that the Princess
his spouse was his father's guest, he rejoiced with exceeding joy
and cried, "Suffer me first to see my mother;[FN#249] then will I
go to the Princess of Daryabar." The King of Harran hereat struck
off the head of his chief enemy and exposed it publicly
throughout the streets of his capital, and all the people exulted
mightily not only at the victory but also for the return of
Khudadad safe and sound; and dancing and feasting were in every
household. Presently Queen Firuzah and the Princess of Daryabar
presented themselves before the Sultan and offered their
congratulations to him, then they went to see Khudadad both hand
in hand and the three falling on one another's necks wept for
very joy.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that after this
the King and his Queen and daughter-in-law sat long conversing,
and they marvelled much how Khudadad, albeit he was sorely gashed
and pierced with the sword, had escaped alive from that wildest
of wolds, whereupon the Prince at the bidding of his sire told
his tale in these words: "A peasant mounted on a camel chanced to
pass by my pavilion and seeing me sore wounded and weltering in
my blood, set me upon his beast and conveyed me to his house;
then, choosing some roots of desert-herbs he placed them on the
hurts so that they kindly healed, and I speedily recovered
strength. After returning thanks to my benefactor and giving him
liberal largesse, I set out for the city of Harran and on the
road I saw the forces of the foe in countless numbers marching
upon thy city. Wherefore I made the matter known to the folk of
the townships and villages round about and besought their aid;
then collecting a large force I placed myself at the head
thereof, and arriving in the nick of time destroyed the invading
hosts." Hereupon the Sultan gave thanks to Allah Almighty and
said, "Let all the Princes who conspired against thy life be put
to death;" and sent forthright for the Sworder of his vengeance;
but Khudadad made request to his sire and said, "In good sooth, O
my lord the King, they all deserve the doom thou hast ordained,
yet be not these my brethren and eke thine own flesh and blood? I
have freely forgiven them their offence against me and I humbly
pray thy pardon also, that thou grant them their lives, for that
blood ever calleth unto blood." The Sultan at length consented
and forgave their offence. Then, summoning all the Ministers, he
declared Khudadad his heir and successor, in presence of the
Princes whom he bade bring from the prison house. Khudadad caused
their chains and fetters to be stricken off and embraced them one
by one, showing them the same fondness and affection as he had
shown to them in the castle of the cannibal Habashi. All the folk
on hearing of this noble conduct of Prince Khudadad raised shouts
of applause and loved him yet more than before. The surgeon who
had done such good service to the Princess of Daryabar received a
robe of honour and much wealth; and on this wise that which began
with mishap had issue in all happiness. When Queen Shahrazad
ended this story she said to Shahryar, "O my lord, thou art
doubtless astonished to find that the Caliph Harun al-Rashid
changed his wrath against Ghanim[FN#250] and his mother and
sister to feelings of favour and affection, but I am assured that
thou wilt be the more surprised on hearing the story of the
curious adventures of that same Caliph with the blind man, Baba
Abdullah." Quoth Dunyazad, as was her way, to her sister
Shahrazad, "O sister mine, what a rare and delectable tale hast
thou told and now prithee favour us with another." She replied,
"It is well nigh dawn but, if my life be spared, I will tell thee
as the morrow morrows a strange and wonderful history of the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid."[FN#251]--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Fourth Night,

When she began to relate the History of





                 THE CALIPH'S NIGHT ADVENTURE.



I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Caliph Harun al-Rashid
was one night wakeful exceedingly and when he rose in the morning
restlessness gat hold of him. Wherefore all about him were
troubled for that "Folk aye follow Prince's fashion;" they
rejoice exceedingly with his joy and are sorrowful with his
sorrows albeit they know not the cause why they are so affected.
Presently the Commander of the Faithful sent for Masrur the
Eunuch, and when he came to him cried, "Fetch me my Wazir,
Ja'afar the Barmaki, without stay or delay." Accordingly, he went
out and returned with the Minister who, finding him alone, which
was indeed rare, and seeing as he drew near that he was in a
melancholic humour, never even raising his eyes, stopped till his
lord would vouchsafe to look upon him. At last the Prince of True
Believers cast his glance upon Ja'afar, but forthright turned
away his head and sat motionless as before. The Wazir descrying
naught in the Caliph's aspect that concerned him personally,
strengthened his purpose and bespake him on this wise, "O
Commander of the Faithful, wilt thine Highness deign suffer me to
ask whence cometh this sadness?" and the Caliph answered with a
clearer brow, "Verily, O Wazir, these moods have of late become
troublesome to me, nor are they to be moved save by hearing
strange tales and verses; and, if thou come not hither on a
pressing affair, thou wilt gladden me by relating somewhat to
dispel my sadness." Replied the Wazir, "O Commander of the
Faithful, my office compelleth me to stand on thy service, and I
would fain remind thee that this is the day appointed for
informing thyself of the good governance of thy capital and its
environs, and this matter shall, Inshallah, divert thy mind and
dispel its gloom." The Caliph answered, "Thou dost well to remind
me, for that I had wholly forgotten it; so fare forth and change
thy vestments while I do the same with mine." Presently the twain
donned habits of stranger merchants and issued out by a private
postern of the palace-garden, which led them into the fields.
After they had skirted the city, they reached the Euphrates' bank
at some distance from the gate opening on that side, without
having observed aught of disorder; then they crossed the river in
the first ferry-boat they found, and, making a second round on
the further side, they passed over the bridge that joined the two
halves of Baghdad-town. At the bridge-foot they met with a blind
old man who asked alms of them; and the Caliph turned about and
crossed his palm with a diner, whereupon the beggar caught hold
of his hand, and held him fast, saying, "O beneficent man, whoso
thou ever may be, whom Allah hath inspired to bestow an alms upon
me, refuse not the favour I crave of thee, which is, to strike me
a buffet upon the ear, for that I deserve such punishment and a
greater still." After these words he quitted his hold of the
Caliph's hand that it might smite him, yet for fear lest the
stranger pass on without so doing he grasped him fast by his long
robe. And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Caliph,
surprised by the blind man's words and deeds said, "I may not
grant thy request nor will I minish the merit of my charity, by
treating thee as thou wouldst have me entreat thee." Saying these
words, he strove to get away from the blind man, but he who after
his long experience expected this refusal of his benefactor, did
his utmost to keep hold of him, and cried, "O my lord, forgive my
audacity and my persistency; and I implore thee either give me a
cuff on the ear, or take back thine alms, for I may not receive
it save on that condition, without falsing a solemn oath I have
sworn before the face of Allah; and, if thou knew the reason,
thou wouldst accord with me that the penalty is light indeed."
Then the Caliph not caring to be delayed any longer, yielded to
the blind man's importunity, and gave him a slight cuff:
whereupon he loosed him forthright and thanked him and blessed
him. When the Caliph and his Wazir, had walked some way from the
blind man, the former exclaimed, "This blind beggar must
assuredly have some right good cause for behaving himself in such
manner to all who give him alms, and I would fain know it. Do
thou return to him and tell him who I am, and bid him fail not to
appear at my palace about mid-afternoon prayer time that I may
converse with him, and hear whatso he hath to say." Hereupon
Ja'afar went back and bestowed alms on the blind man giving him
another cuff on the ear and apprised him of the Caliph's command,
and returned forthright to his lord. Presently, when the twain
reached the town, they found in a square a vast crowd of folk
gazing at a handsome youth and a well shaped, who was mounted on
a mare which he rode at fullest speed round the open space,
spurring and whipping the beast so cruelly that she was covered
with sweat and blood. Seeing this the Caliph, amazed at the
youth's brutality, stopped to ask the by-standers an they knew
why he tortured and tormented the mare on such wise; but he could
learn naught save that for some while past, every day at the same
time, he had entreated her after the same fashion. Hereat as they
walked along, the Caliph bid his Wazir especially notice the
place and order the young man to come without failing on the next
day, at the hour appointed for the blind man. But ere the Caliph
reached his palace, he saw in a street, which he had not passed
through for many months, a newly built mansion, which seemed to
him the palace of some great lord of the land. He asked the
Wazir, an he knew its owner; and Ja'afar answered he did not but
would make inquiry. So he consulted a neighbour who told him that
the house owner was one Khwajah Hasan surnamed Al-Habbal from his
handicraft, rope-making; that he himself had seen the man at work
in the days of his poverty, that he knew not how Fate and Fortune
had befriended him, yet that the same Khwajah had gotten such
exceeding wealth that he had been enabled to pay honourably and
sumptuously all the expenses he had incurred when building his
palace. Then the Wazir, returned to the Caliph, and gave him a
full account of whatso he had heard, whereat cried the Prince of
True Believers, "I must see this Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal: do thou
therefore, O Wazir, go and tell him to come to my palace, at the
same hour thou hast appointed for the other twain." The Minister
did his lord's bidding and the next day, after mid-afternoon
prayers, the Caliph retired to his own apartment and Ja'afar
introduced the three persons whereof we have been speaking and
presented them to the Caliph. All prostrated themselves at his
feet and when they rose up, the Commander of the Faithful asked
his name of the blind man, who answered he was hight Baba
Abdullah. "O Servant of Allah," cried the Caliph, "thy manner of
asking alms yesterday seemed so strange to me that, had it not
been for certain considerations I should not have granted thy
petition; nay, I would have prevented thy giving further offence
to the folk. And now I have bidden thee hither that I may know
from thyself what impelled thee to swear that rash oath whereof
thou toldest me, that I may better judge whether thou have done
well or ill, and if I should suffer thee to persist in a practice
which meseemeth must set so pernicious an example. Tell me openly
how such mad thought entered into thy head, and conceal not
aught, for I will know the truth and the full truth."--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Baba
Abdullah terrified by these words, cast himself a second time at
the Caliph's feet with his face prone to the ground, and when he
rose again, said, "O Commander of the Faithful, I crave pardon of
thy Highness for my audacity, in that I dared require, and well
nigh compelled thee to do a thing which verily seemeth contrary
to sound sense. I acknowledge mine offence; but as I knew not thy
Highness at that time, I implore thy clemency, and I pray thou
wilt consider my ignorance of thine exalted degree. And now as to
the extravagance of my action, I readily admit that it must be
strange to the sons of Adam; but in the eye of Allah 'tis but a
slight penance wherewith I have charged myself for an enormous
crime of which I am guilty, and wherefor, an all the people in
the world were each and every to give me a cuff on the ear
'twould not be sufficient atonement. Thy Highness shall judge of
it thyself, when I, in telling my tale according to thy
commandment, will inform thee of what was my offence." And here
he began to relate




The Story of the Blind Man, Baba Abdullah.[FN#252]



O my lord the Caliph, I, the humblest of thy slaves, was born in
Baghdad, where my father and mother, presently dying within a few
days of each other, left me a fortune large enough to last me
throughout my lifetime. But I knew not its value and soon I had
squandered it in luxury and loose living and I cared naught for
thrift or for increasing my store. But when little was left to me
of my substance, I repented of my evil courses and toiled and
laboured hard by day and night to increase my remaining stock of
money. It is truly said, "After waste cometh knowledge of worth."
Thus little by little I got together fourscore camels, which I
let on hire to merchants, and thus I made goodly gain each time I
found occasion: moreover I was wont to engage myself together
with my beasts and on this wise I journeyed over all the
dominions and domains of thy Highness. Brief, I hoped ere long to
reap an abundant crop of gold by the hiring out of my baggage
animals.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Seventh Night.

Then said she: I have heard, O auspicious King, that Baba
Abdullah continued his tale in these words: Once I had carried
merchants' stuffs to Bassorah for shipping India-wards and I was
returning to Baghdad with my beasts unladen. Now as I fared
homewards I chanced pass across a plain of excellent pasturage
lying fallow and far from any village, and there unsaddled the
camels which I hobbled and tethered together that they might crop
the luxuriant herbs and thorns and yet not fare astray. Presently
appeared a Darwaysh who was travelling afoot for Bassorah, and he
took seat beside me to enjoy ease after unease; whereat I asked
him whence he wayfared and whither he was wending. He also asked
me the same question and when we had told each to other our own
tales, we produced our provisions and brake our fast together,
talking of various matters as we ate. Quoth the Darwaysh, "I know
a spot hard by which enholdeth a hoard and its wealth is so
wonder-great that shouldst thou load upon thy fourscore camels
the heaviest burthens of golden coins and costly gems from that
treasure there will appear no minishing thereof." Hearing these
words I rejoiced with exceeding joy and gathering from his mien
and demeanour that he did not deceive me, I arose forthright and
falling upon his neck, exclaimed, "O Hallow of Allah, who caress
naught for this world's goods and hast renounced all mundane
lusts and luxuries, assuredly thou hast full knowledge of this
treasure, for naught remaineth hidden from holy men as thou art.
I pray thee tell me where it may be found that I may load my
fourscore beasts with bales of Ashrafis and jewels: I wot full
well that thou hast no greed for the wealth of this world, but
take, I pray thee, one of these my fourscore camels as recompense
and reward for the favour." Thus spake I with my tongue but in my
heart I sorely grieved to think that I must part with a single
camel-load of coins and gems; withal I reflected that the other
three-score and nineteen camel-loads would contain riches to my
heart's content. Accordingly, as I wavered in mind, at one moment
consenting and at the next instant repenting, the Darwaysh noting
my greed and covetise and avarice, replied, "Not so, O my
brother: one camel doth not suffice me that I should shew thee
all this hoard. On a single condition only will I tell thee of
the place; to wit, that we twain lead the animals thither and
lade them with the treasure, then shalt thou give me one half
thereof and take the other half to thyself. With forty camels'
load of costly ores and minerals forsure thou canst buy thousands
more of camels." Then, seeing that refusal was impossible, I
cried "So be it! I agree to thy proposal and I will do as thou
desires";" for in my heart I had conned the matter over and well
I wist that forty camel-loads of gold and gems would suffice me
and many generations of my descendants; and I feared lest an I
gain say him I should repent for ever and ever having let so
great a treasure slip out of hand. Accordingly, giving full
consent to all be said, I got together every one of my beasts and
set me a-wayfaring along with the Fakir.[FN#253] After travelling
over some short distance we came upon a gorge between two craggy
mountain-walls towering high in crescent form and the pass was
exceeding narrow so that the animals were forced to pace in
single file, but further on it flared out and we could thread it
without difficulty into the broad Wady below. No human being was
anywhere to be seen or heard in this wild land, so we were
undisturbed and easy in our minds nor feared aught. Then quoth
the Darwaysh, "Leave here the camels and come with me."--And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Eighth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the blind
man Baba Abdullah pursued his tale on this wise:--I did as the
Darwaysh had bidden me; and, nakhing[FN#254] all the camels, I
followed in wake of him. After walking a short way from the
halting-place he produced a flint and steel and struck fire
therewith and lit some sticks he had gotten together; then,
throwing a handful of strong-smelling incense upon the flames, he
muttered words of incantation which I could by no means
understand. At once a cloud of smoke arose, and spireing upwards
veiled the mountains; and presently, the vapour clearing away, we
saw a huge rock with pathway leading to its perpendicular face.
Here the precipice showed an open door, wherethrough appeared in
the bowels of the mountain a splendid palace, the workmanship of
the Jinns, for no man had power to build aught like it. In due
time, after sore toil, we entered therein and found an endless
treasure, ranged in mounds with the utmost ordinance and
regularity. Seeing a heap of Ashrafis I pounced upon it as a
vulture swoopeth upon her quarry, the carrion, and fell to
filling the sacks with golden coin to my heart's content. The
bags were big, but I was constrained to stuff them only in
proportion to the strength of my beasts. The Darwaysh, too,
busied himself in like manner, but he charged his sacks with gems
and jewels only, counselling me the while to do as he did. So I
cast aside the ducats and filled my bags with naught save the
most precious of the stonery. When we had wrought our best, we
set the well-stuffed sacks upon the camels' backs and we made
ready to depart; but, before we left the treasure-house wherein
stood ranged thousands of golden vessels, exquisite in shape and
workmanship, the Darwaysh went into a hidden chamber and brought
from out a silvern casket a little golden box full of some
unguent, which he showed to me, and then he placed it in his
pocket. Presently, he again threw incense upon the fire and
recited his incantations and conjurations, whereat the door
closed and the rock became as before. We then divided the camels,
he taking one half and I the other; and, passing through the
strait and gloomy gorge in single file, we came out upon the open
plain. Here our way parted, he wending in the direction of
Bassorah and I Baghdad-wards; and when about to leave him I
showered thanks upon the Darwaysh who had obtained me all this
wealth and riches worth a thousand thousand of gold coins; and
farewelled him with deep emotions of gratitude; after which we
embraced and wended our several ways. But hardly had I bidden
adieu to the Fakir and had gone some little distance from him
with my file of camels than the Shaytan tempted me with greed of
gain so that I said to myself, "The Darwaysh is alone in the
world, without friends or kinsman, and is wholly estranged from
matters mundane. What will these camel-loads of filthy lucre
advantage him? Moreover, engrossed by the care of the camels, not
to speak of the deceitfulness of riches, he may neglect his
prayer and worship: therefore it behoveth me to take back from
him some few of my beasts." With this resolve I made the camels
halt and tying up their forelegs ran back after the holy man and
called out his name. He heard my loud shouts and awaited me
forthright; and, as soon as I approached him I said, "When I had
quitted thee a thought came into my mind; to wit, that thou art a
recluse who keepest thyself aloof from earthly things, pure in
heart and busied only with orison and devotion Now care of all
these camels will cause thee only toil and moil and trouble and
waste of precious time: 'twere better then to give them back and
not run the risk of these discomforts and dangers. The Darwaysh
replied, "O my son, thou speakest sooth. The tending of all these
animals will bring me naught save ache of head, so do thou take
of them as many as thou listest. I thought not of the burthen and
posher till thou drewest my attention thereto; but now I am
forewarned thereof; so may Almighty Allah keep thee in His holy
keeping!" Accordingly, I took ten camels of him and was about to
gang my gait when suddenly it struck me, "This Fakir was
unconcerned at giving up ten camels, so 'twere better I ask more
of him." Thereupon I drew nearer to him and said, "Thou canst
hardly manage thirty camels; do give me, I pray thee, other ten."
Said he, "O my son, do whatso thou wishest! Take thee other ten
camels; twenty will suffice me." I did his bidding and driving
off the twenty added them to my forty. Then the spirit of
concupiscence possessed me, and I bethought me more and more to
get yet other ten camels from his share; so I retraced my steps
for the third time and asked him for another ten, and of these,
as also the remaining ten, I wheedled him. The Darwaysh gladly
gave up the last of his camels, and, shaking out his
skirts,[FN#255] made ready to depart; but still my accursed greed
stuck to me. Albeit I had got the fourscore beasts laden with
Ashrafis and jewels, and I might have gone home happy and
content, with wealth for fourscore generations, Satan tempted me
still more, and urged me also to take the box of ointment, which
I supposed to contain something more precious than rubies.--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Ninth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Baba
Abdullah continued his tale in these words:--So when I had again
farewelled and embraced him I paused awhile and said, "What wilt
thou do with the little box of salve thou hast taken to thy
portion? I pray thee give me that also." The Fakir would by no
means part with it, whereupon I lusted the more to possess it,
and resolved in my mind that, should the holy man give it up of
his free will, then well and good, but if not I would force it
from him. Seeing my intent he drew the box from out his breast-
pocket[FN#256] and handed it to me saying, "O my son, an thou
wouldst have this box of ointment, then freely do I give it to
thee; but first it behoveth thee to learn the virtue of the
unguent it containeth." Hearing these words I said, "Forasmuch as
thou hast shown me all this favour, I beseech thee tell me of
this ointment and what of properties it possesseth." Quoth he,
"The wonders of this ointment are passing strange and rare. An
thou close thy left eye and rub upon the lid the smallest bit of
the salve then all the treasures of the world now concealed from
thy gaze will come to sight; but an thou rub aught thereof upon
thy right eye thou shalt straightway become stone blind of both."
Thereat I bethought me of putting this wondrous unguent to the
test and placing in his hand the box I said, "I see thou
understandest this matter right well; so now I pray thee apply
somewhat of the ointment with thine own hand to my left eyelid."
The Darwaysh thereupon closed my left eye and with his finger
rubbed a little of the unguent over the lid; and when I opened it
and looked around I saw the hidden hoards of the earth in
countless quantities even as the Fakir had told me I should see
them. Then closing my right eyelid, I bade him apply some of the
salve to that eye also. Said he, "O my son, I have forewarned
thee that if I rub it upon thy right eyelid thou shalt become
stone blind of both. Put far from thee this foolish thought: why
shouldst thou bring this evil to no purpose on thyself?" He spake
sooth indeed, but by reason of my accursed ill-fate I would not
heed his words and considered in my mind, "If applying the salve
to the left eyelid hath produced such effect, assuredly far more
wondrous still shall be the result when rubbed on the right eye.
This fellow doth play me false and keepeth back from me the truth
of the matter." When I had thus determined in my mind I laughed
and said to the holy man, "Thou art deceiving me to the intent
that I should not advantage myself by the secret, for that
rubbing the unguent upon the right eyelid hath some greater
virtue than applying it to the left eye, and thou wouldst
withhold the matter from me. It can never be that the same
ointment hath qualities so contrary and virtues so diverse."
Replied the other, "Allah Almighty is my witness that the marvels
of the ointment be none other save these whereof I bespake thee;
O dear my friend, have faith in me, for naught hath been told
thee save what is sober sooth." Still would I not believe his
words, thinking that he dissembled with me and kept secret from
me the main virtue of the unguent. Wherefore filled with this
foolish thought I pressed him sore and begged that he rub the
ointment upon my right eyelid; but he still refused and said,
"Thou seest how much of favour I have shown to thee: wherefore
should I now do thee so dire an evil? Know for a surety that it
would bring thee lifelong grief and misery; and I beseech thee,
by Allah the Almighty, abandon this thy purpose and believe my
words." But the more he refused so much