 the more did I persist;
and in fine I made oath and sware by Allah, saying, "O Darwaysh,
what things soever I have asked of thee thou gayest freely unto
me and now remaineth only this request for me to make. Allah upon
thee, gainsay me not and grant me this last of thy boons: and
whatever shall betide me I will not hold thee responsible
therefor. Let Destiny decide for good or for evil." When the holy
man saw that his denial was of no avail and that I irked him with
exceeding persistence, he put the smallest bit of ointment on my
right lid and, as I opened wide my eyes, lo and behold! both were
stone-blind: naught could I see for the black darkness before
them and ever since that day have I been sightless and helpless
as thou foundest me. When I knew that I was blinded, I exclaimed,
"O Darwaysh of ill-omen, what thou didst fore tell hath come to
pass;" and I fell to cursing him and saying "O would to Heaven
thou hadst never brought me to the hoard or hadst given me such
wealth. What now avail me all this gold and jewels? Take back thy
forty camels and make me whole again." Replied he, "What evil
have I done to thee? I showed thee favours more than any man hath
ever dealt to another. Thou wouldst not heed my rede, but didst
harden thy heart and lustedst to obtain this wealth and to pry
into the hidden treasures of the earth. Thou wouldst not be
content with what thou hadst and thou didst misdoubt my words
thinking that I would play thee false. Thy case is beyond all
hope, for never more wilt thou regain thy sight; no, never. Then
said I with tears and lamentations, "O Fakir, take back thy
fourscore camels laden with gold and precious stones and wend thy
way: I absolve thee from all blame, natheless I beseech thee by
Allah Almighty to restore my sight an thou art able." He answered
not a word, but leaving me in miserable plight presently took the
load to Bassorah, driving before him the fourscore camels laden
with wealth. I cried aloud and besought him to lead me with him
away from the life destroying wilderness, or to put me on the
path of some caravan, but he regarded not my cries and abandoned
me there.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Tenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Baba
Abdullah the blind man resumed his story, saying:--So when the
Darwaysh departed from me, I had well nigh died of grief and
wrath at the loss of my sight and of my riches, and from the
pangs of thirst[FN#257] and hunger. Next day by good fortune a
caravan from Bassorah passed that way; and, seeing me in such a
grievous condition, the merchants had compassion on me and made
me travel with them to Baghdad. Naught could I do save beg my
bread in order to keep myself alive; so I became a mendicant and
made this vow to Allah Almighty that, as a punishment for this my
unlucky greed and cursed covetise, I would require a cuff upon my
ear from everyone who might take pity on my case and give an
alms. On this wise it was that yesterday I pursued thee with such
pertinacity.--When the blind man made an end of his story the
Caliph said, "O Baba Abdullah! thine offence was grievous; may
Allah have mercy on thee therefor. It now remaineth to thee to
tell thy case to devotees and anchorites that they may offer up
their potent prayers in thy behalf. Take no thought for thy daily
wants: I have determined that for thy living thou shalt have a
dole of four dirhams a day from my royal treasury according to
thy need as long as thou mayest live. But see that thou go no
more to ask for alms about my city." So Baba Abdullah returned
thanks to the Prince of True Believers, saying, "I will do
according to thy bidding." Now when the Caliph Harun al-Rashid
had heard the story of Baba Abdullah and the Darwaysh, he turned
to and addressed the young man whom he had seen riding at fullest
speed upon the mare and savagely lashing and ill-treating her.
"What is thy name?" quoth he, and quoth the youth, bowing his
brow groundwards, "My name, O Commander of the Faithful, is Sidi
Nu'uman."[FN#258] Then said the Caliph, "Hearken now, O Sidi
Nu'uman! Ofttimes have I watched the horsemen exercise their
horses, and I myself have often done likewise, but never saw I
any who rode so mercilessly as thou didst ride thy mare, for thou
didst ply both whip and shovel-iron in cruellest fashion. The
folk all stood to gaze with wonderment, but chiefly I, who was
constrained against my wish to stop and ask the cause of the
bystanders. None, however, could make clear the matter, and all
men said that thou art wont each day to ride the mare in this
most brutal fashion, whereat my mind marvelled all the more. I
now would ask of thee the cause of this thy ruthless savagery,
and see that thou tell me every whit and leave not aught unsaid."
Sidi Nu'uman, hearing the order of the Commander of the Faithful,
became aware he was fully bent upon hearing the whole matter and
would on no wise suffer him to depart until all was explained. So
the colour of his countenance changed and he stood speechless
like a statue through fear and trepidation; whereat said the
Prince of True Believers, "O Sidi Nu'uman, fear naught but tell
me all thy tale. Regard me in the light of one of thy friends and
speak without reserve, and explain to me the matter fully as thou
wouldst do hadst thou been speaking to thy familiars. Moreover,
an thou art afraid of any matter which thou shalt confide to me
and if thou dread my indignation, I grant thee immunity and a
free pardon." At these comforting words of the Caliph, Sidi
Nu'uman took courage, and with clasped hands replied, "I trust I
have not in this matter done aught contrary to thy Highness's law
and custom, and therefore will I willingly obey thy bidding and
relate to thee all my tale. If I have offended in anything then
am I worthy of thy punishment. 'Tis true that I have daily
exercised the mare and ridden her at speed around the hippodrome
as thou sawest me do; and I lashed and gored her with all my
might. Thou hadst compassion on the mare and didst deem me cruel
hearted to entreat her thus, but when thou shalt have heard all
my adventure thou wilt admit, Inshallah--God willing--that this
be only a trifling penalty for her offence, and that not she but
I deserve thy pity and pardon! With thy permission I will now
begin my story." And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

         The end of The Six Hundred and Eleventh Night.

Then said she: I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
Harun al-Rashid accorded the youth permission to speak and that
the rider of the mare began in these words the





History of Sidi Nu'uman.


           
O Lord of beneficence and benevolence, my parents were possessed
of wealth and riches sufficient to provide their son when they
died with ample means for a life long livelihood so that he might
pass his days like a Grandee of the land in ease and joyance and
delight. I--their only child--had nor care nor trouble about any
matter until one day of the days, when in the prime of manhood, I
was a minded to take unto me a wife, a woman winsome and comely
to look upon, that we might live together in mutual love and
double blessedness. But Allah Almighty willed not that a model
helpmate become mine; nay, Destiny wedded me to grief and the
direst misery. I married a maid who in outward form and features
was a model of beauty and loveliness without, however, one single
gracious gift of mind or soul; and on the very second day after
the wedding her evil nature began to manifest itself. Thou art
well aware, O Prince of True Believers, that by Moslem custom
none may look upon the face of his betrothed before the marriage
contract? nor after wedlock can he complain should his bride
prove a shrew or a fright: he must needs dwell with her in such
content as he may and be thankful for his fate, be it fair or
unfair. When I saw first the face of my bride and learnt that it
was passing comely, I joyed with exceeding joy and gave thanks to
Almighty Allah that He had bestowed on me so charming a mate.
That night I slept with her in joy and love-delight; but next day
when the noon meal was spread for me and her I found her not at
table and sent to summon her; and after some delay, she came and
sat her down. I dissembled my annoyance and forbore for this late
coming to find fault with her which I soon had ample reason to
do. It so happened that amongst the many dishes which were served
up to us was a fine pilaff,[FN#259] of which I, according to the
custom in our city, began to eat with a spoon; but she, in lieu
of it pulled out an ear pick from her pocket and therewith fell
to picking up the rice and ate it grain by grain. Seeing this
strange conduct I was sore amazed and fuming inwardly said in
sweet tones, "O my Aminah,[FN#260] what be this way of eating?
hast thou learnt it of thy people or art thou counting grains of
rice purposing to make a hearty meal here after? Thou hast eaten
but ten or twenty during all this time. Or haply thou art
practicing thrift: if so I would have thee know that Allah
Almighty hath given me abundant store and fear not on that
account; but do thou, O my dearling, as all do and eat as thou
seest thy husband eat." I fondly thought that she would assuredly
vouchsafe some words of thanks, but never a syllable spake she
and ceased not picking up grain after grain: nay more, in order
to provoke me to greater displeasure, she paused for a long time
between each. Now when the next course of cakes came on she idly
brake some bread and tossed a crumb or two into her mouth; in
fact she ate less than would satisfy the stomach of a sparrow. I
marvelled much to see her so obstinate and self-willed but I said
to myself, in mine innocence, "May be she hath not been
accustomed to eat with men, and especially she may be too shame
faced to eat heartily in presence of her husband: she will in
time do whatso do other folk." I thought also that perchance she
hath already broken her fast and lost appetite, or haply it hath
been her habit to eat alone. So I said nothing and after dinner
went out to smell the air and play the Jarid[FN#261] and thought
no more of the matter. When, however, we two sat again at meat my
bride ate after the same fashion as before; nay, she would ever
persist in her perversity; whereat I was sore troubled in mind,
and marvelled how without food she kept herself alive. One night
it chanced that deeming me fast asleep she rose up in stealth
from my side, I being wide awake: when I saw her step cautiously
from the bed as one fearing lest she might disturb me. I wondered
with exceeding wonder why she should arise from sleep to leave me
thus and methought I would look into the matter. Wherefore I
still feigned sleep and snored but watched her as I lay, and
presently saw her dress herself and leave the room; I then sprang
off the bed and throwing on my robe and slinging my sword across
my shoulder looked out of the window to spy whither she went.
Presently she crossed the courtyard and opening the street-door
fared forth; and I also ran out through the entrance which she
had left unlocked; then followed her by the light of the moon
until she entered a cemetery hard by our home.--And as the morn
began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Twelfth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Sidi
Nu'uman continued his story saying:--But when I beheld Aminah my
bride enter the cemetery, I stood without and close to the wall
over which I peered so that I could espy her well but she could
not discover me. Then what did I behold but Aminah sitting with a
Ghul![FN#262] Thy Highness wotteth well that Ghuls be of the race
of devils; to wit, they are unclean spirits which inhabit ruins
and which terrify solitary wayfarers and at times seizing them
feed upon their flesh; and if by day they find not any traveller
to eat they go by night to the graveyards and dig out and devour
dead bodies. So I was sore amazed and terrified to see my wife
thus seated with a Ghul. Then the twain dug up from the grave a
corpse which had been newly buried, and the Ghul and my wife
Aminah tore off pieces of the flesh which she ate making merry
the while and chatting with her companion but inasmuch as I stood
at some distance I could not hear what it was they said. At this
sight I trembled with exceeding fear. And when they had made an
end of eating they cast the bones into the pit and thereover
heaped up the earth e'en as it was before. Leaving them thus
engaged in their foul and fulsome work, I hastened home; and,
allowing the street-door to remain half-open as my bride had
done, I reached my room, and throwing myself upon our bed feigned
sleep. Presently Aminah came and doffing her dress calmly lay
beside me, and I knew by her manner that she had not seen me at
all, nor guessed that I had followed her to the cemetery. This
gave me great relief of mind, withal I loathed to bed beside a
cannibal and a corpse-eater; howbeit I lay still despite extreme
misliking till the Muezzin's call for dawn-prayers, when getting
up I busied myself with the Wuzu-ablution and set forth mosque-
wards. Then having said my prayers and fulfilled my ceremonial
duties,[FN#263] I strolled about the gardens, and during this
walk having turned over the matter in my mind, determined that it
behoved me to remove my bride from such ill companionship, and
wean her from the habit of devouring dead bodies. With these
thoughts I came back home at dinner-time, when Aminah on seeing
me return bade the servants serve up the noontide meal and we
twain sat at table; but as before she fell to picking up the rice
grain by grain. Thereat said I to her, "O my wife, it irketh me
much to see thee picking up each grain of rice like a hen. If
this dish suit not thy taste see there are, by Allah's grace and
the Almighty's favour, all kinds of meats before us. Do thou eat
of that which pleaseth thee most; each day the table is bespread
with dishes of different kinds and if these please thee not, thou
hast only to order whatsoever food thy soul desireth. Yet I would
ask of thee one question: Is there no meat upon the table as rich
and toothsome as man's flesh, that thou refuseth every dish they
set before thee?" Ere I had finished speaking my wife became
assured that I was aware of her night adventure: she suddenly
waxed wroth with exceeding wrath, her face flushed red as fire,
her eyeballs started out from their sockets and she foamed at the
mouth with ungovernable fury. Seeing her in this mood I was
terrified and my sense and reason fled by reason of my affright;
but presently in the madness of her passion she took up a tasse
of water which stood beside her and dipping her fingers in the
contents muttered some words which I could not understand; then
sprinkling some drops over me, cried, Accursed that thou art! for
this thine insolence and betrayal do thou be straightway turned
into a dog." At once I became transmewed and she, picking up a
staff began to ribroast me right mercilessly and well nigh killed
me. I ran about from room to room but she pursued me with the
stick, and tunded and belaboured me with might and main, till she
was clean exhausted. She then threw the street-door half open
and, as I made for it to save my life, attempted violently to
close it, so as to squeeze my soul out of my body; but I saw her
design and baffled it, leaving behind me, however, the tip of my
tail; and piteously yelping hereat I escaped further basting and
thought myself lucky to get away from her without broken bones.
When I stood in the street still whining and ailing, the dogs of
the quarter seeing a stranger, at once came rushing at me barking
and biting;[FN#264] and I with tail between my legs tore along
the market place and ran into the shop of one who sold sheeps'
and goats' heads and trotters; and there crouching low hid me in
a dark corner.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Thirteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Sidi
Nu'uman continued his story as follows--The shopkeeper, despite
his scruples of conscience, which caused him to hold all dogs
impure,[FN#265] hath ruth upon my sorry plight and drove away the
yelling and grinning curs that would have followed me into his
shop; and I, escaping this danger of doom, passed all the night
hid in my corner. Early next morning the butcher sallied forth to
buy his usual wares, sheeps' heads and hooves, and, coming back
with a large supply, he began to lay them out for sale within the
shop, when I, seeing that a whole pack of dogs had gathered about
the place attracted by the smell of flesh, also joined them. The
owner noticed me among the ragged tykes and said to himself,
"This dog hath tasted naught since yesterday when it ran yelping
hungrily and hid within my shop." He then threw me a fair sized
piece of meat, but I refused it and went up to him and wagged my
tail to the end that he might know my wish to stay with him and
be protected by his stall: he, however, thought that I had eaten
my sufficiency, and, picking up a staff frightened me away. So
when I saw how the butcher heeded not my case, I trotted off and
wandering to and fro presently came to a bakery and stood before
the door wherethrough I espied the baker at breakfast. Albeit I
made no sign as though I wanted aught of food, he threw me a
bittock of bread; and I, in lieu of snapping it up and greedily
swallowing it, as is the fashion with all dogs the gentle and
simple of them, approached him with it and gazed in his face and
wagged my tail by way of thanks. He was pleased by this my well
bred behaviour and smiled at me; whereat I albeit not one whit
anhungered, but merely to humour him, fell to eating the bread,
little by little and leisurely, to testify my respect. He was yet
more satisfied with my manners and wished to keep me in his shop;
and I, noting his intent, sat by the door and looked wistfully at
him, whereby he knew that I desired naught of him save his
protection. He then caressed me and took charge of me and kept me
to guard his store, but I would not enter his house till after he
had led the way; he also showed me where to lie o'nights and fed
me well at every meal and entreated me right hospitably. I
likewise would watch his every movement and always lay down or
rose up even as he bade me; and whenas he left his lodging or
walked anywhither he took me with him. If ever when I lay asleep
he went outside and found me not, he would stand still in the
street and call to me crying, "Bakht!' Bakht!''[FN#266] an
auspicious name he had given to me; and straightway on hearing
him I would rush about and frisk before the door; and when he set
out to taste the air I paced beside him now running on ahead, now
following at his heels and ever and anon looking up in his face.
Thus some time passed during which I lived with him in all
comfort; till one day of the days it so chanced that a woman came
to the bakery to buy her bread and gave the owner several dirhams
to its price, whereof one was bad coin whilst the others were
good. My master tested all the silvers and, finding out the false
bit, returned it demanding a true dirham in exchange; but the
woman wrangled and would not take it back and swore that it was
sound. Quoth the baker, "The dirham is beyond all doubt a
worthless: see yonder dog of mine, he is but a beast, yet mark me
he will tell thee whether it be true or false silver." So he
called me by my name, "Bakht! Bakht!" whereat I sprang up and ran
towards him and he, throwing all the moneys upon the ground
before me, cried, "Here, look these dirhams over and if there be
a false coin among them separate it from all the others." I
inspected the silvers each by each and found the counterfeit:
then, putting it on one side and all the others on another, I
placed my paw upon the false silver and wagging what remained of
my tail looked up at my master's face. The baker was delighted
with my sagacity, and the woman also, marvelling with excessive
marvel at what had happened, took back her bad dirham and paid
another in exchange. But when the buyer fared forth, my master
called together his neighbours and gossips and related to them
this matter; so they threw down on the ground before me coins
both good and bad, in order that they might test me and see with
their own eyes an I were as clever as my master had said I was.
Many times in succession I picked out the false coins from
amongst the true and placed my paw upon them without once
failing; so all went away astounded and related the case to each
and every one they saw and thus the bruit of me spread abroad
throughout the city. That live long day I spent in testing
dirhams fair and foul.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Fourteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Sidi
Nu'uman continued his story saying:--From that day forwards the
baker honoured me yet more highly, and all his friends and
familiars laughed and said, "Forsooth thou hast in this dog a
mighty good Shroff."[FN#267] And some envied my master his luck
in having me within the shop, and tried ofttimes to entice me
away, but the baker kept me with him nor would he ever allow me
to leave his side; for the fame of me brought him a host of
customers from every quarter of the town even the farthest. Not
many days after there came another woman to buy loaves at our
shop and paid the baker six dirhams whereof one was worthless. My
master passed them over to me for test and trial, and straightway
I picked out the false one, and placing paw thereon looked up in
the woman's face. Hereat she waxed confused and confessed that it
was miscoined and praised me for that I had found it out; then,
going forth the same woman made signs to me that I should follow
her unbeknown to the baker. Now I had not ceased praying Allah
that somehow He would restore me to my human form and hoped that
some good follower of the Almighty would take note of this my
sorry condition and vouchsafe me succour. So as the woman turned
several times and looked at me, I was persuaded in my mind that
she had knowledge of my case; I therefore kept my eyes upon her;
which seeing she came back ere she had stepped many paces, and
beckoned me to accompany her. I understood her signal and
sneaking out of the presence of the baker, who was busy heating
his oven, followed in her wake. Pleased beyond all measure to see
me obey her, she went straight way home with me, and entering she
locked the door and led me into a room where sat a fair maid in
embroidered dress whom I judged by her favour to be the good
woman's daughter. The damsel was well skilled in arts magical; so
the mother said to her, "O my daughter, here is a dog which
telleth bad dirhams from good dirhams. When first I heard the
marvel I bethought me that the beastie must be a man whom some
base wretch and cruel hearted had turned into a dog. Methought
that to day I would see this animal and test it when buying
loaves at the booth of yonder baker and behold, it hath acquitted
itself after the fairest of fashions and hath stood the test and
trial. Look well, O my daughter, at this dog and see whether it
be indeed an animal or a man transformed into a beast by
gramarye." The young lady, who had veiled her face,[FN#268]
hereupon considered me attentively and presently cried, "O my
mother, 'tis even as thou sayest, and this I will prove to thee
forthright." Then rising from her seat she took a basin of water
and dipping hand therein sprinkled some drops upon me saying, "An
thou wert born a dog then do thou abide a dog, but an thou wert
born a man then, by virtue of this water, resume thine human
favour and figure." Immediately I was transformed from the shape
of a dog to human semblance and I fell at the maiden's feet and
kissed the ground before her giving her thanks; then, bussing the
hem of her garment, I cried, "O my lady, thou hast been exceeding
gracious unto one unbeknown to thee and a stranger. How can I
find words wherewith to thank thee and bless thee as thou
deserves"? Tell me now, I pray thee, how and whereby I may shew
my gratitude to thee? From this day forth I am beholden to thy
kindness and am become thy slave." Then I related all my case and
told her of Aminah's wickedness and what of wrongs she had
wrought me; and I made due acknowledgment to her mother for that
she had brought me to her home. Herewith quoth the damsel to me,
"O Sidi Nu'uman, I pray thee bestow not such exceeding thanks
upon me, for rather am I glad and grateful in conferring this
service upon one so well-deserving as thou art. I have been
familiar with thy wife Aminah for a long time before thou didst
marry her; I also knew that she had skill in witchcraft and she
likewise knoweth of my art, for we twain learnt together of one
and the same mistress in the science. We met ofttimes at the
Hammam as friends but, in asmuch as she was ill-mannered and ill-
tempered, I declined further intimacy with her. Think not that it
sufficeth me to have made thee recover thy form as it was
aforetime; nay, verily needs must I take due vengeance of her for
the wrong she hath done thee. And this will I do at thy hand, so
shalt thou have mastery over her and find thyself lord of thine
own house and home.[FN#269] Tarry here awhile until I come
again." So saying the damsel passed into another room and I
remained sitting and talking with her mother and praised her
excellence and kindness towards me. The ancient dame also related
strange and rare deeds of wonder done by her with pure purpose
and lawful means, till the girl returned with an ewer in hand and
said, "O Sidi Nu'uman, my magical art doth tell me that Aminah is
at this present away from home but she will return thither
presently. Meanwhile she dissembleth with the domestics and
feigneth grief at severance from thee; and she hath pretended
that, as thou sattest at meat with her, thou didst suddenly arise
and fare forth on some weighty matter, when presently a dog
rushed through the open door into the room and she drove it away
with a staff." Then giving me a gugglet full of the water the
maiden resumed, "O Sidi Nu'uman, go now to thine own house and,
keeping this gugglet by thee, await patiently Aminah's coming.
Anon she will return and seeing thee will be sore perplexed and
will hasten to escape from thee; but before she go forth sprinkle
some drops from this gugglet upon her and recite these spells
which I shall teach thee. I need not tell thee more; thou wilt
espy with thine own eyes what shall happen." Having said these
words the young lady taught me magical phrases which I fixed in
my memory full firmly, and after this I took my leave and
farewelled them both. When I reached home it happened even as the
young magician had told me; and I had tarried but a short time in
the house when Aminah came in. I held the gugglet in hand and she
seeing me trembled with sore trembling and would fain have run
away; but I hastily sprinkled some drops upon her and repeated
the magical words, whereat she was turned into a mare--the animal
thy Highness deigned remark but yesterday. I marvelled greatly to
sight this transformation and seizing the mare's mane led her to
the stable and secured her with a halter.--And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

         The end of the Six Hudred and Fifteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Sidi
Nu'uman continued his story saying:--When I had secured the mare,
I loaded her with reproaches for her wickedness and her base
behaviour, and lashed her with a whip till my forearm was
tired.[FN#270] Then I resolved within myself that I would ride
her at full speed round the square each day and thus inflict upon
her the justest penalty.--Herewith Sidi Nu'uman held his peace,
having made an end of telling his tale; but presently he resumed,
"O Commander of the Faithful, I trow thou art not displeased at
this my conduct, nay rather thou wouldst punish such a woman with
a punishment still greater than this." He then kissed the hem of
the Caliph's robe and kept silence; and Harun al-Rashid,
perceiving that he had said all his say, exclaimed, "In very
sooth thy story is exceeding strange and rare. The wrong doing of
thy wife hath no excuse and thy requital is methinks in due
measure and just degree, but I would ask thee one thing--How long
wilt thou chastise her thus, and how long will she remain in
bestial guise? 'Twere better now for thee to seek the young lady
by whose magical skill thy wife was transformed and beg that she
bring her back to human shape. And yet I fear me greatly lest
perchance whenas this sorceress, this Ghulah, shall find herself
restored to woman's form and resumeth her conjurations and
incantations she may--who knoweth?.--requite thee with far
greater wrong than she hath done thee heretofore, and from this
thou wilt not be able to escape." After this the Prince of True
Believers forbore to urge the matter, albeit he was mild and
merciful by nature,[FN#271] and addressing the third man whom the
Wazir had brought before him said, "As I was walking in such a
quarter I was astonished to see thy mansion, so great and so
grand is it; and when I made enquiry of the townsfolk they
answered each and every, that the palace belongeth to one
(thyself) whom they called Khwajah Hasan. They added that thou
west erewhile exceeding poor and in straitened case, but that
Allah Almighty had widened thy means and had now sent thee wealth
in such store that thou hast builded the finest of buildings;
moreover, that albeit thou hast so princely a domicile and such
abundance of riches, thou art not unmindful of thy former estate,
and thou dost not waste thy substance in riotous living but thou
addest thereto by lawful trade. The neighbourhood all speaketh
well of thee and not a wight of them hath aught to say against
thee; so I now would know of thee the certainty of these things
and hear from thine own lips how thou didst gain this abundant
wealth. I have summoned thee before me that I might be assured of
all such matters by actual hearsay: so fear not to tell me all
thy tale; I desire naught of thee save knowledge of this thy
case. Enjoy thou to thy heart's content the opulence that
Almighty Allah deigned bestow upon thee, and let thy soul have
pleasure therein. Thus spake the Caliph and the gracious words
reassured the man. Then Khwajah Hasan threw himself before the
Commander of the Faithful and, kissing the carpet at the foot of
the throne, exclaimed, "O Prince of True Believers, I will relate
to thee a faithful relation of my adventure, and Almighty Allah
be my witness that I have not done aught contrary to thy laws and
just commandments, and that all this my wealth is by the favour
and goodness of Allah alone." Harun al-Rashid hereupon again bade
him speak out boldly and forthwith he began to recount in the
following words the





History of Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal.[FN#272]



O Lord of beneficence! obedient to thy royal behest, I will now
inform thy Highness of the means and the measures whereby Destiny
cowered me with such wealth; but first I would thou hear somewhat
of two amongst my friends who abode in the House of Peace,
Baghdad. They twain are yet alive and both well know the history
which thy slave shall now relate. One of them, men call Sa'd, the
other Sa'di.[FN#273] Now Sa'di opined that without riches no one
in this world could be happy and independent; moreover that
without hard toil and trouble and wariness and wisdom withal it
were impossible to become wealthy. But Sa'd differing therefrom
would affirm that affluence cometh not to any save by decree of
Destiny and fiat of Fate and Fortune. Sa'd was a poor man while
Sa'di had great store of good; yet there sprang up a firm
friendship between them and fond affection each for other; nor
were they ever wont to differ upon any matter save only upon
this; to wit, that Sa'di relied solely upon deliberation and
forethought and Sa'd upon doom and man's lot. It chanced one day
that, as they sat talking together on this matter, quoth Sa'di,
"A poor man is he who either is born a pauper and passeth all his
days in want and penury, or he who having been born to wealth and
comfort, doth in the time of manhood squander all he hath and
falleth into grievous need; then lacketh he the power to regain
his riches and to live at ease by wit and industry." Sa'd made
answer, saying, "Nor wit nor industry availeth aught to any one,
but Fate alone enableth him to acquire and to preserve riches.
Misery and want are but accidents and deliberation is naught.
Full many a poor man hath waxed affluent by favour of Fate and
richards manifold have, despite their skill and store, been
reduced to misery and beggary." Quoth Sa'di, "Thou speakest
foolishly. Howbeit put we the matter to fair test and find out
for ourselves some handicraftsman scanty of means and living upon
his daily wage; him let us provide with money, then will he
without a doubt increase his stock and abide in ease and comfort,
and so shalt thou be persuaded that my words be true." Now as
they twain were walking on, they passed through the lane wherein
stood my lodging and saw me a twisting ropes, which craft my
father and grandfather and many generations before me had
followed. By the condition of my home and dress they judged that
I was a needy man; where upon Sa'd pointing me out to Sa'di said,
"An thou wouldst make trial of this our matter of dispute, see
yonder wight. He hath dwelt here for many years and by this trade
of rope making cloth gain a bare subsistence for himself and his.
I know his case right well of old; he is a worthy subject for the
trial; so do thou give him some gold pieces and test the matter."
"Right willingly," replied Sa'di, "but first let us take full
cognizance of him." So the two friends came up to me, whereat I
left my work and saluted them. They returned my salam after which
quoth Sa'di, "Prithee what be thy name?" Quoth I, "My name is
Hasan, but by reason of my trade of rope making all men call me
Hasan al-Habbal."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Sixteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan al-
Habbal (the Rope-maker) continued his story, saying.--Thereupon
Sa'di asked me, "How farest thou by this industry? Me thinks thou
art blithe and quite content therewith. Thou hast worked long and
well and doubtless thou hast laid by large store of hemp and
other stock. Thy forbears carried on this craft for many years
and must have left thee much of capital and property which thou
hast turned to good account and on this wise thou hast largely
increased thy wealth." Quoth I, "O my lord, no money have I in
pouch whereby I may live happy or even buy me enough to eat. This
is my case that every day, from dawn till eve I spend in making
ropes, nor have I one single moment wherein to take rest; and
still I am sore straitened to provide even dry bread for myself
and family. A wife have I and five small children, who are yet
too young to help me ply this business: and 'tis no easy matter
to supply their daily wants; how then canst thou suppose that I
am enabled to put by large store of hemp and stock? What ropes I
twist each day I sell straightway, and of the money earned
thereby I spend part upon our needs and with the rest I buy hemp
wherewith I twist ropes on the next day. However, praise be to
Almighty Allah that, despite this my state of penury He provideth
us with bread sufficing our necessity." When I had made known all
my condition Sa'di replied, "O Hasan, now I am certified of thy
case and indeed 'tis other than I had supposed; and, given that I
gave thee a purse of two hundred Ashrafis, assuredly thou shalt
therewith greatly add to thy gains and be enabled to live in ease
and affluence: what sayest thou thereto?" Said I, "An thou favour
me with such bounty I should hope to grow richer than all and
every of my fellow-craftsmen, albeit Baghdad-town is prosperous
as it is populous." Then Sa'di, deeming me true and trustworthy,
pulled out of his pocket a purse of two hundred gold pieces and
handing them to me said "Take these coins and trade therewith.
May Allah advance thee but see to it that thou use this money
with all heed, and waste it not in folly and ungraciousness. I
and my friend Sa'd will rejoice with all joy to hear of thy well
being; and, if hereafter we come again and find thee in
flourishing condition, 'twill be matter of much satisfaction to
us both." Accordingly, O Commander of the Faithful, I took the
purse of gold with much gladness and a grateful heart and,
placing it in my pocket, thanked Sa'di kissing his garment-hem,
whereupon the two friends fared forth. And I, O Prince of True
Believers, seeing the twain depart, went on working, but was sore
puzzled and perplexed as to where I might bestow the purse; for
my house contained neither cupboard nor locker. Howbeit I took it
home and kept the matter hidden from my wife and children and
when alone and unobserved I drew out ten gold coins by way of
spending money; then, binding the purse mouth with a bit of
string I tied it tightly in the folds of my turband and wound the
cloth around my head. Presently, I went off to the market street
and bought me a stock of hemp and coming homewards I laid in some
meat for supper, it being now a long while since we had tasted
flesh. But as I trudged along the road, meat in hand, a
kite[FN#274] came suddenly swooping down, and would have snatched
the morsel from out my hand had I not driven off the bird with
the other hand. Then it had fain pounced upon the flesh on the
left side but again I scared it away and thus, whilst exerting
myself with frantic efforts to ward off the bird, by ill luck my
turband fell to the ground. At once that accursed kite swooped
down and flew off with it in its talons; and I ran pursuing it
and shouted aloud. Hearing my cries the Bazar-folk, men and women
and a rout of children, did what they could to scare it away and
make the beastly bird drop its prey, but they shouted and cast
stones in vain: the kite would not let drop the turband and
presently flew clean out of sight. I was sore distressed and
heavy hearted to lose the Ashrafis as I tried me home bearing the
hemp and what of food I had bought, but chiefly was I vexed and
grieved in mind, and ready to die of shame at the thought of what
Sa'di would say; especially when I reflected how he would
misdoubt my words, nor deem the tale true when I should tell him
that a kite had carried off my turband with the gold pieces, but
rather would he think that I had practised some deceit and had
devised some amusing fable by way of excuse. Howbeit I hugely
enjoyed what had remained of the ten Ashrafis and with my wife
and children fared sumptuously for some days. Presently, when all
the gold was spent and naught remained thereof, I became as poor
and needy as before, withal I was content and thankful to
Almighty Allah nor blamed my lot. He had sent in his mercy this
purse of gold to me unawares and now He had taken it away,
wherefore I was grateful and satisfied, for what He doeth is ever
well done.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Seventeenth Night.

Then said she: I have heard, O auspicious King, that Master Hasan
the Ropemaker continued his story in these words:--My wife, who
knew not of the matter of the Ashrafis, presently perceived that
I was ill at ease and I was compelled for a quiet life to let her
know my secret; moreover the neighbours came round to ask me of
my case: but I was right loath to tell them all that had betided;
they could not bring back what was gone and they would assuredly
rejoice at my calamity. However, when they pressed me close I
told them every whit; and some thought that I had spoken falsely
and derided me and others that I was daft and hare-brained and my
words were the wild pratings of an idiot or the drivel of dreams.
The youngsters made abundant fun of me and laughed to think that
I, who never in my born days had sighted a golden coin, should
tell how I had gotten so many Ashrafis, and how a kite had flown
away with them. My wife, however, gave full credence to my tale
and wept and beat her breast for sorrow. Thus six months passed
over us, when it chanced one day that the two friends, to wit,
Sa'di and Sa'd, came to my quarter of the town, when quoth Sa'd
to Sa'di, "Lo, yonder is the street where dwelleth Hasan
al-Habbal. Come let us go and see how he hath added to his stock
and how far he hath prospered by means of the two hundred
Ashrafis thou gavest him." Sa'di rejoined, 'Tis well said;
indeed, we have not seen him for many days: I would fain visit
him and I should rejoice to hear that he hath prospered." So the
twain walked along towards my house, Sa'd saying to Sa'di,
"Forsooth I perceive that he appeareth the same in semblance,
poor and ill-conditioned as before; he weareth old and tattered
garments, save that his turband seemeth somewhat newer and
cleaner. Look well and judge thyself and 'tis even as I said."
Thereupon Sa'di came up closer to me and he also understood that
my condition was unaltered; and presently the two friends
addressed me. After the usual salutetion Sa'd asked, O Hasan, how
fareth it with thee, and how goeth it with thy business and have
the two hundred Ashrafis stood thee in good stead and amended thy
trade?" To this answered I, "O my lords, how can I tell you of
the sad mishap that hath befallen me? I dare not speak for very
shame, yet cannot I keep the adventure concealed. Verily a
marvellous matter and a wondrous hath happened to me, the tale
whereof will fill you with wonderment and suspicion, for I wot
full well that ye will not believe it, and that I shall be to you
as one that dealeth in lies; withal needs must I tell you the
whole however unwillingly." Hereat I recounted to them every whit
that had betided me first and last, especially that which had
befallen me from the kite; but Sa'di misdoubted me and mistrusted
me and cried, "O Hasan, thou speakest but in jest and dost
dissemble with us. 'Tis hard to believe the tale thou tellest.
Kites are not wont to fly off with turbands, but only with such
things as they can eat. Thou wouldst but outwit us and thou art
of those who, when some good fortune cometh to them unforeseen,
do straightways abandon their work or their business and, wasting
all in pleasuring, become once more poor and thereafter must
nilly-willy eke out a living as best they may. This methinks be
especially the case with thee; thou hast squandered our gift with
all speed and now art needy as before." "O good my lord, not so,"
cried I; "this blame and these hard words ill befit my deserts,
for I am wholly innocent of all thou imputest to me. The strange
mishap whereof I told thee is the truest of truths; and to prove
that it is no lie all the town-folk have knowledge thereof and in
good sooth I do not play thee false. 'Tis certain that kites do
not fly away with turbands; but such mishaps, wondrous and
marvellous, may betide mankind especially the miserable of lot."
Sa'd also espoused my cause and said, "O Sa'di, ofttimes have we
seen and heard how kites carry off many things besides
comestibles; and his tale may not be wholly contrary to reason."
Then Sa'di pulled out from his pocket a purseful of gold pieces
and counted out and gave me another two hundred, saying, "O
Hasan, take these Ashrafis, but see that thou keep them with all
heed and diligence and beware, and again I say beware, lest thou
lose them like the others. Expend them in such fashion that thou
mayst reap full benefit therefrom and prosper even as thou seest
thy neighbours prosper." I took the money from him and poured out
thanks and blessings upon his head, and when they went their ways
I returned to my rope-walk and thence in due time straight home.
My wife and children were abroad, so again I took ten gold coins
of the two hundred and securely tied up the remainder in a piece
of cloth then I looked around to find a spot wherein to hide my
hoard so that my wife and youngsters might not come to know of it
and lay hands thereon. Presently, I espied a large earthen jar
full of bran standing in a corner of the room, so herein I hid
the rag with the gold coins and I misdeemed that it was safely
concealed from wife and wees.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Eighteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan
al-Habbal thus continued his story:--When I had put the Ashrafis
a bottom the jar of bran, my wife came in and I said naught to
her of the two friends or of aught had happened, but I set out
for the Bazar to buy hemp. Now as soon as I had left the house
there came, by evil fate impelled, a man who sold Tafl, or
fuller's earth,[FN#275] wherewith the poorer sort of women are
wont to wash their hair. My wife would fain have bought some but
not a single Kauri[FN#276] or almond had she. Then she took
thought and said to herself, "This jar of bran is here to no
purpose, I will exchange it for the clay," and he also, the Tafl
seller, agreed to this proposal and went off taking the jar of
bran as the price of the washing earth. Anon I came back with a
load of hemp upon my head and other five on the heads of as many
porters who accompanied me; and I helped them off with their
burthens and, after storing the stuff in a room, I paid and
dismissed them. Then I stretched me out upon the floor to take
rest awhile and looking towards the corner where once stood the
jar of bran I found it gone. Words fail me, O Prince of True
Believers, to describe the tumult of feelings which filled my
heart at the sight. I sprang up with all speed and calling to my
wife enquired of her whither the jar had been carried; and she
replied that she had exchanged its contents for a trifle of
washing clay. Then cried I aloud, "O wretched, O miserable, what
hast thou done? thou hast ruined me and thy children; thou hast
given away great wealth to that clay selling fellow!" Then I told
her all that had betided me, of the coming of the two friends and
how I had hidden the hundred and ninety Ashrafis within the
bran-jar; and she, on hearing this wept sore and beat her breast
and tore her hair crying, "Where now shall I find that clay-
seller? The wight is a stranger, never before did I see him about
this quarter or this street. Then turning to me she continued,
"Herein thou hast dealt right foolishly, for that thou didst not
tell me of the matter, nor didst place any trust in me; otherwise
this mishap would never have happened to us; no, never." And she
lamented with loud lamentation and bitter whereat I said, "Make
not such hubbub nor display such trouble, lest our neighbours
overhear thee, and learning of our mishap peradventure laugh at
us and call us fools. It behoveth us to rest content with the
will of Almighty Allah." However the ten Ashrafis which I had
taken from the two hundred sufficed me to carry on my trade and
to live with more of ease for some short while; but I ever
grieved and I marvelled much anent what could be said to Sa'di
when he should come again; for inasmuch as he believed me not the
first time I was assured in my mind that now he would denounce me
aloud as a cheat and a liar. One day of the days the twain, to
wit, Sa'd and Sa'di, came strolling towards my house conversing
and, as usual, arguing about me and my case; and I seeing them
from afar left off working that I might hide myself, as I could
not for very shame come forth and accost them. Seeing this and
not guessing the reason they entered my dwelling and, saluting me
with the salam, asked me how I had fared. I durst not raise my
eyes so abashed and mortified was I, and with bended brow
returned the greeting; when they, noting my sorry plight,
marvelled saying, "Is all well with thee? Why art thou in this
state? Hast thou not made good use of the gold or hast thou
wasted thy wealth in lewd living?" Quoth I, "O my lords, the
story of the Ashrafis is none other than this. When ye departed
from me I went home with the purse of money and, finding no one
was in the house for all had gone out somewhere, I took out
therefrom ten gold pieces. Then I put the rest together with the
purse within a large earthen jar filled full of bran which had
long stood in one corner of the room, so might the matter be kept
privy from my wife and children. But whilst I was in the market
buying me some hemp, my wife returned home; and at that moment
there came in to her a man which sold fuller's earth for washing
hair. She had need thereof withal naught to pay with; so she went
out to him and said, 'I am clean without coin, but I have a
quantity of bran; say me, wilt thou have that in change for thy
clay?' The man agreed and accordingly my wife took the earth of
him, and gave him in exchange the jarful of bran which he carried
away with him and ganged his gait. An ye ask, 'Wherefore didst
thou not confide the matter to thy spouse and tell her that thou
hadst put the money in the jar?' I on my side answer, that ye
gave me strict injunctions to keep the money this time with the
utmost heed and caution. Methought that stead was the safest
wherein to store the gold and I was loath to trust my wife lest
haply she take some coin therefrom and expend it upon her
household. O my lords, I am certified of your goodness and
graciousness, but poverty and penury are writ in my Book of Fate;
how then can I aspire to possessions and prosperity? Withal,
never while I breathe the breath of life, shall I be forgetful of
this your generous favour." Quoth Sa'di, "Meseemeth I have
disbursed four hundred Ashrafis to no purpose in giving them to
thee; yet the intent wherewith they were given was that thou
shouldst benefit thereby, not that I claim thy praise and
thanksgiving." So they twain compassionated and condoled with me
in my misfortune; and presently Sa'd, an upright man and one who
had acquaintance with me since many a year, produced a leaden
coin[FN#277] which he had picked up from the path and was still
carrying in his pocket; and, after shewing it to Sa'di, said to
me, "Seest thou this bit of lead? Take it and by favour of Fate
thou shalt find out what blessings it will bring to thee." Sa'di
on espying it laughed aloud and made jest of the matter and
flouting said, "What advantage will there be to Hasan from this
mite of lead and in what way shall he use it?" Sa'd handing me
the leaden coin retorted in reply, "Give no heed to whatso Sa'di
may say, but keep this by thee. Let him laugh an he please. One
day haply shall come to pass, Inshallah--an it be the will of
Almighty Allah--that thou shalt by means thereof become a wealthy
man and a magnifico." I took the bit of lead and put it in my
pocket, and the twain bade me farewell and went their way.--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Nineteenth Night.

Then said she--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan al-
Habbal thus continued his story:--As soon as Sa'd and Sa'di had
departed, I went on rope-twisting until night came and when
doffing my dress to go to bed the bit of lead which Sa'd had
given me fell out of my pocket; so I picked it up and set it
carelessly in a small niche in the wall.[FN#278] Now that very
night so it happened that a fisherman, one of my neighbours,
stood in need of a small coin[FN#279] wherewith to buy some twine
for mending his drag-net, as he was wont to do during the dark
hours, in order that he might catch the fish ere dawn of day and
selling his quarry, buy victuals for himself and his household.
So, as he was accustomed to rise while yet somewhat of night
remained, he bade his wife go round about to all the neighbours
and borrow a copper that he might buy the twine required; and the
woman went everywhere, from house to house, but nowhere could she
get loan of a farthing, and at las