d that thy business
is to sew shrouds." Answered the tailor, "It mattereth not to
thee: question me no more questions." Thereupon the robber placed
an Ashrafi in his hand and continued, "I desire not to discover
aught thou hidest, albeit my breast like every honest man's is
the grave of secrets; and this only would I learn of thee, in
what house didst thou do that job? Canst thou direct me thither,
or thyself conduct me thereto?" The tailor took the gold with
greed and cried, "I have not seen with my own eyes the way to
that house. A certain bondswoman led me to a place which I know
right well and there she bandaged my eyes and guided me to some
tenement and lastly carried me into a darkened room where lay the
dead body dismembered. Then she unbound the kerchief and bade me
sew together first the corpse and then the shroud, which having
done she again blindfolded me and led me back to the stead whence
she had brought me and left me there. Thou seest then I am not
able to tell thee where thou shalt find the house." Quoth the
robber, "Albeit thou knowest not the dwelling whereof thou
speakest, still canst thou take me to the place where thou west
blindfolded; then I will bind a kerchief over thine eyes and lead
thee as thou west led: on this wise per chance thou mayest hit
upon the site. An thou wilt do this favour by me, see here
another golden ducat is thine." There upon the bandit slipped a
second Ashrafi into the tailor's palm, and Baba Mustafa thrust it
with the first into his pocket; then, leaving his shop as it was,
he walked to the place where Morgiana had tied the kerchief
around his eyes, and with him went the robber who, after binding
on the bandage, led him by the hand. Baba Mustafa, who was clever
and keen-witted, presently striking the street whereby he had
fared with the handmaid, walked on counting step by step; then,
halting suddenly, he said, "Thus far I came with her;" and the
twain stopped in front of Kasim's house wherein now dwelt his
brother Ali Baba.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the robber
then made marks with white chalk upon the door to the end that he
might readily find it at some future time, and removing the
bandage from the tailor's eyes said, "O Baba Mustafa, I thank
thee for this favour: and Almighty Allah guerdon thee for thy
goodness. Tell me now, I pray thee, who dwelleth in yonder
house?" Quoth he, "In very sooth I wot not, for I have little
knowledge concerning this quarter of the city;" and the bandit,
understanding that he could find no further clue from the tailor,
dismissed him to his shop with abundant thanks, and hastened back
to the tryst place in the jungle where the band awaited his
coming. Not long after it so fortuned that Morgiana, going out
upon some errand, marvelled exceedingly at seeing the chalk-marks
showing white in the door; she stood awhile deep in thought and
presently divined that some enemy had made the signs that he
might recognize the house and play some sleight upon her lord.
She therefore chalked the doors of all her neighbours in like
manner and kept the matter secret, never entrusting it or to
master or to mistress. Meanwhile the robber told his comrades his
tale of adventure and how he had found the clue; so the Captain
and with him all the band went one after other by different ways
till they entered the city; and he who had placed the mark on Ali
Baba's door accompanied the Chief to point out the place. He
conducted him straightway to the house and strewing the sign
exclaimed, "Here dwelleth he of whom we are in search!" But when
the Captain looked around him he saw that all the dwellings bore
chalk-marks after like fashion and he wondered saying, "By what
manner of means knowest thou which house of all these houses that
bear similar signs is that whereof thou spakest?" Hereat the
robber-guide was confounded beyond measure of confusion, and
could make no answer; then with an oath he cried, "I did
assuredly set a sign upon a door, but I know not whence came all
the marks upon the other entrances; nor can I say for a surety
which it was I chalked." Thereupon the Captain returned to the
marketplace and said to his men, "We have toiled and laboured in
vain, nor have we found the house we went forth to seek. Return
we now to the forest our rendezvous: I also will fare thither."
Then all trooped off and assembled together within the
treasure-cave; and, when the robbers had all met, the Captain
judged him worthy of punishment who had spoken falsely and had
led them through the city to no purpose. So he imprisoned him in
presence of them all;[FN#302] and then said he, "To him amongst
you will I show special favour who shall go to town and bring me
intelligence whereby we may lay hands upon the plunderer of our
property." Hereat another of the company came forward and said,
"I am ready to go and enquire into the case, and 'tis I who will
bring thee to thy wish." The Captain after giving him presents
and promises despatched him upon his errand; and by the decree of
Destiny which none may gainsay, this second robber went first to
the house of Baba Mustafa the tailor, as had done the thief who
had foregone him. In like manner he also persuaded the snip with
gifts of golden coin that he be led hood-winked and thus too he
was guided to Ali Baba's door. Here noting the work of his
predecessor, he affixed to the jamb a mark with red chalk the
better to distinguish it from the others whereon still showed the
white. Then tried he back in stealth to his company; but Morgiana
on her part also descried the red sign on the entrance and with
subtle forethought marked all the others after the same fashion;
nor told she any what she had done. Meanwhile the bandit rejoined
his band and vauntingly said, "O our Captain, I have found the
house and thereon put a mark whereby I shall distinguish it
clearly from all its neighbours."--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Captain
despatched another of his men to the city and he found the place,
but, as aforetime, when the troop repaired thither they saw each
and every house marked with signs of red chalk. So they returned
disappointed and the Captain, waxing displeased exceedingly and
distraught, clapped also this spy into gaol. Then said the chief
to himself, "Two men have failed in their endeavour and have met
their rightful meed of punishment; and I trow that none other of
my band will essay to follow up their research; so I myself will
go and find the house of this wight." Accordingly he fared along
and aided by the tailor Baba Mustafa, who had gained much gain of
golden pieces in this matter, he hit upon the house of Ali Baba;
and here he made no outward show or sign, but marked it on the
tablet[FN#303] of his heart and impressed the picture upon the
page of his memory. Then returning to the jungle he said to his
men, "I have full cognizance of the place and have limned it
clearly in my mind; so now there will be no difficulty in finding
it. Go forth straightways and buy me and bring hither nineteen
mules together with one large leathern jar of mustard oil and
seven and thirty vessels of the same kind clean empty. Without me
and the two locked up in gaol ye number thirty-seven souls; so I
will stow you away armed and accoutred each within his jar and
will load two upon each mule, and upon the nineteenth mule there
shall be a man in an empty jar on one side, and on the other the
jar full of oil. I for my part, in guise of an oil-merchant, will
drive the mules into the town, arriving at the house by night,
and will ask permission of its master to tarry there until
morning. After this we shall seek occasion during the dark hours
to rise up and fall upon him and slay him." Furthermore the
Captain spake saying, "When we have made an end of him we shall
recover the gold and treasure whereof he robbed us and bring it
back upon the mules." This counsel pleased the robbers who went
forthwith and purchased mules and huge leathern jars, and did as
the Captain had bidden them. And after a delay of three days
shortly before nightfall they arose; and over smearing all the
jars with oil of mustard, each hid him inside an empty vessel.
The Chief then disguised himself in trader's gear and placed the
jars upon the nineteen mules; to wit, the thirty-seven vessels in
each of which lay a robber armed and accoutred, and the one that
was full of oil. This done, he drove the beasts before him and
presently he reached Ali Baba's place at nightfall; when it
chanced that the house-master was strolling after supper to and
fro in front of his home. The Captain saluted him with the salam
and said, "I come from such and such a village with oil; and
ofttimes have I been here a selling oil, but now to my grief I
have arrived too late and I am sore troubled and perplexed as to
where I shall spend the night. An thou have pity on me I pray
thee grant that I tarry here in thy court yard and ease the mules
by taking down the jars and giving the beasts somewhat of
fodder." Albeit Ali Baba had heard the Captain's voice when
perched upon the tree and had seen him enter the cave, yet by
reason of the disguise he knew him not for the leader of the
thieves, and granted his request with hearty welcome and gave him
full license to halt there for the night. He then pointed out an
empty shed wherein to tether the mules and bade one of the
slave-boys go fetch grain and water. He also gave orders to the
slave-girl Morgiana saying," A guest hath come hither and
tarrieth here to night. Do thou busy thyself with all speed about
his supper and make ready the guest bed for him." Presently, when
the Captain had let down all the jars and had fed and watered his
mules, Ali Baba received him with all courtesy and kindness, and
summoning Morgiana said in his presence, "See thou fail not in
service of this our stranger nor suffer him to lack for aught.
To-morrow early I would fare to the Hammam and bathe; so do thou
give my slave-boy Abdullah a suit of clean white clothes which I
may put on after washing; moreover make thee ready a somewhat of
broth overnight that I may drink it after my return home."
Replied she, "I will have all in readiness as thou hast bidden."
So Ali Baba retired to his rest, and the Captain, having supped,
repaired to the shed and saw that all the mules had their food
and drink for the night.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Captain, after seeing to the mules and the jars which Ali Baba
and his household held to be full of oil, finding utter privacy,
whispered to his men who were in ambush, "This night at midnight
when ye hear my voice, do you quickly open with your sharp knives
the leathern jars from top to bottom and issue forth without
delay." Then passing through the kitchen he reached the chamber
wherein a bed had been dispread for him, Morgiana showing the way
with a lamp. Quoth she, "An thou need aught beside I pray thee
command this thy slave who is ever ready to obey thy say!" He
made answer, "Naught else need I;" then, putting out the light,
he lay him down on the bed to sleep awhile ere the time came to
rouse his men and finish off the work. Meanwhile Morgiana did as
her master had bidden her: she first took out a suit of clean
white clothes and made it over to Abdullah who had not yet gone
to rest; then she placed the pipkin upon the hearth to boil the
broth and blew the fire till it burnt briskly. After a short
delay she needs must see an the broth be boiling, but by that
time all the lamps had gone out and she found that the oil was
spent and that nowhere could she get a light. The slave-boy
Abdullah observed that she was troubled and perplexed hereat, and
quoth he to her, "Why make so much ado? In yonder shed are many
jars of oil: go now and take as much soever as thou listest."
Morgiana gave thanks to him for his suggestion; and Abdullah, who
was lying at his ease in the hall, went off to sleep so that he
might wake betimes and serve Ali Baba in the bath. So the
hand-maiden rose[FN#304] and with oil-can in hand walked to the
shed where stood the leathern jars all ranged in rows. Now, as
she drew nigh unto one of the vessels, the thief who was hidden
therein hearing the tread of footsteps bethought him that it was
of his Captain whose summons he awaited; so he whispered, "Is it
now time for us to sally forth?" Morgiana started back affrighted
at the sound of human accents; but, inasmuch as she was bold and
ready of wit, she replied, "The time is not yet come," and said
to herself, These jars are not full of oil and herein I perceive
a manner of mystery. Haply the oil-merchant hatcheth some
treacherous plot against my lord; so Allah, the Compassionating,
the Compassionate, protect us from his snares!" Wherefore she
answered in a voice made like to the Captain's, "Not yet, the
time is not come. Then she went to the next jar and returned the
same reply to him who was within, and so on to all the vessels
one by one. Then said she in herself, "Laud to the Lord! my
master took this fellow in believing him to be an oil-merchant,
but lo, he hath admitted a band of robbers, who only await the
signal to fall upon him and plunder the place and do him die."
Then passed she on to the furthest jar and finding it brimming
with oil, filled her can, and returning to the kitchen, trimmed
the lamp and lit the wicks; then, bringing forth a large
cauldron, she set it upon the fire, and filling it with oil from
out the jar heaped wood upon the hearth and fanned it to a fierce
flame the readier to boil its contents. When this was done she
baled it out in potfuls and poured it seething hot into the
leathern vessels one by one while the thieves unable to escape
were scalded to death and every jar contained a corpse.[FN#305]
Thus did this slave-girl by her subtle wit make a clean end of
all noiselessly and unknown even to the dwellers in the house.
Now when she had satisfied herself that each and every of the men
had been slain, she went back to the kitchen and shutting to the
door sat brewing Ali Baba's broth. Scarce had an hour passed
before the Captain woke from sleep; and, opening wide his window,
saw that all was dark and silent; so he clapped his hands as a
signal for his men to come forth but not a sound was heard in
return. After awhile he clapped again and called aloud but got no
answer; and when he cried out a third time without reply he was
perplexed and went out to the shed wherein stood the jars. He
thought to himself, "Perchance all are fallen asleep whenas the
time for action is now at hand, so I must e'en awaken them
without stay or delay." Then approaching the nearest jar he was
startled by a smell of oil and seething flesh; and touching it
outside he felt it reeking hot; then going to the others one by
one, he found all in like condition. Hereat he knew for a surety
the fate which had betided his band and, fearing for his own
safety, he clomb on to the wall, and thence dropping into a
garden made his escape in high dudgeon and sore disappointment.
Morgiana awaited awhile to see the Captain return from the shed
but he came not; whereat she knew that he had scaled the wall and
had taken to flight, for that the street-door was double locked;
and the thieves being all disposed of on this wise Morgiana laid
her down to sleep in perfect solace and ease of mind. When two
hours of darkness yet remained, Ali Baba awoke and went to the
Hammam knowing naught of the night adventure, for the gallant
slave-girl had not aroused him, nor indeed had she deemed such
action expedient, because had she sought an opportunity of
reporting to him her plan, she might haply have lost her chance
and spoiled the project. The sun was high over the horizon when
Ali Baba walked back from the Baths; and he marvelled exceedingly
to see the jars still standing under the shed and said, "How
cometh it that he, the oil-merchant my guest, hath not carried to
the market his mules and jars of oil?"--And as the morn began to
dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred ante Thirty-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Ali Baba
presently asked Morgiana what had befallen the oil-merchant his
guest whom he had placed under her charge; and she answered,
"Allah Almighty vouchsafe to thee six score years and ten of
safety! I will tell thee in privacy of this merchant." So Ali
Baba went apart with his slave-girl, who taking him with out the
house first locked the court-door; then showing him a jar she
said, "Prithee look into this and see if within there be oil or
aught else." Thereupon peering inside it he perceived a man at
which sight he cried aloud and fain would have fled in his
fright. Quoth Morgiana, "Pear him not, this man hath no longer
the force to work thee harm, he lieth dead and stone dead."
Hearing such words of comfort and reassurance Ali Baba asked "O
Morgiana, what evils have we escaped and by what means hath this
wretch become the quarry of Fate?" She answered "Alhamdolillah
 Praise be to Almighty Allah!  I will inform thee fully of the
case; but hush thee, speak not aloud, lest haply the neighbours
learn the secret and it end in our confusion. Look now into all
the jars, one by one from first to last." So Ali Baba examined
them severally and found in each a man fully armed and accoutred
and all lay scalded to death. Hereat speechless for sheer
amazement he stared at the jars, but presently re covering
himself he asked, "And where is he, the oil-merchant?" Answered
she, "Of him also I will inform thee. The villain was no trader
but a traitorous assassin whose honied words would have ensnared
thee to thy doom; and now I will tell thee what he was and what
hath happened; but, meanwhile thou art fresh from the Hammam and
thou shouldst first drink somewhat of this broth for thy
stomach's and thy health's sake." So Ali Baba went within and
Morgiana served up the mess; after which quoth her master, "I
fain would hear this wondrous story: prithee tell it to me and
set my heart at ease." Hereat the handmaid fell to relating
whatso had betided in these words, "O my master, when thou badest
me boil the broth and retiredst to rest, thy slave in obedience
to thy command took out a suit of clean white clothes and gave it
to the boy Abdullah; then kindled the fire and set on the broth.
As soon as it was ready I had need to light a lamp so that I
might see to skim it, but all the oil was spent, and, learning
this I told my want to the slave-boy Abdullah, who advised me to
draw somewhat from the jars which stood under the shed.
Accordingly, I took a can and went to the first vessel when
suddenly I heard a voice within whisper with all caution, 'Is it
now time for us to sally forth?' I was amazed thereat and judged
that the pretended merchant had laid some plot to slay thee; so I
replied, 'The time is not yet come.' Then I went to the second
jar and heard another voice to which I made the like answer, and
so on with all of them. I now was certified that these men
awaited only some signal from their Chief whom thou didst take to
guest within thy walls supposing him to be a merchant in oil; and
that after thou receivedst him hospitably the miscreant had
brought these men to murther thee and to plunder thy good and
spoil thy house. But I gave him no opportunity to win his wish.
The last jar I found full of oil and taking somewhat therefrom I
lit the lamp; then, putting a large cauldron upon the fire, I
filled it up with oil which I brought from the jar and made a
fierce blaze under it; and, when the contents were seething hot,
I took out sundry cansful with intent to scald them all to death,
and going to each jar in due order, I poured within them one by
one boiling oil. On this wise having destroyed them utterly, I
returned to the kitchen and having extinguished the lamps stood
by the window watching what might happen, and how that false
merchant would act next. Not long after I had taken my station,
the robber captain awoke and oft-times signalled to his thieves.
Then getting no reply he came downstairs and went out to the
jars, and finding that all his men were slain he fled through the
darkness I know not whither. So when he had clean disappeared I
was assured that, the door being double locked, he had scaled the
wall and dropped into the garden and made his escape. Then with
my heart at rest I slept." And Morgiana, after telling her story
to her master, presently added, "This is the whole truth I have
related to thee. For some days indeed have I had inkling of such
matter, but withheld it from thee deeming it inexpedient to risk
the chance of its meeting the neighbours' ears; now, however,
there is no help but to tell thee thereof. One day as I came to
the house-door I espied thereon a white chalk-mark, and on the
next day a red sign beside the white. I knew not the intent
wherewith the marks were made, nevertheless I set others upon the
entrances of sundry neighbours, judging that some enemy had done
this deed whereby to encompass my master's destruction. Therefore
I made the marks on all the other doors in such perfect
conformity with those I found, that it would be hard to
distinguish amongst them."--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Morgiana
continued to Ali Baba: "Judge now and see if these signs and all
this villainy be not the work of the bandits of the forest, who
marked our house that on such wise they might know it again. Of
these forty thieves there yet remain two others concerning whose
case I know naught; so beware of them, but chiefly of the third
remaining robber, their Captain, who fled hence alive. Take good
heed and be thou cautious of him, for, shouldst thou fall into
his hands, he will in no wise spare thee but will surely murther
thee. I will do all that lieth in me to save from hurt and harm
thy life and property, nor shall thy slave be found wanting in
any service to my lord." Hearing these words Ali Baba rejoiced
with exceeding joyance and said to her, "I am well pleased with
thee for this thy conduct; and say me what wouldst thou have me
do in thy behalf; I shall not fail to remember thy brave deed so
long as breath in me remaineth." Quoth she, "It behoveth us
before all things forthright to bury these bodies in the ground,
that so the secret be not known to any one." Hereupon Ali Baba
took with him his slave-boy Abdullah into the garden and there
under a tree they dug for the corpses of the thieves a deep pit
in size proportionate to its contents, and they dragged the
bodies (having carried off their weapons) to the fosse and threw
them in; then, covering up the remains of the seven and thirty
robbers they made the ground appear level and clean as it wont to
be. They also hid the leathern jars and the gear and arms and
presently Ali Baba sent the mules by ones and twos to the bazar
and sold them all with the able aid of his slave-boy Abdullah.
Thus the matter was hushed up nor did it reach the ears of any;
Ali Baba ceased not to be ill at ease lest haply the Captain or
the surviving two robbers should wreak their vengeance on his
head. He kept himself private with all caution and took heed that
none learn a word of what happened and of the wealth which he had
carried off from the bandits' cave. Meanwhile the Captain of the
thieves having escaped with his life, fled to the forest in hot
wrath and sore irk of mind, and his senses were scattered and the
colour of his visage vanished like ascending smoke. Then he
thought the matter over again and again, and at last he firmly
resolved that he needs must take the life of Ali Baba, else he
would lose all the treasure which his enemy, by knowledge of the
magical words, would take away and turn to his own use.
Furthermore, he determined that he would undertake the business
singlehanded; and, that after getting rid of Ali Baba, he would
gather together another band of banditti and would pursue his
career of brigandage, as indeed his forbears had done for many
generations. So he lay down to rest that night, and rising early
in the morning donned a dress of suitable appearance; then going
to the city alighted at a caravanserai, thinking to himself,
"Doubtless the murther of so many men hath reached the Wali's
ears, and Ali Baba hath been seized and brought to justice, and
his house is levelled and his good is confiscated. The townfolk
must surely have heard tidings of these matters." So he
straightway asked of the keeper of the Khan, "What strange things
have happened in the city during the last few days?" and the
other told him all that he had seen and heard, but the Captain
could not learn a whit of that which most concerned him. Hereby
he understood that Ali Baba was ware and wise, and that he had
not only carried away such store of treasure but he had also
destroyed so many lives and withal had come off scatheless;
furthermore, that he himself must needs have all his wits alert
not to fall into the hands of his foe and perish. With this
resolve the Captain hired a shop in the Bazar, whither he bore
whole bales of the finest stuffs and goodly merchandise from his
forest treasure house; and presently he took his seat within the
store and fell to doing merchant's business. By chance his place
fronted the booth of the defunct Kasim where his son, Ali Baba's
nephew, now traded; and the Captain, who called himself Khwajah
Hasan, soon formed acquaintance and friendship with the shop
keepers around about him and treated all with profuse civilities,
but he was especially gracious and cordial to the son of Kasim, a
handsome youth and a well-dressed, and oft-times he would sit and
chat with him for a long while. A few days after it chanced that
Ali Baba, as he was sometimes wont to do, came to see his nephew,
whom he found sitting in his shop. The Captain saw and recognised
him at sight and one morning he asked the young man, saying,
"Prithee tell me, who is he that ever and anon cometh to thee at
thy place of sale?" whereto the youth made answer, "He is my
uncle, the brother of my father." Whereupon the Captain showed
him yet greater favour and affection the better to deceive him
for his own devices, and gave him presents and made him sit at
meat with him and fed him with the daintiest of dishes. Presently
Ali Baba's nephew bethought him it was only right and proper that
he also should invite the merchant to supper, but whereas his own
house was small, and he was straitened for room and could not
make a show of splendour, as did Khwajah Hasan, he took counsel
with his uncle on the matter.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Ali Baba
replied to his nephew: "Thou sayest well: it behoveth thee to
entreat thy friend in fairest fashion even as he hath entreated
thee. On the morrow, which is Friday, shut thy shop as do all
merchants of repute; then, after the early meal, take Khwajah
Hasan to smell the air,[FN#306] and as thou walkest lead him
hither unawares; meanwhile I will give orders that Morgiana shall
make ready for his coming the best of viands and all necesseries
for a feast. Trouble not thyself on any wise, but leave the
matter in my hands." Accordingly on the next day, to wit, Friday,
the nephew of Ali Baba took Khwajah Hasan to walk about the
garden; and, as they were returning he led him by the street
wherein his uncle dwelt. When they came to the house the youth
stopped at the door and knocking said, "O my lord, this is my
second home: my uncle hath heard much of thee and of thy goodness
me-wards and desireth with exceeding desire to see thee; so,
shouldst thou consent to enter and visit him, I shall be truly
glad and thankful to thee." Albeit Khwajah Hasan rejoiced in
heart that he had thus found means whereby he might have access
to his enemy's house and household, and although he hoped soon to
attain his end by treachery, yet he hesitated to enter in and
stood to make his excuses and walk away But when the door was
opened by the slave-porter, Ali Baba's nephew seized his
companion's hand and after abundant persuasion led him in,
whereat he entered with great show of cheerfulness as though much
pleased and honoured. The house-master received him with all
favour and worship and asked him of his welfare, and said to him
"O my lord, I am obliged and thankful to thee for that thou hast
strewn favour to the son of my brother and I perceive that thou
regardest him with an affection even fonder than my own." Khwajah
Hasan replied with pleasant words and said, "Thy nephew vastly
taketh my fancy and in him I am well pleased, for that although
young in years yet he hath been endued by Allah with much of
wisdom." Thus they twain conversed with friendly conversation and
presently the guest rose to depart and said, "O my lord, thy
slave must now farewell thee; but on some future day--Inshallah
he will again wait upon thee." Ali Baba, however, would not let
him leave and asked, "Whither wendest thou, O my friend? I would
invite thee to my table and I pray thee sit at meat with us and
after hie thee home in peace. Perchance the dishes are not as
delicate as those whereof thou art wont to eat, still deign grant
me this request I pray thee and refresh thyself with my victual."
Quoth Khwajah Hasan, "O my lord I am beholden to thee for thy
gracious invitation, and with pleasure would I sit at meat with
thee, but for a special reason must I needs excuse myself; suffer
me therefore to depart for I may not tarry longer nor accept thy
gracious offer." Hereto the host made reply, "I pray thee, O my
lord, tell me what may be the reason so urgent and weighty?" And
Khwajah Hasan answered, "The cause is this: I must not, by order
of the physician, who cured me lately of my complaint, eat aught
of food prepared with salt." Quoth Ali Baba, "An this be all,
deprive me not, I pray thee, of the honour thy company will
confer upon me: as the meats are not yet cooked, I will forbid
the kitchener to make use of any salt. Tarry here awhile and I
will return anon to thee." So saying Ali Baba went in to Morgiana
and bade her not put salt into any one of the dishes; and she,
while busied with her cooking, fell to marvelling greatly at such
order and asked her master, "Who is he that eateth meat wherein
is no salt?" He answered, "What to thee mattereth it who he may
be? only do thou my bidding." She rejoined, " 'Tis well: all
shall be as thou wishest;" but in mind she wondered at the man
who made such strange request and desired much to look upon him.
Wherefore, when all the meats were ready for serving up, she
helped the slave-boy Abdullah to spread the table and set on the
meal; and no sooner did she see Khwajah Hasan than she knew who
he was, albeit he had disguised himself in the dress of a
stranger merchant; furthermore, when she eyed him attentively she
espied a dagger hidden under his robe. "So ho!" quoth she to
herself, "this is the cause why the villain eateth not of salt,
for that he seeketh an opportunity to slay my master whose mortal
enemy he is; howbeit I will be beforehand with him and despatch
him ere he find a chance to harm my lord."--And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Morgiana,
having spread a white cloth upon the table and served up the
meal, went back to the kitchen and thought out her plot against
the robber Captain. Now when Ali Baba and Khwajah Hasan had eaten
their sufficiency, the slave-boy Abdullah brought Morgiana word
to serve the dessert, and she cleared the table and set on fruit
fresh and dried in salvers, then she placed by the side of Ali
Baba a small tripod for three cups with a flagon of wine, and
lastly she went off with the slave-boy Abdullah into another
room, as though she would herself eat supper. Then Khwajah Hasan,
that is, the Captain of the robbers, perceiving that the coast
was clear, exulted mightily saying to himself, "The time hath
come for me to take full vengeance; with one thrust of my dagger
I will despatch this fellow, then escape across the garden and
wend my ways. His nephew will not adventure to stay my hand, for
an he do but move a finger or toe with that intent another stab
will settle his earthly account. Still must I wait awhile until
the slave-boy and the cook-maid shall have eaten and lain down to
rest them in the kitchen." Morgiana, however, watched him
wistfully and divining his purpose said in her mind, "I must not
allow this villain advantage over my lord, but by some means I
must make void his project and at once put an end to the life of
him." Accordingly, the trusty slave-girl changed her dress with
all haste and donned such clothes as dancers wear; she veiled her
face with a costly kerchief; around her head she bound a fine
turband, and about her middle she tied a waist cloth worked with
gold and silver wherein she stuck a dagger, whose hilt was rich
in filigree and jewelry. Thus disguised she said to the slave-boy
Abdullah, "Take now thy tambourine that we may play and sing and
dance in honour of our master's guest." So he did her bidding and
the twain went into the room, the lad playing and the lass
following. Then, making a low cong‚e, they asked leave to perform
and disport and play; and Ali Baba gave permission, saying,
"Dance now and do your best that this our guest may be mirthful
and merry." Quoth Khwajah Hasan, "O my lord, thou dost indeed
provide much pleasant entertainment." Then the slave-boy Abdullah
standing by began to strike the tambourine whilst Morgiana rose
up and showed her perfect art and pleased them vastly with
graceful steps and sportive motion; and suddenly drawing the
poniard from her belt she brandished it and paced from side to
side, a spectacle which pleased them most of all. At times also
she stood before them, now clapping the sharp-edged dagger under
her armpit and then setting it against her breast. Lastly she
took the tambourine from the slave-boy Abdullah, and still
holding the poniard in her right she went round for largesse as
is the custom amongst merry makers. First she stood before Ali
Baba who threw a gold coin into the tambourine, and his nephew
likewise put in an Ashrafi; then Khwajah Hasan, seeing her about
to approach him, fell to pulling out his purse, when she
heartened her heart and quick as the blinding levee she plunged
the dagger into his vitals, and forthwith the miscreant fell back
stone dead. Ali Baba was dismayed and cried in his wrath, "O
unhappy, what is this deed thou hast done to bring about my
ruin!" But she replied, "Nay, O my lord, rather to save thee and
not to cause thee harm have I slain this man: loosen his garments
and see what thou wilt discover thereunder." So Ali Baba searched
the dead man's dress and found concealed therein a dagger. Then
said Morgiana, "This wretch was thy deadly enemy. Consider him
well: he is none other than the oil-merchant, the Captain of the
band of robbers. Whenas he came hither with intent to take thy
life, he would not eat thy salt; and when thou toldest me that he
wished not any in the meat I suspected him and at first sight I
was assured that he would surely do thee die; Almighty Allah be
praised 'tis even as I thought." Then Ali Baba lavished upon her
thanks and expressions of gratitude, saying, "Lo, these two times
hast thou saved me from his hand," and falling upon her neck he
cried, "See thou art free, and as reward for this thy fealty I
have wedded thee to my nephew." Then turning to the youth he
said, "Do as I bid thee and thou shalt prosper. I would that thou
marry Morgiana, who is a model of duty and loyalty: thou seest
now yon Khwajah Hasan sought thy friendship only that he might
find opportunity to take my life, but this maiden with her good
sense and her wisdom hath slain him and saved us." And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Ali Baba's
nephew straightway consented to marry Morgiana. After which the
three, raising the dead body bore it forth with all heed and
vigilance and privily buried it in the garden, and for many years
no one knew aught thereof. In due time Ali Baba married his
brother's son to Morgiana with great pomp, and spread a
bride-feast in most sumptuous fashion for his friends and
neighbours, and made merry with them and enjoyed singing and all
manner of dancing and amusements. He prospered in every
undertaking and Time smiled upon him and a new source of wealth
was opened to him. For fear of the thieves he had not once
visited the jungle-cave wherein lay the treasure, since the day
he had carried forth the corpse of his brother Kasim. But some
time after, he mounted his hackney one morning and journeyed
thither, with all care and caution, till finding no signs of man
or horse, and reassured in his mind he ventured to draw near the
door. Then alighting from his beast he tied it up to a tree, and
going to the entrance pronounced the words which he had not
forgotten, "Open, O Simsim!" Hereat, as was its wont, the door
flew open, and entering thereby he saw the goods and hoard of
gold and silver untouched and lying as he had left them. So he
felt assured that not one of all the thieves remained alive, and,
that save himself there was not a soul who knew the secret of the
place. At once he bound in his saddle-cloth a load of Ashrafis
such as his horse could bear and brought it home; and in after
days he showed the hoard to his sons and sons' sons and taught
them how the door could be caused to open and shut. Thus Ali Baba
and his household lived all their lives in wealth and joyance in
that city where erst he had been a pauper, and by the blessing of
that secret treasure he rose to high degree and dignities.--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and thirty-ninth Night.

Then by the command of King Shahryar Queen Shahrazad began to
tell in these words the story of





            ALI KHWAJAH AND THE MERCHANT OF BAGHDAD



Under the reign of Caliph Harun al-Rashid there dwelt in the city
of Baghdad a certain merchant, 'Ali Khwajah hight, who had a
small stock of goods wherewith he bought and sold and made a bare
livelihood, abiding alone and without a family in the house of
her forbears.  Now so it came to pass that each night for three
nights together he saw in a vision a venerable Shaykh who bespake
him thus, "Thou art beholden to make a pilgrimage to Meccah; why
abidest thou sunk in heedless slumber and farest not forth as it
behoveth thee?"[FN#307]  Hearing these words he became sore
startled and affrighted, so that he sold shop and goods and all
that he had; and, with firm intent to visit the Holy House of
Almighty Allah, he let his home on hire and joined a caravan that
was journeying to Meccah the Magnified.  But ere he left his
natal city he placed a thousand gold pieces, which were over and
above his need for the journey, within an earthen jar filled up
with Asafiri[FN#308] or Sparrow-olives; and, having made fast the
mouth thereof, he carried the jar to a merchant-friend of many
years standing and said, "Belike, O my brother, thou hast heard
tell that I purpose going with a caravan on pilgrimage to Meccah,
the Holy City; so I have brought a jar of olives the which, I
pray thee, preserve for me in trust against my return."  The
merchant at once arose and handing the key of his warehouse to
Ali Khwajah said, "Here, take the key and open the store and
therein place the jar anywhere thou choosest, and when thou shalt
come back thou wilt find it even as thou leftest it."  Hereupon
Ali Khwajah did his friend's bidding and locking up the door
returned the key to its master.  Then loading his travelling
goods upon a dromedary and mounting a second beast he fared forth
with the caravan.  They came at length to Meccah the Magnified,
and it was the month Zu al-Hijjah wherein myriads of Moslems hie
thither on pilgrimage and pray and prostrate before the Ka'abah-
temple.  And when he had circuited the Holy House and fulfilled
all the rites and ceremonies required of palmers, he set up a
shop for sale of merchandise.[FN#309]  By chance two merchants
passing along that street espied the fine stuffs and goods in Ali
Khwajah's booth and approved much of them and praised their
beauty and excellence.  Presently quoth one to other, "This man
bringeth here most rare and costly goods:  now in Cairo, the
capital of Egypt-land would he get full value for them, and far
more than in the markets of this city."  Hearing mention of
Cairo, Ali Khwajah conceived a sore longing to visit that famous
capital, so he gave up his intent of return Baghdad-wards and
purposed wayfaring to Egypt.  Accordingly he joined a caravan and
arriving thither was well-pleased with the place, both country
and city; and selling his merchandise he made great gain
therefrom.  Then buying other goods and stuffs he purposed to
make Damascus; but for one full month he tarried at Cairo and
visited her sanctuaries and saintly places and after leaving her
walls he solaced himself with seeing many famous cities distant
several days' journey from the capital along the banks of the
River Nilus.  Presently, bidding adieu to Egypt he arrived at the
Sanctified House,[FN#310] Jerusalem and prayed in the Temple of
Banu Isra'il which the Moslems had re-edified.  In due time he
reached Damascus and observed that the city was well builded and
much peopled, and that the fields and meads were well-watered
with springs and channels and that the gardens and vergiers were
laden with flowers and fruits.  Amid such delights Ali Khwajah
hardly thought of Baghdad; withal he ceased not to pursue his
journey through Aleppo, Mosul and Shiraz, tarrying some time at
all of these towns, especially at Shiraz, till at length after
seven years of wayfaring he came back to Baghdad.--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Fortieth Night.

Then said she:--It behoveth thee now, O auspicious King, to hear
of the Baghdad merchant and his lack of probity.  For seven long
years he never once thought of Ali Khwajah or of the trust
committed to his charge; till one day as his wife sat at meat
with him at the evening meal, their talk by chance was of olives. 
Quoth she to him, "I would now fain have some that I may eat of
them;" and quoth he, "As thou speakest thereof I bethink me of
that Ali Khwajah who seven years ago fared on a pilgrimage to
Meccah, and ere he went left in trust with me a jar of Sparrow-
olives which still cumbereth the store-house.  Who knoweth where
he is or what hath betided him?  A man who lately returned with
the Hajj-caravan brought me word that Ali Khwajah had quitted
Meccah the Magnified with intent to journey on to Egypt.  Allah
Almighty alone knoweth an he be still alive or he be now dead;
however, if his olives be in good condition I will go bring some
hither that we may taste them: so give me a platter and a lamp
that I may fetch thee somewhat of them."  His wife, an honest
woman and an upright, made answer, "Allah forbid that thou
shouldst do a deed so base and break thy word and covenant.  Who
can tell?  Thou art not assured by any of his death; perchance he
may come back from Egypt safe and sound tomorrow or the day
after; then wilt thou, an thou cannot deliver unharmed to him
what he hath left in pledge, be ashamed of this thy broken troth
and we shall be disgraced before man and dishonoured in the
presence of thy friend.  I will not for my part have any hand in
such meanness nor will I taste the olives; furthermore, it
standeth not to reason that after seven years' keeping they
should be fit to eat.  I do implore thee to forswear this ill
purpose."  On such wise the merchant's wife protested and prayed
her husband that he meddle not with Ali Khwajah's olives, and
shamed him of his intent so that for the nonce he cast the matter
from his mind.  However, although the trader refrained that
evening from taking Ali Khwajah's olives, yet he kept the design
in memory until one day when, of his obstinacy and unfaith, he
resolved to carry out his project; and rising up walked  towards
the store-room dish in hand.  By chance he met his wife who said,
"I am no partner with thee in this ill-action:  in very truth
some evil shall befal thee an thou do such deed."  He heard her
but heeded her not; and, going to the store-room opened the jar
and found the olives spoiled and white with mould; but presently
he tilted up the jar and pouring some of its contents into the
dish, suddenly saw an Ashrafi fall from the vessel together with
the fruit.  Then, filled with greed, he turned out all that was
within into another jar and wondered with exceeding wonder to
find the lower half full of golden coins.  Presently, putting up
the moneys and the olives he closed the vessel and going back
said to his wife, "Thou spakest sooth, for I have examined the
jar and have found the fruit mouldy and foul of smell; wherefore
I returned it to its place and left it as it was aforetime." 
That night the merchant could not sleep a wink for thinking of
the gold and how he might lay hands thereon; and when morning
morrowed he took out all the Ashrafis and buying some fresh
olives in the Bazar filled up the jar with them and closed the
mouth and set it in its usual place.  Now it came to pass by
Allah's mercy that at the end of the month Ali Khwajah returned
safe and sound to Baghdad; and he first went to his old friend,
to wit, the merchant who, greeting him with feigned joy, fell on
his neck, but withal was sore troubled and perplexed at what
might happen.  After salutations and much rejoicing on either
part Ali Khwajah bespake the merchant on business and begged that
he might take back his jar of Asafiri-olives which he had placed
in charge of his familiar.  Quoth the merchant to Ali Khwajah, "O
my friend, I wot not where thou didst leave thy jar of olives;
but here is the key, go down to the store-house and take all that
is thine own."  So Ali Khwajah did as he was bidden and carrying
the jar from the magazine took his leave and hastened home; but,
when he opened the vessel and found not the gold coins, he was
distracted and overwhelmed with grief and made bitter
lamentation.  Then he returned to the merchant and said, "O my
friend, Allah, the All-present and the All-seeing, be my witness
that, when I went on my pilgrimage to Meccah the Magnified, I
left a thousand Ashrafis in that jar, and now I find them not. 
Canst thou tell me aught concerning them?  An thou in thy sore
need have made use of them, it mattereth not so thou wilt give
them back as soon as thou art able."  The merchant, apparently
pitying him, said, "O good friend, thou didst thyself with thine
hand set the jar inside the store-room.  I wist not that thou
hadst aught in it save olives; yet as thou didst leave it, so in
like manner didst thou find it and carry it away; and now thou
chargest me with theft of Ashrafis.  It seemeth strange and
passing strange that thou shouldst make such accusation.  When
thou wentest thou madest no mention of any money in the jar, but
saidst that it was full of olives, even as thou hast found it. 
Hadst thou left gold coins therein, then surely thou wouldst have
recovered them."  Hereupon Ali Khwajah begged hard with much
entreaty, saying, "Those thousand Ashrafis were all I owned, the
money earned by years of toil: I do beseech thee have pity on my
case and give them back to me."  Replied the merchant, waxing
wroth with great wrath, "O my friend, a fine fellow thou art to
talk of honesty and withal make such false and lying charge. 
Begone: hie thee hence and come not to my house again; for now I
know thee as thou art, a swindler and imposter."  Hearing this
dispute between Ali Khwajah and the merchant all the people of
the quarter came crowding to the shop.--And as the morn began to
dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-first Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
multitude which thronged about the merchant's shop warmly took up
the matter; and thus it became well known to all, rich and poor,
within the city of Baghdad how that one Ali Khwajah had hidden a
thousand Ashrafis within a jar of olives and had placed it on
trust with a certain merchant; moreover how, after pilgrimaging
to Meccah and seven years of travel the poor man had returned,
and that the rich man had gainsaid his words anent the gold and
was ready to make oath that he had not received any trust of the
kind.  At length, when naught else availed, Ali Khwajah was
constrained to bring the matter before the Kazi, and to claim one
thousand Ashrafis of his false friend.  The Judge asked, "What
witnesses hast thou who may speak for thee?"  and the plantiff
answered, "O my lord the Kazi, I feared to tell the matter to any
man lest all come to know of my secret.  Allah Almighty is my
sole testimony.  This merchant was my friend and I recked not
that he would prove dishonest and unfaithful."  Quoth the Judge,
"Then must I needs send for the merchant and hear what he saith
on oath;" and when the defendant came they made him swear by all
he deemed holy, facing Ka'abah-wards with hands uplifted, and he
cried, "I swear that I know naught of any Ashrafis belonging to
Ali Khwajah."[FN#311]  Hereat the Kazi pronounced him innocent
and dismissed him from court; and Ali Khwajah went home sad at
heart and said to himself, "Alas, what justice is this which hath
been meted out to me, that I should lose my money, and my just
cause be deemed unjust!  It hath been truly said, 'He loseth the
lave who sueth before a knave.' "  On the next day he drew out a
statement of his case; and, as the Caliph Harun al-Rashid was on
his way to Friday-prayers, he fell down on the ground before him
and presented to him the paper.  The Commander of the Faithful
read the petition and having understood the case deigned give
order saying, "To-morrow bring the accuser and the accused to the
audience-hall and place the petition before my presence, for I
myself will enquire into this matter."  That night the Prince of
True Believers, as was his wont, donned disguise to walk about
the squares of Baghdad and its streets and lanes and, accompanied
by Ja'afar the Barmaki and Masrur the Sworder of his vengeance,
proceeded to espy what happened in the city.  Immediately on
issuing forth he came upon an open place in the Bazar when he
heard the hubbub of children a-playing and saw at scanty distance
some ten or dozen boys making sport amongst themselves in the
moonlight;  and he stopped awhile to watch their diversion.  Then
one amongst the lads, a goodly and a fair-complexioned, said to
the others, "Come now and let us play the game of Kazi:  I will
be the Judge; let one of you be Ali Khwajah, and another the
merchant with whom he placed the thousand Ashrafis in pledge
before faring on his pilgrimage:  so come ye before me and let
each one plead his plea."  When the Caliph heard the name of Ali
Khwajah he minded him of the petition which had been presented to
him for justice against the merchant, and bethought him that he
would wait and see how the boy would perform the part of Kazi in
their game and upon what decision he would decide.  So the Prince
watched the mock-trial with keen interest saying to himself,
"This case hath verily made such stir within the city that even
the children know thereof and re-act it in their sports." 
Presently, he amongst the lads who took the part of Ali Khwajah
the plaintiff and his playmate who represented the me