rchant of
Baghdad accused of theft, advanced and stood before the boy who
as the Kazi sat in pomp and dignity.  Quoth the Judge, "O Ali
Khwajah, what is thy claim against this merchant?"  and the
complainant preferred his charge in a plea of full detail.  Then
said the Kazi to the boy who acted merchant, "What answerest thou
to this complaint and why didst thou not return the gold pieces?" 
The accused made reply even as the real defendant had done and
denied the charge before the Judge, professing himself ready to
take oath thereto.  Then said the boy-Kazi, "Ere thou swear on
oath that thou hast not taken the money, I would fain see for
myself the jar of olives which the plaintiff deposited with thee
on trust."  Then turning to the boy who represented Ali Khwajah
he cried, "Go thou and instantly produce the jar that I may
inspect it."  And when the vessel was brought the Kazi said to
the two contentious, "See now and say me:  be this the very jar
which thou, the plaintiff, leftest with the defendant?"  and both
answered that it was and the same.  Then said the self-
constituted Judge, "Open now the jar and bring hither some of the
contents that I may see the state in which the Asafiri-olives
actually are."  Then tasting of the fruit, "How is this?  I find
their flavour is fresh and their state excellent.  Surely during
the lapse of seven twelvemonths the olives would have become
mouldy and rotten.  Bring now before me two oil-merchants of the
town that they may pass opinion upon them."  Then two other of
the boys assumed the parts commanded and coming into court stood
before the Kazi, who asked, "Are ye olive-merchants by trade?" 
They answered, "We are and this hath been our calling for many
generations and in buying and selling olives we earn our daily
bread."  Then said the Kazi, "Tell me now, how long do olives
keep fresh and well-flavoured?"  and said they, "O my lord,
however carefully we keep them, after the third year they change
flavour and colour and become no longer fit for food, in fact
they are good only to be cast away."  Thereupon quoth the boy-
Kazi, "Examine me now these olives that are in this jar and say
me how old are they and what is their condition and savour."--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the two
boys who played the parts of oil-merchants pretended to take some
berries from the jar and taste them and presently they said, "O
our lord the Kazi, these olives are in fair condition and full-
flavoured."  Quoth the Kazi, "Ye speak falsely, for 'tis seven
years since Ali Khwajah put them in the jar as he was about to go
a-pilgrimaging;" and quoth they, "Say whatso thou wilt those
olives are of this year's growth, and there is not an oil-
merchant in all Baghdad but who will agree with us."  Moreover
the accused was made to taste and smell the fruits and he could
not but admit that it was even so as they had avouched.  Then
said the boy-Kazi to the boy-defendant, " 'Tis clear thou art a
rogue and a rascal, and thou hast done a deed wherefor thou
richly deservest the gibbet."  Hearing this the children frisked
about and clapped their hands with glee and gladness, then
seizing hold of him who acted as the merchant of Baghdad, they
led him off as to execution.  The Commander of the Faithful,
Harun al-Rashid, was greatly pleased at this acuteness of the boy
who had assumed the part of judge in the play, and commanded his
Wazir Ja'afar saying, "Mark well the lad who enacted the Kazi in
this mock-trial and see that thou produce him on the morrow:  he
shall try the case in my presence substantially and in real
earnest, even as we have heard him deal with it in play.  Summon
also the Kazi of this city that he may learn the administration
of justice from this child.  Moreover send word to Ali Khwajah
bidding him bring with him the jar of olives, and have also in
readiness two oil-merchants of the town."  Thus as they walked
along the Caliph gave orders to the Wazir and then returned to
his palace.  So on the morrow Ja'afar the Barmaki went to that
quarter of the town where the children had enacted the mock-trail
and asked the schoolmaster where his scholars might be, and he
answered, "They have all gone away, each to his home."  So the
minister visited the houses pointed out to him and ordered the
little ones to appear in his presence.  Accordingly they were
brought before him, when he said to them, "Who amongst you is he
that yesternight acted the part of Kazi in play and passed
sentence in the case of Ali Khwajah?"  The eldest of them
replied, " 'Twas I, O my lord the Wazir;" and then he waxed pale,
not knowing why the question was put.  Cried the Minister, "Come
along with me; the Commander of the Faithful hath need of thee." 
At this the mother of the lad was sore afraid and wept; but
Ja'afar comforted her and said, "O my lady, have no fear and
trouble not thyself.  Thy son will soon return to thee in safety,
Inshallah--God willing--and methinks the Sultan will show much
favour unto him."  The woman's heart was heartened on hearing
these words of the Wazir and she joyfully dressed her boy in his
best attire and sent him off with the Wazir, who led him by the
hand to the Caliph's audience-hall and executed all the other
commandments which had been issued by his liege lord.  Then the
Commander of the Faithful, having taken seat upon the throne of
justice, set the boy upon a seat beside him, and as soon as the
contending parties appeared before him, that is Ali Khwajah and
the merchant of Baghdad, he commanded them to state each man his
case in presence of the child who should adjudge the suit.  So
the two, plaintiff and defendant recounted their contention
before the boy in full detail; and when the accused stoutly
denied the charge and was about to swear on oath that what he
said was true, with hands uplifted and facing Ka'abah-wards, the
child-Kazi prevented him, saying, "Enough!  swear not on oath
till thou art bidden; and first let the jar of olives be produced
in Court."  Forthwith the jar was brought forward and placed
before him; and the lad bade open it;  then, tasting one he gave
also to two oil-merchants who had been summoned, that they might
do likewise and declare how old was the fruit and whether its
savour was good or bad.  They did his bidding and said, "The
flavour of these olives hath not changed and they are of this
year's growth."  Then said the boy, "Methinks ye are mistaken,
for seven years ago Ali Khwajah put the olives into the jar: how
then could fruit of this year find their way therein?"  But they
replied, " 'Tis even as we say: an thou believe not our words
send straightway for other oil-merchants and make enquiry of
them, so shalt thou know if we speak sooth or lies."  But when
the merchant of Baghdad saw that he could no longer avail to
prove his innocence, he confessed everything; to wit, how he had
taken out the Ashrafis and filled the jar with fresh olives. 
Hearing this the boy said to the Prince of True Believers, "O
gracious sovereign, last night in play we tried this cause, but
thou alone has power to apply the penalty.  I have adjudged the
matter in thy presence and I humbly pray that thou punish this
merchant according to the law of the Koran and the custom of the
Apostle; and thou decree the restoring of his thousand gold
pieces to Ali Khwajah, for that he hath been proved entitled to
them."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
ordered the merchant of Baghdad to be taken away and be hanged,
after he should have made known where he had put the thousand
Ashrafis and that these should have been restored their rightful
owner, Ali Khwajah.  He also turned to the Kazi who had hastily
adjudged the case, and bade him learn from that lad to do his
duty more sedulously and conscientiously.  More-over the Prince
of True Believers embraced the boy, and ordered that the Wazir
give him a thousand pieces of gold from the royal treasury and
conduct him safely to his home and parents.[FN#312]  And after,
when the lad grew to man's estate, the Commander of the Faithful
made him one of his cup-companions and furthered his fortunes and
ever entreated him with the highmost honour.  But when Queen
Shahrazad had ended the story of Ali Khwajah and the merchant of
Baghdad she said, "Now, O auspicious King, I would relate a more
excellent history than any, shouldst thou be pleased to hear that
I have to say;" and King Shahryar replied, "By Allah! what an
admirable tale is this thou hast told:  my ears do long to hear
another as rare and commendable."  So Shahrazad began forthright
to recount the adventures of[FN#313]






                   PRINCE AHMAD AND THE FAIRY
                       PERI-BANU.[FN#314]



In days of yore and times long gone before there was a Sultan of
India who begat three sons; the eldest hight Prince Husayn, the
second Prince Ali, and the youngest Prince Ahmad; moreover he had
a niece, named Princess Nur al-Nihar,[FN#315] the daughter of his
cadet brother who, dying early, left his only child under her
uncle's charge. The King busied himself with abundant diligence
about her instruction and took all care that she should be taught
to read and write, sew and embroider, sing and deftly touch all
instruments of mirth and merriment. This Princess also in beauty
and loveliness and in wit and wisdom far excelled all the maidens
of her own age in every land. She was brought up with the Princes
her cousins in all joyance; and they ate together and played
together and slept together; and the king had determined in his
mind that when she reached marriageable age he would give her in
wedlock to some one of the neighbouring royalties; but, when she
came to years of discretion, her uncle perceived that the three
Princes his sons were all three deep in love of her, and each
desired in his heart to woo and to win and to wed her. Wherefore
was the King sore troubled in mind and said to himself, "An I
give the Lady Nur al-Nihar in wedlock to any one of her cousins,
the other twain will be dissatisfied and murmur against my
decision; withal my soul cannot endure to see them grieved and
disappointed. And should I marry her to some stranger the three
Princes my sons will be sore distressed and saddened in soul;
nay, who knoweth that they may not slay themselves or go forth
and betake them to some far and foreign land? The matter is a
troublous and a perilous; so it behoveth me their sire to take
action on such wise that if one of them espouse her, the other
two be not displeased thereat." Long time the Sultan revolved the
matter in his mind; and at length he devised a device; and,
sending for the three princes, addressed them saying, "O my sons,
ye are in my opinion of equal merit one with other; nor can I
give preference to any of you and marry him to the Princess Nur
al-Nihar; nor yet am I empowered to wed her with all three. But I
have thought of one plan whereby she shall be wife to one of you,
and yet shall not cause aught of irk or envy to his brethren; so
may your mutual love and affection remain unabated, and one shall
never be jealous of the other's happiness. Brief, my device is
this:--Go ye and travel to distant countries, each one separating
himself from the others; and do ye bring me back the thing most
wondrous and marvellous of all sights ye may see upon your
wayfarings; and he who shall return with the rarest of
curiosities shall be husband to the Princess Nur al-Nihar.
Consent ye now to this proposal; and whatso of money ye require
for travel and for the purchase of objects seld-seen and
singular, take ye from the royal treasury as much as ye desire."
The three Princes, who were ever submissive to their sire,
consented with one voice to this proposal, and each was satisfied
and confident that he would bring the King the most extraordinary
of gifts and thereby win the Princess to wife. So the Sultan bade
give to each what moneys he wanted without stint or account, and
counselled them to make ready for the journey without stay or
delay and depart their home in the Peace of Allah.--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-fourth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the three
princely brothers forthright made them ready for journey and
voyage. So they donned disguise, preferring the dress of
wandering merchants; and, buying such things as they needed and
taking with them each his suite they mounted steeds of purest
blood and rode forth in a body from the palace. For several
stages they travelled the same road until, reaching a place where
it branched off in three different ways, they alighted at a Khan
and ate the evening meal. Then they made compact and covenant,
that whereas they had thus far travelled together they should at
break of day take separate roads and each wend his own way and
all seek different and distant regions, agreeing to travel for
the space of one year only, after which, should they be in the
land of the living, all three would rendezvous at that same
caravanserai and return in company to the King their sire.
Furthermore, they determined that the first who came back to the
Khan should await the arrival of the next, and that two of them
should tarry there in expectancy of the third. Then, all this
matter duly settled, they retired to rest, and when the morning
morrowed they fell on one another's necks and bade farewell; and,
lastly, mounting their horses, they rode forth each in his own
direction. Now Prince Husayn, the eldest, had oft heard recount
the wonders of the land Bishangarh[FN#316], and for a long while
had wished to visit it; so he took the road which led thither,
and, joining himself to a caravan journeying that way,
accompanied it by land and by water and traversed many regions,
desert wilds and stony wolds, dense jungles and fertile tracts,
with fields and hamlets and gardens and townships. After three
months spent in wayfare at length he made Bishangarh, a region
over-reigned by manifold rulers, so great was its extent and so
far reaching was its power. He put up at a Khan built specially
for merchants who came from the farthest lands, and from the folk
who dwelt therein he heard tell that the city contained a large
central market[FN#317] wherein men bought and sold all manner of
rarities and wondrous things. Accordingly, next day Prince Husayn
repaired to the Bazar and on sighting it he stood amazed at the
prospect of its length and width. It was divided into many
streets, all vaulted over but lit up by skylights; and the shops
on either side were substantially builded, all after one pattern
and nearly of the same size, while each was fronted by an awning
which kept off the glare and made a grateful shade. Within these
shops were ranged and ordered various kinds of wares; there were
bales of "woven air"[FN#318] and linens of finest tissue,
plain-white or dyed or adorned with life-like patterns wherefrom
beasts and trees and blooms stood out so distinctly that one
might believe them to be very ferals, bosquets and gardens. There
were moreover silken goods, brocaded stuffs, and finest satins
from Persia and Egypt of endless profusion; in the China
warehouses stood glass vessels of all kinds, and here and there
were stores wherein tapestries and thousands of foot-carpets lay
for sale. So Prince Husayn walked on from shop to shop and
marvelled much to see such wondrous things whereof he had never
even dreamt: and he came at length to the Goldsmiths' Lane and
espied gems and jewels and golden and silvern vessels studded
with diamonds and rubies, emeralds, pearls and other precious
stones, all so lustrous and dazzling bright that the stores were
lit up with their singular brilliancy. Hereat he said to himself,
"If in one street only there be such wealth and jewels so rare,
Allah Almighty and none save He knoweth what may be the riches in
all this city." He was not less astonished to behold the
Brahmins, how their women-kind for excess of opulence bedecked
themselves with the finest gems and were ornamented with the
richest gear from front to foot: their very slave-boys and
handmaids wore golden necklaces and bracelets and bangles studded
with precious stones. Along the length of one market street were
ranged hosts of flower-sellers; for all the folk, both high and
low, wore wreaths and garlands: some carried nosegays in hand,
other some bound fillets round their heads, while not a few had
ropes and festoons surrounding and hanging from their necks. The
whole place seemed one huge parterre of bloomery; even traders
set bouquets in every shop and stall, and the scented air was
heavy with perfume. Strolling to and fro Prince Husayn was
presently tired and would fain have sat him down somewhere to
rest awhile, when one of the merchants, noting his look of
weariness, with kindly courtesy prayed him be seated in his
store. After saluting him with the salam the stranger sat down;
and anon he saw a broker come that way, offering for sale a
carpet some four yards square, and crying, "This be for sale; who
giveth me its worth; to wit, thirty thousand gold pieces?"--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-fifth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Prince
marvelled with excessive marvel at the price, and, beckoning the
dealer, examined his wares right well; then said he, "A carpet
such as this is selleth for a few silverlings. What special
virtue hath it that thou demand therefor the sum of thirty
thousand gold coins?" The broker, believing Husayn to be a
merchant man lately arrived at Bishangarh, answered him saying,
"O my lord, thinkest thou I price this carpet at too high a
value? My master hath bidden me not to sell it for less than
forty thousand Ashrafis." Quoth the Prince, "It surely cloth
possess some wondrous virtue, otherwise wouldst thou not demand
so prodigious a sum;" and quoth the broker, "'Tis true, O my
lord, its properties are singular and marvellous. Whoever sitteth
on this carpet and willeth in thought to be taken up and set down
upon other site will, in the twinkling of an eye, be borne
thither, be that place nearhand or distant many a day's journey
and difficult to reach."[FN#319] The Prince hearing these words
said to himself, "Naught so wonder-rare as this rug can I carry
back to the Sultan my sire to my gift, or any that afford him
higher satisfaction and delight. Almighty Allah be praised, the
aim of my wayLare is attained and hereby, Inshallah! I shall win
to my wish. This, if anything, will be to him a joy for ever."
Wherefore the Prince, with intent to buy the Flying Carpet,
turned to the broker and said, If indeed it have properties such
as thou describest, verily the price thou askest therefor is not
over much, and I am ready to pay thee the sum required." The
other rejoined, "An thou doubt my words I pray thee put them to
the test and by such proof remove thy suspicions. Sit now upon
this square of tapestry, and at thy mere wish and will it shall
transport us to the caravanserai wherein thou abidest: on this
wise shalt thou be certified of my words being sooth, and when
assured of their truth thou mayest count out to me, there and
then, but not before, the value of my wares." Accordingly, the
man spread out the carpet upon the ground behind his shop and
seated the Prince thereupon, he sitting by his side. Then, at the
mere will[FN#320] and wish of Prince Husayn, the twain were at
once transported as though borne by the throne of Solomon to the
Khan. So the eldest of the brothers joyed with exceeding joy to
think that he had won so rare a thing, whose like could nowhere
be found in the lands nor amongst the Kings; and his heart and
soul were gladdened for that he had come to Bishangarh and hit
upon such a prodigy. Accordingly he counted out the forty
thousand Ashrafis as payment for the carpet, and gave, moreover,
another twenty thousand by way of sweetmeat to the broker.
Furthermore, he ceased not saying to himself that the King on
seeing it would forthright wed him to the Princess Nur al-Nihar;
for it were clear impossible that either of his brothers, e'en
though they searched the whole world over and over, could find a
rarity to compare with this. He longed to take seat upon the
carpet that very instant and fly to his own country, or, at
least, to await his brothers at the caravanserai where they had
parted under promise and covenant, pledged and concluded, to meet
again at the year's end. But presently he bethought him that the
delay would be long and longsome, and much he feared lest he be
tempted to take some rash step; wherefore he resolved upon
sojourning in the country whose King and subjects he had ardently
desired to behold for many a day, and determined that he would
pass the time in sight-seeing and in pleasuring over the lands
adjoining. So Prince Husayn tarried in Bishangarh some months.
Now the King of that country was wont to hold a high court once
every week for hearing disputes and adjudging causes which
concerned foreign merchants; and thus the Prince ofttimes saw the
King, but to none would he tell a word of his adventure. However,
inasmuch as he was comely of countenance, graceful of gait, and
courteous of accost, stout hearted and strong, wise and ware and
witty, he was held by the folk in higher honour than the Sultan;
not to speak of the traders his fellows; and in due time he be
came a favourite at court and learned of the ruler himself all
matters concerning his kingdom and his grandeur and greatness.
The Prince also visited the most famous Pagodas[FN#321] of that
country. The first he saw was wrought in brass and orichalch of
most exquisite workmanship: its inner cell measured three yards
square and contained amiddlemost a golden image in size and
stature like unto a man of wondrous beauty; and so cunning was
the workmanship that the face seemed to fix its eyes, two immense
rubies of enormous value, upon all beholders no matter where they
stood.[FN#322] He also saw another idol-temple, not less strange
and rare than this, builded in a village on a plain surface of
some half acre long and broad, wherein bloomed lovely rose-trees
and jasmine and herb-basil and many other sweet-scented plants,
whose perfume made the air rich with fragrance. Around its court
ran a wall three feet high, so that no animal might stray
therein; and in the centre was a terrace well-nigh the height of
a man, all made of white marble and wavy alabaster, each and
every slab being dressed so deftly and joined with such nice
joinery that the whole pavement albeit covering so great a space,
seemed to the sight but a single stone. In the centre of the
terrace stood the domed fane towering some fifty cubits high and
conspicuous for many miles around: its length was thirty cubits
and its breadth twenty, and the red marbles of the revetment were
clean polished as a mirror, so that every image was reflected in
it to the life. The dome was exquisitely carved and sumptuously
ornamented without; and within were ranged in due rank and
sequence rows and rows of idols. To this, the Holy of Holies,
from morn till eve thousands of Brahmins, men and women, came
docking for daily worship. They had sports and diversions as well
as rites and ceremonies: some feasted and others danced, some
sang, others played on instruments of mirth and merriment, while
here and there were plays and revels and innocent merry-makings.
And hither at every season flocked from distant lands hosts of
pilgrims seeking to fulfil their vows and to perform their
orisons; all bringing gifts of gold and silver coin and presents
rare and costly which they offered to the gods in presence of the
royal officers.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-sixth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Husayn also saw a fete once a year within the city of Bishangarh
and the Ryots all, both great and small, gathered together and
circumambulated the Pagodas; chiefly circuiting one which in size
and grandeur surpassed all others. Great and learned Pandits
versed in the Shastras[FN#323] made journeys of four or five
months and greeted one another at that festival; thither too the
folk from all parts of India pilgrimaged in such crowds that
Prince Husayn was astounded at the sight; and, by reason of the
multitudes that thronged around the temples, he could not see the
mode in which the gods were worshipped. On one side of the
adjacent plain which stretched far and wide, stood a new-made
scaffolding of ample size and great magnificence, nine storeys
high, and the lower part supported by forty pillars; and here one
day in every week the King assembled his Wazirs for the purpose
of meting out justice to all strangers in the land. The palace
within was richly adorned and furnished with costly furniture:
without, upon the wall faces were limned homely landscapes and
scenes of foreign parts and notably all manner beasts and birds
and insects even gnats and flies, portrayed with such skill of
brain and cunning of hand that they seemed real and alive and the
country-folk and villagers seeing from afar paintings of lions
and tigers and similar ravenous beasts, were filled with awe and
dismay. On the other three sides of the scaffolding were
pavilions, also of wood, built for use of the commons,
illuminated and decorated inside and outside like the first, and
wroughten so cunningly that men could turn them round, with all
the people in them, and moving them about transfer them to
whatsoever quarter they willed. On such wise they shifted these
huge buildings by aid of machinery;[FN#324] and the folk inside
could look upon a succession of sports and games. Moreover, on
each side of the square elephants were ranged in ranks, the
number amounting to well nigh one thousand, their trunks and ears
and hinder parts being painted with cinnabar and adorned with
various lively figures; their housings were of gold brocade and
their howdahs purfled with silver, carrying minstrels who
performed on various instruments, whilst buffoons delighted the
crowd with their jokes and mimes played their most diverting
parts. Of all the sports, however, which the Prince beheld, the
elephant-show amused him most and Wiled him with the greatest
admiration. One huge beast, which could be wheeled about where
the keepers ever listed, for that his feet rested upon a post
which travelled on casters, held in his trunk a flageolet whereon
he played so sweetly well that all the people were fain to cry
Bravo! There was another but a smaller animal which stood upon
one end of a beam laid crosswise upon, and attached with hinges
to, a wooden block eight cubits high, and on the further end was
placed an iron weight as heavy as the elephant, who would press
down for some time upon the beam until the end touched the
ground, and then the weight would raise him up again.[FN#325]
Thus the beam swung like a see saw aloft and adown; and, as it
moved, the elephant swayed to and fro and kept time with the
bands of music, loudly trumpeting the while. The people moreover
could wheel about this elephant from place to place as he stood
balanced on the beam; and such exhibitions of learned elephants
were mostly made in presence of the King. Prince Husayn spent
well nigh a year in sight-seeing amongst the fairs and festivals
of Bishangarh; and, when the period of the fraternal compact drew
near, he spread his carpet upon the court-ground behind the Khan
wherein he lodged, and sitting thereon, together with his suite
and the steeds and all he had brought with him, mentally wished
that he might be transported to the caravanserai where the three
brothers had agreed to meet. No sooner had he formed the thought
than straightway, in the twinkling of an eye, the carpet rose
high in air and sped through space and carried them to the
appointed stead where, still garbed as a merchant he remained in
expectation of his brothers' coming. Hearken now, O auspicious
King, to what befel Prince Ali, the second brother of Prince
Husayn. On the third day after he had parted from the two others,
he also joined a caravan and journeyed towards Persia; then,
after a march of four months arriving at Shiraz, the capital of
Iran-land, he alighted at a Khan, he and his fellow-travellers
with whom he had made a manner of friendship; and, passing as a
jeweller, there took up his abode with them. Next day the traders
fared forth to buy wares and to sell their goods; but Prince Ali,
who had brought with him naught of vendible, and only the things
he needed, presently doffed his travelling dress, and in company
with a comrade of the caravan entered the chief Bazar, known as
the Bazistan,[FN#326] or cloth-market. Ali strolled about the
place, which was built of brick and where all the shops had
arched roofs resting on handsome columns; and he admired greatly
to behold the splendid store-houses exposing for sale all manner
goods of countless value. He wondered much what wealth was in the
town if a single market street contained riches such as these.
And as the brokers went about crying their goods for sale, he saw
one of them hending in hand an ivory tube in length about a
cubit, which he was offering for sale at the price of thirty
thousand Ashrafis. Hearing such demand Prince Ali thought to
himself, "Assuredly this fellow is a fool who asketh such a price
for so paltry a thing."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-seventh Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince Ali
presently asked one of the shopkeepers with whom he had made
acquaintance, saying, "O my friend, is this man a maniac that he
asketh a sum of thirty thousand Ashrafis for this little pipe of
ivory? Surely none save an idiot would give him such a price and
waste upon it such a mint of money." Said the shop man, "O my
lord, this broker is wiser and warier than all the others of his
calling, and by means of him I have sold goods worth thousands of
sequins. Until yesterday he was in his sound senses; but I cannot
say what state is his to day and whether or no he have lost his
wits; but this wot I well, that if he ask thirty thousand for yon
ivory tube, 'twill be worth that same or even more. Howbeit we
shall see with our own eyes. Sit thee here and rest within the
shop until he pass this way." So Prince Ali abode where he was
bidden and presently the broker was seen coming up the street.
Then the shopman calling to him said, "O man, rare merit hath yon
little pipe; for all the folk are astounded to hear thee ask so
high a price therefor; nay more, this friend of mine thinketh
that thou art crazy." The broker, a man of sense, was on no wise
chafed at these words but answered with gentle speech, "O my
lord, I doubt not but that thou must deem me a madman to ask so
high a price, and set so great a value upon an article so mean;
but when I shall have made known to thee its properties and
virtues, thou wilt most readily consent to take it at that
valuation. Not thou alone but all men who have heard me cry my
cry laugh and name me ninny." So saying, the broker showed the
Spying Tube to Prince Ali and handing it to him said, "Examine
well this ivory, the properties of which I will explain to thee.
Thou seest that it is furnished with a piece of glass at either
end;[FN#327] and, shouldst thou apply one extremity thereof to
thine eye, thou shalt see what thing soe'er thou listest and it
shall appear close by thy side though parted from thee by many an
hundred of miles." Replied the Prince, "This passeth all
conception, nor can I believe it to be veridical until I shall
have tested it and I become satisfied that 'tis even as thou
sayest." Hereupon the broker placed the little tube in Prince
Ali's hand, and showing him the way to handle it said, "Whatso
thou mayest wish to descry will be shown to thee by looking
through this ivory." Prince Ali silently wished to sight his
sire, and when he placed the pipe close to his eye forthwith he
saw him hale and hearty, seated on his throne and dispensing
justice to the people of his dominion. Then the youth longed with
great longing to look upon his lady love the Princess Nur
al-Nihar; and straightway he saw her also sitting upon her bed,
sound and sane, talking and laughing, whilst a host of handmaids
stood around awaiting her commands. The Prince was astonished
exceedingly to behold this strange and wondrous spectacle, and
said to himself, "An I should wander the whole world over for ten
years or more and search in its every corner and cranny, I shall
never find aught so rare and precious as this tube of ivory."
Then quoth he to the broker, "The virtues of thy pipe I find are
indeed those thou hast described, and right willingly I give to
thee its price the thirty thousand Ashrafis." Replied the sales-
man, "O my lord, my master hath sworn an oath that he will not
part with it for less than forty thousand gold pieces." Here-upon
the Prince, understanding that the broker was a just man and a
true, weighed out to him the forty thousand sequins and became
master of the Spying Tube, enraptured with the thought that
assuredly it would satisfy his sire and obtain for him the hand
of Princess Nur al-Nihar. So with mind at ease Ali journeyed
through Shiraz and over sundry parts of Persia; and in fine, when
the year was well nigh spent he joined a caravan and, travelling
back to India, arrived safe and sound at the appointed
caravanserai whither Prince Husayn had foregone him. There the
twain tarried awaiting the third brother's safe return. Such, O
King Shahryar, is the story of the two brothers; and now I
beseech thee incline thine ear and hearken to what befel the
youngest, to wit Prince Ahmad; for indeed his adventure is yet
more peregrine and seld-seen of all. When he had parted from his
brothers, he took the road leading to Samarkand; and, arriving
there after long travel, he also like his brothers alighted at a
Khan. Next day he fared forth to see the market square, which
folk call the Bazistan, and he found it fairly laid out, the
shops wroughten with cunning workmanship and filled with rare
stuffs and precious goods and costly merchandise. Now as he
wandered to and fro he came across a broker who was hawking a
Magical Apple and crying aloud, "Who will buy this fruit, the
price whereof be thirty-five thousand gold pieces?" Quoth Prince
Ahmad to the man, "Prithee let me see the fruit thou holdest in
hand, and explain to me what hidden virtue it possesseth that
thou art asking for it so high a value." Quoth the other, smiling
and handing to him the apple, "Marvel not at this, O good my
lord: in sooth I am certified that when I shall have explained
its properties and thou shalt see how it advantageth all mankind,
thou wilt not deem my demand exorbitant; nay, rather thou wilt
gladly give a treasure house of gold so thou may possess
it."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-eighth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the broker
said moreover to Prince Ahmad, "Now hearken to me, O my lord, and
I will tell thee what of virtue lieth in this artificial apple.
If anyone be sick of a sickness however sore, nay more if he be
ill nigh unto death, and perchance he smell this pome, he will
forthwith recover and become well and whole of whatsoever disease
he had, plague or pleurisy, fever or other malignant distemper,
as though he never had been attacked; and his strength will
return to him forthright, and after smelling this fruit he will
be free from all ailment and malady so long as life shall remain
to him." Quoth Prince Ahmad, "How shall I be assured that what
thou speakest is truth? If the matter be even as thou sayest,
then verily I will give thee right gladly the sum thou
demandest." Quoth the broker, "O my lord, all men who dwell in
the parts about Samarkand know full well how there once lived in
this city a sage of wondrous skill who, after many years of toil
and travail, wrought this apple by mixing medicines from herbs
and minerals countless in number. All his good, which was great,
he expended upon it, and when he had perfected it he made whole
thousands of sick folk whom he directed only to smell the fruit.
But, alas! his life presently came to an end and death overtook
him suddenly ere he could save himself by the marvellous scent;
and, as he had won no wealth and left only a bereaved wife and a
large family of young children and dependents manifold, his widow
had no help but provide for them a maintenance by parting with
this prodigy." While the salesman was telling his tale to the
Prince a crowd of citizens gathered around them and one amongst
the folk, who was well known to the broker, came forward and
said, "A friend of mine lieth at home sick to the death: the
doctors and surgeons all despair of his life; so I beseech thee
let him smell this fruit that he may live." Hearing these words,
Prince Ahmad turned to the salesman and said, "O my friend, if
this sick man of whom thou hearest can recover strength by
smelling the apple, then will I straightway buy it of thee at a
valuation of forty thousand Ashrafis." The man had permission to
sell it for a sum of thirty-five thousand; so he was satisfied to
receive five thousand by way of brokerage, and he rejoined, "'Tis
well, O my lord, now mayest thou test the virtues of this apple
and be persuaded in thy mind: hundreds of ailing folk have I made
whole by means of it." Accordingly the Prince accompanied the
people to the sick man's house and found him lying on his bed
with the breath in his nostrils; but, as soon as the dying man
smelt the fruit, at once recovering strength he rose in perfect
health, sane and sound. Hereupon Ahmad bought the Magical Apple
of the dealer and counted out to him the forty thousand Ashrafis.
Presently, having gained the object of his travels, he resolved
to join some caravan marching Indiawards and return to his
father's home; but meanwhile he resolved to solace himself with
the sights and marvels of Samarkand. His especial joy was to gaze
upon the glorious plain highs Soghd,[FN#328] one of the wonders
of this world: the land on all sides was a delight to the sight,
emerald-green and bright, with crystal rills like the plains of
Paradise; the gardens bore all manner flowers and fruits and the
cities and palaces gladdened the stranger's gaze. After some days
Prince Ahmad joined a caravan of merchants wending Indiawards;
and, when his long and longsome travel was ended, he at last
reached the caravanserai where his two brothers, Husayn and Ali,
impatiently awaited his arrival. The three rejoiced with
exceeding joy to meet once more and fell on one another's necks;
thanking Allah who had brought them back safe and sound, hale and
hearty, after such prolonged and longsome absence. Then Prince
Husayn, being the eldest, turned to them and said, "Now it
behoveth us each to recount what hath betided him and announce
what rare thing he hath brought back and what be the virtues
thereof; and I, being the first-born, will be the foremost to
tell my adventures. I bring with me from Bishangarh, a carpet,
mean to look at, but such are its properties that should any sit
thereon and wish in mind to visit country or city, he will at
once be carried thither in ease and safety although it be distant
months, nay years of journey. I have paid forty thousand gold
pieces to its price; and, after seeing all the wonders of
Bishangarh-land, I took seat upon my purchase and willed myself
at this spot. Straightway I found myself here as I wished and
have tarried in this caravanserai three months awaiting your
arrival. The flying carpet is with me; so let him who listeth
make trial of it." When the senior Prince had made an end of
telling his tale, Prince Ali spake next and said, "O my brother,
this carpet which thou hast brought is marvel-rare and hath most
wondrous gifts; nor according to thy statement hath any in all
the world seen aught to compare with it." Then bringing forth the
Spying Tube, he pursued, "Look ye here, I too have bought for
forty thousand Ashrafis somewhat whose merits I will now show
forth to you."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-ninth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince Ali
enlarged upon the virtues of his purchase and said, "Ye see this
ivory pipe? By means of it man may descry objects hidden from his
sight and distant from him many a mile. 'Tis truly a most
wondrous matter and right worthy your inspection, and you two may
try it an ye will. Place but an eye close to the smaller glass
and form a wish in mind to see what thing soe'er your soul
desireth; and, whether it be near hand or distant many hundreds
of miles, this ivory will make the object look clear and close to
you." At these words Prince Husayn took the pipe from Prince Ali
and, applying his eye to one end as he had been directed, then
wished in his heart to behold the Princess Nur al-Nihar;[FN#329]
and the two brothers watched him to learn what he would say.
Suddenly they saw his face change colour and wither as a wilted
flower, while in his agitation and distress a flood of tears
gushed from his eyes; and, ere his brothers recovered from their
amazement and could enquire the cause of such strangeness, he
cried aloud, "Alas! and well away. We have endured toil and
travail, and we have travelled so far and wide hoping to wed the
Princess Nur al-Nihar. But 'tis all in vain: I saw her lying on
her bed death-sick and like to breathe her last and around her
stood her women all weeping and wailing in the sorest of sorrow.
O my brothers, an ye would see her once again for the last time,
take ye one final look through the glass ere she be no more."
Hereat Prince Ali seized the Spying Tube and peered through it
and found the condition of the Princess even as his brother
Husayn had described; so he presently passed it over to Prince
Ahmad, who also looked and was certified that the Lady Nur
al-Nihar was about to give up the ghost. So he said to his elder
brothers, "We three are alike love distraught for the Princess
and the dearest wish of each one is to win her. Her life is on
the ebb, still I can save her and make her whole if we hasten to
her without stay or delay." So saying he pulled from his pocket
the Magical Apple and showed it to them crying, "This thing is
not less in value than either the Flying Carpet or the Spying
Tube. In Samarkand I bought it for forty thousand gold pieces and
here is the best opportunity to try its virtues. The folk told me
that if a sick man hold it to his nose, although on the point of
death, he will wax at once well and hale again: I have myself
tested it, and now ye shall see for yourselves its marvel-cure
when I shall apply it to the case of Nur al-Nihar. Only, let us
seek her presence ere she die." Quoth Prince Husayn, "This were
an easy matter: my carpet shall carry us in the twinkling of an
eye straight to the bedside of our beloved. Do ye without
hesitation sit down with me thereupon, for there is room
sufficient to accommodate us three; we shall instantly be carried
thither and our servants can follow us." Accordingly, the three
Princes disposed themselves upon the Flying Carpet and each
willed in his mind to reach the bedside of Nur al-Nihar, when
instantly they found themselves within her apartment. The
handmaids and eunuchs in waiting were terrified at the sight and
marvelled how these stranger men could have entered the chamber;
and, as the Castratos were fain fall upon them, brand in hand,
they recognised the Princes and drew back still in wonderment at
their intrusion. Then the brothers rose forthright from the
Flying Carpet and Prince Ahmad came forwards and put the Magical
Apple to the nostrils of the lady, who lay stretched on the couch
in unconscious state; and as the scent reached her brain the
sickness left her and the cure was complete. She opened wide her
eyes and sitting erect upon her bed looked all around and chiefly
at the Princes as they stood before her; for she felt that she
had waxed hale and hearty as though she awoke after the sweetest
of slumber. Presently she arose from her couch and bade her
tire-women dress her the while they related to her the sudden
coming of the three Princes, her uncle's sons, and how Prince
Ahmad had made her smell something whereby she had recovered of
her illness. And after she had made the Ablution of Health she
joyed with exceeding joy to see the Princes and returned thanks
to them, but chiefly to Prince Ahmad in that he had restored her
to health and life.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Fiftieth Night.

Then she said:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
brothers also were gladdened with exceeding gladness to see the
Princess Nur al-Nihar recover so suddenly from mortal malady and,
presently taking leave of her, they fared to greet their father.
Meanwhile the Eunuchs had reported the whole matter to the
Sultan, and when the Princes came before him he rose and embraced
them tenderly and kissed them on their foreheads, filled with
satisfaction to see them again and to hear from them the welfare
of the Princess, who was dear to him as she had been his
daughter. Then the three brothers produced each one the wondrous
thing he had brought from his wayfare; and Prince Husayn first
showed the Flying Carpet which in the twinkling of an eye had
transported them home from far distant exile and said, "For
outward show this carpet hath no merit, but inasmuch as it
possesseth such wondrous virtue, methinks 'tis impossible to find
in all the world aught that can compare to it for rarity." Next,
Prince Ali presented to the King his Spying Tube and said, "The
mirror of Jamshid[FN#330] is as vain and naught beside this pipe,
by means whereof all things from East to West and from North to
South are made clearly visible to the ken of man." Last of all,
Prince Ahmad produced the Magical Apple which wondrously saved
the dear life of Nur al-Nihar and said, "By means of this fruit
all maladies and grievous distempers are at once made whole."
Thus each presented his rarity to the Sultan, saying, "O our
lord, deign examine well these gifts we have brought and do thou
pronounce which of them all is most excellent and admirable; so,
according to thy promise, he amongst us on whom thy choice may
fall shall marry the Princess Nur al-Nihar." When the King had
patiently listened to their several claims and had understood how
each gift took part in restoring health to his niece, for a while
he dove deep in the sea of thought and then answered, "Should I
award the palm of merit to Prince Ahmad, whose Magical Apple
cured the Princess, then should I deal unfairly by the other two.
Albeit his rarity restored her to life and health from mortal
illness, yet say me how had he known of her condition save by the
virtue of Prince Ali's Spying Tube? In like manner, but for the
Flying Carpet of Prince Husayn, which brought you three hither in
a moment's space, the Magical Apple would have been of no avail.
Wherefore 'tis my rede all three had like part and can claim
equal merit in healing her; for it were impossible to have made
her whole if any one thing of the three were wanting; furthermore
all three objects are wondrous and marvellous without one
surpassing other, nor can I, with aught of reason, assign
preference or precedence to any. My promise was to marry the Lady
Nur al-Nihar to him who should produce the rarest of rarities,
but although strange 'tis not less true that all are alike in the
one essential condition. The difficulty still remaineth and the
question is yet unsolved, whilst I fain would have the matter
settled ere the close of day, and without prejudice to any. So
needs must I fix upon some plan whereby I may be able to adjudge
one of you to be the winner, and bestow upon him the hand of
Princess Nur al-Nihar, according to my plighted word; and thus
absolve myself from all responsibility. Now I have resolved upon
this course of action; to wit, that ye should mount each one his
own steed and all of you be provided with bow and arrows; then do
ye ride forth to the Maydan--the hippodrome--whither I and my
Ministers of State and Grandees of the kingdom and Lords of the
land will follow you. There in my presence ye shall each, turn by
turn, shoot a shaft with all your might and main; and he amongst
you whose arrow shall fly the farthest will be adjudged by me
worthiest to win the Princess Nur al-Nihar to wife." Accordingly
the three Princes, who could not gainsay the decision of their
sire nor question its wisdom and justice, backed their coursers,
and each taking his bow and arrows made straight for the place
appointed. The King also, when he had stored the presents in the
royal treasury, arrived there with his Wazirs and the dignitaries
of his realm; and as soon as all was ready, the eldest son and
heir, Prince Husayn, essayed his strength and skill and shot a
shaft far along the level plain. After him Prince Ali hent his
bow in hand and, discharging an arrow in like direction, overshot
the first; and lastly came Prince Ahmad's turn. He too aimed at
the same end, but such was the decree of Destiny, that although
the knights and courtiers urged on their horses to note where his
shaft might strike ground, withal they saw no trace thereof and
none of them knew if it had sunk into the bowels of earth or had
flown up to the confines of the sky. Some, indeed, there were who
with evil mind held that Prince Ahmad had not shot any bolt, and
that his arrow had never left his bow. So at last the King bade
no more search be made for it and declared himself in favour of
Prince Ali and adjudged that he should wed the Princess Nur
al-Nihar, forasmuch as his arrow had outsped that of Prince
Husayn. Accordingly, in due course the marriage rites and
ceremonies were performed after the law and ritual of the land
with exceeding pomp and grandeur. But Prince Husayn would not be
present at the bride-feast by reason of his dis appointment and
jealousy, for he had loved the Lady Nur al-Nihar with a love far
exceeding that of either of his brothers; and he doffed his
princely dress and donning the garb of a Fakir fared forth to
live a hermit's life. Prince Ahmad also burned with envy and
refused to join the wedding-feast; he did not, however, like
Prince Husayn, retire to a hermitage, but he spent all his days
in searching for his shaft to find where it had fallen. Now it so
fortuned that one morning he went again, alone as was his wont,
in quest thereof, and starting from the stead whence they had
shot their shafts reached the place where the arrows of Princes
Husayn and Ali had been found. Then going straight forwards he
cast his glances on every side over hill and dale to his right
and to his left.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-first Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Ahmad went searching for his shaft over hill and dale when, after
covering some three parasangs, suddenly he espied it lying flat
upon a rock.[FN#331] Hereat he marvelled greatly, wondering how
the arrow had flown so far, but even more so when he went up to
it and saw that it had not stuck in the ground but appeared to
have rebounded and to have fallen flat upon a slab of stone.
Quoth he to himself, "There must assuredly be some mystery in
this matter: else how could anyone shoot a shaft to such a
distance and find it fallen after so strange a fashion." Then,
threading his way amongst the pointed crags and huge boulders, he
presently came to a hollow in the ground which ended in a
subterraneous passage, and after pacing a