 few paces he espied an
iron door. He pushed this open with all ease, for that it had no
bolt, and entering, arrow in hand, he came upon an easy slope by
which he descended. But whereas he feared to find all pitch-dark,
he discovered at some distance a spacious square, a widening of
the cave, which was lighted on every side with lamps and
candelabra. Then advancing some fifty cubits or more his glance
fell upon a vast and handsome palace, and presently there issued
from within to the portico a lovely maiden lovesome and lovable,
a fairy-form robed in princely robes and adorned from front to
foot with the costliest of jewels. She walked with slow and
stately gait, withal graceful and blandishing, whilst around her
ranged her attendants like the stars about a moon of the
fourteenth night. Seeing this vision of beauty, Prince Ahmad
hastened to salute her with the salam and she returned it; then
coming forwards greeted him graciously and said in sweetest
accents, "Well come and welcome, O Prince Ahmad: I am pleased to
have sight of thee. How fareth it with thy Highness and why hast
thou tarried so long away from me?" The King's son marvelled
greatly to hear her name him by his name; for that he knew not
who she was, as they had never seen each other aforetime--how
then came she to have learnt his title and condition? Then
kissing ground before her he said, "O my lady, I owe thee much of
thanks and gratitude for that thou art pleased to welcome me with
words of cheer in this strange place where I, alone and a
stranger, durst enter with exceeding hesitation and trepidation.
But it perplexeth me sorely to think how thou camest to learn the
name of thy slave." Quoth she with a smile, "O my lord, come
hither and let us sit at ease within yon belvedere; and there I
will give an answer to thine asking." So they went thither,
Prince Ahmad following her footsteps; and on reaching it he was
filled with wonder to see its vaulted roof of exquisite
workmanship and adorned with gold and lapis lazuli[FN#332] and
paintings and ornaments, whose like was nowhere to be found in
the world. The lady seeing his astonishment said to the Prince,
"This mansion is nothing beside all my others which now, of my
free will, I have made thine own; and when thou seest them thou
shalt have just cause for wonderment. Then that sylph-like being
took seat upon a raised dais and with abundant show of affection
seated Prince Ahmad by her side. Presently quoth she, "Albeit
thou know me not, I know thee well, as thou shalt see with
surprise when I shall tell thee all my tale. But first it
behoveth me disclose to thee who I am. In Holy Writ belike thou
hast read that this world is the dwelling-place not only of men,
but also of a race hight the Jann in form likest to mortals. I am
the only daughter of a Jinn chief of noblest strain and my name
is Peri-Banu. So marvel not to hear me tell thee who thou art and
who is the King thy sire and who is Nur al-Nihar, the daughter of
thine uncle. I have full knowledge of all concerning thyself and
thy kith and kin; how thou art one of three brothers who all and
each were daft for love of Princess Nur al-Nihar and strave to
win her from one another to wife. Furthermore thy sire deemed it
best to send you all far and wide over foreign lands, and thou
faredest to far Samarkand and broughtest back a Magical Apple
made with rare art and mystery which thou boughtest for forty
thousand Ashrafis; then by means whereof thou madest the Princess
thy lady-love whole of a grievous malady, whilst Prince Husayn,
thine elder brother, bought for the same sum of money a Flying
Carpet at Bishangarh, and Prince Ali also brought home a Spying
Tube from Shiraz-city. Let this suffice to show thee that naught
is hidden from me of all thy case; and now do thou tell me in
very truth whom dost thou admire the more, for beauty and
loveliness, me or the lady Nur al-Nihar thy brother's wife? My
heart longeth for thee with excessive longing and desireth that
we may be married and enjoy the pleasures of life and the joyance
of love. So say me, art thou also willing to wed me, or pinest
thou in preference for the daughter of thine uncle? In the
fulness of my affection for thee I stood by thy side unseen
during the archery meeting upon the plain of trial, and when thou
shottest thy shaft I knew that it would fall far short of Prince
Ali's,[FN#333] so I hent it in hand ere it touched ground and
carried it away from sight, and striking it upon the iron door
caused it rebound and lie flat upon the rock where thou didst
find it. And ever since that day I have been sitting in
expectancy, wotting well that thou wouldst search for it until
thou find it, and by such means I was certified of bringing thee
hither to me." Thus spake the beautiful maiden Peri-Banu who with
eyes full of love-longing looked up at Prince Ahmad; and then
with modest shame bent low her brow and averted her glance.--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-Second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that when Prince
Ahmad heard these words of Peri-Banu he rejoiced with joy
exceeding, and said to himself, "The Princess Nur al-Nihar is not
within my power to win, and Peri-Banu doth outvie her in
comeliness of favour and in loveliness of form and in
gracefulness of gait." In short so charmed was he and captivated
that he clean forgot his love for his cousin; and, noting that
the heart of his new enchantress inclined towards him, he
replied, "O my lady, O fairest of the fair, naught else do I
desire save that I may serve thee and do thy bidding all my life
long. But I am of human and thou of non-human birth. Thy friends
and family, kith and kin, will haply be displeased with thee an
thou unite with me in such union." But she made answer, "I have
full sanction of my parents to marry as I list and whomsoever I
may prefer. Thou sayest that thou wilt be my servant, nay, rather
be thou my lord and master; for I myself and my life and all my
good are very thine, and I shall ever be thy bondswoman. Consent
now, I beseech thee, to accept me for thy wife: my heart doth
tell me thou wilt not refuse my request." Then Peri-Banu added,
"I have told thee already that in this matter I act with fullest
authority. Besides all this there is a custom and immemorial
usage with us fairy-folk that, when we maidens come to
marriageable age and years of understanding, each one may wed,
according the dictates of her heart, the person that pleaseth her
most and whom she judgeth likely to make her days happy Thus wife
and husband live with each other all their lives in harmony and
happiness. But if a girl be given away in marriage by the
parents, according to their choice and not hers, and she be mated
to a helpmate unmeet for her, because ill-shapen or ill-
conditioned or unfit to win her affection, then are they twain
likely to be at variance each with other for the rest of their
days; and endless troubles result to them from such ill-sorted
union. Nor are we bound by another law which bindeth modest
virgins of the race of Adam; for we freely announce our
preference to those we love, nor must we wait and pine to be
wooed and won." When Prince Ahmad heard these words of answer, he
rejoiced with exceeding joy and stooping down essayed to kiss the
skirt of her garment, but she prevented him, and in lieu of her
hem gave him her hand. The Prince clasped it with rapture and
according to the custom of that place, he kissed it and placed it
to his breast and upon his eyes. Hereat quoth the Fairy, smiling
a charming smile, "With my hand locked in thine plight me thy
troth even as I pledge my faith to thee, that I will alway true
and loyal be, nor ever prove faithless or fail of constancy." And
quoth the Prince, "O loveliest of beings, O dearling of my soul,
thinkest thou that I can ever become a traitor to my own heart, I
who love thee to distraction and dedicate to thee my body and my
sprite; to thee who art my queen, the very empress of me? Freely
I give myself to thee, do thou with me whatso thou wilt."
Hereupon Peri-Banu said to Prince Ahmad, "Thou art my husband and
I am thy wife.[FN#334] This solemn promise made between thee and
me standeth in stead of marriage-contract: no need have we of
Kazi, for with us all other forms and ceremonies are superfluous
and of no avail. Anon I will show thee the chamber where we shall
pass the bride-night; and methinks thou wilt admire it and
confess that there is none like thereto in the whole world of
men." Presently her handmaidens spread the table and served up
dishes of various kinds, and the finest wines in flagons and
goblets of gold dubbed with jewels. So they twain sat at meat and
ate and drank their sufficiency. Then Peri-Banu took Prince Ahmad
by the hand and led him to her private chamber wherein she slept;
and he stood upon the threshold amazed to see its magnificence
and the heaps of gems and precious stones which dazed his sight,
till recovering himself he cried, "Methinks there is not in the
universe a room so splendid and decked with costly furniture and
gemmed articles such as this." Quoth Peri-Banu, "An thou so
admire and praise this palace what wilt thou say when sighting
the mansions and castles of my sire the Jann-King? Haply too when
thou shalt behold my garden thou wilt be filled with wonder and
delight; but now 'tis over late to lead thee thither and night
approacheth." Then she ushered Prince Ahmad into another room
where the supper had been spread, and the splendour of this
saloon yielded in naught to any of the others; nay, rather it was
the more gorgeous and dazzling. Hundreds of wax candles set in
candelabra of the finest amber[FN#335] and the purest crystal,
ranged on all sides, rained floods of light, whilst golden
flowerpots and vessels of finest workmanship and priceless worth,
of lovely shapes and wondrous art, adorned the niches and the
walls.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that tongue of
man can never describe the magnificence of that room in which
bands of virgin Peris, loveliest of forms and fairest of
features, garbed in choicest garments played on sweet-toned
instruments of mirth and merriment or sang lays of amorous
significance to strains of heart bewitching music. Then they
twain, to wit the bride and bridegroom, sat down at meat, ever
and anon delaying to indulge in toyings and bashful love-play and
chaste caresses. Peri-Banu with her own hands passed the choicest
mouthfuls to Prince Ahmad and made him taste of each dish and
dainty, telling him their names and whereof they were composed.
But how shall I, O auspicious King Shahryar, avail to give thee
any notion of those Jinn-made dishes or to describe with due meed
of praise the delicious flavour of meats such as no mortal ever
tasted or ever beheld? Then, when both had supped, they drank the
choicest wines, and ate with relish sweet conserves and dry fruit
and a dessert of various delicacies. At length, when they had
their requirement of eating and drinking, they retired into
another room which contained a raised dais of the grandest,
bedecked with gold-purfled cushions and pillows wrought with
seed-pearl and Achaemenian tapestries, whereupon they took seat
side by side for converse and solace. Then came in a troop of
Jinns and fairies who danced and sang before them with wondrous
grace and art; and this pretty show pleased Peri-Banu and Prince
Ahmad, who watched the sports and displays with ever-renewed
delight. At last the newly wedded couple rose and retired, weary
of revelry, to another chamber, wherein they found that the
slaves had dispread the genial bed, whose frame was gold studded
with jewels and whose furniture was of satin and sendal flowered
with the rarest embroidery. Here the guests who attended at the
marriage festival and the handmaids of the palace, ranged in two
lines, hailed the bride and bridegroom as they went within; and
then, craving dismissal, they all departed leaving them to take
their joyance in bed. On such wise the marriage-festival and
nuptial merry-makings were kept up day after day, with new dishes
and novel sports, novel dances and new music; and, had Prince
Ahmad lived a thousand years with mortal kind, never could he
have seen such revels or heard such strains or enjoyed such
love-liesse. Thus six months soon passed in the Fairy-land beside
Peri-Banu, whom he loved with a love so fond that he would not
lose her from his sight for a moment's space; but would feel
restless and ill-at-ease whenas he ceased to look upon her. In
like manner Peri-Banu was fulfilled with affection for him and
strove to please her bridegroom more and more every moment by new
arts of dalliance and fresh appliances of pleasure, until so
absorbing waxed his passion for her that the thought of home and
kindred, kith and kin, faded from his thoughts and fled his mind.
But after a time his memory awoke from slumber and at times he
found himself longing to look upon his father, albeit well did he
wot that it were impossible to find out how the far one fared
unless he went himself to visit him. So one day quoth he to
Peri-Banu, "An it be thy pleasure, I pray thee give me thy
command that I may leave thee for a few days to see my sire, who
doubtless grieveth at my long absence and suffereth all the
sorrows of separation from his son." Peri-Banu, hearing these
words was dismayed with sore dismay, for that she thought within
herself that this was only an excuse whereby he might escape and
leave her after enjoyment and possession had made her love pall
upon the palate of his mind. So quoth she in reply, "Hast thou
forgotten thy vows and thy plighted troth, that thou wishest to
leave me now? Have love and longing ceased to stir thee, whilst
my heart always throbbeth in raptures as it hath ever done at the
very thought of thee?" Replied the Prince, "O dearling of my
soul, my queen, my empress, what be these doubts that haunt thy
mind, and why such sad misgivings and sorrowful words? I know
full well that the love of thee and thine affection me-wards are
even as thou sayest; and did I not acknowledge this truth or did
I prove unthankful or fail to regard thee with a passion as warm
and deep, as tender and as true as thine own, I were indeed an
ingrate and a traitor of the darkest dye. Far be it from me to
desire severance from thee nor hath any thought of leaving thee
never to return at any time crossed my mind. But my father is now
an old man well shotten in years and he is sore grieved in mind
at this long separation from his youngest son. If thou wilt deign
command, I would fain go visit him and with all haste return to
thine arms; yet I would not do aught in this matter against thy
will; and such is my fond affection for thee that I would fain be
at all hours of the day and watches of the night by thy side nor
leave thee for a moment of time." Peri-Banu was somewhat
comforted by this speech; and from his looks, words and acts she
was certified that Prince Ahmad really loved her with fondest
love and that his heart was true as steel to her as was his
tongue. Whereupon she granted him leave and liberty to set forth
and see his sire, whilst at the same time she gave him strict
commandment not to tarry long with his kith and kin. Hearken now,
O auspicious King Shahryar, to what befel the Sultan of Hindostan
and how it fared with him after the marriage of Prince Ali to
Princess Nur al-Nihar.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that not seeing
Prince Husayn and Prince Ahmad for the space of many days the
Sultan waxed exceeding sad and heavy-hearted, and one morning
after Darbar,[FN#336] asked his Wazirs and Ministers what had
betided them and where they were. Hereto the councillors made
answer saying, "O our lord, and shadow of Allah upon earth, thine
eldest son and fruit of thy vitals and heir apparent to thine
Empire the Prince Husayn, in his disappointment and jealousy and
bitter grief hath doffed his royal robes to become a hermit, a
devotee, renouncing all worldly lusts and gusts. Prince Ahmad thy
third son also in high dudgeon hath left the city; and of him
none knoweth aught, whither he hath fled or what hath befallen
him." The King was sore distressed and bade them write without
stay or delay and forthright despatch firmans and commands to all
the Nabobs and Governors of the provinces, with strict
injunctions to make straight search for Prince Ahmad and to send
him to his sire the moment he was found. But, albeit the
commandments were carried out to the letter and all the seekers
used the greatest diligence none came upon any trace of him.
Then, with increased sadness of heart, the Sultan ordered his
Grand Wazir to go in quest of the fugitive and the Minister
replied, "Upon my head be it and mine eyes! Thy servant hath
already caused most careful research to be made in every quarter,
but not the smallest clue hath yet come to hand: and this matter
troubleth me the more for that he was dear to me as a son." The
Ministers and Grandees now understood that the King was
overwhelmed with woe, tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted by reason of
the loss of Prince Ahmad; whereupon bethought the Grand Wazir of
a certain witch famed for the Black Art who could conjure down
the stars from heaven; and who was a noted dweller in the
capital. So going to the Sultan he spake highly of her skill in
knowledge of the abstruse,[FN#337] saying "Let the King, I pray
thee, send for this sorceress and enquire of her concerning his
lost son." And the King replied, "'Tis well said: let her be
brought hither and haply she shall give me tidings of the Prince
and how he fareth." So they fetched the Sorceress and set her
before the Sultan, who said, "O my good woman, I would have thee
know that ever since the marriage of Prince Ali with the Lady Nur
al-Nihar, my youngest son Prince Ahmad,[FN#338] who was
disappointed in her love, hath disappeared from our sight and no
man knoweth aught of him. Do thou forthright apply thy magical
craft and tell me only this:--Is he yet alive or is he dead? An
he live I would learn where is he and how fareth he; moreover, I
would ask, Is it written in my book of Destiny that I shall see
him yet again?" To this the Witch made reply, "O Lord of the Age
and ruler of the times and tide, 'tis not possible for me at once
to answer all these questions which belong to the knowledge of
Hidden Things; but, if thy Highness deign grant me one day of
grace, I will consult my books of gramarye and on the morrow will
give thee a sufficient reply and a satisfactory." The Sultan to
this assented, saying, "An thou can give me detailed and adequate
answer, and set my mind at ease after this sorrow, thou shalt
have an exceeding great reward and I will honour thee with
highmost honour." Next day the Sorceress, accompanied by the
Grand Wazir, craved permission to appear before the presence, and
when it was granted came forward and said, "I have made ample
investigation by my art and mystery and I have assured myself
that Prince Ahmad is yet in the land of the living. Be not
therefore uneasy in thy mind on his account; but at present, save
this only, naught else can I discover regarding him, nor can I
say for sure where he be or how he is to be found." At these
words the Sultan took comfort, and hope sprang up within his
breast that he should see his son again ere he died. Now return
we to the story of Prince Ahmad. Whenas Peri-Banu understood that
he was bent upon visiting his sire and she was convinced that his
love her-wards remained firm and steadfast as before, she took
thought and determined that it would ill become her to refuse him
leave and liberty for such purpose; so she again pondered the
matter in her mind and debated with herself for many an hour till
at length, one day of the days, she turned to her husband and
said, "Albeit my heart consenteth not to part from thee for a
moment or to lose sight of thee for a single instant, still
inasmuch as thou hast ofttimes made entreaty of me and hast shown
thyself so solicitous to see thy sire, I will no longer baffle
thy wish. But this my favour will depend upon one condition;
otherwise I will never grant thy petition and give thee such
permission. Swear to me the most binding of oaths that thou wilt
haste thee back hither with all possible speed, and thou wilt not
by long absence cause me yearning grief and anxious waiting for
thy safe return to me." Prince Ahmad, well pleased to win his
wish, thanked her saying, "O my beloved, fear not for me after
any fashion and rest assured I will come back to thee with all
haste as soon as I shall have seen my sire; and life hath no
charms for me away from thy presence. Although I must needs be
severed from thee for a few days, yet will my heart ever turn to
thee and to thee only." These words of Prince Ahmad gladdened the
heart of Peri-Banu and drove away the darksome doubts and
mysterious misgivings which ever haunted her nightly dreams and
her daily musings.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
gladdened by these premises addressed her husband, Prince Ahmad,
"So now, as soon as thy heart desireth, go thou and pay thy
respects to thy sire; but ere thou set out I would charge thee
with one charge and look that on no wise thou forget my rede and
my counsel. Speak not to any a single word of this thy marriage
nor of the strange sights thou hast seen and the wonders thou
hast witnessed; but keep them carefully concealed from thy father
and thy brethren and from thy kith and kin, one and all. This
only shalt thou tell thy sire, so his mind may be set at ease
that thou art buxom and happy; also that thou hast returned home
for a while only with the object of seeing him and becoming
assured of his welfare." Then she gave orders to her people
bidding them make ready for the journey without delay; and when
all things were prepared she appointed twenty horsemen, armed
cap-a-pie and fully accoutred, to accompany her husband, and gave
him a horse of perfect form and proportions, swift as the
blinding leven or the rushing wind; and its housings and
furniture were bedeckt with precious ores and studded with
jewels. Then she fell on his neck and they embraced with warmest
love; and as the twain bade adieu, Prince Ahmad, to set her mind
at rest, renewed his protestations and sware to her again his
solemn oath. Then mounting his horse and followed by his suite
(all Jinn-born cavaliers) he set forth with mighty pomp and
circumstance, and riding diligently he soon reached his father's
capital. Here he was received with loud acclamations, the like of
which had never been known in the land. The Ministers and
Officers of State, the citizens and the Ryots all rejoiced with
exceeding joy to see him once more, and the folk left their work
and with blessings and low obeisances joined the cavalcade; and,
crowding around him on every side, escorted him to the palace
gates. When the Prince reached the threshold he dismounted and,
entering the audience-hall, fell at his father's feet and kissed
them in a transport of filial affection. The Sultan, well nigh
distraught for delight at the unexpected sight of Prince Ahmad,
rose from his throne and threw himself upon his son's neck
weeping for very joy and kissed his forehead saying, "O dear my
child, in despair at the loss of the Lady Nur al-Nihar thou didst
suddenly fly from thy home, and, despite all research, nor trace
nor sign of thee was to be found however sedulously we sought
thee; and I, distracted at thy disappearance, am reduced to this
condition in which thou seest me. Where hast thou been this long
while, and how hast thou lived all this time?" Replied Prince
Ahmad, "'Tis true, O my lord the King, that I was downhearted and
distressed to see Prince Ali gain the hand of my cousin, but that
is not the whole cause of my absence. Thou mayest remember how,
when we three brothers rode at thy command to yonder plain for a
trial of archery, my shaft, albeit the place was large and flat,
disappeared from sight and none could find where it had fallen.
Now so it fortuned that one day in sore heaviness of mind I fared
forth alone and unaccompanied to examine the ground thereabout
and try if haply I could find my arrow. But when I reached the
spot where the shafts of my brothers, Princes Husayn and Ali, had
been picked up, I made search in all directions, right and left,
before and behind, thinking that thereabouts mine also might come
to hand; but all my trouble was in vain: I found neither shaft
nor aught else. So walking onwards in obstinate research, I went
a long way, and at last despairing, I would have given up the
quest, for full well I knew that my bow could not have carried so
far, and indeed that 'twere impossible for any marksman to have
driven bolt or pile to such distance, when suddenly I espied it
lying flat upon a rock some four parasangs[FN#339] distant from
this place." The Sultan marvelled with much marvel at his words
and the Prince presently resumed, "So when I picked up the arrow,
O my lord, and considered it closely I knew it for the very one I
had shot, but admired in my mind how it had come to fly so far,
and I doubted not but that there was a somewhat mysterious about
the matter. While I thus reflected I came upon the place where I
have sojourned ever since that day in perfect solace and
happiness. I may not tell thee more of my tale than this; for I
came only to ease thy mind on my account, and now I pray thee
deign grant me thy supreme permission that I return forthright to
my home of delights. From time to time I will not cease to wait
upon thee and to enquire of thy welfare with all the affection of
a son." Replied the King, "O my child, the sight of thee hath
gladdened mine eyes; and I am now satisfied; and not unwillingly
I give thee leave to go, since thou art happy in some place so
near hand; but shouldst thou at any time delay thy coming hither,
say me, how shall I be able to get tidings of thy good health and
welfare?" And quoth Prince Ahmad, "O my lord the King, that which
thou requirest of me is part of my secret and this must remain
deep hidden in my breast: as I said before, I may not discover it
to thee nor say aught that might lead to its discovery. However,
be not uneasy in thy soul, for I will appear before thee full
many a time and haply I may irk thee with continual coming." "O
my son," rejoined the Sultan, "I would not learn thy secret an
thou would keep it from me, but there is one only thing I desire
of thee, which is, that ever and anon I may be assured of thine
enduring health and happiness. Thou hast my full permission to
hie thee home, but forget not at least once a month to come and
see me even as now thou dost, lest such forgetfulness cause me
anxiety and trouble, cark and care." So Prince Ahmad tarried with
his father three days full-told, but never for a moment did the
memory of the Lady Peri-Banu fade from his mind; and on the
fourth day he mounted horse and returned with the same pomp and
pageantry wherewith he came.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
joyed with exceeding joy at the sight of Prince Ahmad as he
returned to his home; and it seemed to her as though they had
been parted for three hundred years: such is love that moments of
separation are longsome and weary as twelvemonths. The Prince
offered much of excuses for his short absence and his words
delighted Peri-Banu yet the more. So these twain, lover and
beloved, passed the time in perfect happiness, taking their
pleasure one with other. Thus a month went by and Prince Ahmad
never once mentioned the name of his sire nor expressed a wish to
go visit him according to his promise. Noting this change, the
Lady Peri-Banu said to him one day, "Thou toldest me aforetime
that once in the beginning of each month thou wouldst fare forth
and travel to thy father's court and learn news of his welfare:
why then neglectest thou so to do, seeing that he will be
distressed and anxiously expecting thee?" Replied Prince Ahmad,
"'Tis even as thou sayest, but, awaiting thy command and thy
permission, I have forborne to propose the journey to thee." And
she made answer, "Let thy faring and thy returning rest not on my
giving thee liberty of leave. At the beginning of each month as
it cometh round, do thou ride forth, and from this time forwards
thou hast no need to ask permission of me. Stay with thy sire
three days full-told and on the fourth come back to me without
fail." Accordingly, on the next day betimes in the morning Prince
Ahmad took his departure and as aforetime rode forth with
abundant pomp and parade and repaired to the palace of the Sultan
his sire, to whom he made his obeisance. On like manner continued
he to do each month with a suite of horsemen larger and more
brilliant than before, whilst he himself was more splendidly
mounted and equipped. And whenever the Crescent appeared in the
Western sky he fondly farewelled his wife and paid his visit to
the King, with whom he tarried three whole days, and on the
fourth returned to dwell with Peri-Banu. But, as each and every
time he went, his equipage was greater and grander than the last,
at length one of the Wazirs, a favourite and cup-companion of the
King, was filled with wonderment and jealousy to see Prince Ahmad
appear at the palace with such opulence and magnificence. So he
said in himself, "None can tell whence cometh this Prince, and by
what means he hath obtained so splendid a suite." Then of his
envy and malice that Wazir fell to plying the King with deceitful
words and said, "O my liege lord and mighty sovran, it ill
becometh thee to be thus heedless of Prince Ahmad's proceedings.
Seest thou not how day after day his retinue increaseth in
numbers and puissance? What an he should plot against thee and
cast thee into prison, and take from thee the reins of the realm?
Right well thou wottest that inasmuch as thou didst wed Prince
Ali to the Lady Nur al-Nihar thou provokedest the wrath of Prince
Husayn and Prince Ahmad; so that one of them in the bitterness of
his soul renounced the pomps and vanities of this world and hath
become a Fakir, whilst the other, to wit; Prince Ahmad, appeareth
before thy presence in such inordinate power and majesty.
Doubtless they both seek their revenge; and, having gotten thee
into their power, the twain will deal treacherously with thee. So
I would have thee beware, and again I say beware; and seize the
forelock of opportunity ere it be too late; for the wise have
said,

'Thou canst bar a spring with a sod of clay * But when grown
'twill bear a big host away.'"

Thus spake that malicious Wazir; and presently he resumed, "Thou
knowest also that when Prince Ahmad would end his three days'
visits he never asketh thy leave nor farewelleth thee nor biddeth
adieu to any one of his family. Such conduct is the beginning of
rebellion and proveth him to be rancorous of heart. But 'tis for
thee in thy wisdom to decide." These words sank deep in the heart
of the simple-minded Sultan and grew a crop of the direst
suspicions. He presently thought within himself, "Who knoweth the
mind and designs of Prince Ahmad, whether they be dutiful or
undutiful towards me? Haply he may be plotting vengeance; so it
besitteth me to make enquiries concerning him, to discover where
he dwelleth and by what means he hath attained to such puissance
and opulence." Filled with these jealous thoughts, he sent in
private one day, unbeknown to the Grand Wazir who would at all
times befriend Prince Ahmad, to summon the Witch; and, admitting
her by a secret postern to his private chamber, asked of her
saying, "Thou didst aforetime learn by thy magical art that
Prince Ahmad was alive and didst bring me tidings of him. I am
beholden to thee for this good office, and now I would desire of
thee to make further quest into his case and ease my mind, which
is sore disturbed. Albeit my son still liveth and cometh to visit
me every month, yet am I clean ignorant of the place wherein he
dwelleth and whence he setteth out to see me; for that he keepeth
the matter close hidden from his sire. Go thou forthright and
privily, without the knowledge of any, my Wazirs and Nabobs, my
courtiers and my household; and make thou diligent research and
with all haste bring me word whereabouts he liveth. He now
sojourneth here upon his wonted visit; and, on the fourth day,
without leave-taking or mention of departure to me or to any of
the Ministers and Officers, he will summon his suite and mount
his steed; then will he ride to some little distance hence and
suddenly disappear. Do thou without stay or delay forego him on
the path and lie perdue in some convenient hollow hard by the
road whence thou mayest learn where he hometh; then quickly bring
me tidings thereof." Accordingly, the Sorceress departed the
presence of the King; and, after walking over the four parasangs,
she hid herself within a hollow of the rocks hard by the place
where Prince Ahmad had found his arrow, and there awaited his
arrival. Early on the morrow the Prince, as was his wont, set out
upon his journey without taking leave of his sire or fare welling
any of the Ministers. So when they drew nigh, the Sorceress
caught sight of the Prince and of the retinue that rode before
and beside him; and she saw them enter a hollow way which forked
into a many of by-ways; and so steep and dangerous were the
cliffs and boulders about the track that hardly could a footman
safely pace that path. Seeing this the Sorceress bethought her
that it must surely lead to some cavern or haply to a
subterraneous passage, or to a souterrain the abode of Jinns and
fairies; when suddenly the Prince and all his suite vanished from
her view. So she crept out of the hiding-place wherein she had
ensconced herself and wandered far and wide seeking, as
dillgently as she was able, but never finding the subterraneous
passage nor yet could she discern the iron door which Prince
Ahmad had espied, for none of human flesh and blood had power to
see this save he alone to whom it was made visible by the Fairy
Peri-Banu; furthermore it was ever concealed from the prying eyes
of womankind. Then said the Sorceress to herself, This toil and
moil have I undertaken to no purpose; yea, verily, I have failed
to find out that wherefor I came." So she went forthright back to
the Sultan and reported to him all that had betided her, how she
had lain in wait amid the cliffs and boulders and had seen the
Prince and suite ride up the most perilous of paths and, having
entered a hollow way, disappear in an eyetwinkling from her
sight. And she ended by saying, "Albeit I strove my utmost to
find out the spot wherein the Prince abideth, yet could I on no
wise succeed; and I pray thy Highness may grant me time to search
further into the matter and to find out this mystery which by
skill and caution on my part shall not long abide concealed."
Answered the Sultan, "Be it as thou wilt: I grant thee leisure to
make enquiry and after a time I shall await thy return
hither."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that moreover
the King largessed the Witch with a diamond of large size and of
great price, saying, "Take this stone to guerdon for thy trouble
and travail and in earnest of future favours; so, when thou shalt
return and bring me word that thou hast searched and found out
the secret, thou shalt have a Bakhshish of far greater worth and
I will make thy heart rejoice with choicest joy and honour thee
with highmost honour." So the Sorceress looked forwards to the
coming of the Prince, for well she knew that at the sight of each
crescent he rode home to visit his sire and was bound to abide
with him three days, even as the Lady Peri-Banu had permitted and
had enjoined him. Now when the moon had waxed and waned, on the
day before the Prince would leave home upon his monthly visit,
the Witch betook her to the rocks and sat beside the place whence
she imagined he would issue forth; and next morning early he and
his suite, composed of many a mounted knight with his esquire
a-foot, who now always accompanied him in increasing numbers,
rode forth gallantly through the iron doorway and passed hard by
the place where she lay in wait for him. The Sorceress crouched
low upon the ground in her tattered rags; and, seeing a heap by
his way, the Prince at first supposed that a slice of stone had
fallen from the rocks across his path. But as he drew nigh she
fell to weeping and wailing with might and main as though in sore
dolour and distress, and she ceased not to crave his countenance
and assistance with increase of tears and lamentations. The
Prince seeing her sore sorrow had pity on her, and reining in his
horse, asked her what she had to require of him and what was the
cause of her cries and lamentations. At this the cunning crone
but cried the more, and the Prince was affected with compassion
still livelier at seeing her tears and hearing her broken, feeble
words. So when the Sorceress perceived that Prince Ahmad had ruth
on her and would fain show favour to her, she heaved a heavy sigh
and in woeful tones, mingled with moans and groans, addressed him
in these false words, withal holding the hem of his garment and
at times stopping as if convulsed with pain, "O my lord and lord
of all loveliness, as I was journeying from my home in yonder
city upon an errand to such a place, behold, when I came thus far
upon my way, suddenly a hot fit of fever seized me and a
shivering and a trembling, so that I lost all strength and fell
down helpless as thou seest me; and still no power have I in hand
or foot to rise from the ground and to return to my place."
Replied the Prince, "Alas, O good woman, there is no house at
hand where thou mayest go and be fitly tended and tendered.
Howbeit I know a stead whither, an thou wilt, I can convey thee
and where by care and kindness thou shalt (Inshallah!) soon
recover of thy complaint. Come then with me as best thou canst."
With loud moans and groans the Witch made answer, "So weak am I
in every limb and helpless that I can by no means rise off the
ground or move save with the help of some friendly hand." The
Prince then bade one of his horsemen lift up the feeble and
ailing old woman and set her upon his steed; and the cavalier did
his lord's bidding forthright and mounted her astraddle upon the
crupper of his courser: then, Prince Ahmad rode back with her and
entering by the iron door carried her to his apartment and sent
for Peri-Banu. His wife hurriedly coming forth to the Prince
asked him in her flurry, "Is all well and wherefore hast thou
come back and what wouldst thou that thou hast sent for me?"
Prince Ahmad then told her of the old woman who was healthless
and helpless, adding, "Scarce had I set out on my journey when I
espied this ancient dame lying hard by the roadside, suffering
and in sore distress. My heart felt pity for her to see her in
such case and constrained me to bring her hither as I could not
leave her to die among the rocks; and I pray thee of thy bounty
take her in and give her medicines that she may soon be made
whole of this her malady. An thou wilt show this favour I shall
not cease to thank thee and be beholden to thee." --And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
looked at the old woman and charged a twain of her handmaidens
that they carry her into a room apart and tend her with the
tenderest care and the uttermost of diligence. The attendants did
as she bade them and transported the Sorceress to the place she
had designed. Then Peri-Banu addressed Prince Ahmad saying, "O my
lord, I am pleased to see thy pitiful kindness towards this
ancient dame, and I surely will look to her case even as thou
hast enjoined me; but my heart misgiveth me and much I fear some
evil will result from thy goodness. This woman is not so ill as
she doth make believe, but practiseth deceit upon thee and I ween
that some enemy or envier hath plotted a plot against me and
thee. Howbeit go now in peace upon thy journey." The Prince, who
on no wise took to heart the words of his wife, presently replied
to her, "O my lady, Almighty Allah forfend thee from all offence!
With thee to help and guard me I fear naught of ill: I know of no
foeman who would compass my destruction, for I bear no grudge
against any living being, and I foresee no evil at the hands of
man or Jann." Thereupon the Prince again took leave of Peri-Banu
and repaired with his attendants to the palace of his sire who,
by reason of the malice of his crafty Minister, was inwardly
afraid to see his son; but not the less he welcomed him with
great outward show of love and affection. Meanwhile the two fairy
handmaidens, to whom Peri-Banu had given charge of the Witch,
bore her away to a spacious room splendidly furnished; and laid
her on a bed having a mattress of satin and a brocaded coverlet.
Then one of them sat by her side whilst the other with all speed
fetched, in a cup of porcelain, an essence which was a sovereign
draught for ague and fever. Presently they raised her up and
seated her on the couch saying, "Drain thou this drink. It is the
water of the Lions' Fount and whoso tasteth of the same is
forthwith made whole of what disease soever he hath." The
Sorceress took the cup with great difficulty and after swallowing
the contents lay back on the bed; and the handmaidens spread the
quilt over her saying, "Now rest awhile and thou shalt soon feel
the virtues of this medicine." Then they left her to sleep for an
hour or so; but presently the Witch, who had feigned sickness to
the intent only that she might learn where Prince Ahmad abode and
might inform the Sultan thereof, being assured that she had
discovered all that she desired, rose up and summoning the
damsels said to them, "The drinking of that draught hath restored
to me all my health and strength: I now feel hale and hearty once
more and my limbs are filled with new life and vigour. So at once
acquaint your lady herewith, that I may kiss the hem of her robe
and return my thanks for her goodness me-wards, then depart and
hie me home again." Accordingly, the two handmaidens took the
Sorceress with them and showed her as they went along the several
apartments, each more magnificent and kingly than the other; and
at length they reached the belvedere which was the noblest saloon
of all, and fitted and filled with furniture exceeding costly and
curious. There sat Peri-Banu upon a throne which was adorned with
diamonds and rubies, emeralds, pearls and other gems of unwonted
size and water, whilst round about her stood fairies of lovely
form and features, robed in the richest raiments and awaiting
with folded hands her commandments. The Sorceress marvelled with
extreme marvel to see the splendour of the chambers and their
furniture, but chiefly when she beheld the Lady Peri-Banu seated
upon the jewelled throne; nor could she speak a word for
confusion and awe, but she bent down low and placed her head upon
Peri-Banu's feet. Quoth the Princess in soft speech and
reassuring tones, "O good woman, it pleaseth me greatly to see
thee a guest in this my palace, and I joy even more to learn that
thou be wholly quit of thy sickness. So now solace thy spirits
with walking all round about the place and my servants will
accompany thee and show thee what there is worthy of thine
inspection." Hereat the Witch again louted low and kissed the
carpet under Peri-Banu's feet, and took leave of her hostess in
goodly phrase and with great show of gratitude for her favours.
The handmaids then led her round the palace and displayed to her
all the rooms, which dazed and dazzled her sight so that she
could not find words to praise them sufficiently. Then she went
her ways and the fairies escorted her past the iron doorway
whereby Prince Ahmad had brought her in, and left her, bidding
her God-speed and blessing her; and the foul crone with many
thanks took the road to her own home. But when she had walked to
some distance she was minded to see the iron door, so might she
with ease know it again; so she went back, but lo and behold! the
entrance had vanished and was invisible to her as to all other
women. Accordingly, after searching on all sides and pacing to
and fro and finding nor sign nor trace of palace or portal, she
repaired in despair to the city and, creeping along a deserted
path-way, entered the palace, according to her custom, by the
private postern. When safely within she straightway sent word by
an eunuch to the Sultan, who ordered that she be brought before
him. She approached him with troubled countenance, whereat,
perceiving that she had failed to carry out her purpose, he
asked, "What news? Hast thou accomplished thy design or hast thou
been baffled therein?" --And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Sorceress, who was a mere creature of the malicious Wazir,
replied, "O King of kings, this matter have I fully searched out
even as thou gavest command, and I am about to tell thee all that
hath betided me. The signs of sorrow and marks of melancholy thou
notest upon my countenance are for other cause which narrowly
concerneth thy welfare." Then she began to recount her adventure
in these terms, "Now when I had reached the rocks I sat me down
feigning sickness; and, as Prince Ahmad passed that way and heard
my complaining and saw my grievous condition, he had compassion
on me. After some 'said and say' he took me with him by a
subterranean passage and through an iron door to a magnificent
palace and gave me in charge of a fairy, Peri-Banu hight, of
passing beauty and loveliness, such as human eye hath never yet
seen. Prince Ahmad bade her make me her guest for some few days
and bring me a medicine which would complete my cure, and she to
please him at once appointed handmaidens to attend upon me. So I
was certified that the twain were one flesh, husband and wife. I
feigned to be exceeding frail and feeble and made as though I had
not strength to walk or even to stand; whereat the two damsels
supported me, one on either side, and I was carried into a room
where they gave me somewhat to drink and put me upon a bed to
rest and sleep. Then thought I to myself:--'Verily I have gained
the object wherefor I had feigned sickness'; and I was assured
that it availed no more to practise deceit. Accordingly, after a
short while I arose and said to the attendants that the draught
which they had given me to drink had cut short the fever and had
restored strength to my limbs and life to my frame. Then they led
me to the presence of the Lady Peri-Banu, who was exceeding
pleased to see me once more hale and hearty, and bade her
handmaidens conduct me around the palace and show each room in
its beauty and splendour; after which I craved leave to wend my
ways and here am I again to work thy will." When thus she had
made known to the King all that had betided her, she resumed,
"Perchance, on hearing of the might and majesty, opulence and
magnificence of the Lady Peri-Banu, thou wilt be gladdened and
say within thyself, ''Tis well that Prince Ahmad is wedded to
this Fairy and hath gotten for himself such wealth and power;'
but to the thinking of this thy slave the matter is quite other.
It is not well, I dare avouch, that thy son should possess such
puissance and treasures, for who knoweth but that he may by good
aid of Peri-Banu bring about division and disturbance in the
realm? Beware of the wiles and malice of women. The Prince is
bewitched with love of her, and peradventure at her incitement he
may act towards thee otherwise than right, and lay hands on thy
hoards and seduce thy subjects and become master of thy kingdom;
and albeit he would not of his own free will do aught to his
father and his forbears save what was pious and dutiful, yet the
charms of his Princess may work upon him little by little and end
by making him a rebel and what more I may not say. Now mayest
thou see that the matter is a weighty, so be not heedless but
give it full consideration." Then the Sorceress made ready to
gang her gait when spake the King, saying, "I am beholden to thee
in two things; the first, that thou tookest upon thyself much
toil and travail, and on my behalf riskedst thy life to learn the
truth anent my son Prince Ahmad. Secondly, I am thankful for that
thou hast given me a rede so sound and such wholesome counsel."
So saying, he dismissed her with the highmost honour; but no
sooner had she left the palace than he, sore distraught, summoned
his second Wazir, the malicious Minister who had incited him
against Prince Ahmad, and when he and his friends appeared in the
presence he laid before them the whole matter and asked of them,
saying, "What is your counsel, and what must I do to protect
myself and my kingdom against the wiles of this Fairy?" Replied
one of his councillors, "'Tis but a trifling matter and the
remedy is simple and nearhand. Command that Prince Ahmad, who is
now within the city if not in the palace, be detained as one
taken prisoner. Let him not be put to death, lest haply the deed
may engender rebellion; but at any rate place him under arrest
and if he prove violent clap him in irons."--And as the morn
began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Sixtieth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that this felon
counsel pleased the malicious Minister and all his fautors and
flatterers highly approved his rede. The Sultan kept silence and
made no reply, but on the morrow he sent and summoned the
Sorceress and debated with her whether he should or should not
cast Prince Ahmad into prison. Quoth she, "O King of kings, this
counsel is clean contrary to sound sense and right reason. An
thou throw Prince Ahmad into gaol, so must thou also do with all
his knights and their esquires; and inasmuch as they are Jinns
and Marids, who can tell their power of reprisals? Nor
prison-cells nor gates of adamant can keep them in; they will
forthwith escape and report such violence to the Fairy who, wroth
with extreme wrath to find her husband doomed to durance vile
like a common malefactor, and that too for no default or crime
but by a treacherous arrest, will assuredly deal the direst of
vengeance on thy head and do us a damage we shall not be able to
forfend. An thou wilt confide in me, I will advise thee how to
act, whereby thou mayest win thy wish and no evil will come nigh
thee or thy kingship. Thou knowest well that to Jinns and Fairies
is power given of doing in one short moment deeds marvellous and
wondrous, which mortals fail to effect after long years of toil
and trouble. Now whenas thou goest a-hunting or on other
expedition, thou requirest pavilions for thyself and many tents
for thy retinue and attendants and soldiery; and in making ready
and transporting such store much time and wealth are wastefully
expended. I would advise, O King of kings, that thou try Prince
Ahmad by the following test: do thou bid him bring to thee a
Shahmiyanah[FN#340] so long and so broad that it will cover and
lodge the whole of thy court and men-at-arms and camp-followers,
likewise the beasts of burthen; and yet it must be so light that
a man may hold it in the hollow of his hand and carry it
whithersoever he listeth." Then, after holding her peace for a
while, she added, still addressing the Sultan, "And as soon as
Prince Ahmad shall acquit himself of this commission, 