do thou
demand of him a somewhat still greater and more wondrous
wherewith I will make thee ware, and which he will find grievous
of execution. On this wise shalt thou fill thy treasury with rare
inventions and strange, the handicraft of Jann, nor will this
cease till such time in fine when thy son shall be at his wits'
end to carry out thy requirements. Then, humbled and abashed, he
will never dare to enter thy capital or even thy presence; and
thus shalt thou be saved from fear of harm at his hands, and thou
shalt not have need to put him in gaol or, worse still, to do him
dead." Hearing these words of wisdom, the Sultan made known the
Witch's device to his advisers and asked them what they deemed
thereof. They held their peace and answered not a word or good or
ill; while he himself highly approved it and said no more. Next
day Prince Ahmad came to visit the King, who welcomed him with
overflowing affection and clasping him to his bosom kissed him on
eyes and forehead. Long time they sat conversing on various
subjects, till at length the Sultan finding an occasion spake
thus, "O dear my son, O Ahmad, for many a day have I been sad at
heart and sorrowful of soul because of separation from thee, and
when thou camest back I was gladdened with great gladness at
sight of thee, and albeit thou didst and dost still withhold from
me the knowledge of thy whereabouts, I refrained from asking thee
or seeking to find out thy secret, since it was not according to
thy mind to tell me of thine abode. Now, however, I have heard
say that thou art wedded to a mighty Jinniyah[FN#341], of passing
beauty; and the tidings please me with the highmost possible
pleasure. I desire not to learn aught from thee concerning thy
Fairy-wife save whatso thou wouldst entrust to me of thine own
free will; but, say me, should I at any time require somewhat of
thee, canst thou obtain it from her? Doth she regard thee with
such favour that she will not deny thee anything thou askest of
her?" Quoth the Prince, "O my lord, what dost thou demand of me?
My wife is devoted to her husband in heart and soul, so prithee
let me learn what it is thou wouldst have of me and her." Replied
the Sultan, Thou knowest that ofttimes I fare a-hunting or on
some foray and fray, when I have great need of tents and
pavilions and Shahmiyanahs, with herds and troops of camels and
mules and other beasts of burden to carry the camp from place to
place. I would, therefore, that thou bring me a tent so light
that a man may carry it in the hollow of his hand, and yet so
large that it may contain my court and all my host and camp and
suttlers and bat-animals. An thou wouldst ask the Lady for this
gift I know full well that she can give it; and hereby shalt thou
save me much of trouble in providing carriage for the tentage and
spare me much waste and loss of beasts and men." The Prince
replied, "O my sire the Sultan, trouble not thy thought. I will
at once make known thy wish to my wife, the Lady Peri-Banu; and,
albeit little I wot an fairies have the faculty of making a
pavilion such as thou describest, or indeed (supposing that they
have such power), an she will grant me or not grant me her
aidance; and, moreover, although I cannot promise thee such
present, yet whatsoever lieth in my ability to do, that will I
gladly do for thy service."--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-first Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that quoth the
King to Prince Ahmad, "Shouldst thou perchance fail in this
matter and bring me not the gift required, O my son, I will never
see thy face again. A sorry husband thou, in good sooth, if thy
wife refuse so mean a thing and hasten not to do all thou biddest
her do; giving thee to see that thou art of small value and
consequence in her eyes, and that her love for thee is a quantity
well nigh to naught. But do thou, O my child, go forth and
straightway ask her for the tent. An she give it thee know thou
she desireth thee and thou art the dearest of all things to her;
and I have been informed that she loveth thee with all her heart
and soul and will by no means refuse thee aught thou requirest,
were it even the balls of her eyes." Now Prince Ahmad was ever
wont to tarry three days each month with the Sultan his sire, and
return to his spouse on the fourth; but this time he stayed two
days only and farewelled his father on the third. As he passed
into the palace Peri-Banu could not but note that he was sad at
heart and downcast of face; so she asked of him, "Is all well
with thee? Why hast thou come to-day and not tomorrow from the
presence of the King thy father, and why carriest thou so triste
a countenance?" Whereupon, after kissing her brow and fondly
embracing her, he told her the whole matter, first to last, and
she made answer, "I will speedily set thy mind at rest, for I
would not see thee so saddened for a moment longer. Howbeit, O my
love, from this petition of the Sultan thy sire I am certified
that his end draweth nigh, and he will soon depart this world to
the mercy of Allah the Almighty.[FN#342] Some enemy hath done
this deed and much of mischief hath made for thee; and the result
is that thy father, all unmindful of his coming doom, cloth seek
diligently his own destruction." The Prince, anxious and alarmed,
thus answered his wife, "Almighty Allah be praised, the King my
liege lord is in the best of health and showeth no sign of
disorder or decrepitude: 'tis but this morning I left him hale
and hearty, and in very sooth I never saw him in better case.
Strange, indeed, that thou shouldst ken what shall betide him
before I have told thee aught concerning him, and especially how
he hath come to learn of our marriage and of our home." Quoth
Peri-Banu, "O my Prince, thou knowest what I said to thee whenas
I saw the old dame whom thou broughtest hither as one afflicted
with the ague and fever. That woman, who is a Witch of Satan's
breed, hath disclosed to thy father all he sought to learn
concerning this our dwelling-place. And notwithstanding that I
saw full clearly she was nor sick nor sorry, but only feigning a
fever, I gave her medicine to drink which cureth complaints of
all kinds, and she falsely made believe that by its virtues she
had recovered health and strength. So when she came to take leave
of me, I sent her with two of my damsels and bid them display to
her every apartment in the palace together with its furniture and
decorations, that she might better know the condition of me and
thee. Now all this did I on thy account only, for thou badest me
show compassion to the ancient woman and I was rejoiced to see
her departing safe and sound and in the best of spirits. Save her
alone, no human being had ever power to know aught of this place,
much less to come hither." Prince Ahmad hearing these words
thanked and praised her and said, "O sun-faced beauty, I would
beg of thee to grant me a boon whereof my father hath made
request of me; to wit, a Shahmiyanah of such dimensions that it
may shelter him and his many, his camp and bat-cattle and withal
may be carried in the hollow of the hand. An such marvel exist I
wot not, yet would I do my utmost to procure it, and carry it to
him right loyally." Quoth she, "Why trouble thyself for so small
a matter? I will forthright send for it and give it thee." Then
she summoned one of her handmaids who was treasurer to her and
said, "O Nur Jehan,[FN#343] go thou at once and bring me a
pavilion of such and such a fashion." So she fared forth without
delay and as quickly came back with the pavilion which, at her
lady's bidding, she placed in the palm of Prince Ahmad's hand.
--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Ahmad hent the pavilion in hand and thought to himself, "What is
this Peri-Banu giveth me? Surely she doth make a mock of me." His
wife, however, reading his mind in his face fell to laughing
aloud, and asked, "What is it, O my dearling Prince? Dost thou
think that I am jesting and jibing at thee?" Then she continued,
addressing the treasurer Nur Jehan, "Take now yon tent from
Prince Ahmad and set it upon the plain that he may see its vast
size and know if it be such an one as required by the Sultan his
sire." The handmaid took the pavilion and pitched it afar from
the Palace; and yet one end thereof reached thereto from the
outer limit of the plain; and so immense was its size that (as
Prince Ahmad perceived) there was room therein for all the King's
court; and, were two armies ranged under it with their
camp-followers and bat-animals, one would on no wise crowd or
inconvenience the other. He then begged pardon of Peri-Banu
saying, "I wot not that the Shahmiyanah was so prodigious of
extent and of so marvellous a nature; wherefore I misdoubted when
first I saw it." The Treasurer presently struck the tent and
returned it to the palm of his hand; then, without stay or delay,
he took horse and followed by his retinue rode back to the royal
presence, where after obeisance and suit and service he presented
the tent. The Sultan also, at first sight of the gift, thought it
a small matter, but marvelled with extreme marvel to see its size
when pitched, for it would have shaded his capital and its
suburbs. He was not, however, wholly satisfied, for the size of
the pavilion now appeared to him superfluous; but his son assured
him that it would always fit itself to its contents. He thanked
the Prince for bringing him so rare a present, saying, "O my son,
acquaint thy consort with my obligation to her and offer my
grateful thanks for this her bounteous gift. Now indeed know I of
a truth that she doth love thee with the whole of her heart and
soul and all my doubts and fears are well nigh set at rest." Then
the King commanded they should pack up the tent and store it with
all care in the royal treasury. Now strange it is but true, that
when the Sultan received this rare present from the Prince, the
fear and doubt, the envy and jealousy of his son, which the Witch
and the malicious Wazir and his other illadvisers had bred in his
breast, waxed greater and livelier than before; because he was
now certified that in very truth the Jinniyah was gracious beyond
measure to her mate and that, notwithstanding the great wealth
and power of the sovereign, she could outvie him in mighty deeds
for the aidance of her husband. Accordingly, he feared with
excessive fear lest haply she seek opportunity to slay him in
favour of the Prince whom she might enthrone in his stead. So he
bade bring the Witch who had counselled him aforetime, and upon
whose sleight and malice he now mainly relied. When he related to
her the result of her rede, she took thought for a while; then,
raising her brow said, "O King of kings, thou troublest thyself
for naught: thou needest only command Prince Ahmad to bring thee
of the water of the Lions' Spring. He must perforce for his
honour's sake fulfil thy wish, and if he fail he will for very
shame not dare to show his face again at court. No better plan
than this canst thou adopt; so look to it nor loiter on thy way."
Next day at eventide, as the Sultan was seated in full Darbar
surrounded by his Wazirs and Ministers, Prince Ahmad came
forwards and making due obeisance took seat by his side and below
him. Hereat, the King addressed him, as was his wont, with great
show of favour saying, "It delighteth me mightily that thou hast
brought me the tent I required of thee; for surely in my Treasury
there be naught so rare and strange. Yet one other thing lack I,
and couldst thou bring it me I shall rejoice with joy exceeding.
I have heard tell that the Jinniyah, thy consort, maketh constant
use of a water which floweth from the Lions' Spring, the drinking
whereof doeth away with fevers and all other deadly diseases. I
know thou art anxious that I live in health; and thou wilt
gladden me by bringing somewhat of that water, so I may drink
thereof when occasion shall require, and well I wot that, as thou
valuest my love and affection thee wards, thou wilt not refuse to
grant me my request." Prince Ahmad on hearing this demand was
struck with surprise that his sire should so soon make a second
demand. So he kept silence awhile, thinking within himself, I
have managed by some means to obtain the tent from the Lady
Peri-Banu, but Allah only knoweth how she will now act, and
whether this fresh request will or will not rouse her wrath.
Howbeit I know that she will on no wise deny me any boon I may
ask of her." So after much hesitation Prince Ahmad made reply, "O
my lord the King, I have no power to do aught in this matter,
which resteth only with my spouse the Princess; yet will I
petition her to give the water; and, if she vouchsafe consent I
will bring it straight to thee. Indeed I cannot promise thee such
boon with all certainty: I would gladly do my endeavour in all
and everything that can benefit thee, but to ask her for this
water is a work more weighty than asking for the tent." Next day
the Prince took his departure and returned to Peri-Banu; and
after loving embraces and greetings quoth he, "O my lady and
light of my eyes, the Sultan my sire sendeth thee his grateful
thanks for the granting of his wish; to wit, the pavilion; and
now he adventureth himself once more and, certified of thy bounty
and beneficence, he would pray from thy hand the boon of a little
water from the Lions' Spring. Withal I would assure thee that an
the giving of this water please thee not, let the matter be clean
forgotten; for to do all thou willest is my one and only wish."
Peri-Banu made reply, "Methinks the Sultan, thy sire, would put
both me and thee to the test by requiring such boons as those
suggested to him by the Sorceress." --And as the morn began to
dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
said further to Prince Ahmad, "Natheless I will grant this
largesse also as the Sultan hath set his mind upon it, and no
harm shall come therefrom to me or to thee, albe 'tis a matter of
great risk and danger, and it is prompted by not a little of
malice and ungraciousness. But give careful heed to my words, nor
neglect thou aught of them, or thy destruction is certain-sure. I
now will tell thee what to do. In the hall of yonder castle which
riseth on that mountain is a fountain sentinelled by four lions
fierce and ravening; and they watch and ward the path that
leadeth thereto, a pair standing on guard whilst the other two
take their turn to rest, and thus no living thing hath power to
pass by them. Yet will I make known to thee the means whereby
thou mayest win thy wish without any hurt or harm befalling thee
from the furious beasts." Thus saying she drew from an ivory box
a clew of thread and, by means of a needle one of those wherewith
she had been plying her work, made thereof a ball. This she
placed in the hands of her husband, and said, "First, be thou
careful that thou keep about thee with all diligence this ball,
whose use I shall presently explain to thee. Secondly, choose for
thyself two horses of great speed, one for thine own riding,
whilst on the other thou shalt load the carcass of a freshly
slaughtered sheep cut into four quarters. In the third place,
take with thee a phial wherewith I will provide thee, and this is
for carrying the water which thou, Inshallah--God willing--shalt
bring back. As soon as the morn shall morrow do thou arise with
the light and go forth riding thy chosen steed and leading the
other alongside of thee by the reins. When thou shalt reach the
iron portals which open upon the castle-court, at no great
distance from the gate, do thou cast the ball of thread upon the
ground before thee. Forthwith it will begin rolling onwards of
its own will towards the castle door; and do thou follow it
through the open entrance until such time as it stop its course.
At this moment thou shalt see the four lions; and the two that
wake and watch will rouse the twain that sleep and rest. All four
will turn their jaws to the ground and growl and roar with
hideous howlings, and make as though about to fall upon thee and
tear thee limb from limb. However, fear not nor be dismayed, but
ride boldly on and throw to the ground from off the led-horse the
sheep's quarters, one to each lion. See that thou alight not from
thy steed, but gore his ribs with thy shovel stirrup[FN#344] and
ride with all thy might and main up to the basin which gathereth
the water. Here dismount and fill the phial whilst the lions will
be busied eating. Lastly, return with all speed and the beasts
will not prevent thy passing by them." Next day, at peep of morn,
Prince Ahmad did according to all that Peri-Banu had bidden him
and rode forth to the castle. Then, having passed through the
iron portals and crossed the court and opened the door, he
entered the hall, where he threw the quarters of the sheep before
the lions, one to each, and speedily reached the Spring. He
filled his phial with water from the basin and hurried back with
all haste. But when he had ridden some little distance he turned
about and saw two of the guardian lions following upon his track;
however, he was on no wise daunted but drew his sabre from the
sheath to prepare him for self-protection. Hereat one of the
twain seeing him bare his brand for defence, retired a little way
from the road and, standing at gaze, nodded his head and wagged
his tail, as though to pray the Prince to put up his scymitar and
to assure him that he might ride in peace and fear no peril. The
other lion then sprang forwards ahead of him and kept close him,
and the two never ceased to escort him until they reached the
city, nay even the gate of the Palace. The second twain also
brought up the rear till Prince Ahmad had entered the
Palace-door; and, when they were certified of this, all four went
back by the way they came. Seeing such wondrous spectacle, the
towns-folk all fled in dire dismay, albeit the enchanted beasts
molested no man; and presently some mounted horsemen espying
their lord riding alone and unattended came up to him and helped
him alight. The Sultan was sitting in his audience-hall
conversing with his Wazirs and Ministers when his son appeared
before him; and Prince Ahmad, having greeted him and blessed him
and, in dutiful fashion, prayed for his permanence of existence
and prosperity and opulence, placed before his feet the phial
full of the water from the Lions' Spring, saying, "Lo, I have
brought thee the boon thou desiredst of me. This water is most
rare and hard to obtain; nor is there in all thy Treasure-house
aught so notable and of such value as this. If ever thou fall ill
of any malady (Almighty Allah forfend this should be in thy
Destiny!) then drink a draught thereof and forthwith thou shalt
be made whole of whatso distemper thou hast." When Prince Ahmad
had made an end of speaking, the Sultan, with all love and
affection, grace and honour, embraced him and kissed his head;
then, seating him on his right said, "O my son, I am beholden to
thee, beyond count and measure, for that thou hast adventured thy
life and brought this water with great irk and risk from so
perilous a place." Now the Witch had erewhile informed the King
concerning the Lions' Spring and of the mortal dangers which
beset the site; so that he knew right well how gallant was his
son's derring-do; and presently he said, "Say me, O my child, how
couldst thou venture thither and escape from the lions and
broughtest back the water, thyself remaining safe and sound?"
--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Prince
replied, "By thy favour, O my lord the Sultan, have I returned in
safety from that stead mainly because I did according to the
bidding of my spouse, the Lady Peri-Banu; and I have brought the
water from the Lions' Spring only by carrying out her commands."
Then he made known to his father all that had befallen him in
going and returning; and when the Sultan noted the pre-eminent
valiance and prowess of his son he only feared the more, and the
malice and the rancour, envy and jealousy which filled his heart
waxed tenfold greater than before. However, dissembling his true
sentiments he dismissed Prince Ahmad and betaking him to his
private chamber at once sent word to bid the Witch appear in the
presence; and when she came, he told her of the Prince's visit
and all about the bringing of the water from the Lions' Spring.
She had already heard somewhat thereof by reason of the hubbub in
the city at the coming of the lions; but, as soon as she had
given ear to the whole account, she marvelled with mighty marvel
and, after whispering in the Sultan's ear her new device, said to
him in triumph, "O King of kings, this time thou shalt lay a
charge on the Prince and such commandment methinks will trouble
him and it shall go hard with him to execute aught thereof."
"Thou sayest well," replied the Sovran, "now indeed will I try
this plan thou hast projected for me." Wherefore, next day whenas
Prince Ahmad came to the presence of his sire, the King said to
him, "O dear my child, it delighteth me exceedingly to see thy
virtue and valour and the filial love wherewith thou art
fulfilled, good gifts chiefly shown by obtaining for me the two
rarities I asked of thee. And now one other and final requirement
I have of thee; and, shouldst thou avail to satisfy my desire, I
shall be wellpleased in my beloved son and render thanks to him
for the rest of my days." Prince Ahmad answered, "What is the
boon thou requirest? I will for my part do thy bidding as far as
in me lieth." Then quoth the King in reply to the Prince, "I
would fain have thee bring me a man of size and stature no more
than three feet high, with beard full twenty ells in length, who
beareth on his shoulder a quarter staff of steel, thirteen score
pounds in weight, which he wieldeth with ease and swingeth around
his head without wrinkle on brow, even as men wield cudgels of
wood." On this wise the Sultan, led astray by the Doom of Destiny
and heedless alike of good and evil, asked that which should
bring surest destruction upon himself. Prince Ahmad also, with
blind obedience out of pure affection to his parent, was ready to
supply him with all he required unknowing what was prepared for
him in the Secret Purpose. Accordingly he said, "O my sire the
Sultan, I trow me 'twill be hard to find, all the world over, a
man such as thou desirest, still I will work my best to do thy
bidding." Thereupon the Prince retired from the presence and
returned, as usual, to his palace where he greeted Peri-Banu with
love and gladness; but his face was troubled and his heart was
heavy at the thought of the King's last behest. Perceiving his
pre-occupation the Princess asked him, saying, "O dear my lord,
what tidings bringest thou for me to-day?" Hereto replied he,
"The Sultan at each visit requireth of me some new thing and
burtheneth me with his requests; and to-day he purposeth to try
me and, in the hopes of putting me to shame, he asketh somewhat
which 'twere vain to hope I can find in all the world." Thereupon
Prince Ahmad told her all the King had said to him.--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
hearing these words said to the Prince, "Trouble not thyself at
all in this matter. Thou didst venture at great risk to carry off
for thy father water from the Lions' Spring and thou succeededst
in winning thy wish. Now this task is on no wise more difficult
or dangerous than was that: nay 'tis the easier for that he thou
describest is none other than Shabbar, my brothergerman. Although
we both have the same parents, yet it pleased Almighty Allah to
enform us in different figures and to make him unlike his sister
as being in mortal mould can be. Moreover he is valiant and
adventurous, always seeking some geste and exploit whereby to
further my interest, and right willingly doth he carry out whatso
he undertaketh. He is shaped and formed as the Sultan thy sire
hath described, nor useth he any weapons save the Nabbut[FN#345]
or quarter staff of steel. And see now I will send for him, but
be not thou dismayed at sighting him." Replied Prince Ahmad, "If
he be in truth thine own brother what matter how he looketh? I
shall be pleased to see him as when one welcometh a valued friend
or a beloved kinsman. Wherefore should I fear to look upon him?"
Hearing these words Peri-Banu despatched one of her attendants
who brought to her from her private treasury a chafing-dish of
gold; then she bade a fire be lit therein, and sending for a
casket of noble metals studded with gems, the gift of her
kinsmen, she took therefrom some incense and cast it upon the
flames. Herewith issued a dense smoke spireing high in air and
spreading all about the palace; and a few moments after,
Peri-Banu who had ceased her conjurations cried, "Lookye my
brother Shabbar cometh! canst thou distinguish his form?" The
Prince looked up and saw a mannikin in stature dwarfish and no
more than three feet high, and with a boss on breast and a hump
on back; withal he carried himself with stately mien and majestic
air. On his right shoulder was borne his quarter staff of steel
thirteen score pounds in weight. His beard was thick and twenty
cubits in length but arranged so skilfully that it stood clear
off from the ground; he wore also a twisted pair of long
mustachios curling up to his ears, and all his face was covered
with long pile. His eyes were not unlike unto pig's eyes; and his
head, on which was placed a crown-like coiffure, was enormous of
bulk, contrasting with the meanness of his stature. Prince Ahmad
sat calmly beside his wife, the Fairy, and felt no fear as the
figure approached; and presently Shabbar walked up and glancing
at him asked Peri-Banu saying, "Who be this mortal who sitteth
hard by thee?" Hereto she replied, "O my brother, this is my
beloved husband, Prince Ahmad, son of the Sultan of Hindostan. I
sent thee not an invitation to the wedding as thou wast then
engaged on some great expedition; now, however, by the grace of
Almighty Allah thou hast returned triumphant and victorious over
thy foes, wherefore I have summoned thee upon a matter which
nearly concerneth me." Hearing these words Shabbar looked
graciously at Prince Ahmad, saying, "O my beloved sister, is
there any service I can render to him?" and she replied, "The
Sultan his sire desireth ardently to see thee, and I pray thee go
forthright to him and take the Prince with thee by way of guide."
Said he, "This instant I am ready to set forth;" but said she,
"Not yet, O my brother. Thou art fatigued with journeying; so
defer until the morrow thy visit to the King, and this evening I
will make known to thee all that concerneth Prince Ahmad."
Presently the time came; so Peri-Banu informed her brother
Shabbar concerning the King and his ill-counsellors; but she
dwelt mainly upon the misdeeds of the old woman, the Witch; and
how she had schemed to injure Prince Ahmad and despitefully
prevent his going to city or court, and she had gained such
influence over the Sultan that he had given up his will to hers
and ceased not doing whatso she bade him. Next day at dawn
Shabbar the Jinn and Prince Ahmad set out together upon a visit
to the Sultan; and when they had reached the city gates, all the
folk, nobles and commons, were struck with consternation at the
dwarf's hideous form; and, flying on every side in affright and
running into shops and houses, barred the doors and closed the
casements and hid themselves therein. So panic-stricken indeed
was their flight that many feet lost shoes and sandals in
running, while from the heads of others their loosened turbands
fell to earth. And when they twain approached the palace through
streets and squares and market-places desolate as the Desert of
Samawah,[FN#346] all the keepers of the gates took to their heels
at sight of Shabbar and fled, so there was none to hinder their
entering. They walked straight on to the audience-chamber where
the Sultan was holding Darbar, and they found in attendance on
him a host of Ministers and Councillors, great and small, each
standing in his proper rank and station. They too on seeing
Shabbar speedily took flight in dire dismay and hid themselves;
also the guards had deserted their posts nor cared in any way to
let or stay the twain. The Sovran still sat motionless on his
throne, where Shabbar went up to him with lordly mien and royal
dignity and cried, "O King, thou hast expressed a wish to see me;
and lo, I am here. Say now what wouldst thou have me do?"--And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the King
made no reply to Shabbar, but held up his hands before his eyes
that he might not behold that frightful figure, and turning his
head would fain have fled in terror. Shabbar was filled with fury
at this rudeness on the part of the Sultan, and was wroth with
exceeding wrath to think that he had troubled himself to come at
the bidding of such a craven, who now on seeing him would fain
run away. So the Jinn, without an instant's delay, raised his
quarter staff of steel, and, swinging it twice in air, before
Prince Ahmad could reach the throne or on any wise interfere,
struck the Sultan so fiercely upon the poll that his skull was
smashed and his brains were scattered over the floor. And when
Shabbar had made an end of this offender, he savagely turned upon
the Grand Wazir who stood on the Sultan's right and incontinently
would have slain him also, but the Prince craved pardon for his
life and said, "Kill him not: he is my friend and hath at no time
said one evil word against me. But such is not the case with the
others, his fellows." Hearing these words the infuriated Shabbar
fell upon the Ministers and ill-counsellors on either side, to
wit, all who had devised evil devices against Prince Ahmad, and
slew them each and every and suffered none to escape save only
those who had taken flight and hidden themselves. Then, going
from the hall of justice to the courtyard, the Dwarf said to the
Wazir whose life the Prince had saved, "Harkye, there is a Witch
who beareth enmity against my brother, the husband of my sister.
See that thou produce her forthright; likewise the villain who
filled his father's mind with hate and malice, envy and jealousy
against him, so may I quite them in full measure for their
misdeeds." The Grand Wazir produced them all, first the
Sorceress, and then the malicious minister with his rout of
fautors and flatterers, and Shabbar felled them one after the
other with his quarter staff of steel and killed them pitilessly,
crying to the Sorceress, "This is the end of all thy machinations
with the King, and this is the fruit of thy deceit and treachery;
so learn not to feign thyself sick." And in the blindness of his
passion he would have slain all the inhabitants of the city, but
Prince Ahmad prevented him and pacified him with soft and
flattering words. Hereupon Shabbar habited his brother in the
royal habit and seated him on the throne and proclaimed him
Sultan of Hindostan. The people all, both high and low, rejoiced
with exceeding joy to hear these tidings, for Prince Ahmad was
beloved by every one; so they crowded to swear fealty and bring
presents and Nazaranahs[FN#347] and raised shouts of acclamation
crying out, "Long live King Ahmad!" When all this was done,
Shabbar sent for his sister, Peri-Banu, and made her Queen under
the title of Shahr-Banu;[FN#348] and in due time taking leave of
her and of King Ahmad, the Jinni returned to his own home. And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that after these
things King Ahmad summoned Prince Ali his brother and Nur
al-Nihar and made him governor of a large city hard by the
capital, and dismissed him thither in high state and splendour.
Also he commissioned an official to wait upon Prince Husayn and
tell him all the tidings, and sent word saying, "I will appoint
thee ruler over any capital or country thy soul desireth; and, if
thou consent, I will forward thee letters of appointment." But
inasmuch as the Prince was wholly content and entirely happy in
Darwaysh-hood, he cared naught for rule or government or aught of
worldly vanities; so he sent back the official with his duty and
grateful thanks, requesting that he might be left to live his
life in solitude and renunciation of matters mundane. Now when
Queen Shahrazad had made an end of telling her story and yet the
night was not wholly spent, King Shahryar spake saying, "This thy
story, admirable and most wonderful, hath given me extreme
delight; and I pray thee do thou tell us another tale till such
time as the last hours of this our night be passed." She replied,
"Be it as thou wilt, O auspicious King: I am thy slave to do as
thou shalt bid." Then she began to relate the tale of





                THE TWO SISTERS WHO ENVIED THEIR
                        CADETTE[FN#349]



In days of yore and in times long gone before there lived a king
of Persia, Khusrau Shah hight, renowned for justice and
righteousness. His father, dying at a good old age, had left him
sole heir to all the realm and, under his rule, the tiger and the
kid drank side by side at the same Ghat;[FN#350] and his treasury
was ever full and his troops and guards were numberless. Now it
was his wont to don disguise and, attended by a trusty Wazir, to
wander about the street at night-time. Whereby things seld-seen
and haps peregrine became known to him, the which, should I tell
thee all thereof, O auspicious King, would weary thee beyond
measure. So he took seat upon the throne of his forbears and when
the appointed days of mourning were ended, according to the
custom of that country, he caused his exalted name, that is
Khusrau Shah, be struck upon all the coins of the kingdom and
entered into the formula of public prayer.[FN#351] And when
stablished in his sovranty he went forth as aforetime on one
evening accompanied by his Grand Wazir, both in merchant's habit,
walking the streets and squares, the markets and lanes, the
better to note what might take place both of good and of bad. By
chance they passed, as the night darkened, through a quarter
where dwelt people of the poorer class; and as they walked on,
the Shah heard inside a house women talking with loud voices;
then going near, he peeped in by the door-chink, and saw three
fair sisters who having supped together were seated on a divan
talking one to other. The King thereupon applied his ear to the
crack and listened eagerly to what they said, and heard each and
every declaring what was the thing she most desired.[FN#352]
Quoth the eldest, "I would I were married to the Shah's head
Baker for then should I ever have bread to eat, the whitest and
choicest in the city, and your hearts would be fulfilled with
envy and jealousy and malice at my good luck." Quoth the second,
"I would rather wive with the Shah's chief Kitchener and eat of
dainty dishes that are placed before his Highness, wherewith the
royal bread which is common throughout the Palace cannot compare
for gust and flavour." And quoth the third and youngest of the
three, and by far the most beautiful and lively of them all, a
maiden of charming nature, full of wit and humour; sharp-witted,
wary and wise, when her turn came to tell her wish, "O sisters,
my ambition is not as ordinary as yours. I care not for fine
bread nor glutton-like do I long for dainty dishes. I look to
somewhat nobler and higher: indeed I would desire nothing less
than to be married by the King and become the mother of a
beautiful Prince, a model of form and in mind as masterful as
valorous. His hair should be golden on one side and silvern on
the other: when weeping he should drop pearls in place of tears,
and when laughing his rosy lips should be fresh as the blossom
new-blown." The Shah was amazed with exceeding amazement to hear
the wishes of the three sisters, but chiefly of the youngest and
determined in himself that he would gratify them all. Wherefore
quoth he to the Grand Wazir, "Mark well this house And on the
morrow bring before me these maidens whom we Heard discoursing;"
and quoth the Wazir, "O Asylum of the Universe, I hear but to
obey." Thereupon the twain walked back to the palace and laid
them down to rest. When morning morrowed, the Minister went for
the sisters and brought them to the King, who, after greeting
them and heartening their hearts, said to them in kindly tone, "O
ye maidens of weal, last night what was it that in merry word and
jest ye spake one to other? Take heed ye tell the Shah every whit
in full detail, for all must become known to us; something have
we heard, but now the King would have ye recount your discourse
to his royal ears."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that at these
words of the Shah the sisters, confused and filled with shame,
durst not reply but stood before him silent with heads bent low;
and despite all questioning and encouragement they could not
pluck up courage. However, the youngest was of passing comeliness
in form and feature and forthwith the Shah became desperately
enamoured of her; and of his live began reassuring them and
saying, "O ye Princesses of fair ones, be not afraid nor troubled
in thought; nor let bashfulness or shyness prevent you telling
the Shah what three wishes you wished, for fain would he fulfil
them all." Thereat they threw themselves at his feet and, craving
his pardon for their boldness and freedom of speech, told him the
whole talk, each one repeating the wish she had wished; and on
that very day Khusrau Shah married the eldest sister to his chief
Baker, and the second sister to his head Cook, and bade make all
things ready for his own wedding with the youngest sister. So
when the preparations for the royal nuptials had been made after
costliest fashion, the King's marriage was celebrated with royal
pomp and pageantry, and the bride received the titles of Light of
the Harem and Banu of Iran-land. The other two maidens were
likewise married, one to the King's Baker the other to his Cook,
after a manner according to their several degrees in life and
with little show of grandeur and circumstance. Now it had been
only right and reasonable that these twain having won each her
own wish, should have passed their time in solace and happiness,
but the decree of Destiny doomed otherwise; and, as soon as they
saw the grand estate whereto their youngest sister had risen, and
the magnificence of her marriage-festival, their hearts were
fired with envy and jealousy and sore despite and they resolved
upon giving the rein to their hatred and malignancy and to work
her some foul mischief. On this wise they remained for many
months consumed with rancour, day and night; and they burned with
grief and anger whenever they sighted aught of her superior style
and state. One morning as the two met at the Hammam and found
privacy and opportunity, quoth the eldest sister to the second,
"A grievous thing it is indeed that she, our youngest sister, no
lovelier than ourselves, should thus be raised to the dignity and
majesty of Queendom and indeed the thought is overhard to bear."
Quoth the other, "O sister mine, I also am perplexed and
displeased at this thing, and I know not what of merit the Shah
could have seen in her that he was tempted to choose her for his
consort. She ill befitteth that high estate with that face like a
monkey's favour; and, save her youth, I know nothing that could
commend her to his Highness that he should so exalt her above her
fellows. To my mind thou and not she art fit to share the royal
bed; and I nurse a grudge against the King for that he hath made
this jade his Queen." And the eldest sister rejoined, "I likewise
marvel beyond all measure; and I swear that thy youth and beauty,
thy well-shaped figure and lovely favour and goodliness of gifts
past challenge or compare, might well have sufficed to win the
King and have tempted him to wed and bed with thee and make thee
his crowned Queen and Sovran Lady in lieu of taking to his arms
this paltry strumpet. Indeed he hath shown no sense of what is
right and just in leaving thee disappointed; and on this account
only the matter troubleth me with exceeding trouble."--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the two
sisters took counsel each with other how they might abase their
youngest sister in the Shah's sight and cause her downfall and
utter ruin. Day and night they conned over the matter in their
minds and spoke at great length about it when they ever met
together, and pondered endless plans to injure the Queen their
sister, and if possible bring about her death; but they could fix
upon none. And, whilst they bore this despite and hatred towards
her and diligently and deliberately sought the means of
gratifying their bitter envy, hatred and malice, she on the other
hand regarded them with the same favour and affection as she had
done before marriage and thought only how to advantage their low
estate. Now when some months of her wedded life had passed, the
fair Queen was found to be with child whereof the glad tidings
filled the Shah with joy; and straightway he commanded all the
people of the capital and throughout the while Empire keep
holiday with feasts and dancing and every manner jollity as
became so rare and important an occasion. But as soon as the news
came to the ears of the two Envious Sisters they were constrained
perforce to offer their congratulations to the Queen; and, after
a long visit, as the twain were about to crave dismissal they
said, "Thanks be to Almighty Allah, O our sister, who hath shown
us this happy day. One boon have we to ask of thee: to wit, that
when the time shall come for thee to be delivered of a child, we
may assist as midwives at thy confinement, and be with thee and
nurse thee for the space of forty days." The Queen in her
gladness made reply, "O sisters mine, I fain would have it so;
for at a time of such need I know f none on whom to rely with
such dependence as upon you. During my coming trial your presence
with me will be most welcome and opportune; but I can do only
what thing the Shah biddeth anor can I do aught save by his
leave. My advice is thus:--Make known this matter to your mates
who have always access to the royal presence, and let them
personally apply for your attendance as midwives; I doubt not but
that the Shah will give you leave to assist me and remain by my
side, considering the fond relationship between us three." Then
the two sisters returned home full of evil thoughts and malice,
and told their wishes to their husbands who, in turn, bespake
Khusrau Shah, and proffered their petition with all humility,
little knowing what was hidden from them in the Secret Purpose.
The King replied, "When I shall have thought the matter over in
my mind, I will give you suitable orders." So saying he privately
visited the Queen and to her said, "O my lady, an it please thee,
methinks 'twould be well to summon thy sisters and secure their
aidance, when thou shalt be labouring of child, in lieu of any
stranger: and if thou be of the same mind as myself let me at
once learn and take steps to obtain their consent and concert ere
thy time arriveth. They will wait on thee with more loving care
than any hired nurse and thou wilt find thyself the safer in
their hands." Replied the Queen, "O my lord the Shah, I also
venture to think that 'twould be well to have my sisters by my
side and not mere aliens at such an hour." Accordingly he sent
sword to them and from that day they dwelt within the palace to
make all ready for the expected confinement; and on this wise
they found means to carry out their despiteful plot which during
so many days they had devised to scanty purpose. When her full
tale of months had been told, the Banu was brought to bed of a
man-child marvellous in beauty, whereat the fire of envy and
hatred was kindled with redoubled fury in the sisters' breasts.
So they again took counsel not suffered ruth nor natural
affection to move their cruel hearts; and presently, with great
care and secrecy, they wrapped the new-born in a bit of blanket
and putting him into a basket cast him into a canal which flowed
hard by the Queen's apartment.[FN#353] They then placed a dead
puppy in the place of the prince and showed it to the other
midwives and nurses, averring that the Queen had given birth to
such abortion. When these untoward tidings reached the King's ear
he was sore discomforted and waxed wroth with exceeding wrath.--
And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Seventieth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the King,
enflamed with sudden fierceness, drew his sword and would have
slain his Queen had not the Grand Wazir, who happened to be in
his presence at the time, restrained his rage and diverted him
from his unjust design and barbarous purpose. Quoth he, "O Shadow
of Allah upon earth, this mishap is ordained of the Almighty Lord
whose will no man hath power to gainsay. The Queen is guiltless
of offence against thee, for what is born of her is born without
her choice, and she indeed hath no hand therein." With this and
other sage counsels he dissuaded his lord from carrying out his
fell purpose and saved the guiltless Queen from a sudden and
cruel death. Meanwhile the basket wherein lay the newly-born
Prince was carried by the current into a rivulet which flowed
through the royal gardens; and, as the Intendant of the pleasure
grounds and pleasaunces chanced to walk along the bank, by the
decree of Destiny he caught sight of the basket floating by, and
he called a gardener, bidding him lay hold of it and bring it to
him that he might see what was therein. The man ran along the
rivulet side; and, with a long stick drawing the basket to land,
showed it to the Intendant who opened it and beheld within a new-
born babe, a boy of wondrous beauty wrapped in a bit of blanket;
at which sight he was astounded beyond measure of surprise. Now
it chanced that the Intendant, who was one of the Emirs and who
stood high in favour with the Sovran, had no children: withal he
never ceased offering prayers and vows to Almighty Allah that he
might have a son to keep alive his memory and continue his name.
Delighted at the sight he took home the basket with the babe and
giving it to his wife said, "See how Allah hath sent to us this
man-child which I just now found floating upon the waters; and do
thou apply thee forthright and fetch a wet-nurse to give him milk
and nourish him; and bring him up with care and tenderness as
though he were thine own." So the Intendant's wife took charge of
the child with great gladness and reared him with her whole
heart, diligently as though born of her own womb; nor did the
Intendant say aught to any, or seek to find out whose might be
the child lest haply some one claim and take it from him. He was
certified in his mind that the boy came from the Queen's quarter
of the palace, but deemed inexpedient to make too strict enquiry
concerning the matter; and he and his spouse kept the secret with
all secrecy. A year after this the Queen gave birth to a second
son, when her sisters, the Satanesses full of spite, did with
this babe, even as they had done by the first: they wrapped it in
a cloth and set it in a basket which they threw into the stream,
then gave out that the Queen had brought forth a kitten. But once
more, by the mercy of Allah Almighty, this boy came to the hands
of that same Intendant of the gardens who carried him to his wife
and placed him under her charge with strict injunctions to take
care of the second foundling sedulously as she had done with the
first. The Shah, enraged to hear the evil tidings, again rose up
to slay the Queen; but as before the Grand Wazir prevented him
and calmed his wrath with words of wholesome rede and a second
time saved the unhappy mother's life. And after another year had
gone by the Banu was brought to bed and this time bore a daughter
by whom the sisters did as they had done by her brothers: they
set the innocent inside a basket and threw her into the stream;
and the Intendant found her also and took her to his wife and
bade her rear the infant together with the other two castaways.
Hereupon the Envious Sisters, wild with malice, reported that the
Queen had given birth to a musk-ratling;[FN#354] whereat King
Khusrau could no longer stay his wrath and indignation. So he
cried in furious rage to the Grand Wazir, "What, shall the Shah
suffer this woman, who beareth naught but vermin and abortions,
to share the joys of his bed? Nay more, the King can no longer
allow her to live, else she will fill the palace with monstrous
births: in very sooth, she is herself a monster, and it behoveth
us to rid this place of such unclean creature and accursed." So
saying the Shah commanded them do her to death; but the ministers
and high officers of estate who stood before the presence fell at
the royal feet and besought pardon and mercy for the Queen. The
Grand Wazir also said with folded hands, "O Shahihshah[FN#355]--O
King of the kings--thy slave would fain represent that 'tis not
in accordance with the course of justice or the laws of the land
to take the life of a woman for no fault of her own. She cannot
interfere with Destiny, nor can she prevent unnatural births such
as have thrice betided her; and such mishaps have oftentimes
befallen other women, whose cases call for compassion and not
punishment. An the King be displeased with her then let him cease
to live with her, and the loss of his gracious favour will be a
penalty dire enough; and, if the Shah cannot suffer the sight of
her, then let her be confined in some room apart, and let her
expiate her offence by alms deed and charity until 'Izrail, the
Angel of Death, separate her soul from her flesh." Hearing these
words of counsel from his aged Councillor, Khusrau Shah
recognised that it had been wrong to slay the Queen, for that she
could on no wise do away with aught that was determined by Fate
and Destiny; and presently he said to the Grand Wazir, "Her life
is spared at thine intercession, O wise man and ware; yet will
the King doom her to a weird which, haply, is hardly less hard to
bear than death. And now do thou forthright make ready, by the
side of the Cathedral-mosque, a wooden cage with iron bars and
lock the Queen therein as one would confine a ferocious wild
beast.[FN#356] Then every Mussulman who wendeth his way to public
prayers Shall spit in her face ere he set foot within the fane,
and if any fail to carry out this command he shall be punished in
like manner. So place guards and inspectors to enforce obedience
and let me hear if there be aught of gainsaying." The Wazir durst
not make reply but carried out the Shah's commandments; and this
punishment inflicted upon the blameless Queen had far better
befitted her Envious Sisters.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

      The End of the Six Hundred and Seventy-first Night.

Then said she--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the cage was
made ready with all speed; and, when the forty days after
purification of child-bed[FN#357] had come to an end, the Banu
was locked therein; and, according to the King's commandment, all
who came to prayer in the Great Mosque would first spit in her
face. The hapless woman, well knowing that she 