mark our well-travelled little tale does duty in accounting for the
building of a parish church, as we learn from Thorpe, in his "Northern
Mythology," vol. ii. p. 253:

Many years ago there lived in Erritso, near Frederica, a very poor man who one
day said, "If I had a large sum of money, I would build a church for the
parish." The following night he dreamed that if he went to the south bridge at
Veile he would make his fortune. He followed the intimation and strolled
backwards and forwards on the bridge until it grew late, but without seeing
any sign of good fortune. When just on the point of returning, he was accosted
by an officer, who asked him why he had spent a whole day so on the bridge. He
told him his dream, on hearing which the officer related to him in return that
he also on the preceding night had dreamed that in a barn in Erritso,
belonging to a man whose name he mentioned, a treasure lay buried. Now the
name he mentioned was the man's own, who prudently kept his own counsel,
hastened home, and found the treasure in a barn. The man was faithful to his
word, and built the church.[FN#379]

Equally at home, as we have seen, in Sicily, Holland, Germany, and Denmark,
the identical legend is also domiciled in Scotland and England. Thus Robert
Chambers, in his "Popular Rhymes of Scotland," ed. 1826, p. 56, speaking of
Dundonald Castle, in Ayrshire, the ancient seat of King Robert II., relates
the following local tradition:

Donald, the builder, was originally a poor man, but had the faculty of
dreaming lucky dreams. Upon one occasion he dreamed thrice in one night that
if he were to go to London Bridge he would make a fortune. He went
accordingly, and saw a man looking over the parapet of the bridge, whom he
accosted courteously, and after a little conversation, intrusted him with the
secret of the occasion of his visiting London Bridge. The stranger told him
that he had made a very foolish errand, for he had himself once had a similar
vision, which directed him to go to a certain spot in Ayrshire, in Scotland,
where he would find a vast treasure, and for his part he had never once
thought of obeying the injunction. From his description of the spot, however,
the sly Scot at once perceived that the treasure in question must be concealed
nowhere but in his own humble kail-yard at home, to which he immediately
repaired, in full expectation of finding it. Nor was he disappointed; for
after destroying many good and promising cabbages, and completely cracking
credit with his wife, who considered him as mad, he found a large potful of
gold coin, with which he built a stout castle for himself, and became the
founder of a flourishing family.

"This absurd story," adds Chambers, "is localised in almost every district of
Scotland always referring to London Bridge, and Hogg (the Ettrick Shepherd)
has worked up the fiction in a very amusing manner in one of his 'Winter
Evening Tales,' substituting the Bridge at Kelso for that of London."

But the legend of the Chapman, or Pedlar, of Swaffam, in Norfolk, handed down,
as it has been, from one credulous generation to another, with the most minute
details and perfect local colour, throws quite into the shade all other
versions or variants of the ancient tale of the poor man of Baghdad.
Blomfield, in his "History of Norfolk," 8vo ea., vol. vi. 211-213, reproduces
it as follows, from Sir Roger Twysden's "Reminiscences":

"The story of the Pedlar of Swaffam Market is in substance this: That dreaming
one night, if he went to London, he should certainly meet with man upon London
Bridge which should tell him good news; he was so perplexed in his mind that
till he set upon his journey he could have no rest. To London therefore he
hastes, and walked upon the Bridge for some hours, where being espied by a
shopkeeper and asked what he wanted, he answered, 'You may well ask me that
question, for truly (quoth he) I am come hither upon a very vain errand,' and
so told the story of his dream which occasioned his journey. Whereupon the
shopkeeper replied, 'Alas, good friend, should I have heeded dreams I might
have proved myself as very a fool as thou hast; for 'tis not long since that I
dreamt that at a place called Swaffam Market, in Norfolk, dwells one John
Chapman, a pedlar, who hath a tree in his back yard, under which is buried a
pot of money. Now, therefore if I should have made a journey thither to dig
for such hidden treasure, judge you whether I should not have been counted a
fool.' To whom the Pedlar cunningly said, 'Yes, truly: I will therefore return
home and follow my business, not heeding such dreams hence-forward.' But when
he came home (being satisfied that his dream was fulfilled), he took occasion
to dig in that place, and accordingly found a large pot full of money, which
he prudently concealed, putting the pot among the rest of his brass. After a
time, it happened that one who came to his house, and beholding the pot,
observed an inscription upon it, which being in Latin he interpreted it, that
under that there was another twice as good.[FN#380] Of this inscription the
Pedlar was before ignorant, or at least minded it not; but when he heard the
meaning of it, he said, ' 'Tis very true, in the shop where I bought this pot
stood another under it which was twice as big'; but considering that it might
tend to his further profit to dig deeper in the same place where he found
that, he fell again to work and discovered such a pot as was intimated by the
inscription, full of old coin; notwithstanding all which, he so concealed his
wealth that the neighbours took no notice of it. But not long after the
inhabitants of Swaffam resolving to re-edify their church, and having
consulted the workmen about the charge, they made a levy, wherein they taxed
the Pedlar according to no other rate but what they had formerly done. But he,
knowing his own ability, came to the church and desired the workmen to show
him their model and to tell him what they esteemed the charge of the north
aisle would amount to, which when they told him, he presently undertook to pay
them for building it, and not only that, but for a very tall and beautiful
tower steeple.

"This is the tradition of the inhabitants, as it was told me there. And in
testimony thereof, there was then his picture, with his wife and three
children, in every window of the aisle, with an inscription running through
the bottom of all those windows, viz., 'Orate pro bono statu Johannis
Chapman.... Uxoris ejus, et Liberorum quorum, qui quidem Johannes hanc alam
cum fenestris tecto et . . . fieri fecit.' It was in Henry the Seventh's time,
but the year I now remember not, my notes being left with Mr. William
Sedgwicke, who trickt the pictures, he being then with me. In that aisle is
his seat, of an antique form, and on each side the entrance, the statue of the
Pedlar of about a foot in length, with pack on his back, very artificially
[?artistically] cut. This was sent me from Mr. William Dugdale, of Blyth Hall,
in Warwickshire, in a letter dated Jan. 29th, 1652-3, which I have since
learned from others to have been most True. Roger Twysden."

Mr. William E. A. Axon, in "The Antiquary," vol. xi. p. 168, gives the same
version, with some slight variations, from a work entitled "New Help to
Discourse," which he says was often printed between 1619 and 1696: The dream
was "doubled and tripled," and the Pedlar stood on the bridge for two or three
days; but no mention is made of his finding a second pot of money: "he found
an infinite mass of money, with part of which he re-edified the church, having
his statue therein to this day, cut out in stone, with his pack on his back
and his dog at his heels, his memory being preserved by the same form or
picture in most of the glass windows in taverns and alehouses in that town to
this day." The story is also told of a cobbler in Somersetshire (in an article
on Dreams, "Saturday Review," Dec. 28, 1878), who dreamt three nights in
succession that if he went to London Bridge he would there meet with something
to his advantage. For three days he walked over the bridge, when at length a
stranger came up to him, and asked him why he had been walking from end to end
of the bridge for these three days, offering nothing for sale nor purchasing
aught. The man having told him of his strange dream, the stranger said that he
too had dreamt of a lot of gold buried in a certain orchard in such a place in
Somersetshire. Upon this the cobbler returned home and found the pot of gold
under an apple-tree. He now sent his son to school, where he learnt Latin, and
when the lad had come home for his holidays, he happened to look at the pot
that had contained the gold and seeing some writing on it he said, "Father, I
can show you what I have learnt at school is of some use." He then translated
the Latin inscription on the pot thus: "Look under and you will find better "
They did look under and a large quantity of gold was found. Mr. Axon gives a
version of the legend in the Yorkshire dialect in "The Antiquary," vol. xii.
pp. 121-2, and there is a similar story connected with the parish church of
Lambeth.[FN#381]

Regarding the Norfolk tradition of the lucky and generous Pedlar, Blomfield
says that the north side of the church of Swaffam (or Sopham) was certainly
built by one John Chapman, who was churchwarden in 1462; but he thinks that
the figures of the pedlar, etc., were only put "to set forth the name of the
founder: such rebuses are frequently met with on old works." The story is also
told in Abraham de la Prynne's Diary under date Nov. 10, 1699, as "a constant
tradition" concerning a pedlar in Soffham.

Such is the close resemblance between the Turkish version of the Dream and
that in the tale of Zayn al-Asnam that I am disposed to consider both as
having been derived from the same source, which, however, could hardly have
been the story told by El-Ishaki. In Zayn al-Asnam a shaykh appears to the
prince in a dream and bids him hie to Egypt, where he will find heaps of
treasure; in the Turkish story the shaykh appears to the poor water-carrier
three times and bids him go to Damascus for the like purpose. The prince
arrives at Cairo and goes to sleep in a mosque, when the shayka again presents
himself before him in a dream and tells him that he has done well in obeying
him--he had only made a trial of his courage: "now return to thy capital and I
will make thee wealthy,"-- in the Turkish story the water-carrier also goes
into a mosque at Damascus and receives a loaf of bread there from a baker.
When the prince returns home the shaykh appears to him once more and bids him
take a pickaxe and go to such a palace of his sire and dig in such a place,
where he should find riches,--in the Turkish story the water-carrier having
returned to his own house, the shaykh comes to him three times more and bids
him search near to where he is and he should find wealth. The discovery by
Zayn al-Asnam of his father's hidden treasure, after he had recklessly
squandered all his means, bears some analogy to the well-known ballad of the
"Heir of Linne," who, when reduced to utter poverty, in obedience to his dying
father's injunction, should such be his hap, went to hang himself in the
"lonely lodge" and found there concealed a store of gold.

With regard to the second part of the tale of Zayn al-Asnam--the Quest of the
Ninth Image--and the Turkish version of which my friend Mr. Gibb has kindly
furnished us with a translation from the mystical work of 'Ali 'Aziz Efendi,
the Cretan, although no other version has hitherto been found,[FN#382] I have
little doubt that the story is of either Indian or Persian extraction, images
and pictures being abhorred by orthodox (or sunni) Muslims generally; and such
also, I think, should we consider all the Arabian tales of young men becoming
madly enamoured of beautiful girls from seeing their portraits--though we can
readily believe that an Arab as well as a Persian or Indian youth might fall
in love with a pretty maid from a mere description of her personal charms, as
we are told of the Bedouin coxcomb Amarah in the Romance of Antar. If the
Turkish version, which recounts the adventures of the Prince Abd es-Samed in
quest of the lacking image (the tenth, not the ninth, as in the Arabian) was
adapted from Zayn al-Asnam, the author has made considerable modifications in
re-telling the fascinating story, and, in my opinion, it is not inferior to
the Arabian version. In the Turkish, the Prince's father appears to him in a
vision of the night,[FN#383] and conducts him to the treasure-vault, where he
sees the vacant pedestal and on it the paper in which his father directs him
to go to Cairo and seek counsel of the Shaykh Mubarak, who would instruct him
how to obtain the lacking image; and the prince is commissioned by the shaykh
to bring him a spotless virgin who has never so much as longed for the
pleasures of love, when he should receive the image for his reward. The shaykh
gives him a mirror which should remain clear when held before such a virgin,
but become dimmed when reflecting the features of another sort of girl; also a
purse which should be always full of money.[FN#384] In the Arabian story the
Shaykh Mubarak accompanies Zayn al-Asnam in his quest of the image to the land
of Jinnistan, the King whereof it is who requires the prince to procure him a
pure virgin and then he would give him the lacking image. In the Turkish
version the prince Abd es-Samed proceeds on the adventure alone, and after
visiting many places without success he goes to Baghdad, where by means of the
Imam he at last finds the desiderated virgin, whom he conducts to Mubarak. In
the Arabian story the Imam, Abu Bakr (Haji Bakr in the Turkish), is at first
inimical towards the prince and the shaykh but after being propitiated by a
present of money he is all complaisance, and, as in the Turkish, introduces
the prince to the fallen vazir, the father of the spotless virgin. The sudden
conversion of the Imam from a bitter enemy to an obliging friend is related
with much humour: one day denouncing the strangers to the folk assembled in
the mosque as cutpurses and brigands, and the next day withdrawing his
statement, which he says had been made on the information of one of the
prince's enviers, and cautioning the people against entertaining aught but
reverence for the strangers. This amusing episode is omitted in the Turkish
version. In one point the tale of Zayn al-Asnam has the advantage of that of
Abd es-Samed: it is much more natural, or congruous, that the King of the
Genii should affect to require the chaste maiden and give the prince a magical
mirror which would test her purity, and that the freed slave Mubarak should
accompany the prince in his quest.




            Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp--p. 31.



Those scholars who declared a number of the tales in Galland's "Mille et une
Nuits" to be of his own invention, because they were not found in any of the
Arabic MS. texts of The Nights preserved in European libraries, were
unconsciously paying that learned and worthy man a very high compliment, since
the tales in question are among the best in his work and have ever been, and
probably will continue to be, among the most popular favourites. But that fact
that Galland seized the first opportunity of intimating that two of those
tales were not translated or inserted by himself ought to have been alone
amply sufficient presumptive evidence of his good faith with regard to the
others.

A friendly reviewer of my "Popular Tales and Fictions" etc. states that modern
collectors of European M„rchen, though "working from 100 to 150 years after
the appearance of the 'Thousand and One Nights,' in European literature, have
not found the special versions therein contained distributed widely and
profusely throughout Europe," and that my chapter on Aladdin is proof
sufficient that they have not done so. The reviewer goes on to say that I cite
"numerous variants, but, save one from Rome, variants of the theme, not of the
version; some again, such as the Mecklenburg and Danish forms, are more
primitive in tone; and all lack those effective and picturesque details which
are the charm of the Arabian story, and which a borrower only interested in
the story as a story might just be expected to retain.''[FN#385]

But it is not contended that the folk-tales of Europe owe much, if indeed
anything at all, to the "Arabian Nights," which is not only as it now exists a
comparatively modern work--Baron de Sacy has adduced good reasons for placing
the date of its composition in the middle of the 9th century of the Hijra, or
about 1446 A.D. but was first made known in Europe so late as the first
quarter of the last century. Several of the tales, and incidents of the tales,
in the "Thousand and One Nights" were current in Europe in the 12th century--
imported by the Moors of Spain, and by European travellers, pilgrims, and
minstrels from the East. Thus the Arabian tale of the Ebony (or Enchanted)
Horse is virtually identical with the Hispano-French romance of Cleomades and
Claremonde; that of Prince Kamar al Zaman is fairly represented by the romance
of Peter of Provence and the Fair Maguelone. The episode of Astolphy and
Joconde in Ariosto's "Orlando Furioso" is identical with the opening story of
The Nights which constitutes the frame of the collection.[FN#386] The Magnetic
Rock (or rock of adamant) which figures in the adventures of Sindbad occurs in
the popular German story of "Herzog Ernst von Baiern," which is extant in a
Latin poem that cannot be later than the 13th century and is probably a
hundred years earlier.[FN#387] The Valley of Diamonds in the History of
Sindbad is described by Marco Polo who travelled in the East in the 13th
century; moreover, it had been known in Europe from the 4th century, when the
story connected with it was related by Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis, who lays
the scene in Scythia, while Marco Polo and the author of Sindbad's Voyages
both place it in India, where the fiction probably had its origin

When we find a popular (i.e. oral) European tale reproduce the most minute
details of a story found in The Nights, we should conclude that it has been
derived therefrom and within quite recent times, and such I am now disposed to
think is the case of the Roman version of Aladdin given by Miss Busk under the
title of "How Cajusse was Married," notwithstandtng the circumstance that the
old woman from whom it was obtained was almost wholly illiterate. A child who
could read might have told the story out of Galland to his or her nurse,
through whom it would afterwards assume local colour, with some modifications
of the details. But stories having all the essential features of the tale of
Aladdin were known throughout Europe long before Galland's work was published,
and in forms strikingly resembling other Asiatic versions, from one of which
the Arabian tale must have been adapted. The incidents of the Magician and
Aladdin at the Cave, and the conveying of the Princess and the vazir's son
three nights in succession to Aladdin's house (which occurs, in modified
forms, in other tales in The Nights), I consider as the work of the Arabian
author. Stripped of these particulars, the elements of the tale are identical
in all versions, Eastern and Western: a talisman, by means of which its
possessor can command unlimited wealth, &c.; its loss and the consequent
disappearance of the magnificent palace erected by supernatural agents who are
subservient to the owner of the talisman, and finally its recovery together
with the restoration of the palace to its original situation. The Arabian tale
is singular in the circumstance of the talisman (the Lamp) being recovered by
human means--by the devices of the hero himself, in fact, since in all the
European and the other Asiatic forms of the story it is recovered by, as it
was first obtained from, grateful animals. To my mind, this latter is the
pristine form of the tale, and points to a Buddhist origin--mercy to all hying
creatures being one of the leading doctrines of pure Buddhism.

The space at my disposal does not admit of the reproduction in extenso of the
numerous versions or variants of Aladdin: a brief outline of their features
will however serve my purpose. In the tale of Maruf the Cobbler, which
concludes the Bulak and Calcutta printed texts of The Nights, we have an
interesting version of Aladdin. The hero runs away from his shrewish wife and
under false presences is married to a king's daughter. He confesses his
imposture to the princess, who loves him dearly, and she urges him to flee
from her father's vengeance and not to return until his death should leave the
throne vacant, and having furnished him with money, he secretly quits the city
at daybreak. After riding some distance, he begins to feel hungry, and seeing
a peasant ploughing a field he goes up to him and asks for some food. The
peasant sets off to his house for eatables and meanwhile Maruf begins to
plough a furrow, when presently the ploughshare strikes against something
hard, which he finds to be an iron ring. He tugs at the ring and raises a
slab, which discovers a number of steps, down which he goes and comes into a
cavern filled with gold and precious stones, and in a box made of a single
diamond he finds a talismanic ring, on placing which on his finger a monstrous
figure appears and expresses his readiness and ability to obey all his
commands. In brief, by means of this genie, the hero obtains immense wealth in
gold and jewels, and also rich merchandise, which enable him to return to the
city in the capacity of a merchant, which he had professed himself when he
married the princess. The vazir, who had from the first believed him to be an
arrant impostor, lays a plot with the King to worm out of him the secret of
his wealth, and succeeds so well at a private supper, when Maruf is elevated
with wine, that he obtains possession of the ring, summons the genie, and
causes him to carry both the King and Maruf into a far distant desert. He then
compels the other ministers and the people to acknowledge him as king, and
resolves to marry the princess. She temporises with him; invites him to sup
with her; plies him with wine, induces him to throw the ring into a corner of
the room, pretending to be afraid of the demon who is held captive in it; and
when he has become insensible (in plain English, dead drunk), she seizes the
ring, summons the genie, and commands him to secure the vazir and bring back
her father and husband, which he does "in less than no time." The vazir is of
course put to death, and the princess takes charge of the ring for the future,
alleging that neither the King nor her husband is to be trusted with the
custody of such a treasure.

Another Arabian version is found--as Sir Richard Burton points out, note 1, p.
119--in "The Fisherman's Son," one of the tales translated by Jonathan Scott
from the Wortley Montague MS. text of The Nights, where the hero finds a magic
ring inside a cock: like Aladdin, he marries the King's daughter and has a
grand palace built for him by the genii. The ring is afterwards disposed of to
a Jew, in the same manner as was the Lamp to the Magician, and the palace with
the princess is conveyed to a distant desert island. The fisherman's son takes
to flight. He purchases of a man who offered them for sale a dog, a cat, and a
rat, which turn out to be well-disposed magicians, and they recover the ring
from the Jew's mouth while he is asleep. The ring is dropped into the sea
accidentally while the animals are crossing it to rejoin their master, but is
brought to the hero by a fish which he had returned to the sea out of pity in
his fisherman days. The genie conveys the palace back again, and so on.--In a
Mongolian version ("Siddhi Kur") a young merchant parts with all his wares to
save a mouse, an ape, and a bear from being tortured to death by boys. One of
those creatures procures for him a wishing-stone, by means of which he has a
grand palace built and obtains much treasure. He foolishly exchanges his
talisman with the chief of a caravan for all their gold and merchandise, and
it is afterwards restored to him by the grateful and ingenious animals.--In a
Tamil version--referred to by Sir Richard, p. 30, note 2--which occurs in the
"Madanakamarajankadai," a poor wandering young prince buys a cat and a
serpent; at his mother's suggestion, he sets the serpent at liberty and
receives from his father a wishing ring. He gets a city built in the jungle--
or rather where the jungle was--and marries a beautiful princess. An old hag
is employed by another king to procure him the princess for his wife. She
wheedles herself into the confidence of the unsuspecting young lady, and
learning from her the properties of the ring, induces her to borrow it of her
husband for a few minutes, in order that she (the old trot) might apply it to
her head to cure a severe headache. No sooner has she got possession of the
ring than she disappears, and having delivered it to the other King, he
"thought" of the princess, and in the twinkling of an eye she is carried
through the air and set down before him. The ring is recovered by means of the
cat which the hero had fostered, and so on.

Sir Richard has referred to a number of Italian versions (p. 30, note 2),
which will be found epitomised in a most valuable and interesting paper, by my
late friend Mr. H. C. Coote, on the sources of some of M. Galland's Tales, in
the First Part of the Folk-Lore Record for 1880, and, in conclusion, I may
briefly glance at a few other European variants. Among those which not only
bear a close analogy one to another but also to the Asiatic versions cited
above are the following: No. 15 of M. Leger's French collection of Slav Tales
is a Bohemian version, in which the hero, Jenik, saves a dog, a cat, and a
serpent from being killed. From the serpent's father he gets an enchanted
watch (evidently a modern substitute for a talismanic stone, or ring), which
procures him a splendid palace and the King's daughter for his bride. But the
young lady, unlike the Princess Badr al-Badur with Aladdin, does not love
Jenik, and having learned from him the secret of his great wealth, she steals
the talisman and causes a palace to be built in the middle of the sea, where
she goes to live, after making Jenik's palace disappear. Jenik's faithful dog
and cat recover the talisman, which, as in the Arabian story of the
Fisherman's Son, is dropped in the sea while they are swimming back and
restored by a fish.--In No. 9 of M. and so "Comes Albanais" the hero saves a
serpent's life and gets in return a wishing-stone and so on. The talisman is
stolen by a rascally Jew on the night of the wedding, and the palace with the
princess is transported to the distant sea-shore. The hero buys a cat and
feeds it well. He and his cat arrive at the spot where the palace now stands,
and the cat compels the chief of a colony of mice to steal the talisman from
the Jew while he is asleep.--A popular Greek version in Hahn's collection
combines incidents found in Aladdin and in the versions in which grateful
animals play prominent parts: The hero rescues a snake which some boys are
about to kill and gets in reward from the snake's father a seal-ring, which he
has only to lick and a black man will present himself, ready to obey his
orders. As in Aladdin, the first use he makes of the talisman is to have his
mother's cupboard filled with dainty food. Then he bids his mother "go to the
King, and tell him he must give me his daughter in marriage." After many
objections, she goes to deliver her message to the King, who replies that if
her son build a castle larger than his, he shall have the princess to wife.
The castle is built that same night, and when the mother goes next morning to
require the King's performance of his promise, he makes a further stipulation
that her son should first pave the way between the two castles with gold. This
is done at once, and the King gives the hero his daughter. Here the
resemblance to the Aladdin story ceases and what follows (as well as what
precedes) is analogous to the other Asiatic forms. The princess has a black
servant of whom she is enamoured. She steals the ring and elopes with her
sable paramour to an island in the sea, where she has a castle erected by the
power of the ring. The black man sleeps with the ring under his tongue, but
the hero's dog takes the cat on his back and swims to the island; and the cat
contrives to get the ring and deliver it to her master, who straightway causes
the castle to be removed from the island, then kills the black man, and
afterwards lives happily with the princess.--In a Danish version (Prof.
Grundtvig's "Danske Folke„ventyr") a peasant gets from an aged man a
wishing-box, and henceforward lives in grand style. After his death the
steward and servants cheat his son and heir, so that in ten years he is ruined
and turned out of house and home. All the property he takes with him is an old
sheepskin jacket, in which he finds the wishing-box, which had been, unknown
to him, the cause of his father's prosperity. When the "slave" of the box
appears, the hero merely asks for a fiddle that when played upon makes
everybody who hears it to dance.[FN#388] He hires himself to the King, whose
daughter gives him, in jest, a written promise to marry him, in exchange for
the fiddle. The King, when the hero claims the princess, insists on her
keeping her promise, and they are married. Then follows the loss of the
wishing-box, as in the Greek version, only in place of a black man it is a
handsome cavalier who is the lady's paramour. The recovery of the box is
accomplished by very different means, and may be passed over, as belonging to
another cycle of tales.[FN#389]

It is perhaps hardly worth while to make a critical analysis of the tale of
Aladdin, since with all its gross inconsistencies it has such a hold of the
popular fancy that one would not wish it to be otherwise than it is. But it
must have occurred to many readers that the author has blundered in
representing the Magician as closing the Cave upon Aladdin because he refused
to give up the Lamp before he had been helped out. As the lad was not aware of
the properties of the Lamp, he could have had no object in retaining it for
himself, while the Magician in any case was perfectly able to take it by force
from him. And if he wished to do away with Aladdin, yet incur no
"blood-guiltiness" (see ante, p. 52 and note), he might surely have contrived
to send him down into the Cave again and then close it upon him. As to the
Magician giving his ring to Aladdin, I can't agree with Sir Richard in
thinking (p. 48, note 1) that he had mistaken its powers; this seems to me
quite impossible. The ring was evidently a charm against personal injury as
well as a talisman to summon an all-powerful and obedient genie. It was only
as a charm that the Magician placed it on Aladdin's finger, and, as the
Hindustani Version explains, he had in his rage and vexation forgot about the
ring when he closed the entrance to the Cave. It appears to me also
incongruous that the Lamp, which Aladdin found burning, should afterwards only
require to be rubbed in order to cause the genie to appear. One should have
supposed that the lighting of it would have been more natural or appropriate;
and it is possible that such was in the original form of the Aladdin version
before it was reduced to writing, since we find something of the kind in a
Mecklenburg version given in Grimm under the title of "Des blaue Licht." A
soldier who had long served his King is at last discharged without any pay. In
the course of his wanderings he comes to the hut of an old woman, who proves
to be a witch, and makes him work for her in return for his board and lodging.
One day she takes him to the edge of a dry well, and bids him go down and get
her the Blue Light which he would find at the bottom. He consents, and she
lets him down by a rope. When he has secured the Light he signals to the old
witch to draw him up, and when she has pulled him within her reach, she bids
him give her the Light, he refuses to do so until he is quite out of the well,
upon which she lets him fall to the bottom again. After ruminating his
condition for some time he bethinks him of his pipe, which is in his pocket--
he may as well have a smoke if he is to perish. So he lights his pipe at the
Blue Light, when instantly there appears before him a black dwarf, with a hump
on his back and a feather in his cap, who demands to know what he wants, for
he must obey the possessor of the Blue Light. The soldier first requires to be
taken out of the well, and next the destruction of the old witch, after which
he helps himself to the treasures in the hag's cottage, and goes off to the
nearest town, where he puts up at the best inn and gets himself fine clothes.
Then he determines to requite the King, who had sent him away penniless, so he
summons the Dwarf[FN#390] and orders him to bring the King's daughter to his
room that night, which the Dwarf does, and very early in the morning he
carries her back to her own chamber in the palace. The princess tells her
father that she has had a strange dream of being borne through the air during
the night to an old soldier's house. The King says that if it was not a dream,
she should make a hole in her pocket and put peas into it, and by their
dropping out the place where she was taken to could be easily traced. But the
Dwarf when he transports her the second night discovers the trick, and strews
peas through all the other streets, and the only result was the pigeons had a
rare feast. Then the King bids the princess hide one of her shoes in the
soldier's room, if she is carried there again. A search is made for the shoe
in every house the next day, and when it is found in the soldier's room he
runs off, but is soon caught and thrown into prison. In his haste to escape he
forgot to take the Blue Light with him. He finds only a ducat in his pocket,
and with this he bribes an old comrade whom he sees passing to go and fetch
him a parcel he had left at the inn, and so he gets the Blue Light once more.
He summons the Dwarf, who tells him to be of good cheer, for all will yet be
well, only he must take the Blue Light with him when his trial comes on. He is
found guilty and sentenced to be hung upon the gallows-tree. On his way to
execution he asks as a last favour to be allowed to smoke, which being
granted, he lights his pipe and the Dwarf appears. "Send," says the soldier--
"send all these people to the right about; as for the King, cut him into three
pieces." The Dwarf lays about him with a will, and soon makes the crowd
scuttle off. The King begs hard for his life, and agrees to let the soldier
have the princess for his wife and the kingdom afterwards.

Thus, it will be seen, popular tales containing all the essential elements of
the story of Aladdin are spread over Europe, though hardly any of the versions
was probably derived from it; and the conclusion at which I have arrived is
that those elements, or incidents have been time out of mind the common
property of European and Asiatic peoples, and that the tale of Aladdin may be
considered as an almost unique version. The Mecklenburg legend is the only
variant which has the incident of the Magician requiring the Lamp before
helping the hero out of the Cave and that of the transporting of the princess
from her palace to the hero's house during the night, but these are not, I
think, sufficient evidence that it was adapted from Galland.

The royal command that all shops are to be closed and everybody must keep
within doors while the Princess Badr al-Badur proceeds to the bath and
Aladdin's playing the part of Peeping Tom of Coventry occur in many Eastern
stories and find a curious analogue in the Adventures of Kurroglu, the
celebrated robber-poet, as translated by Dr. Alexander Chodzko m his "Popular
Poetry of Persia," printed for the Oriental Translation Fund, and copies of
that work being somewhat scarce, I daresay the story will be new to most of my
readers:

Listen now to the tale about the Princess Nighara, daughter of the Turkish
sultan Murad. In the neighbourhood of Constantinople lived a man who was known
there under the name of Belli Ahmad. One day the Princess Nighara went out for
a walk through the bazars of Constantinople. At the same time Kurroglu's fame
spread all over Turkey; everybody was telling stories about him, and all were
struck with wonder. The Princess Nighara's fond heart particularly was filled
with an ardent wish of seeing this extraordinary hero, and she often thought
in her mind, "O my God, when will you allow me to behold Kurroglu?" It
happened that while Belli Ahmad was taking a walk in the bazars of Istambul,
he looked and beheld on the platform of the building daroghs beating drums,
whilst all the inmates of the bazar, the workmen as well as the merchants,
were flying in a great hurry after having left their shops ajar. "Why are they
thus running;" inquired Belli Ahmad of a Turk. "Doss thou know nothing? Then
listen: Our king, Sultan Murad, is gone on a pilgrimage to Mecca. His son
Burji Sultan reigns until his father's return. He has a sister whose name is
the Princess Nighara. Every Friday she goes to pray in the great mosque. The
Sultan's will is that during the passage of the princess through the bazars,
no man should remain there, but that all the shops be left open. This is the
reason of this panic and flight. As soon as the princess has passed, the
merchants and workmen will return to their shops again."

Belli Ahmad said in his heart, "Thy name is Belli Ahmad, and shalt thou not
see this beautiful Princess Nighara? If not, thou art unworthy of the name of
Belli[FN#391] Ahmad " He then looked to the right and left and entered
stealthily into a greengrocer's shop enclosed within a few boards. The train
of the princess now appeared. First passed with their whips farashes and
yassals, who led the procession and were followed by eunuchs with canes of
office (chogan) in their hands. At last appeared the Princess Nighara,
surrounded by a score of waiting-women. She walked with a downcast countenance
in front of them, and bending her head towards the ground said to herself, "O
thou earth on which my foot is treading, I beseech thee, receive my
prayer!"[FN#392] Belli Ahmad saw and heard her through the chinks of the
boards behind which he sat concealed When Nighara saw the shop with vegetables
she wondered why it should be the only shop enclosed with boards whilst all
the other shops were standing open. She then said to her waiting-women, "What
is the reason of this? Whilst goldsmiths who possess a capital of a hundred
thousand tomans have left their shops open, how is it that this petty merchant
of vegetables, whose poor shop used always to be open, has shut it up to-day?
There must be something extraordinary in all this. Break down the enclosure,
my girls, and throw the boards aside."

Belli Ahmad heard, and his soul was on the point of making its exit. He threw
himself with his face downwards as if he was prostrated by a severe illness.
When her orders had been executed Nighara entered the shop. Perceiving a
fellow stretched out his whole length and embracing the floor with both hands,
she kicked him with her foot,[FN#393] exclaiming, "Who art thou that wallowest
in the dirt?" Belli Ahmad sprang to his feet and bowing to the Princess said,
"Lady, I am a stranger here. God preserve you from being in a strange land
anywhere! I saw that the merchants of the bazar were beaten and driven away,
and I was frightened. But what was I to do? If I should hide myself in some
rich shop I might be taken for a thief. I have therefore chosen this miserable
hovel, where nothing can be found except greens, onions, and mouldy biscuits.
And even if there were in it a few copper pieces, the owner at his departure
must have taken them away. Pardon me, Princess; my soul was at stake and I hid
myself."

Nighara inquired, "Stranger, what countryman art thou?" "I am a native of
Erzerum." "Hast thou seen in those parts the Castle of Chamley-bill?"[FN#394]
"Yes, lady, I have seen it." "In that valley lives a man named Kurroglu: didst
thou see him?" "O my Princess, I am one of his servants, I am a slave
purchased with his gold." "Canst thou delver him a letter from me?" "And
wherefore not, fairest? Thou hast only to write and entrust it to me." The
Princess Nighara immediately wrote a letter to Kurroglu with her own hand. And
what did she write? Here it is: "O thou who art called Kurroglu, the glory of
thy name has thrown a spell over the countries of Turkey. I have heard that
thou hast carried away Ayvaz from the town of Orfah. My name is Princess
Nighara, Sultan Murad's daughter. I tell thee, that thou mayest learn if thou
dost not know it, that for a long time I have felt an ardent desire of seeing
thee. If thou art distinguished by courage, come to Istambul and carry me
away."

And the bold Kurroglu, when he read the lady's billet, assumed the dress of a
Haji, gained access to the seraglio gardens on the presence that he was
entrusted with a private message to the Princess Nighara from her father the
Sultan, whom he had met on the road to Mecca, and carried the amorous young
lady to his fortress of Chamley-bill.--The story, together with the scene
between the princess and Kurroglu in the gardens and the palace, is, no doubt,
a true picture of the "ways" of Turkish ladies of high degree in former times,
and confirms much that Sir Richard has stated regarding Eastern women in his
notes to The Nights and his Terminal Essay.

                A VERY DIFFERENT SORT OF ALADDIN

figures in a story which in the first part bears some analogy to the
celebrated Arabian tale, and which occurs in an interesting little work, now
apparently forgotten, entitled "The Orientalist, or, Letters of a Rabbi (see
Vol. 16, App. 4). With Notes by James Noble, Oriental Master in the Scottish
Naval and Military Academy," Edinburgh, 1831. The substance of the story is as
follows (p. 118 ff.):

An aged Dervish falls ill in the house of a poor widow, who tends him with
great care, with which he is so touched that he offers to take charge of her
only son Abdallah. The good woman gladly consents, and the Dervish sets out
accompanied by his young ward, having intimated to his mother that they must
perform a journey which would last about two years. One day they arrived at a
solitary place, and the Dervish said to Abdallah, "My son, we are now at the
end of our journey. I shall employ my prayers to obtain from Allah that the
earth shall open and make an entrance wide enough to permit thee to descend
into a place where thou shalt find one of the greatest treasures that the
earth contains. Hast thou courage to descend into the subterranean vault?"
Abdallah swore he might depend upon his obedience and zeal. Then the Dervish
lighted a small fire, into which he cast a perfume; he read and prayed for
some moments, after which the earth opened, and he said to the young man,
"Thou mayest now enter. Remember that it is in thy power to do me a great
service, and that this is perhaps the only opportunity thou shalt ever have of
testifying to me that thou art not ungrateful. Do not let thyself be dazzled
by all the riches that thou shalt find there: think only of seizing upon an
iron candlestick with twelve branches, which thou shalt find close to the
door. That is absolutely necessary to me; come up immediately and bring it to
me."

Abdallah descended, and, neglecting the advice of the Dervish, filled his vest
and sleeves with the gold and jewels which he found heaped up in the vault,
whereupon the opening by which he had entered closed of itself. He had,
however, sufficient presence of mind to seize the iron candlestick, and
endeavoured to find some other means of escape from the vault. At length he
discovers a narrow passage, which he follows until he reaches the surface of
the earth, and looking about for the Dervish saw him not, but to his surprise
found that he was close to his mother's house. On showing his wealth to his
mother it all suddenly vanished. But the candlestick remained. He lighted one
of the branches, upon which a dervish appeared, and after turning round for an
hour, he threw down an asper (about 3 farthings) and vanished. Next night he
put a light in each of the branches, when twelve dervishes appeared, and after
continuing their gyrations an hour, each threw down an asper and vanished.

Thus Abdallah and his mother contrived to live for a time, till at length he
resolved to carry the candlestick to the Dervish, hoping to obtain from him
the treasure which he had seen in the vault. He remembered his name and city,
and on reaching his dwelling he found the Dervish living in a magnificent
palace with fifty porters at the gate. Quoth the Dervish, when Abdallah
appeared before him, "Thou art an ungrateful wretch! Hadst thou known the
value of the candlestick, thou wouldst never have brought it to me. I will
show thee its true use." Then the Dervish placed a light in each branch,
whereupon twelve dervishes appeared and began to whirl, but on his giving each
a blow with a cane in an instant they were changed into twelve heaps of
sequins, diamonds and other precious stones.

Ungrateful as Abdallah had shown himself, yet the Dervish gave him two camels
laden with gold and a slave, telling him he must depart the next morning.
During the night Abdallah stole the candlestick and placed it at the bottom of
one of his sacks. In the morning he took his leave of the generous Dervish and
set off. When about half a day's journey from his own city he sold the slave,
that there should be no witness to his former poverty and bought another in
his stead. Arriving home, he carefully placed his loads of treasure in a
private chamber, and then put a light in each branch of the candlestick, and
when the twelve dervishes appeared, as usual, he dealt each a blow with a
cane. But he had not observed that the Dervish employed his left hand, and he
had naturally used his right in consequence of which the twelve dervishes each
drew from under their robes a heavy club and beat him till he was nearly dead,
and then vanished, as did also the treasure, the camels, the slave, and the
wonder-working candlestick.

It is to be regretted that the author has not stated the sources whence he
drew his stories, but that they are without exception of Eastern extraction
does not admit of any doubt: some are taken from the "Panchatantra,"
"Hitopadesa," or "Anvar-i-Suhayli," and others are found in other Asiatic
story-books. I have however not met with the foregoing elsewhere than in
Noble's little volume. The beginning of the story is near akin to that of
Aladdin: for the wicked magician who pretends to take the tailor's son under
his care we have a dervish who in good faith takes charge of the son of a poor
widow who had nursed him through a severe illness. The cave scene is very
similar in both, only the magician performs diabolical incantations, while the
dervish practices "white magic" and prays to Allah for assistance. The
twelve-branched candlestick takes the place of the Wonderful Lamp. Like
Aladdin, young Abdallah is shut in the cavern, though not because he refused
to give up the candlestick until he was safe above ground again, but because
his cupidity induced him to pocket some of the treasures which filled the
cave.

There is a strong Indian--even Buddhistic--flavour in the story of Abdallah
and the Dervish, and the apparition of the twelve whirling fakirs, who when
struck with a cane held in the left hand fall into so many heaps of gold coin,
has its analogue in the "Hitopadesa" and also in the Persian Tales of a Parrot
("Tuti Nama"). The 10th Fable of Book iii. of the "Hitopadesa' goes thus: In
the city of Ayodhya (Oude) there was a soldier named Churamani, who, being
anxious for money, for a long time with pain of body worshipped the deity the
jewel of whose diadem is the lunar crescent.[FN#395] Being at length purified
from his sins, in his sleep he had a vision in which, through the favour of
the deity, he was directed by the lord of the Yakshas[FN#396] to do as
follows: 'Early in the morning, having been shaved, thou must stand, club in
hand, concealed behind the door of thy house; and the beggar whom thou seest
come into the court thou wilt put to death without mercy by blows of thy
staff. Instantly the beggar will become a pot full of gold, by which thou wilt
be comfortable the rest of thy life." These instructions being followed, it
came to pass accordingly. But the barber who had been brought to shave him,
having witnessed it all, said to himself, "O, is this the mode of gaining
treasure? Why, then, may not I also do the same?" From that day forward the
barber in like manner, with club in hand, day after day awaited the coming of
the beggar. One day a beggar being so caught was attacked by him and killed
with the stick, for which offence the barber himself was beaten by the King's
officers and died.

The same story is differently told, at greater length and with considerable
humour, in Nakhshabi's Parrot-Book, but the outline of it only can be given
here: A rich merchant named Abd-el-Malik resolved to give all his substance to
the poor and needy before he departed this life. At midnight an apparition
stood before him in the habit of a fakir and thus addressed him: "I am the
apparition of thy good fortune and the genius of thy future happiness.[FN#397]
When thou, with such unbounded generosity, didst bequeath all thy wealth to
the poor, I determined not to pass by thy door unnoticed, but to enrich thee
with an inexhaustible treasure, suitable to the greatness of thy capacious
soul. To accomplish which I will every morning in this shape appear to thee;
thou shalt strike me a few blows on the head, and I shall instantly fall at
thy feet, transformed into an image of gold. From this take as much as thou
shalt have occasion for; and every member that shall be separated from the
image shall instantly be replaced by another of the same precious
metal."[FN#398] In the morning a covetous neighbour named Hajm visited the
merchant, and soon after the apparition presented itself. Abd-el-Malik at once
arose and after striking it several blows on the head with a stick, it fell
down and was changed into an image of gold. He took what sufficed for the
day's needs and gave the larger portion to his visitor. When Hajm the covetous
returned to his own house he pondered what he had seen, and concluding it
would be as easy for him to convert fakirs into gold, invited to a feast at
his house all the fakirs of the province. When they had feasted to their
hearts' content, Hajm seized a heavy club and began to unmercifully belabour
his guests till he broke their heads and "the crimson torrent stained the
carpet of hospitality." The cries of the fakirs soon brought the police to
their assistance, and a great crowd of people gathered outside the house. Hajm
was immediately haled before the magistrate, and attempted to justify his
conduct by giving an account of what he had seen done in the house of
Abd-el-Malik. The merchant was sent for and declared Hajm to be mad, no better
proof of which could be desired than his treatment of the fakirs. So Hajm the
covetous was sent forthwith to the hospital for lunatics.







               Khudadad and His Brothers--p. 145.



Readers of The Nights must have observed that a large number of the tales
begin with an account of a certain powerful king, whose dominions were almost
boundless, whose treasury overflowed, and whose reign was a blessing to his
people; but he had one all-absorbing care--he had no son. Thus in the tale of
Khudadad we read that in the city of Harran there dwelt a sultan "of
illustrious lineage, a protector of the people, a lover of his lieges, a
friend of mankind, and renowned for being gifted with every good quality.
Allah Almighty had bestowed upon him all that his heart could desire, save the
boon of a child, for though he had lovely wives within his harem-door and
concubine