s galore [far too many, no doubt!], he had not been blessed with a
son," and so forth. This is the "regulation" opening of by far the greater
number of Asiatic stories, even as it was de rigueur for the old pagan Arab
poets to begin their kasidas with a lamentation for the departure of a fair
one, whether real or imaginary. The Sultan of our story is constantly
petitioning Heaven for the boon of a son (who among Easterns is considered as
the "light of the house"), and at length there appears to him in his slumbers
a comely man who bids him go on the morrow to his chief gardener and get from
him a pomegranate, of which he should eat as many seeds as he pleases, after
which his prayers for offspring should be granted. This remedy for barrenness
is very common in Indian fictions (to which I believe Khudadad belongs), only
it is usually the king's wives who eat the seeds or fruit.[FN#399] A few
parallels to the opening of our tale from Indian sources may prove somewhat
interesting, both to students of popular fictions and to those individuals who
are vaguely styled "general readers."

A Kashmiri tale, entitled "The Four Princes," translated by the Rev. J. Hinton
Knowles, in the "Indian Antiquary," 1886,[FN#400] thus begins: In days long
since gone by there lived a king most clever, most holy, and most wise, who
was a pattern king. His mind was always occupied with plans for the
improvement of his country and people; his darbar was open to all; his ear was
ever ready to listen to the petition of the humblest subject, he afforded
every facility for trade; he established hospitals for the sick, inns (sara'e)
for travellers, and large schools for those who wished to learn. These and
many other such things he did. Nothing was left undone that ought to be done,
and nothing was done that ought not to have been done. Under such a wise,
just, and beneficent ruler the people of course lived very happily. Few poor
or unenlightened or wicked persons were to be found in the country. But the
great and good king had not a son. This was an intense sorrow to him--the one
dark cloud that now and again overshadowed his otherwise happy and glorious
life. Every day he prayed earnestly to Siva to grant him an heir to sit upon
the throne after him. One day Siva appeared to him in the garb of a
yogi,[FN#401] and bade him ask a boon and it should be granted. "Take these
four fruits," said Siva, "and give them to your wife to eat on such a day
before sunrise. Then shall your wife give birth to four sons who will be
exceedingly clever and good." The king follows these instructions and in due
course his wife is delivered of four sons at one birth and thereupon dies. The
rest of the story is a variant of the Tamil romance "Alakesa Katha,''[FN#402]
and of "Strike, but hear!" in Rev. Lal Behari Day's "Folk-Tales of Bengal."

This is how the Tamil story of The Four Good Sisters begins ("Folk-Lore in
Southern India," Part iii., by Pandit S. M. Natesa Sastri[FN#403]): In the
town of Tanjai there reigned a king named Hariji, who was a very good and
charitable sovereign. In his reign the tiger and the bull drank out of the
same pool, the serpent and the peacock amused themselves under the same tree;
and thus even birds and beasts of a quarrelsome and inimical disposition lived
together like sheep of the same flock. While the brute creation of the great
God was thus living in friendship and happiness, need it be said that this
king's subjects led a life of peace and prosperity unknown in any other
country under the canopy of heaven? But for all the peace which his subjects
enjoyed, Hariji himself had no joy: his face was always drooping, his lips
never moved in laughter, and he was as sad as sad could be because he had no
son.--After trying in vain the distribution of charitable gifts which his
ministers and the priests recommended, the king resolves to retire into the
wilderness and there endeavour to propitiate Mahesvara [i.e. Siva], hoping
thus to have his desire fulfilled. He appoints his ministers to order the
realm during his absence, and doffing his royal robes clothes himself in the
bark of trees and takes up his abode in the desert. After practising the most
severe austerities for the space of three years, Siva, mounted on his bull,
with his spouse Parvati by his side, appears before the hermit, who is
overjoyed at the sight of the deity. Siva bids him ask any boon and it should
be granted. The royal ascetic desires to have a son. Then says Siva: "For thy
long penance we grant thy request. Choose then--a son who shall always be with
thee till death, but shall be the greatest fool in the whole world, or four
daughters who shall live with thee for a short time, then leave thee and
return before thy death, but who shall be the incarnation of learning. To thee
is left to choose which thou wilt have," and so saying, the deity gives him a
mango fruit for his wife to eat, and then disappears. The king elects to have
the four learned daughters, whose history is very entertaining.

Another tale in the Pandit's collection (No. 4) informs us that once upon a
time in a town named Vanjaimanagar there ruled a king named Sivachar. He was a
most just king and ruled so well that no stone thrown up fell down, no crow
pecked at the new-drawn milk, the lion and the bull drank water from the same
pond, and peace and prosperity reigned throughout the kingdom. Notwithstanding
all these blessings, care always sat on his face. His days and nights he spent
in praying that God might bless him with a son. Wherever he saw pipal trees he
ordered Brahmans to circumambulate them.[FN#404] Whatever medicines the
doctors recommended he was ever ready to swallow, however bitter they might
be. At last fortune favoured Sivachar; for what religious man fails to obtain
his desire? The king in his sixtieth year had a son, and his joy knew no
bounds.

In like fashion does the Persian "Sindibad Nama" begin: There reigned in India
a sage and mighty monarch, the bricks of whose palace were not of stone or
marble but of gold; the fuel of whose kitchen was fresh wood of aloes; who had
brought under the signet of his authority the kingdoms of Rum and Abyssinia;
and to whom were alike tributary the Ethiop Maharaj and the Roman Kaysar. He
was distinguished above all monarchs for his virtue clemency, and justice. But
although he was the refuge of the Khalifate, he was not blessed with an heir:
life and the world appeared profitless to him, because he had no fruit of the
heart in the garden of his soul. One night, while reclining on his couch, sad
and thoughtful, consumed with grief like a morning taper, he heaved a deep
sigh upon which one of his favourite wives (he had a hundred in his harem),
advancing towards him and kissing the ground, inquired the cause of his
distress. He discloses it. His wife consoles him, encourages him to hope, and
assures him that if he prayed, his prayers would be answered, but that at all
events it was his duty to be resigned to the will of God. "Prayer is the only
key that will open the door of difficulty." The king fasted for a whole week
and was assiduous in his devotions. One night he prayed with peculiar
earnestness and self-abasement till morning. The companion of his couch was
one of his wives, fairer than the sun and the envy of a pert. He clasped her
in his embrace, exclaiming, "There is no strength, no power, save in God!" and
he felt assured in his heart that his prayer was granted. In due time a son
was born to him, and, eager to show his gratitude, he bestowed munificent
gifts and lavished his treasures on all his subjects.

The seventh of Lal Behari Day's "Folk-Tales of Bengal" opens as follows: Once
on a time there reigned a king who had seven queens. He was very sad, for the
seven queens were all barren. A holy mendicant, however, one day told the king
that in a certain forest there grew a tree, on a branch of which hung seven
mangoes; if the king himself plucked those mangoes and gave one to each of the
queens they would all become mothers. So the king went to the forest, plucked
the seven mangoes that grew upon one branch, and gave a mango to each of the
queens to eat. In a short time the king's heart was filled with joy as he
heard that the seven queens were pregnant.--In Miss Stokes' "Indian Fairy
Tales,' p. 91, Raja Barbal receives from an ascetic 160 lichi fruits, one of
which he is to give to each of his 160 wives, who would have each a son.--
Similar instances occur in Steel and Temple's "Wide Awake Stories," from the
Panjab and Kashmir, pp. 47 and 290, and in Natesa Sastri's "Dravidian Nights'
Entertainments" (a translation of the Tamil romance entitled
"Madanakamarajankadai"), pp. 55, 56.--Among biblical instances of women having
offspring after being long barren are: Sarah, the wife of Abraham (Gen. ch.
xv. 2 4, xxi. 1, 2); Rachel, the wife of Jacob (Gen. ch. xxx., 1, 22, 23); and
Elisabeth, the wife of Zacharias, the high-priest, who were the parents of
John the Baptist (Luke, ch. i.). Whether children be a "blessing,"
notwithstanding all that has been said and sung about the exquisite joys of
paternity and maternity, is perhaps doubtful, generally speaking: one thing is
certain, that many an honest fellow has had too much cause to "wonder why the
devil he got an heir!"[FN#405]

Although no version or variant of the story of Khudadad and his Brothers has
yet been found besides the one in the Turkish collection "Al-Faraj ba'd
al-Shiddah," yet the elements of which it is composed occur in many European
and Asiatic tales. As we have in Galland a story of sisters who envied their
cadette, so, by way of justice to the "fair sex," we have likewise this tale
of envious brothers, which is a favourite theme of popular fictions, only in
the story of Khudadad, the brothers were not at first aware of the hero's
kinship to them, though they had been informed of it when they most
ungratefully cut and slashed him with their swords as he lay asleep by the
side of his beauteous bride the Princess of Daryabar.

Sometimes it is not a brother, or brothers, but a treacherous friend or a
secret, cowardly rival, who attempts the life of the hero and claims the
credit and reward for his bold achievement. Many examples must occur to
readers familiar with Icelandic, Norwegian, and German folk-tales which need
not here be cited. In the old French romance of the Chevalier Berinus and his
gallant son Aigres de l'Aimant, the King of Loquiferne is in love with the
Princess Melia, daughter of a king named Absalon, who would give her only to
the prince who should bring with him two knights prepared to combat with and
slay two fierce lions, or would attempt this feat himself. None of the barons
of the King of Loquiferne offering themselves for the adventure, Aigres
undertakes it very readily, and is accompanied by a knight named Acars, who
has charge of a casket of jewels destined for the princess as a wedding-gift.
Young Aigres encounters and kills the lions singlehanded, and the lily-livered
and faithless Acars envies him the glory of his exploit. On their way back to
Loquiferne with the Princess Melia, as they pass near a deep well Acars
purposely allows the casket of jewels to fall into it and pretends to be
distracted at the misfortune. But the gallant Aigres securing one end of his
horse's reins to the top of the well descends by this improvised rope, and
when he dives into the water to recover the casket the rascal Acars cuts the
reins and compels the princess and her maid to follow him. His triumph is
brief, however, for Melia and her maid are taken from him, without his
striking a blow in their defence, by a king who is in love with the princess.
Acars proceeds to the court of the King of Loquiferne and tells him how the
lady had been snatched out of his hands by a king who attacked him with a
great army while Aigres had fled like a craven. Meanwhile Aigres contrives to
get out of the well, and finds his steed and armour close by: he is fortunate
in rescuing the princess and her maid from the king who had taken them from
Acars, and arriving at the court of Loquiferne denounces Acars as a coward and
traitor, and the princess Melia confirms his assertions; so the carpet-knight
is for ever disgraced.

Another example not very generally known is found in the Urdu romance, "Gul-i
Bakawali:" When the hero, Taj al-Maluk, the youngest son of King Zayn
al-Maluk, is born, the astrologers cast his horoscope and predict that the
king will lose his sight as soon as he looks upon him. In order to prevent
such a calamity, the king causes the child and his mother to be placed in a
house far distant from the city, where Zayn al-Maluk grows up into a handsome,
courageous youth. By chance he meets his father, the king, while the latter is
hunting, and the king no sooner casts his eyes on the youth than he becomes
blind. The royal physicians tell him that only the Rose of Bakawali can
restore his sight, and the four other sons of the king set out together to
procure this wonderful flower. They fall victims to the wiles of a courtesan,
who wins all their money at play and ultimately imprisons them in her house.
In the meantime Taj al-Maluk has started on the same errand; he outwits the
courtesan, obtains the liberation of his brothers, and then journeys to
Jinnistan, where, by the help of a friendly demon, he plucks the Rose in the
garden of the beauteous fairy Bakawali, and retraces his way homeward. Meeting
with his four brothers on the road, he acquaints them of his success, and on
their doubting the virtue of the flower, it is applied to the eyes of a blind
man, and his sight is instantly restored. Upon this the brothers take the
flower from Taj al-Maluk by force and hasten with it to their father. But the
hero's friends the demons build for him a splendid palace, and the fame of his
wealth soon reaches the court of his father, who, with the four brothers and
the ministers of state, visits him, and after a great feast Taj al-Maluk makes
himself known to the king and relates the whole story of how he procured the
flower that had restored his sight. The king falls upon his son's neck and
weeps tears of joy, saying, "You have restored the light of my eyes by the
Rose of Bakawali, and by the sight of you the door of cheerfulness has been
opened in my sorrowful heart. It is incumbent on me to make known this
enlivening news to your mother, who has looked out for you with anxiety and I
must cause her, who has been afflicted with grief at your absence, to drink
the sherbet of the glad tidings of your safety." Then the king went to Taj
al-Maluk's mother, made many apologies for his ill treatment of her, exalted
her higher than she was previously, and gave her the joyful news of her son's
arrival. The remainder of the romance recounts the marvellous adventures of
the hero in fairyland, whither he proceeds to rejoin Bakawali, and where he
undergoes many strange transformations; but ultimately all is "merry as
marriage beds."--Nothing is said about the punishment or pardon of the
treacherous brothers, but doubtless in the original form of the story the hero
acted as generously towards them as did Khudadad when his father would have
put the forty brothers to death. It seems somewhat strange that after
Khudadad's brothers had killed him (as they believed) they did not take the
Princess Daryabar away with them, which generally happens in stories of this
kind.




       The Story of the Blind Man, Baba Abdullah--p. 178.



An incident in the Muhammedan version of the legend of the Seven Sleepers may
have furnished a hint for this well-told tale. When the evil-minded Dekianus
views the Hid Treasure, which he had covenanted with the aged man who read the
Tablet for him and conducted him to the spot should be equitably divided
betwixt them--when he had beheld with wonder and astonishment the incalculable
riches contained in the seven chambers, he says within himself, "And must I
share this with the old man?" Then he ponders and thinks, "Nay, but I will
give him a goodly portion ;" but finally he resolves to give him nothing--nay
more, to take away his life so that there should be none on earth besides
himself acquainted with the source of his wealth. In vain does the old man bid
him take all the treasure and swear that he will ever preserve the secret:
Dekianus smote him with his sword so that he died.

There is a tale in the Persian story-book "Shamsah wa Kahkahah" (also entitled
"Mahbub al-Kalub") which bears some analogy to the story of the Blind Man,
Baba Abdullah. A skilful geomancer is desired by a tradesman to cast his
horoscope. He does so, and informs the tradesman that he is to find a
treasure. The man is incredulous, but after the operation is repeated with the
same result at length becomes convinced of the accuracy of the geomancer's
calculations, locks his door, and forthwith they both begin to dig the floor.
They come upon a large stone which on removal is found to have covered a well.
The geomancer lowers the tradesman down it in a basket, which the latter fills
with gold and silver and precious stones, and it is drawn up by the geomancer.
When this has been repeated several times and the geomancer views the immense
quantity of glittering treasure heaped up beside him, covetous thoughts enter
his mind, and he determines to leave the tradesman to his fate at the bottom
of the well, take all the wealth for himself, and live in comfort and luxury
the rest of his days. Accordingly he does not again let the basket down, and
the poor tradesman, suspecting his iniquitous design, calls out piteously to
his perfidious friend, imploring him not to leave him there to perish, and
swearing that the treasure should be equally shared as between brothers. But
the covetous geomancer is deaf to his appeal, and begins to consider how the
treasure might be conveyed to his own house without attracting the notice of
any of the folk of the quarter, and in the midst of his cogitatious he falls
asleep. Now it happened that the poor tradesman had an enemy who had long
waited for an opportunity to do him a personal injury, and that very night he
came to the house, and by means of a rope with a hook which he fastened to the
wall he climbed on to the roof and descended into the place where the
geomancer was sleeping. The man, mistaking him for the tradesman, seized the
geomancer and with a sharp awl pierced his eyes, blinding him for ever. But,
having thus effected his revenge as he thought, in groping his way out of the
house he stumbled into the well and broke his foot. The tradesman, taking him
for the geomancer, come for more gold, upbraided him for his insatiable
avarice, and the man, in his turn, supposing him to have been thrown into the
well by the tradesman, replied, "Be satisfied; I have punished him who cast
you into this place," but as he began to howl from the pain of his broken
foot, the tradesman knew that he was not the geomancer. Next morning the
tradesman's son arrives from a long trading journey, with much gold and
merchandise and many slaves. On entering his father's house he is astounded to
perceive the open well and by the side of it a vast heap of treasure and a man
holding both hands to his eyes and wailing bitterly, lamenting the
covetousness which had caused him the loss of his eyesight. The young man
sends a slave down into the well and the first person drawn up is the
tradesman, who is both surprised and overjoyed to behold his son once more,
and tells him the whole story. His enemy is then taken out and is dismayed to
find that he has blinded the wrong man. Both the geomancer and the tradesman's
enemy are pardoned, but the latter dies soon after, while the geomancer
retires to a cave in the mountains, where every morning and evening two small
loaves are thrown in to him by an unknown hand, and during the rest of his
life he never ceased to repeat this distich:

          If you possess one barley grain of justice,
          You will never have half a grain of sorrow.

But much more closely resembling the story of Baba Adbullah is a tale in the
Persian romance which recounts the imaginary adventures of Hatim Ta'i. A blind
man is confined in a cage which is suspended from a branch of a tree, and
constantly exclaims, "Do evil to none; if you do, evil will overtake you."
Hatim having promised to mend his condition and relieve him, he relates his
history as follows:

"I am by occupation a merchant, and my name is Hamir. When I became of age my
father had finished the building of this city, and he called the same after my
name. Shortly after, my father departed on a sea-voyage, and left me in charge
of the city. I was a free hearted and social young man, and so in a short time
expended all the property left under my care by my father. Thus I became
surrounded with poverty and want, and as I knew that my father had hidden
treasures somewhere in the house, I resolved to discover them if possible. I
searched everywhere, but found nothing, and, to complete my woe, I received
the news of my father's death, the ship in which he sailed being wrecked.

"One day as I was sauntering, mournful and dejected, through the bazar, I
espied a learned man who cried out, 'If any one has lost his money by theft or
otherwise, my knowledge of the occult sciences enables me to recover the same,
but on condition that I receive one fourth of the amount.' When I heard this
seasonable proclamation, I immediately approached the man of science, and
stated to him my sad condition and how I had been reduced from affluence to
poverty. The sage undertook to restore my wealth, and above all to discover
the treasures concealed in my father's house. I conducted him to the house and
showed him every apartment, which he carefully examined one after another. At
length by his art he discovered the stores we were in search of; and when I
saw the gold and silver and other valuables, which exceeded calculation, the
demon of fraud entered my heart, and I refused to fulfil my promise of giving
a fourth of the property to the man of wisdom. I offered him only a few small
pieces of silver; instead of accepting which, he stood for a few moments in
silent meditation, and with a look of scorn said, 'Do I thus receive the
fourth part of your treasure which you agreed to give me? Base man, of what
perjury are you guilty?' On hearing this I became enraged, and having struck
him several blows on the face, I expelled him from my house. In a few days
however he returned. and so far ingratiated himself into my confidence that we
became intimate friends; and night and day he displayed before my sight the
various hidden treasures contained within the bowels of the earth. One day I
asked him to instruct me in this wonderful science, to which he answered that
no instruction was requisite. 'Here,' said he, 'is a composition of surma and
whoever applies the same to his eyes, to him will all the wealth of this world
become visible.'[FN#406] 'Most learned sir,' I replied, 'if you will anoint
mine eyes with this substance I promise to share with you the half of all such
treasures as I may discover.' 'I agree,' said my friend; 'meanwhile let us
retire to the desert, where we shall be free from interruption.'

"We immediately set out, and when we arrived there I was surprised at seeing
this cage and asked my companion whose it was. I received for answer, that it
belonged to no one. In short, we both sat down at the foot of this tree, and
the sage, having produced the surma from his pocket, began to apply it to my
eyes. But, alas! no sooner had he applied this composition than I became
totally deprived of sight. In a voice of sorrow I asked him why he had thus
treated me, and he replied, 'Such is the reward of treachery; and if you wish
to recover your sight, you must for some time undergo penance in this cage.
You must utter no complaint and you shall exclaim from time to time, 'Do no
evil to any one; if you do, evil will befall you.' I entreated the sage to
relieve me, saying, 'You are a mere mortal like myself, and dare you thus
torment a fellow-creature? How will you account for your deeds to the Supreme
Judge?' He answered, 'This is the reward of your treachery.' Seeing him
inexorable, I begged of him to inform me when and how my sight was to be
restored, and he told me, that a noble youth should one day visit me, and to
him I was to make known my condition, and farther state, that in the desert of
Himyar there is a certain herb called the Flower of Light, which the youth was
to procure and apply to my eyes, by means of which my sight should be
restored."

When the man in the cage had ended his story, the magnanimous Hatim bade him
be of good cheer, for he would at once endeavour to relieve him. By the aid of
the fairies, who carry him through the air for the space of seven days, he
arrives in the desert where the Flowers of Light shine brilliant as lamps on a
festival night, diffusing the sweetest perfume far and wide; and recking
naught for the serpents, scorpions, and beasts of prey which infested the
place (for he had a talisman that protected him), he advances and plucks three
of the largest and most brilliant flowers. Returning in the same manner as he
had gone thither, he reaches the spot where the blind man Hamir is imprisoned;
taking down the cage, he releases the wretched man, compresses the stalk of
the flower so that the juice drops upon his sightless eyeballs, and when this
has been repeated three times Hamir opens his eyes, and seeing Hatim falls
prostrate at his feet with a profusion of thanks.

Although there are some differences in the details of the story of Baba
Abdullah and that of Hamir, as above, yet the general similarity between them
is sufficient to warrant the conclusion that if one was not adapted from the
other, both must have been derived from the same source; and here we have, I
think, clear evidence of the genuineness of another of the tales which Galland
was believed to have invented himself.




                History of Sidi Nu'man--p. 187.



It is curious to find this current as a folk-tale at Palena, in the Abruzzi,
without any material variation except in the conclusion. My friend, Mr. E.
Sidney Hartland, has favoured me with the following abstract of the Italian
version, as given in vol. iii. of the "Archivio per lo studio delle Tradizioni
Popolari" (Palermo, 1882), p. 222:

There was once a husband and wife. The wife says that she cannot eat anything,
and only picks a few grains of rice with a large pin. Her husband asks why she
eats nothing, and she answers that she does not want to eat. Meantime she goes
out secretly every night, and the husband begins to have suspicions of her.
One night he follows her softly and finds she goes to the burial ground, where
she meets with certain female companions. They open a grave and feed on the
flesh of the dead. The next morning the husband cooks rice again, and the wife
picks up a few grains of it with a pin as before. The husband exclaims, "What!
you enjoy the flesh of dead men, and over rice you are so finical as to eat it
with a pin!" The wife is so enraged at learning that her husband knows of her
doings that she goes to the water-bucket, fills a small bottle from it, and
having muttered certain words over the water flings it upon him and he
instantly becomes transformed into a dog. A provision merchant sees him
running about, and takes and sets him on his counter. When the people come to
buy provisions the dog examines the money to see if it be good, and the false
coin he throws on the ground. One day a man comes to buy bacon and offers
false coin. The provision merchant refuses to take it; they dispute over the
matter, and it is referred to the dog, who throws the money on the ground. The
man is astonished, and returning home tells his wife, who at once says that
the dog is not a dog, and desires her husband to bring her the animal that she
may see it. The man returns to the provision merchant and begs him to lend him
the dog for a little while, and takes it home. The wife, who is a companion of
the wife of him who has been changed into a dog, and understands witchcraft,
fills a bottle with water, pronounces certain words over it, and throws the
water upon the dog, who immediately becomes a man again, and she advises him
to do to his wife as she had done to him, and imparts the secret to him. As
soon as he returns home he fills the bottle with water from the bucket, says
the words he had learned, and throws the water over his wife, who becomes a
mare. He drives her out of the house and beats her as flax is beaten. To every
one who asks why he is thrashing the mare he tells his story, and the people
say, "Serve her right!" This goes on for some time. At last, when the husband
sees that his wife has voided enough foam from the mouth, with another dash of
water he changes her back to her proper form, and henceforward she eats
whatever is set before her, obeys her husband in all things, and never goes
out by night again. So they live long, happy and contented.

This version from the Abruzzi so closely resembles the story of Sidi Nu'man
that we should perhaps be justified in concluding it to have been directly
derived from Galland's Nights, in the absence of any Venetian version, which
might well have been imported independently from the East, but however this
may be, the story in Galland bears unquestionable internal evidence that it is
a genuine Arabian narrative, having nothing peculiarly European in its
details.

A somewhat similar story is quite familiar to me, but I cannot at present call
to mind whether it occurs in a Persian collection or in The Nights, in which
the woman going out when she thinks her husband asleep, the latter follows her
to a hut at some distance which she enters, and peeping into the hut, he sees
a hideous black give her a severe beating for not coming sooner, while she
pleads that she could not venture to quit the house until her husband was
sound asleep. The two carouse together, and by-and-by the black going outside
for a purpose, the husband strikes off his head with his sword and then
conceals himself close by. The woman, after waiting some time, goes out to see
what is detaining her paramour, and finding his headless body, she moans over
it in great sorrow, and then taking the corpse on her back carries it away and
throws it into the river. Her husband hastens home before her, and so she
suspects nothing. Some days after, when she refuses to do some light work
because of her physical weakness, her husband can no longer control himself,
and tells her that she had strength enough to carry on her back the body of
her black paramour, and so on.[FN#407]

The ghoul-wife of Arabian tales, who eats little or nothing at home, has her
in the rakshasi of Indian fictions, who secretly devours antelopes, etc. There
are many parallels in The Nights and other Asiatic story-books to the incident
of Sidi Nu'man being changed back into his proper form, the most noteworthy
being perhaps the case of the Second Calender in the shape of a monkey, or
ape, whom the princess, an adept in white magic, at once recognizes as a man
and veils her face, as does the young woman in the case of Sidi Nu'man: but
while the Calender is restored to his own form, the princess, alas! perishes
in her encounter with the genie who had transformed him.--In most of the
Arabian tales of magical transformations of men and women into beasts the
victims are ultimately restored to their natural forms, but in the Indian
romance of the princess Somasekhara and Chitrasekhara, a wicked king named
Ugrabahu is permanently changed by some water taken from a magic fountain into
a monkey and sold to a beggar, who compels him to perform tricks in public for
his benefit. Heywood, in his "History of Women" (Book viii.), cites some
curious European stories of men being transformed into donkeys by eating a
certain kind of cheese,





          History of Khwajah Hasan Al-habbal--p. 198.



How this entertaining story found its way into North Germany--and nowhere else
in Europe, so far as I am aware--it is not easy to say, but its twin-brother
seems to be orally current there, in all essential details, excepting the
marvellous conclusion. For the poor ropemaker, however, a struggling weaver
and for the two gentlemen, Sa'd and Sa'di, three rich students are
substituted. There does not appear (according to the version given by Thorpe
in his "Yule Tide Stories," which he entitles, not inaptly, The Three Gifts)
to be any difference of opinion among the students regarding the influence of
Destiny, or Fate, upon men's fortunes: they simply give the poor weaver a
hundred dollars "to assist him in his housekeeping." The weaver hides the
money in a heap of rags, unknown to his wife, who sells them to a
rag-collector for a trifling sum. A year afterwards the students are again
passing the house of the weaver and find him poorer than ever. He tells them
of his mishap and they give him another hundred dollars warning him to be more
careful with the money this time. The weaver conceals the dollars in the
ash-tub, again without the cognisance of his wife, who disposes of the ashes
for a few pieces of soap. At the end of the second year the students once more
visit the wretched weaver, and on being informed of his loss, they throw a bit
of lead at his feet, saying it's of no use to give such a fool money, and go
away in a great huff. The weaver picks up the lead and places it on the window
sill. By-and-by a neighbour, who is a fisherman, comes in and asks for a bit
of lead or some other heavy thing, for his net, and on receiving the lead
thrown down by the students promises to give him in return the first large
fish he catches. The weaver does get a fine fish, which he immediately cuts
open, and finds in its stomach a "large stone," which he lays on the
window-sill, where, as it becomes dark, the stone gives forth a brighter and
brighter light, "just like a candle," and then he places it so that it
illuminates the whole apartment. "That's a cheap lamp," quoth he to his wife:
"wouldst not like to dispose of it as thou didst the two hundred dollars?" The
next evening a merchant happening to ride past the weaver's house perceives
the brilliant stone, and alighting from his horse, enters and looks at it,
then offers ten dollars for it, but the weaver says the stone is not for sale.
"What! not even for twenty dollars?" "Not even for that." The merchant keeps
on increasing his offers till he reaches a thousand dollars, which was about
half its real value, for the stone was a diamond, and which the weaver
accepts, and thus he becomes the richest man in all the village. His wife,
however, took credit to herself for his prosperity, often saying to him, "How
well it was that I threw away the money twice, for thou hast me to thank for
thy good luck!"--and here the German story ends. For the turban of the
ropemaker and the kite that carried it off, with its precious lining, we have
the heap of rags and the rag-collector; but the ashes exchanged for soap
agrees with the Arabian story almost exactly.

The incident of the kite carrying off the poor ropemaker's turban in which he
had deposited the most part of the gold pieces that he received from the
gentleman who believed that "money makes money"--an unquestionable fact, in
spite of our story--is of very frequent occurrence in both Western and Eastern
fictions. My readers will recollect its exact parallel in the abstract of the
romance of Sir Isumbras, cited in Appendix to the preceding volumes: how the
Knight, with his little son, after the soudan's ship has sailed away with his
wife, is bewildered in a forest, where they fall asleep, and in the morning at
sunrise when he awakes, an eagle pounces down and carries off his scarlet
mantle, in which he had tied up his scanty store of provisions together with
the gold he had received from the soudan; and how many years after he found it
in a bird's nest (Supp. Nights, vol. ii. p. 260 and p. 263).--And, not to
multiply examples, a similar incident occurs in the "Katha Sarit Sagara," Book
ix. ch. 54, where a merchant named Samudrasura is shipwrecked and contrives to
reach the land, where he perceives the corpse of a man, round the loins of
which is a cloth with a knot in it. On unfastening the cloth he finds in it a
necklace studded with jewels. The merchant proceeds towards a city called
Kalasapuri, carrying the necklace in his hand. Overpowered by the heat, he
sits down in a shady place and falls asleep. The necklace is recognised by
some passing policemen as that of the king's daughter, and the merchant is at
once taken before the king and accused of having stolen it. While the merchant
is being examined, a kite swoops down and carries off the necklace. Presently
a voice from heaven declares that the merchant is innocent, explains how the
necklace came into his possession, and orders the king to dismiss him with
honour. This celestial testimony in favour of the accused satisfies the king,
who gives the merchant much wealth and sends him on his way. The rest of the
story is as follows: "And after he had crossed the sea, he travelled with a
caravan, and one day, at evening time, he reached a wood. The caravan encamped
in the wood for the night, and while Samudrasura was awake a powerful host of
bandits attacked it. While the bandits were massacring the members of the
caravan, Samudrasura left his wares and fled, and climbed up a banyan-tree
without being discovered. The host of bandits departed, after they had carried
off all the wealth, and the merchant spent that night there, perplexed with
fear and distracted with grief. In the morning he cast his eves towards the
top of the tree, and saw, as fate would have it, what looked like the light of
a lamp, trembling among the leaves. And in his astonishment he climbed up the
tree and saw a kite's nest, in which there was a heap of glittering priceless
jewelled ornaments. He took them all out of it, and found among the ornaments
that necklace which he had found in Svarnadvipa and the kite had carried off.
He obtained from that nest unlimited wealth, and descending from the tree, he
went off delighted, and reached in course of time his own city of Harshapura.
There the merchant Samudrasura remained, enjoying himself to his heart's
content, with his family, free from the desire of any other wealth."

There is nothing improbable--at all events, nothing impossible--in the History
of Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal. That he should lose the two sums of money in the
manner described is quite natural, and the incidents carry with them the
moral: "Always take your wife into your confidence" (but the Khwajah was a
Muslim), notwithstanding the great good luck which afterwards befell, and
which, after all, was by mere chance. There is nothing improbable in the
finding of the turban with the money intact in the bird's nest, but that this
should occur while the Khwajah's benefactors were his guests is--well, very
extraordinary indeed! As to the pot of bran--why, some little license must be
allowed a story-teller, that is all that need be said! The story from
beginning to end is a most charming one, and will continue to afford pleasure
to old and young--to "generations yet unborn."




             Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves--p.219
                                


I confess to entertaining a peculiar affection for this tale. It was the first
of the tales of the "Arabian Nights Entertainments" which I read in the days
of my "marvelling boyhood" eheu! fugaces, &c, etc. I may therefore be somewhat
prejudiced in its favour, just as I still consider Scott's "Waverley" as the
best of his long series of fascinating fictions, that being the first of them
which I read--as it was the first he wrote. But "All Baba and the Forty
Thieves"--the "open, sesame!" "shut, sesame!"--the sackfuls of gold and silver
and the bales of rich merchandise in the robbers' cave--the avaricious brother
forgetting the magical formula which would open the door and permit him to
escape with his booty--his four quarters hung up in terrorem--and above all,
the clever, devoted slave girl Morgiana, who in every way outwitted the crafty
robber-chief,--these incidents remain stamped in my memory ineffaceably: like
the initials of lovers' names cut into the bark of a growing tree, which, so
far from disappearing, become larger by the lapse of time. To me this
delightful tale will ever be, as Hafiz sings of something, "freshly fresh and
newly new." I care not much though it never be found in an Arabic or any other
Oriental dress--but that it is of Asiatic invention is self-evident; there is,
in my poor opinion nothing to excel it, if indeed to equal it, for intense
interest and graphic narrative power in all The Nights proper.

Sir Richard Burton has remarked, in note 1, p. 219, that Mr. Coote could only
find in the south of Europe, or in the Levant, analogues of two of the
incidents of this tale, yet one of those may be accepted as proof of its
Eastern extraction, namely, the Cyprian story of "Three Eyes," where the ogre
attempts to rescue his wife with a party of blacks concealed in bales: "The
King's jester went downstairs, in order to open the bales and takes something
out of them. Directly he approached one of the sacks, the black man answered
from the inside,'Is it time, master?' In the same manner he tried all the
sacks, and then went upstairs and told them that the sacks were full of black
men. Directly the King's bride heard this, she made the jester and the company
go downstairs. They take the executioner with them, and go to the first sack.
The black man says from the inside, 'Is it time ?' 'Yes,' say they to him, and
directly he came out they cut his head off. In the same manner they go to the
other sacks and kill the other black men.''[FN#408]

The first part of the tale of Ali Baba--ending with the death of his greedy
brother--is current in North Germany, to this effect:

A poor woodcutter, about to fell a beech at the back of the scattered ruins of
the castle of Dummburg, seeing a monk approach slowly through the forest, hid
himself behind a tree. The monk passed by and went among the rocks. The
woodcutter stole cautiously after him and saw that he stopped at a small door
which had never been discovered by the villagers. The monk knocks gently and
cries, "Little door, open!" and the door springs open. He also cries, "Little
door, shut!" and the door is closed. The woodcutter carefully observes the
place, and next Sunday goes secretly and obtains access to the vault by the
same means as that employed by the monk. He finds in it "large open vessels
and sacks full of old dollars and fine guilders, together with heavy gold
pieces, caskets filled with jewels and pearls, costly shrines and images of
saints, which lay about or stood on tables of silver in corners of the vault."
He takes but a small quantity of the coin, and as he is quitting the vault a
voice cries, "Come again!" First giving to the church, for behoof of the poor,
a tenth of what he had taken, he goes to the town and buys clothes for his
wife and children, giving out to his neighbours that he had found an old
dollar and a few guilders under the roots of a tree that he had felled. Next
Sunday he again visits the vault, this time supplying himself somewhat more
liberally from the hoard, but still with moderation and discretion, and "Come
again!" cries a voice as he is leaving. He now gives to the church two tenths,
and resolves to bury the rest of the money he had taken in his cellar. But he
can't resist a desire to first measure the gold, for he could not count it. So
he borrows for this purpose a corn-measure of a neighbour--a very rich but
penurious man, who starved himself, hoarded up corn, cheated the labourer of
his hire, robbed the widow and the orphan, and lent money on pledges. Now the
measure had some cracks in the bottom, through which the miser shook some
grains of corn into his own heap when selling it to the poor labourer, and
into these cracks two or three small coins lodged, which the miser was not
slow to discover. He goes to the woodcutter and asks him what it was he had
been measuring. "Pine-cones and beans. But the miser holds up the coins he had
found in the cracks of the measure, and threatens to inform upon him and have
him put to the question if he will not disclose to him the secret of his
money. So the woodcutter is constrained to tell him the whole story and much
against his will, but not before he had made the miser promise that he would
give one-tenth to the church, he conducts him to the vault. The miser enters,
with a number of sacks, the woodcutter waiting outside to receive them when
filled with treasure. But while the miser is gloating over the enormous wealth
before him--even "wealth beyond the dreams of avarice"--a great black dog
comes and lays himself down on the sacks. Terrified at the flaming eyes of the
dog, the miser crept towards the door but in his fear forgot the proper words,
and instead of saying, "Little door, open!" he cried!, "Little door, shut!"
The woodcutter, having waited a long time, approached the door, and knocking
gently and crying "Little door, open!" the door sprang open and he entered.
There lay the bleeding body of his wicked neighbour, stretched on his sacks,
but the vessels of gold and silver, and diamonds and pearls, sank deeper and
deeper into the earth before his eyes, till all had completely
vanished.[FN#409]

The resemblance which this North German tale bears to the first part of "All
Baba" is striking, and is certainly not merely fortuitous; the fundamental
outline of the latter is readily recognisable in the legend of The Dummburg,
notwithstanding differences in the details. In both the hero is a poor
woodcutter, or faggot-maker; for the band of robbers a monk is substituted in
the German legend, and for the "open, sesame" and "shut, sesame," we have
"little door, shut," and "little door, open." In both the borrowing of a
corn-measure is the cause of the secret being revealed--in the one case, to
Kasim, the greedy brother of Ali Baba and in the other, to a miserly old
hunks; the fate of the latter and the disappearance of all the treasure are
essentially German touches. The subsequent incidents of the tale of Ali Baba,
in which the main interest of the narrative is concentrated;--Ali Baba's
carrying off the four quarters of his brother's body and having them sewed
together, the artifices by which the slave-girl checkmates the robber-chief
and his followers in their attempts to discover the man who had learned the
secret of the treasure-cave--her marking all the doors in the street and her
pouring boiling oil on the robbers concealed in the oil-skins in the
courtyard;--these incidents seem to have been adapted, or imitated, from some
version of the world-wide story of the Robbery of the Royal Treasury, as told
by Herodotus, of Rhampsinitus, King of Egypt, in which the hero performs a
series of similar exploits to recover the headless body of his brother and at
the same time escape detection. Moreover, the conclusion of the tale of Ali
Baba, where we are told he lived in comfort and happiness on the wealth
concealed in the robbers' cave, and "in after days he showed the hoard to his
sons and his sons' sons, and taught them how the door could be caused to open
and shut"--this is near akin to the beginning of Herodotus' legend of the
treasury: the architect who built it left a stone loose, yet so nicely
adjusted that it could not be discovered by any one not in the secret, by
removing which he gained access to the royal stores of gold, and having taken
what he wanted replaced the stone as before; on his deathbed he revealed the
secret to his two sons as a legacy for their future maintenance. The discovery
of Ali Baba's being possessed of much money from some coins adhering to the
bottom of the corn-measure is an incident of very frequent occurrence in
popular fictions; for instance, in the Icelandic story of the Magic Queen that
ground out gold or whatever its possessor desired (Powell and Magnusson's
collection, second series); in the Indian tale of the Six Brothers (Vernieux's
collection) and its Irish analogue "Little Fairly;" in the modern Greek
popular tale of the Man with Three Grapes (Le Grand's French collection), and
a host of other tales, both Western and Eastern. The fate of Ali Baba's rich
and avaricious brother, envious of his good luck, finds also many
parallels--mutatis mutandis--as in the story of the Magic Queen, already
referred to, and the Mongolian tale of the poor man and the Dakinis, the 14th
relation of Siddhi Kur. Morgiana's counter-device of marking all the doors in
the street, so that her master's house should not be recognised, often occurs,
in different forms: in my work on Popular Tales and Fictions, vol. ii. pp.
164, 165, a number of examples are cited. The pretended merchant's objecting
to eat meat cooked with salt, which fortunately aroused Morgiana's suspicions
of his real character for robber and murderer as he was, he would not be
"false to his salt''[FN#410]--recalls an anecdote related by D'Herbelot, which
may find a place here, in conclusion: The famous robber Yacub bin Layth,
afterwards the founder of a dynasty of Persian monarchs called Soffarides, in
one of his expeditions broke into the royal palace and having collected a
large quantity of plunder, was on the point of carrying it off when his foot
struck against something which made him stumble. Supposing it not to be an
article of value, he put it to his mouth, the better to distinguish it. From
the taste he found it was a lump of salt, the symbol and pledge of
hospitality, on which he was so touched that he retired immediately without
carrying away any part of his booty. The next morning the greatest
astonishment was caused throughout the palace on the discovery of the
valuables packed up and ready for removal. Yacub was arrested and brought
before the prince, to whom he gave a faithful account of the whole affair, and
by this means so ingratiated himself with his sovereign that he employed him
as a man of courage and ability in many arduous enterprises, in which he was
so successful as to be raised to the command of the royal troops, whose
confidence in and affection for their general induced them on the prince's
death to prefer his interest to that of the heir to the throne, from whence he
afterwards spread his extensive conquests.

                      * * * * * * * * * *

Since the foregoing was in type I discovered that I had overlooked another
German version, in Grimm, which preserves some features of the Arabian tale
omitted in the legend of The Dummburg:

There were two brothers, one rich, the other poor. The poor brother, one day
wheeling a barrow through the forest, had just come to a naked looking
mountain, when he saw twelve great wild men approaching, and he hid himself in
a tree, believing them to be robbers. "Semsi mountain, Semsi mountain, open!"
they cried, and the mountain opened, and they went in. Presently they came
out, carrying heavy sacks. "Semsi mountain, Semsi mountain, shut thyself!"
they cried; and the mountain closed and they went away. The poor man went up
then and cried. "Semsi mountain Semsi mountain, open!" the mountain opens, he
goes in, finds a cavern full of gold, silver, and jewels, fills his pockets
with gold only, and coming out cries, "Semsi mountain, Semsi mountain, shut
thyself!" He returns home and lives happily till his gold is exhausted. Then
"he went to his brother to borrow a measure that held a bushel, and brought
himself some more." This he does again, and this time the rich brother smears
the inside of the bushel with pitch and when he gets it back finds a gold coin
sticking to it, so he taxes his poor brother with having treasure and learns
the secret. Off he drives, resolved to bring back, not gold, but jewels. He
gets in by saying, "Semsi mountain, Semsi mountain, open!" He loads himself
with precious stones, but has forgotten the word, and cries only, "Simeli
mountain, Simeli mountain, open!" The robbers return and charge him with
having twice stolen 