from them. He vainly protests, "It was not I " and they
cut his head off.

Here the twelve wild men represent the forty robbers, and, as in Ali Baba, it
is the hero's brother who falls a victim to his own cupidity. In the Arabian
tale the hero climbs up into a tree when he sees the robbers approach, in The
Dummburg he hides himself behind a tree to watch the proceedings of the monk;
and in Grimm's version he hides in a tree. On this last-cited story W. Grimm
has the following note: "It is remarkable that this story, which is told in
the province of Munster, is told also in the Hartz, about The Dummburg, and
closely resembles the Eastern story of 'The Forty Thieves,' where even the
rock Sesam, which falls open at the words Semsi and Semeli, recalls the name
of the mountain in the German saga. This name for a mountain is, according to
a document in Pistorius (3, 642), very ancient in Germany. A mountain in
Grabfeld is called Similes and in a Swiss song a Simeliberg is again
mentioned. This makes us think of the Swiss word 'Sine!,' for 'sinbel,' round.
In Meier, No. 53, we find 'Open, Simson.' In Prohle's 'Marcher fur die
Jugend,' No. 30, where the story is amplified, it is Simsimseliger Mountain.
There is also a Polish story which is very like it." Dr. Grimm is mistaken in
saying that in the Arabian tale the "rock Sesam" falls open at the words Semsi
and Semeli: even in his own version, as the brother finds to his cost, the
word Simeli does not open the rock. In Ali Baba the word is "Simsim" (Fr.
Sesame), a species of grain, which the brother having forgot, he cries out
"Barley." The "Open, Simson" in Meier's version and the "Semsi" in Grimm's
story are evidently corruptions of "Simsim," or "Samsam," and seem to show
that the story did not become current in Germany through Galland's work.

Dr. N. B. Dennys, in his "Folk-Lore of China, and its Affinities with that of
the Aryan and Semitic Races," p. 134, cites a legend of the cave Kwang-sio-foo
in Kiang-si, which reflects part of the tale of Ali Baba: There was in the
neighbourhood a poor herdsman named Chang, his sole surviving relative being a
grandmother with whom he lived. One day, happening to pass near the cave, he
overheard some one using the following words: "Shih mun kai, Kwai Ku hsen
sheng lai," Stone door, open; Mr. Kwai Ku is coming. Upon this the door of the
cave opened and the speaker entered. Having remained there for some time he
came out, and saying, "Stone door, close; Mr. Kwai Ku is going," the door
again opened and the visitor departed. Chang's curiosity was naturally
excited, and having several times heard the formula repeated, he waited one
day until the genie (for such he was) had taken his departure and essayed to
obtain an entrance. To his great delight the door yielded, and having gone
inside he found himself in a romantic grotto of immense extent. Nothing
however in the shape of treasure met his eye, so having fully explored the
place he returned to the door, which shut at his bidding, and went home. Upon
telling his grandmother of his adventure she expressed a strong wish to see
the wonderful cavern; and thither they accordingly went together the next day.
Wandering about in admiration of the scenery, they became separated, and Chang
at length, supposing that his grandmother had left, passed out of the door and
ordered it to shut. Reaching home, he found to his dismay that she had not yet
arrived. She must of course have been locked up in the cave, so back he sped
and before long was using the magic sentence to obtain access. But alas! the
talisman had failed, and poor Chang fell into an agony of apprehension as he
reflected that his grandmother would either be starved to death or killed by
the enraged genie. While in this perplexity the genie appeared and asked him
what was amiss. Chang frankly told him the truth and implored him to open the
door. This the genie refused to do, but told him that his grandmother's
disappearance was a matter of fate. The cave demanded a victim. Had it been a
male, every succeeding generation of his family would have seen one of its
members arrive at princely rank. In the case of a woman her descendants would
in a similar way possess power over demons. Somewhat comforted to know that he
was not exactly responsible for his grandmother's death, Chang returned home
and in process of time married. His first son duly became Chang tien shih
(Chang, the Master of Heaven), who about A.D. 25 was the first holder of an
office which has existed uninterruptedly to the present day.




        Ali Khwajah and the Merchant of Baghdad--p. 246.



Precocious Children.--See note at end of the Tale, p. 256.--In the
(apocryphal) Arabic Gospel of the Saviour's Infancy is the following passage:

"Now in the month of Adar, Jesus, after the manner of a King, assembled the
boys together. They spread their clothes on the ground and he sat down upon
them. Then they put on his head a crown made of flowers, and like
chamber-servants stood in his presence, on the right and on the left, as if he
was a king. And whoever passed by that way was forcibly dragged by the boys,
saying, 'Come hither and adore the king; then go away.'"

A striking parallel to this is found in the beginning of the Mongolian Tales
of Ardshi Bordshi--i.e., the celebrated Indian monarch, Raja Bhoja, as given
in Miss Busk's "Sagas from the Far East," p. 252.

"Long ages ago there lived a mighty king called Ardshi Bordshi.[FN#411] In the
neighbourhood of his residence was a hill where the boys who were tending the
calves were wont to pass the time by running up and down. But they had also
another custom, and it was that whichever of them won the race was king for
the day--an ordinary game enough, only that when it was played in this place
the Boy-King thus constituted was at once endowed with such extraordinary
importance and majesty that everyone was constrained to treat him as a real
king. He had not only ministers and dignitaries among his playfellows, who
prostrated themselves before him, and fulfilled all his behests, but whoever
passed that way could not choose but pay him homage also."[FN#412]

This is followed by an analogous story to that of Ah Khwajah and the Merchant
of Baghdad, under the title of "The False Friend," in which a merchant on a
trading journey entrusts a friend with a valuable jewel to give to his wife on
his return home, and the friend retaining it for his own use suborns two men
to bear witness that they saw him deliver it to the merchant's wife, so the
King dismisses the suit. But the Boy-King undertakes to try the case de novo;
causes the two witnesses to be confined in separate places, each with a piece
of clay which he is required to make into the form of the jewel, and the
models are found to be different one from the other, and both from the shape
of the jewel as described by the false friend. A similar story occurs in
several Indian collections, with a Kazi instead of the Boy-King.

A curious instance of precocity is related in the Third Book of the "Masnavi"
(see ante p. 365), of which Mr. E. H. Whinfield gives an outline in his
admirable and most useful abridgment of that work: The boys wished to obtain a
holiday, and the sharpest of them suggested that when the master came into
school each boy should condole with him on his alleged sickly appearance.
Accordingly, when he entered, one said, "O master, how pale you are looking!
and another said, You are looking very ill to-day, and so on. The master at
first answered that there was nothing the matter with him, but as one boy
after another continued assuring him that he looked very ill, he was at length
deluded into imagining that he must really be ill. So he returned to his
house, making the boys follow him there, and told his wife that he was not
well, bidding her mark how pale he was. His wife assured him he was not
looking pale, and offered to convince him by bringing a mirror, but he refused
to look at it, and took to his bed. He then ordered the boys to begin their
lessons; but they assured him that the noise made his head ache, and he
believed them, and dismissed them to their homes, to the annoyance of their
mothers.

Another example of juvenile cleverness is found in a Persian collection of
anecdotes entitled "Lata'yif At-Taw'ayif," by 'Ali ibn Husain Al-Va'iz
Al-Kashifi: One day Nurshirvan saw in a dream that he was drinking with a frog
out of the same cup. When he awoke he told this dream to his vazir, but he
knew not the interpretation of it. The king grew angry and said, "How long
have I maintained thee, that if any difficulty should arise thou mightest
unloose the knot of it, and if any matter weighed on my heart thou shouldst
lighten it? Now I give thee three days, that thou mayest find out the meaning
of this dream, and remove the trouble of my mind; and if, within that space,
thou art not successful, I will kill thee." The vazir went from the presence
of Nurshirvan confounded and much in trouble. He gathered together all the
sages and interpreters of dreams, and told the matter to them, but they were
unable to explain it; and the vazir resigned his soul to death. But this story
was told in the city, and on the third day he heard that there was a mountain,
ten farsangs distant from the city, in which was a cave, and in this cave a
sage who had chosen the path of seclusion, and lived apart from mankind, and
had turned his face to the wall. The vazir set out for this place of
retirement, saying to himself, "Perhaps he will be able to lay a plaster on my
wound, and relieve it from the throbbings of care." So he mounted his horse,
and went to find the sage. At the moment he arrived at the hill a company of
boys were playing together. One of them cried out with a loud voice, "The
vazir is running everywhere in search of an interpreter, and all avails him
nothing; now the interpretation of the dream is with me, and the truth of it
is clear to me." When these words reached the ears of the vazir he drew in the
reins, and calling the boy to him asked him, "What is thy name? He replied,
"Buzurjmibr." The vazir said "All the sages and interpreters have failed in
loosing the knot of this difficulty--how dost thou, so young in years, pretend
to be able to do it? He replied, "All the world is not given to every one."
The vazir said, "If thou speakest truth, explain." Said the boy "Take me to
the monarch, that I may there unloose the knot of this difficulty." The vazir
said, "If thou shouldst fail, what then will come of it?" The boy replied, "I
will give up my own blood to the king, that they may slay me instead of thee."
The vazir took the boy with him, returned, and told the whole matter to the
king and produced the boy in his presence. The king was very angry, and said,
"All the wise men and dream interpreters of the court were unable to satisfy
me, and thou bringest me a child, and expectest that he shall loose the knot
of the difficulty." The vazir bowed his head. And Buzurjmihr said, "Look not
upon his youth, but see whether he is able to expound the mystery or not." The
king then said, "Speak." He replied, "I cannot speak in this multitude." So
those who were present retired, and the monarch and the youth were left alone.
Then said the youth, "A stranger has found entrance into thy seraglio, and is
dishonouring thee, along with a girl who is one of thy concubines." The king
was much moved at this interpretation, and looked from one of the wise men to
another, and at length said to the boy, "This is a serious matter thou hast
asserted; how shall this matter be proceeded in, and in what way fully known?"
The boy replied, "Command that every beautiful woman in thy seraglio pass
before thee unveiled, that the truth of this matter may be made apparent." The
king ordered them to pass before him as the boy had said, and considered the
face of each one attentively. Among them came a young girl extremely
beautiful, whom the king much regarded. When she came opposite to him, a
shuddering as of palsy, fell upon her, and she shook from head to foot, so
that she was hardly able to stand. The king called her to him, and threatening
her greatly, bade her speak the truth. She confessed that she loved a handsome
slave and had privately introduced him into the seraglio. The king ordered
them both to be impaled, and turning to the rewarding of Buzurjmihr, he made
him the object of his special bounty.

This story has been imported into the "History of the Seven Wise Masters of
Rome," the European form of the Book of Sindibad, where the prince discovers
to his father the paramour of his step-mother, the empress, in the person of a
young man disguised as one of her maid-servants, and its presence in the work
is quite inconsistent with the lady's violent lust after the young prince.
There is a similar tale in the Hebrew version, "Mishle Sandabar," but the
disguised youth is not detected. Vatsyayana, in his "Kama Sutra" (or Aphorisms
of Love), speaks of it as a common practice in India thus to smuggle men into
the women's apartments in female attire. In the Introduction to the "Katha
Sarit Sagara," Vararuchi relates how King Yogananda saw his queen leaning out
of a window and asking questions of a Bahman guest that was looking up. That
trivial circumstance threw the king into a passion, and he gave orders that
the Brahman should be put to death) for jealousy interferes with discernment.
Then as that Brahman was being led off to the place of execution in order that
he should be put to death, a fish in the market laughed aloud, though it was
dead. The king hearing it immediately prohibited for the present the execution
of the Brahman, and asked Vararuchi the reason why the fish laughed. He
desired time to think over the matter and learned from the conversation of a
rakshasi with her children that the fish said to himself, "All the king's
wives are dissolute, for in every part of his harem there are men dressed up
as women, and nevertheless while those escape, an innocent Brahman is to be
put to death;" and this tickled the fish so that he laughed. Mr. Tawney says
that Dr. Liebrecht, in "Orient und Occident," vol. i. p. 341, compares this
story with one in the old French romance of Merlin. There Merlin laughs
because the wife of Julius Caesar had twelve young men disguised as
ladies-in-waiting. Benfey, in a note on Liebrecht's article, compares with the
story of Merlin one by the Countess d'Aulnois, No. 36 of Basile's
"Pentamerone," Straparola, iv. 1, and a story in the "Suka Saptati." In this
some cooked fish laugh so that the whole town hears them; the reason being the
same as in the above story and in that of Merlin. In a Kashmiri version, which
has several other incidents and bears a close resemblance to No. 4 of M.
Legrand's "Recueil de Contes Populaires Grecs," to the story of "The Clever
Girl" in Professor T. F. Crane's "Italian Popular Tales," and to a fable in
the Talmud, the king requires his vazir to inform him within six months why
the fish laughed in presence of the queen. The vazir sends his son abroad
until the king's anger had somewhat cooled--for himself he expects nothing but
death. The vazir's son learns from the clever daughter of a farmer that the
laughing of the fish indicates that there is a man in the palace unknown to
the king. He hastens home and tells his father the secret, who at once
communicates it to the king. All the female attendants in the palace are
called together and ordered to jump across the mouth of a pit which he has
caused to be dug: the man would betray his sex in the trial. Only one person
succeeded and he was found to be a man.[FN#413] Thus was the queen satisfied,
and the faithful old vazir saved, and his son, of course, married the farmer's
clever daughter.




            Prince Ahmad and the Peri Banu--p. 256.



How, in the name of all that is wonderful--how has it happened that this
ever-delightful tale is not found in any text of The Nights? And how could it
be supposed for a moment that Galland was capable of conceiving such a tale--
redolent, as it is, of the East and of Fairyland? Not that Fairyland where
"True Thomas," otherwise ycleped Thomas the Rymer, otherwise Thomas of
Erceldoune, passed several years in the bewitching society of the Fairy Queen,
years which appeared to him as only so many moments: but Eastern Fairyland,
with all its enchanting scenes; where priceless gems are as plentiful as
"autumnal leaves which strong the brooks in Vallombrosa;" where, in the royal
banqueting hall, illuminated with hundreds of wax candles, in candelabra of
the finest amber and the purest crystal are bands of charming damsels, fairest
of form and feature, who play on sweet- toned instruments which discourse
heart-ravishing strains of melody;--meanwhile the beauteous Peri Banu is
seated on a throne adorned with diamonds and rubies and emeralds, and pearls
and other gems, and by her side is the thrice-happy Prince Ahmad, who feels
himself amply indemnified for the loss of his fair cousin Princess
Nur-en-Nihar. Auspicious was that day when he shot the arrow which the
enamoured Peri Banu caused to be wafted through the air much farther than arm
of flesh could ever send the feathered messenger! And when the Prince feels a
natural longing to visit his father in the land of mortals from time to time,
behold the splendid cavalcade issue from the portals of the fairy palace--the
gallant jinn-born cavaliers, mounted on superb steeds with gorgeous housings,
who accompany him to his father's capital. But alas! the brightest sky is
sooner or later overcast--human felicity is--etc., etc. The old king's mind is
poisoned against his noble son by the whisperings of a malignant and envious
minister--a snake in the grass--a fly in the ointment of Prince Ahmad's
beatitude! And to think of the old witch gaining access to the fairy palace--
it was nothing less than an atrocity! And the tasks which she induces the king
to set Prince Ahmad to perform--but they are all accomplished for him by his
fairy bride. The only thing to regret--the fatal blemish in the tale--is the
slaughter of the old king. Shabbar did right well to dash into the smallest
pieces the wicked vazir and the foul witch and all who aided and abetted them,
but "to kill a king!" and a well-meaning if soft-headed king, who was, like
many better men, led astray by evil counsellors!

Having thus blown off the steam--I mean to say, having thus ventilated the
enthusiasm engendered by again reading the tale of Prince Ahmad and the Peri
Banu, I am now in a fitter frame of mind for the business of examining some
versions and variants of it, for though the tale has not yet been found in
Arabic, it is known from the banks of Ganga to the snow-clad hills and vales
of Iceland--that strange land whose heart is full of the fiercest fires. This
tale, like that of Zayn al-Asnam, comprises two distinct stories, which have
no necessary connection, to wit, (1) the adventures of the Three Princes, each
in quest of the rarest treasure, wherewith to win the beautiful Princess
Nur-en-Nihar; and (2) the subsequent history of the third Prince and the Peri
Banu. The oldest known form of the story concludes with the recovery of the
lady--not from death's door, but from a giant who had carried her off, and the
rival claims of the heroes to the hand of the lady are left undecided:
certainly a most unsatisfactory ending, though it must be confessed the case
was, as the priest found that of Paddy and the stolen pullet, somewhat
"abstruse." In the "Vetalapanchavinsati," or Twenty-five Tales of a Vampyre
(concerning which collection see Appendix to the preceding volumes, p. 230),
the fifth recital is to this purpose:

There was a Brahman in Ajjayini (Oojein) whose name was Harisvamin; he had a
son named Devasvamin and a daughter far famed for her wondrous beauty and
rightly called Somaprabha (Moonlight). When the maiden had attained
marriageable age, she declared to her parents that she was only to be married
to a man who possessed heroism, or knowledge, or magic power. It happened soon
after this that Harisvamin was sent by the king on state business to the
Dekkan, and while there a young Brahman, who had heard the report of
Somaprabha's beauty, came to him as a suitor for the hand of his daughter.
Harisvamin informed him of the qualifications which her husband must possess,
and the Brahman answered that he was endowed with magic power, and having
shown this to the father's satisfaction, he promised to give him his daughter
on the seventh day from that time. In like manner, at home, the son and the
wife of Harisvamin had, unknown to each other, promised Somaprabha to a young
man who was skilled in the use of missile weapons and was very brave, and to a
youth who possessed knowledge of the past, the present, and the future; and
the marriage was also fixed to take place on the seventh day. When Harisvamin
returned home he at once told his wife and son of the contract he has entered
into with the young Brahman, and they in their turn acquainted him of their
separate engagements, and all were much perplexed what course to adopt in the
circumstances.

On the seventh day the three suitors arrived, but Somaprabha was found to have
disappeared in some inexplicable manner. The father then appealed to the man
of knowledge, saying, "Tell me where my daughter is gone?" He replied, "She
has been carried off by a rakshasa to his habitation in the Vindhya forest."
Then quoth the man of magic power "Be of good cheer, for I will take you in a
moment where the possessor of knowledge says she is." And forthwith he
prepared a magic chariot that could fly through the air, provided all sorts of
weapons, and made Harisvamin, the man of knowledge, and the brave man enter it
along with himself, and in a moment carried them to the dwelling of the
rakshasa. Then followed a wonderful fight between the brave man and the
rakshasa, and in a short time the hero cut off his head, after which they took
Somaprabha into the chariot and quickly returned to Harisvamin's house. And
now arose a great dispute between the three suitors. Said the man of
knowledge, "If I had not known where the maiden was how could she have been
discovered?" The man of magic argued, "If I had not made this chariot that can
fly through the air, how could you all have come and returned in a moment?"
Then the brave man said, "If I had not slain the rakshasa, how could the
maiden have been rescued?" While they were thus wrangling Harisvamin remained
silent, perplexed in mind. The Vampyre, having told this story to the King,
demanded to know to whom the maiden should have been given. The King replied,
"She ought to have been given to the brave man; for he won her by the might of
his arm and at the risk of his life, slaying that rakshasa in combat. But the
man of knowledge and the man of magic power were appointed by the Creator to
serve as his instruments." The perplexed Harisvamin would have been glad, no
doubt, could he have had such a logical solution of the question as this of
the sagacious King Trivikramasena--such was his six-syllabled name.

The Hindi version ("Baytal Pachisi") corresponds with the Sanskrit, but in the
Tamil version the father, after hearing from each of the three suitors an
account of his accomplishments, promises to give his daughter to "one of
them." Meanwhile a giant comes and carries off the damsel. There is no
difference in the rest of the story.

In the Persian Parrot-Book ("Tuti Nama" ) where the tale is also found
[FN#414]--it is the 34th recital of the loquacious bird in the India Office
MS. No. 2573, the 6th in B. Gerrans' partial translation, 1792, and the 22nd
in Kaderi's abridgment--the first suitor says that his art is to discover
anything lost and to predict future events; the second can make a horse of
wood which would fly through the air; and the third was an unerring archer.

In the Persian "Sindibad Nama," a princess, while amusing herself in a garden
with her maidens, is carried away by a demon to his cave in the mountains. The
king proclaims that he will give his daughter in marriage to whoever should
bring her back. Four brothers offer themselves for the undertaking: one is a
guide who has travelled over the world; the second is a daring robber, who
would take the prey even from the lion's mouth; the third is a brave warrior;
and the fourth is a skilful physician. The guide leads the three others to the
demons' cave, the robber steals the damsel while the demon is absent; the
physician, finding her at death's door, restored her to perfect health; while
the warrior puts to flight a host of demons who sallied out of the cave.

The Sanskrit story has undergone a curious transformation among the Kalmuks.
In the 9th Relation of Siddhi Kur (a Mongolian version of the Vampyre Tales)
six youths are companions: an astrologer, a smith, a doctor, a mechanic, a
painter, and a rich man's son. At the mouth of a great river each plants a
tree of life and separates, taking different roads, having agreed to meet
again at the same spot, when if the tree of any of them is found to be
withered it will be a token that he is dead. The rich man's son marries a
beautiful girl, who is taken from him by the Khan, and the youth is at the
same time put to death by the Khan's soldiers and buried under a great rock.
When the four other young men meet at the time and place appointed they find
the tree of the rich youth withered. Thereupon the astrologer by his art
discovers where the youth is buried; the smith breaks the rock asunder; the
physician restores the youth to life, and he tells them how the Khan had
robbed him of his wife and killed him. The mechanic then constructs a flying
chariot in the form of Garuda--the bird of Vishnu; the counterpart of the
Arabian rukh--which the painter decorates, and when it is finished the rich
youth enters it and is swiftly borne through the air to the roof of the Khan's
dwelling, where he alights. The Khan, supposing the machine to be a real
Garuda, sends the rich youth's own wife to the roof with some food for it.
Could anything have been more fortunate? The youth takes her into the wooden
Garuda and they quickly arrive at the place where his companions waited for
his return. When they beheld the marvellous beauty of the lady the five
skilful men instantly fell in love with her, and began to quarrel among
themselves, each claiming the lady as his by right, and drawing their knives
they fought and slew one another. So the rich youth was left in undisputed
possession of his beautiful bride.

Coming back to Europe we find the primitive form of the story partly preserved
in a Greek popular version given in Hahn's collection: Three young men are in
love with the same girl, and agree to go away and meet again at a given time,
when he who shall have learned the best craft shall marry the girl. They meet
after three years' absence. One has become a famous astronomer; the second is
so skilful a physician that he can raise the dead, and the third can run
faster than the wind. The astronomer looks at the girl's star and knows from
its trembling that she is on the point of death. The physician prepares a
medicine which the third runs off with at the top of his speed, and pours it
down the girl's throat just in time to save her life--though, for the matter
of that, she might as well have died, since the second suitor was able to
resuscitate the dead!

But the German tale of the Four Clever Brothers, divested of the preliminary
incidents which have been brought into it from different folk-tales, more
nearly approaches the form of the original, as we may term the Sanskrit story
for convenience' sake: A poor man sends his four sons into the world, each to
learn some craft by which he might gain his own livelihood. After travelling
together for some time they came to a place where four roads branched off and
there they separated, each going along one of the roads, having agreed to meet
at the same spot that day four years. One learns to be an excellent astronomer
and, on quitting, his master gives him a telescope,[FN#415] saying, "With this
thou canst see whatever takes place either on earth or in heaven, and nothing
can remain concealed from thee." Another becomes a most expert thief. The
third learns to be a sharpshooter and gets from his master a gun which would
never fail him: whatever he aimed at he was sure to hit. And the youngest
becomes a very clever tailor and is presented by his master with a needle,
which could sew anything together, hard or soft. At the end of the four years
they met according to agreement, and returning together to their father's
house, they satisfied the old man with a display of their abilities Soon after
this the king's daughter was carried off by a dragon, and the king proclaimed
that whoever brought her back should have her to wife. This the four clever
brothers thought was a fine chance for them, and they resolved to liberate the
king's daughter. The astronomer looked through his telescope and saw the
princess far away on a rock in the sea and the dragon watching beside her.
Then they went and got a ship from the king, and sailed over the sea till they
came to the rock, where the princess was sitting and the dragon was asleep
with his head in her lap. The hunter feared to shoot lest he should kill the
princess. Then the thief crept up the rock and stole her from under the dragon
so cleverly that the monster did not awake. Full of joy, they hurried off with
her and sailed away. But presently the dragon awoke and missing the princess
flew after them through the air. Just as he was hovering above the ship to
swoop down upon it, the hunter shot him through the heart and he tumbled down
dead, but falling on the vessel his carcase smashed it into pieces. They laid
hold of two planks and drifted about till the tailor with his wonderful needle
sewed the planks together, and then they collected the fragments of the ship
which the tailor also sewed together so skilfully that their ship was again
sea-worthy, and they soon got home in safety. The king was right glad to see
his daughter and told the four brothers they must settle among themselves
which of them should have her to wife. Upon this they began to wrangle with
one another. The astronomer said, "If I had not seen the princess, all your
arts would have been useless, so she is mine." The thief claimed her, because
he had rescued her from the dragon; the hunter, because he had shot the
monster; and the tailor, because he had sewn the ship together and saved them
all from drowning. Then the king decreed: "Each of you has an equal right, and
as all of you cannot have her, none of you shall; but I will give to each as a
reward half a kingdom," with which the four clever brothers were well
contented.

The story has assumed a droll form among the Albanians, in which no fewer than
seven remarkably endowed youths play their parts in rescuing a king's daughter
from the Devil, who had stolen her out of the palace. One of the heroes could
hear far off; the second could make the earth open; the third could steal from
any one without his knowing it; the fourth could throw an object to the end of
the world; the fifth could erect an impregnable tower; the sixth could bring
down anything however high it might be in the air and the seventh could catch
whatever fell from any height. So they set off together, and after travelling
along way, the first lays his ear to the ground. "I hear him," he says. Then
the second causes the earth to open, and down they go, and find the Devil
sound asleep, snoring like thunder, with the princess clasped to his breast.
The third youth steals her without waking the fiend. Then the fourth takes off
the Devil's shoes and flings them to the end of the world, and off they all go
with the princess. The Devil wakes and goes after them, but first he must find
his shoes--though what need he could have for shoes it is not easy to say; but
mayhap the Devil of the Albanians is minus horns, hoof and tail! This gives
the fifth hero time to erect his impregnable tower before the fiend returns
from the end of the world. When he comes to the tower he finds all his skill
is naught, so he has recourse to artifice, which indeed has always been his
forte. He begs piteously to be allowed one last look of his beloved princess.
They can't refuse him so slight a favour, and make a tiny hole in the tower
wall, but, tiny as it is, the Devil is able to pull the princess through it
and instantly mounts on high with her. Now is the marksman's opportunity: he
shoots at the fiend and down he comes, "like a hundred of bricks" (as we don't
say in the classics), at the same time letting go the princess, who is
cleverly caught by the seventh hero, and is none the worse for her aerial
journey. The princess chooses the seventh for her husband, as he is the
youngest and best looking, but her father the king rewards his companions
handsomely and all are satisfied.

The charming history of Prince Ahmad and his fairy bride is "conspicuous from
its absence" in all these versions, but it re-appears in the Italian
collection of Nerucci: "Novelle Popolari Montalesi," No. xl., p. 335, with
some variations from Galland's story:

A certain king had three daughters, and a neighbouring king had three sons,
who were much devoted to the chase. They arrived at the city of the first
king, and all fell in love with his daughter[FN#416] and wanted to marry her.
Her father said it was impossible to content them all, but if one of them
would ask her, and if he pleased her, he would not oppose the marriage. They
could not agree which it was to be, and her father proposed that they should
all travel, and the one who at the end of six months brought the most
beautiful and wonderful present should marry her. They set out in different
directions and at the end of six months they meet by appointment at a certain
inn. The eldest brings a magic carpet on which he is wafted whithersoever he
will. (It goes a hundred miles in a day.) The second brings a telescope which
shows whatever is happening a hundred miles away. The youngest brings three
stones of a grape, one of which put into the mouth of a person who is dying
restores him to life. They at once test the telescope by wishing to see the
princess, and they find her dying--at the last gasp indeed. By means of the
carpet they reach the palace m time to save her life with one of the
grape-stones. Each claims the victory. Her father, almost at his wits' end to
decide the question, decrees that they shall shoot with the crossbow, and he
who shoots farthest shall win the princess. The second brother shoots farther
than the first; but the youngest shoots so far that they cannot find where
kits arrow has fallen. He persists in the search and falls down a deep hole,
from the bottom of which he can scarcely see a speck of the sky. There an ogre
(mago) appears to him and also a bevy of young fairy maidens of extreme
beauty. They lead him to a marvellous palace, give him refreshments and
provide him with a room and a bed, where every night one of the fairies bears
him company. He spends his days in pleasure until the king's daughter is
almost forgotten. At last he begins to think he ought to learn what has become
of his brothers, his father, and the lady. The chief fairy however, tries to
dissuade him warning him that evil will befall him if he return to his
brothers. He persists, and she tells him that the princess is given to his
eldest brother, who reigns in his father-in-law's stead the latter having
died, and that his own father is also dead; and she warns him again not to go.
But he goes. His eldest brother says that he thought he was dead "in that
hole." The hero replies that, on the contrary, he fares so well with a bevy of
young and beautiful fairies that he does not even envy him, and would not
change places with him for all the treasures in the world. His brother,
devoured by rage, demands that the hero bring him within eight days a pavilion
of silk which will lodge three hundred soldiers, otherwise he will destroy his
palace of delights. The hero, affrighted, returns to the fairies and relates
his brother's threats. The chief fairy says, "Didn't I tell you so? You
deserve that I should leave you to your fate; but, out of pity for your youth,
I will help you." And he returns to his brother within eight days with the
required pavilion. But his brother is not satisfied: he demands another silk
pavilion for 600 soldiers, else he will lay waste the abode of the fairies.
This pavilion he also receives from the fairies, and it was much finer and
richer than the first. His brother's demands rise when he sees that the hero
does not find any difficulty in satisfying him. He now commands that a column
of iron 12 cubits (braccia) high be erected in the midst of a piazza. The
chief of the fairies also complies with this requirement. The column is ready
in a moment, and as the hero cannot carry it himself, she gives it to the
guardian ogre, who carries it upon his shoulders, and presents himself, along
with the hero, before the eldest brother. As soon as the latter comes to see
the column set in the piazza the ogre knocks him down and reduces him to pulp
(cofaccino, lit., a cake), and the hero marries his brother's widow and
becomes king in his stead.

Almost suspiciously like the story in Galland in many of the details is an
Icelandic version in Powell and Magnusson's collection, yet I cannot conceive
how the peasantry of that country could have got it out of "Les Mille et une
Nuits." There are two ways by which the story might have reached them
independently of Galland's work: the Arabs and Persians traded extensively in
former times with Scandinavia, through Russia, and this as well as other Norse
tales of undoubtedly Eastern extraction may have been communicated by the same
channel;[FN#417] or the Norsemen may have taken it back with them from the
South of Europe. But however this may be, the Icelandic version is so quaint
in its diction, has such a fresh aroma about it, and such novel particulars,
that I feel justified in giving it here in full:

It is said that once, in the days of old, there was a good and wealthy king
who ruled over a great and powerful realm; but neither his name nor that of
his kingdom is given, nor the latter's whereabouts in the world. He had a
queen, and by her three sons, who were all fine youths and hopeful, and the
king loved them well. The king had taken, too, a king's daughter from a
neighbouring kingdom, to foster her, and she was brought up with his sons. She
was of the same age as they, and the most beautiful and accomplished lady that
had ever been seen in those days, and the king loved her in no way less than
his own sons. When the princess was of age, all the king's sons fell in love
with her, and things even went so far that they all of them engaged her at
once, each in his own name. Their father, being the princess's foster-father,
had the right of bestowing her in marriage, as her own father was dead. But as
he was fond of all his sons equally the answer he gave them was, that he left
it to the lady's own choice to take for a husband whichever of the brothers
she loved the most. On a certain day he had the princess called up to him and
declared his will to her, telling her that she might choose for a husband
whichever she liked best of his sons. The princess answered, "Bound I am in
duty to obey your words. But as to this choice of one of your sons to be my
husband I am in the greatest perplexity; for I must confess they are all
equally dear to me, and I cannot choose one before the other." When the king
heard this answer of the princess he found himself in a new embarrassment, and
thought a long while what he could do that should be equally agreeable to all
parties, and at last hit upon the following decision of the matter: that all
his sons should after a year's travel return each with a precious thing, and
that he who had the finest thing should be the princess's husband. This
decision the king's sons found to be a just one and they agreed to meet after
one year at a certain castle in the country, whence they should go all
together, to the town, in order to lay their gifts before the princess. And
now their departure from the country was arranged as well as could be.

First the tale tells of the eldest, that he went from one land to another, and
from one city to another, in search of a precious thing, but found nowhere
anything that at all suited his ideas. At last the news came to his ears that
there was a princess who had so fine a spy-glass that nothing so marvellous
had ever been seen or heard of before. In it one could see all over the world,
every place, every city, every man, and every living being that moved on the
face of the earth, and what every living thing in the world was doing. Now the
prince thought that surely there could be no more precious thing at all likely
to turn up for him than this telescope; he therefore went to the princess, in
order to buy the spy-glass if possible. But by no means could he prevail upon
the king's daughter to part with her spy-glass, till he had told her his whole
story and why he wanted it, and used all his powers of entreaty. As might be
expected, he paid for it well. Having got it he returned home, glad at his
luck, and hoping to wed the king's daughter.

The story next turns to the second son. He had to struggle with the same
difficulties as his elder brother. He travelled for a long while over the wide
world without finding anything at all suitable, and thus for a time he saw no
chance of his wishes being fulfilled. Once he came into a very well-peopled
city; and went about in search of precious things among the merchants, but
neither did he find nor even see what he wanted. He heard that there lived a
short way from the town a dwarf, the cleverest maker of curious and cunning
things. He therefore resolved to go to the dwarf in order to try whether he
could be persuaded to make him any costly thing. The dwarf said that he had
ceased to make things of that sort now and he must beg to be excused from
making anything of the kind for the prince. But he said that he had a piece of
cloth, made in his younger days, with which however, he was very unwilling to
part. The king's son asked the nature and use of the cloth The dwarf answered,
"On this cloth one can go all over the world, as well through the air as on
the water. Runes are on it, which must be understood by him who uses it." Now
the prince saw that a more precious thing than this could scarcely be found,
and therefore asked the dwarf by all means to let him have the cloth. And
although the dwarf would not at first part with his cloth at all, yet at last,
hearing what would happen if the king's son did not get it, he sold it to him
at a mighty high price. The prince was truly glad to have got the cloth, for
it was not only a cloth of great value, but also the greatest of treasures m
other respects, having gold-seams and jewel-embroidery. After this he returned
home, hoping to get the best of his brothers in the contest for the damsel.

The youngest prince left home last of all the three brethren.[FN#418] First he
travelled from one village to another in his own country, and went about
asking for precious things of every merchant he met on his way, as also on all
sides where there was the slightest hope of his getting what he wanted. But
all his endeavours were in vain, and the greater part of the year was spent in
fruitless search till at last he waxed sad in mind at his lot. At this time he
came into a well-peopled city, whereto people were gathered from all parts of
the world. He went from one merchant to another till at last he came to one
who sold apples.[FN#419] This merchant said he had an apple that was of so
strange a nature that if it was put into the arm-hole of a dying man he would
at once return to life. He declared that it was the property of his family and
had always been used in the family as a medicine. As soon as the king's son
heard this he would by all means have the apple, deeming that he would never
be able to find a thing more acceptable to the king's daughter than this. He
therefore asked the merchant to sell him the apple and told him all the story
of his search, and that his earthly welfare was based upon his being in no way
inferior to his brethren in his choice of precious things for the princess.
The merchant felt pity for the prince when he had told him his story, so much
so that he sold him the apple, and the prince returned home, glad and
comforted at his happy luck.

Now nothing more is related of the three brothers till they met together at
the place before appointed. When they were all together each related the
striking points in his travelling. All being here, the eldest brother thought
that he would be the first to see the princess and find out how she was and
therefore he took forth his spy-glass and turned it towards the city. But what
saw he? The beloved princess lying in her bed, in the very jaws of death! The
king, his father, and all the highest nobles of the court were standing round
the bed in the blackness of sorrow, sad in their minds, and ready to receive
the last sigh of the fair princess. When the prince saw this lamentable sight
he was grieved beyond measure. He told his brothers what he had seen and they
were no less struck with sorrow than himself. They began bewailing loudly,
saying that they would give all they had never to have undertaken this
journey, for then at least they would have been able to perform the last
offices for the fair princess. But in the midst of these bewailings the second
brother bethought him of his cloth, and remembered that he could get to the
town on it in a moment. He told this to his brothers and they were glad at
such good and unexpected news. Now the cloth was unfolded and they all stepped
on to it, and in one of moment it was high in the air and in the next inside
the town. When they were there they made all haste to reach the room of the
princess, where everybody wore an air deep sadness. They were told that the
princess's every breath was her last. Then the youngest brother remembered his
wonderful apple, and thought that it would never be more wanted to show its
healing power than now. He therefore went straight into the bed-room of the
princess and placed the apple under her right arm. And at the same moment it
was as if a new breath of life flushed through the whole body of the princess;
her eyes opened, and after a little while she began to speak to the folk
around her. This and the return of the king's sons caused great joy at the
court of the king.

Now some time went by until the princess was fully recovered. Then a large
meeting was called together, at which the brothers were bidden to show their
treasures. First the eldest made his appearance, and showing his spy-glass
told what a wonderful thing it was, and also how it was due to this glass that
the life of the fair princess had ever been saved, as he had seen through it
how matters stood in the town. He therefore did not doubt for a moment that
his gift was the one which would secure him the fair princess.

Next stepped forward the second brother with the cloth. Having described its
powers, he said, "I am of opinion that my brother's having seen the princess
first would have proved of little avail had I not had the cloth, for thereupon
we came so quickly to the place to save the princess; and I must declare that
to my mind, the cloth is the chief cause of the king's daughter's recovery."

Next stepped forward the youngest prince and said, as he laid the apple before
the people, "Little would the glass and the cloth have availed to save the
princess's live had I not had the apple. What could we brothers have profited
in being only witnesses of the beloved damsel's death? What would this have
done, but awaken our grief and regret? It is due alone to the apple that the
princess is yet alive; wherefore I find myself the most deserving of her."

Then a long discussion arose in the meeting, and the decision at last came
out, that all the three things had worked equally towards the princess's
recovery, as might be seen from the fact that if one had been wanting the
others would have been worthless. It was therefore declared that, as all gifts
had equal claim to the prize, no one could decide to whom the princess should
belong.

After this the king planned another contrivance in order to come to some end
of the matter. He soon should try their skill in shooting, and he who proved
to be the ablest shooter of them should have the princess. So a mark was
raised and the eldest brother stepped forward with his bow and quiver. He
shot, and no great distance from the mark fell his arrow. After that stepped
forward the second brother, and his arrow well-nigh reached the mark. Last of
all stepped forward the third and youngest brother, and his arrow seemed to go
farther than the others, but in spite of continued search for many days it
could not be found. The king decided in this matter that his second son should
marry the princess They were married accordingly, and as the king, the father
of the princess, was dead, his daughter now succeeded him, and her husband
became king over his wife's inheritance. They are now out of this tale, as is
also the eldest brother, who settled in life abroad.

The youngest brother stayed at home with his father, highly displeased at the
decision the latter had given concerning the marriage of the princess. He was
wont to wander about every day where he fancied his arrow had fallen, and at
last he found it fixed in an oak in the forest, and saw that it had by far
outstripped the mark. He now called together witnesses to the place where the
arrow was, with the intention of bringing about some justice m his case. But
of this there was no chance, for the king said he could by no means alter his
decision. At this the king's son was so grieved that he went well-nigh out of
his wits. One day he busked for a journey, with the full intention of never
again setting foot m his country. He took with him all he possessed of fine
and precious things, nobody knowing his rede, not even his father, the king.

He went into a great forest and wandered about there many days, without
knowing whither he was going, and at last, yielding to hunger and weariness,
he found himself no longer equal to travelling; so he sat down under a tree,
thinking that his sad and sorrowful life would here come to a close. But after
he had sat thus awhile he saw ten people, all in fine attire and bright
armour, come riding towards the stone. On arriving there they dismounted, and
having greeted the king's son begged him to go with them, and mount the spare
horse they had with them, saddled and bridled in royal fashion. He accepted
this offer and mounted the horse, and after this they rode on their way till
they came to a large city. The riders dismounted and led the prince into the
town, which was governed by a young and beautiful maiden-queen. The riders led
the king's son at once to the virgin-queen, who received him with great
kindness. She told him that she had heard of all the ill-luck that had
befallen him and also that he had fled from his father. "Then," quoth she, "a
burning love for you was kindled in my breast and a longing to heal your
wounds. You must know that it was I who sent the ten riders to find you out
and bring you hither. I give you the chance of staying here; I offer you the
rule of my whole kingdom, and I will try to sweeten your embittered life;--
this is all that I am able to do." Although the prince was in a sad and gloomy
state of mind, he saw nothing better than to accept this generous offer and
agree to the marriage with the maiden-queen. A grand feast was made ready, and
they were married according to the ways of that country. And the young king
took at once in hand the government, which he managed with much ability.

Now the story turns homewards, to the old king. After the disappearance of his
son he became sad and weary of life, being, as he was, sinking in age. His
queen also had died sometim