t extraits des Manuscrits de la Bibliothﬁque rationale
publi⁄s par l'Academie des inscriptions et belles lettres. And
there will be a tirage ” part of 200-300 copies entitled Histoire
d' 'Alﬂ al-DØn ou La Lampe Merveilleuse, Texte Arabe, publi⁄ par
H. Zotenberg, Paris, Imprimerie Nationale, 1888; including a most
important contribution:--Sur quelques Manuscrits des Mille et une
Nuits et la traduction de Galland.[FN#1]

The learned and genial author has favoured me with proof sheets
of his labours: it would be unfair to disclose the discoveries,
such as the Manuscript Journals in the Bibliothﬁque Nationale
(Nos. 15277 to 15280), which the illustrious Garland kept
regularly till the end of his life, and his conversations with
"M. Hanna, Maronite d'Halep," alias Jean Dipi (Dippy, a
corruption of Diab): suffice it to say that they cast a clear and
wholly original light upon the provenance of eight of the
Gallandian histories. I can, however, promise to all
"Aladdinists" a rich harvest of facts which wholly displace those
hitherto assumed to be factual. But for the satisfaction of my
readers I am compelled to quote the colophon of M. Zotenberg's
great "find" (vol. ii.), as it bears upon a highly important
question.

"And the finishing thereof was during the first decade of Jamﬂdi the Second,
of the one thousand and one hundred and fifteenth year of the Hegirah (= A.D.
1703) by the transcription of the neediest of His slaves unto Almighty Allah,
Ahmad bin Mohammed al-Tarﬂd›, in Baghdad City: he was a Shﬂfi'› of school, and
a Mosuli by birth, and a Baghdadi by residence, and he wrote it for his own
use, and upon it he imprinted his signet. So Allah save our lord Mohammed and
His Kin and Companions and assain them! Kab›kaj."[FN#2]

Now as this date corresponds with A.D. 1703, whereas Galland did
begin publishing until 1705-1705 the original MS. of Ahmad al-
Tarﬂd› could not have been translated or adapted from the French;
and although the transcription by Mikhail Sabbagh, writing in
1805-10, may have introduced modification borrowed from Galland,
yet the scrupulous fidelity of his copy, shown by sundry marginal
and other notes, lays the suspicion that changes of importance
have been introduced by him. Remains now only to find the
original codex of Al-Tarﬂd›.

I have noticed in my translation sundry passages which appear to
betray the Christian hand; but these are mostly of scanty
consequence in no wise affecting the genuineness of the text.

The history of Zayn al Asnam was copied from the Sabbﬂgh MS. and
sent to me by M. Houdas, Professeur d'Arabe vulgaire a l'Ecole
des langues orientales vivantes; an Arabist, whose name is
favourably quoted in the French Colonies of Northern Africa M.
Zotenberg kindly lent me his own transcription of Alaeddin before
sending it to print; and I can only regret that the dilatory
proceedings of the Imprimerie Nationale, an establishment
supported by the State, and therefore ignoring the trammels of
private industry, have prevented my revising the version now
submitted to the public. This volume then begins with the two
Gallandian Tales, "Zeyn Alasnam" and "Aladdin," whose Arabic
original was discovered by M. Zotenberg during the last year:
although separated in the French version, I have brought them
together for the sake of uniformity. The other eight (or nine,
including the Princess of Daryabar), entitled History of Khudadad
and his Brothers, and the Princess of Daryabar;

History of Khudadad and his Brothers, and the Princess of
Daryabar;
History of the Blind Man, Baba Abdullah;
History of Sidi Nu'uman;
History of Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal;
History of Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves;
History of Ali Khwajah and the Merchant of Baghdad;
History of Prince Ahmad and the Fairy Peri-banu;
History of the two Sisters who envied their Cadette,

are borrowed mainly from the Indian version of Totﬂrﬂm Shﬂyﬂn.

And here I must quote the bibliographical notices concerning the
sundry versions into Urdu or Hindustani which have been drawn up
with great diligence by Mr. Blumhardt.

"The earliest attempt to translate the Arabian Nights was made by Munshi Shams
al-D›n Ahmad Shirwﬂni. A prose version of the first two hundred Nights made by
him Êfor the use of the College at Fort St. George' was lithographed at Madras
in the year A.H. 1252 (A.D. 1836) and published in 8vo volumes (pp. 517, 426)
under the title 'Hikayat ool jaleeah'[FN#3] (Hikﬂyﬂt al-jal›lah). The
translation was made from an Arabic original but it does not appear what
edition was made use of. The translator had intended to bring out a version of
the entire work, but states in his preface that, being unable to procure the
Arabic of the other Nights, he could not proceed with the translation, and had
to be content to publish only two hundred Nights. This version does not appear
to have become popular, for no other edition seems to have been published. And
the author must not be confounded with Shaykh Ahmad Shirwﬂni, who, in A.D.
1814, printed an Arabic edition of the Arabian Nights Entertainments
(Calcutta, Pereira) which also stopped at No. CC.

"The next translation was made by Munshi al-Kar›m, likewise in prose. From the
preface and colophon to this work it appears that 'Abd al-Kar›m obtained a
copy of Edward Foster's English version of the Arabian Nights, and after two
years' labour completed a translation of the whole work in A.H. 1258 (A.D.
1842). It was lithographed at the Mustafai Press at Kanp∑r (Cawnpore) in the
year A.H. 1263 (A.D. 1847) and published in four vols., in two royal 8vos,
lithographed; each containing two Jilds (or parts, pp. 276, 274; 214 and 195).

"A second edition appeared from the same press in A.H. 1270 (A.D. 1853) also
in two vols. 8vo of two Jilds each (pp. 249, 245; 192, 176). Since then
several other editions have been published at Cawnpore, at Lakhnau[FN#4] and
also at Bombay. This translation is written in an easy fluent style, omitting
all coarseness of expression or objectionable passages, in language easily
understood, and at the same time in good and elegant Hindustani. It is
therefore extremely popular, and selections from the 4th Jild have been taken
as text books for the Indian Civil Service examinations. A Romanised Urdu
version of the first two Jilds according to Duncan Forbes' system of
transliteration, was made 'under the superintendence of T. W. H. Tolbort,' and
published under the editorship of F. Pincott in London, by W. H. Allen and Co.
in 1882.[FN#5] There has been no attempt to divide this translation into
Nights: there are headings to the several tales and nothing more. To supply
this want, and also to furnish the public with a translation closer to the
original, and one more intelligible to Eastern readers, and in accordance with
Oriental thought and feeling, a third translation was taken in hand by Totﬂrﬂm
Shﬂyﬂn, at the instance of Nawal Kishore, the well-known bookseller and
publisher of Lucknow. The first edition of this translation was lithographed
at Lucknow in the year A.H. 1284 (A.D. 1868) and published in a 4to vol. of
1,080 pages under the title of Hazﬂr Dastﬂn.[FN#6] Totﬂrﬂm Shﬂyﬂn has followed
'Abd al-Karim's arrangement of the whole work into four Jilds, each of which
has a separate pagination (pp. 304; 320, 232, and 224.) The third Jild has 251
Nights: the other three 250 each. The translation is virtually in prose, but
it abounds in snatches of poetry, songs and couplets taken from the writings
of Persian poets, and here and there a verse-rendering of bits of the story.
This translation, though substantially agreeing in the main with that of 'Abd
al-Karim, yet differs widely from it in the treatment. It is full of flowery
metaphors and is written in a rich, ornate style full of Persian and Arabic
words and idioms, which renders it far less easy to understand than the simple
language of 'Abd al-Karim. Some passages have been considerably enlarged and
sometimes contain quite different reading from that of 'Abd al-Karim with
occasional additional matter. In other places descriptions have been much
curtailed so that although the thread of the story may be the same in both
translations it is hard to believe that the two translators worked from the
same version. Unfortunately Totﬂrﬂm Shﬂyﬂn makes no mention at Ali the source
whence he made his translation whether English or Arabic. This translation
reached its fourth edition in 1883, and has been published with the addition
of several badly executed full-page illustrations evidently taken from English
prints.

"Yet another translation of The Nights has been made into Hindustani, and this
a versified paraphrase, the work of three authors whose takhallus or noms de
plume, were as follows: "Nas›m" (Muhammad Asghar Ali Khﬂn), translator of the
first Jild, "Shﬂyﬂn" (Totﬂrﬂm Shﬂyﬂn), who undertook the second and third
Jilds, and "Chaman" (Shﬂd› Lﬂl) by whom the fourth and last Jild was
translated. The work is complete in 1,244 pages 4to, and was lithographed at
Lucknow; Jilds i.-iii. in A.H. 1278 (A.D. 1862) and Jild iv. in 1285 (A.D.
1869). This translation is also divided into Nights, differing slightly from
the prose translation of Totﬂrﬂm Shﬂyﬂn, as the first Jild has 251 Nights and
the others 250 each."

And now I have only to end this necessarily diffuse Foreword with
my sincerest thanks to Mr. Clouston, the Storiologist, who has
brought his wide experience of Folk-lore to bear upon the tales
included in my Third Supplemental Volume; and to Dr. Steingass,
who during my absence from England kindly passed my proofs
through the press.

RICHARD F. BURTON.

Sauerbrunn-Rohitsch, Styria.
September 15, '87.







                      Supplemental Nights
                                
                       To The Book Of The
                                
                  Thousand Nights And A Night





  When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,[FN#7]

Quoth Dunyﬂzﬂd, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night;" and Shahrﬂzﬂd replied, "With
love and good will! I will relate to you




                THE TALE OF ZAYN AL-ASNAM.[FN#8]



It hath reached me, O King of the Age, that in
Bassorah-city[FN#9] reigned a puissant Sultan, who was opulent
exceedingly and who owned all the goods of life; but he lacked a
child which might inherit his wealth and dominion. So, being
sorely sorrowful on this account, he arose and fell to doing
abundant alms-deeds to Fak›rs and the common poor, to the Hallows
and other holy men and prayed their recourse to Allah Almighty,
in order that the Lord (to whom belong Might and Majesty!) might
of His grace bless him with issue. And the Compassionate accepted
his prayer for his alms to the Religious and deigned grant his
petition; and one night of the nights after he lay with the Queen
she went away from him with child. Now as soon as the Sultan
heard of the conception he rejoiced with exceeding great joyance,
and when the days of delivery drew near he gathered together all
the astrologers and sages who strike the sand-board,[FN#10]and
said to them, "'Tis our desire that ye disclose and acquaint us
anent the birth which is to be born during the present month
whether it shall be male or female, and what shall befal it from
the shifts of Time, and what shall proceed from it." Thereupon
the geomantists struck their sand-boards and the astrophils
ascertained their ascendants and they drew the horoscope of the
babe unborn, and said to the sovran, "O King of the Age and Lord
of the Time and the Tide, verily the child to which the Queen
shall presently give birth will be a boy and 't will be right for
thee to name him Zayn al-Asnﬂm--Zayn of the Images." Then spake
the geomantists, saying, "Know then, Ho though the King, that
this little one shall approve him when grown to man's estate
valiant and intelligent; but his days shall happen upon sundry
troubles and travails, and yet if he doughtily fight against all
occurrence he shall become the most opulent of the Kings of the
World." Exclaimed the Sultan, "An the child approve himself
valorous, as ye have announced, then the toil and moil which
shall be his lot may be held for naught, inasmuch as calamities
but train and strengthen the songs of the Kings."[FN#11] Shortly
after this the Queen gave birth to a man-child, and Glory be to
Him who fashioned the babe with such peerless beauty and
loveliness! The King named his son Zayn al-Asnam, and presently
he became even as the poets sang of one of his fellows in
semblance, 

"He showed; and they cried, 'Be Allah blest!'* And who made him
     and formed him His might attest!
This be surely the lord of all loveliness; * And all others his
     lieges and thralls be confest."

Then Zayn al-Asnam grew up and increased until his age attained
its fifteenth year, when his sire the Sultan appointed for him an
experienced governor, one versed in all the sciences and
philosophies;[FN#12] who fell to instructing him till such times
as he waxed familiar with every branch of knowledge, and in due
season he became an adult. Thereupon the Sultan bade summon his
son and heir to the presence together with the Lords of his land
and the Notables of his lieges and addressed him before them with
excellent counsel saying, "O my son, O Zayn al-Asnam, seeing that
I be shotten in years and at the present time sick of a sickness
which haply shall end my days in this world and which anon shall
seat thee in my stead, therefore, I bequeath unto thee the
following charge. Beware, O my son, lest thou wrong any man, and
incline not to cause the poor complain; but do justice to the
injured after the measure of thy might. Furthermore, have a care
lest thou trust to every word spoken to thee by the Great; but
rather lend thou ever an ear unto the voice of the general; for
that thy Grandees will betray thee as they seek only whatso
suiteth them, not that which suiteth thy subjects." A few days
after this time the old Sultan's distemper increased and his
lifeterm was fulfilled and he died; whereupon his son, Zayn
al-Asnam, arose and donned mourning-dress for his father during
six days; and on the seventh he went forth to the Divan and took
seat upon the throne of his Sultanate. He also held a levee
wherein were assembled all the defenders of the realm, and the
Ministers and the Lords of the land came forward and condoled
with him for the loss of his parent and wished him all good
fortune and gave him joy of his kingship and dominion and prayed
for his endurance in honour and his permanence in prosperity.
--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night;" and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Zayn al-Asnam seeing himself
in this high honour and opulence[FN#13] and he young in years and
void of experience, straightway inclined unto lavish expenditure
and commerce with the younglings, who were like him and fell to
wasting immense wealth upon his pleasures; and neglected his
government, nor paid aught of regard to his subjects.[FN#14]
Thereupon the Queen-mother began to counsel him, and forbid him
from such ill courses, advising him to abandon his perverse
inclinations and apply his mind to rule and commandment, and to
further the policy of his kingdom, lest the lieges repudiate him
and rise up against him and depose him. But he would on no wise
hearken to a single of her words and persisted in his ignorant
folly; whereat the folk murmured, inasmuch as the Lords of the
land had put forth their hands to tyranny and oppression when
they saw the King lacking in regard for his Ryots. And presently
the commons rose up against Zayn al-Asnam and would have dealth
harshly with him had not his mother been a woman of wits and
wisdom and contrivance, dearly loved of the general. So she
directed the malcontents aright and promised them every good:
then she summoned her son Zayn al-Asnam and said to him, "Behold,
O my child, that which I foretold for thee, to wit that thou
wastest thy realm and lavishest thy life to boot by persevering
in what ignorance thou art; for that thou hast placed the
governance of thy Kingdom in the hands of inexperienced youth and
hast neglected the elders and hast dissipated thy moneys and the
moneys of the monarchy, and thou hast lavished all thy treasure
upon wilfulness and carnal pleasuring." Zayn al-Asnam, awaking
from the slumber of negligence, forthright accepted his mother's
counsel and, faring forth at once to the Diwan,[FN#15] he
entrusted the management of the monarchy to certain old officers,
men of intelligence and experience. But he acted on this wise
only after Bassorah-town was ruined, inasmuch as he had not
turned away from his ignorant folly before he had wasted and
spoiled all the wealth of the Sultanate, and he had become
utterly impoverished. Thereupon the Prince fell to repenting and
regretting that which had been done by him, until the repose of
sleep was destroyed for him and he shunned meat and drink; nor
did this cease until one night of the nights which had sped in
such grief and thoughtfulness and vain regret until dawn drew
nigh and his eyelids closed for a little while. Then an old and
venerable Shaykh appeared to him in a vision[FN#16] and said to
him, "O Zayn al-Asnam, sorrow not; for after sorrow however sore
cometh naught but joyance; and, would'st thou win free of this
woe, up and hie thee to Egypt where thou shalt find hoards of
wealth which shall replace whatso thou hast wasted and will
double it more than twofold." Now when the Prince was aroused
from his sleep he recounted to his mother all he had seen in his
dream; but his parent began to laugh at him, and he said to her,
"Mock me not: there is no help but that I wend Egypt-wards."
Rejoined she, "O my son, believe not in swevens which be mere
imbroglios of sleep and lying phantasies;" and retorted saying,
"In very sooth my vision is true and the man whom I saw therein
is of the Saints of Allah and his words are veridical." Then on a
night of the nights mounting horse alone and privily, he
abandoned his Kingdom; and took the highway to Egypt; and he rode
day and night until he reached Cairo-city. He entered it and saw
it to be a mighty fine capital; then, tethering his steed he
found shelter in one of its Cathedral-mosques, and he worn out by
weariness; however, when he had rested a little he fared forth
and bought himself somewhat of food. After eating, his excessive
fatigue caused him fall asleep in the mosque; nor had he slept
long ere the Shaykh[FN#17] appeared to him a second time in
vision and said to him, "O Zayn al-Asnam,"--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

      When it was the Four Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the Shaykh again appeared to
the Prince in a vision and said to him, "O Zayn al-Asnam, though
hast obeyed me in whatso I bade thee and I only made trial of
thee to test an thou be valiant or a craven. But now I wot thy
worth, inasmuch as thou hast accepted my words and thou hast
acted upon my advice: so do thou return straightway to thy
capital and I will make thee a wealthy ruler, such an one that
neither before thee was any king like unto thee nor shall any
like unto thee come after thee." Hereat Zayn al-Asnam awoke and
cried "Bismillah,--in the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the
Compassionate--what be this Shaykh who verily persecuted me until
I travelled to Cairo; and I having faith in him and holding that
he was either the Apostle (whom Allah save and assain!) or one of
the righteous Hallows of God; and there is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! By the Lord,
but I did right well in not relating my dream to any save to my
mother, and in warning none of my departure. I had full faith in
this oldster; but now, meseemeth, the man is not of those who
know the Truth (be He extolled and exalted!); so by Allah I will
cast off all confidence in this Shaykh and his doings." With this
resolve the Prince slept that night in the Mosque and on the
morrow took horse and after a few days of strenuous travel
arrived at his capital Bassorah. Herein he entered by night, and
forthright went in to his mother who asked him, "Say me, hast
thou won aught of whatso the Shaykh promised thee?" and he
answered her by acquainting her with all his adventure. Then she
applied her to consoling and comforting him, saying, "Grieve not,
O my son; if Almighty Allah have apportioned unto thee aught thou
shalt obtain it without toil and travail.[FN#18] But I would see
thee wax sensible and wise, abandoning all these courses which
have landed thee in poverty, O my son; and shunning songstresses
and commune with the inexperienced and the society of loose
livers, male and female. All such pleasures as these are for the
sons of the ne'er-do-well, not for the scions of the Kings thy
peers." Herewith Zayn al-Asnam sware an oath to bear in mind all
she might say to him, never to gainsay her commandments, nor
deviate from them a single hair's breadth; to abandon all she
should forbid him, and to fix his thoughts upon rule and
goverance. Then he addrest himself to sleep, and as he slumbered,
the Shaykh appeared to him a third time in vision, and said, "O
Zayn al-Asnam, O thou valorous Prince; this very day, as soon as
thou shalt have shaken off thy drowsiness, I will fulfil my
covenant with thee. So take with thee a pickaxe, and hie to such
a palace of thy sire, and turn up the ground, searching it well
in such a place where thou wilt find that which shall enrich
thee." As soon as the Prince awoke, he hastened to his mother in
huge joy and told her his tale; but she fell again to laughing at
him, and saying, "O my child, indeed this old man maketh mock of
thee and naught else; so get thyself clear of him." But Zayn
al-Asnam replied, "O mother mine, verily this Shaykh is soothfast
and no liar: for the first time he but tried me and now he
proposeth to perform his promise." Whereto his mother, "At all
events, the work is not wearisome; so do thou whatso thou willest
even as he bade thee. Make the trial and Inshallah--God
willing--return to me rejoicing; yet sore I fear lest thou come
back to me and say, 'Sooth thou hast spoken in thy speech, O my
mother!" However Zayn al-Asnam took up a pickaxe and, descending
to that part of the palace where his sire lay entombed, began to
dig and to delve; nor had he worked a long while[FN#19] ere, lo
and behold! there appeared to him a ring bedded in a marble slab.
He removed the stone and saw a ladder-like flight of steps
whereby he descended until he found a huge souterrain all
pillar'd and propped with columns of marble and alabaster. And
when he entered the inner recesses he saw within the cave-like
souterrain a pavilion which bewildered his wits, and inside the
same stood eight jars[FN#20] of green jasper. So he said in his
mind, "What may be these jars and what may be stored
therein?"--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

           When it was the full Five Hundredth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that when Zayn al-Asnam saw the
jars, he came forwards and unlidding them found each and every
full of antique[FN#21] golden pieces; so he hent a few in hand
seen and going to his mother gave of them to her saying, "Hast
thou seen, O my mother?" She marvelled at the matter and made
answer, "Beware, O my son, of wasting this wealth as thou
dissipatedst otheraforetime;" whereupon her son sware to her an
oath saying, "Have no care, O my mother, nor be thy heart other
than good before me; and I desire that thou also find
satisfaction in mine actions." Presently she arose and went forth
with him, and the twain descended into the cavern-like souterrain
and entered the pavilion, where the Queen saw that which
wildereth the wits; and she made sure with her own eyes that the
jars were full of gold. But while they enjoyed the spectacle of
the treasure behold, they caught sight of a smaller jar
wondrously wrought in green jasper; so Zayn al-Asnam opened it
and found therein a golden key; whereupon quoth the Queen-mother,
"O my son, needs must this key have some door which it
unlocketh." Accordingly they sought all about the souterrain and
the pavilion to find if there be a door or aught like thereto,
and presently, seeing a wooden lock fast barred, they knew
wherefor the key was intended. Presently the Prince applied it
and opened the lock, whereupon the door of a palace gave
admittance, and when the twain entered they found it more
spacious than the first pavilion and all illumined with a light
which dazed the sight; yet not a wax-candle lit it up nor indeed
was there a recess for lamps. Hereat they marvelled and meditated
and presently they discovered eight images[FN#22] of precious
stones, all seated upon as many golden thrones, and each and
every was cut of one solid piece; and all the stones were pure
and of the finest water and most precious of price. Zayn al-Asnam
was confounded hereat and said to his mother, "Whence could my
sire have obtained all these rare things?" And the twain took
their pleasure in gazing at them and considering them and both
wondered to see a ninth throne unoccupied, when the Queen espied
a silken hanging whereon was inscribed, "O my son, marvel not at
this mighty wealth which I have acquired by sore stress and
striving travail. But learn also that there existeth a Ninth
Statue whose value is twenty-fold greater than these thou seest
and, if thou would win it, hie thee again to Cairo-city. There
thou shalt find a whilome slave of mine Mubﬂrak[FN#23] hight and
he will take thee and guide thee to the Statue; and 'twill be
easy to find him on entering Cairo: the first person thou shalt
accost will point out the house to thee, for that Mubarak is
known throughout the place." When Zayn al-Asnam had read this
writ he cried: "O my mother, 'tis again my desire to wend my way
Cairo-wards and seek out this image; so do thou say how seest
thou my vision, fact or fiction, after thou assuredst me saying,
'This be an imbroglio of sleep?' However, at all events, O my
mother, now there is no help for it but that I travel once more
to Cairo." Replied she, "O my child, seeing that thou be under
the protection of the Apostle of Allah (whom may He save and
assain!) so do thou fare in safety, while I and thy Wazir will
order thy reign in thine absence till such time as thou shalt
return." Accordingly the Prince went forth and gat him ready and
rode on till he reached Cairo where he asked for Mubarak's house.
The folk answered him saying, "O my lord, this be a man than whom
none is wealthier or greater in boon deeds and bounties, and his
home is ever open to the stranger." Then they showed him the way
and he followed it till he came to Mubarak's mansion where he
knocked at the door and a slave of the black slaves opened to
him.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and First Night, 

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night;" and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Zayn al-Asnam knocked at the
door when a slave of Mubarak's black slaves came out to him and
opening asked him, "Who[FN#24] art thou and what is it thou
wantest?" The Prince answered, "I am a foreigner from a far
country, and I have heard of Mubarak thy lord that he is famed
for liberality and generosity; so that I come hither purposing to
become his guest." Thereupon the chattel went in to his lord and,
after reporting the matter to him, came out and said to Zayn
al-Asnam, "O my lord, a blessing hath descended upon us by thy
footsteps. Do thou enter, for my master Mubarak awaiteth thee."
Therewith the Prince passed into a court spacious exceedingly and
all beautified with trees and waters, and the slave led him to
the pavilion wherein Mubarak was sitting. As the guest came in
the host straightway rose up and met him with cordial greeting
and cried, "A benediction hath alighted upon us and this night is
the most benedight of the nights by reason of thy coming to us!
So who are thou, O youth, and whence is thine arrival and whither
is thine intent?" He replied, "I am Zayn al-Asnam and I seek one
Mubarak, a slave of the Sultan of Bassorah who deceased a year
ago, and I am his son." Mubarak rejoined, "What sayest thou? Thou
the son of the King of Bassorah?" and the other retorted, "Yea,
verily I am his son."[FN#25] Quoth Mubarak, "In good sooth my
late lord the King of Bassorah left no son known to me! But what
may be thine age, O youth?" "Twenty years or so," quoth the
Prince, presently adding, "But thou, how long is it since thou
leftest my sire?" "I left him eighteen years ago," said the
other; "but, O my shild Zayn al-Asnam, by what sign canst thou
assure me of thy being the son of my old master, the Sovran of
Bassorah?" Said the Prince, "Thou alone knowest that my father
laid out beneath his palace a souterrain,[FN#26] and in this he
placed forty jars of the finest green jasper, which he filled
with pieces of antique gold, also that within a pavilion he
builded a second palace and set therein eight images of precious
stones, each one of a single gem, and all seated upon royal seats
of placer-gold.[FN#27] He also wrote upon a silken hanging a writ
which I read and which bade me repair to thee and thou wouldst
inform me concerning the Ninth Statue whereabouts it may be,
assuring me that it is worth all the eight." Now when Mubarak
heard these words, he fell at the feet of Zayn al-Asnam and
kissed them exclaiming, "Pardon me, O my lord, in very truth thou
art the son of my old master;" adding, presently, "I have spread,
O my lord, a feast[FN#28] for all the Grandess of Cairo and I
would that thy Highness honour it by thy presence." The Prince
replied, "With love and the best will." Thereupon Mubarak arose
and forewent Zayn al-Asnam to the saloon which was full of the
Lords of the land there gathered together, and here he seated
himself after stablishing Zayn al-Asnam in the place of honour.
Then he bade the tables be spread and the feast be served and he
waited upon the Prince with arms crossed behind his back[FN#29]
and at times falling upon his knees. So the Grandees of Cairo
marvelled to see Mubarak, one of the great men of the city,
serving the youth and wondered with extreme wonderment, unknowing
whence the stranger was.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

        When it was the Five Hundred and Second Night, 

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Mubarak fell to waiting upon
Zayn al-Asnam the son of his old lord, and the Grandees of Cairo
there sitting marvelled to see Mubarak, one of the great men of
the city, serving the youth and wondered with extreme wonderment,
unknowing whence the stranger was. After this they ate and drank
and supped well and were cheered till at last Mubarak turned
towards them and said, "O folk, admire not that I wait upon this
young man with all worship and honour, for that he is the son of
my old lord, the Sultan of Bassorah, who bought me with his money
and who died without manumitting me. I am, therefore, bound to do
service to his son, this my young lord, and all that my hand
possesseth of money and munition belongeth to him nor own I aught
thereof at all, at all." When the Grandees of Cairo heard these
words, they stood up before Zayn al-Asnam and salamed to him with
mighty great respect and entreated him with high regard and
blessed him. Then said the Prince, "O assembly, I am in the
presence of your worships, and be ye my witnesses. O Mubarak,
thou art now freed and all thou hast of goods, gold and gear erst
belonging to us becometh henceforth thine own and thou art
endowed with them for good each and every. Eke do thou ask whatso
of importance thou wouldst have from me, for I will on no wise
let or stay thee in thy requiring it." With this Mubarak arose
and kissed the hand of Zayn al-Asnam and thanked him for his
boons, saying, "O my lord, I wish for thee naught save thy weal,
but the wealth that is with me is altogether overmuch for my
wants." Then the Prince abode with the Freedman four days, during
which all the Grandees of Cairo made act of presence day by day
to offer their salams as soon as they heard men say, "This is the
master of Mubarak and the monarch of Bassorah." And whenas the
guest had taken his rest he said to his host, "O Mubarak, my
tarrying with thee hath been long; whereto said the other, "Thou
wottest, O my lord, that the matter whereinto thou comest to
enquire is singular-rare, but that it also involveth risk of
death, and I know not if thy valour can make the attainment
thereto possible to thee." Rejoined Zayn al-Asnam, "Know, O
Mubarak, that opulence is gained only by blood; nor cometh aught
upon mankind save by determination and predestination of the
Creator (be He glorified and magnified!); so look to thine own
stoutness of heart and take thou no thought of me." Thereupon
Mubarak forthright bade his slaves get them ready for wayfare; so
they obeyed his bidding in all things and mounted horse and
travelled by light and dark over the wildest of wolds, every day
seeing matters and marvels which bewildered their wits, sights
they had never seen in all their years, until they drew near unto
a certain place. There the party dismounted and Mubarak bade the
negro slaves and eunuchs abide on the spot saying to them, "Do ye
keep watch and ward over the beasts of burthen and the horses
until what time we return to you." After this the twain set out
together afoot and quoth the Freedman to the Prince, "O my lord,
here valiancy besitteth, for that now thou art in the land of the
Image[FN#30] thou camest to seek." And they ceased not walking
till they reached a lake, a long water and a wide, where quoth
Mubarak to his companion, "Know, O my lord, that anon will come
to us a little craft bearing a banner of azure tinct and all its
planks are of chaunders and lign-aloes of Comorin, the most
precious of woods. And now I would charge thee with a charge the
which must thou most diligently observe." Asked the other, "Thou
wilt see in that boat a boatman[FN#31] whose fashion is the
reverse of man's; but beware, and again I say beware, lest thou
utter a word, otherwise he will at once drown us.[FN#32] Learn
also that this stead belongeth to the King of the Jinns and that
everything thou beholdest is the work of the Jann."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Third Night, 

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Mubarak and Zayn al-Asnam
came upon a lake where, behold, they found a little craft whose
planks were of chaunders and lign-aloes of Comorin and therein
stood a ferryman with the head of an elephant while the rest of
his body wore the semblance of a lion.[FN#33] Presently he
approached them and winding his trunk around them[FN#34] lifted
them both into the boat and seated them beside himself: then he
fell to paddling till he passed through the middle of the lake
and he ceased not so doing until he had landed them on the
further bank. Here the twain took ground and began to pace
forwards, gazing around them the while and regarding the trees
which bore for burthen ambergris and lign-aloes, sandal, cloves,
and gelsamine,[FN#35] all with flowers and fruits bedrest whose
odours broadened the breast and excited the sprite. There also
the birds warbled, with various voices, notes ravishing and
rapturing the heart by the melodies of their musick. So Mubarak
turned to the Prince and asked him saying, "How seest thou this
place, O my lord?" and the other answered, "I deem, O Mubarak,
that in very truth this be the Paradise promised to us by the
Prophet (whom Allah save and assain!)." Thence they fared
forwards till they came upon a mighty fine palace all builded of
emeralds and rubies with gates and doors of gold refined: it was
fronted by a bridge one hundred and fifty cubits long to a
breadth of fifty, and the whole was one rib of a fish.[FN#36] At
the further end thereof stood innumerous hosts of the Jann, all
frightful of favour and fear-inspiring of figure and each and
every hent in hand javelins of steel which flashed to the sun
like December leven. Thereat quoth the Prince to his companion,
"This be a spectacle which ravisheth the wits;" and quoth
Mubarak, "It now behoveth that we abide in our places nor advance
further lest there happen to us some mishap; and may Allah
vouchsafe to us safety!" Herewith he brought forth his pouch four
strips of a yellow silken stuff and zoning himself with one threw
the other over his shoulders;[FN#37] and he gave the two
remaining pieces to the Prince that he might do with them on like
wise. Next he dispread before either of them a waist shawl[FN#38]
of white sendal and then he pulled out of his poke sundry
precious stones and scents and ambergris and eagle-wood;[FN#39]
and, lastly, each took his seat upon his sahs, and when both were
ready Mubarak repeated the following words to the Prince and
taught him to pronounce them before the King of the Jann, "O my
lord, Sovran of the Spirits, we stand within thy precincts and we
throw ourselves on thy protection;" whereto Zayn al-Asnam added,
"And I adjure him earnestly that he accept of us." But Mubarak
rejoined, "O my lord, by Allah I am in sore fear. Hear me! An he
determine to accept us without hurt or harm he will approach us
in the semblance of a man rare of beauty and comeliness but, if
not, he will assume a form frightful and terrifying. Now an thou
see him in his favourable shape do thou arise forthright and
salam to him and above all things beware lest thou step beyond
this thy coth." The Prince replied, "To hear is to obey," and the
other continued, "And let thy salam to him be thy saying, O King
of the Sprites and Sovran of the Jann and Lord of Earth, my sire,
the whilome Sultan of Bassorah, whom the Angel of Death hath
removed (as is not hidden from thy Highness) was ever taken under
thy protection and I, like him, come to thee sueing the same
safeguard."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that Mubarak fell to lessoning
Zayn al-Asnam how he should salute the King of the Jinns, and
pursued, "Likewise, O my lord, if he hail us with gladsome face
of welcome he will doubtless say thee, 'Ask whatso thou wantest
of me!' and the moment he giveth thee his word do thou at once
prefer thy petition saying, O my lord, I require of thy Highness
the Ninth Statue than which is naught more precious in the world,
and thou didst promise my father to vouchsafe me that same." And
after this Mubarak instructed his master how to address the King
and crave of him the boon and how to bespeak him with pleasant
speech. Then he began his conjurations and fumigations and
adjurations and recitations of words not understanded of any and
but little time elapsed before cold rain down railed and
lightning flashed and thunder roared and thick darkness veiled
earth's face. Presently came forth a mighty rushing wind and a
voice like an earthquake, the quake of earth on Judgment
Day.[FN#40] The Prince, seeing these horrors and sighting that
which he had never before seen or heard, trembled for terror in
every limb; but Mubarak fell to laughing at him and saying, "Fear
not, O my lord: for that which thou dreadest is what we seek, for
to us it is an earnest of glad tidings and success; so be thou
satisfied and hold thyself safe."[FN#41] After this the skies
waxed clear and serene exceedingly while perfumed winds and the
purest scents breathed upon them; nor did a long time elapse ere
the King of the Jann presented himself under the semblance of a
beautiful man who had no peer in comeliness save and excepting
Him who lacketh likeness and to Whom be honour and glory! He
gazed at Zayn al-Asnam with a gladsome aspect and a riant,
whereat the Prince arose forthright and recited the string of
benedictions taught to him by his companion and the King said to
him with a smiling favour, "O Zayn al-Asnam, verily I was wont to
love thy sire, the Sultan of Bassorah and, when he visited me
ever, I used to give him an image of those thou sawest, each cut
of a single gem; and thou also shalt presently become to me
honoured as thy father and yet more. Ere he died I charged him to
write upon the silken curtain the writ thou readest and eke I
gave promise and made covenant with him to take thee like thy
parent under my safeguard and to gift thee as I gifted him with
an image, to wit, the ninth, which is of greater worth than all
those viewed by thee. So now 'tis my desire to stand by my word
and to afford thee my promised aid."--And Shahrazad was surprised
by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

         When it was the Five Hundred and Fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the Lord of the Jann said to
the Prince, "I will take thee under my safeguard and the Shaykh
thou sawest in thy swevens was myself and I also 'twas who bade
thee dig under thy palace down to the souterrain wherein thou
sawest the crocks of gold and the figures of fine gems. I also
well know wherefore thou art come hither and I am he who caused
thee to come and I will give thee what thou seekest, for all that
I would not give it to thy sire. But 'tis on condition that thou
return unto me bringing a damsel whose age is fifteen, a maiden
without rival or likeness in loveliness; furthermore she must be
a pure virgin and a clean maid who hath never lusted for male nor
hath ever been solicited of man;[FN#42] and lastly, thou must
keep faith with me in safeguarding the girl whenas thou returnest
hither and beware lest thou play the traitor with her whilst thou
bringest her to me." To this purport the Prince sware a mighty
strong oath adding, "O my lord, thou hast indeed honoured me by
requiring of me such service, but truly 'twill be right hard for
me to find a fair one like unto this; and, grant that I find one
perfectly beautiful and young in years after the requirement of
thy Highness, how shall I weet if she ever longed for mating with
man or that male ever lusted for her?" Replied the King, "Right
thou art, O Zayn al-Asnam, and verily this be a knowledge
whereunto the sons of men may on no wise attain. However, I will
give thee a mirror[FN#43] of my own whose virtue is this. When
thou shalt sight a young lady whose beauty and loveliness please
thee, do thou open the glass,[FN#44] and, if thou see therein her
image clear and undimmed, do thou learn forthright that she is a
clean maid without aught of defect or default and endowed with
every praiseworthy quality. But if, contrariwise, the figure be
found darkened or clothed in uncleanness, do thou straightway
know that damsel is sullied by soil of sex. Shouldst thou find
her pure and gifted with all manner good gifts, bring her to me
but beware not to offend with her and do villainy, and if thou
keep not faith and promise with me bear in mind that thou shalt
lose thy life." Hereupon the Prince made a stable and solemn pact
with the King, a covenant of the sons of the Sultans which may
never be violated.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

         When it was the Five Hundred and Sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, tell
us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the Prince Zayn al-Asnam made
a stable and trustworthy compact to keep faith with the King of
the Jann and never to play traitor thereto, but to bring the maid
en tout bien et tout honneur to that potentate who made over to
him the mirror saying, "O my son, take this looking-glass whereof
I bespake thee and depart straightway." Thereupon the Prince and
Mubarak arose and, after blessing him, fared forth and journeyed
back until they made the lakelet, where they sat but a little ere
appeared the boat which had brought them bearing the Jinni with
elephantine head and leonine body, and he was standing up ready
for paddling.[FN#45] The twain took passage with him (and this by
command of the King of the Jann) until they reached Cairo and
returned to their quarters, where they abode whilst they rested
from the travails of travel. Then the Prince turned to his
companion and said, "Arise with us and wend we to
Baghdad[FN#46]-city that we may look for some damsel such as the
King describeth!" and Mubarak replied, "O my lord, we be in
Cairo, a city of the cities, a wonder of the world, and here no
doubt there is but that I shall find such a maiden, nor is there
need that we fare therefor to a far country." Zayn al-Asnam
rejoined, "True for thee, O Mubarak, but what be the will and the
way whereby to hit upon such a girl, and who shall go about to
find her for us?" Quoth the other, "Be not beaten and broken
down, O my lord, by such difficulty: I have by me here an ancient
dame (and cursed be the same!) who maketh marriages, and she is
past mistress in wiles and guiles; nor will she be hindered by
the greatest of obstacles."[FN#47] So saying, he sent to summon
the old trot, and informed her that he wanted a damsel perfect of
beauty and not past her fifteenth year, whom he would marry to
the son of his lord; and he promised her sumptuous Bakhshish and
largesse if she would do her very best endeavour. Answered she,
"O my lord, be at rest: I will presently contrive to satisfy thy
requirement even beyond thy desire; for under my hand are damsels
unsurpassable in beauty and loveliness, and all be the daughters
of honourable men." But the old woman, O Lord of the Age, knew
naught anent the mirror. So she went forth to wander about the
city and work on her well-known ways.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say. 

        When it was the Five Hundred and Seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the old woman went forth to
work on her well-known ways, and she wandered about town to find
a maiden for the Prince Zayn al-Asnam. Whatever notable beauty
she saw she would set before Mubarak; but each semblance as it
was considered in the mirror showed exceedingly dark and dull,
and the inspector would dismiss the girl. This endured until the
crone had brought to him all the damsels in Cairo, and not one
was found whose reflection in the mirror showed clear-bright and
whose honour was pure and clean, in fact such an one as described
by the King of the Jann. Herewith Mubarak, seeing that he had not
found one in Cairo to please him, or who proved pure and
unsullied as the King of the Jann had required, determined to
visit Baghdad: so they rose up and equipped them and set out and
in due time they made the City of Peace where they hired them a
mighty fine mansion amiddlemost the capital. Here they settled
themselves in such comfort and luxury that the Lords of the land
would come daily to eat at their table, even the thirsty and
those who went forth betimes,[FN#48] and what remained of the
meat was distributed to the mesquin and the miserable; also every
poor stranger lodging in the Mosques would come to the house and
find a meal. Therefore the bruit of them for generosity and
liberality went abroad throughout the city and won for them
notable name and the fairest of fame; nor did any ever speak of
aught save the beneficence of Zayn al-Asnam and his generosity
and his opulence. Now there chanced to be in one of the
cathedral-mosques and Imﬂm,[FN#49] Abu Bakr hight, a ghostly man
passing jealous and fulsome, who dwelt hard by the manion wherein
the Prince and Mubarak abode; and he, when he heard of their
lavish gifts and alms deeds, and honourable report, smitten by
envy and malice and hatred, fell to devising how he might draw
them into some calamity that might despoil the goods they enjoyed
and destroy their lives, for it is the wont of envy to fall not
save upon the fortunate. So one day of the days, as he lingered
in the Mosque after mid-afternoon prayer, he came forwards amidst
the folk and cried, "O ye, my brethren of the Faith which is true
and who bear testimony to the unity of the Deity, I would have
you to weet that housed in this our quarter are two men which be
strangers, and haply ye have heard of them how they lavish and
waste immense sums of money, in fact moneys beyond measure, and
for my part I cannot but suspect that they are cutpurses and
brigands who commit robberies in their own country and who came
hither to expend their spoils."--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Five Hundred and Eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
tell us one of thy fair tales, so therewith we may cut short the
waking hours of this our night," and quoth Shahrazad:--It hath
reached me, O King of the Age, that the Imam in his jealousy of
Zayn al-Asnam and Mubarak said to the congregation, "Verily they
be brigands and cutpurses;" adding, "O believers of Mohammed, I
counsel you in Allah's name that ye guard yourselves against such
accurseds; for haply the Caliph shall in coming times hear of
these twain and ye also shall fall with them into
calamity.[FN#50] I have hastened to caution you, and having
warned you I wash my hands of your business, and after this do ye
as ye judge fit." All those present replied with one voice,
"Indeed we will do whatso thou wishest us to do, O Abu Bakr!" But
when the Imam heard this from them he arose and, bringing forth
ink-case and reed-pen and a sheet of paper, began inditing an
address to the Commander of the Faithful, recounting all that was
against the two strangers. However, by decree of Destiny, Mubarak
chanced to be in the Mosque amongst the crowd when he heard the
address of the blameworthy Imam and how he purposed applying by
letter to the Caliph. So he delayed not at all but returned home
forthright and, taking an hundred dinars and packing up a parcel
of costly clothes, silverwrought all, repaired in haste to the
reverend's quarters and knocked at the door. The preacher came
and opened to him, but sighting Mubarak he asked him in anger,
"What is't thou wantest and who art thou?" Whereto the other
answered, "I am Mubarak and at thy service, O my master t