hat ours are beyond all price. So arise, O my mother, as I bade
thee and bring me the porcelain bowl aforesaid, that I may
arrange therein some of these gems and we will see what semblance
they show." So she brought him the China bowl saying in herself,
"I shall know what to do when I find out if the words of my child
concerning these jewels be soothfast or not;" and she set it
before her son who pulled the stones out of his pockets and
disposed them in the bowl and ceased not arranging therein gems
of sorts till such time as he had filled it. And when it was
brimful she could not fix her eyes firmly upon it; on the
contrary, she winked and blinked for the dazzle of the stones and
their radiance and excess of lightning like glance; and her wits
were bewildered thereat; only she was not certified of their
value being really of the enormous extent she had been told.
Withal she reflected that possibly her son might have spoken
aright when he declared that their like was not to be found with
the Kings. Then Alaeddin turned to her and said, "Thou hast seen,
O my mother, that this present intended for the Sultan is
magnificent, and I am certified that it will procure for thee
high honour with him and that he will receive thee with all
respect. And now, O my mother, thou hast no excuse; so compose
thy thoughts and arise; take thou this bowl and away with it to
the palace." His mother rejoined, "O my son, 'tis true that the
present is high-priced exceedingly and the costliest of the
costly; also that according to thy word none owneth its like. But
who would have the boldness to go and ask the Sultan for his
daughter, the Lady Badr al-Badur? I indeed dare not say to him,
ÊI want thy daughter!' when he shall ask me, ÊWhat is thy want?'
for know thou, O my son, that my tongue will be tied. And,
granting that Allah assist me and I embolden myself to say to
him, ÊMy wish is to become a connection of thine through the
marriage of thy daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur, to my son
Alaeddin,' they will surely decide at once that I am demented and
will thrust me forth in disgrace and despised. I will not tell
thee that I shall thereby fall into danger of death, for 'twill
not only be I but thou likewise. However, O my son, of my regard
for thine inclination, I needs must embolden myself and hie
thither; yet, O my child, if the King receive me and honour me on
account of the gift and enquire of me what thou desirest,"--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin's mother said to her son, "And in reply I ask
of him that which thou desirest in the matter of thy marriage
with his daughter, how shall I answer him an he ask me, as is
man's wont, What estates hast thou, and what income? And
perchance, O my son, he will question me of this before
questioning me of thee." Alaeddin replied, " 'tis not possible
that the Sultan should make such demand what time he considereth
the jewels and their magnificence; nor is it meet to think of
such things as these which may never occur. Now do thou but arise
and set before him this present of precious stones and ask of him
his daughter for me, and sit not yonder making much of the
difficulty in thy fancy. Ere this thou hast learned, O mother
mine, that the Lamp which we possess hath become to us a stable
income and that whatso I want of it the same is supplied to me;
and my hope is that by means thereof I shall learn how to answer
the Sultan should he ask me of that thou sayest."[FN#130] Then
Alaeddin and his mother fell to talking over the subject all that
night long and when morning morrowed, the dame arose and
heartened her heart, especially as her son had expounded to her
some little of the powers of the Lamp and the virtues thereof; to
wit, that it would supply all they required of it. Alaeddin,
however, seeing his parent take courage when he explained to her
the workings of the Lamp, feared lest she might tattle to the
folk thereof;[FN#131]  so he said to her, "O my mother, beware
how thou talk to any of the properties of the Lamp and its
profit, as this is our one great good. Guard thy thoughts lest
thou speak over much concerning it before others, whoso they be;
haply we shall lose it and lose the boon fortune we possess and
the benefits we expect, for that 'tis of him."[FN#132]  His
mother replied, "Fear not, therefor, O my son," and she arose and
took the bowl full of jewels, which she wrapped up in a fine
kerchief, and went forth betimes that she might reach the Divan
ere it became crowded. When she passed into the Palace, the lev⁄e
not being fully attended, she saw the Wazirs and sundry of the
Lords of the land going into the presence-room and after a short
time, when the Divan was made complete by the Ministers and high
Officials and Chieftains and Emirs and Grandees, the Sultan
appeared and the Wazirs made their obeisance and likewise did the
Nobles and the Notables. The King seated himself upon the throne
of his kingship, and all present at the lev⁄e stood before him
with crossed arms awaiting his commandment to sit; and, when they
received it, each took his place according to his degree; then
the claimants came before the Sultan who delivered sentence,
after his wonted way, until the Divan was ended, when the King
arose and withdrew into the palace[FN#133] and the others all
went their ways.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin's mother, having come the earliest of all,
found means of entering without any addressing her or offering to
lead her to the presence; and she ceased not standing there until
the Divan ended, when the Sultan arose and withdrew into the
palace and the others all went about their business. And when she
saw the throne empty and the King passing into his Harem, she
also wended her ways and returned home. But as soon as her son
espied her, bowl in hand, he thought that haply something
untoward had befallen her, but he would not ask of aught until
such time as she had set down the bowl, when she acquainted him
with that which had occurred and ended by adding,
"Alhamdolillah,--laud to the Lord!--O my child, that I found
courage enough and secured for myself standing place in the lev⁄e
this day; and, albe I dreaded to bespeak the King yet
(Inshallah!) on the morrow I will address him. Even to-day were
many who, like myself, could not get audience of the Sultan. But
be of good cheer, O my son, and to-morrow needs must I bespeak
him for thy sake; and what happened not may happen." When
Alaeddin heard his parent's words, he joyed with excessive joy;
and, although he expected the matter to be managed hour by hour,
for excess of his love and longing to the Lady Badr al-Budur, yet
he possessed his soul in patience. They slept well that night and
betimes next morning the mother of Alaeddin arose and went with
her bowl to the King's court which she found closed. So she asked
the people and they told her that the Sultan did not hold a lev⁄e
every day but only thrice in the se'nnight; wherefor she
determined to return home; and, after this, whenever she saw the
court open she would stand before the King until the reception
ended and when it was shut she would go to make sure thereof; and
this was the case for the whole month. The Sultan was wont to
remark her presence at every lev⁄e, but, on the last day when she
took her station, as was her wont, before the Council, she
allowed it to close and lacked boldness to come forwards and
speak even a syllable. Now as the King having risen was making
for his Harem accompanied by the Grand Wazir, he turned to him
and said, "O Wazir, during the last six or seven lev⁄e days I see
yonder old woman present herself at every reception and I also
note that she always carrieth a something under her mantilla. Say
me, hast thou, O Wazir, any knowledge of her and her intention?"
"O my lord the Sultan, said the other, "verily women be weakly of
wits, and haply this goodwife cometh hither to complain before
thee[FN#134] against her goodman or some of her people." But this
reply was far from satisfying the Sultan; nay, be bade the Wazir,
in case she should come again, set her before him; and forthright
the Minister placed hand on head and exclaimed, "To hear is to
obey, O our lord the Sultan!"--And Shahrazad was surprised by the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the mother of Alaeddin, as she made a practice of
repairing to the Divan every day and passing into the room and
standing opposite the King, albeit she was sorrowful and sore
aweary, withal for her son's sake she endeavored to make easy all
her difficulties. Now one day of the days, when she did according
to her custom, the Sultan cast his eyes upon her as she stood
before him, and said to his Grand Wazir, "This be the very woman
whereof I spake to thee yesterday, so do thou straightway bring
her before me, that I may see what be her suit and fulfil her
need." Accordingly, the Minister at once introduced her and when
in the presence she saluted the King by kissing her finger tips
and raising them to her brow;[FN#135] and, praying for the
Sultan's glory and continuance and the permanence of his
prosperity, bussed ground before him. Thereupon, Quoth he "O
woman,[FN#136] for sundry days I have seen thee attend the lev⁄e
sans a word said; so tell me an thou have any requirement I may
grant." She kissed ground a second time and after blessing him,
answered, "Yea, verily, as thy head liveth, O King of the Age, I
have a want; but first of all, do thou deign grant me a promise
of safety that I may prefer my suit to the ears of our lord the
Sultan; for haply thy Highness[FN#137] may find it a singular."
The King, wishing to know her need, and being a man of unusual
mildness and clemency, gave his word for her immunity and bade
forthwith dismiss all about him, remaining without other but the
Grand Wazir. Then he turned towards his suppliant and said,
"Inform me of thy suit: thou hast the safeguard of Allah Al-
mighty." "O King of the Age," replied she, "I also require of
thee pardon;" and Quoth he, "Allah pardon thee even as I do."
Then, Quoth she, "O our lord the Sultan, I have a son, Alaeddin
hight; and he, one day of the days, having heard the crier
commending all men to shut shop and shun the streets, for that
the Lady Badr al-Budur, daughter of the Sultan, was going to the
Hammam, felt an uncontrollable longing to look upon her, and hid
himself in a stead whence he could sight her right well, and that
place was behind the door of the Baths. When she entered he
beheld her and considered her as he wished, and but too well;
for, since the time he looked upon her, O King of the Age, unto
this hour, life hath not been pleasant to him. And he hath
required of me that I ask her to wife for him from thy Highness,
nor could I drive this fancy from his mind because love of her
hath mastered his vitals and to such degree that he said to me,
ÊKnow thou, O mother mine, that an I win not my wish surely I
shall die.' Accordingly I hope that thy Highness will deign be
mild and merciful and pardon this boldness on the part of me and
my child and refrain to punish us therefor." When the Sultan
heard her tale he regarded her with kindness and, laughing aloud,
asked her, "What may be that thou carriest and what be in yonder
kerchief?" And she seeing the Sultan laugh in lieu of waxing
wroth at her words, forthright opened the wrapper and set before
him the bowl of jewels, whereby the audience-hall was illumined
as it were by lustres and candelabra;[FN#138] and he was dazed
and amazed at the radiance of the rare gems, and he fell to
marvelling at their size and beauty and excellence.--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, if thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the King saw the gems he was seized by surprise
and cried, "Never at all until this day saw I anything like these
jewels for size and beauty and excellence: nor deem I that there
be found in my treasury a single one like them." Then he turned O
Wazir? Tell me hast thou to his Minister and asked, "What sayest
thou, seen in thy time such mighty fine jewels as these?" The
other answered, "Never saw I such, O our lord the Sultan, nor do
I think that there be in the treasures of my lord the Sultan the
fellow of the least thereof." The King resumed, "Now indeed whoso
hath presented to me such jewels meriteth to become bridegroom to
my daughter, Badr al-Budur; because, as far as I see, none is
more deserving of her than he." When the Wazir heard the Sultan's
words he was tongue-tied with concern and he grieved with sore
grief, for the King had promised to give the Princess in marriage
to his son; so after a little while he said, "O King of the Age,
thy Highness deigned promise me that the Lady Badr al-Budur
should be spouse to my son; so 'tis but right that thine exalted
Highness vouchsafe us a delay of three months, during which time,
Inshallah! my child may obtain and present an offering yet
costlier than this." Accordingly the King, albeit he knew that
such a thing could not be done, or by the Wazir or by the
greatest of his Grandees, yet of his grace and kindness granted
him the required delay. Then he turned to the old woman,
Alaeddin's mother, and said, "Go to thy son and tell him I have
pledged my word that my daughter shall be in his name;[FN#139]
only 'tis needful that I make the requisite preparations of
nuptial furniture for her use; and 'tis only meet that he take
patience for the next three months." Receiving this reply,
Alaeddin's mother thanked the Sultan and blessed him; then, going
forth in hottest haste, as one flying for joy, she went home; and
when her son saw her entering with a smiling face, he was
gladdened at the sign of good news, especially because she had
returned without delay as on the Fast days, and had not brought
back the bowl. Presently he asked her saying, "Inshallah, thou
bearest me, O my mother, glad tidings; and peradventure the
jewels and their value have wrought their work and belike thou
hast been kindly received by the King and he hath shown thee
grace and hath given ear to thy request?" So she told him the
whole tale, how the Sultan had entreated her well and had
marvelled at the extraordinary size of the gems and their
surpassing water as did also the Wazir, adding, "And he promised
that his daughter should be thine. Only, O my child, the Wazir
spake of a secret contract made with him by the Sultan before he
pledged himself to me and, after speaking privily, the King put
me off to the end of three months: therefore I have become
fearful lest the Wazir be evilly disposed to thee and perchance
he may attempt to change the Sultan's mind." And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when Alaeddin heard his mother's words and how the
Sultan had promised him his daughter, deferring, however, the
wedding until after the third month, his mind was gladdened and
he rejoiced exceedingly and said, "Inasmuch as the King hath
given his word after three months (well, it is a long time!), at
all events my gladness is mighty great." Then he thanked his
parent, showing her how her good work had exceeded her toil and
travail; and said to her, "By Allah, O my mother, hitherto I was
as 'twere in my grave and therefrom thou hast withdrawn me; and I
praise Allah Almighty because I am at this moment certified that
no man in the world is happier than I or more fortunate." Then he
took patience until two of the three months had gone by. Now one
day of the days his mother fared forth about sundown to the Bazar
that she might buy somewhat of oil; and she found all the market
shops fast shut and the whole city decorated, and the folk
placing waxen tapers and flowers at their casements; and she
beheld the soldiers and household troops and Aghﬂs[FN#140] riding
in procession and flambeaux and lustres flaming and flaring, and
she wondered at the marvellous sight and the glamour of the
scene. So she went in to an oilman's store which stood open still
and bought her need of him and said, "By thy life, O uncle, tell
me what be the tidings in town this day, that people have made
all these decorations and every house and market-street are
adorned and the troops all stand on guard?" The oilman asked her,
"O woman, I suppose thou art a stranger and not one of this
city?" and she answered, "Nay, I am thy townswoman." He rejoined,
"Thou a towns-woman, and yet wottest not that this very night the
son of the Grand Wazir goeth in to the Lady Badr al-Budur,
daughter of the Sultan! He is now in the Hammam and all this
power of soldiery is on guard and standing under arms to await
his coming forth, when they will bear him in bridal procession to
the palace where the Princess expecteth him." As the mother of
Alaeddin heard these words, she grieved and was distraught in
thought and perplexed how to inform her son of this sorrowful
event, well knowing that the poor youth was looking, hour by
hour, to the end of the three months. But she returned
straightway home to him and when she had entered she said, "O my
son, I would give thee certain tidings, yet hard to me will be
the sorrow they shall occasion thee." He cried, "Let me know what
be thy news;" and she replied, "Verily the Sultan hath broken his
promise to thee in the matter of the Lady Badr al-Budur, and this
very night the Grand Wazir's son goeth in to her. And for some
time, O my son, I have suspected that the Minister would change
the King's mind, even as I told thee how he had spoken privily to
him before me." Alaeddin[FN#141] asked, "How learnedst thou that
the Wazir's son is this night to pay his first visit to the
Princess?" So she told him the whole tale, how when going to buy
oil she had found the city decorated and the eunuch-officials and
Lords of the land with the troops under arms awaiting the
bridegroom from the Baths; and that the first visit was appointed
for that very night. Hearing this Alaeddin was seized with a
fever of jealousy brought on by his grief: however, after a short
while he remembered the Lamp and, recovering his spirits said,
"By thy life, O my mother, do thou believe that the Wazir's son
will not enjoy her as thou thinkest. But now leave we this
discourse and arise thou and serve up supper[FN#142] and after
eating let me retire to my own chamber and all will be well and
happy." And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin after he had supped retired to his chamber
and, locking the door, brought out the Lamp and rubbed it, whenas
forthright appeared to him its Familiar who said, "Ask whatso
thou wantest, for I am thy Slave and Slave to him who holdeth the
Lamp in hand; I and all the Slaves of the Lamp." He replied,
"Hear me! I prayed the Sultan for his daughter to wife and he
plighted her to me after three months; but he hath not kept his
word; nay, he hath given her to the son of the Wazir and this
very night the bridegroom will go in to her. Therefore I command
thee (an thou be a trusty Servitor to the Lamp) when thou shalt
see bride and bridegroom bedded together this night,[FN#143] at
once take them up and bear them hither abed; and this be what I
want of thee." The Marid replied, "Hearing and obeying; and if
thou have other service but this, do thou demand of me all thou
desirest." Alaeddin "At the present time I require naught save
that I bade thee do." Here upon the Slave disappeared and
Alaeddin returned to pass the rest of the evening with his
mother. But at the hour when he knew that the Servitor would be
coming, he arose and refired to his chamber and after a little
while, behold, the Marid came bringing to him the newly-wedded
couple upon their bridal-bed. Alaeddin rejoiced to see them with
exceeding joy; then he cried to the Slave, "Carry yonder gallows-
bird hence and lay him at full length in the privy."[FN#144] His
bidding was done straightway; but, before leaving him, the Slave
blew upon the bridegroom a blast so cold that it shrivelled him
and the plight of the Wazir's son became piteous. Then the
Servitor returning to Alaeddin said to him, "An thou require
aught else, inform me thereof;" and said the other, "Return a-
morn that thou mayest restore them to their stead;" whereto, "I
hear and obey," Quoth the Marid and evanished. Presently Alaeddin
arose, hardly believing that the affair had been such a success
for him; but whenas he looked upon the Lady Badr al-Budur lying
under his own roof, albeit he had long burned with her love yet
he preserved respect for her and said, "O Princess of fair ones,
think not that I brought thee hither hither to minish thy honour.
Heaven forfend! Nay 'twas only to prevent the wrong man enjoying
thee, for that thy sire the Sultan promised thee to me. So do
thou rest in peace."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales." whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Lady Badr al-Budur, daughter of the Sultan,
saw herself in that mean and darksome lodging, and heard
Alaeddin's words, she was seized with fear and trembling and
waxed clean distraught; nor could she return aught of reply.
Presently the youth arose and stripping off his outer dress
placed a scymitar between them and lay upon the bed beside the
Princess;[FN#145] and he did no villain deed, for it sufficed him
to prevent the consummation of her nuptials with the Wazir's son.
On the other hand the Lady Badr al-Budur passed a night the
evillest of all nights; nor in her born days had she seen a
worse; and the same was the case with the Minister's son who lay
in the chapel of ease and who dared not stir for the fear of the
Jinni which overwhelmed him. As soon as it was morning the Slave
appeared before Alaeddin, without the Lamp being rubbed, and said
to him, "O my lord, an thou require aught, command me therefor,
that I may do it upon my head and mine eyes." Said the other,
"Go, take up and carry the bride and bridegroom to their own
apartment;" so the Servitor did his bidding in an eye-glance and
bore away the pair, and placed them in the palace as whilome they
were and without their seeing any one; but both died of affright
when they found themselves being transported from stead to
stead.[FN#146] And the Marid had barely time to set them down and
wend his ways ere the Sultan came on a visit of congratulation to
his daughter; and, when the Wazir's son heard the doors thrown
open, he sprang straightway from his couch and donned his
dress[FN#147] for he knew that none save the King could enter at
that hour. Yet it was exceedingly hard for him to leave his bed
wherein he wished to warm himself a trifle after his cold night
in the water closet which he had lately left.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Sultan went in to his daughter Badr al-Budur and
kissing her between the eyes gave her good morning and asked her
of her bridegroom and whether she was pleased and satisfied with
him. But she returned no reply whatever and looked at him with
the eye of anger and, although he repeated his words again and
again, she held her peace nor bespake him with a single syllable.
So the King quitted her and, going to the Queen, informed her of
what had taken place between him and his daughter; and the
mother, unwilling to leave the Sultan angered with their child,
said to him, "O King of the Age, this be the custom of most
newly-married couples at least during their first days of
marriage, for that they are bashful and somewhat coy. So deign
thou excuse her and after a little while she will again become
herself and speak with the folk as before, whereas now her shame,
O King of the Age, keepeth her silent. However 'tis my wish to
fare forth and see her." Thereupon the Queen arose and donned her
dress; then, going to her daughter, wished her good morning and
kissed her between the eyes. Yet would the Princess make no
answer at all, whereat Quoth the Queen to herself, "Doubtless
some strange matter hath occurred to trouble her with such
trouble as this." So she asked her saying "O my daughter, what
hath caused this thy case? Let me know what hath betided thee
that, when I come and give thee good morning, thou hast not a
word to say to me?" Thereat the Lady Badr al-Budur raised her
head and said, "Pardon me O my mother, 'twas my duty to meet thee
with all respect and worship, seeing that thou hast honoured me
by this visit. However, I pray thee to hear the cause of this my
condition and see how the night I have just spent hath been to me
the evillest of the nights. Hardly had we lain down, O my mother,
than one whose form I wot not uplifted our bed and transported it
to a darksome place, fulsome and mean." Then the Princess related
to the Queen-mother all that had befallen her that night; how
they had taken away her bridegroom, leaving her lone and
lonesome, and how after a while came another youth who lay beside
her, in lieu of her bridegroom, after placing his scymitar
between her and himself; "and in the morning" (she continued) "he
who carried us off returned and bore us straight back to our own
stead. But at once when he arrived hither he left us and suddenly
my sire the Sultan entered at the hour and moment of our coming
and I I had nor heart nor tongue to speak him withal, for the
stress of the terror and trembling which came upon me. Haply such
lack of duty may have proved sore to him, so I hope, O my mother,
that thou wilt acquaint him with the cause of this my condition
and that he will pardon me for not answering him and blame me
not, but rather accept my excuses."--And Shahrazad was surprised
by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Queen heard these words of Princess Badr al-
Budur, she said to her, "O my child, compose thy thoughts. An
thou tell such tale before any, haply shall he say, ÊVerily, the
Sultan's daughter hath lost her wits.' And thou hast done right
well in not choosing to recount thine adventure to thy father;
and beware and again I say beware, O my daughter, lest thou
inform him thereof." The Princess replied, "O my mother, I have
spoken to thee like one sound in senses nor have I lost my wits:
this be what befel me and, if thou believe it not because coming
from me, ask my bridegroom." To which the Queen replied, "Rise up
straightway, O my daughter, and banish from thy thoughts such
fancies as these; and robe thyself and come forth to glance at
the bridal feasts and festivities they are making in the city for
the sake of thee and thy nuptials; and listen to the drumming and
the singing and look at the decorations all intended to honour
thy marriage, O my daughter." So saying, the Queen at once
summoned the tirewomen who dressed and prepared the Lady Badr al-
Budur; and presently she went in to the Sultan and assured him
that their daughter had suffered during all her wedding-night
from swevens and nightmare and said to him, "Be not severe with
her for not answering thee." Then the Queen sent privily for the
Wazir's son and asked of the matter, saying, "Tell me, are these
words of the Lady Badr al-Budur soothfast or not?" But he, in his
fear of losing his bride out of hand, answered, "O my lady, I
have no knowledge of that whereof thou speakest." Accordingly the
mother made sure that her daughter had seen visions and dreams.
The marriage-feasts lasted throughout that day with
Almahs[FN#148] and singers and the smiting of all manner
instruments of mirth and merriment, while the Queen and the Wazir
and his son strave right strenuously to enhance the festivities
that the Princess might enjoy herself; and that day they left
nothing of what exciteth to pleasure unrepresented in her
presence, to the end that she might forget what was in her
thoughts and derive increase of joyance. Yet did naught of this
take any effect upon her; nay, she sat in silence, sad of
thought, sore perplexed at what had befallen her during the last
night. It is true that the Wazir's son had suffered even more
because he had passed his sleeping hours lying in the water-
closet: he, however, had falsed the story and had cast out
remembrance of the night in the first place for his fear of
losing his bride and with her the honour of a connection which
brought him such excess of consideration and for which men envied
him so much; and, secondly, on account of the wondrous loveliness
of the Lady Badr al-Budur and her marvellous beauty. Alaeddin
also went forth that day and looked at the merry-makings which
extended throughout the city as well as the palace and he fell a-
laughing, especially when he heard the folk prating of the high
honour which had accrued to the son of the Wazir and the
prosperity of his fortunes in having become son-in-law to the
Sultan and the high consideration shown by the wedding f€tes. And
he said in his mind, "Indeed ye wot not, O ye miserables, what
befel him last night that ye envy him!" But after darkness fell
and it was time for sleep, Alaeddin arose and, retiring to his
chamber, rubbed the Lamp, whereupon the Slave incontinently
appeared.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Slave appeared in presence of Alaeddin, he was
bidden to bring him the Sultan's daughter together with her
bridegroom as on the past night ere the Wazir's son could abate
her maidenhead. So the Marid without stay or delay evanished for
a little while until the appointed time, when he returned
carrying the bed whereon lay the Lady Badr al-Budur and the
Wazir's son; and he did with the bridegroom as he had done
before, to wit, he took him up and lay him at full length in the
jakes and there left him dried up for excess of fear and
trembling. Then Alaeddin arose, and placing the scymitar between
himself and the Princess, lay down beside her; and when day broke
the Slave restored the pair to their own place, leaving Alaeddin
filled with delight at the state of the Minister's son. Now when
the Sultan woke up amorn he resolved to visit his daughter and
see if she would treat him as on the past day; so shaking off his
sleep he sprang up and arrayed himself in his raiment and, going
to the apartment of the Princess bade open the door. Thereat the
son of the Wazir arose forthright and came down from his bed and
began donning his dress whilst his ribs were wrung with cold; for
when the King entered the Slave had but just brought him back.
The Sultan, raising the arras,[FN#149] drew near his daughter as
she lay abed and gave her good morning; then kissing her between
the eyes, he asked her of her case. But he saw her looking sour
and sad and she answered him not at all, only glowering at him as
one in anger and her plight was pitiable. Hereat the Sultan waxed
wroth with her for that she would not reply and he suspected that
something evil had befallen her,[FN#150] whereupon he bared his
blade and cried to her, brand in hand, saying, "What be this hath
betided thee? Either acquaint me with what happened or this very
moment I will take thy life! Is such conduct the token of honour
and respect I expect of thee, that I address thee and thou
answerest me not a word?" When the Lady Badar al- Badur saw her
sire in high dudgeon and the naked glaive in his grip, she was
freed from her fear of the past, so she raised her head and said
to him, "O my beloved father, be not wroth with me nor be hasty
in thy hot passion for I am excusable in what thou shalt see of
my case. So do thou lend an ear to what occurred to me and well I
wot that after hearing my account of what befel to me during
these two last nights, thou wilt pardon me and thy Highness will
be softened to pitying me even as I claim of thee affection for
thy child." Then the Princess informed her father of all that had
betided her adding, "O my sire, an thou believe me not, ask my
bridegroom and he will recount to thy Highness the whole
adventure, nor did I know either what they would do with him when
they bore him away from my side or where they would place him."--
And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day, and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan heard his daughter's words, he was
saddened and his eyes brimmed with tears, then he sheathed his
sabre and kissed her saying, "O my daughter wherefore[FN#151]
didst thou not tell me what happened on the past night that I
might have guarded thee from this torture and terror which
visited thee a second time? But now 'tis no matter. Rise and cast
out all such care and to-night I will set a watch to ward thee
nor shall any mishap again make thee miserable." Then the Sultan
returned to his palace and straightway bade summon the Grand
Wazir and asked him, as he stood before him in his service, "O
Wazir how dost thou look upon this matter? Haply thy son hath
informed thee of what occurred to him and to my daughter." The
Minister replied, "O King of the Age, I have not seen my son or
yesterday or to-day." Hereat the Sultan told him all that had
afflicted the Princess, adding, " 'tis my desire that thou at
once seek tidings of thy son concerning the facts of the case:
peradventure of her fear my daughter may not be fully aware of
what really befel her; withal I hold all her words to be
truthful." So the Grand Wazir arose and, going forth, bade summon
his son and asked him anent all his lord had told him whether it
be true or untrue. The youth replied, "O my father the Wazir,
Heaven forbid that the Lady Badr al-Budur speak falsely: indeed
all she said was sooth and these two nights proved to us the
evillest of our nights instead of being nights of pleasure and
marriage-joys. But what befel me was the greater evil because,
instead of sleeping abed with my bride, I lay in the wardrobe, a
black hole, frightful, noisome of stench, truly damnable; and my
ribs were bursten with cold." In fine the young man told his
father the whole tale, adding as he ended it, "O dear father
mine, I implore thee to speak with the Sultan that he may set me
free from this marriage. Yes, indeed 'tis a high honour for me to
be the Sultan's son-in-law and especially the love of the
Princess hath gotten hold of my vitals; but I have no strength
left to endure a single night like unto these two last."--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Wazir, hearing the words of his son, was saddened
and sorrowful exceedingly, for it was his design to advance and
promote his child by making him son-in-law to the Sultan. So he
became thoughtful and perplexed about the affair and the device
whereby to manage it, and it was sore grievous for him to break
off the marriage, it having been a rare enjoyment to him that he
had fallen upon such high good fortune. Accordingly he said,
"Take patience, O my son, until we see what may happen this
night, when we will set watchmen to ward you; nor do thou give up
the exalted distinction which hath fallen to none save to
thyself." Then the Wazir left him and, returning to the sovran,
reported that all told to him by the Lady Badr al-Budur was a
true tale; whereupon Quoth the Sultan, "Since the affair is on
this wise, we require no delay," and he at once ordered all the
rejoicings to cease and the marriage to be broken off. This
caused the folk and the citizen to marvel at the matter,
especially when they saw the Grand Wazir and his son leaving the
palace in pitiable plight for grief and stress of passion; and
the people fell to asking, "What hath happened and what is the
cause of the wedding being made null and void?" Nor did any know
aught of the truth save Alaeddin the lover who claimed the
Princess's hand, and he laughed in his sleeve. But even after the
marriage was dissolved, the Sultan forgot nor even recalled to
mind his promise made to Alaeddin's mother; and the same was the
case with the Grand Wazir, while neither had any inkling of
whence befel them that which had befallen. So Alaeddin patiently
awaited the lapse of the three months after which the Sultan had
pledged himself to give him to wife his daughter; but, as soon as
ever the term came, he sent his mother to the Sultan for the
purpose of requiring him to keep his covenant. So she went to the
palace and when the King appeared in the Divan and saw the old
woman standing before him, he remembered his promise to her
concerning the marriage after a term of three months, and he
turned to the Minister and said "O Wazir, this be the ancient
dame who presented me with the jewels and to whom we pledged our
word that when the three months had elapsed we would summon her
to our presence before all others." So the Minister went forth
and fetched her[FN#152] and when she went in to the Sultan's
presence she saluted him and prayed for his glory and permanence
of prosperity. Hereat the King asked her if she needed aught, and
she answered, "O King of the Age, the three months' term thou
assignedst to me is finished, and this is thy time to marry my
son Alaeddin with thy daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur." The
Sultan was distraught at this demand, especially when he saw the
old woman's pauper condition, one of the meanest of her kind; and
yet the offering she had brought to him was of the most
magnificent, far beyond his power to pay the price. Accordingly,
he turned to the Grand Wazir and said, "What device is there with
thee? In very sooth I did pass my word, yet meseemeth that they
be pauper folk and not persons of high condition."--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Grand Wazir who was dying of envy and who was
especially saddened by what had befallen his son, said to
himself, "How shall one like this wed the King's daughter and my
son lose this highmost honour?" Accordingly, he answered his
Sovran speaking privily, "O my lord, 'tis an easy[FN#153] matter
to keep off a poor devil such as this, for he is not worthy that
thy Highness give his daughter to a fellow whom none knoweth what
he may be." "By what means," enquired the Sultan, "shall we put
off the man when I pledged my promise; and the word of the Kings
is their bond?" Replied the Wazir, "O my lord, my rede is that
thou demand of him forty platters made of pure sand-gold[FN#154]
and full of gems (such as the woman brought thee aforetime), with
forty white slave-girls to carry the platters and forty black
eunuch-slaves." The King rejoined, "By Allah, O Wazir, thou hast
spoken to the purpose, seeing that such thing is not possible and
by this way we shall be freed." Then Quoth he to Alaeddin's
mother, "Do thou go and tell thy son that I am a man of my word
even as I plighted it to him, but on condition that he have power
to pay the dower of my daughter; and that which I require of him
is a settlement consisting of two score platters of virgin gold,
all brimming with gems the like of those thou broughtest to me,
and as many white handmaids to carry them and two score black
eunuch-slaves to serve and escort the bearers. An thy son avail
hereto I will marry him with my daughter." Thereupon she returned
home wagging her head and saying in her mind, "Whence can my poor
boy procure these platters and such jewels? And granted that he
return to the Enchanted Treasury and pluck them from the trees
which, however, I hold impossible; yet given that he bring them
whence shall he come by the girls and the blacks?" Nor did she
leave communing with herself till she reached her home, where she
found Alaeddin awaiting her, and she lost no time in saying "O my
son, did I not tell thee never to fancy that thy power would
extend to the Lady Badr al-Budur, and that such a matter is not
possible to folk like ourselves?" "Recount to me the news," Quoth
he; so Quoth she, "O my child, verily the Sultan received me with
all honour according to his custom and, meseemeth his intentions
towards us be friendly. But thine enemy is that accursed Wazir;
for, after I addressed the King in thy name as thou badest me
say, ÊIn very sooth the promised term is past,' adding Ê 'Twere
well an thy Highness would deign issue commandment for the
espousals of thy daughter the Lady Badr al-Budur to my son
Alaeddin he turned to and addressed the Minister who answered
privily, after which the Sultan gave me his reply." Then she
enumerated the King's demands and said, "O my son, he indeed
expecteth of thee an instant reply but I fancy that we have no
answer for him." And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when Alaeddin heard these words he laughed and said, "O
my mother, thou affirmeth that we have no answer and thou deemest
the case difficult exceedingly; but compose thy thoughts and
arise and bring me somewhat we may eat; and, after we have dined,
an the Compassionate be willing, thou shalt see my reply. Also
the Sultan thinketh like thyself that he hath demanded a
prodigious dower in order to divert me from his daughter, whereas
the fact is that he hath required of me a matter far less than I
expected. But do thou fare forth at once and purchase the
provision and leave me to procure thee a reply." So she went out
to fetch her needful from the Bazar and Alaeddin retired to his
chamber and taking the Lamp rubbed it, when forthright appeared
to him its Slave and said, "Ask, O my lord, whatso thou wantest."
The other replied, "I have demanded of the Sultan his daughter to
wife and he hath required of me forty bowls of purest gold each
weighing ten pounds[FN#155] and all to be filled with gems such
as we find in the Gardens of the Hoard; furthermore, that they be
borne on the heads of as many white handmaids, each attended by
her black eunuch-slave, also forty in full rate; so I desire that
thou bring all these into my presence." "Hearkening and obeying,
O my lord," Quoth the Slave and, disappearing for the space of an
hour or so, presently returned bringing the platters and jewels,
handmaids and eunuchs; then, setting them before him the Marid
cried, "This be what thou demandest of me: declare now an thou
want any matter or service other than this." Alaeddin rejoined,
"I have need of naught else; but, an I do, I will summon thee and
let thee know." The Slave now disappeared and, after a little
while, Alaeddin's mother returned home and, on entering the
house, saw the blacks and the handmaids.[FN#156] Hereat she
wondered and exclaimed, "All this proceedeth from the Lamp which
Allah perpetuate to my son!" But ere she doffed her mantilla
Alaeddin said to her, "O my mother, this be thy time before the
Sultan enter his Serraglio-palace;[FN#157] do thou carry to him
what he required and wend thou with it at once, so may he know
that I avail to supply all he wanteth and yet more; also that he
is beguiled by his Grand Wazir and the twain imagined vainly that
they would baffle me." Then he arose forthright and opened the
house-door, when the handmaids and blackamoors paced forth in
pairs, each girl with her eunuch beside her, until they crowded
the quarter, Alaeddin's mother foregoing them. And when the folk
of that ward sighted such mighty fine sight and marvellous
spectacle, all stood at gaze and they considered the forms and
figures of the handmaids marvelling at their beauty and
loveliness, for each and every wore robes inwrought with gold and
studded with jewels, no dress being worth less than a thousand
dinars.[FN#158] They stared as intently at the bowls and albeit
these were covered with pieces of brocade, also orfrayed and
dubbed with precious stones, yet the sheen outshot from them
dulled the thine of sun.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the folk and especially the people of the quarter stood
a marvelling at this singular scene. Then Alaeddin's mother
walked forwards and all the handmaids and eunuchs paced behind
her in the best of ordinance and disposition, and the citizens
gathered to gaze at the beauty of the damsels, glorifying God the
Most Great, until the train reached the palace and entered it
accompanied by the tailor's widow. Now when the Aghas and
Chamberlains and Army-officers beheld them, all were seized with
surprise, notably by seeing the handmaids who each and every
would ravish the reason of an anchorite. And albeit the royal
Chamberlains and Officials were men of family, the sons of
Grandees and Emirs, yet they could not but especially wonder at
the costly dresses of the girls and the platters borne upon their
heads; nor could they gaze at them open eyed by reason of the
exceeding brilliance and radiance. Then the Nabobs went in and
reported to the King who forthright bade admit them to the
presence chamber, and Alaeddin's mother went in with them. When
they stood before the Sultan, all saluted him with every sign of
respect and worship and prayed for his glory and prosperity; then
they set down from their heads the bowls at his feet and, having
removed the brocade covers, rested with arms crossed behind them.
The Sultan wondered with exceeding wonder and was distraught by
the beauty of the handmaids and their loveliness which passed
praise; and his wits were wildered when he considered the golden
bowls brimful of gems which captured man's vision, and he was
perplexed at the marvel until he became, like the dumb, unable to
utter a syllable for the excess of his wonder. Also his sense was
stupefied the more when he bethought him that within a hour or so
all these treasures had been collected. Presently he commended
the slave-girls to enter, with what loads they bore, the dower of
the Princess; and, when they had done his bidding Alaeddin's
mother came forward and said to the Sultan, "O my lord, this be
not much wherewith to honour the Lady Badr al-Budur, for that she
meriteth these things multiplied times manifold." Hereat the
Sovran turned to the Minister and asked, "What sayest thou, O
Wazir? is not he who could produce such wealth in a time so
brief, is he not, I say, worthy to become the Sultan's son-in-law
and take the King's daughter to wife?" Then the Minister
(although he marvelled at these riches even more than did the
Sultan), whose envy was killing him and growing greater hour by
hour, seeing his liege lord satisfied with the moneys and the
dower and yet being unable to fight against fact, made answer, "
'tis not worthy of her." Withal he fell to devising a device
against the King that he might withhold the Lady Badr al-Budur
from Alaeddin and accordingly he continued, "O my liege, the
treasures of the universe all of them are not worth a nail-paring
of thy daughter: indeed thy Highness hath prized these things
overmuch in comparison with her."--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Five Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the King heard the words of his Grand Wazir, he
knew that the speech was prompted by excess of envy; so turning
to the mother of Alaeddin he said, "O woman, go to thy son and
tell him that I have accepted of him the dower and stand to my
bargain, and that my daughter be his bride and he my son-in-law:
furthermore, bid him at once make act of presence that I may
become familiar with him: he shall see naught from me save all
honour and consideration, and this night shall be the beginning
of the marriage-festivities. Only, as I said to thee, let him
come to me and tarry not." Thereupon Alaeddin's mother returned
home with the speed of the stormwinds that she might hasten her
utmost to congratulate her son; and she flew with joy at the
thought that her boy was about to become[FN#159] son-in-law to
the Sultan. After her departure the King dismissed the Divan and,
entering the palace of the Princess, bade them bring the bowls
and the handmaids before him and before her, that she also might
inspect them. But when the Lady Badr al-Budur considered the
jewels, she waxed distraught and cried, "Meseemeth that in the
treasuries of the world there be not found one jewel rivalling
these jewels." Then she looked at the handmaids and marvelled at
their beauty and loveliness, and knew that all this came from her
new bridegroom who had sent them in her service. So she was
gladdened, albeit she had been grieved and saddened on account of
her former hus