band, the Wazir's son, and she rejoiced with
exceeding joy when she gazed upon the damsels and their charms;
nor was her sire, the Sultan, less pleased and inspirited when he
saw his daughter relieved of all her mourning and melancholy and
his own vanished at the sight of her enjoyment. Then he asked
her, "O my daughter, do these things divert thee? Indeed I deem
that this suitor of thine be more suitable to thee than the son
of the Wazir; and right soon (Inshallah!), O my daughter, shalt
thou have fuller joy with him." Such was the case with the King;
but as regards Alaeddin, as soon as he saw his mother entering
the house with face laughing for stress of joy he rejoiced at the
sign of glad tidings and cried, "To Allah alone be lauds!
Perfected is all I desired." Rejoined his mother, "Be gladdened
at my good news, O my son, and hearten thy heart and cool thine
eyes for the winning of thy wish. The Sultan hath accepted thine
offering, I mean the moneys and the dower of the Lady Badr al-
Budur, who is now thine affianced bride; and, this very night, O
my child, is your marriage and thy first visit to her; for the
King, that he might assure me of his word, hath proclaimed to the
world thou art his son-in-law and promised this night to be the
night of going in. But he also said to me, ÊLet thy son come
hither forthright that I may become familiar with him and receive
him with all honour and worship.' And now here am I, O my son, at
the end of my labours; happen whatso may happen the rest is upon
thy shoulders." Thereupon Alaeddin arose and kissed his mother's
hand and thanked her, enhancing her kindly service: then he left
her and entering his chamber took the Lamp and rubbed it when, lo
and behold! its Slave appeared and cried, "Adsum! Ask whatso thou
wantest." The young man replied, " 'tis my desire that thou take
me to a Hammam whose like is not in the world; then, fetch me a
dress so costly and kingly that no royalty ever owned its
fellow." The Marid replied, "I hear and I obey," and carried him
to Baths such as were never seen by the Kings of the ChosroŸs,
for the building was all of alabaster and carnelian and it
contained marvellous limnings which captured the sight; and the
great hall[FN#160] was studded with precious stones. Not a soul
was therein but, when Alaeddin entered, one of the Jann in human
shape washed him and bathed[FN#161] him to the best of his
desire.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin, after having been washed and bathed, left the
Baths and went into the great hall where he found that his old
dress had been removed and replaced by a suit of the most
precious and princely. Then he was served with sherbets and
ambergris'd coffee[FN#162] and, after drinking, he arose and a
party of black slaves came forwards and clad him in the costliest
of clothing, then perfumed and fumigated him. It is known that
Alaeddin was the son of a tailor, a pauper, yet now would none
deem him to be such; nay, all would say, "This be the greatest
that is of the progeny of the Kings: praise be to Him who
changeth and who is not changed!" Presently came the Jinni and
lifting him up bore him to his home and asked, "O my lord, tell
me hast thou aught of need?" He answered, "Yes, 'tis my desire
that thou bring me eight and forty Mamelukes, of whom two dozen
shall forego me and the rest follow me, the whole number with
their war-chargers and clothing and accoutrements; and all upon
them and their steeds must be of naught save of highest worth and
the costliest, such as may not be found in treasuries of the
Kings. Then fetch me a stallion fit for the riding of the
ChosroŸs and let his furniture, all thereof, be of gold crusted
with the finest gems:[FN#163] fetch me also eight and forty
thousand dinars that each white slave may carry a thousand gold
pieces. 'tis now my intent to fare to the Sultan, so delay thou
not, for that without all these requisites whereof I bespake thee
I may not visit him. Moreover set before me a dozen slave-girls
unique in beauty and dight with the most magnificent dresses,
that they wend with my mother to the royal palace; and let every
handmaid be robed in raiment that befitteth Queen's wearing." The
Slave replied, "To hear is to obey;" and, disappearing for an
eye-twinkling, brought all he was bidden bring and led by hand a
stallion whose rival was not amongst the Arabian Arabs,[FN#164]
and its saddle cloth was of splendid brocade gold-inwrought.
Thereupon, without stay or delay, Alaeddin sent for his mother
and gave her the garments she should wear and committed to her
charge the twelve slave-girls forming her suite to the palace.
Then he sent one of the Mamelukes, whom the Jinni had brought, to
see if the Sultan had left the Serraglio or not. The white slave
went forth lighter than the lightning and returning in like
haste, said, "O my lord, the Sultan awaiteth thee!" Hereat
Alaeddin arose and took horse, his Mamelukes riding a-van and a-
rear of him, and they were such that all must cry, "Laud to the
Lord who created them and clothed them with such beauty and
loveliness." And they scattered gold amongst the crowd in front
of their master who surpassed them all in comeliness and
seemlihead nor needst thou ask concerning the sons of the Kings,-
-praise be to the Bountiful, the Eternal! All this was of the
virtues of the Wonderful Lamp,[FN#165] which, whoso possessed,
him it gifted with fairest favour and finest figure, with wealth
and with wisdom. The folk admired Alaeddin's liberality and
exceeding generosity and all were distraught seeing his charms
and elegance, his gravity and his good manners, they glorified
the Creator for this noble creation, they blessed him each and
every and, albeit they knew him for the son of Such-an-one, the
tailor, yet no man envied him; nay, all owned that he deserved
his great good fortune.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the people were bewildered at Alaeddin and his
liberality and generosity; and all blessed and prayed for him,
high and low, as he rode palace-wards with the Mamelukes before
and behind him, scattering gold upon the heads of the folk. Now
the Sultan had assembled the Lords of the land and, informing
them of the promise he had passed to Alaeddin, touching the
marriage of his daughter, had bidden them await his approach and
then go forth, one and all, to meet him and greet him. Hereupon
the Emirs and Wazirs, the Chamberlains, the Nabobs and the Army-
officers took their stations expecting him at the palace gate.
Alaeddin would fain have dismounted at the outer entrance; but
one of the Nobles, whom the King had deputed for such duty,
approached him and said, "O my lord, 'tis the Royal Command that
thou enter riding thy steed nor dismount except at the Divan-
door."[FN#166] Then they all forewent him in a body and conducted
him to the appointed place where they crowded about him, these to
hold his stirrup and those supporting him on either side whilst
others took him by the hands and helped him dismount; after which
all the Emirs and Nobles preceded him into the Divan and led him
close up to the royal throne. Thereupon the Sultan came down
forthright from his seat of estate and, forbidding him to buss
the carpet, embraced and kissed and seated him to the
right[FN#167] of and beside himself. Alaeddin did whatso is
suitable, in the case of the Kings, of salutation and offering of
blessings, and said, "O our lord the Sultan, indeed the
generosity of thy Highness demanded that thou deign vouchsafe to
me the hand of thy daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur, albeit I
undeserve the greatness of such gift, I being but the humblest of
thy slaves I pray Allah grant thee prosperity and perpetuance;
but in very sooth, O King, my tongue is helpless to thank thee
for the fullness of the favour, passing all measure, which thou
hast bestowed upon me. And I hope of thy Highness that thou wilt
give me a piece of ground fitted for a pavilion which shall besit
thy daughter, the Lady Badr al-Budur." The Sultan was struck with
admiration when he saw Alaeddin in his princely suit and looked
upon him and considered his beauty and loveliness, and noted the
Mamelukes standing to serve him in their comeliness and
seemlihead; and still his marvel grew when the mother of Alaeddin
approached him in costly raiment and sumptuous, clad as though
she were a Queen, and when he gazed upon the twelve handmaids
standing before her with crossed arms and with all worship and
reverence doing her service. He also considered the eloquence of
Alaeddin and his delicacy of speech and he was astounded thereat,
he and all his who were present at the lev⁄e. Thereupon fire was
kindled in the Grand Wazir's heart for envy of Alaeddin until he
was like to die: and it was worse when the Sultan, after hearing
the youth's succession of prayers and seeing his high dignity of
demeanour, respectful withal, and his eloquence and elegance of
language, clasped him to his bosom and kissed him and cried,
"Alas, O my son, that I have not enjoyed thy converse before this
day!" And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan  beheld Alaeddin after such fashion, he
rejoiced in him with mighty great joy and straightway bade the
music[FN#168] and the bands strike up; then he arose and, taking
the youth led him into the palace where supper had been prepared
and the Eunuchs at once laid the tables. So the Sovran sat down
and seated his son-in-law on his right side and the Wazirs and
high officials and Lords of the land took places each according
to his degree, whereupon the bands played and a mighty fine
marriage-feast was dispread in the palace. The King now applied
himself to making friendship with Alaeddin and conversed with the
youth, who answered him with all courtesy and eloquence, as
though he had been bred in the palaces of the kings or he had
lived with them his daily life. And the more the talk was
prolonged between them, the more did the Sultan's pleasure and
delight increase, hearing his son-in-law's readiness of reply and
his sweet flow of language. But after they had eaten and drunken
and the trays were removed, the King bade summon the Kazis and
witnesses who presently attended and knitted the knot and wrote
out the contract-writ between Alaeddin and the Lady Badr al-
Budur. And presently the bridegroom arose and would have fared
forth, when his father in law withheld him and asked, "Whither
away, O my child? The bride-f€tes have begun and the marriage is
made and the tie is tied and the writ is written." He replied, "O
my lord the King, 'tis my desire to edify, for the Lady Badr al-
Budur, a pavilion befitting her station and high degree, nor can
I visit her before so doing. But, Inshallah! the building shall
be finished within the shortest time, by the utmost endeavor of
thy slave and by the kindly regard of thy Highness, and, although
I do (yes indeed!) long to enjoy the society of the Lady Badr al-
Budur, yet 'tis incumbent on me first to serve her and it
becometh me to set about the work forthright." "Look around thee,
O my son," replied the Sultan, "for what ground thou deemest
suitable to thy design and do thou take all things into thy
hands; but I deem the best for thee will be yonder broad plain
facing my palace; and, if it please the build thy pavilion
thereupon." "And this," answered Alaeddin "is the sum of my
wishes that I may be nearhand to thy Highness. So saying he
farewelled the King and took horse, with his Mamelukes riding
before him and behind him, and all the world blessed him and
cried, "By Allah he is deserving," until such time as he reached
his home. Then he alighted from his stallion and repairing to his
chamber, rubbed the Lamp and be hold, the Slave stood before him
and said, "Ask, O my lord whatso thou wantest;" and Alaeddin
rejoined, "I require thee of a service grave and important which
thou must do for me, and 'tis that thou build me with all urgency
a pavilion fronting the palace of the Sultan; and it must be a
marvel for it shall be provided with every requisite, such as
royal furniture and so forth." The Slave replied, "To hear is to
obey."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fourth  Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Slave evanished and, before the next dawn brake,
returned to Alaeddin and said, "O my lord, the pavilion is
finished to the fullest of thy fancy; and, if thou wouldst
inspect it, arise forthright and fare with me." Accordingly, he
rose up and the Slave carried him in the space of an eye-glance
to the pavilion which, when Alaeddin looked upon it struck him
with surprise at such building, all its stones being of jasper
and alabaster, Sumﬂk›[FN#169]  marble and mosaic-work. Then the
Slave led him into the treasury which was full of all manner of
gold and silver and costly gems, not to be counted or computed,
priced or estimated. Thence to another place, where Alaeddin saw
all requisites for the tables, plates and dishes, spoons and
ladles, basins and covers, cups and tasses, the whole of precious
metal: thence to the kitchen, where they found the kitcheners
provided with their needs and cooking batteries, likewise golden
and silvern; thence to a warehouse piled up with chests full-
packed of royal raiment, stuffs that captured the reason, such as
gold-wrought brocades from India and China and kimcobs[FN#170] or
orfrayed cloths; thence to many apartments replete with
appointments which beggar description; thence to the stables
containing coursers whose like was not to be met with amongst the
kings of the universe; and, lastly, they went to the harness-
rooms all hung with housings, costly saddles and other furniture,
everywhere studded with pearls and precious stones. And all this
was the work of one night. Alaeddin was wonder-struck and
astounded by that magnificent display of wealth which not even
the mightiest monarch on earth could produce; and more so to see
his pavilion fully provided with eunuchs and handmaids whose
beauty would seduce a saint. Yet the prime marvel of the pavilion
was an upper kiosque or belvedere of four-and-twenty windows all
made of emeralds and rubies and other gems; [FN#171]  and one
window remained unfinished at the requirement of Alaeddin that
the Sultan might prove him impotent to complete it. When the
youth had inspected the whole edifice, he was pleased and
gladdened exceedingly: then, turning to the Slave he said, "I
require of thee still one thing which is yet wanting and whereof
I had forgotten to tell thee." "Ask, O my lord, thy want," Quoth
the Servitor; and Quoth the other, "demand of thee a carpet of
the primest brocade all gold-inwrought which, when unrolled and
outstretched, shall extend hence to the Sultan's palace in order
that the Lady Badr al-Budur may, when coming hither, pace upon
it[FN#172]  and not tread common earth." The Slave departed for a
short while and said on his return, "O my lord verily that which
thou demandest is here." Then he took him and showed him a carpet
which wildered the wits, and it extended from palace to pavilion;
and after this the Servitor bore off Alaeddin and set him down in
his own home. And Shahrazed was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine; an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the Age,
that the Slave, after displaying the Carpet to Alaeddin, bore him
home. Now day was brightening so the Sultan rose from his sleep
and throwing open the casement looked out[FN#173] and espied,
opposite his palace, a palatial pavilion ready edified. Thereupon
he fell to rubbing his eyes and opening them their widest and
considering the scene, and he soon was certified that the new
edifice was mighty fine and grand enough to be-wilder the wits.
Moreover, with amazement as great he saw the carpet dispread
between palace and pavilion: like their lord also the royal door-
keepers and the household, one and all, were dazed and amazed at
the spectacle. Meanwhile[FN#174]  the Wazir came in and, as he
entered, espied the newly builded pavilion and the carpet,
whereat he also wondered; and, when he went in to the Sultan the
twain fell to talking on this marvellous matter with great
surprise at a sight which distracted the gazer and attracted the
heart. They said finally, "In very truth, of this pavilion we
deem that none of the royalties could build its fellow;" and the
King, turning to the Minister, asked him, "Hast thou seen now
that Alaeddin is worthy to be the husband of the Princess my
daughter? Hast thou looked upon and considered this right royal
building, this magnificence of opulence, which thought of man can
not contain?" But the Wazir in his envy of Alaeddin replied, ÊO
King of the Age, indeed this foundation and this building and
this opulence may not be save by means of magic nor can any man
in the world, be he the richest in good or the greatest in
governance, avail to found and finish in a single night such
edifice as this." The Sultan rejoined, "I am surprised to see in
thee how thou dost continually harp on evil opinion of Alaeddin;
but I hold that 'tis caused by thine envy and jealousy. Thou west
present when I gave him the ground at his own prayer for a place
whereon he might build a pavilion wherein to lodge my daughter,
and I myself favoured him with a site for the same and that too
before thy very face. But however that be, shall one who could
send me as dower for the Princess such store of such stones
whereof the kings never obtained even a few, shall he, I say, be
unable to edify an edifice like this?"--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Wazir heard the Sultan's words, he knew that
his lord loved Alaeddin exceedingly; so his envy and malice
increased; only, as he could do nothing against the youth, he sat
silent and impotent to return a reply. But Alaeddin seeing that
it was broad day, and the appointed time had come for his
repairing to the palace (where his wedding was being celebrated
and the Emirs and Wazirs and Grandees were gathered together
about the Sultan to be present at the ceremony), arose and rubbed
the Lamp, and when its Slave appeared and said, O my lord, ask
whatso thou wantest, for I stand before thee and at thy service,"
said he, "I mean forthright to seek the palace, this day being my
wedding-festival and I want thee to supply me with ten thousand
dinars." The Slave evanished for an eye-twinkling and returned
bringing the moneys, when Alaeddin took horse with his Mamelukes
a-van and a-rear and passed on his way, scattering as he went
gold pieces upon the lieges until all were fondly affected
towards him and his dignity was enhanced. But when he drew near
the palace, and the Emirs and Aghas and Army-officers who were
standing to await him noted his approach, they hastened
straightway to the King and gave him the tidings thereof;
whereupon the Sultan rose and met his son-in-law and after
embracing and kissing him, led him still holding his hand into
his own apartment where he sat down and seated him by his right
side. The city was all decorated and music rang through the
palace and the singers sang until the King bade bring the noon-
meal, when the eunuchs and Mamelukes hastened to spread the
tables and trays which are such as are served to the kings. Then
the Sultan and Alaeddin and the Lords of the land and the
Grandees of the realm took their seats and ate and drank until
they were satisfied. And it was a mighty fine wedding in city and
palace and the high nobles all rejoiced therein and the commons
of the kingdom were equally gladdened, while the Governors of
provinces and Nabobs of districts flocked from far regions to
witness Alaeddin's marriage and its processions and festivities.
The Sultan also marvelled in his mind to look at Alaeddin's
mother[FN#175] and recall to mind how she was wont to visit him
in pauper plight, while her son could command all this opulence
and magnificence. And when the spectators, who crowded the royal
palace to enjoy the wedding-feasts, looked upon Alaeddin's
pavilion and the beauties of the building, they were seized with
an immense surprise that so vast an edifice as this could be
reared on high during a single night; and they blessed the youth
and cried, "Allah gladden him! By Allah, he deserveth all this!
Allah bless his days!"--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her per misted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when dinner was done, Alaeddin rose and, farewelling
the Sultan, took horse with his Mamelukes and rode to his own
pavilion that he might prepare to receive therein his bride, the
Lady Badr al-Budur. And as he passed, all the folk shouted their
good wishes with one voice and their words were, "Allah gladden
thee! Allah increase thy glory. Allah grant thee length of life!"
while immense crowds of people gathered to swell the marriage
procession and they conducted him to his new home, he showering
gold upon them during the whole time. When he reached his
pavilion, he dismounted and walked in and sat him down on the
divan, whilst his Mamelukes stood before him with arms afolded;
also after a short delay they brought him sherbets and, when
these were drunk, he ordered his white slaves and handmaids and
eunuchs and all who were in the pavilion to make ready for
meeting the Lady Badr al-Budur. Moreover, as soon as mid-
afternoon came and the air had cooled and the great heat of the
sun was abated, the Sultan bade his Army-officers and Emirs and
Wazirs go down into the Maydﬂn plain[FN#176] whither he likewise
rode. And Alaeddin also took horse with his Mamelukes, he
mounting a stallion whose like was not among the steeds of the
Arab al-Arbﬂ,[FN#177] and he showed his horsemanship in the
hippodrome and so played with the Jar›d[FN#178]  that none could
withstand him, while his bride sat gazing upon him from the
latticed balcony of her bower and, seeing in him such beauty and
cavalarice, she fell headlong in love of him and was like to fly
for joy. And after they had ringed their horses on the Maydan and
each had displayed whatso he could of horsemanship, Alaeddin
proving himself the best man of all, they rode in a body to the
Sultan's palace and the youth also returned to his own pavilion.
But when it was evening, the Wazirs and Nobles took the
bridegroom and, falling in, escorted him to the royal Hammam
(known as the Sultﬂn›), when he was bathed and perfumed. As soon
as he came out he donned a dress more magnificent than the former
and took horse with the Emirs and the soldier-officers riding
before him and forming a grand cort⁄ge, wherein four of the
Wazirs bore naked swords round about him.[FN#179] All the
citizens and the strangers and the troops marched before him in
ordered throng carrying wax-candles and kettle drums and pipes
and other instruments of mirth and merriment, until they
conducted him to his pavilion. Here he alighted and walking in
took his seat and seated the Wazirs and Emirs who had escorted
him, and the Mamelukes brought sherbets and sugared drinks, which
they also passed to the people who had followed in his train. It
was a world of folk whose tale might not be told; withal Alaeddin
bade his Mamelukes stand without the pavilion-doors and shower
gold upon the crowd.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan returned from the Maydan-plain to his
palace he ordered the household, men as well as women,
straightway to form a cavalcade for his daughter, with all
ceremony, and bear her to her bridegroom's pavilion. So the
nobles and soldier-officers, who had followed and escorted the
bridegroom, at once mounted, and the handmaids and eunuchs went
forth with wax-candles and made a mighty fine procession for the
Lady Badr al-Budur and they paced on preceding her till they
entered the pavilion of Alaeddin whose mother walked beside the
bride. In front of the Princess also fared the wives of the
Wazirs and Emirs, Grandees and Notables, and in attendance on her
were the eight and forty slave-girls presented to her aforetime
by her bridegroom, each hending in hand a huge cierge scented
with camphor and ambergris and set in a candlestick of gem-
studded gold. And reaching Alaeddin's pavilion they led her to
her bower in the upper storey and changed her robes and enthroned
her; then, as soon as the displaying was ended, they accompanied
her to Alaeddin's apartments and presently he paid her the first
visit. Now his mother was with the bride and, when the bridegroom
came up and did off her veil, the ancient dame fell to
considering the beauty of the Princess and her loveliness; and
she looked around at the pavilion which was all litten up by gold
and gems besides the manifold candelabra of precious metals
encrusted with emeralds and jacinths; so she said in her mind,
"Once upon a time I thought the Sultan's palace mighty fine, but
this pavilion is a thing apart; nor do I deem that any of the
greatest Kings of ChosroŸs attained in his day to aught like
thereof; also am I certified that all the world could not build
anything evening it." Nor less did the lady Badr al-Budur fall to
gazing at the pavilion and marvelling for its magnificence. Then
the tables were spread and they all ate and drank and were
gladdened; after which fourscore damsels came before them each
holding in hand an instrument of mirth and merriment; then they
deftly moved their finger tips and touched the strings smiting
them into song, most musical, most melancholy, till they rent the
hearts of the hearers. Hereat the Princess increased in marvel
and Quoth she to herself, "In all my life ne'er heard I songs
like these,''[FN#180] till she forsook food, the better to
listen. And at last Alaeddin poured out for her wine and passed
it to her with his own hand; so great joy and jubilee went round
amongst them and it was a notable night, such an one as Iskander,
Lord of the Two Horns,[FN#181] had never spent in his time. When
they had finished eating and drinking and the tables were removed
from before them, Alaeddin arose and went in to his
bride.[FN#182] As soon as morning morrowed he left his bed and
the treasurer brought him a costly suit and a mighty fine, of the
most sumptuous robes worn by the kings. Then, after drinking
coffee devoured with ambergris, he ordered the horses be saddled
and, mounting with his Mamelukes before and behind him, rode to
the Sultan's palace and on his entering its court the eunuchs
went in and reported his coming to their lord.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
ÊWith love and good will."---It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan heard of Alaeddin's approach, he rose
up forthright to receive him and embraced and kissed him as
though he were his own son: then, seating him on his right, he
blessed and prayed for him, as did the Wazirs and Emirs, the
Lords of the land and the Grandees of the realm. Presently, the
King commanded bring the morning-meal which the attendants served
up and all broke their fast together, and when they had eaten and
drunken their sufficiency and the tables were removed by the
eunuchs, Alaeddin turned to the Sultan and said, "O my lord,
would thy Highness deign honour me this day at dinner, in the
house of the Lady Badr al-Budur thy beloved daughter, and come
accompanied by all thy Ministers and Grandees of the reign?" The
King replied (and he was delighted with his son-in-law), "Thou
art surpassing in liberality, O my son!" Then he gave orders to
all invited and rode forth with them (Alaeddin also riding beside
him) till they reached the pavilion and as he entered it and
considered its construction, its architecture and its stonery,
all jasper and carnelian, his sight was dazed and his wits were
amazed at such grandeur and magnificence of opulence. Then
turning to the Minister he thus addressed him, "What sayest thou?
Tell me hast thou seen in all thy time aught like this amongst
the mightiest of earth's monarchs for the abundance of gold and
gems we are now beholding?" The Grand Wazir replied, "O my lord
the King, this be a feat which cannot be accomplished by might of
monarch amongst Adam's sons; [FN#183] nor could the collected
peoples of the universal world build a palace like unto this;
nay, even builders could not be found to make aught resembling
it, save (as I said to thy Highness) by force of sorcery." These
words certified the King that his Minister spake not except in
envy end jealousy of Alaeddin, and would stablish in the royal
mind that all this splendour was not made of man but by means of
magic and with the aid of the Black Art. So Quoth he to him,
"Suffice thee so much, O Wazir: thou hast none other word to
speak and well I know what cause urgeth thee to say this say."
Then Alaeddin preceded the Sultan till he conducted him to the
upper Kiosque where he saw its skylights, windows and latticed
casements and jalousies wholly made of emeralds and rubies and
other costly gems; whereat his mind was perplexed and his wits
were bewildered and his thoughts were distraught. Presently he
took to strolling round the Kiosque and solacing himself with
these sights which captured the vision, till he chanced to cast a
glance at the window which Alaeddin by design had left unwrought
and not finished like the rest; and, when he noted its lack of
completion, he cried, "Woe and well away for thee, O window,
because of thine imperfection;"[FN#184] and, turning to his
Minister he asked, "Knowest thou the reason of leaving incomplete
this window and its framework?"--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Seventieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Wazir said to the Sultan, "O my lord, I conceive
that the want of finish in this window resulteth from thy
Highness having pushed on Alaeddin's marriage and he lacked the
leisure to complete it." Now at that time, Alaeddin had gone in
to his bride, the Lady Badr al-Budur, to inform her of her
father's presence; and, when he returned, the King asked him, "O
my son what is the reason why the window of this Kiosque was not
made perfect?" "O King of the Age, seeing the suddenness of my
wedding," answered he, "I failed to find artists for finishing
it." Quoth the Sultan, "I have a mind to complete it myself;" and
Quoth Alaeddin, "Allah perpetuate thy glory, O thou the King; so
shall thy memory endure in thy daughter's pavilion." The Sultan
forthright bade summon jewellers and goldsmiths and ordered them
be supplied from the treasury with all their needs of gold and
gems and noble ores; and, when they were gathered together he
commanded them to complete the work still wanting in the Kiosque-
window. Meanwhile the Princess came forth to meet her sire the
Sultan who noticed, as she drew near, her smiling face; so he
embraced her and kissed her, then led her to the pavilion and all
entered in a body. Now this was the time of the noon day meal and
one table had been spread for the Sovran, his daughter and his
son-in-law and a second for the Wazirs, the Lords of the land,
the Grandees of the realm, the Chief Officers of the host, the
Chamberlains and the Nabobs. The King took seat between the
Princess and her husband; and, when he put forth his hand to the
food and tasted it, he was struck with surprise by the flavour of
the dishes and their savoury and sumptuous cooking. Moreover,
there stood before him the fourscore damsels each and every
saying to the full moon, "Rise that I may seat myself in thy
stead!"[FN#185] All held instruments of mirth and merriment and
they tuned the same and deftly moved their finger-tips and smote
the strings into song most musical, most melodious, which
expanded the mourner's heart. Hereby the Sultan was gladdened and
time was good to him and for high enjoyment he exclaimed, "In
very sooth the thing is beyond the compass of King and Kaysar."
Then they fell to eating and drinking; and the cup went round
until they had drunken enough, when sweetmeats and fruits of
sorts and other such edibles were served, the dessert being laid
out in a different salon whither they removed and enjoyed of
these pleasures their sufficiency. Presently the Sultan arose
that he might see if the produce of his jewellers and goldsmiths
favoured that of the pavilion; so he went upstairs to them and
inspected their work and how they had wrought; but he noted a
mighty great difference and his men were far from being able to
make anything like the rest of Alaeddin's pavilion. And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that after the King had inspected the work of his jewellers
and goldsmiths, they informed him how all the gems stored in the
Lesser Treasury had been brought to them and used by them but
that the whole had proved insufficient; wherefor he bade open the
Greater Treasury and gave the workmen all they wanted of him.
Moreover he allowed them, an it sufficed not, to take the jewels
wherewith Alaeddin had gifted him. They carried off the whole and
pushed on their labours but they found the gems fail them, albeit
had they not yet finished half the part wanting to the Kiosque-
window. Herewith the King commended them to seize all the
precious stones owned by the Wazirs and Grandees of the realm;
but, although they did his bidding, the supply still fell short
of their requirements. Next morning Alaeddin arose to look at the
jeweller's work and remarked that they had not finished a moiety
of what was wanting to the Kiosque-window: so he at once ordered
them to undo all they had done and restore the jewels to their
owners. Accordingly, they pulled out the precious stones and sent
the Sultan's to the Sultan and the Wazirs' to the Wazirs. Then
the jewellers went to the King and told him of what Alaeddin had
bidden; so he asked them, "What said he to you, and what was his
reason and wherefore was he not content that the window be
finished and why did he undo the work ye wrought?" They answered,
"O our lord, we know not at all, but he bade us deface whatso we
had done." Hereupon the Sultan at once called for his horse, and
mounting, took the way pavilion-wards, when Alaeddin, after
dismissing the goldsmiths and jewellers had retired into his
closet and had rubbed the Lamp. Hereat straightway its Servitor
appeared to him and said, "Ask whatso thou wantest: thy Slave is
between thy hands;" and said Alaeddin, " 'tis my desire that thou
finish the window which was left unfinished." The Marid replied,
"On my head be it and also upon mine eyes!" then he vanished and
after a little while returned saying, "O my lord, verily that
thou commandedst me do is completed." So Alaeddin went upstairs
to the Kiosque and found the whole window in wholly finished
state; and, whilst he was still considering it, behold, a
castrato came in to him and said, "O my lord, the Sultan hath
ridden forth to visit thee and is passing through the pavilion-
gate." So Alaeddin at once went down and received his father-in-
law. And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."---It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Sultan, on sighting his son-in-law, cried to him,
"Wherefore, O my child, hast thou wrought on this wise and
sufferedst not the jewellers to complete the Kiosque-window
leaving in the pavilion an unfinished place?" Alaeddin replied "O
King of the Age, I left it not imperfect save for a design of
mine own; nor was I incapable of perfecting it nor could I
purpose that thy Highness should honour me with visiting a
pavilion wherein was aught of deficiency. And, that thou mayest
know I am not unable to make it perfect, let thy Highness deign
walk upstairs with me and see if anything remain to be done
therewith or not." So the Sultan went up with him and, entering
the Kiosque, fell to looking right and left, but he saw no
default at all in any of the windows; nay, he noted that all were
perfect. So he marvelled at the sight and embraced Alaeddin and
kissed him, saying, "O my son, what be this singular feat? Thou
canst work in a single night what in months the jewellers could
not do. By Allah, I deem thou hast nor brother nor rival in this
world." Quoth Alaeddin, "Allah prolong thy life and preserve thee
to perpetuity! thy slave deserveth not this encomium;" and Quoth
the King, "By Allah, O my child, thou meritest all praise for a
feat whereof all the artists of the world were incapable." Then
the Sultan came clown and entered the apartments of his daughter
the Lady Badr al-Budur, to take rest beside her, and he saw her
joyous exceedingly at the glory and grandeur wherein she was;
then, after reposing awhile he returned to his palace. Now
Alaeddin was wont every day to thread the city-streets with his
Mamelukes riding a-van and a-rear of him showering rightwards and
leftwards gold upon the folk; and all the world, stranger and
neighbour, far and near, were fulfilled of his love for the
excess of his liberality and generosity. Moreover he increased
the pensions of the poor Religious and the paupers and he would
distribute alms to them with his own hand; by which good deed, he
won high renown throughout the realm and most of the Lords of the
land and Emirs would eat at his table; and men swore not at all
save by his precious life. Nor did he leave faring to the chase
and the Maydan-plain and the riding of horses and playing at
javelin-play[FN#186] in presence of the Sultan; and, whenever the
Lady Badr al-Budur beheld him disporting himself on the backs of
steeds, she loved him much the more, and thought to herself that
Allah had wrought her abundant good by causing to happen whatso
happened with the son of the Wazir and by preserving her
virginity intact for her true bridegroom, Alaeddin.--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales." whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin won for himself day by day a fairer fame and a
rarer report, while affection for him increased in the hearts of
all the lieges and he waxed greater in the eyes of men. Moreover
it chanced that in those days certain enemies took horse and
attacked the Sultan, who armed and accoutred an army to repel
them and made Alaeddin commander thereof. So he marched with his
men nor ceased marching until he drew near the foe whose forces
were exceeding many; and, presently, when the action began he
bared his brand and charged home upon the enemy. Then battle and
slaughter befel and violent was the hurry-burly, but at last
Alaeddin broke the hostile host and put all to flight, slaying
the best part of them and pillaging their coin and cattle,
property and possessions; and he despoiled them of spoils that
could not be counted nor computed. Then he returned victorious
after a noble victory and entered the capital which had decorated
herself in his honour, of her delight in him; and the Sultan went
forth to meet him and giving him joy embraced him and kissed him;
and throughout the kingdom was held high festival with great joy
and gladness. Presently, the Sovran and his son-in-law repaired
to the pavilion where they were met by the Princess Badr al-Budur
who rejoiced in her husband and, after kissing him between the
eyes, led him to her apartments. After a time the Sultan also
came and they sat down while the slave-girls brought them
sherbets and confections which they ate and drank. Then the
Sultan commanded that the whole kingdom be decorated for the
triumph of his son-in-law and his victory over the invader; and
the subjects and soldiery and all the people knew only Allah in
heaven and Alaeddin on earth; for that their love, won by his
liberality, was increased by his noble horsemanship and his
successful battling for the country and putting to flight the
foe. Such then was the high fortune of Alaeddin; but as regards
the Maghrabi, the Magician, after returning to his native
country, he passed all this space of time in bewailing what he
had borne of toil and travail to win the Lamp and mostly that his
trouble had gone vain and that the morsel when almost touching
his lips had flown from his grasp. He pondered all this and
mourned and reviled Alaeddin for the excess of his rage against
him and at times he would exclaim, "For this bastard's death
underground I am well satisfied and hope only that some time or
other I may obtain the Lamp, seeing how 'tis yet safe." Now one
day of the days he struck a table of sand and dotted down the
figures and carefully considered their consequence; then he
transferred them to paper that he might study them and make sure
of Alaeddin's destruction and the safety of the Lamp preserved
beneath the earth. Presently, he firmly stablished the sequence
of the figures, mothers as well as daughters,[FN#187]  but still
he saw not the Lamp. Thereupon rage overrode him and he made
another trial to be assured of Alaeddin's death; but he saw him
not in the Enchanted Treasure. Hereat his wrath still grew, and
it waxed greater when he ascertained that the youth had issued
from underground and was now upon earth's surface alive and
alert: furthermore, that he had become owner of the Lamp, for
which he had himself endured such toil and travail and troubles
as man may not bear save for so great an object. Accordingly
Quoth he to himself, "I have suffered sore pains and penalties
which none else could have endured for the Lamp's sake in order
that other than I may carry it off; and this Accursed hath taken
it without difficulty. And who knoweth an he wot the virtues of
the Lamp, than whose owner none in the world should be
wealthier?" And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, the Magician, having considered and
ascertained that Alaeddin had escaped from the souterrain and had
gotten the boon of the Lamp, said to himself, "There is no help
but that I work for his destruction." He then struck another
geomantic table and examining the figures saw that the lad had
won for himself unmeasurable riches and had wedded the daughter
of his King; so of his envy and jealousy he was fired with the
flame of wrath; and, rising without let or stay, he equipped
himself and set forth for China-land, where he arrived in due
season. Now when he had reached the King's capital wherein was
Alaeddin, he alighted at one of the Khﬂns; and, when he had
rested from the weariness of wayfare, he donned his dress and
went down to wander about the streets, where he never passed a
group without hearing them prate about the pavilion and its
grandeur and vaunt the beauty of Alaeddin and his lonesomeness,
his liberality and generosity, his fine manners and his good
morals. Presently he entered an establishment wherein men were
drinking a certain warm beverage;[FN#188] and, going up to one of
those who were loud in their lauds, he said to him, "O fair
youth, who may be the man ye describe and commend?" "Apparently
thou art a foreigner, O man," answered the other, "and thou
comest from a far country; but, even this granted, how happeneth
it thou hast not heard of the Emir Alaeddin whose renown, I
fancy, hath filled the universe and whose pavilion, known by
report to far and near, is one of the Wonders of the World? How,
then, never came to thine ears aught of this or the name of
Alaeddin (whose glory and enjoyment our Lord increase!) and his
fame?" The Moorman replied, "The sum of my wishes is to look upon
this pavilion and, if thou wouldest do me a favour, prithee guide
me thereunto, for I am a foreigner." The man rejoined, "To hear
is to obey;" and, foregoing him pointed out Alaeddin's pavilion,
whereupon the Maroccan fell to considering it and at once
understood that it was the work of the Lamp. So he cried, "Ah!
Ah! needs must I dig a pit for this Accursed, this son of a snip,
who could not earn for himself even an evening meal: and, if the
Fates abet me, I will assuredly destroy his life and send his
mother back to spinning at her wheel, e'en as she was wont
erewhiles to do." So saying, he returned to his caravanserai in a
sore state of grief and melancholy and regret bred by his envy
and hate of Alaeddin.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the, Five Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Maghrabi, the Magician, reached his
caravanserai, he took his astrological gear[FN#189] and geomantic
table to discover where might be the Lamp; and he found that it
was in the pavilion and not upon Alaeddin's person. So he
rejoiced thereat with joy exceeding and exclaimed, "Now indeed
'twill be an easy task to take the life of this Accursed and I
see my way to getting the Lamp." Then he went to a coppersmith
and said to him, "Do thou make me a set of lamps and take from me
their full price and more; only I would have thee hasten to
finish them." Replied the smith, "Hearing and obeying," and fell
aworking to keep his word; and when they were ready the Moorman
paid him what price he required; then taking them he carried them
to the Khan and set them in a basket. Presently he began
wandering about the highways and market-streets of the capital
crying aloud, "Ho! who will exchange old lamps for new
lamps?''[FN#190] But when the folk heard him cry on this wise,
they derided him and said, "Doubtless this man is Jinn-mad, for
that he goeth about offering new for old;" and a world followed
him and the children of the quarter caught him up from place to
place, laughing at him the while, nor did he forbid them or care
for their maltreatment. And he ceased not strolling about the
streets till he came under Alaeddin's pavilion,[FN#191] where he
shouted with his loudest voice and the boys screamed at him, "A
madman! A madman!" Now Destiny had decreed that the Lady Badr al-
Budur be sitting in her Kiosque whence she heard one crying like
a crier, and the children bawling at him; only she understood not
what was going on; so she gave orders to one of her slave-girls
saying,[FN#192] "Go thou and see who 'tis that crieth and what be
his cry?" The girl fared forth and looked on when she beheld a
man crying, "Ho! who will exchange old lamps for new lamps?" and
the little ones pursuing and laughing at him; and as loudly
laughed the Princess when this strange case was told to her. Now
Alaeddin had carelessly left the Lamp in his pavilion without
hiding it and locking it up in his strong box;[FN#193] and one of
the slave-girls who had seen it said, "O my lady, I think to have
noticed, in the apartment of my lord Alaeddin, an old lamp: so
let us give it in change for a new lamp to this man, and see if
his cry be truth or lie."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
ÊWith love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that hereupon the Princess said to the slave-girl, ÊBring
the old lamp which thou saidst to have seen in thy lord's
apartment." Now the Lady Badr al-Budur knew naught of the Lamp
and of the specialties thereof which had raised Alaeddin her
spouse to such high degree and grandeur; and her only end and aim
was to understand by experiment the mind of a man who would give
in exchange the new for the old. So the handmaid fared forth and
went up to Alaeddin's apartment and returned with the Lamp to her
lady who, like all the others, knew nothing of the Maghrabi's
cunning tricks and his crafty device. Then the Princess bade an
Aghﬂ of the eunuchry go down and barter the old Lamp for a new
lamp. So he obeyed her bidding and, after taking a new lamp from
the man, he returned and laid it before his lady who looking at
it and seeing that it was brand-new, fell to laughing at the
Moorman's wits. But the Maroccan, when he held the article in
hand and recognised it for the Lamp of the Enchanted
Treasury,[FN#194] at once placed it in his breast-pocket and left
all the other lamps to the folk who were bartering of him. Then
he went forth running till he was clear of the city, when he
walked leisurely over the level grounds and he took patience
until night fell on him in desert ground where was none other but
himself. There he brought out the Lamp when suddenly appeared to
him the Marid who said, "Adsum! thy slave between thy hands is
come: ask of me whatso thou wantest." " 'tis my desire," the
Moorman replied, "that thou upraise from its present place
Alaeddin's pavilion with its inmates and all that be therein, not
forge