tting myself, and set it down upon my own land, Africa. Thou
knowest my town and I want the building placed in the gardens
hard by it." The Marid-slave replied, "Hearkening and obedience:
close thine eyes and open thine eyes whenas thou shalt find
thyself together with the pavilion in thine own country." This
was done; and, in an eye-twinkling, the Maroccan and the pavilion
with all therein were transported to the African land. Such then
was the work of the Maghrabi, the Magician; but now let us return
to the Sultan and his son-in-law. It was the custom of the King,
because of his attachment to and his affection for his daughter,
every morning when he had shaken off sleep, to open the latticed
casement and look out therefrom that he might catch sight of her
abode. So that day he arose and did as he was wont.--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

    When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Sultan drew near the latticed casement of his
palace and looked out at Alaeddin's pavilion he saw naught; nay,
the site was smooth as a well-trodden highway and like unto what
it had been aforetime; and he could find nor edifice nor offices.
So astonishment clothed him as with a garment, and his wits were
wildered and he began to rub his eyes, lest they be dimmed or
darkened, and to gaze intently; but at last he was certified that
no trace of the pavilion remained nor sign of its being; nor wist
he the why and the wherefore of its disappearance. So his
surprise increased and he smote hand upon hand and the tears
trickled down his cheeks over his beard, for that he knew not
what had become of his daughter. Then he sent out officials
forthright and summoned the Grand Wazir who at once attended;
and, seeing him in this piteous plight said, ÊPardon, O King of
the Age, may Allah avert from thee every ill! Wherefore art thou
in such sorrow?" Exclaimed the Sovran, "Methinketh thou wottest
not my case?" and Quoth the Minister, "On no wise. O our lord: by
Allah, I know of it nothing  at all." "Then," resumed the Sultan,
" 'tis manifest thou hast not looked this day in the direction of
Alaeddin's pavilion." "True, O my lord," Quoth the Wazir, "it
must still be locked and fast shut;" and Quoth the King,
"Forasmuch as thou hast no inkling of aught,[FN#195] arise and
look out at the window and see Alaeddin's pavilion whereof thou
sayest 'tis locked and fast shut." The Minister obeyed his
bidding but could not see anything, or pavilion or other place;
so with mind and thoughts sore perplexed he returned to his liege
lord who asked him, "Hast now learned the reason of my distress
and noted yon locked-up palace and fast shut?" Answered the
Wazir, "O King of the Age erewhile I represented to thy Highness
that this pavilion and these matters be all magical." Hereat the
Sultan, fired with wrath, cried, "Where be Alaeddin?" and the
Minister replied, "He hath gone a-hunting," when the King
commanded without stay or delay sundry of his Aghas and Army-
officers to go and bring to him his son-in-law chained and with
pinioned elbows. So they fared forth until they found Alaeddin
when they said to him, "O our lord Alaeddin, excuse us nor be
thou wroth with us; for the King hath commanded that we carry
thee before him pinioned and fettered, and we hope pardon from
thee because we are under the royal orders which we cannot
gainsay." Alaeddin, hearing these words, was seized with surprise
and not knowing the reason of this remained tongue-tied for a
time, after which he turned to them and asked, "O assembly, have
you naught of knowledge concerning the motive of the royal
mandate? Well I wot my soul to be innocent and that I never
sinned against king or against kingdom." "O our lord," answered
they, "we have no inkling whatever." So Alaeddin alighted from
his horse and said to them, "Do ye whatso the Sultan bade you do,
for that the King's command is upon the head and the
eyes."[FN#196]--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Aghas, having bound Alaeddin in bonds and pinioned
his elbows behind his back, haled him in chains and carried him
into the city. But when the lieges saw him pinioned and ironed,
they understood that the Sultan purposed to strike off his head;
and, forasmuch as he was loved of them exceedingly, all gathered
together and seized their weapons; then, swarming out of their
houses, followed the soldiery to see what was to do. And when the
troops arrived with Alaeddin at the palace, they went in and
informed the Sultan of this, whereat he forthright commanded the
Sworder to cut off the head of his son-in-law. Now as soon as the
subjects were aware of this order, they barricaded the gates and
closed the doors of the palace and sent a message to the King
saying, "At this very moment we will level thine abode over the
heads of all it containeth and over thine own,[FN#197] if the
least hurt or harm befal Alaeddin." So the Wazir went in and
reported to the Sultan, "O King of the Age, thy commandment is
about to seal the roll of our lives; and 'twere more suitable
that thou pardon thy son-in-law lest there chance to us a sore
mischance; for that the lieges do love him far more than they
love us." Now the Sworder had already dispread the carpet of
blood and, having seated Alaeddin thereon, had bandaged his eyes;
moreover he had walked round him several times awaiting the last
orders of his lord, when the King looked out of the window and
saw his subjects, who had suddenly attacked him, swarming up the
walls intending to tear them down. So forthright he bade the
Sworder stay his hand from Alaeddin and commanded the crier fare
forth to the crowd and cry aloud that he had pardoned his son-in-
law and received him back into favour. But when Alaeddin found
himself free and saw the Sultan seated on his throne, he went up
to him and said, "O my lord, inasmuch as thy Highness hath
favoured me throughout my life, so of thy grace now deign let me
know the how and the wherein I have sinned against thee?" "O
traitor, cried the King, "unto this present I knew not any sin of
thine;" then, turning to the Wazir he said, "Take him and make
him look out at the window and after let him tell us where be his
pavilion." And when the royal order was obeyed Alaeddin saw the
place level as a well trodden road, even as it had been ere the
base of the building was laid, nor was there the faintest trace
of edifice. Hereat he was astonished and perplexed knowing not
what had occurred; but, when he returned to the presence, the
King asked him, "What is it thou hast seen? Where is thy pavilion
and where is my daughter, the core of my heart, my only child,
than whom I have none other?" Alaeddin answered "O King of the
Age, I wot naught thereof nor aught of what hath befallen," and
the Sultan rejoined, "Thou must know, O Alaeddin, I have pardoned
thee only that thou go forth and look into this affair and
enquire for me concerning my daughter; nor do thou ever show
thyself in my presence except she be with thee; and, if thou
bring her not, by the life of my head, I will cut off the head of
thee." The other replied, "To hear is to obey: only vouchsafe me
a delay and respite of some forty days; after which, an I produce
her not, strike off my head[FN#198] and do with me whatso thou
wishes"."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say,

     When it was the Five Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Sultan said to Alaeddin, "Verily I have granted
thee thy request, a delay of forty days; but think not thou canst
fly from my hand, for I would bring thee back even if thou wert
above the clouds instead of being only upon earth's surface."
Replied Alaeddin, "O my lord the Sultan, as I said to thy
Highness, an I fail to bring her within the term appointed, I
will present myself for my head to be stricken off." Now when the
folk and the lieges all saw Alaeddin at liberty, they rejoiced
with joy exceeding and were delighted for his release; but the
shame of his treatment and bashfulness before his friends and the
envious exultation of his foes had bowed down Alaeddin's head; so
he went forth a wandering through the city ways and he was
perplexed concerning his case and knew not what had befallen him.
He lingered about the capital for two days, in saddest state,
wotting not what to do in order to find his wife and his
pavilion, and during this time sundry of the folk privily brought
him meat and drink. When the two days were done he left the city
to stray about the waste and open lands outlying the walls,
without a notion as to whither he should wend; and he walked on
aimlessly until the path led him beside a river where, of the
stress of sorrow that overwhelmed him, he abandoned himself to
despair and thought of casting himself into the water. Being,
however, a good Moslem who professed the unity of the God-head,
he feared Allah in his soul; and, standing upon the margin he
prepared to perform the Wuz∑-ablution. But as he was baling up
the water in his right hand and rubbing his fingers,[FN#199] it
so chanced that he also rubbed the Ring. Hereat its Marid
appeared and said to him, "Adsum! thy thrall between thy hands is
come: ask of me whatso thou wantest." Seeing the Marid, Alaeddin
rejoiced with exceeding joy and cried,[FN#200] "O Slave, I desire
of thee that thou bring before me my pavilion and therein my
wife, the Lady Badr al-Budur, together with all and everything it
containeth." "O my lord," replied the Marid, " 'tis right hard
upon me that thou demandest a service whereto I may not avail:
this matter dependeth upon the Slave of the Lamp nor dare I even
attempt it." Alaeddin rejoined, "Forasmuch as the matter is
beyond thy competence, I require it not of thee, but at least do
thou take me up and set me down beside my pavilion in what land
soever that may be." The Slave exclaimed, "Hearing and obeying, O
my lord ;" and, uplifting him high in air, with in the space of
an eye-glance set him down beside his pavilion in the land of
Africa and upon a spot facing his wife's apartment. Now this was
at fall of night yet one look enabled him to recognise his home;
whereby his cark and care were cleared away and he recovered
trust in Allah after cutting off all his hope to look upon his
wife once more. Then he fell to pondering the secret and
mysterious favours of the Lord (glorified be His omnipotence!);
and how, after despair had mastered him, the Ring had come to
gladden him and how, when all his hopes were cut off Allah had
deigned bless him with the services of its Slave. So he rejoiced
and his melancholy left him; then, as he had passed four days
without sleep for the excess of his cark and care and sorrow and
stress of thought, he drew near his pavilion and slept under a
tree hard by the building which (as we mentioned) had been set
down amongst the gardens outlying the city of Africa.--And
Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Eightieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin lay that night under a tree beside his
pavilion in all restfulness; but whoso weareth head hard by the
headsman may not sleep o' nights save whenas slumber prevail over
him. He slumbered till Morning showed her face and, when awakened
by the warbling of the small birds, he arose and went down to the
bank of the river which flowed thereby into the city; and here he
again washed hands and face [FN#201] and after finished his Wuz∑-
ablution. Then he prayed the dawn-prayer, and when he had ended
his orisons he returned and sat down under the windows of the
Princess's bower. Now the Lady Badr al-Budur, of her exceeding
sorrow for severance from her husband and her sire the Sultan,
and for the great mishap which had happened to her from the
Maghrabi, the Magician, the Accursed, was wont to rise during the
murk preceding dawn and to sit in tears inasmuch as she could not
sleep o' nights, and had forsworn meat and drink. Her favourite
slave-girl would enter her chamber at the hour of prayer-
salutation in order to dress her; and this time, by decree of
Destiny, when she threw open the window to let her lady comfort
and console herself by looking upon the trees and rills, and she
herself peered out of the lattice, she caught sight of her master
sitting below, and informed the Princess of this, saying, "O my
lady! O my lady! here's my lord Alaeddin seated at the foot of
the wall." So her mistress arose hurriedly and gazing from the
casement saw him; and her husband raising his head saw her; so
she saluted him and he saluted her, both being like to fly for
joy. Presently Quoth she, "Up and come in to me by the private
postern, for now the Accursed is not here;" and she gave orders
to the slave-girl who went down and opened for him. Then Alaeddin
passed through it and was met by his wife, when they embraced and
exchanged kisses with all delight until they wept for overjoy.
After this they sat down and Alaeddin said to her, "O my lady,
before all things 'tis my desire to ask thee a question. 'Twas my
wont to place an old copper lamp in such a part of my pavilion,
what became of that same?" When the Princess heard these words
she sighed and cried, "O my dearling, 'twas that very Lamp which
garred us fall into this calamity!" Alaeddin asked her, "How
befel the affair?" and she answered by recounting to him all that
passed, first and last, especially how they had given in exchange
an old lamp for a new lamp, adding, "And next day we hardly saw
one another at dawn before we found ourselves in this land, and
he who deceived us and took the lamp by way of barter informed me
that he had done the deed by might of his magic and by means of
the Lamp; that he is a Moorman from Africa, and that we are now
in his native country."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Lady Badr al-Budur ceased speaking, Alaeddin
resumed, "Tell me the intent of this Accursed in thy respect,
also what he sayeth to thee and what be his will of thee?" She
replied, "Every day he cometh to visit me once and no more: he
would woo me to his love and he sueth that I take him to spouse
in lieu of thee and that I forget thee and be consoled for the
loss of thee. And he telleth me that the Sultan my sire hath cut
off my husband's head, adding that thou, the son of pauper
parents, wast by him enriched. And he sootheth me with talk, but
he never seeth aught from me save weeping and wailing; nor hath
he heard from me one sugar-sweet word."[FN#202] Quoth Alaeddin,
"Tell me where he hath placed the Lamp an thou know anything
thereof:" and Quoth she, "He beareth it about on his body alway,
nor is it possible that he leave it for a single hour; moreover
once when he related what I have now recounted to thee, he
brought it out of his breast-pocket and allowed me to look upon
it." When Alaeddin heard these words, he joyed with exceeding joy
and said, "O my lady, do thou lend ear to me. 'Tis my design to
go from thee forthright and to return only after doffing this my
dress; so wonder not when thou see me changed, but direct one of
thy women to stand by the private pastern alway and, whenever she
espy me coming, at once to open. And now I will devise a device
whereby to slay this damned loon." Herewith he arose and, issuing
from the pavilion door, walked till he met on the way a Fellah to
whom he said, "O man, take my attire and give me thy garments."
But the peasant refused, so Alaeddin stripped him of his dress
perforce[FN#203] and donned it, leaving to the man his own rich
gear by way of gift. Then he followed the highway leading to the
neighbouring city and entering it went to the Perfumers' Bazar
where he bought of one some rarely potent Bhang, the son of a
minute,[FN#204] paying two dinars for two drachms thereof and he
returned in disguise by the same road till he reached the
pavilion. Here the slave-girl opened to him the private pastern
wherethrough he went in to the Lady Badr al-Budur.--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

     When it Was the Five Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when Alaeddin went in disguised to his wife he said,
"Hear me! I desire of thee that thou dress and dight thyself in
thy best and thou cast off all outer show and semblance of care;
also when the Accursed, the Maghrabi, shall visit thee, do thou
receive him with a ÊWelcome and fair welcome,' and meet him with
smiling face and invite him to come and sup with thee. Moreover,
let him note that thou hast forgotten Alaeddin thy beloved,
likewise thy father; and that thou hast learned to love him with
exceeding love, displaying to him all manner joy and pleasure.
Then ask him for wine which must be red and pledge him to his
secret in a significant draught; and, when thou hast given him
two to three cups full and hast made him wax careless, then drop
these drops into his cup and fill it up with wine: no sooner
shall he drink of it than he will fall upon his back senseless as
one dead." Hearing these words, the Princess exclaimed," 'Tis
exceedingly sore to me that I do such deed;[FN#205] withal must I
do it that we escape the defilement of this Accursed who tortured
me by severance from thee and from my sire. Lawful and right
therefore is the slaughter of this Accursed." Then Alaeddin ate
and drank with his wife what hindered his hunger; then, rising
without stay or delay, fared forth the pavilion. So the Lady Badr
al-Budur summoned the tirewoman who robed and arrayed her in her
finest raiment and adorned her and perfumed her; and, as she was
thus, behold, the accursed Maghrabi entered. He joyed much seeing
her in such case and yet more when she confronted him, contrary
to her custom, with a laughing face; and his love-longing
increased and his desire to have her. Then she took him and,
seating him beside her, said, "O my dearling, do thou (an thou be
willing) come to me this night and let us sup together.
Sufficient to me hath been my sorrow for, were I to sit mourning
through a thousand years or even two thousand, Alaeddin would not
return to me from the tomb; and I depend upon thy say of
yesterday, to wit, that my sire the Sultan slew him in his stress
of sorrow for severance from me. Nor wonder thou an I have
changed this day from what I was yesterday; and the reason
thereof is I have determined upon taking thee to friend and
playfellow in lieu of and succession to Alaeddin, for that now I
have none other man but thyself. So I hope for thy presence this
night, that we may sup together and we may carouse and drink
somewhat of wine each with other; and especially 'tis my desire
that thou cause me taste the wine of thy natal soil, the African
land, because belike 'tis better than aught of the wine of China
we drink: I have with me some wine but 'tis the growth of my
country and I vehemently wish to taste the wine produced by
thine." And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that when the Maghrabi saw the love lavisht upon him by the
Lady Badr al-Budur, and noted her change from the sorrowful,
melancholy woman she was wont to be, he thought that she had cut
off her hope of Alaeddin and he joyed exceedingly and said to
her, "I hear and obey, O my lady, whatso thou wishest and all
thou biddest. I have at home a jar of our country wine, which I
have carefully kept and stored deep in earth for a space of eight
years; and I will now fare and fill from it our need and will
return to thee in all haste." But the Princess, that she might
wheedle him the more and yet more, replied "O my darling, go not
thou, leaving me alone, but send one of the eunuchs to fill for
us thereof and do thou remain sitting beside me, that I may find
in thee my consolation." He rejoined, "O my lady, none wotteth
where the jar be buried save myself nor will I tarry from thee."
So saying, the Moorman went out and after a short time he brought
back as much wine as they wanted whereupon Quoth the Princess to
him, "Thou hast been at pains and trouble to serve me and I have
suffered for thy sake, O my beloved." Quoth he, "On no wise, O
eyes of me; I hold myself enhonoured by thy service." Then the
Lady Badr al-Budur sat with him at table, and the twain fell to
eating and presently the Princess expressed a wish to drink, when
the handmaid filled her a cup forthright and then crowned another
for the Maroccan. So she drank to his long life and his secret
wishes and he also drank to her life; then the Princess, who was
unique in eloquence and delicacy of speech, fell to making a cup
companion of him and beguiled him by addressing him in the
sweetest terms full of hidden meaning. This was done only that he
might become more madly enamoured of her, but the Maghrabi
thought that it resulted from her true inclination for him; nor
knew that it was a snare set up to slay him. So his longing for
her increased, and he was dying of love for her when he saw her
address him in such tenderness of words and thoughts, and his
head began to swim and all the world seemed as nothing in his
eyes. But when they came to the last of the supper and the wine
had mastered his brains and the Princess saw this in him, she
said, "With us there be a custom throughout our country, but I
know not an it be the usage of yours or not." The Moorman
replied, "And what may that be?" So she said to him, "At the end
of supper each lover in turn taketh the cup of the beloved and
drinketh it off;" and at once she crowned one with wine and bade
the handmaid carry to him her cup wherein the drink was blended
with the Bhang. Now she had taught the slave-girl what to do and
all the handmaids and eunuchs in the pavilion longed for the
Sorcerer's slaughter and in that matter were one with the
Princess. Accordingly the damsel handed him the cup and he, when
he heard her words and saw her drinking from his cup and passing
hers to him noted all that show of love, fancied himself
Iskander, Lord of the Two Horns. Then said she to him, the while
swaying gracefully to either side and putting her hand within his
hand, "O my life, here is thy cup with me and my cup with thee,
and on this wise [FN#206] do lovers drink from each other's
cups." Then she bussed the brim and drained it to the dregs and
again she kissed its lip and offered it to him. Thereat he hew
for joy and meaning to do the like, raised her cup to his mouth
and drank off the whole contents, without considering whether
there was therein aught harmful or not. And forthright he rolled
upon his back in deathlike condition and the cup dropped from his
grasp, whereupon the Lady Badr al-Budur and the slave-girls ran
hurriedly and opened the pavilion door to their lord Alaeddin
who, disguised as a Fellah, entered therein.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin entering his pavilion, went up to the
apartment of his wife, whom he found still sitting at table; and
facing her lay the Maghrabi as one slaughtered; so he at once
drew near to her and kissed her and thanked her for this. Then
rejoicing with joy exceeding he turned to her and said "Do thou
with thy handmaids betake thyself to the inner-rooms and leave me
alone for the present that I may take counsel touching mine
affair." The Princess hesitated not but went away at once, she
and her women; then Alaeddin arose and after locking the door
upon them, walked up to the Moorman and put forth his hand to his
breast-pocket and thence drew the Lamp; after which he unsheathed
his sword and slew the villain.[FN#207] Presently he rubbed the
Lamp and the Marid-slave appeared and said, "Adsum, O my lord,
what is it thou wantest?" "I desire of thee," said Alaeddin,
"that thou take up my pavilion from this country and transport it
to the land of China and there set it down upon the site where it
was whilome, fronting the palace of the Sultan." The Marid
replied, "Hearing and obeying, O my lord.' The Alaeddin went and
sat down with his wife and throwing his arms round her neck
kissed her and she kissed him, and they sat in converse, what
while the Jinni transported the pavilion and all therein to the
place appointed. Presently Alaeddin bade the handmaids spread the
table before him and he and the Lady Badr al-Budur took seat
thereat and fell to eating and drinking, in all joy and gladness,
till they had their sufficiency when, removing to the chamber of
wine and cup-converse, they sat there and caroused in fair
companionship and each kissed other with all love-liesse. The
time had been long and longsome since they enjoyed aught of
pleasure; so they ceased not doing thus until the wine-sun arose
in their heads and sleep get hold of them, at which time they
went to their bed in all ease and comfort.[FN#208] Early on the
next morning Alaeddin woke and awoke his wife, and the slave-
girls came in and donned her dress and prepared her and adorned
her whilst her husband arrayed himself in his costliest raiment
and the twain were ready to fly for joy at reunion after parting.
Moreover the Princess was especially joyous and gladsome because
on that day she expected to see her beloved father. Such was the
case of Alaeddin and the Lady Badr al-Budur; but as regards the
Sultan, after he drove away his son-in-law he never ceased to
sorrow for the loss of his daughter; and every hour of every day
he would sit and weep for her as women weep, because she was his
only child and he had none other to take to heart. And as he
shook off sleep, morning after morning, he would hasten to the
window and throw it open and peer in the direction where formerly
stood Alaeddin's pavilion and pour forth tears until his eyes
were dried up and their lids were ulcered. Now on that day he
arose at dawn and, according to his custom, looked out when, lo
and behold! he saw before him an edifice; so he rubbed his eyes
and considered it curiously when he became certified that it was
the pavilion of his son-in-law. So he called for a horse [FN#209]
without let or delay; and as soon as his beast was saddled, he
mounted and made for the place; and Alaeddin, when he saw his
father-in-law approaching, went down and met him half way: then,
taking his hand, aided him to step upstairs to the apartment of
his daughter. And the Princess, being as earnestly desirous to
see her sire, descended and greeted him at the door of the
staircase fronting the ground-floor hall. Thereupon the King
folded her in his arms and kissed her, shedding tears of joy; and
she did likewise till at last Alaeddin led them to the upper
saloon where they took seats and the Sultan fell to asking her
case and what had betided her.--And Shahrazad was surprised by
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.
 
      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

   Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy,
do tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad
replied, With love and good will."---It hath reached me, O King
of the Age, that the Lady Badr al-Budur began to inform the
Sultan of all which had befallen her, saying, "O my father, I
recovered not life save yesterday when I saw my husband, and he
it was who freed me from the thraldom of that Maghrabi, that
Magician, that Accursed, than whom I believe there be none viler
on the face of earth; and, but for my beloved, I had never
escaped him nor hadst thou seen me during the rest of my days.
But mighty sadness and sorrow get about me, O my father, not only
for losing thee but also for the loss of a husband, under whose
kindness I shall be all the length of my life, seeing that he
freed me from that fulsome sorcerer." Then the Princess began
repeating to her sire every thing that happened to her, and
relating to him how the Moorman had tricked her in the guise of a
lamp-seller who offered in exchange new for old; how she had
given him the Lamp whose worth she knew not, and how she had
bartered it away only to laugh at the lampman's folly. "And next
morning, O my father," she continued, "we found ourselves and
whatso the pavilion contained in Africa-land, till such time as
my husband came to us and devised a device whereby we escaped:
and, had it not been for Alaeddin's hastening to our aid, the
Accursed was determined to enjoy me perforce." Then she told him
of the Bhang-drops administered in wine to the African and
concluded, "Then my husband returned to me and how I know not,
but we were shifted from Africa land to this place." Alaeddin in
his turn recounted how, finding the wizard dead drunken, he had
sent away his wife and her women from the polluted place into the
inner apartments; how he had taken the Lamp from the Sorcerer's
breast-pocket whereto he was directed by his wife; how he had
slaughtered the villain and, finally how, making use of the Lamp,
he had summoned its Slave and ordered him to transport the
pavilion back to its proper site, ending his tale with, "And, if
thy Highness have any doubt anent my words, arise with me and
look upon the accursed Magician." The King did accordingly and,
having considered the Moorman, bade the carcase be carried away
forthright and burned and its ashes scattered in air. Then he
took to embracing Alaeddin and kissing him said, "Pardon me, O my
son, for that I was about to destroy thy life through the foul
deeds of this damned enchanter, who cast thee into such pit of
peril; and I may be excused, O my child, for what I did by thee,
because I found myself forlorn of my daughter; my only one, who
to me is dearer than my very kingdom. Thou knowest how the hearts
of parents yearn unto their offspring, especially when like
myself they have but one and none other to love." And on this
wise the Sultan took to excusing himself and kissing his son-in-
law.--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say,

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin said to the Sultan, "O King of the Time, thou
didst naught to me contrary to Holy Law, and I also sinned not
against thee; but all the trouble came from that Maghrabi, the
impure, the Magician." Thereupon the Sultan bade the city be
decorated and they obeyed him and held high feast and
festivities. He also commanded the crier to cry about the streets
saying, "This day is a mighty great f€te, wherein public
rejoicings must be held throughout the realm, for a full month of
thirty days, in honour of the Lady Badr al-Budur and her husband
Alaeddin's return to their home." On this wise befel it with
Alaeddin and the Maghrabi; but withal the King's son-in-law
escaped not wholly from the Accursed, albeit the body had been
burnt and the ashes scattered in air. For the villain had a
brother yet more villainous than himself, and a greater adept in
necromancy, geomancy and astromancy; and, even as the old saw
saith "A bean and 'twas split;"[FN#210] so each one dwelt in his
own quarter of the globe that he might fill it with his sorcery,
his fraud and his treason.[FN#211] Now, one day of the days it
fortuned that the Moorman's brother would learn how it fared with
him, so he brought out his sandboard and dotted it and produced
the figures which, when he had considered and carefully studied
them, gave him to know that the man he sought was dead and housed
in the tomb. So he grieved and was certified of his decease, but
he dotted a second time seeking to learn the manner of the death
and where it had taken place; so he found that the site was the
China-land and that the mode was the foulest of slaughter;
furthermore, that he who did him die was a young man Alaeddin
hight. Seeing this he straightway arose and equipped himself for
wayfare; then he set out and cut across the wilds and words and
heights for the space of many a month until he reached China and
the capital of the Sultan wherein was the slayer of his brother.
He alighted at the so-called Strangers' Khan and, hiring himself
a cell, took rest therein for a while; then he fared forth and
wandered about the highways that he might discern some path which
would aid him unto the winning of his ill-minded wish, to wit, of
wreaking upon Alaeddin blood-revenge for his brother.[FN#212]
Presently he entered a coffee-house, a fine building which stood
in the market-place and which collected a throng of folk to play,
some at the mankalah,[FN#213] others at the backgammon[FN#214]
and others at the chess and what not else. There he sat down and
listened to those seated beside him and they chanced to be
conversing about an ancient dame and a holy, by name
Fatimah,[FN#215] who dwelt alway at her devotions in a hermitage
without the town, and this she never entered save only two days
each month. They mentioned also that she had performed many
saintly miracles[FN#216] which, when the Maghrabi, the
Necromancer, heard he said in himself, "Now have I found that
which I sought: Inshallah--God willing--by means of this crone
will I win to my wish."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, the Necromancer, went up to the folk who
were talking of the miracles performed by the devout old woman
and said to one of them, "O my uncle, I heard you all chatting
about the prodigies of a certain saintess named Fatimah: who is
she and where may be her abode? "Marvellous!"[FN#217] exclaimed
the man: "How canst thou be in our city and yet never have heard
about the miracles of the Lady Fatimah? Evidently, O thou poor
fellow, thou art a foreigner, since the fastings of this devotee
and her asceticism in worldly matters and the beauties of her
piety never came to thine ears." The Moorman rejoined, " 'tis
true, O my lord: yes, I am a stranger and came to this your city
only yesternight; and I hope thou wilt inform me concerning the
saintly miracles of this virtuous woman and where may be her
wone, for that I have fallen into a calamity, and 'tis my wish to
visit her and crave her prayers, so haply Allah (to whom be
honour and glory!) will, through her blessings, deliver me from
mine evil." Hereat the man recounted to him the marvels of
Fatimah the Devotee and her piety and the beauties of her
worship; then, taking him by the hand went with him without the
city and showed him the way to her abode, a cavern upon a
hillock's head. The Necromancer acknowledged his kindness in many
words and, thanking him for his good offices, returned to his
cell in the caravanserai. Now by the fiat of Fate on the very
next day Fatimah came down to the city, and the Maghrabi, the
Necromancer, happened to leave his hostelry a-morn, when he saw
the folk swarming and crowding; wherefore he went up to discover
what was to do and found the Devotee standing amiddlemost the
throng, and all who suffered from pain or sickness flocked to her
soliciting a blessing and praying for her prayers; and each and
every she touched became whole of his illness.[FN#218] The
Maroccan, the Necromancer, followed her about until she returned
to her antre; then, awaiting till the evening evened, he arose
and repaired to a vintner's store where he drank a cup of wine.
After this he fared forth the city and finding the Devotee's
cavern, entered it and saw her lying prostrate[FN#219] with her
back upon a strip of matting. So he came for ward and mounted
upon her belly; then he drew his dagger and shouted at her; and,
when she awoke and opened her eyes, she espied a Moorish man with
an unsheathed poniard sitting upon her middle as though about to
kill her. She was troubled and sore terrified, but he said to
her, "Hearken! an thou cry out or utter a word I will slay thee
at this very moment: arise now and do all I bid thee." Then he
sware to her an oath that if she obeyed his orders, whatever they
might be, he would not do her die. So saying, he rose up from off
her and Fatimah also arose, when he said to her, "Give me thy
gear and take thou my habit ;" whereupon she gave him her
clothing and head-fillets, her face-kerchief and her mantilla.
Then Quoth he, " 'tis also requisite that thou anoint me with
somewhat shall make the colour of my face like unto thine."
Accordingly she went into the inner cavern and, bringing out a
gallipot of ointment, spread somewhat thereof upon her palm and
with it besmeared his face until its hue favoured her own; then
she gave him her staff[FN#220] and, showing him how to walk and
what to do when he entered the city, hung her rosary around his
neck. Lastly she handed to him a mirror and said, "Now look! Thou
differest from me in naught;" and he saw himself Fatimah's
counterpart as though she had never gone or come.[FN#221] But
after obtaining his every object he falsed his oath and asked for
a cord which she brought to him; then he seized her and strangled
her in the cavern; and presently, when she was dead, haled the
corpse outside and threw it into a pit hard by.--And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted
say.

     When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, after murthering Fatimah, threw her body
into a pit and went back to sleep in her cavern; and, when broke
the day, he rose and repairing to the town took his stand under
the walls of Alaeddin's pavilion. Hereupon flocked the folk about
him, all being certified that he was Fatimah the Devotee and he
fell to doing whatso she was wont to do: he laid hands on these
in pain and recited for those a chapter of the Koran and made
orisons for a third. Presently the thronging of the folk and the
clamouring of the crowd were heard by the Lady Badr al-Budur, who
said to her handmaidens, "Look what is to do and what be the
cause of this turmoil!" Thereupon the Agha of the eunuchry fared
forth to see what might be the matter and presently returning
said, "O my lady, this clamour is caused by the Lady Fatimah, and
if thou be pleased to command, I will bring her to thee; so shalt
thou gain through her a blessing." The Princess answered, "Go
bring her, for since many a day I am always hearing of her
miracles and her virtues, and I do long to see her and get a
blessing by her intervention, for the folk recount her
manifestations in many cases of difficulty." The Agha went forth
and brought in the Maroccan, the Necromancer, habited in
Fatimah's clothing; and, when the wizard stood before the Lady
Badr al-Budur, he began at first sight to bless her with a string
of prayers; nor did any one of those present doubt at all but
that he was the Devotee herself. The Princess arose and salam'd
to him then seating him beside her, said, "O my Lady Fatimah,
'tis my desire that thou abide with me alway, so might I be
blessed through thee, and also learn of thee the paths[FN#222] of
worship and piety and follow thine example making for salvation."
Now all this was a foul deceit of the accursed African and he
designed furthermore to complete his guile, so he continued, "O
my Lady, I am a poor woman and a religious that dwelleth in the
desert; and the like of me deserveth not to abide in the palaces
of the kings." But the Princess replied, "Have no care whatever,
O my Lady Fatimah; I will set apart for thee an apartment of my
pavilion, that thou mayest worship therein and none shall ever
come to trouble thee; also thou shalt avail to worship Allah in
my place better than in thy cavern." The Maroccan rejoined,"
Hearkening and obedience, O my lady; I will not oppose thine
order for that the commands of the children of the kings may not
be gainsaid nor renounced. Only I hope of thee that my eating and
drinking and sitting may be within my own chamber which shall be
kept wholly private; nor do I require or desire the delicacies of
diet, but do thou favour me by sending thy handmaid every day
with a bit of bread and a sup of water;[FN#223] and, when I feel
fain of food, let me eat by myself in my own room." Now the
Accursed hereby purposed to avert the danger of haply raising his
face-kerchief at meal-times, when his intent might be baffled by
his beard and mustachios discovering him to be a man. The
Princess replied, "O my Lady Fatimah, be of good heart; naught
shall happen save what thou wishest. But now arise and let me
show thee the apartment in the palace which I would prepare for
thy sojourn with us."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-ninth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Lady Badr al-Budur arose and taking the Necromancer
who had disguised himself as the Devotee, ushered him in to the
place which she had kindly promised him for a home and said, "O
my Lady Fatimah, here thou shalt dwell with every comfort about
thee and in all privacy and repose; and the place shall be named
after thy name;" whereupon the Maghrabi acknowledged her kindness
and prayed for her. Then the Princess showed him the jalousies
and the jewelled Kiosque with its four and twenty windows[FN#224]
and said to him, "What thinkest thou, O my Lady Fatimah, of this
marvellous pavilion?" The Moorman replied, "By Allah, O my
daughter, 'tis indeed passing fine and wondrous exceedingly; nor
do I deem that its fellow is to be found in the whole universe;
but alas for the lack of one thing which would enhance its beauty
and decoration !" The Princess asked her, "O my Lady Fatimah,
what lacketh it and what be this thing would add to its
adornment? Tell me thereof, inasmuch as I was wont to believe it
wholly perfect." The Maroccan answered, "O my lady, all it
wanteth is that there be hanging from the middle of the dome the
egg of a fowl called the Rukh;[FN#225] and, were this done, the
pavilion would lack its peer all the world over." The Princess
asked, "What be this bird and where can we find her egg?" and the
Maroccan answered, "O my lady, the Rukh is indeed a giant fowl
which carrieth off camels and elephants in her pounces and flieth
away with them, such is her stature and strength; also this fowl
is mostly found in Mount Kﬂf; and the architect who built this
pavilion is able to bring thee one of her eggs." They then left
such talk as it was the hour for the noon day meal and, when the
handmaid had spread the table, the Lady Badr al-Budur sent down
to invite the Accursed African to eat with her. But he accepted
not and for a reason he would on no wise consent; nay, he rose
and retired to the room which the Princess had assigned to him
and whither the slave-girls carried his dinner. Now when evening
evened, Alaeddin returned from the chase and met his wife who
salam'd to him and he clasped her to his bosom and kissed her.
Presently, looking at her face he saw thereon a shade of sadness
and he noted that contrary to her custom, she did not laugh; so
he asked her, "What hath betided thee, O my dearling? tell me,
hath aught happened to trouble thy thoughts!" "Nothing whatever,"
answered she, "but, O my beloved, I fancied that our pavilion
lacked naught at all; however, O eyes of me, O Alaeddin, were the
dome of the upper story hung with an egg of the fowl called Rukh,
there would be naught like it in the universe." Her husband
rejoined, "And for this trifle thou art saddened when 'tis the
easiest of all matters to me! So cheer thyself; and, whatever
thou wantest, 'tis enough thou inform me thereof, and I will
bring it from the abysses of the earth in the quickest time and
at the earliest hour."--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Five Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that Alaeddin after refreshing the spirits of his Princess
by promising her all she could desire, repaired straight way to
his chamber and taking the Lamp[FN#226] rubbed it, when the Marid
appeared without let or delay saying, "Ask whatso thou wantest."
Said the other, "I desire thee to fetch me an egg of the bird
Rukh and do thou hang it to the dome-crown of this my pavilion."
But when the Marid heard these words, his face waxed fierce and
he shouted with a mighty loud voice and a frightful, and cried,
"O denier of kindly deeds, sufficeth it not for thee that I and
all the Slaves of the Lamp are ever at thy service, but thou must
also require me to bring thee our Liege Lady[FN#227] for thy
pleasure, and hang her up at thy pavilion dome for the enjoyment
of thee and thy wife! Now by Allah, ye deserve, thou and she,
that I reduce you to ashes this very moment and scatter you upon
the air; but, inasmuch as ye twain be ignorant of this matter,
unknowing its inner from its outer significance, I will pardon
you for indeed ye are but innocents. The offence cometh from that
accursed Necromancer, brother to the Maghrabi, the Magician, who
abideth here representing himself to be Fatimah, the Devotee,
after assuming her dress and belongings and murthering her in the
cavern: indeed he came hither seeking to slay thee by way of
blood-revenge for his brother; and 'tis he who taught thy wife to
require this matter of me.''[FN#228] So saying the Marid
evanished. But when Alaeddin heard these words, his wits fled his
head and his joints trembled at the Marid's terrible shout; but
he empowered his purpose and, rising forthright, issued from his
chamber and went into his wife's. There he affected an ache of
head, for that he knew how famous was Fatimah for the art and
mystery of healing all such pains; and, when the Lady Badr al-
Budur saw him sitting hand to head and complaining of unease, she
asked him the cause and he answered, "I know of none other save
that my head acheth exceedingly." Hereupon she straightway bade
summon Fatimah that the Devotee might impose her hand upon his
head;[FN#229] and Alaeddin asked her, "Who may this Fatimah be?"
So she informed him that it was Fatimah the Devotee to whom she
had given a home in the pavilion. Meanwhile the slave-girls had
fared forth and summoned the Maghrabi, and when the Accursed made
act of presence, Alaeddin rose up to him and, acting like one who
knew naught of his purpose, salam'd to him as though he had been
the real Fatimah and, kissing the hem of his sleeve, welcomed him
and entreated him with honour and said, "O my Lady Fatimah, I
hope thou wilt bless me with a boon, for well I wot thy practice
in the healing of pains: I have gotten a mighty ache in my head."
The Moorman, the Accursed, could hardly believe that he heard
such words, this being all that he desired.--And Shahrazad was
surprised by the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister mine, an thou be other than sleepy, do
tell us some of thy pleasant tales," whereupon Shahrazad replied,
"With love and good will."--It hath reached me, O King of the
Age, that the Maghrabi, the Necromancer, habited as Fatimah the
Devotee, came up to Alaeddin that he might place hand upon his
head and heal his ache; so he imposed one hand and, putting forth
the other under his gown, drew a dagger wherewith to slay him.
But Alaeddin watched him and, taking patience till he had wholly
unsheathed the weapon, seized him with a forceful grip; and,
wrenching the dagger from his grasp plunged it deep into his
heart. When the Lady Badr al-Budur saw him do on this wise, she
shrieked and cried out, "What hath this virtuous and holy woman
done that thou hast charged thy neck with the heavy burthen of
her blood shed wrongfully? Hast thou no fear of Allah that thou
killest Fatimah, this saintly woman, whose miracles are far-
famed?" "No," replied Alaeddin "I have not killed Fatimah. I have
slain only Fatimah's slayer, he that is the brother of the
Maghrabi, the Accursed, the Magician, who carried thee off by his
black art and transported my pavilion to the Africa-land; and
this damnable brother of his came to our city and wrought these
wiles, murthering Fatimah and assuming her habit, only that he
might avenge upon me his brother's blood; and he also 'twas who
taught thee to require of me a Rukh's egg, that my death might
result from such requirement. But, an thou doubt my speech, come
forwards and consider the person I have slain." Thereupon
Alaeddin drew aside the Moorman's face-kerchief and the Lady Badr
al-Budur saw the semblance of a man with a full beard that well
nigh covered his features. She at once knew the truth and said to
her husband, "O my beloved, twice have I cast thee into death-
risk!" but he rejoined, "No harm in that, O my lady, by the
blessing of your loving eyes: I accept with all joy all things
thou bringest me." The Princess, hearing these words, hastened to
fold him in her arms and kissed him saying, "O my dearling, all
this is for my love to thee and I knew naught thereof; but indeed
I do not deem lightly of thine affection." So Alaeddin kissed her
and strained her to his breast; and the love between them waxed
but greater. At that moment the Sultan appeared and they told him
all that had happened, showing him the corpse of the Maghrabi,
the Necromancer, when the King commanded the body to be burned
and the ashes scattered on air, even as had befallen the Wizard's
brother. And Alaeddin abode with his wife, the Lady Badr al-
Budur, in all pleasure and joyance of life and thenceforward
escaped every danger; and, after a while, when the Sultan
deceased, his son-in-law was seated upon the throne of the
Kingdom; and he commanded and dealt justice to the lieges so that
all the