 folk loved him, and he lived with his wife in all solace
and happiness until there came to him the Destroyer of delights
and the Severer of societies.[FN#230] Quoth Dunyazad, "O sister
mine, how rare is thy tale and delectable!" and Quoth Shahrazad,
"And what is this compared with that I could relate to you after
the coming night, an this my lord the King deign leave me on
life?" So Shahryar said to himself, "Indeed I will not slay her
until she tell me the whole tale."

 When it was the Five Hundred and Ninety-second Night,[FN#231]

Shahrazad began to relate the adventures of




               KHUDADAD[FN#232] AND HIS BROTHERS.



Said she, O auspicious King, this my tale relateth to the Kingdom
of Diyﬂr Bakr[FN#233] in whose capital-city of Harrﬂn[FN#234]
dwelt a Sultan of illustrious lineage, a protector of the people,
a lover of his lieges, a friend of mankind and renowned for being
gifted with every good quality. Now Allah Almighty had bestowed
upon him all that his heart could desire, save boon of child, for
though he had lovely wives within his Harem-door and fair
concubines galore, he had been not blessed with a son; wherefor
he offered up incessant worship to the Creator. One night there
appeared to him in a dream a man of comely visage and holy of
semblance like unto a prophet, who addressed him, saying, "O
puissant King, thy vows are at length heard. Arise to-morrow at
day-dawn, pray a two-bow prayer and offer up thy petitions; then
haste thee to the Chief Gardener of thy palace and require of him
a pomegranate whereof do thou eat as many seeds as seemeth best
to thee; after which perform another two-bow prayer, and Allah
will shower favours and graces upon thy head." The King, awaking
at peep of day, called to mind the vision of the night, and
returning thanks to the Almighty, made his orisons and kneeling
invoked a benedicite. Then he rose and repaired to the garth, and
receiving a pomegranate from the Head-Gardener, counted out and
ate fifty grains thereof; to wit, one for each of his wives.
After this he lay the night in turn with them all and by the
omnipotence of the Creator all gave in due time signs of
pregnancy, save one Fir∑zah[FN#235] hight. So the King conceived
a grudge against her, saying in his soul, "Allah holdeth this
woman vile and accursed and He willeth not that she become the
mother of a Prince, and on this wise hath the curse of barrenness
become her lot." He would have had her done to death but the
Grand Wazir made intercession for her and suggested to the Sultan
that perchance Firuzah might prove with child and withal not show
outward signal thereof, as is the manner of certain women;
wherefore to slay her might be to destroy a Prince with the
mother. Quoth the King, "So be it! slay her not, but take heed
that she abide no longer or at court or in the city, for I cannot
support the sight of her." Replied the Minister, "It shall be
done even as thy Highness biddeth: let her be conveyed to the
care of thy brother's son, Prince Sam›r." The King did according
to the counsel of his Wazir and despatched his loathed Queen to
Samaria[FN#236] accompanied by a writ with the following purport,
to his nephew, "We forward this lady to thy care: entreat her
honourably and, shouldest thou remark tokens of pregnancy in her,
see that thou acquaint us therewith without stay or delay." So
Firuzah journeyed to Samaria, and when her time was fulfilled she
gave birth to a boy babe, and became the mother of a Prince who
in favour was resplendent as the sheeny day. Hereat the lord of
Samaria sent message by letter to the Sultan of Harran saying, "A
Prince hath been borne by the womb of Firuzah: Allah Almighty
give thee permanence of prosperity!" By these tidings the King
was filled with joy; and presently he replied to his cousin,
Prince Samir, "Each one of my forty-and-nine spouses hath been
blessed with issue and it delighteth me beyond bounds that
Firuzah hath also given me a son. Let him be named
Khudadad--God's gift--do thou have due care of him and whatsoever
thou mayest need for his birth-ceremonies shall be counted out to
thee without regard to cost." Accordingly Prince Samir took in
hand with all pleasure and delight the charge of Prince Khudadad;
and, as soon as the child reached the age for receiving
instruction, he caused him to be taught cavalarice and archery
and all such arts and sciences which it behoveth the sons of the
Kings to learn, so that he became perfect in all manner
knowledge. At eighteen years of age he waxed seemly of semblance
and such were his strength and valiance that none in the whole
world could compare with him. Presently, feeling himself gifted
with unusual vigour and virile character he addressed one day of
the days Firuzah his parent, saying, "O mother mine, grant me thy
leave to quit Samaria and fare in quest of fortune, especially of
some battle-field where I may prove the force and prowess of me.
My sire, the Sultan of Harran, hath many foes, some of whom are
lusting to wage war with him; and I marvel that at such time he
doth not summon me and make me his aid in this mightiest of
matters. But seeing that I possess such courage and Allah-given
strength it behoveth me not to remain thus idly at home. My
father knoweth not of my lustihood, nor forsooth doth he think of
me at all; nevertheless 'tis suitable that at such a time I
present myself before him, and tender my services until my
brothers be fit to fight and to front his foes." Hereto his
mother made answer, "O my dear son, thine absence pleaseth me
not, but in truth it becometh thee to help thy father against the
enemies who are attacking him on all sides, provided that he send
for thine aidance."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Khudadad
replied to his mother Firuzah, "Indeed I am unable to brook
delay; moreover such longing have I in heart to look upon the
Sultan, my sire, that an I go not and visit him and kiss his feet
I shall assuredly die. I will enter his employ as a stranger and
all unknown to him, nor will I inform him that I am his son; but
I shall be to him as a foreigner or as one of his hired knaves,
and with such devotion will I do him suit and service that, when
he learneth that I am indeed his child, he may grant me his
favour and affection." Prince Samir also would not suffer him to
depart and forbade him therefrom; but one day of the days the
Prince suddenly set out from Samaria under pretext that he was
about to hunt and chase. He mounted a milk-white steed, whose
reins and stirrups were of gold and the saddle and housings were
of azure satin dubbed with jewels and fringed with pendants of
fresh pearls. His scymitar was hilted with a single diamond, the
scabbard of chaunders-wood was crested with rubies and emeralds
and it depended from a gemmed waist-belt; while his bow and
richly wrought quiver hung by his side. Thus equipped and
escorted by his friends and familiars he presently arrived at
Harran-city after the fairest fashion; and, when occasion offered
itself, he made act of presence before the King and did his
obeisance at Darbar. The Sultan, remarking his beauty and
comeliness, or haply by reason of an outburst of natural
affection, was pleased to return his salam; and, graciously
calling him to his side, asked of him his name and pedigree,
whereto Khudadad answered, "O my liege, I am the son of an Emir
of Cairo. A longing for travel hath made me quit my native place
and wander from clime to clime till at length I have come hither;
and, hearing that thou hast matters of importance in hand, I am
desirous of approving to thee my valiancy." The King joyed with
exceeding joy to hear this stout and doughty speech, and
forthwith gave him a post of command in his army; and Khudadad by
careful supervision of the troops soon won the esteem of his
officers by his desire to satisfy them and the hearts of his
soldiers by reason of his strength and courage, his goodly nature
and his kindly disposition. He also brought the host and all its
equipments and munitions of warfare into such excellent order and
method that the King on inspecting them was delighted and created
the stranger Chief Commandant of the forces and made him an
especial favourite; while the Wazirs and Emirs, also the Nabobs
and the Notables, perceiving that he was highly reputed and
regarded, showed him abundant good will and affection. Presently,
the other Princes, who became of no account in the eyes of the
King and the lieges, waxed envious of his high degree and
dignity. But Khudadad ceased not to please the Sultan his sire,
at all times when they conversed together, by his prudence and
discretion, his wit and wisdom, and gained his regard ever more
and more; and when the invaders, who had planned a raid on the
realm, heard of the discipline of the army and of Khudadad's
provisions for materials of war, they abstained from all hostile
intent. After a while the King committed to Khudadad the custody
and education of the forty-nine Princes, wholly relying on his
sagesse and skill; and thus, albeit Khudadad was of age like his
brothers, he became their master by reason of his sapience and
good sense. Whereupon they hated him but the more; and, when
taking counsel one day, quoth one to the other, "What be this
thing our sire hath done that he should make a stranger-wight his
cup-companion and set him to lord it over us? We can do naught
save by leave of this our governor, and our condition is past
bearing; so contrive we to rid ourselves of this foreigner and at
least render him vile and contemptible in the eyes of our sire
the Sultan." Said one, "Let us gather together and slay him in
some lonely spot;" and said another, "Not so! to kill him would
benefit us naught, for how could we keep the matter hidden from
the King? He would become our enemy and Allah only wotteth what
evil might befal us. Nay, rather let us crave permission of him
and fare a-hunting and then tarry we in some far-off town; and
after a while the King will marvel at our absence, then grief
will be sore upon him and at length, waxing displeased and
suspicious, he will have this fellow expelled the palace or haply
done to death. This is the only sure and safe way of bringing
about his destruction."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
forty-and-nine brothers agreed to hold this plan wisest and,
presently going together to Khudadad, asked leave of him to ride
about the country awhile or fare to the chase, promising they
would return by set of sun. He fell into the snare and allowed
them to go; whereupon they sallied forth a-hunting but did not
come back that day or the next. On the third morning the King who
missed them asked Khudadad wherefore it was that none of his sons
were to be seen; and he answered that three days before they had
gotten leave from him to go a-hunting and had not returned.
Hereat the father was perplexed with sore perplexity; and, when
sundry days more had passed by and still the Princes appeared
not, the old Sultan was much troubled in mind and hardly
restraining his rage summoned Khudadad and in hot wrath
exclaimed, "O thou neglectful stranger, what courage and
over-daring is this of thine that thou didst suffer my sons fare
to the chase and didst not ride with them! And now 'tis but right
that thou set out and search for them and bring them back;
otherwise thou shalt surely die." Khudadad, hearing these harsh
words, was startled and alarmed; however he got him ready and
mounted his horse forthwith and left the city in quest of the
Princes his brethren, wandering about from country to country,
like unto a herd seeking a straying flock of goats. Presently,
not finding any trace of them in homestead or on desert-ground,
he became sad and sorrowful exceedingly, saying in his soul, "O
my brothers, what hath befallen you and where can ye be dwelling?
Perchance some mighty foeman hath made you prisoners so that ye
cannot escape; and I may never return unto Harran till I find
you; for this will be a matter of bitter regret and repine to the
King." So he repented more and more having suffered them to go
without his escort and guidance. At length whilst searching for
them from plain to plain and forest to forest he chanced come
upon a large and spacious prairie in the middlemost whereof rose
a castle of black marble; so he rode on at a foot pace and when
close under the walls he espied a lady of passing beauty and
loveliness who was seated at a window in melancholy plight and
with no other ornament than her own charms. Her lovely hair hung
down in dishevelled locks; her raiment was tattered and her
favour was pale and showed sadness and sorrow. Withal she was
speaking under her breath and Khudadad, giving attentive ear,
heard her say these words, "O youth, fly this fatal site, else
thou wilt fall into the hands of the monster who dwelleth here: a
man-devouring Ethiopian[FN#237] is lord of this palace; and he
seizeth all whom Fate sendeth to this prairie and locketh them up
in darksome and narrow cells that he may preserve them for food."
Khudadad exclaimed, "O my lady, tell me I pray thee who thou art
and whereabouts was thy home;" and she answered, "I am a daughter
of Cairo and of the noblest thereof. But lately, as I wended my
way to Baghdad, I alighted upon this plain and met that Habashi,
who slew all my servants and carrying me off by force placed me
in this palace. I no longer cared to live, and a thousand times
better were it for me to die; for that this Abyssinian lusteth to
enjoy me and albeit to the present time I have escaped the
caresses of the impure wretch, to-morrow an I still refuse to
gratify his desire he will surely ravish me and do me dead. So I
have given up all hope of safety; but thou, why hast thou come
hither to perish? Escape without stay or delay, for he hath gone
forth in quest of wayfarers and right soon will he return.
Moreover he can see far and wide and can descry all who traverse
this wold." Now hardly had the lady spoken these words when the
Abyssinian drew in sight; and he was as a Gh∑l of the Wild, big
of bulk, and fearsome of favour and figure, and he mounted a
sturdy Tartar steed, brandishing, as he rode, a weighty blade
which none save he could wield. Prince Khudadad seeing this
monstrous semblance was sore amazed and prayed Heaven that he
might be victorious over that devil: then unsheathing his sword
he stood awaiting the Abyssinian's approach with courage and
steadfastness; but the blackamoor when he drew near deemed the
Prince too slight and puny to fight and was minded to seize him
alive. Khudadad, seeing how his foe had no intent to combat,
struck him with his sword on the knee a stroke so dour that the
negro foamed with rage and yelled a yell so loud that the whole
prairie resounded with the plaint. Thereupon the brigand, fiery
with fury, rose straight in his shovel-stirrups and struck
fiercely at Khudadad with his huge sword and, but for the
Prince's cunning of fence and the cleverness of his courser, he
would have been sliced in twain like unto a cucumber. Though the
scymitar whistled through the air, the blow was harmless, and in
an eye-twinkling Khudadad dealt him a second cut and struck off
his right hand which fell to the ground with the sword hilt it
gripped, when the blackamoor losing his balance rolled from the
saddle and made earth resound with the fall. Thereupon the Prince
sprang from his steed and deftly severing the enemy's head from
his body threw it aside. Now the lady had been looking down at
the lattice rigid in prayer for the gallant youth; and, seeing
the Abyssinian slain and the Prince victorious, she was overcome
with exceeding joy and cried out to her deliverer, "Praise be to
Almighty Allah, O my lord, who by thy hand hath defeated and
destroyed this fiend. Come now to me within the castle, whose
keys are with the Abyssinian; so take them and open the door and
deliver me." Khudadad found a large bunch of keys under the dead
man's girdle wherewith he opened the portals of the fort and
entered a large saloon in which was the lady; and, no sooner did
she behold him than running to meet him she was about to cast
herself at his feet and kiss them when Khudadad prevented her.
She praised him with highest praise and extolled him for valiancy
above all the champions of the world, and he returned the salam
to her who, when seen near hand seemed endued with more grace and
charms than had appeared from afar. So the Prince joyed with
extreme joy and the twain sat down in pleasant converse.
Presently, Khudadad heard shrieks and cries and weeping and
wailing with groans and moans and ever loudening lamentations; so
he asked the lady, saying, "whence are these clamours and from
whom come these pitiful complaints?" And, she pointing to a
wicket in a hidden corner of the court below, answered, saying,
"O my lord, these sounds come therefrom. Many wretches driven by
Destiny have fallen into the clutches of the Abyssinian Ghul and
are securely locked up in cells, and each day he was wont to
roast and eat one of the captives." "'Twill please me vastly,"
quoth Khudadad, "to be the means of their deliverance: come, O my
lady, and show me where they are imprisoned." Thereupon the twain
drew near to the place and the Prince forthright tried a key upon
the lock of the dungeon but it did not fit; then he made essay of
another wherewith they opened the wicket. As they were so doing
the report of the captives' moaning and groaning increased yet
more and more until Khudadad, touched and troubled at their
impatience, asked the cause of it. The lady replied, "O my lord,
hearing our footsteps and the rattling of the key in the lock
they deem that the cannibal, according to his custom, hath come
to supply them with food and to secure one of them for his
evening meal. Each feareth lest his turn for roasting be come, so
all are affrighted with sore affright and redouble their shouts
and cries."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the sounds
from that secret place seemed to issue from under ground or from
the depths of a draw-well. But when the Prince opened the dungeon
door, he espied a steep staircase and descending thereby found
himself in a deep pit, narrow and darksome, wherein were penned
more than an hundred persons with elbows pinioned and members
chained; nor saw he aught of light save through one bull's-eye.
So he cried to them, "O ye unfortunates, fear ye no more! I have
slain the Abyssinian; and render ye praise to Allah Almighty who
hath rid you of your wrong-doer: also I come to strike off your
fetters and return you to freedom." Hearing these glad tidings
the prisoners were in raptures of delight and raised a general
cry of joy and jubilee. Hereupon Khudadad and the lady began to
loose their hands and feet; and each, as he was released from his
durance, helped to unchain his fellows: brief, after a moment of
time all were delivered from their bonds and bondage. Then each
and every kissed Khudadad's feet and gave thanks and prayed for
his welfare; and when those whilom prisoners entered the
court-yard whereupon the sun was shining sheen, Khudadad
recognised amongst them his brothers, in quest of whom he had so
long wandered. He was amazed with exceeding amazement and
exclaimed, "Laud be to the Lord, that I have found you one and
all safe and sound: your father is sorely sad and sorrowful at
your absence; and Heaven forfend that this devil hath devoured
any from amongst you." He then counted their number,
forty-and-nine, and set them apart from the rest; and all in
excess of joy fell upon one another's necks and ceased not to
embrace their saviour. After this the Prince spread a feast for
the captives, each and every, whom he had delivered; and, when
they had eaten and drunken their full, he restored to them the
gold and silver, the Turkey carpets and pieces of Chinese silk
and brocade and other valuables innumerable which the Abyssinian
had plundered from the caravans, as also their own personal goods
and chattels, directing each man to claim his own; and what
remained he divided equally amongst them. "But," quoth he, "by
what means can ye convey these bales to your own countries, and
where can ye find beasts of burden in this wild wold?" Quoth
they, "O our Lord, the Abyssinian robbed us of our camels with
their loads and doubtless they are in the stables of the castle."
Hereupon Khudadad fared forth with them to the stables and there
found tethered and tied not only the camels but also the
forty-nine horses of his brothers the princes, and accordingly he
gave to each one his own animal. There were moreover in the
stables hundreds of Abyssinian slave-boys who, seeing the
prisoners released, were certified that their lord the cannibal
was slain and fled in dismay to the forest and none thought of
giving chase to them. So the merchants loaded their merchandise
upon the camels' backs and farewelling the Prince set out for
their own countries. Then quoth Khudadad to the lady, "O thou
rare in beauty and chastity, whence camest thou when the
Abyssinian seized thee and whither now wouldst thou wend? Inform
me thereof that I may restore thee to thy home; haply these
Princes, my brethren, sons of the Sultan of Harran, know thine
abode; and doubtless they will escort thee thither." The lady
turning to Khudadad presently made answer, "I live far from here
and my country, the land of Egypt, is over distant for travel.
But thou, O valorous Prince, hast delivered mine honour and my
life from the hands of the Abyssinian and hast shown me such
favour that 'twould ill become me to conceal from thee my
history. I am the daughter of a mighty king; reigning over the
Sa'›d or upper Nile-land; and when a tyrant foeman seized him
and, reaving him of life as well as of his realm, usurped his
throne and seized his kingdom, I fled away to preserve my
existence and mine honour." Thereupon Khudadad and his brothers
prayed the lady to recount all that had befallen her and
reassured her, saying, "Henceforth thou shalt live in solace and
luxury: neither toil nor trouble shall betide thee." When she saw
that there was no help for her but to tell all her tale, she
began in the following words to recount the




          History of the Princess of Daryabar.[FN#238]



In an island of the islands standeth a great city called
Daryﬂbﬂr, wherein dwelt a king of exalted degree. But despite his
virtue and his valour he was ever sad and sorrowful having naught
of offspring, and he offered up without surcease prayers on that
behalf. After long years and longsome supplications a half boon
was granted to him; to wit, a daughter (myself) was born. My
father who grieved sore at first presently rejoiced with joy
exceeding at the unfortunate ill-fated birth of me; and, when I
came of age to learn, he bade me be taught to read and write; and
caused me to be instructed in court-ceremonial and royal duties
and the chronicles of the past, to the intent that I might
succeed him as heiress to his throne and his kingship. Now it
happened one day that my sire rode out a-hunting and gave chase
to a wild ass[FN#239] with such hot pursuit that he found himself
at eventide separated from his suite; so, wearied with the chase,
he dismounted from his steed and seating himself by the side of a
forest-path, he said to himself "The onager will doubtless seek
cover in this copse." Suddenly he espied a light shining bright
amidst the trees and, thinking that a hamlet might be hard by, he
was minded to night there and at day-dawn to determine his
further course. Hereupon he arose and walking towards the light
he found that it issued from a lonely hut in the forest; then
peering into the inside he espied an Abyssinian burly of bulk and
in semblance like unto a Satan, seated upon a divan. Before him
were ranged many capacious jars full of wine and over a fire of
charcoal he was roasting a bullock whole and eating the flesh and
ever and anon drinking deep draughts from one of the pitchers.
Furthermore the King sighted in that hut a lady of exquisite
beauty and comeliness sitting in a corner direly distressed: her
hands were fast bound with cords, and at her feet a child of two
or three years of age lay beweeping his mother's sorry
plight.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that seeing the
doleful state of these twain, my sire was filled with ruth and
longed to fall upon the ogre sword in hand; however, not being
able to cope with him he restrained his wrath and remained on
stealthy watch. The giant having drained all the pitchers of wine
and devoured half of the barbacued bullock presently addressed
himself to the lady and said, "O loveliest of Princesses, how
long wilt thou prove thee coy and keep aloof from me? Dost thou
not see how desirous I am of winning thy heart and how I am dying
for the love of thee? 'Tis therefore only right that thou also
shouldst return my affection and know me as thine own, when I
will become to thee the kindest of mankind." "O thou Ghul of the
waste," cried the lady, "what be this whereof thou pratest?
Never; no, never shalt thou win thy wish of me, however much thou
mayest lust therefor. Torment me or, an thou wilt, destroy me
downright, but for my part I will on no wise yield me to thy
lusts." At these words the infuriated savage roared aloud, "'Tis
enough and more than enough: thy hate breedeth hatred in me and
now I desire less to have and hold thee than to do thee die."
Then he seized her with one hand, and drawing his sabre with the
other, would have struck off her head from her body when my
father shot at him a shaft so deftly that it pierced his heart
and came out gleaming at his back and he fell to the ground and
found instant admission into Jahannam. Hereupon my sire entered
the hut and unbinding the lady's bonds enquired of her who she
was and by what means that ogre had brought her thither. Answered
she, "Not far from this site there liveth on the sea-shore a race
of Saracens, like unto the demons of the desert. Sorely against
my will I was wedded to their Prince and the fulsome villain thou
hast now slain was one of my husband's chief officers. He fell
madly in love to me and he longed with excessive longing to get
me into his power and to carry me off from my home. Accordingly,
one day of the days when my husband was out of the way and I was
in privacy, he carried me off with this my babe from the palace
to this wild wood wherein is none save He[FN#240] and where well
he wot that all search and labour would be baffled; then, hour
after hour he designed guilty designs against me, but by the
mercy of Almighty Allah I have ever escaped all carnal soil of
that foul monster. This evening, in despair of my safety, I was
rejecting his brutal advances when he attempted to take my life
and in the attempt he was slain by thy valorous hand. This is
then my story which I have told thee." My father reassured the
Princess, saying, "O my lady, let thy heart be at ease; at
day-break I will take thee away from this wilderness and escort
thee to Daryabar, of which city I am the Sultan; and, shouldst
thou become fain of that place, then dwell therein until thy
husband shall come in quest of thee." Quoth the lady, "O my lord,
this plan doth not displease me." So with the earliest light next
morning my father took mother and child away from that forest and
set forth homewards when suddenly he fell in with his Sirdars and
officers who had been wandering hither and thither during the
livelong night in search of him. They rejoiced with great joy on
seeing the King and marvelled with exceeding marvel at the sight
of a veiled one with him, admiring much that so love-some a lady
should be found dwelling in a wold so wild. Thereupon the King
related to them the tale of the ogre and of the Princess and how
he had slain the blackamoor. Presently they set forth on their
homeward way; one of the Emirs seating the dame behind him on his
horse's crupper while another took charge of the child. They
reached the royal city, where the King ordered a large and
splendid mansion to be built for his guest, the babe also
received a suitable education; and thus the mother passed her
days in perfect comfort and happiness. After the lapse of some
months, when no tidings, however fondly expected, came of her
husband, she resigned herself to marrying my father whom she had
captivated by her beauty and loveliness and amorous
liveliness,[FN#241] whereupon he wedded her, and when the
marriage-contract was drawn up (as was customary in those days),
they sojourned together in one stead. As time went on the lad
grew up to be a lusty youth of handsome mien; moreover he became
perfect in courtly ceremonial and in every art and science that
befit Princes. The King and all the Ministers and Emirs highly
approved of him, and determined that I should be married to him,
and that he should succeed the sovereign as heir to throne and
kingship. The youth also was well pleased with such tokens of
favour from my father, but chiefly he rejoiced with exceeding joy
to hear talk of his union with his protector's only daughter. One
day my sire desired to place my hand in his to the intent that
the marriage ceremony should at once take place, but first he
would impose upon my suitor certain conditions, whereof one was
that he should wed none other but his wife's daughter, that is,
myself. This pledge displeased the haughty youth, who forthwith
refused his consent thereto, deeming himself by the demand of
such condition a despised and contemptible suitor of villain
birth.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

     The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that, the lady
continued:--On this wise the wedding was deferred, and this delay
became a matter of sore displeasure to the young man, who thought
in his heart that my father was his foe. Therefore he ever strove
to lure him into his power till one day in a frenzy of rage he
slew him and proclaimed himself King of Daryabar. Moreover the
murtherer would have entered my chamber to kill me also had not
the Wazir, a true and faithful servant of the crown, at the
tidings of his liege lord's death speedily taken me away, and
hidden me in the house of a friend where he bade me remain
concealed. Two days afterwards, having fitted out a ship, he
embarked me therein with a Kahramﬂnah--an old duenna--and set
sail for a country whose King was of my father's friends, to the
intent that he might consign me to his charge, and obtain from
him the aid of an army wherewith he might avenge himself upon the
ungrateful and ungracious youth who had proved himself a traitor
to the salt.[FN#242] But a few days after our weighing anchor a
furious storm began to blow making the captain and crew sore
confounded and presently the waves beat upon the vessel with such
exceeding violence that she brake up, and the Wazir and the
duenna and all who were therein (save myself) were drowned in the
billows. But I, albeit well nigh a-swoon, clung to a plank and
was shortly after washed ashore by the send of the sea, for Allah
of His mighty power had preserved me safe and sound from
death-doom by the raging of the ocean, to the end that further
troubles might befal me. When I returned to sense and
consciousness, I found myself alive on the strand and offered up
grateful thanks to Almighty Allah; but not seeing the Wazir or
any one of the company I knew that they had perished in the
waters.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Princess of Daryabar continued:--Presently, calling to
remembrance the murther of my father I cried aloud with an
exceeding bitter cry and was sore afraid at my lonesome plight,
insomuch that I would fain have cast myself again into the sea,
when suddenly the voice of man and tramp of horse-hooves fell
upon my ears. Then looking about I descried a band of cavaliers
in the midst of whom was a handsome prince: he was mounted upon a
steed of purest Rabite[FN#243] blood and was habited in a
gold-embroidered surcoat; a girdle studded with diamonds girt his
loins and on his head was a crown of gold; in fine it was evident
from his garb as from his aspect that he was a born ruler of
mankind. Thereupon, seeing me all alone on the sea-shore, the
knights marvelled with exceeding marvel; then the Prince detached
one of his captains to ascertain my history and acquaint him
there-with; but albeit the officer plied me with questions I
answered him not a word and shed a flood of tears in the deepest
silence. So noting the waifage on the sand they thought to
themselves, "Perchance some vessel hath been wrecked upon this
shore and its planks and timber have been cast upon the land, and
doubtless this lady was in that ship and hath been floated ashore
on some plank." Whereupon the cavaliers crowded around me and
implored me to relate unto them what had befallen me;
nevertheless I still answered them not a word. Presently the
Prince himself drew near to me and, much amazed, sent away his
suite from about me and addressed me in these words, "O my lady,
fear naught of ill from me nor distress thyself by needless
affright. I would convey thee to my home and under my mother's
care; wherefore I am curious to know of thee who thou art. The
Queen will assuredly befriend thee and keep thee in comfort and
happiness." And now understanding that his heart was drawn
towards me, I told him all that had betided me, and he on hearing
the story of my sad destiny became moved with the deepest emotion
and his eyes brimmed with tears. Then he comforted me and carried
me with him and committed me to the Queen his mother, who also
lent kindly ear to my tale of the past, first and last, and
hearing it she also was greatly grieved, and wearied not day or
night in tending me and (as far as in her lay) striving to make
me happy. Seeing, moreover, that her son was deeply enamoured of
me and love-distraught she agreed to my becoming his wife, while
I also consented when I looked upon his handsome and noble face
and figure and to his proved affection for me and his goodness of
heart. Accordingly, in due time the marriage was celebrated with
royal pomp and circumstance. But what escape is there from Fate?
On that very night, the night of the wedding, a King of Zanzibar
who dwelt hard by that island, and had erewhile practised against
the kingdom, seizing his opportunity, attacked us with a mighty
army, and having put many to death, bethought him to take me and
my husband alive. But we escaped from his hands and fleeing under
the murks of night to the sea-shore found there a fisherman's
boat, which we entered thanking our stars and launched it and
floated far away on the current, unknowing whither Destiny was
directing us. On the third day we espied a vessel making us,
whereat we rejoiced with joy excessive, deeming her to be some
merchantman coming to our aidance. No sooner had it lain
alongside, however, than up there sprang five or six
pirates,[FN#244] each brandishing a naked brand in hand, and
boarding us tied our arms behind us and carried us to their
craft. They then tare the veil from my face and forthwith desired
to possess me, each saying to other, "I will enjoy this wench."
On this wise wrangling and jangling ensued till right soon it
turned to battle and bloodshed, when moment by moment and one by
one the ravishers fell dead until all were slain save a single
pirate, the bravest of the band. Quoth he to me, "Thou shalt fare
with me to Cairo where dwelleth a friend of mine and to him will
I give thee, for erewhile I promised him that on this voyage I
would secure for him a fair woman for handmaid." Then seeing my
husband, whom the pirates had left in bonds he exclaimed, "Who
may be this hound? Is he to thee a lover or a friend?" and I made
answer, "He is my wedded husband." "'Tis well," cried he: "in
very sooth it behoveth me to release him from the bitter pangs of
jealousy and the sight of thee enfolded in another's fond
embrace." Whereat the ruffian raised aloft the ill-fated Prince,
bound foot and hand, and cast him into the sea, while I shrieked
aloud and implored his mercy, but all in vain. Seeing the Prince
struggling and drowning in the waves I cried out and screamed and
buffetted my face and tare my hair and would fain have cast
myself into the waters but I could not, for he held me fast and
lashed me to the mainmast. Then, pursuing our course with
favouring winds we soon arrived at a small port-village where he
bought camels and boy-slaves and journeyed on towards Cairo; but
when several stages of the road were left behind us, the
Abyssinian who dwelt in this castle suddenly overtook us. From
afar we deemed him to be a lofty tower, and when near us could
hardly believe him to be a human being.-- And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Five Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Princess of Daryabar continued:--At once unsheathing his huge
sword the Habashi made for the pirate and ordered him to
surrender himself prisoner, with me and all his slaves, and with
pinioned elbows to accompany him. Hereat the robber with hot
courage and heading his followers rushed fiercely on the
Abyssinian, and for a long time the fight raged thick and fast,
till he and his lay dead upon the field; whereupon the Abyssinian
led off the camels and carried me and the pirate's corpse to this
castle, and devoured the flesh of his foe at his evening meal.
Then turning to me as I wept with bitter weeping he said, "Banish
from thy breast this woe and this angry mood; and abide in this
castle at perfect ease and in comfort, and solace thyself with my
embraces. However, since thou appearest at this present to be in
dire distress, I will excuse thee for to-night, but without fail
I shall require thee of thyself on the morrow." He then led me
into a separate chamber and locking fast the gates and doors,
fell asleep alone in another place. Arising early on the next
morning he searched the castle round about, unlocked the wicket
which he closed again and sallied forth, according to his custom,
in quest of wayfarers. But the caravan escaped him and anon he
returned empty-handed when thou didst set upon him and slay him."
On this wise the Princess of Daryabar related her history to
Prince Khudadad who was moved with ruth for her: then comforting
her he said, "Henceforth fear naught nor be on any wise dismayed.
These princes are the sons of the King of Harran; and if it
please thee, let them lead thee to his court and stablish thee in
comfort and luxury: the King also will guard thee from all evil.
Or, shouldest thou be loath to fare with them, wilt thou not
consent to take for spouse him who hath rescued thee from so
great calamity?" The Princess of Daryabar consented to wed with
him and forthwith the marriage was celebrated with grand display
in the castle and here they found meats and drinks of sundry
sorts, and delicious fruits and fine wines wherewith the cannibal
would regale himself when a-weary of man's flesh. So Khudadad
made ready dishes of every colour and feasted his brothers. Next
day taking with them such provaunt as was at hand, all set forth
for Harran, and at the close of each stage they chose a suitable
stead for nighting; and, when but one day's journey lay before
them, the Princes supped that night off what was left to them of
their viaticum and drained all the wine that remained. But when
the drink had mastered their wits, Khudadad thus addressed his
brothers, saying, "Hitherto have I withheld from you the secret
of my birth, which now I must disclose. Know ye then that I am
your brother, for I also am a son of the King of Harran, whom the
Lord of Samaria-land brought up and bade educate; and lastly, my
mother is the Princess Firuzah." Then to the Princess of
Daryabar, "Thou didst not recognize my rank and pedigree and, had
I discovered myself erewhile, haply thou hadst been spared the
mortification of being wood by a man of vulgar blood. But now
ease thy mind for that thy husband is a Prince." Quoth she,
"Albeit thou discoveredst to me naught until this time, still my
heart felt assured that thou wast of noble birth and the son of
some potent sovereign." The Princes one and all appeared
outwardly well pleased and offered each and every warm
congratulations whilst the wedding was celebrating; but inwardly
they were filled with envy and sore annoy at such unwelcome issue
of events, so much so that when Khudadad retired with the
Princess of Daryabar to his tent and slept, those ingrates,
forgetful of the service rendered to them by their brother in
that he had rescued them when prisoners in the hands of the
man-devouring Abyssinian, remained deep in thought and seeking a
safe place took counsel one with other to kill him. Quoth the
foremost of them, "O my brethren, our father showed him the
liveliest affection when he was to us naught save a vagrant and
unknown, and indeed made him our ruler and our governor; and now,
hearing of his victory won from the ogre and learning that the
stranger is his son, will not our sire forthwith appoint this
bastard his only heir and give him dominion over us so that we
must all be forced to fall at his feet and bear his yoke? My rede
is this that we make an end of him in this very spot."
Accordingly they stole softly into his tent and dealt him from
every side strokes with their swords, so that they slashed him in
every limb and fondly thought that they had left him dead on the
bed without their awaking the Princess. Next morning they entered
the city of Harran and made their salams to the King, who
despaired of sighting them again, so he rejoiced with exceeding
joy on seeing them restored to him safe and sound and sane, and
asked why they had tarried from him so long. In reply they
carefully concealed from him their being thrown into the dungeon
by the Ghul of Abyssinia and how Khudadad had rescued them: on
the contrary all declared that they had been delayed whilst
a-hunting and a-visiting the adjacent cities and countries. So
the Sultan gave full credence to their account and held his
peace. Such was their case; but as regards Khudadad, when the
Princess of Daryabar awoke in the morning she found her
bridegroom lying drowned in blood gashed and pierced with a score
of wounds.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

            The end of the full Six Hundredth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that, the
Princess, deeming her bridegroom dead, wept at this sight right
sore; and, calling to mind his youth and beauty, his valour and
his many virtues, she washed his face with her tears and
exclaimed, "Well-away and woe is me, O my lover, O Khudadad, do
these eyes look upon thee in sudden and violent death? Are these
thy brothers (the devils!) whom thy courage hath saved, the
destroyers of thee? Nay 'tis I am thy murtheress; I who suffered
thee to ally thy Fate with my hapless destiny, a lot that doometh
to destruction all who befriend me." Then considering the body
attentively she perceived that breath was slowly coming and going
through his nostrils, and that his limbs were yet warm. So she
made fast the tent-door and ran city-wards to seek a surgeon, and
anon having found a skilful leech, she returned with him, but lo
and behold! Khudadad was missing. She wist not what had become of
him, but thought in her mind that some wild beast had carried him
off; then she wept bitterly and bemoaned her mishap, so that the
surgeon was moved to ruth and with words of comfort and
consolation offered her house and service; and lastly he bore her
to the town and assigned to her a separate dwelling. He also
appointed two slave-girls to wait upon her, and albeit he knew
naught of her condition he was ever in attendance on her with the
honour and homage due to the kings. One day, she being somewhat
less sad of heart, the surgeon, who had now informed himself of
her condition, asked her, saying, "O my lady, be pleased to
acquaint me with thine estate and thy misfortunes, and as far as
in me lieth I will strive to aid and succour thee." And she,
observing the leech to be shrewd and trustworthy withal, made
known to him her story. Quoth the surgeon, "An it be thy wish, I
would gladly escort thee to thy father-in-law the King of Harran,
who is indeed a wise sovereign and a just; and he will rejoice to
see thee and will take vengeance on the unnatural Princes, his
sons, for the blood of thy husband unjustly shed." These words
pleased well the Princess; so the surgeon hired two dromedaries
which they mounted and the twain set forth for the city of
Harran. Alighting that same evening at a caravanserai the leech
asked what news had come from town; and the Keeper answered, "The
King of Harran had a son passing valiant and accomplished who
abode with him for some years as a stranger; but lately he was
lost, nor doth any know of him whether he be dead or alive. The
Princess Firuzah his mother hath sent allwheres in search of him,
yet hath she found nor trace nor tidings of him. His parents and
indeed all the folk, rich and poor, weep and wail for him and
albeit the Sultan hath other forty and nine sons, none of them
can compare with him for doughty deeds and skilful craft, nor
from any one of them deriveth he aught of comfort or consolation.
Full quest and search have been made but hitherto all hath been
in vain." The surgeon thereupon made known these words to the
Princess of Daryabar, who was minded to go straightway and
acquaint the mother of Khudadad with everything that had befallen
her husband; but the surgeon, after full reflection, said, "O
Princess, shouldst thou fare with this intent, haply ere thou
arrive thither the forty-nine Princes may hear of thy coming; and
they, by some means or other, will assuredly do thee die, and thy
life will be spent to no purpose. Nay, rather let me go first to
Prince Khudadad's mother: I will tell her all thy tale and she
doubtless will send for thee. Until such time do thou remain
secret in this Serai." Accordingly the leech rode on leisurely
for the city and on the road he met a lady mounted upon a
she-mule[FN#245] whose housings were of the richest and finest,
while behind her walked confidential servants, followed by a band
of horsemen and foot- soldiers and Habashi slaves; and, as she
rode along, the people formed espalier, standing on either side
to salute her while she passed. The leech also joined the throng
and made his obeisance, after which quoth he to a bystander,
which was a Darwaysh, "Methinks this lady must be a queen?" "'Tis
even so," quoth the other, "she is the consort of our Sultan and
all the folk honour and esteem her above her sister-wives for
that in truth she is the mother of Prince Khudadad and of him
thou surely hast heard." Hereupon the surgeon accompanied the
cavalcade; and, when the lady dismounted at a cathedral-mosque
and gave alms of Ashrafis[FN#246] and gold coins to all around
(for the King had enjoined her that until Khudadad's return she
should deal charity to the poor with her own hand, and pray for
the youth's being restored to his home in peace and safety), the
mediciner also mingled with the throng which joined in
supplications for their favourite and whispered to a slave
saying, "O my brother, it behoveth me that I make known without
stay or delay to Queen Firuzah a secret which is with me."
Replied he, "An it be aught concerning Prince Khudadad 'tis well:
the King's wife will surely give ear to thee; but an it be other,
thou wilt hardly win a hearing, for that she is distraught by the
absence of her son and careth not for aught beside." The surgeon,
still speaking low, made reply, "My secret concerneth that which
is on her mind." "If this be so," returned the slave, "do thou
follow her train privily till it arrive at the palace gate."
Accordingly, when the Lady Firuzah reached her royal apartments,
the man made petition to her, saying, "A stranger would fain tell
somewhat to thee in private;" and she deigned give permission and
command, exclaiming, "'Tis well, let him be brought hither."
Hereupon the slave presented to her the surgeon whom the Queen
with gracious mien bade approach; and he, kissing ground between
her hands, made his petition in these words: "I have a long tale
to tell thy Highness whereat thou shalt greatly marvel." Then he
described to her Khudadad's condition, the villainy of his
brothers and his death at their hands and of his corpse having
been carried off by wild beasts. Queen Firuzah hearing of her
son's murther fell straight- way a-swooning to the ground, and
the attendants ran up and, raising her, besprinkled her face with
rose-water until she recovered sense and consciousness. Then she
gave orders to the surgeon saying, "Hie thee straightway to the
Princess of Daryabar and convey to her greetings and expressions
of sympathy both from myself and from his sire;" and as the leech
departed she called to mind her son and wept with sore weeping.
By chance the Sultan, who was passing by that way, seeing Firuzah
in tears and sobs and breaking out into sore and bitter
lamentation, asked of her the reason thereof.--And as the morn
began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and First Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that when her
husband enquired of Queen Firuzah why and wherefore she wept and
wailed, and moaned and groaned, she told him all she had heard
from the leech, and her husband was filled with hot wrath against
his sons. So he rose up and went straightway to the
audience-chamber, where the townsfolk had gathered together to
petition him and to pray for justice and redress; and they,
seeing his features working with rage, were all sore afraid.
Presently the Sultan seated himself on the throne of his kingship
and gave an order to his Grand Wazir, saying, "O Wazir Hasan,
take with thee a thousand men of the guard which keepeth watch
and ward over the palace and do thou bring hither the forty-and-
nine Princes, my unworthy sons, and cast them into the prison
appointed unto man-slayers and murtherers; and have a heed that
none of them escape." The Wazir did as he was bidden, and seizing
the Princes one and all cast them into gaol with the murtherers
and other criminals, then reported his action to his liege lord.
Hereat the Sultan dismissed sundry claimants and suppliants,
saying, "For the space of one full-told month henceforth it
besitteth me not to sit in the justice-hall. Depart hence, and,
when the thirty days shall have passed away, do ye return hither
again." After this rising from the throne he took with him the
Wazir Hasan, and entering the apartment of Queen Firuzah, gave
command to the Minister that he bring in all haste and with royal
state and dignity from the caravanserai, the Princess of Daryabar
and the mediciner. The Wazir straightway took horse accompanied
by the Emirs and soldiers; and, leading a fine white she-mule
richly adorned with jewelled trappings from out of the royal
stables, he rode to the caravanserai wherein abode the Princess
of Daryabar. Having told her all that the King had done, he
seated her upon the animal and, mounting the surgeon upon a steed
of Turcoman[FN#247] blood, all three proceeded with pomp and
grandeur to the palace. The shop-keepers and townsfolk ran out to
greet the lady as the cavalcade wound its way through the
streets; and, when they heard say that she was the wife of Prince
Khudadad, they rejoiced with exceeding joy for that they should
now receive tidings of his whereab