outs. As soon as the procession
reached the palace gates the Princess of Daryabar saw the Sultan,
who had come forth to greet her, and she alighted from the mule
and kissed his feet. The King then raised her by the hand and
conducted her to the chamber wherein sat Queen Firuzah awaiting
her visit, and all three fell on one another's necks and wept
sore and could on no wise control their grief. But whenas their
sorrow was somewhat assuaged, the Princess of Daryabar said to
the King, "O my lord the Sultan, I would proffer humble petition
that full vengeance may fall upon those, one and all, by whom my
husband hath been so foully and cruelly murthered." Replied the
King, "O my lady, rest assured that I will assuredly put to death
all those villains in requital for the blood of Khudadad;"
presently adding, "'Tis true that the dead body of my brave son
hath not been found, still it seemeth but right to me that a tomb
be built, a cenotaph whereby his greatness and goodness may be
held in everlasting remembrance." Thereupon he summoned the Grand
Wazir and bade that a great Mausoleum of white marble be edified
amiddlemost the city and the Minister straightway appointed
workmen and made choice of a suitable spot in the very centre of
the capital. So there they built a gorgeous cenotaph crowned with
a noble dome under which was sculptured a figure of Khudadad;
and, when the news of its completion reached the King, he
appointed a day for ceremonious mourning and perlections of the
Koran. At the appointed time and term the townsfolk gathered
together to see the funeral procession and the obsequies for the
departed; and the Sultan went in state to the Mausoleum together
with all the Wazirs, the Emirs and Lords of the land, and took
seat upon carpets of black satin purfled with flowers of gold
which were dispread over the marble floor. After a while a bevy
of Knights rode up, with downcast heads and half-closed eyes; and
twice circuiting the dome[FN#248] they halted the third time in
front of the door, and cried out aloud, "O Prince, O son of our
Sultan, could we by the sway of our good swords and the strength
of our gallant arms restore thee to life, nor heart nor force
would fail us in the endeavour; but before the fiat of Almighty
Allah all must bow the neck." Then the horsemen rode away to the
place whence they came, followed by one hundred hermits hoar of
head and dwellers of the caves who had passed their lives in
solitude and abstinence nor ever held converse with man or
womankind, neither did they appear in Harran at any time save for
the obsequies of the reigning race. In front came one of these
greybeards steadying with one hand a huge and ponderous tome
which he bore upon his head. Presently all the holy men thrice
compassed the Mausoleum, then standing on the highway the eldest
cried with a loud voice, "O Prince, could we by dint of orisons
and devotions bring thee back to life, these hearts and souls of
ours would be devoted to quickening thee, and on seeing thee
arise once again we would wipe thy feet with our own age-white
beards." And when they also retired came one hundred maidens of
wondrous beauty and loveliness, mounted on white barbs whose
saddles were richly embroidered and set with jewels: their faces
were bare and on their heads they bore golden canisters filled
with precious stones, rubies and diamonds. They also rode in
circuit round the cenotaph and, halting at the door, the youngest
and fairest of them, speaking in the name of her sisterhood,
exclaimed, "O Prince, could our youth and our charms avail thee
aught, we would present ourselves to thee and become thy
handmaids; but alas! thou knowest full well that our beauties are
here all in vain nor can our love now warm thy clay." Then they
also departed in the deepest grief. As soon as they had
disappeared the Sultan and all with him rose up and walked thrice
round the figure that had been set up under the dome; then
standing at its feet the father said, "O my beloved son,
enlighten these eyes which tears for the stress of separation
have thus bedimmed." He then wept bitterly and all his Ministers
and Courtiers and Grandees joined in his mourning and
lamentations; and, when they had made an end of the obsequies,
the Sultan and his suite returned palace-wards and the door of
the dome was locked.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Sultan
commanded congregational prayers in all the mosques for a full
told week and he ceased not to mourn and weep and wail before the
cenotaph of his son for eight days. And as soon as this term was
passed he commanded the Grand Wazir that vengeance be meted out
for the murther of Prince Khudadad, and that the Princes be
brought out from their dungeons and be done to death. The tidings
were bruited about the city, and preparations were made for
executing the assassins and crowds of folk collected to gaze upon
the scaffold, when suddenly came a report that an enemy whom the
King had routed in bygone times was marching upon the city with a
conquering army. Hereat the Sultan was sore troubled and
perplexed and the ministers of state said one to other, "Alas!
had Prince Khudadad been on life he would forthwith have put to
flight the forces of the foe however fierce and fell." Natheless
the Sovran set out from the city with his suite and host, and eke
he made ready for flight to some other land by way of the river
should the enemy's force prove victorious. Then the two powers
met in deadly combat; and the invader, surrounding the King of
Harran's many on every side, would have cut him to pieces with
all his warriors, when behold, an armed force hitherto unseen
rode athwart the plain at a pace so swift and so sure that the
two hostile Kings gazed upon them in uttermost amazement, nor
wist any one whence that host came. But when it drew near, the
horsemen charged home on the enemies and in the twinkling of an
eye put them to flight; then hotly pursuing felled them with the
biting sword and the piercing spear. Seeing this onslaught the
King of Harran marvelled greatly and rendering thanks to heaven
said to those around him, "Learn ye the name of the Captain of
yonder host, who he may be and whence came he." But when all the
foemen had fallen upon the field save only a few who escaped
hither and thither and the hostile sultan who had been taken
prisoner, the Captain of the friendly forces returned from
pursuit well pleased to greet the King. And, lo and behold! as
the twain drew near one to other the Sultan was certified that
the Captain was none other than his beloved child, Khudadad,
whilome lost and now found. Accordingly, he rejoiced with joy
unspeakable that his enemy had thus been vanquished and that he
had again looked upon his son, Khudadad, who stood before him
alive and safe and sound. "O my sire," presently exclaimed the
Prince, "I am he whom thou deemest to have been slain; but Allah
Almighty hath kept me on life that I might this day stand thee in
good stead and destroy these thine enemies." "O my beloved son,"
replied the King, "surely I had despaired and never hoped again
to see thee with these mine eyes." So father and son dismounted
and fell upon each other's necks and quoth the Sultan, clasping
the youth's hand, "Long since have I known of thy valiant deeds,
and how thou didst save thine ill-omened brothers from the hands
of the man-devouring Abyssinian, and of the evil wherewith they
requited thee. Go now to thy mother, of whom naught remaineth,
through bitter tears for thee, save skin and bone: be thou the
first to gladden her heart and give her the good tidings of this
thy victory." As they rode along, the Prince enquired of the
Sultan, his sire, how he had heard tell of the Habashi and of the
rescue of the Princes from the cannibal's clutches. "Hath one of
my brothers," added he, "informed thee of this adventure?" "Not
so, O my son," replied the King, "not they, but the Princess of
Daryabar told me the miserable tale thereof: she hath dwelt for
many days with me and 'twas she who first and foremost demanded
vengeance for thy blood." when Khudadad heard that the Princess
his spouse was his father's guest, he rejoiced with exceeding joy
and cried, "Suffer me first to see my mother;[FN#249] then will I
go to the Princess of Daryabar." The King of Harran hereat struck
off the head of his chief enemy and exposed it publicly
throughout the streets of his capital, and all the people exulted
mightily not only at the victory but also for the return of
Khudadad safe and sound; and dancing and feasting were in every
household. Presently Queen Firuzah and the Princess of Daryabar
presented themselves before the Sultan and offered their
congratulations to him, then they went to see Khudadad both hand
in hand and the three falling on one another's necks wept for
very joy.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that after this
the King and his Queen and daughter-in-law sat long conversing,
and they marvelled much how Khudadad, albeit he was sorely gashed
and pierced with the sword, had escaped alive from that wildest
of wolds, whereupon the Prince at the bidding of his sire told
his tale in these words: "A peasant mounted on a camel chanced to
pass by my pavilion and seeing me sore wounded and weltering in
my blood, set me upon his beast and conveyed me to his house;
then, choosing some roots of desert-herbs he placed them on the
hurts so that they kindly healed, and I speedily recovered
strength. After returning thanks to my benefactor and giving him
liberal largesse, I set out for the city of Harran and on the
road I saw the forces of the foe in countless numbers marching
upon thy city. Wherefore I made the matter known to the folk of
the townships and villages round about and besought their aid;
then collecting a large force I placed myself at the head
thereof, and arriving in the nick of time destroyed the invading
hosts." Hereupon the Sultan gave thanks to Allah Almighty and
said, "Let all the Princes who conspired against thy life be put
to death;" and sent forthright for the Sworder of his vengeance;
but Khudadad made request to his sire and said, "In good sooth, O
my lord the King, they all deserve the doom thou hast ordained,
yet be not these my brethren and eke thine own flesh and blood? I
have freely forgiven them their offence against me and I humbly
pray thy pardon also, that thou grant them their lives, for that
blood ever calleth unto blood." The Sultan at length consented
and forgave their offence. Then, summoning all the Ministers, he
declared Khudadad his heir and successor, in presence of the
Princes whom he bade bring from the prison house. Khudadad caused
their chains and fetters to be stricken off and embraced them one
by one, showing them the same fondness and affection as he had
shown to them in the castle of the cannibal Habashi. All the folk
on hearing of this noble conduct of Prince Khudadad raised shouts
of applause and loved him yet more than before. The surgeon who
had done such good service to the Princess of Daryabar received a
robe of honour and much wealth; and on this wise that which began
with mishap had issue in all happiness. When Queen Shahrazad
ended this story she said to Shahryar, "O my lord, thou art
doubtless astonished to find that the Caliph Har∑n al-Rashid
changed his wrath against Ghﬂnim[FN#250] and his mother and
sister to feelings of favour and affection, but I am assured that
thou wilt be the more surprised on hearing the story of the
curious adventures of that same Caliph with the blind man, Bﬂbﬂ
Abdullah." Quoth Dunyazad, as was her way, to her sister
Shahrazad, "O sister mine, what a rare and delectable tale hast
thou told and now prithee favour us with another." She replied,
"It is well nigh dawn but, if my life be spared, I will tell thee
as the morrow morrows a strange and wonderful history of the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid."[FN#251]--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Fourth Night,

When she began to relate the History of





                 THE CALIPH'S NIGHT ADVENTURE.



I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Caliph Harun al-Rashid
was one night wakeful exceedingly and when he rose in the morning
restlessness gat hold of him. Wherefore all about him were
troubled for that "Folk aye follow Prince's fashion;" they
rejoice exceedingly with his joy and are sorrowful with his
sorrows albeit they know not the cause why they are so affected.
Presently the Commander of the Faithful sent for Masr∑r the
Eunuch, and when he came to him cried, "Fetch me my Wazir,
Ja'afar the Barmaki, without stay or delay." Accordingly, he went
out and returned with the Minister who, finding him alone, which
was indeed rare, and seeing as he drew near that he was in a
melancholic humour, never even raising his eyes, stopped till his
lord would vouchsafe to look upon him. At last the Prince of True
Believers cast his glance upon Ja'afar, but forthright turned
away his head and sat motionless as before. The Wazir descrying
naught in the Caliph's aspect that concerned him personally,
strengthened his purpose and bespake him on this wise, "O
Commander of the Faithful, wilt thine Highness deign suffer me to
ask whence cometh this sadness?" and the Caliph answered with a
clearer brow, "Verily, O Wazir, these moods have of late become
troublesome to me, nor are they to be moved save by hearing
strange tales and verses; and, if thou come not hither on a
pressing affair, thou wilt gladden me by relating somewhat to
dispel my sadness." Replied the Wazir, "O Commander of the
Faithful, my office compelleth me to stand on thy service, and I
would fain remind thee that this is the day appointed for
informing thyself of the good governance of thy capital and its
environs, and this matter shall, Inshallah, divert thy mind and
dispel its gloom." The Caliph answered, "Thou dost well to remind
me, for that I had wholly forgotten it; so fare forth and change
thy vestments while I do the same with mine." Presently the twain
donned habits of stranger merchants and issued out by a private
postern of the palace-garden, which led them into the fields.
After they had skirted the city, they reached the Euphrates' bank
at some distance from the gate opening on that side, without
having observed aught of disorder; then they crossed the river in
the first ferry-boat they found, and, making a second round on
the further side, they passed over the bridge that joined the two
halves of Baghdad-town. At the bridge-foot they met with a blind
old man who asked alms of them; and the Caliph turned about and
crossed his palm with a diner, whereupon the beggar caught hold
of his hand, and held him fast, saying, "O beneficent man, whoso
thou ever may be, whom Allah hath inspired to bestow an alms upon
me, refuse not the favour I crave of thee, which is, to strike me
a buffet upon the ear, for that I deserve such punishment and a
greater still." After these words he quitted his hold of the
Caliph's hand that it might smite him, yet for fear lest the
stranger pass on without so doing he grasped him fast by his long
robe. And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Caliph,
surprised by the blind man's words and deeds said, "I may not
grant thy request nor will I minish the merit of my charity, by
treating thee as thou wouldst have me entreat thee." Saying these
words, he strove to get away from the blind man, but he who after
his long experience expected this refusal of his benefactor, did
his utmost to keep hold of him, and cried, "O my lord, forgive my
audacity and my persistency; and I implore thee either give me a
cuff on the ear, or take back thine alms, for I may not receive
it save on that condition, without falsing a solemn oath I have
sworn before the face of Allah; and, if thou knew the reason,
thou wouldst accord with me that the penalty is light indeed."
Then the Caliph not caring to be delayed any longer, yielded to
the blind man's importunity, and gave him a slight cuff:
whereupon he loosed him forthright and thanked him and blessed
him. When the Caliph and his Wazir, had walked some way from the
blind man, the former exclaimed, "This blind beggar must
assuredly have some right good cause for behaving himself in such
manner to all who give him alms, and I would fain know it. Do
thou return to him and tell him who I am, and bid him fail not to
appear at my palace about mid-afternoon prayer time that I may
converse with him, and hear whatso he hath to say." Hereupon
Ja'afar went back and bestowed alms on the blind man giving him
another cuff on the ear and apprised him of the Caliph's command,
and returned forthright to his lord. Presently, when the twain
reached the town, they found in a square a vast crowd of folk
gazing at a handsome youth and a well shaped, who was mounted on
a mare which he rode at fullest speed round the open space,
spurring and whipping the beast so cruelly that she was covered
with sweat and blood. Seeing this the Caliph, amazed at the
youth's brutality, stopped to ask the by-standers an they knew
why he tortured and tormented the mare on such wise; but he could
learn naught save that for some while past, every day at the same
time, he had entreated her after the same fashion. Hereat as they
walked along, the Caliph bid his Wazir especially notice the
place and order the young man to come without failing on the next
day, at the hour appointed for the blind man. But ere the Caliph
reached his palace, he saw in a street, which he had not passed
through for many months, a newly built mansion, which seemed to
him the palace of some great lord of the land. He asked the
Wazir, an he knew its owner; and Ja'afar answered he did not but
would make inquiry. So he consulted a neighbour who told him that
the house owner was one Khwﬂjah Hasan surnamed Al-Habbﬂl from his
handicraft, rope-making; that he himself had seen the man at work
in the days of his poverty, that he knew not how Fate and Fortune
had befriended him, yet that the same Khwajah had gotten such
exceeding wealth that he had been enabled to pay honourably and
sumptuously all the expenses he had incurred when building his
palace. Then the Wazir, returned to the Caliph, and gave him a
full account of whatso he had heard, whereat cried the Prince of
True Believers, "I must see this Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal: do thou
therefore, O Wazir, go and tell him to come to my palace, at the
same hour thou hast appointed for the other twain." The Minister
did his lord's bidding and the next day, after mid-afternoon
prayers, the Caliph retired to his own apartment and Ja'afar
introduced the three persons whereof we have been speaking and
presented them to the Caliph. All prostrated themselves at his
feet and when they rose up, the Commander of the Faithful asked
his name of the blind man, who answered he was hight Baba
Abdullah. "O Servant of Allah," cried the Caliph, "thy manner of
asking alms yesterday seemed so strange to me that, had it not
been for certain considerations I should not have granted thy
petition; nay, I would have prevented thy giving further offence
to the folk. And now I have bidden thee hither that I may know
from thyself what impelled thee to swear that rash oath whereof
thou toldest me, that I may better judge whether thou have done
well or ill, and if I should suffer thee to persist in a practice
which meseemeth must set so pernicious an example. Tell me openly
how such mad thought entered into thy head, and conceal not
aught, for I will know the truth and the full truth."--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Baba
Abdullah terrified by these words, cast himself a second time at
the Caliph's feet with his face prone to the ground, and when he
rose again, said, "O Commander of the Faithful, I crave pardon of
thy Highness for my audacity, in that I dared require, and well
nigh compelled thee to do a thing which verily seemeth contrary
to sound sense. I acknowledge mine offence; but as I knew not thy
Highness at that time, I implore thy clemency, and I pray thou
wilt consider my ignorance of thine exalted degree. And now as to
the extravagance of my action, I readily admit that it must be
strange to the sons of Adam; but in the eye of Allah 'tis but a
slight penance wherewith I have charged myself for an enormous
crime of which I am guilty, and wherefor, an all the people in
the world were each and every to give me a cuff on the ear
'twould not be sufficient atonement. Thy Highness shall judge of
it thyself, when I, in telling my tale according to thy
commandment, will inform thee of what was my offence." And here
he began to relate




The Story of the Blind Man, Baba Abdullah.[FN#252]



O my lord the Caliph, I, the humblest of thy slaves, was born in
Baghdad, where my father and mother, presently dying within a few
days of each other, left me a fortune large enough to last me
throughout my lifetime. But I knew not its value and soon I had
squandered it in luxury and loose living and I cared naught for
thrift or for increasing my store. But when little was left to me
of my substance, I repented of my evil courses and toiled and
laboured hard by day and night to increase my remaining stock of
money. It is truly said, "After waste cometh knowledge of worth."
Thus little by little I got together fourscore camels, which I
let on hire to merchants, and thus I made goodly gain each time I
found occasion: moreover I was wont to engage myself together
with my beasts and on this wise I journeyed over all the
dominions and domains of thy Highness. Brief, I hoped ere long to
reap an abundant crop of gold by the hiring out of my baggage
animals.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Seventh Night.

Then said she: I have heard, O auspicious King, that Baba
Abdullah continued his tale in these words: Once I had carried
merchants' stuffs to Bassorah for shipping India-wards and I was
returning to Baghdad with my beasts unladen. Now as I fared
homewards I chanced pass across a plain of excellent pasturage
lying fallow and far from any village, and there unsaddled the
camels which I hobbled and tethered together that they might crop
the luxuriant herbs and thorns and yet not fare astray. Presently
appeared a Darwaysh who was travelling afoot for Bassorah, and he
took seat beside me to enjoy ease after unease; whereat I asked
him whence he wayfared and whither he was wending. He also asked
me the same question and when we had told each to other our own
tales, we produced our provisions and brake our fast together,
talking of various matters as we ate. Quoth the Darwaysh, "I know
a spot hard by which enholdeth a hoard and its wealth is so
wonder-great that shouldst thou load upon thy fourscore camels
the heaviest burthens of golden coins and costly gems from that
treasure there will appear no minishing thereof." Hearing these
words I rejoiced with exceeding joy and gathering from his mien
and demeanour that he did not deceive me, I arose forthright and
falling upon his neck, exclaimed, "O Hallow of Allah, who caress
naught for this world's goods and hast renounced all mundane
lusts and luxuries, assuredly thou hast full knowledge of this
treasure, for naught remaineth hidden from holy men as thou art.
I pray thee tell me where it may be found that I may load my
fourscore beasts with bales of Ashrafis and jewels: I wot full
well that thou hast no greed for the wealth of this world, but
take, I pray thee, one of these my fourscore camels as recompense
and reward for the favour." Thus spake I with my tongue but in my
heart I sorely grieved to think that I must part with a single
camel-load of coins and gems; withal I reflected that the other
three-score and nineteen camel-loads would contain riches to my
heart's content. Accordingly, as I wavered in mind, at one moment
consenting and at the next instant repenting, the Darwaysh noting
my greed and covetise and avarice, replied, "Not so, O my
brother: one camel doth not suffice me that I should shew thee
all this hoard. On a single condition only will I tell thee of
the place; to wit, that we twain lead the animals thither and
lade them with the treasure, then shalt thou give me one half
thereof and take the other half to thyself. With forty camels'
load of costly ores and minerals forsure thou canst buy thousands
more of camels." Then, seeing that refusal was impossible, I
cried "So be it! I agree to thy proposal and I will do as thou
desires";" for in my heart I had conned the matter over and well
I wist that forty camel-loads of gold and gems would suffice me
and many generations of my descendants; and I feared lest an I
gain say him I should repent for ever and ever having let so
great a treasure slip out of hand. Accordingly, giving full
consent to all be said, I got together every one of my beasts and
set me a-wayfaring along with the Fak›r.[FN#253] After travelling
over some short distance we came upon a gorge between two craggy
mountain-walls towering high in crescent form and the pass was
exceeding narrow so that the animals were forced to pace in
single file, but further on it flared out and we could thread it
without difficulty into the broad Wady below. No human being was
anywhere to be seen or heard in this wild land, so we were
undisturbed and easy in our minds nor feared aught. Then quoth
the Darwaysh, "Leave here the camels and come with me."--And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Eighth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the blind
man Baba Abdullah pursued his tale on this wise:--I did as the
Darwaysh had bidden me; and, nakhing[FN#254] all the camels, I
followed in wake of him. After walking a short way from the
halting-place he produced a flint and steel and struck fire
therewith and lit some sticks he had gotten together; then,
throwing a handful of strong-smelling incense upon the flames, he
muttered words of incantation which I could by no means
understand. At once a cloud of smoke arose, and spireing upwards
veiled the mountains; and presently, the vapour clearing away, we
saw a huge rock with pathway leading to its perpendicular face.
Here the precipice showed an open door, wherethrough appeared in
the bowels of the mountain a splendid palace, the workmanship of
the Jinns, for no man had power to build aught like it. In due
time, after sore toil, we entered therein and found an endless
treasure, ranged in mounds with the utmost ordinance and
regularity. Seeing a heap of Ashrafis I pounced upon it as a
vulture swoopeth upon her quarry, the carrion, and fell to
filling the sacks with golden coin to my heart's content. The
bags were big, but I was constrained to stuff them only in
proportion to the strength of my beasts. The Darwaysh, too,
busied himself in like manner, but he charged his sacks with gems
and jewels only, counselling me the while to do as he did. So I
cast aside the ducats and filled my bags with naught save the
most precious of the stonery. When we had wrought our best, we
set the well-stuffed sacks upon the camels' backs and we made
ready to depart; but, before we left the treasure-house wherein
stood ranged thousands of golden vessels, exquisite in shape and
workmanship, the Darwaysh went into a hidden chamber and brought
from out a silvern casket a little golden box full of some
unguent, which he showed to me, and then he placed it in his
pocket. Presently, he again threw incense upon the fire and
recited his incantations and conjurations, whereat the door
closed and the rock became as before. We then divided the camels,
he taking one half and I the other; and, passing through the
strait and gloomy gorge in single file, we came out upon the open
plain. Here our way parted, he wending in the direction of
Bassorah and I Baghdad-wards; and when about to leave him I
showered thanks upon the Darwaysh who had obtained me all this
wealth and riches worth a thousand thousand of gold coins; and
farewelled him with deep emotions of gratitude; after which we
embraced and wended our several ways. But hardly had I bidden
adieu to the Fakir and had gone some little distance from him
with my file of camels than the Shaytan tempted me with greed of
gain so that I said to myself, "The Darwaysh is alone in the
world, without friends or kinsman, and is wholly estranged from
matters mundane. What will these camel-loads of filthy lucre
advantage him? Moreover, engrossed by the care of the camels, not
to speak of the deceitfulness of riches, he may neglect his
prayer and worship: therefore it behoveth me to take back from
him some few of my beasts." With this resolve I made the camels
halt and tying up their forelegs ran back after the holy man and
called out his name. He heard my loud shouts and awaited me
forthright; and, as soon as I approached him I said, "When I had
quitted thee a thought came into my mind; to wit, that thou art a
recluse who keepest thyself aloof from earthly things, pure in
heart and busied only with orison and devotion Now care of all
these camels will cause thee only toil and moil and trouble and
waste of precious time: 'twere better then to give them back and
not run the risk of these discomforts and dangers. The Darwaysh
replied, "O my son, thou speakest sooth. The tending of all these
animals will bring me naught save ache of head, so do thou take
of them as many as thou listest. I thought not of the burthen and
posher till thou drewest my attention thereto; but now I am
forewarned thereof; so may Almighty Allah keep thee in His holy
keeping!" Accordingly, I took ten camels of him and was about to
gang my gait when suddenly it struck me, "This Fakir was
unconcerned at giving up ten camels, so 'twere better I ask more
of him." Thereupon I drew nearer to him and said, "Thou canst
hardly manage thirty camels; do give me, I pray thee, other ten."
Said he, "O my son, do whatso thou wishest! Take thee other ten
camels; twenty will suffice me." I did his bidding and driving
off the twenty added them to my forty. Then the spirit of
concupiscence possessed me, and I bethought me more and more to
get yet other ten camels from his share; so I retraced my steps
for the third time and asked him for another ten, and of these,
as also the remaining ten, I wheedled him. The Darwaysh gladly
gave up the last of his camels, and, shaking out his
skirts,[FN#255] made ready to depart; but still my accursed greed
stuck to me. Albeit I had got the fourscore beasts laden with
Ashrafis and jewels, and I might have gone home happy and
content, with wealth for fourscore generations, Satan tempted me
still more, and urged me also to take the box of ointment, which
I supposed to contain something more precious than rubies.--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Ninth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Baba
Abdullah continued his tale in these words:--So when I had again
farewelled and embraced him I paused awhile and said, "What wilt
thou do with the little box of salve thou hast taken to thy
portion? I pray thee give me that also." The Fakir would by no
means part with it, whereupon I lusted the more to possess it,
and resolved in my mind that, should the holy man give it up of
his free will, then well and good, but if not I would force it
from him. Seeing my intent he drew the box from out his breast-
pocket[FN#256] and handed it to me saying, "O my son, an thou
wouldst have this box of ointment, then freely do I give it to
thee; but first it behoveth thee to learn the virtue of the
unguent it containeth." Hearing these words I said, "Forasmuch as
thou hast shown me all this favour, I beseech thee tell me of
this ointment and what of properties it possesseth." Quoth he,
"The wonders of this ointment are passing strange and rare. An
thou close thy left eye and rub upon the lid the smallest bit of
the salve then all the treasures of the world now concealed from
thy gaze will come to sight; but an thou rub aught thereof upon
thy right eye thou shalt straightway become stone blind of both."
Thereat I bethought me of putting this wondrous unguent to the
test and placing in his hand the box I said, "I see thou
understandest this matter right well; so now I pray thee apply
somewhat of the ointment with thine own hand to my left eyelid."
The Darwaysh thereupon closed my left eye and with his finger
rubbed a little of the unguent over the lid; and when I opened it
and looked around I saw the hidden hoards of the earth in
countless quantities even as the Fakir had told me I should see
them. Then closing my right eyelid, I bade him apply some of the
salve to that eye also. Said he, "O my son, I have forewarned
thee that if I rub it upon thy right eyelid thou shalt become
stone blind of both. Put far from thee this foolish thought: why
shouldst thou bring this evil to no purpose on thyself?" He spake
sooth indeed, but by reason of my accursed ill-fate I would not
heed his words and considered in my mind, "If applying the salve
to the left eyelid hath produced such effect, assuredly far more
wondrous still shall be the result when rubbed on the right eye.
This fellow doth play me false and keepeth back from me the truth
of the matter." When I had thus determined in my mind I laughed
and said to the holy man, "Thou art deceiving me to the intent
that I should not advantage myself by the secret, for that
rubbing the unguent upon the right eyelid hath some greater
virtue than applying it to the left eye, and thou wouldst
withhold the matter from me. It can never be that the same
ointment hath qualities so contrary and virtues so diverse."
Replied the other, "Allah Almighty is my witness that the marvels
of the ointment be none other save these whereof I bespake thee;
O dear my friend, have faith in me, for naught hath been told
thee save what is sober sooth." Still would I not believe his
words, thinking that he dissembled with me and kept secret from
me the main virtue of the unguent. Wherefore filled with this
foolish thought I pressed him sore and begged that he rub the
ointment upon my right eyelid; but he still refused and said,
"Thou seest how much of favour I have shown to thee: wherefore
should I now do thee so dire an evil? Know for a surety that it
would bring thee lifelong grief and misery; and I beseech thee,
by Allah the Almighty, abandon this thy purpose and believe my
words." But the more he refused so much the more did I persist;
and in fine I made oath and sware by Allah, saying, "O Darwaysh,
what things soever I have asked of thee thou gayest freely unto
me and now remaineth only this request for me to make. Allah upon
thee, gainsay me not and grant me this last of thy boons: and
whatever shall betide me I will not hold thee responsible
therefor. Let Destiny decide for good or for evil." When the holy
man saw that his denial was of no avail and that I irked him with
exceeding persistence, he put the smallest bit of ointment on my
right lid and, as I opened wide my eyes, lo and behold! both were
stone-blind: naught could I see for the black darkness before
them and ever since that day have I been sightless and helpless
as thou foundest me. When I knew that I was blinded, I exclaimed,
"O Darwaysh of ill-omen, what thou didst fore tell hath come to
pass;" and I fell to cursing him and saying "O would to Heaven
thou hadst never brought me to the hoard or hadst given me such
wealth. What now avail me all this gold and jewels? Take back thy
forty camels and make me whole again." Replied he, "What evil
have I done to thee? I showed thee favours more than any man hath
ever dealt to another. Thou wouldst not heed my rede, but didst
harden thy heart and lustedst to obtain this wealth and to pry
into the hidden treasures of the earth. Thou wouldst not be
content with what thou hadst and thou didst misdoubt my words
thinking that I would play thee false. Thy case is beyond all
hope, for never more wilt thou regain thy sight; no, never. Then
said I with tears and lamentations, "O Fakir, take back thy
fourscore camels laden with gold and precious stones and wend thy
way: I absolve thee from all blame, natheless I beseech thee by
Allah Almighty to restore my sight an thou art able." He answered
not a word, but leaving me in miserable plight presently took the
load to Bassorah, driving before him the fourscore camels laden
with wealth. I cried aloud and besought him to lead me with him
away from the life destroying wilderness, or to put me on the
path of some caravan, but he regarded not my cries and abandoned
me there.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

          The end of the Six Hundred and Tenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Baba
Abdullah the blind man resumed his story, saying:--So when the
Darwaysh departed from me, I had well nigh died of grief and
wrath at the loss of my sight and of my riches, and from the
pangs of thirst[FN#257] and hunger. Next day by good fortune a
caravan from Bassorah passed that way; and, seeing me in such a
grievous condition, the merchants had compassion on me and made
me travel with them to Baghdad. Naught could I do save beg my
bread in order to keep myself alive; so I became a mendicant and
made this vow to Allah Almighty that, as a punishment for this my
unlucky greed and cursed covetise, I would require a cuff upon my
ear from everyone who might take pity on my case and give an
alms. On this wise it was that yesterday I pursued thee with such
pertinacity.--When the blind man made an end of his story the
Caliph said, "O Baba Abdullah! thine offence was grievous; may
Allah have mercy on thee therefor. It now remaineth to thee to
tell thy case to devotees and anchorites that they may offer up
their potent prayers in thy behalf. Take no thought for thy daily
wants: I have determined that for thy living thou shalt have a
dole of four dirhams a day from my royal treasury according to
thy need as long as thou mayest live. But see that thou go no
more to ask for alms about my city." So Baba Abdullah returned
thanks to the Prince of True Believers, saying, "I will do
according to thy bidding." Now when the Caliph Harun al-Rashid
had heard the story of Baba Abdullah and the Darwaysh, he turned
to and addressed the young man whom he had seen riding at fullest
speed upon the mare and savagely lashing and ill-treating her.
"What is thy name?" quoth he, and quoth the youth, bowing his
brow groundwards, "My name, O Commander of the Faithful, is S›d›
Nu'umﬂn."[FN#258] Then said the Caliph, "Hearken now, O Sidi
Nu'uman! Ofttimes have I watched the horsemen exercise their
horses, and I myself have often done likewise, but never saw I
any who rode so mercilessly as thou didst ride thy mare, for thou
didst ply both whip and shovel-iron in cruellest fashion. The
folk all stood to gaze with wonderment, but chiefly I, who was
constrained against my wish to stop and ask the cause of the
bystanders. None, however, could make clear the matter, and all
men said that thou art wont each day to ride the mare in this
most brutal fashion, whereat my mind marvelled all the more. I
now would ask of thee the cause of this thy ruthless savagery,
and see that thou tell me every whit and leave not aught unsaid."
Sidi Nu'uman, hearing the order of the Commander of the Faithful,
became aware he was fully bent upon hearing the whole matter and
would on no wise suffer him to depart until all was explained. So
the colour of his countenance changed and he stood speechless
like a statue through fear and trepidation; whereat said the
Prince of True Believers, "O Sidi Nu'uman, fear naught but tell
me all thy tale. Regard me in the light of one of thy friends and
speak without reserve, and explain to me the matter fully as thou
wouldst do hadst thou been speaking to thy familiars. Moreover,
an thou art afraid of any matter which thou shalt confide to me
and if thou dread my indignation, I grant thee immunity and a
free pardon." At these comforting words of the Caliph, Sidi
Nu'uman took courage, and with clasped hands replied, "I trust I
have not in this matter done aught contrary to thy Highness's law
and custom, and therefore will I willingly obey thy bidding and
relate to thee all my tale. If I have offended in anything then
am I worthy of thy punishment. 'Tis true that I have daily
exercised the mare and ridden her at speed around the hippodrome
as thou sawest me do; and I lashed and gored her with all my
might. Thou hadst compassion on the mare and didst deem me cruel
hearted to entreat her thus, but when thou shalt have heard all
my adventure thou wilt admit, Inshallah--God willing--that this
be only a trifling penalty for her offence, and that not she but
I deserve thy pity and pardon! With thy permission I will now
begin my story."˚And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

         The end of The Six Hundred and Eleventh Night.

Then said she: I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
Harun al-Rashid accorded the youth permission to speak and that
the rider of the mare began in these words the





History of Sidi Nu'uman.


           
O Lord of beneficence and benevolence, my parents were possessed
of wealth and riches sufficient to provide their son when they
died with ample means for a life long livelihood so that he might
pass his days like a Grandee of the land in ease and joyance and
delight. I--their only child--had nor care nor trouble about any
matter until one day of the days, when in the prime of manhood, I
was a minded to take unto me a wife, a woman winsome and comely
to look upon, that we might live together in mutual love and
double blessedness. But Allah Almighty willed not that a model
helpmate become mine; nay, Destiny wedded me to grief and the
direst misery. I married a maid who in outward form and features
was a model of beauty and loveliness without, however, one single
gracious gift of mind or soul; and on the very second day after
the wedding her evil nature began to manifest itself. Thou art
well aware, O Prince of True Believers, that by Moslem custom
none may look upon the face of his betrothed before the marriage
contract? nor after wedlock can he complain should his bride
prove a shrew or a fright: he must needs dwell with her in such
content as he may and be thankful for his fate, be it fair or
unfair. When I saw first the face of my bride and learnt that it
was passing comely, I joyed with exceeding joy and gave thanks to
Almighty Allah that He had bestowed on me so charming a mate.
That night I slept with her in joy and love-delight; but next day
when the noon meal was spread for me and her I found her not at
table and sent to summon her; and after some delay, she came and
sat her down. I dissembled my annoyance and forbore for this late
coming to find fault with her which I soon had ample reason to
do. It so happened that amongst the many dishes which were served
up to us was a fine pilaff,[FN#259] of which I, according to the
custom in our city, began to eat with a spoon; but she, in lieu
of it pulled out an ear pick from her pocket and therewith fell
to picking up the rice and ate it grain by grain. Seeing this
strange conduct I was sore amazed and fuming inwardly said in
sweet tones, "O my Aminah,[FN#260] what be this way of eating?
hast thou learnt it of thy people or art thou counting grains of
rice purposing to make a hearty meal here after? Thou hast eaten
but ten or twenty during all this time. Or haply thou art
practicing thrift: if so I would have thee know that Allah
Almighty hath given me abundant store and fear not on that
account; but do thou, O my dearling, as all do and eat as thou
seest thy husband eat." I fondly thought that she would assuredly
vouchsafe some words of thanks, but never a syllable spake she
and ceased not picking up grain after grain: nay more, in order
to provoke me to greater displeasure, she paused for a long time
between each. Now when the next course of cakes came on she idly
brake some bread and tossed a crumb or two into her mouth; in
fact she ate less than would satisfy the stomach of a sparrow. I
marvelled much to see her so obstinate and self-willed but I said
to myself, in mine innocence, "May be she hath not been
accustomed to eat with men, and especially she may be too shame
faced to eat heartily in presence of her husband: she will in
time do whatso do other folk." I thought also that perchance she
hath already broken her fast and lost appetite, or haply it hath
been her habit to eat alone. So I said nothing and after dinner
went out to smell the air and play the Jar›d[FN#261] and thought
no more of the matter. When, however, we two sat again at meat my
bride ate after the same fashion as before; nay, she would ever
persist in her perversity; whereat I was sore troubled in mind,
and marvelled how without food she kept herself alive. One night
it chanced that deeming me fast asleep she rose up in stealth
from my side, I being wide awake: when I saw her step cautiously
from the bed as one fearing lest she might disturb me. I wondered
with exceeding wonder why she should arise from sleep to leave me
thus and methought I would look into the matter. Wherefore I
still feigned sleep and snored but watched her as I lay, and
presently saw her dress herself and leave the room; I then sprang
off the bed and throwing on my robe and slinging my sword across
my shoulder looked out of the window to spy whither she went.
Presently she crossed the courtyard and opening the street-door
fared forth; and I also ran out through the entrance which she
had left unlocked; then followed her by the light of the moon
until she entered a cemetery hard by our home.--And as the morn
began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Twelfth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Sidi
Nu'uman continued his story saying:--But when I beheld Aminah my
bride enter the cemetery, I stood without and close to the wall
over which I peered so that I could espy her well but she could
not discover me. Then what did I behold but Aminah sitting with a
Ghul![FN#262] Thy Highness wotteth well that Ghuls be of the race
of devils; to wit, they are unclean spirits which inhabit ruins
and which terrify solitary wayfarers and at times seizing them
feed upon their flesh; and if by day they find not any traveller
to eat they go by night to the graveyards and dig out and devour
dead bodies. So I was sore amazed and terrified to see my wife
thus seated with a Ghul. Then the twain dug up from the grave a
corpse which had been newly buried, and the Ghul and my wife
Aminah tore off pieces of the flesh which she ate making merry
the while and chatting with her companion but inasmuch as I stood
at some distance I could not hear what it was they said. At this
sight I trembled with exceeding fear. And when they had made an
end of eating they cast the bones into the pit and thereover
heaped up the earth e'en as it was before. Leaving them thus
engaged in their foul and fulsome work, I hastened home; and,
allowing the street-door to remain half-open as my bride had
done, I reached my room, and throwing myself upon our bed feigned
sleep. Presently Aminah came and doffing her dress calmly lay
beside me, and I knew by her manner that she had not seen me at
all, nor guessed that I had followed her to the cemetery. This
gave me great relief of mind, withal I loathed to bed beside a
cannibal and a corpse-eater; howbeit I lay still despite extreme
misliking till the Muezzin's call for dawn-prayers, when getting
up I busied myself with the Wuz∑-ablution and set forth mosque-
wards. Then having said my prayers and fulfilled my ceremonial
duties,[FN#263] I strolled about the gardens, and during this
walk having turned over the matter in my mind, determined that it
behoved me to remove my bride from such ill companionship, and
wean her from the habit of devouring dead bodies. With these
thoughts I came back home at dinner-time, when Aminah on seeing
me return bade the servants serve up the noontide meal and we
twain sat at table; but as before she fell to picking up the rice
grain by grain. Thereat said I to her, "O my wife, it irketh me
much to see thee picking up each grain of rice like a hen. If
this dish suit not thy taste see there are, by Allah's grace and
the Almighty's favour, all kinds of meats before us. Do thou eat
of that which pleaseth thee most; each day the table is bespread
with dishes of different kinds and if these please thee not, thou
hast only to order whatsoever food thy soul desireth. Yet I would
ask of thee one question: Is there no meat upon the table as rich
and toothsome as man's flesh, that thou refuseth every dish they
set before thee?" Ere I had finished speaking my wife became
assured that I was aware of her night adventure: she suddenly
waxed wroth with exceeding wrath, her face flushed red as fire,
her eyeballs started out from their sockets and she foamed at the
mouth with ungovernable fury. Seeing her in this mood I was
terrified and my sense and reason fled by reason of my affright;
but presently in the madness of her passion she took up a tasse
of water which stood beside her and dipping her fingers in the
contents muttered some words which I could not understand; then
sprinkling some drops over me, cried, Accursed that thou art! for
this thine insolence and betrayal do thou be straightway turned
into a dog." At once I became transmewed and she, picking up a
staff began to ribroast me right mercilessly and well nigh killed
me. I ran about from room to room but she pursued me with the
stick, and tunded and belaboured me with might and main, till she
was clean exhausted. She then threw the street-door half open
and, as I made for it to save my life, attempted violently to
close it, so as to squeeze my soul out of my body; but I saw her
design and baffled it, leaving behind me, however, the tip of my
tail; and piteously yelping hereat I escaped further basting and
thought myself lucky to get away from her without broken bones.
When I stood in the street still whining and ailing, the dogs of
the quarter seeing a stranger, at once came rushing at me barking
and biting;[FN#264] and I with tail between my legs tore along
the market place and ran into the shop of one who sold sheeps'
and goats' heads and trotters; and there crouching low hid me in
a dark corner.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Thirteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Sidi
Nu'uman continued his story as follows--The shopkeeper, despite
his scruples of conscience, which caused him to hold all dogs
impure,[FN#265] hath ruth upon my sorry plight and drove away the
yelling and grinning curs that would have followed me into his
shop; and I, escaping this danger of doom, passed all the night
hid in my corner. Early next morning the butcher sallied forth to
buy his usual wares, sheeps' heads and hooves, and, coming back
with a large supply, he began to lay them out for sale within the
shop, when I, seeing that a whole pack of dogs had gathered about
the place attracted by the smell of flesh, also joined them. The
owner noticed me among the ragged tykes and said to himself,
"This dog hath tasted naught since yesterday when it ran yelping
hungrily and hid within my shop." He then threw me a fair sized
piece of meat, but I refused it and went up to him and wagged my
tail to the end that he might know my wish to stay with him and
be protected by his stall: he, however, thought that I had eaten
my sufficiency, and, picking up a staff frightened me aw