ay. So
when I saw how the butcher heeded not my case, I trotted off and
wandering to and fro presently came to a bakery and stood before
the door wherethrough I espied the baker at breakfast. Albeit I
made no sign as though I wanted aught of food, he threw me a
bittock of bread; and I, in lieu of snapping it up and greedily
swallowing it, as is the fashion with all dogs the gentle and
simple of them, approached him with it and gazed in his face and
wagged my tail by way of thanks. He was pleased by this my well
bred behaviour and smiled at me; whereat I albeit not one whit
anhungered, but merely to humour him, fell to eating the bread,
little by little and leisurely, to testify my respect. He was yet
more satisfied with my manners and wished to keep me in his shop;
and I, noting his intent, sat by the door and looked wistfully at
him, whereby he knew that I desired naught of him save his
protection. He then caressed me and took charge of me and kept me
to guard his store, but I would not enter his house till after he
had led the way; he also showed me where to lie o'nights and fed
me well at every meal and entreated me right hospitably. I
likewise would watch his every movement and always lay down or
rose up even as he bade me; and whenas he left his lodging or
walked anywhither he took me with him. If ever when I lay asleep
he went outside and found me not, he would stand still in the
street and call to me crying, "Bakht!' Bakht!''[FN#266] an
auspicious name he had given to me; and straightway on hearing
him I would rush about and frisk before the door; and when he set
out to taste the air I paced beside him now running on ahead, now
following at his heels and ever and anon looking up in his face.
Thus some time passed during which I lived with him in all
comfort; till one day of the days it so chanced that a woman came
to the bakery to buy her bread and gave the owner several dirhams
to its price, whereof one was bad coin whilst the others were
good. My master tested all the silvers and, finding out the false
bit, returned it demanding a true dirham in exchange; but the
woman wrangled and would not take it back and swore that it was
sound. Quoth the baker, "The dirham is beyond all doubt a
worthless: see yonder dog of mine, he is but a beast, yet mark me
he will tell thee whether it be true or false silver." So he
called me by my name, "Bakht! Bakht!" whereat I sprang up and ran
towards him and he, throwing all the moneys upon the ground
before me, cried, "Here, look these dirhams over and if there be
a false coin among them separate it from all the others." I
inspected the silvers each by each and found the counterfeit:
then, putting it on one side and all the others on another, I
placed my paw upon the false silver and wagging what remained of
my tail looked up at my master's face. The baker was delighted
with my sagacity, and the woman also, marvelling with excessive
marvel at what had happened, took back her bad dirham and paid
another in exchange. But when the buyer fared forth, my master
called together his neighbours and gossips and related to them
this matter; so they threw down on the ground before me coins
both good and bad, in order that they might test me and see with
their own eyes an I were as clever as my master had said I was.
Many times in succession I picked out the false coins from
amongst the true and placed my paw upon them without once
failing; so all went away astounded and related the case to each
and every one they saw and thus the bruit of me spread abroad
throughout the city. That live long day I spent in testing
dirhams fair and foul.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Fourteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Sidi
Nu'uman continued his story saying:--From that day forwards the
baker honoured me yet more highly, and all his friends and
familiars laughed and said, "Forsooth thou hast in this dog a
mighty good Shroff."[FN#267] And some envied my master his luck
in having me within the shop, and tried ofttimes to entice me
away, but the baker kept me with him nor would he ever allow me
to leave his side; for the fame of me brought him a host of
customers from every quarter of the town even the farthest. Not
many days after there came another woman to buy loaves at our
shop and paid the baker six dirhams whereof one was worthless. My
master passed them over to me for test and trial, and straightway
I picked out the false one, and placing paw thereon looked up in
the woman's face. Hereat she waxed confused and confessed that it
was miscoined and praised me for that I had found it out; then,
going forth the same woman made signs to me that I should follow
her unbeknown to the baker. Now I had not ceased praying Allah
that somehow He would restore me to my human form and hoped that
some good follower of the Almighty would take note of this my
sorry condition and vouchsafe me succour. So as the woman turned
several times and looked at me, I was persuaded in my mind that
she had knowledge of my case; I therefore kept my eyes upon her;
which seeing she came back ere she had stepped many paces, and
beckoned me to accompany her. I understood her signal and
sneaking out of the presence of the baker, who was busy heating
his oven, followed in her wake. Pleased beyond all measure to see
me obey her, she went straight way home with me, and entering she
locked the door and led me into a room where sat a fair maid in
embroidered dress whom I judged by her favour to be the good
woman's daughter. The damsel was well skilled in arts magical; so
the mother said to her, "O my daughter, here is a dog which
telleth bad dirhams from good dirhams. When first I heard the
marvel I bethought me that the beastie must be a man whom some
base wretch and cruel hearted had turned into a dog. Methought
that to day I would see this animal and test it when buying
loaves at the booth of yonder baker and behold, it hath acquitted
itself after the fairest of fashions and hath stood the test and
trial. Look well, O my daughter, at this dog and see whether it
be indeed an animal or a man transformed into a beast by
gramarye." The young lady, who had veiled her face,[FN#268]
hereupon considered me attentively and presently cried, "O my
mother, 'tis even as thou sayest, and this I will prove to thee
forthright." Then rising from her seat she took a basin of water
and dipping hand therein sprinkled some drops upon me saying, "An
thou wert born a dog then do thou abide a dog, but an thou wert
born a man then, by virtue of this water, resume thine human
favour and figure." Immediately I was transformed from the shape
of a dog to human semblance and I fell at the maiden's feet and
kissed the ground before her giving her thanks; then, bussing the
hem of her garment, I cried, "O my lady, thou hast been exceeding
gracious unto one unbeknown to thee and a stranger. How can I
find words wherewith to thank thee and bless thee as thou
deserves"? Tell me now, I pray thee, how and whereby I may shew
my gratitude to thee? From this day forth I am beholden to thy
kindness and am become thy slave." Then I related all my case and
told her of Aminah's wickedness and what of wrongs she had
wrought me; and I made due acknowledgment to her mother for that
she had brought me to her home. Herewith quoth the damsel to me,
"O Sidi Nu'uman, I pray thee bestow not such exceeding thanks
upon me, for rather am I glad and grateful in conferring this
service upon one so well-deserving as thou art. I have been
familiar with thy wife Aminah for a long time before thou didst
marry her; I also knew that she had skill in witchcraft and she
likewise knoweth of my art, for we twain learnt together of one
and the same mistress in the science. We met ofttimes at the
Hammam as friends but, in asmuch as she was ill-mannered and ill-
tempered, I declined further intimacy with her. Think not that it
sufficeth me to have made thee recover thy form as it was
aforetime; nay, verily needs must I take due vengeance of her for
the wrong she hath done thee. And this will I do at thy hand, so
shalt thou have mastery over her and find thyself lord of thine
own house and home.[FN#269] Tarry here awhile until I come
again." So saying the damsel passed into another room and I
remained sitting and talking with her mother and praised her
excellence and kindness towards me. The ancient dame also related
strange and rare deeds of wonder done by her with pure purpose
and lawful means, till the girl returned with an ewer in hand and
said, "O Sidi Nu'uman, my magical art doth tell me that Aminah is
at this present away from home but she will return thither
presently. Meanwhile she dissembleth with the domestics and
feigneth grief at severance from thee; and she hath pretended
that, as thou sattest at meat with her, thou didst suddenly arise
and fare forth on some weighty matter, when presently a dog
rushed through the open door into the room and she drove it away
with a staff." Then giving me a gugglet full of the water the
maiden resumed, "O Sidi Nu'uman, go now to thine own house and,
keeping this gugglet by thee, await patiently Aminah's coming.
Anon she will return and seeing thee will be sore perplexed and
will hasten to escape from thee; but before she go forth sprinkle
some drops from this gugglet upon her and recite these spells
which I shall teach thee. I need not tell thee more; thou wilt
espy with thine own eyes what shall happen." Having said these
words the young lady taught me magical phrases which I fixed in
my memory full firmly, and after this I took my leave and
farewelled them both. When I reached home it happened even as the
young magician had told me; and I had tarried but a short time in
the house when Aminah came in. I held the gugglet in hand and she
seeing me trembled with sore trembling and would fain have run
away; but I hastily sprinkled some drops upon her and repeated
the magical words, whereat she was turned into a mare--the animal
thy Highness deigned remark but yesterday. I marvelled greatly to
sight this transformation and seizing the mare's mane led her to
the stable and secured her with a halter.--And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

         The end of the Six Hudred and Fifteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Sidi
Nu'uman continued his story saying:--When I had secured the mare,
I loaded her with reproaches for her wickedness and her base
behaviour, and lashed her with a whip till my forearm was
tired.[FN#270] Then I resolved within myself that I would ride
her at full speed round the square each day and thus inflict upon
her the justest penalty.--Herewith Sidi Nu'uman held his peace,
having made an end of telling his tale; but presently he resumed,
"O Commander of the Faithful, I trow thou art not displeased at
this my conduct, nay rather thou wouldst punish such a woman with
a punishment still greater than this." He then kissed the hem of
the Caliph's robe and kept silence; and Harun al-Rashid,
perceiving that he had said all his say, exclaimed, "In very
sooth thy story is exceeding strange and rare. The wrong doing of
thy wife hath no excuse and thy requital is methinks in due
measure and just degree, but I would ask thee one thing--How long
wilt thou chastise her thus, and how long will she remain in
bestial guise? ÊTwere better now for thee to seek the young lady
by whose magical skill thy wife was transformed and beg that she
bring her back to human shape. And yet I fear me greatly lest
perchance whenas this sorceress, this Ghulah, shall find herself
restored to woman's form and resumeth her conjurations and
incantations she may--who knoweth?.--requite thee with far
greater wrong than she hath done thee heretofore, and from this
thou wilt not be able to escape." After this the Prince of True
Believers forbore to urge the matter, albeit he was mild and
merciful by nature,[FN#271] and addressing the third man whom the
Wazir had brought before him said, "As I was walking in such a
quarter I was astonished to see thy mansion, so great and so
grand is it; and when I made enquiry of the townsfolk they
answered each and every, that the palace belongeth to one
(thyself) whom they called Khwﬂjah Hasan. They added that thou
west erewhile exceeding poor and in straitened case, but that
Allah Almighty had widened thy means and had now sent thee wealth
in such store that thou hast builded the finest of buildings;
moreover, that albeit thou hast so princely a domicile and such
abundance of riches, thou art not unmindful of thy former estate,
and thou dost not waste thy substance in riotous living but thou
addest thereto by lawful trade. The neighbourhood all speaketh
well of thee and not a wight of them hath aught to say against
thee; so I now would know of thee the certainty of these things
and hear from thine own lips how thou didst gain this abundant
wealth. I have summoned thee before me that I might be assured of
all such matters by actual hearsay: so fear not to tell me all
thy tale; I desire naught of thee save knowledge of this thy
case. Enjoy thou to thy heart's content the opulence that
Almighty Allah deigned bestow upon thee, and let thy soul have
pleasure therein. Thus spake the Caliph and the gracious words
reassured the man. Then Khwajah Hasan threw himself before the
Commander of the Faithful and, kissing the carpet at the foot of
the throne, exclaimed, "O Prince of True Believers, I will relate
to thee a faithful relation of my adventure, and Almighty Allah
be my witness that I have not done aught contrary to thy laws and
just commandments, and that all this my wealth is by the favour
and goodness of Allah alone." Harun al-Rashid hereupon again bade
him speak out boldly and forthwith he began to recount in the
following words the





History of Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal.[FN#272]



O Lord of beneficence! obedient to thy royal behest, I will now
inform thy Highness of the means and the measures whereby Destiny
cowered me with such wealth; but first I would thou hear somewhat
of two amongst my friends who abode in the House of Peace,
Baghdad. They twain are yet alive and both well know the history
which thy slave shall now relate. One of them, men call Sa'd, the
other Sa'd›.[FN#273] Now Sa'di opined that without riches no one
in this world could be happy and independent; moreover that
without hard toil and trouble and wariness and wisdom withal it
were impossible to become wealthy. But Sa'd differing therefrom
would affirm that affluence cometh not to any save by decree of
Destiny and fiat of Fate and Fortune. Sa'd was a poor man while
Sa'di had great store of good; yet there sprang up a firm
friendship between them and fond affection each for other; nor
were they ever wont to differ upon any matter save only upon
this; to wit, that Sa'di relied solely upon deliberation and
forethought and Sa'd upon doom and man's lot. It chanced one day
that, as they sat talking together on this matter, quoth Sa'di,
"A poor man is he who either is born a pauper and passeth all his
days in want and penury, or he who having been born to wealth and
comfort, doth in the time of manhood squander all he hath and
falleth into grievous need; then lacketh he the power to regain
his riches and to live at ease by wit and industry." Sa'd made
answer, saying, "Nor wit nor industry availeth aught to any one,
but Fate alone enableth him to acquire and to preserve riches.
Misery and want are but accidents and deliberation is naught.
Full many a poor man hath waxed affluent by favour of Fate and
richards manifold have, despite their skill and store, been
reduced to misery and beggary." Quoth Sa'di, "Thou speakest
foolishly. Howbeit put we the matter to fair test and find out
for ourselves some handicraftsman scanty of means and living upon
his daily wage; him let us provide with money, then will he
without a doubt increase his stock and abide in ease and comfort,
and so shalt thou be persuaded that my words be true." Now as
they twain were walking on, they passed through the lane wherein
stood my lodging and saw me a twisting ropes, which craft my
father and grandfather and many generations before me had
followed. By the condition of my home and dress they judged that
I was a needy man; where upon Sa'd pointing me out to Sa'di said,
"An thou wouldst make trial of this our matter of dispute, see
yonder wight. He hath dwelt here for many years and by this trade
of rope making cloth gain a bare subsistence for himself and his.
I know his case right well of old; he is a worthy subject for the
trial; so do thou give him some gold pieces and test the matter."
"Right willingly," replied Sa'di, "but first let us take full
cognizance of him." So the two friends came up to me, whereat I
left my work and saluted them. They returned my salam after which
quoth Sa'di, "Prithee what be thy name?" Quoth I, "My name is
Hasan, but by reason of my trade of rope making all men call me
Hasan al-Habbﬂl."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Sixteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan al-
Habbal (the Rope-maker) continued his story, saying.--Thereupon
Sa'di asked me, "How farest thou by this industry? Me thinks thou
art blithe and quite content therewith. Thou hast worked long and
well and doubtless thou hast laid by large store of hemp and
other stock. Thy forbears carried on this craft for many years
and must have left thee much of capital and property which thou
hast turned to good account and on this wise thou hast largely
increased thy wealth." Quoth I, "O my lord, no money have I in
pouch whereby I may live happy or even buy me enough to eat. This
is my case that every day, from dawn till eve I spend in making
ropes, nor have I one single moment wherein to take rest; and
still I am sore straitened to provide even dry bread for myself
and family. A wife have I and five small children, who are yet
too young to help me ply this business: and 'tis no easy matter
to supply their daily wants; how then canst thou suppose that I
am enabled to put by large store of hemp and stock? What ropes I
twist each day I sell straightway, and of the money earned
thereby I spend part upon our needs and with the rest I buy hemp
wherewith I twist ropes on the next day. However, praise be to
Almighty Allah that, despite this my state of penury He provideth
us with bread sufficing our necessity." When I had made known all
my condition Sa'di replied, "O Hasan, now I am certified of thy
case and indeed 'tis other than I had supposed; and, given that I
gave thee a purse of two hundred Ashrafis, assuredly thou shalt
therewith greatly add to thy gains and be enabled to live in ease
and affluence: what sayest thou thereto?" Said I, "An thou favour
me with such bounty I should hope to grow richer than all and
every of my fellow-craftsmen, albeit Baghdad-town is prosperous
as it is populous." Then Sa'di, deeming me true and trustworthy,
pulled out of his pocket a purse of two hundred gold pieces and
handing them to me said "Take these coins and trade therewith.
May Allah advance thee but see to it that thou use this money
with all heed, and waste it not in folly and ungraciousness. I
and my friend Sa'd will rejoice with all joy to hear of thy well
being; and, if hereafter we come again and find thee in
flourishing condition, 'twill be matter of much satisfaction to
us both." Accordingly, O Commander of the Faithful, I took the
purse of gold with much gladness and a grateful heart and,
placing it in my pocket, thanked Sa'di kissing his garment-hem,
whereupon the two friends fared forth. And I, O Prince of True
Believers, seeing the twain depart, went on working, but was sore
puzzled and perplexed as to where I might bestow the purse; for
my house contained neither cupboard nor locker. Howbeit I took it
home and kept the matter hidden from my wife and children and
when alone and unobserved I drew out ten gold coins by way of
spending money; then, binding the purse mouth with a bit of
string I tied it tightly in the folds of my turband and wound the
cloth around my head. Presently, I went off to the market street
and bought me a stock of hemp and coming homewards I laid in some
meat for supper, it being now a long while since we had tasted
flesh. But as I trudged along the road, meat in hand, a
kite[FN#274] came suddenly swooping down, and would have snatched
the morsel from out my hand had I not driven off the bird with
the other hand. Then it had fain pounced upon the flesh on the
left side but again I scared it away and thus, whilst exerting
myself with frantic efforts to ward off the bird, by ill luck my
turband fell to the ground. At once that accursed kite swooped
down and flew off with it in its talons; and I ran pursuing it
and shouted aloud. Hearing my cries the Bazar-folk, men and women
and a rout of children, did what they could to scare it away and
make the beastly bird drop its prey, but they shouted and cast
stones in vain: the kite would not let drop the turband and
presently flew clean out of sight. I was sore distressed and
heavy hearted to lose the Ashrafis as I tried me home bearing the
hemp and what of food I had bought, but chiefly was I vexed and
grieved in mind, and ready to die of shame at the thought of what
Sa'di would say; especially when I reflected how he would
misdoubt my words, nor deem the tale true when I should tell him
that a kite had carried off my turband with the gold pieces, but
rather would he think that I had practised some deceit and had
devised some amusing fable by way of excuse. Howbeit I hugely
enjoyed what had remained of the ten Ashrafis and with my wife
and children fared sumptuously for some days. Presently, when all
the gold was spent and naught remained thereof, I became as poor
and needy as before, withal I was content and thankful to
Almighty Allah nor blamed my lot. He had sent in his mercy this
purse of gold to me unawares and now He had taken it away,
wherefore I was grateful and satisfied, for what He doeth is ever
well done.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Seventeenth Night.

Then said she: I have heard, O auspicious King, that Master Hasan
the Ropemaker continued his story in these words:--My wife, who
knew not of the matter of the Ashrafis, presently perceived that
I was ill at ease and I was compelled for a quiet life to let her
know my secret; moreover the neighbours came round to ask me of
my case: but I was right loath to tell them all that had betided;
they could not bring back what was gone and they would assuredly
rejoice at my calamity. However, when they pressed me close I
told them every whit; and some thought that I had spoken falsely
and derided me and others that I was daft and hare-brained and my
words were the wild pratings of an idiot or the drivel of dreams.
The youngsters made abundant fun of me and laughed to think that
I, who never in my born days had sighted a golden coin, should
tell how I had gotten so many Ashrafis, and how a kite had flown
away with them. My wife, however, gave full credence to my tale
and wept and beat her breast for sorrow. Thus six months passed
over us, when it chanced one day that the two friends, to wit,
Sa'di and Sa'd, came to my quarter of the town, when quoth Sa'd
to Sa'di, "Lo, yonder is the street where dwelleth Hasan
al-Habbal. Come let us go and see how he hath added to his stock
and how far he hath prospered by means of the two hundred
Ashrafis thou gavest him." Sa'di rejoined, 'Tis well said;
indeed, we have not seen him for many days: I would fain visit
him and I should rejoice to hear that he hath prospered." So the
twain walked along towards my house, Sa'd saying to Sa'di,
"Forsooth I perceive that he appeareth the same in semblance,
poor and ill-conditioned as before; he weareth old and tattered
garments, save that his turband seemeth somewhat newer and
cleaner. Look well and judge thyself and 'tis even as I said."
Thereupon Sa'di came up closer to me and he also understood that
my condition was unaltered; and presently the two friends
addressed me. After the usual salutetion Sa'd asked, O Hasan, how
fareth it with thee, and how goeth it with thy business and have
the two hundred Ashrafis stood thee in good stead and amended thy
trade?" To this answered I, "O my lords, how can I tell you of
the sad mishap that hath befallen me? I dare not speak for very
shame, yet cannot I keep the adventure concealed. Verily a
marvellous matter and a wondrous hath happened to me, the tale
whereof will fill you with wonderment and suspicion, for I wot
full well that ye will not believe it, and that I shall be to you
as one that dealeth in lies; withal needs must I tell you the
whole however unwillingly." Hereat I recounted to them every whit
that had betided me first and last, especially that which had
befallen me from the kite; but Sa'di misdoubted me and mistrusted
me and cried, "O Hasan, thou speakest but in jest and dost
dissemble with us. 'Tis hard to believe the tale thou tellest.
Kites are not wont to fly off with turbands, but only with such
things as they can eat. Thou wouldst but outwit us and thou art
of those who, when some good fortune cometh to them unforeseen,
do straightways abandon their work or their business and, wasting
all in pleasuring, become once more poor and thereafter must
nilly-willy eke out a living as best they may. This methinks be
especially the case with thee; thou hast squandered our gift with
all speed and now art needy as before." "O good my lord, not so,"
cried I; "this blame and these hard words ill befit my deserts,
for I am wholly innocent of all thou imputest to me. The strange
mishap whereof I told thee is the truest of truths; and to prove
that it is no lie all the town-folk have knowledge thereof and in
good sooth I do not play thee false. ÊTis certain that kites do
not fly away with turbands; but such mishaps, wondrous and
marvellous, may betide mankind especially the miserable of lot."
Sa'd also espoused my cause and said, "O Sa'di, ofttimes have we
seen and heard how kites carry off many things besides
comestibles; and his tale may not be wholly contrary to reason."
Then Sa'di pulled out from his pocket a purseful of gold pieces
and counted out and gave me another two hundred, saying, "O
Hasan, take these Ashrafis, but see that thou keep them with all
heed and diligence and beware, and again I say beware, lest thou
lose them like the others. Expend them in such fashion that thou
mayst reap full benefit therefrom and prosper even as thou seest
thy neighbours prosper." I took the money from him and poured out
thanks and blessings upon his head, and when they went their ways
I returned to my rope-walk and thence in due time straight home.
My wife and children were abroad, so again I took ten gold coins
of the two hundred and securely tied up the remainder in a piece
of cloth then I looked around to find a spot wherein to hide my
hoard so that my wife and youngsters might not come to know of it
and lay hands thereon. Presently, I espied a large earthen jar
full of bran standing in a corner of the room, so herein I hid
the rag with the gold coins and I misdeemed that it was safely
concealed from wife and wees.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Eighteenth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan
al-Habbal thus continued his story:--When I had put the Ashrafis
a bottom the jar of bran, my wife came in and I said naught to
her of the two friends or of aught had happened, but I set out
for the Bazar to buy hemp. Now as soon as I had left the house
there came, by evil fate impelled, a man who sold Tafl, or
fuller's earth,[FN#275] wherewith the poorer sort of women are
wont to wash their hair. My wife would fain have bought some but
not a single Kauri[FN#276] or almond had she. Then she took
thought and said to herself, "This jar of bran is here to no
purpose, I will exchange it for the clay," and he also, the Tafl
seller, agreed to this proposal and went off taking the jar of
bran as the price of the washing earth. Anon I came back with a
load of hemp upon my head and other five on the heads of as many
porters who accompanied me; and I helped them off with their
burthens and, after storing the stuff in a room, I paid and
dismissed them. Then I stretched me out upon the floor to take
rest awhile and looking towards the corner where once stood the
jar of bran I found it gone. Words fail me, O Prince of True
Believers, to describe the tumult of feelings which filled my
heart at the sight. I sprang up with all speed and calling to my
wife enquired of her whither the jar had been carried; and she
replied that she had exchanged its contents for a trifle of
washing clay. Then cried I aloud, "O wretched, O miserable, what
hast thou done? thou hast ruined me and thy children; thou hast
given away great wealth to that clay selling fellow!" Then I told
her all that had betided me, of the coming of the two friends and
how I had hidden the hundred and ninety Ashrafis within the
bran-jar; and she, on hearing this wept sore and beat her breast
and tore her hair crying, "Where now shall I find that clay-
seller? The wight is a stranger, never before did I see him about
this quarter or this street. Then turning to me she continued,
"Herein thou hast dealt right foolishly, for that thou didst not
tell me of the matter, nor didst place any trust in me; otherwise
this mishap would never have happened to us; no, never." And she
lamented with loud lamentation and bitter whereat I said, "Make
not such hubbub nor display such trouble, lest our neighbours
overhear thee, and learning of our mishap peradventure laugh at
us and call us fools. It behoveth us to rest content with the
will of Almighty Allah." However the ten Ashrafis which I had
taken from the two hundred sufficed me to carry on my trade and
to live with more of ease for some short while; but I ever
grieved and I marvelled much anent what could be said to Sa'di
when he should come again; for inasmuch as he believed me not the
first time I was assured in my mind that now he would denounce me
aloud as a cheat and a liar. One day of the days the twain, to
wit, Sa'd and Sa'di, came strolling towards my house conversing
and, as usual, arguing about me and my case; and I seeing them
from afar left off working that I might hide myself, as I could
not for very shame come forth and accost them. Seeing this and
not guessing the reason they entered my dwelling and, saluting me
with the salam, asked me how I had fared. I durst not raise my
eyes so abashed and mortified was I, and with bended brow
returned the greeting; when they, noting my sorry plight,
marvelled saying, "Is all well with thee? Why art thou in this
state? Hast thou not made good use of the gold or hast thou
wasted thy wealth in lewd living?" Quoth I, "O my lords, the
story of the Ashrafis is none other than this. When ye departed
from me I went home with the purse of money and, finding no one
was in the house for all had gone out somewhere, I took out
therefrom ten gold pieces. Then I put the rest together with the
purse within a large earthen jar filled full of bran which had
long stood in one corner of the room, so might the matter be kept
privy from my wife and children. But whilst I was in the market
buying me some hemp, my wife returned home; and at that moment
there came in to her a man which sold fuller's earth for washing
hair. She had need thereof withal naught to pay with; so she went
out to him and said, 'I am clean without coin, but I have a
quantity of bran; say me, wilt thou have that in change for thy
clay?' The man agreed and accordingly my wife took the earth of
him, and gave him in exchange the jarful of bran which he carried
away with him and ganged his gait. An ye ask, 'Wherefore didst
thou not confide the matter to thy spouse and tell her that thou
hadst put the money in the jar?' I on my side answer, that ye
gave me strict injunctions to keep the money this time with the
utmost heed and caution. Methought that stead was the safest
wherein to store the gold and I was loath to trust my wife lest
haply she take some coin therefrom and expend it upon her
household. O my lords, I am certified of your goodness and
graciousness, but poverty and penury are writ in my Book of Fate;
how then can I aspire to possessions and prosperity? Withal,
never while I breathe the breath of life, shall I be forgetful of
this your generous favour." Quoth Sa'di, "Meseemeth I have
disbursed four hundred Ashrafis to no purpose in giving them to
thee; yet the intent wherewith they were given was that thou
shouldst benefit thereby, not that I claim thy praise and
thanksgiving." So they twain compassionated and condoled with me
in my misfortune; and presently Sa'd, an upright man and one who
had acquaintance with me since many a year, produced a leaden
coin[FN#277] which he had picked up from the path and was still
carrying in his pocket; and, after shewing it to Sa'di, said to
me, "Seest thou this bit of lead? Take it and by favour of Fate
thou shalt find out what blessings it will bring to thee." Sa'di
on espying it laughed aloud and made jest of the matter and
flouting said, "What advantage will there be to Hasan from this
mite of lead and in what way shall he use it?" Sa'd handing me
the leaden coin retorted in reply, "Give no heed to whatso Sa'di
may say, but keep this by thee. Let him laugh an he please. One
day haply shall come to pass, Inshallah--an it be the will of
Almighty Allah--that thou shalt by means thereof become a wealthy
man and a magnifico." I took the bit of lead and put it in my
pocket, and the twain bade me farewell and went their way.--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Nineteenth Night.

Then said she--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan al-
Habbal thus continued his story:--As soon as Sa'd and Sa'di had
departed, I went on rope-twisting until night came and when
doffing my dress to go to bed the bit of lead which Sa'd had
given me fell out of my pocket; so I picked it up and set it
carelessly in a small niche in the wall.[FN#278] Now that very
night so it happened that a fisherman, one of my neighbours,
stood in need of a small coin[FN#279] wherewith to buy some twine
for mending his drag-net, as he was wont to do during the dark
hours, in order that he might catch the fish ere dawn of day and
selling his quarry, buy victuals for himself and his household.
So, as he was accustomed to rise while yet somewhat of night
remained, he bade his wife go round about to all the neighbours
and borrow a copper that he might buy the twine required; and the
woman went everywhere, from house to house, but nowhere could she
get loan of a farthing, and at last she came home weary and
disappointed. Quoth the fisherman to her, "Hast thou been to
Hasan al-Habbal?" and quoth she, "Nay, I have not tried at his
place. It is the furthest of all the neighbours' houses and
fanciest thou, even had I gone there, I could thence have brought
back aught?" "Off with thee, O laziest of hussies and good for
nothing of baggages," cried the fisherman, "away with thee this
instant; perchance he hath a copper to lend us." Accordingly the
woman, grumbling and muttering, fared forth and coming to my
dwelling knocked at the door, saying, "O Hasan al-Habbal, my
husband is in sore need of a pice wherewith to buy some twine for
mending his nets." Minding me of the coin which Sa'd had given me
and where it had been put away, I shouted out to her, "Have
patience, my spouse will go forth to thee and give thee what thou
needest." My wife, hearing all this hubbub, woke from sleep, and
I told her where to find the bit of money, whereupon she fetched
it and gave it to the woman, who joyed with exceeding joy, and
said, "Thou and thy husband have shown great kindness to my man,
wherefore I promise thee that whatsoever fish he may chance to
catch at the first throw of the net shall be thine; and I am
assured that my goodman, when he shall hear of this my promise,
will consent thereto." Accordingly when the woman took the money
to her husband and told him of what pledge she had given, he was
right willing, and said to her, "Thou hast done well and wisely
in that thou madest this covenant." Then having bought some twine
and mended all the nets he rose before dawn and hastened
riverwards to catch fish according to his custom. But when he
cast the net into the stream for the first throw and haled it in,
he found that it contained but one fish and that a full
span[FN#280] or so in thickness, which he placed apart as my
portion. Then he threw the net again and again and at each cast
he caught many fishes both small and great, but none reached in
size that he first had netted. As soon as he returned home the
fisherman came at once to me and brought the fish he had netted
in my name, and said, O our neighbour, my wife promised over
night that thou shouldst have whatever fishes should come to
ground at the first net throw; and this fish is the only one I
caught. Here it is, prithee take it as a thanks offering for the
kindness of last night, and as fulfilment of the promise. If
Allah Almighty had vouchsafed to me of fish a seine-full, all had
been thine but 'tis thy fate that only this one was landed at the
first cast." Said I, "The mite I gave thee yesternight was not of
such value that I should look for somewhat in return;" and
refused to accept it. But after much "say and said" he would not
take back the fish, and he insisted that it was mine: wherefore I
agreed to keep it and gave it to my wife, saying, "O woman, this
fish is a return for the mite I gave last night to the fisherman
our neighbour. Sa'd hath declared that by means of that coin I
shall attain to much riches and abundant opulence." Then I
recounted to my wife how my two friends had visited me and what
they said and did, and all concerning the leaden coin which Sa'd
had given to me. She wondered at seeing but a single fish and
said, "How shall I cook it? Meseemeth 'twere best to cut it up
and broil it for the children, especially as we have naught of
spices and condiments wherewith to dress it otherwise." Then, as
she sliced and cleansed the fish she found within its belly a
large diamond which she supposed to be a bit of glass or crystal;
for she oft had heard tell of diamonds[FN#281] but never with her
own eyes had she beheld one. So she gave it to the youngest of
the children for a plaything and when the others saw it, by
reason of its brightness and brilliancy all desired to have it
and each kept it in turn awhile; moreover when night came and the
lamp was lighted they crowded round the stone and gazed upon its
beauty, and screamed and shouted with delight.[FN#282] When my
wife had spread the table we sat down to supper and the eldest
boy set the diamond upon the tray, and as soon as we all had
finished eating, the children fought and scrambled as before for
it. At first I paid no heed to their noise and hubbub, but when
it waxed exceeding loud and irksome I asked my eldest lad the
cause why they quarrelled and made such turmoil. Quoth he, "The
trouble and dispute are about a piece of glass which giveth forth
a light as bright as the lamp." Whereat I told him to produce it
and marvelled greatly to see its sparkling water, and enquired of
my wife whence she had gotten the piece of crystal. Quoth she,
"This I found within the belly of the fish as I was gutting it."
Still I did not suppose it to be aught but glass. Presently I
bade my wife hide the lamp behind the hearth.--And as the morn
began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Twentieth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan al-
Habbal thus continued his story:--And when my wife had hidden the
lamp from view, such was the brightness of the diamond that we
could see right well without other light; wherefore I placed it
upon the hearth[FN#283] that we might work by it, and said within
myself, "The coin that Sa'd left with me hath produced this
benefit that we no longer stand in need of a lamp: at least it
saveth us oil." When the youngsters saw me put out the lamp and
use the glass in its stead they jumped and danced for joy, and
screamed and shouted with glee so that all the neighbours round
about could hear them when I chid them and sent them to bed; we
also went to rest and right soon fell asleep. Next day I woke
betimes and went on with my work and thought not of the piece of
glass. Now there dwelt hard by us a wealthy Jew, a jeweller who
bought and sold all kinds of precious stones; and, as he and his
wife essayed to sleep that night, by reason of the noise and
clamour of the children they were disturbed for many hours and
slumber visited not their eyes. And when morn appeared, the
jeweller's wife came to our house to make complaint both for
herself and her husband anent the hubbub and shouting. Ere she
could say a word of blame my wife, guessing the intent wherewith
she came, addressed her saying, "O Rah›l,[FN#284] I fear me that
my children pestered thee last night with their laughing and
crying. I crave thine indulgence in this matter; well thou must
wot how children now cry now laugh at trifles. Come in and see
the cause of all their excitement wherefor thou wouldst justly
call me to account." She did accordingly and saw the bit of glass
about which the youngsters had made such din and uproar; and when
she, who had long experience of all manner precious stones,
beheld the diamond she was filled with wonderment. My wife then
told her how she had found it in the fish's belly, whereupon
quoth the Jewess, "This bit of glass is more excellent than all
other sorts of glass. I too have such an one as this which I am
wont to wear sometimes; and wouldst thou sell it I will buy this
thing of thee." Hearing her words the children began to cry and
said, "O mother dear, an thou wilt not sell it we promise
henceforth to make no noise." Understanding that they would by no
means part with it, the women held their peace and presently the
Jewess fared forth, but ere she took her leave she whispered my
wife, "See that thou tell the matter to none; and, if thou have a
mind to sell it at once send me word." Now the Jew was sitting in
his shop when his wife went to him and told him of the bit of
glass. Quoth he, "Go straightway back and offer a price for it,
saying that 'tis for me. Begin with some small bidding, then
raise the sum until thou get it." The Jewess thereupon returned
to my house and offered twenty Ashrafis, which my wife deemed a
large sum to give for such a trifle; however, she would not close
the bargain. At that moment I happened to leave my work and,
coming home to our noon meal, saw the two women talking on the
threshold; and my wife stopped me, saying, "This neighbour
biddeth twenty Ashrafis to price for the piece of glass, but I
have as yet given her no reply. What sayest thou?" Then I
bethought me of what Sa'd had told me; to wit, that much wealth
would come to me by virtue of his leaden coin. The Jewess seeing
how I hesitated bethought her that I would not consent to the
price; so quoth she, "O neighbour, an thou wilt not agree to part
with the bit of glass for twenty pieces of gold, I will e'en give
thee fifty." Hereat I reflected that whereas the Jewess raised
her offer so readily from twenty golden pieces to fifty, this
glass must surely be of great value; so I kept silence and
answered her not a word. Then noting that I still held my peace
she cried, "Take then one hundred: this be its full value; nay I
know not in very deed if my husband will consent to so high a
price." Said I in reply, "O my good woman, why talk so foolishly?
I will not sell it for aught less than an hundred
thousand[FN#285] gold coins; and thou mayest take it at that
price but only because thou art neighbour to us." The Jewess
raised her offer coin by coin to fifty thousand Ashrafis and
said, "I pray thee wait till morning and sell it not till then,
so that my man may come round and see it." "Right willingly,"
quoth I; "by all manner of means let thy husband drop in and
inspect it."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Twenty-first Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan al-
Habbal thus continued his story.-- Next day the Jew came to my
house and I drew forth and showed to him the diamond which shone
and glittered in my palm with light as bright as any lamp's.
Presently, assured that all which his wife had told him of its
water and lustre was strictly true, he took it in hand and,
examining it and turning it about, marvelled with mighty marvel
at its beauty saying, "My wife made offer of fifty thousand gold
pieces: see now I will give thee yet another twenty thousand."
Said I, "Thy wife hath surely named to thee what sum I fixed to
wit, one hundred thousand Ashrafis and naught less: I shall not
abate one jot or tittle of this price." The Jew did all he could
to buy it for a lesser sum; but I answered only, "It mattereth
naught; an thou desire not to come to my terms I must needs sell
it to some other jeweller." At length he consented and weighed me
out two thousand gold pieces by way of earnest-money, saying,
"To-morrow I will bring the amount of my offer and carry off my
diamond." To this I gave assent and so, on the day following, he
came to me and weighed out the full sum of one hundred thousand
Ashrafis, which he had raised amongst his friends and partners in
business. Then I gave him the diamond which had brought me such
exceeding wealth, and offered thanks to him and praises unto
Almighty Allah for this great good Fortune gotten unawares, and
much I hoped soon to see my two friends, Sa'd and Sa'di, and to
thank them likewise. So first I set my house in order and gave
spending-money to my wife for home necessaries and for clothing
herself and children; moreover, I also bought me a fine mansion
and furnished it with the best. Then said I to my wife, who
thought of nothing save rich clothes and high diet and a life of
ease and enjoyment, "It behoveth us not to give up this our
craft: we must needs put by some coin and carry on the business."
Accordingly, I went to all the rope-makers of the city and buying
with much money several manufactories put them to work, and over
each establishment I set an overseer, an intelligent man and a
trustworthy, so that there is not now throughout Baghdad-city a
single ward or quarter that hath not walks and workshops of mine
for rope making. Nay, further, I have in each town and every
district of Al-Irak warehouses, all under charge of honest
supervisors; and thus it is that I have amassed such a muchel of
wealth. Lastly, for my own especial place of business I bought
another house, a ruined place with a sufficiency of land
adjoining; and, pulling down the old shell, I edified in lieu
thereof the new and spacious edifice which thy Highness hath
deigned yesterday to look upon. Here all my workmen are lodged
and here also are kept my office-books and accounts; and besides
my warehouse it containeth apartments fitted with furniture in
simple style all sufficient for myself and my family. After some
time I quitted my old home, wherein Sa'd and Sa'di had seen me
working, and went and lived in the new mansion and not long after
this removal my two friends and benefactors bethought them that
they would come and visit me They marvelled much when, entering
my old workshop, they found me not, and they asked the
neighbours, "Where dwelleth such and such a rope-maker? Is he
alive or dead?" Quoth the folk "He now is a rich merchant; and
men no longer call him simply 'Hasan,' but entitle him 'Master
Hasan the Rope-maker.' He hath built him a splendid building and
he dwelleth in such and such a quarter." Whereupon the two
familiars set forth in search of me; and they rejoiced at the
good report; albeit Sa'di would by no means be convinced that all
my wealth had sprung (as Sa'd contended) from its root, that
small leaden coin. Presently, conning the matter over in his mind
he said to his comrade, "It delighteth me much to hear of all
this good fortune which hath betided Hasan, despite that he twice
deceived me and took from me four hundred gold pieces, whereby he
hath gotten to himself these riches; for it is absurd to think
that it hath come from the leaden coin thou gavest him. Withal I
do forgive him and owe him no grudge." Replied the other, "Thou
art mistaken. I know Hasan of old to be a good man and true: he
would not delude thee and what he told us is simple sooth. I am
persuaded in my mind that he hath won all his wealth and opulence
by the leaden coin: however we shall hear anon what he may have
to say." Conversing thus they came into the street wherein I now
dwell and, seeing a large and magnificent mansion and a new made,
they guessed it was mine. So they knocked and, on the porter
opening, Sa'di marvelled to see such grandeur and so many folk
sitting within, and feared lest haply they had unwittingly
entered the house of some Emir. Then plucking courage he enquired
of the porter, "Is this the dwelling place of Khwajah Hasan al-
Habbal?"--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazed held her peace
till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Twenty-second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan
al-Habbal continued thus his story:--The porter made reply, "This
is verily the house of Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal; he is within and
he sitteth in his office. I pray thee enter and one of the slaves
will make known thy coming to him." Hereupon the two friends
walked in, and as soon as I saw them I recognised them, and
rising up to them I ran and kissed the hems of their garments.
They would fain have fallen on my neck and embraced me, but with
meekness of mind I would not suffer them so to do; and presently
I led them into a large and spacious saloon, and bade them sit
upon the highmost seats of honour. They would have constrained me
to take the best place, but I exclaimed "O my lords, I am on no
wise better than the poor rope-maker Hasan, who not unmindful of
your worth and goodness ever prayeth for your welfare, and who
deserveth not to sit in higher stead than you." Then they took
seat and I opposite them, when quoth Sa'di, "My heart rejoiceth
with exceeding joy to see thee in this condition, for that Allah
hath given thee all even as thou wishedst. I doubt not thou has
gotten all this abundance and opulence by means of the four
hundred gold pieces which I gave to thee; but say me truly
wherefore didst thou twice deceive me and bespeak me falsely?"
Sa'd listened to these words with silent indignation, and ere I
could make reply he broke out saying, "O Sa'di, how often have I
assured thee that all which Hasan said aforetime anent the losing
of the Ashrafis is very sooth and no leasing?" Then they began to
dispute each with other; when I, recovering from my surprise,
exclaimed, "O my lords, of what avail is this contention? Be not
at variance, I beseech you, on my account. All that had befallen
me I made known to you; and, whether ye believe my words or ye
believe them not, it mattereth but little. Now hearken to the
whole truth of my tale." Then I made known to them the story of
the piece of lead which I had given to the fisherman and of the
diamond found in the fish's belly; brief, I told them every whit
even as I have now related to thy Highness. On hearing all my
adventure Sa'di said, "O Khwajah Hasan, it seemeth to me passing
strange that so great a diamond should be found in the belly of a
fish; and I deem it a thing impossible that a kite should fly off
with thy turband, or that thy wife should give away the jar of
bran in exchange for fuller's earth. Thou sayest the tale is
true, still can I not give credit to thy words, for I know full
well that the four hundred gold pieces have gotten thee all this
wealth." But when they twain rose up to take their 