leave, I also
arose and said, "O my lords, ye have shown favour to me in that
ye have thus deigned visit me in my poor home. I beseech you now
to taste of my food and to tarry here this night under your
servant's roof; as to-morrow I would fain take you by the way of
the river to a country house which I have lately bought." Hereto
they consented with some objections; and I, after giving orders
for the evening meal, showed them about the house and displayed
the furniture and entertained them with pleasing words and
pleasant converse, till a slave came and announced that supper
was served. So I led them to the saloon wherein were ranged the
trays loaded with many kinds of meats; on all sides stood
camphorated wax candles,[FN#286] and before the table were
gathered musicians singing and playing on various instruments of
mirth and merriment, whilst in the upper part of the saloon men
and women were dancing and making much diversion. When we had
supped we went to bed, and rising early we prayed the dawn-
prayer, and presently embarked on a large and well-appointed
boat, and the rowers rowing with a flowing tide soon landed us at
my country seat. Then we strolled in a body about the grounds and
entered the house, when I showed them our new buildings and
displayed to them all that appertained thereto; and hereat they
marvelled with great marvel. Thence we repaired to the garden and
saw, planted in rows along the walks, fruit-trees of all kinds
with ripe fruit bowed down, and watered with water from the river
by means of brick-work channels. All round were flowering shrubs
whose perfume gladdened the Zephyr; here and there fountains and
jets of water shot high in air; and sweet-voiced birds made
melody amid the leafy branches hymning the One, the Eternal; in
short, the sights and scents on every side filled the soul with
joy and gladness. My two friends walked about in joyance and
delight, and thanked me again and again for bringing them to so
lovely a site and said, "Almighty Allah prosper thee in house and
garth." At last I led them to the foot of a tall tree near to one
of the garden walls and shewed them a little summer-house wherein
I was wont to take rest and refreshment; and the room was
furnished with cushions and divans and pillows purfled with
virgin gold.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

       The end of The Six Hundred and Twenty-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Hasan al-
Habbal thus pursued his tale:--Now so it happened that, as we sat
at rest within that summer house, two sons of mine, whom I had
sent together with their governor to my country place for change
of water and air,[FN#287] were roaming about the garden seeking
birds' nests. Presently they came across a big one upon the top
most boughs and tried to swarm up the trunk and carry it off, but
by reason of their lack of strength and little practice they
durst not venture so high; whereupon they bade a slave boy who
ever attended on them, climb the tree. He did their bidding, but
when looking into the nest he was amazed with exceeding amazement
to see it mainly made of an old turband. So he brought down the
stuff and handed it to the lads. My eldest son took it from his
hands and carried it to the arbour for me to see, and set it at
my feet saying in high glee, "O my father, look here; this nest
is made of cloth." Sa'd and Sa'di wondered with all wonderment at
the sight and the marvel grew the greater when I, after
considering it closely, recognised it for the very turband
whereon the kite had swooped and which had been borne off by the
bird. Then quoth I to my two friends "Examine well this turband
and certify yourselves that it is the selfsame one worn upon my
head when first ye honoured me with your presence." Quoth Sa'd,
"I know it not," and quoth Sa'di, "An thou find within it the
hundred and ninety gold pieces, then shalt thou be assured that
is thy turband in very sooth." I said, "O my lord, this is, well
I wot, that very turband." And as I held it in my hand, I found
it heavy of weight, and opening out the folds felt somewhat tied
up in one of the corners of the cloth;[FN#288] so I unrolled the
swathes when lo and behold! I came upon the purse of gold pieces.
Hereat, shewing it to Sa'di, I cried, "Canst thou not recognise
this purse?" and he replied, "'Tis in truth the very purse of
Ashrafis which I gave thee when first we met." Then I opened the
mouth and, pouring out the gold in one heap upon the carpet, bade
him count his money; and he turned it over coin by coin and made
the sum there of one hundred and ninety Ashrafis. Hereat waxing
sore ashamed and confounded, he exclaimed, "Now do I believe thy
words: nevertheless must thou admit that thou hast earned one
half of this thy prodigious wealth with the two hundred gold
pieces I gave thee after our second visit, and the other half by
means of the mite thou gottest from Sa'd." To this I made no
answer, but my friends ceased not to dispute upon the matter. We
then sat down to meat and drink, and when we had eaten our
sufficiency, I and my two friends went to sleep in the cool
arbour; after which when the sun was well nigh set we mounted and
rode off to Baghdad leaving the servants to follow. However,
arrived at the city we found all the shops shut and nowhere could
we get grain and forage for the horses, and I sent off two slave
boys who had run alongside of us to search for provender. One of
them found a jar of bran in the shop of a corn-dealer and paying
for the provision brought it, together with the jar, under
promise that on the morrow he would carry back the vessel. Then
he began to take out the bran by handfuls in the dark and to set
it before the horses.˚And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious king, that Hasan al-
Habbal thus continued his story:--So as the slave boy took out
the bran by handfuls and set it before the horses, suddenly his
hand came upon a piece of cloth wherein was somewhat heavy. He
brought it to me even as he found it and said, "See, is not this
cloth the very one of whose loss thou hast ofttimes spoken to
us?" I took it and wondering with great wonder knew it was the
self same piece of stuff wherein I had tied up the hundred and
four-score and ten Ashrafis before hiding them in the jar of
bran. Then said I to my friends, "O my lords, it hath pleased
Almighty Allah, ere we parted, I and you, to bear me witness of
my words and to stablish that I told you naught save whatso was
very sooth." And I resumed, addressing Sa'di, "See here the other
sum of money, that is, the hundred and ninety Ashrafis which thou
gayest me and which I tied up in this very piece of cloth I now
recognise." Then I sent for the earthen jar that they might see
it, and also bade carry it to my wife that she also might bear
witness, an it be or be not the very bran-jar which she gave in
exchange for fuller's earth. Anon she sent us word and said, "Yea
verily I know it well. 'Tis the same jar which I had filled with
bran." Accordingly Sa'di owned that he was wrong and said to
S'ad, "Now I know that thou speakest truth, and am convinced that
wealth cometh not by wealth; but only by the grace of Almighty
Allah doth a poor man become a rich man." And he begged pardon
for his mistrust and unbelief. We accepted his excuses whereupon
we retired to rest and early on the morrow my two friends bade me
adieu and journeyed home wards with full persuasion that I had
done no wrong and had not squandered the moneys they had given
me.--Now when the Caliph Harun al-Rashid had heard the story of
Khwajah Hasan to the end, he said, "I have known thee of old by
fair report of thee from the folk who, one and all, declare that
thou art a good man and true. Moreover the self same diamond
whereby thou hast attained to so great riches is now in my
treasury; so I would fain send for Sa'di forthright that he may
see it with his own eyes, and weet for certain that not by means
of money do men become or rich or poor." The Prince of True
Believers said moreover to Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal, "Go now and
tell thy tale to my treasurer that he may take it down in writing
for an everlasting memorial, and place the writ in the treasury
together with the diamond." Then the Caliph with a nod dismissed
Khawajah Hasan; and Sidi Nu'uman and Baba Abdullah also kissed
the foot of the throne and departed. So when Queen Shahrazad had
made an end of relating this history she was about to begin the
story of 'All Baba and the Forty Thieves, but King Shahryar
prevented her, saying, "O Shahrazad I am well pleased with this
thy tale, but now the dawn appeareth and the chanticleer of morn
doth sound his shrill clarion. This day also I spare thy life, to
the intent that I may listen at my ease to this new history of
thine at the end of the coming night." Hereupon the three took
their rest until the fittest time drew near.--And as the morning
morrowed Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night.

With the dawn Dunyazad awoke Queen Shahrazad from slumber sweet
and said, "Arise, O my sister, but alas! 'tis a bitter thing to
stand in awe of coming doom." Replied Shahrazad, "O dear my
sister, be not thou downhearted: if life's span be spent naught
can avert the sharp edged sword. Yet place thy trust in Allah
Almighty and put far from thee all such anxious thoughts: my
tales are tokens of life prolonged." Whereupon Queen Shahrazad
began to tell in these words the story of






            ALI BABA AND THE FORTY THIEVES.[FN#289]



In days of yore and in times and tides long gone before there
dwelt in a certain town of Persia two brothers one named Kﬂsim
and the other ÊAl› Bﬂbﬂ, who at their father's demise had divided
the little wealth he had left to them with equitable division,
and had lost no time in wasting and spending it all. The elder,
however, presently took to himself a wife, the daughter of an
opulent merchant; so that when his father-in-law fared to the
mercy of Almighty Allah, he became owner of a large shop filled
with rare goods and costly wares and of a storehouse stocked with
precious stuffs; likewise of much gold that was buried in the
ground. Thus was he known throughout the city as a substantial
man. But the woman whom Ali Baba had married was poor and needy;
they lived, therefore, in a mean hovel and Ali Baba eked out a
scanty livelihood by the sale of fuel which he daily collected in
the jungle[FN#290] and carried about the town to the Bazar upon
his three asses. Now it chanced one day that Ali Baba had cut
dead branches and dry fuel sufficient for his need, and had
placed the load upon his beasts when suddenly he espied a
dust-cloud spireing high in air to his right and moving rapidly
towards him; and when he closely considered it he descried a
troop of horsemen riding on amain and about to reach him. At this
sight he was sore alarmed, and fearing lest perchance they were a
band of bandits who would slay him and drive off his donkeys, in
his affright he began to run; but forasmuch as they were near
hand and he could not escape from out the forest, he drove his
animals laden with the fuel into a bye-way of the bushes and
swarmed up a thick trunk of a huge tree to hide himself therein;
and he sat upon a branch whence he could descry everything
beneath him whilst none below could catch a glimpse of him above;
and that tree grew close beside a rock which towered high above
head. The horsemen, young, active, and doughty riders, came close
up to the rock-face and all dismounted; whereat Ali Baba took
good note of them and soon he was fully persuaded by their mien
and demeanour that they were a troop of highwaymen who, having
fallen upon a caravan had despoiled it and carried off the spoil
and brought their booty to this place with intent of concealing
it safely in some cache. Moreover he observed that they were
forty in number.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious king, that Ali Baba
saw the robbers, as soon as they came under the tree, each
unbridle his horse and hobble it; then all took off their
saddle-bags which proved to be full of gold and silver. The man
who seemed to be the captain presently pushed forwards, load on
shoulder, through thorns and thickets, till he came up to a
certain spot where he uttered these strange words, "Open, O
Simsim!"[FN#291] and forthwith appeared a wide doorway in the
face of the rock. The robbers went in and last of all their Chief
and then the portal shut of itself. Long while they stayed within
the cave whilst Ali Baba was constrained to abide perched upon
the tree, re fleeting that if he came down peradventure the band
might issue forth that very moment and seize him and slay him. At
last he had determined to mount one of the horses and driving on
his asses to return townwards, when suddenly the portal dew open.
The robber-chief was first to issue forth; then, standing at the
entrance, he saw and counted his men as they came out, and lastly
he spake the magical words, "Shut, O Simsim!" whereat the door
closed of itself. When all had passed muster and review, each
slung on his saddle-bags and bridled his own horse and as soon as
ready they rode off, led by the leader, in the direction whence
they came. Ali Baba remained still perched on the tree and
watched their departure; nor would he descend until what time
they were clean gone out of sight, lest perchance one of them
return and look around and descry him. Then he thought within
himself, "I too will try the virtue of those magical words and
see if at my bidding the door will open and close." So he called
out aloud, "Open, O Simsim!" And no sooner had he spoken than
straightway the portal flew open and he entered within. He saw a
large cavern and a vaulted, in height equalling the stature of a
full-grown man and it was hewn in the live stone and lighted up
with light that came through air-holes and bullseyes in the upper
surface of the rock which formed the roof. He had expected to
find naught save outer gloom in this robbers' den, and he was
surprised to see the whole room filled with bales of all manner
stuffs, and heaped up from sole to ceiling with camel-loads of
silks and brocades and embroidered cloths and mounds on mounds of
vari-coloured carpetings; besides which he espied coins golden
and silvern without measure or account, some piled upon the
ground and others bound in leathern bags and sacks. Seeing these
goods and moneys in such abundance, Ali Baba determined in his
mind that not during a few years only but for many generations
thieves must have stored their gains and spoils in this place.
When he stood within the cave, its door had closed upon him, yet
he was not dismayed since he had kept in memory the magical
words; and he took no heed of the precious stuffs around him, but
applied himself only and wholly to the sacks of Ashrafis. Of
these he carried out as many as he judged sufficient burthen for
the beasts; then he loaded them upon his animals, and covered
this plunder with sticks and fuel, so none might discern the
bags, but might think that he was carrying home his usual ware.
Lastly he called out, "Shut, O Simsim!" and forthwith the door
closed, for the spell so wrought that whensoever any entered the
cave, its portal shut of itself behind him; and, as he issued
therefrom, the same would neither open nor close again till he
had pronounced the words, "Shut, O Simsim!" Presently, having
laden his asses Ali Baba urged them before him with all speed to
the city and reaching home he drove them into the yard; and,
shutting close the outer door, took down first the sticks and
after the bags of gold which he carried in to his wife. She felt
them and finding them full of coin suspected that Ali Baba had
been robbing and fell to berating and blaming him for that he
should do so ill a thing.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that quoth Ali
Baba to his wife: "Indeed I am no robber and rather do thou
rejoice with me at our good fortune." Hereupon he told her of his
adventure and began to pour the gold from the bags in heaps
before her, and her sight was dazzled by the sheen and her heart
delighted at his recital and adventures. Then she began counting
the gold, whereat quoth Ali Baba, "O silly woman how long wilt
thou continue turning over the coin? now let me dig a hole
wherein to hide this treasure that none may know its secret."
Quoth she, "Right is thy rede! still would I weigh the moneys and
have some inkling of their amount;" and he replied, "As thou
pleasest", but see thou tell no man." So she went of f in haste
to Kasim's home to borrow weights and scales wherewith she might
balance the Ashrafis and make some reckoning of their value; and
when she could not find Kasim she said to his wife, "Lend me, I
pray thee, thy scales for a moment." Replied her
sister-in-law,[FN#292] "Hast thou need of the bigger balance or
the smaller?" and the other rejoined, "I need not the large
scales, give me the little;" and her sister-in-law cried, "Stay
here a moment whilst I look about and find thy want." With this
pretext Kasim's wife went aside and secretly smeared wax and suet
over the pan of the balance, that she might know what thing it
was Ali Baba's wife would weigh, for she made sure that whatso it
be some bit thereof would stick to the wax and fat. So the woman
took this opportunity to satisfy her curiosity, and Ali Baba's
wife suspecting naught thereof carried home the scales and began
to weigh the gold, whilst Ali Baba ceased not digging; and, when
the money was weighed, they twain stowed it into the hole which
they carefully filled up with earth. Then the good wife took back
the scales to her kinswoman, all unknowing that an Ashrafi had
adhered to the cup of the scales; but when Kasim's wife espied
the gold coin she fumed with envy and wrath saying to herself,
"So ho ! they borrowed my balance to weigh out Ashrafis?" and she
marvelled greatly whence so poor a man as Ali Baba had gotten
such store of wealth that he should be obliged to weigh it with a
pair of scales. Now after long pondering the matter, when her
husband returned home at eventide, she said to him, "O man, thou
deemest thyself a wight of wealth and substance, but lo, thy
brother Ali Baba is an Emir by the side of thee and richer far
than thou art. He hath such heaps of gold that he must needs
weigh his moneys with scales, whilst thou, forsooth, art
satisfied to count thy coin." "Whence knowest thou this?" asked
Kasim, and in answer his wife related all anent the pair of
scales and how she found an Ashrafi stuck to them, and shewed him
the gold coin which bore the mark and superscription of some
ancient king. No sleep had Kasim all that night by reason of his
envy and jealousy and covetise; and next morning he rose betimes
and going to Ali Baba said, "O my brother, to all appearance thou
art poor and needy; but in effect thou hast a store of wealth so
abundant that perforce thou must weigh thy gold with scales."
Quoth Ali Baba, "What is this thou sayest? I understand thee not;
make clear thy purport;" and quoth Kasim with ready rage, "Feign
not that thou art ignorant of what I say and think not to deceive
me." Then showing him the Ashrafi he cried, "Thousands of gold
coins such as these thou hast put by; and meanwhile my wife found
this one stuck to the cup of the scales." Then Ali Baba
understood how both Kasim and his wife knew that he had store of
Ashrafis, and said in his mind that it would not avail him to
keep the matter hidden, but would rather cause ill-will and
mischief; and thus he was induced to tell his brother every whit
concerning the bandits[FN#293] and also of the treasure trove in
the cave. When he had heard the story, Kasim exclaimed, ÊI would
fain learn of thee the certainty of the place where thou foundest
the moneys; also the magical words whereby the door opened and
closed; and I forewarn thee an thou tell me not the whole truth,
I will give notice of those Ashrafis to the Wali;[FN#294] then
shalt thou forfeit all thy wealth and be disgraced and thrown
into gaol." Thereupon Ali Baba told him his tale not forgetting
the magical words; and Kasim who kept careful heed of all these
matters next day set out, driving ten mules he had hired, and
readily found the place which Ali Baba had described to him. And
when he came to the afore said rock and to the tree whereon Ali
Baba had hidden himself and he had made sure of the door he cried
in great joy, "Open, O Simsim!" The portal yawned wide at once
and Kasim went within and saw the piles of jewels and treasures
lying ranged all around; and, as soon as he stood amongst them
the door shut after him as wont to do. He walked about in ecstasy
marvelling at the treasures, and when weary of admiration he
gathered together bags of Ashrafis, a sufficient load for his ten
mules, and placed them by the entrance in readiness to be carried
outside and set upon the beasts. But by the will of Allah
Almighty he had clean forgotten the cabalistic words and cried
out, "Open, O Barley!" whereat the door refused to move.
Astonished and confused beyond measure he named the names of all
manner of grains save sesame, which had slipped from his memory
as though he had never heard the word; whereat in his dire
distress he heeded not the Ashrafis that lay heaped at the
entrance and paced to and fro, backwards and forwards, within the
cave sorely puzzled and perplexed. The wealth whose sight had
erewhile filled his heart with joy and gladness was now the cause
of bitter grief and sadness.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Kasim gave
up all hope of the life which he by his greed and envy had so
sore imperilled. It came to pass that at noontide the robbers,
returning by that way, saw from afar some mules standing beside
the entrance and much they marvelled at what had brought the
beasts to that place; for, inasmuch as Kasim by mischance had
failed to tether or hobble them, they had strayed about the
jungle and were browsing hither and thither. However, the thieves
paid scant regard to the estrays nor cared they to secure them,
but only wondered by what means they had wandered so far from the
town. Then, reaching the cave the Captain and his troop
dismounted and going up to the door repeated the formula and at
once it flew open. Now Kasim had heard from within the cave the
horse hooves drawing nigh and yet nigher; and he fell down to the
ground in a fit of fear never doubting that it was the clatter of
the banditti who would slaughter him without fail. Howbeit he
presently took heart of grace and at the moment when the door
flew open he rushed out hoping to make good his escape. But the
unhappy ran full tilt against the Captain who stood in front of
the band, and felled him to the ground; where upon a robber
standing near his chief at once bared his brand and with one cut
crave Kasim clean in twain. Thereupon the robbers rushed into the
cavern, and put back as they were before the bags of Ashrafis
which Kasim had heaped up at the doorway ready for taking away;
nor recked they aught of those which Ali Baba had removed, so
dazed and amazed were they to discover by what means the strange
man had effected an entrance. All knew that it was not possible
for any to drop through the skylights so tall and steep was the
rock's face, withal slippery of ascent; and also that none could
enter by the portal unless he knew the magical words whereby to
open it. However they presently quartered the dead body of Kasim
and hung it to the door within the cavern, two parts to the right
jamb and as many to the left[FN#295] that the sight might be a
warning of approaching doom for all who dared enter the cave.
Then coming out they closed the hoard door and rode away upon
their wonted work. Now when night fell and Kasim came not home,
his wife waxed uneasy in mind and running round to Ali Baba said,
"O my brother, Kasim hath not returned: thou knowest whither he
went, and sore I fear me some misfortune hath betided him." Ali
Baba also divined that a mishap had happened to prevent his
return; not the less, however, he strove to comfort his
sister-in-law with words of cheer and said, "O wife of my
brother, Kasim haply exerciseth discretion and, avoiding the
city, cometh by a roundabout road and will be here anon. This, I
do believe, is the reason why he tarrieth." Thereupon comforted
in spirit Kasim's wife fared homewards and sat awaiting her
husband's return; but when half the night was spent and still he
came not, she was as one distraught. She feared to cry aloud for
her grief, lest haply the neighbours hearing her should come and
learn the secret; so she wept in silence and upbraiding herself
fell to thinking, "Wherefore did I disclose this secret to him
and beget envy and jealousy of Ali Baba? this be the fruit
thereof and hence the disaster that hath come down upon me." She
spent the rest of the night in bitter tears and early on the
morrow tried in hottest hurry to Ali Baba and prayed that he
would go forth in quest of his brother; so he strove to console
her and straightway set out with his asses for the forest.
Presently, reaching the rock he wondered to see stains of blood
freshly shed and not finding his brother or the ten mules he
forefelt a calamity from so evil a sign. He then went to the door
and saying, "Open, O Simsim!" he pushed in and saw the dead body
of Kasim, two parts hanging to the right, and the rest to the
left of the entrance. Albeit he was affrighted beyond measure of
affright he wrapped the quarters in two cloths and laid them upon
one of his asses, hiding them care fully with sticks and fuel
that none might see them. Then he placed the bags of gold upon
the two other animals and likewise covered them most carefully;
and, when all was made ready he closed the cave door with the
magical words, and set him forth wending homewards with all ward
and watchfulness. The asses with the load of Ashrafis he made
over to his wife and bade her bury the bags with diligence; but
he told her not the condition in which he had come upon his
brother Kasim. Then he went with the other ass, to wit, the beast
whereon was laid the corpse to the widow's house and knocked
gently at the door. Now Kasim had a slave-girl shrewd and sharp
witted, Morgiana[FN#296] highs. She as softly undid the bolt and
admitted Ali Baba and the ass into the courtyard of the house,
when he let down the body from the beast's back and said, "O
Morgiana, haste thee and make thee ready to perform the rites for
the burial of thy lord: I now go to tell the tidings to thy
mistress and I will quickly return to help thee in this matter."
At that instant Kasim's widow seeing her brother in law,
exclaimed, "O Ali Baba, what news bringest thou of my spouse?
Alas, I see grief tokens written upon thy countenance. Say
quickly what hath happened." Then he recounted to her how it had
fared with her husband and how he had been slain by the robbers
and in what wise he had brought home the dead body.--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazed held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Ali Baba
pursued: "O my lady, what was to happen hath happened but it
behoveth us to keep this matter secret, for that our lives depend
upon privacy." She wept with sore weeping and made answer, "It
hath fared with my husband according to the fiat of Fate; and now
for thy safety's sake I give thee my word to keep the affair
concealed." He replied, "Naught can avail when Allah hath
decreed. Rest thee in patience; until the days of thy
widow-hood[FN#297] be accomplisht"; after which time I will take
thee to wife, and thou shalt live in comfort and happiness; and
fear not lest my first spouse vex thee or show aught of jealousy,
for that she is kindly and tender of heart." The widow lamenting
her loss noisily, cried, "Be it as e'en thou please." Then Ali
Baba farewelled her, weeping and wailing for her husband; and
joining Morgiana took counsel with her how to manage the burial
of his brother. So, after much consultation and many warnings, he
left the slave-girl and departed home driving his ass before him.
As soon as Ali Baba had fared forth Morgiana went quickly to a
druggist's shop; and, that she might the better dissemble with
him and not make known the matter, she asked of him a drug often
administered to men when diseased with dangerous dis-temper. He
gave it saying, "Who is there in thy house that lieth so ill as
to require this medicine?" and said she, "My Master Kasim is sick
well nigh unto death: for many days he hath nor spoken nor tasted
aught of food, so that almost we despair of his life." Next day
Morgiana went again and asked the druggist for more of medicine
and essences such as are adhibited to the sick when at door of
death, that the moribund may haply rally before the last breath.
The man gave the potion and she taking it sighed aloud and wept,
saying' "I fear me he may not have strength to drink this
draught: methinks all will be over with him ere I return to the
house." Meanwhile Ali Baba was anxiously awaiting to hear sounds
of wailing and lamentation in Kasim's home that he might at such
signal hasten thither and take part in the ceremonies of the
funeral. Early on the second day Morgiana went with veiled face
to one Bﬂbﬂ Mustafﬂ,[FN#298] a tailor well shotten in years whose
craft was to make shrouds and cerecloths; and as soon as she saw
him open his shop she gave him a gold piece and said, "Do thou
bind a bandage over thine eyes and come along with me." Mustafa
made as though he would not go, whereat Morgiana placed a second
gold coin in his palm and entreated him to accompany her. The
tailor presently consented for greed of gain, so tying a kerchief
tightly over his eyes she led him by the hand to the house
wherein lay the dead body of her master. Then, taking off the
bandage in the darkened room she bade him sew together the
quarters of the corpse, limb to its limb; and, casting a cloth
upon the body, said to the tailor "Make haste and sew a shroud
according to the size of this dead man and I will give thee
therefor yet another ducat." Baba Mustafa quickly made the
cerecloth of fitting length and breadth, and Morgiana paid him
the promised Ashrafi; then once more bandaging his eyes led him
back to the place whence she had brought him. After this she
returned hurriedly home and with the help of Ali Baba washed the
body in warm water and donning the shroud lay the corpse upon a
clean place ready for burial. This done Morgiana went to the
mosque and gave notice to an Imam[FN#299] that a funeral was
awaiting the mourners in a certain household, and prayed that he
would come to read the prayers for the dead; and the Imam went
back with her. Then four neighbours took up the bier[FN#300] and
bore it on their shoulders and fared forth with the Imam and
others who were wont to give assistance at such obsequies. After
the funeral prayers were ended four other men carried off the
coffin; and Morgiana walked before it bare of head, striking her
breast and weeping and wailing with exceeding loud lament, whilst
Ali Baba and the neighbours came behind. In such order they
entered the cemetery and buried him; then, leaving him to Munkar
and Nakir[FN#301] the Questioners of the Dead all wended their
ways. Presently the women of the quarter, according to the custom
of the city, gathered together in the house of mourning and sat
an hour with Kasim's widow comforting and condoling, presently
leaving her somewhat resigned and cheered. Ali Baba stayed forty
days at home in ceremonial lamentation for the loss of his
brother; so none within the town save himself and his wife
(Kasim's widow) and Morgiana knew aught about the secret. And
when the forty days of mourning were ended Ali Baba removed to
his own quarters all the property belonging to the deceased and
openly married the widow; then he appointed his nephew, his
brother's eldest son, who had lived a long time with a wealthy
merchant and was perfect of knowledge in all matters of trade,
such as selling and buying, to take charge of the defunct's shop
and to carry on the business.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, it so chanced
one day when the robbers, as was their wont, came to the
treasure-cave that they marvelled exceedingly to find nor sign
nor trace of Kasim's body whilst they observed that much of gold
had been carried off. Quoth the Captain, "Now it behoveth us to
make enquiry in this matter; else shall we suffer much of loss
and this our treasure, which we and our forefathers have amassed
during the course of many years, will little by little be wasted
and spoiled." Hereto all assented and with single mind agreed
that he whom they had slain had knowledge of the magical words
whereby the door was made to open; moreover that some one beside
him had cognizance the spell and had carried off the body, and
also much of gold; wherefore they needs must make diligent
research and find out who the man ever might be. They then took
counsel and determined that one amongst them, who should be
sagacious and deft of wit, must don the dress of some merchant
from foreign parts; then, repairing to the city he must go about
from quarter to quarter and from street to street, and learn if
any townsman had lately died and if so where he wont to dwell,
that with this clue they might be enabled to find the wight they
sought. Hereat said one of the robbers, "Grant me leave that I
fare and find out such tidings in the town and bring thee word a;
and if I fail of my purpose I hold my life in forfeit."
Accordingly that bandit, after disguising himself by dress,
pushed at night into the town and next morning early he repaired
to the market square and saw that none of the shops had yet been
opened, save only that of Baba Mustafa the tailor, who thread and
needle in hand sat upon his working stool. The thief bade him
good day and said, " ÊTis yet dark: how canst thou see to sew?"
Said the tailor, "I perceive thou art a stranger. Despite my
years my eyesight is so keen that only yesterday I sewed together
a dead body whilst sitting in a room quite darkened." Quoth the
bandit thereupon to himself, "I shall get somewhat of my want
from this snip;" and to secure a further clue he asked,
"Meseemeth thou wouldst jest with me and thou meanest that a
cerecloth for a corpse was stitched by thee and that thy business
is to sew shrouds." Answered the tailor, "It mattereth not to
thee: question me no more questions." Thereupon the robber placed
an Ashrafi in his hand and continued, "I desire not to discover
aught thou hidest, albeit my breast like every honest man's is
the grave of secrets; and this only would I learn of thee, in
what house didst thou do that job? Canst thou direct me thither,
or thyself conduct me thereto?" The tailor took the gold with
greed and cried, "I have not seen with my own eyes the way to
that house. A certain bondswoman led me to a place which I know
right well and there she bandaged my eyes and guided me to some
tenement and lastly carried me into a darkened room where lay the
dead body dismembered. Then she unbound the kerchief and bade me
sew together first the corpse and then the shroud, which having
done she again blindfolded me and led me back to the stead whence
she had brought me and left me there. Thou seest then I am not
able to tell thee where thou shalt find the house." Quoth the
robber, "Albeit thou knowest not the dwelling whereof thou
speakest, still canst thou take me to the place where thou west
blindfolded; then I will bind a kerchief over thine eyes and lead
thee as thou west led: on this wise per chance thou mayest hit
upon the site. An thou wilt do this favour by me, see here
another golden ducat is thine." There upon the bandit slipped a
second Ashrafi into the tailor's palm, and Baba Mustafa thrust it
with the first into his pocket; then, leaving his shop as it was,
he walked to the place where Morgiana had tied the kerchief
around his eyes, and with him went the robber who, after binding
on the bandage, led him by the hand. Baba Mustafa, who was clever
and keen-witted, presently striking the street whereby he had
fared with the handmaid, walked on counting step by step; then,
halting suddenly, he said, "Thus far I came with her;" and the
twain stopped in front of Kasim's house wherein now dwelt his
brother Ali Baba.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the robber
then made marks with white chalk upon the door to the end that he
might readily find it at some future time, and removing the
bandage from the tailor's eyes said, "O Baba Mustafa, I thank
thee for this favour: and Almighty Allah guerdon thee for thy
goodness. Tell me now, I pray thee, who dwelleth in yonder
house?" Quoth he, "In very sooth I wot not, for I have little
knowledge concerning this quarter of the city;" and the bandit,
understanding that he could find no further clue from the tailor,
dismissed him to his shop with abundant thanks, and hastened back
to the tryst place in the jungle where the band awaited his
coming. Not long after it so fortuned that Morgiana, going out
upon some errand, marvelled exceedingly at seeing the chalk-marks
showing white in the door; she stood awhile deep in thought and
presently divined that some enemy had made the signs that he
might recognize the house and play some sleight upon her lord.
She therefore chalked the doors of all her neighbours in like
manner and kept the matter secret, never entrusting it or to
master or to mistress. Meanwhile the robber told his comrades his
tale of adventure and how he had found the clue; so the Captain
and with him all the band went one after other by different ways
till they entered the city; and he who had placed the mark on Ali
Baba's door accompanied the Chief to point out the place. He
conducted him straightway to the house and strewing the sign
exclaimed, "Here dwelleth he of whom we are in search!" But when
the Captain looked around him he saw that all the dwellings bore
chalk-marks after like fashion and he wondered saying, "By what
manner of means knowest thou which house of all these houses that
bear similar signs is that whereof thou spakest?" Hereat the
robber-guide was confounded beyond measure of confusion, and
could make no answer; then with an oath he cried, "I did
assuredly set a sign upon a door, but I know not whence came all
the marks upon the other entrances; nor can I say for a surety
which it was I chalked." Thereupon the Captain returned to the
marketplace and said to his men, "We have toiled and laboured in
vain, nor have we found the house we went forth to seek. Return
we now to the forest our rendezvous: I also will fare thither."
Then all trooped off and assembled together within the
treasure-cave; and, when the robbers had all met, the Captain
judged him worthy of punishment who had spoken falsely and had
led them through the city to no purpose. So he imprisoned him in
presence of them all;[FN#302] and then said he, "To him amongst
you will I show special favour who shall go to town and bring me
intelligence whereby we may lay hands upon the plunderer of our
property." Hereat another of the company came forward and said,
"I am ready to go and enquire into the case, and Êtis I who will
bring thee to thy wish." The Captain after giving him presents
and promises despatched him upon his errand; and by the decree of
Destiny which none may gainsay, this second robber went first to
the house of Baba Mustafa the tailor, as had done the thief who
had foregone him. In like manner he also persuaded the snip with
gifts of golden coin that he be led hood-winked and thus too he
was guided to Ali Baba's door. Here noting the work of his
predecessor, he affixed to the jamb a mark with red chalk the
better to distinguish it from the others whereon still showed the
white. Then tried he back in stealth to his company; but Morgiana
on her part also descried the red sign on the entrance and with
subtle forethought marked all the others after the same fashion;
nor told she any what she had done. Meanwhile the bandit rejoined
his band and vauntingly said, "O our Captain, I have found the
house and thereon put a mark whereby I shall distinguish it
clearly from all its neighbours."--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Captain
despatched another of his men to the city and he found the place,
but, as aforetime, when the troop repaired thither they saw each
and every house marked with signs of red chalk. So they returned
disappointed and the Captain, waxing displeased exceedingly and
distraught, clapped also this spy into gaol. Then said the chief
to himself, "Two men have failed in their endeavour and have met
their rightful meed of punishment; and I trow that none other of
my band will essay to follow up their research; so I myself will
go and find the house of this wight." Accordingly he fared along
and aided by the tailor Baba Mustafa, who had gained much gain of
golden pieces in this matter, he hit upon the house of Ali Baba;
and here he made no outward show or sign, but marked it on the
tablet[FN#303] of his heart and impressed the picture upon the
page of his memory. Then returning to the jungle he said to his
men, "I have full cognizance of the place and have limned it
clearly in my mind; so now there will be no difficulty in finding
it. Go forth straightways and buy me and bring hither nineteen
mules together with one large leathern jar of mustard oil and
seven and thirty vessels of the same kind clean empty. Without me
and the two locked up in gaol ye number thirty-seven souls; so I
will stow you away armed and accoutred each within his jar and
will load two upon each mule, and upon the nineteenth mule there
shall be a man in an empty jar on one side, and on the other the
jar full of oil. I for my part, in guise of an oil-merchant, will
drive the mules into the town, arriving at the house by night,
and will ask permission of its master to tarry there until
morning. After this we shall seek occasion during the dark hours
to rise up and fall upon him and slay him." Furthermore the
Captain spake saying, "When we have made an end of him we shall
recover the gold and treasure whereof he robbed us and bring it
back upon the mules." This counsel pleased the robbers who went
forthwith and purchased mules and huge leathern jars, and did as
the Captain had bidden them. And after a delay of three days
shortly before nightfall they arose; and over smearing all the
jars with oil of mustard, each hid him inside an empty vessel.
The Chief then disguised himself in trader's gear and placed the
jars upon the nineteen mules; to wit, the thirty-seven vessels in
each of which lay a robber armed and accoutred, and the one that
was full of oil. This done, he drove the beasts before him and
presently he reached Ali Baba's place at nightfall; when it
chanced that the house-master was strolling after supper to and
fro in front of his home. The Captain saluted him with the salam
and said, "I come from such and such a village with oil; and
ofttimes have I been here a selling oil, but now to my grief I
have arrived too late and I am sore troubled and perplexed as to
where I shall spend the night. An thou have pity on me I pray
thee grant that I tarry here in thy court yard and ease the mules
by taking down the jars and giving the beasts somewhat of
fodder." Albeit Ali Baba had heard the Captain's voice when
perched upon the tree and had seen him enter the cave, yet by
reason of the disguise he knew him not for the leader of the
thieves, and granted his request with hearty welcome and gave him
full license to halt there for the night. He then pointed out an
empty shed wherein to tether the mules and bade one of the
slave-boys go fetch grain and water. He also gave orders to the
slave-girl Morgiana saying," A guest hath come hither and
tarrieth here to night. Do thou busy thyself with all speed about
his supper and make ready the guest bed for him." Presently, when
the Captain had let down all the jars and had fed and watered his
mules, Ali Baba received him with all courtesy and kindness, and
summoning Morgiana said in his presence, "See thou fail not in
service of this our stranger nor suffer him to lack for aught.
To-morrow early I would fare to the Hammam and bathe; so do thou
give my slave-boy Abdullah a suit of clean white clothes which I
may put on after washing; moreover make thee ready a somewhat of
broth overnight that I may drink it after my return home."
Replied she, "I will have all in readiness as thou hast bidden."
So Ali Baba retired to his rest, and the Captain, having supped,
repaired to the shed and saw that all the mules had their food
and drink for the night.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Captain, after seeing to the mules and the jars which Ali Baba
and his household held to be full of oil, finding utter privacy,
whispered to his men who were in ambush, "This night at midnight
when ye hear my voice, do you quickly open with your sharp knives
the leathern jars from top to bottom and issue forth without
delay." Then passing through the kitchen he reached the chamber
wherein a bed had been dispread for him, Morgiana showing the way
with a lamp. Quoth she, "An thou need aught beside I pray thee
command this thy slave who is ever ready to obey thy say!" He
made answer, "Naught else need I;" then, putting out the light,
he lay him down on the bed to sleep awhile ere the time came to
rouse his men and finish off the work. Meanwhile Morgiana did as
her master had bidden her: she first took out a suit of clean
white clothes and made it over to Abdullah who had not yet gone
to rest; then she placed the pipkin upon the hearth to boil the
broth and blew the fire till it burnt briskly. After a short
delay she needs must see an the broth be boiling, but by that
time all the lamps had gone out and she found that the oil was
spent and that nowhere could she get a light. The slave-boy
Abdullah observed that she was troubled and perplexed hereat, and
quoth he to her, "Why make so much ado? In yonder shed are many
jars of oil: go now and take as much soever as thou listest."
Morgiana gave thanks to him for his suggestion; and Abdullah, who
was lying at his ease in the hall, went off to sleep so that he
might wake betimes and serve Ali Baba in the bath. So the
hand-maiden rose[FN#304] and with oil-can in hand walked to the
shed where stood the leathern jars all ranged in rows. Now, as
she drew nigh unto one of the vessels, the thief who was hidden
therein hearing the tread of footsteps bethought him that it was
of his Captain whose summons he awaited; so he whispered, "Is it
now time for us to sally forth?" Morgiana started back affrighted
at the sound of human accents; but, inasmuch as she was bold and
ready of wit, she replied, "The time is not yet come," and said
to herself, These jars are not full of oil and herein I perceive
a manner of mystery. Haply the oil-merchant hatcheth some
treacherous plot against my lord; so Allah, the Compassionating,
the Compassionate, protect us from his snares!" Wherefore she
answered in a voice made like to the Captain's, "Not yet, the
time is not come. Then she went to the next jar and returned the
same reply to him who was within, and so on to all the vessels
one by one. Then said she in herself, "Laud to the Lord! my
master took this fellow in believing him to be an oil-merchant,
but lo, he hath admitted a band of robbers, who only await the
signal to fall upon him and plunder the place and do him die."
Then passed she on to the furthest jar and finding it brimming
with oil, filled her can, and returning to the kitchen, trimmed
the lamp and lit the wicks; then, bringing forth a large
cauldron, she set it upon the fire, and filling it with oil from
out the jar heaped wood upon the hearth and fanned it to a fierce
flame the readier to boil its contents. When this was done she
baled it out in potfuls and poured it seething hot into the
leathern vessels one by one while the thieves unable to escape
were scalded to death and every jar contained a corpse.[FN#305]
Thus did this slave-girl by her subtle wit make a clean end of
all noiselessly and unknown even to the dwellers in the house.
Now when she had satisfied herself that each and every of the men
had been slain, she went back to the kitchen and shutting to the
door sat brewing Ali Baba's broth. Scarce had an hour passed
before the Captain woke from sleep; and, opening wide his window,
saw that all was dark and silent; so he clapped his hands as a
signal for his men to come forth but not a sound was heard in
return. After awhile he clapped again and called aloud but got no
answer; and when he cried out a third time without reply he was
perplexed and went out to the shed wherein stood the jars. He
thought to himself, "Perchance all are fallen asleep whenas the
time for action is now at hand, so I must e'en awaken them
without stay or delay." Then approaching the nearest jar he was
startled by a smell of oil and seething flesh; and touching it
outside he felt it reeking hot; then going to the others one by
one, he found all in like condition. Hereat he knew for a surety
the fate which had betided his band and, fearing for his own
safety, he clomb on to the wall, and thence dropping into a
garden made his escape in high dudgeon and sore disappointment.
Morgiana awaited awhile to see the Captain return from the shed
but he came not; whereat she knew that he had scaled the wall and
had taken to flight, for that the street-door was double locked;
and the thieves being all disposed of on this wise Morgiana laid
her down to sleep in perfect solace and ease of mind. When two
hours of darkness yet remained, Ali Baba awoke and went to the
Hammam knowing naught of the night adventure, for the gallant
slave-girl had not aroused him, nor indeed had she deemed such
action expedient, because had she sought an opportunity of
reporting to him her plan, she might haply have lost her chance
and spoiled the project. The sun was high over the horizon when
Ali Baba walked back from the Baths; and he marvelled exceedingly
to see the jars still standing under the shed and said, "How
cometh it that he, the oil-merchant my guest, hath not carried to
the market his mules and jars of oil?"--And as the morn began to
dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred ante Thirty-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Ali Baba
presently asked Morgiana what had befallen the oil-merchant his
guest whom he had placed under her charge; and she answered,
"Allah Almighty vouchsafe to thee six score years and ten of
safety! I will tell thee in privacy of this merchant." So Ali
Baba went apart with his slave-girl, who taking him with out the
house first locked the court-door; then showing him a jar she
said, "Prithee look into this and see if within there be oil or
aught else." Thereupon peering inside it he perceived a man at
which sight he cried aloud and fain would have fled in his
fright. Quoth Morgiana, "Pear him not, this man hath no longer
the force to work thee harm, he lieth dead and stone dead."
Hearing such words of comfort and reassurance Ali Baba asked "O
Morg