iana, what evils have we escaped and by what means hath this
wretch become the quarry of Fate?" She answered "Alhamdolillah
˚Praise be to Almighty Allah!˚ I will inform thee fully of the
case; but hush thee, speak not aloud, lest haply the neighbours
learn the secret and it end in our confusion. Look now into all
the jars, one by one from first to last." So Ali Baba examined
them severally and found in each a man fully armed and accoutred
and all lay scalded to death. Hereat speechless for sheer
amazement he stared at the jars, but presently re covering
himself he asked, "And where is he, the oil-merchant?" Answered
she, "Of him also I will inform thee. The villain was no trader
but a traitorous assassin whose honied words would have ensnared
thee to thy doom; and now I will tell thee what he was and what
hath happened; but, meanwhile thou art fresh from the Hammam and
thou shouldst first drink somewhat of this broth for thy
stomach's and thy health's sake." So Ali Baba went within and
Morgiana served up the mess; after which quoth her master, "I
fain would hear this wondrous story: prithee tell it to me and
set my heart at ease." Hereat the handmaid fell to relating
whatso had betided in these words, "O my master, when thou badest
me boil the broth and retiredst to rest, thy slave in obedience
to thy command took out a suit of clean white clothes and gave it
to the boy Abdullah; then kindled the fire and set on the broth.
As soon as it was ready I had need to light a lamp so that I
might see to skim it, but all the oil was spent, and, learning
this I told my want to the slave-boy Abdullah, who advised me to
draw somewhat from the jars which stood under the shed.
Accordingly, I took a can and went to the first vessel when
suddenly I heard a voice within whisper with all caution, ÊIs it
now time for us to sally forth?' I was amazed thereat and judged
that the pretended merchant had laid some plot to slay thee; so I
replied, ÊThe time is not yet come.' Then I went to the second
jar and heard another voice to which I made the like answer, and
so on with all of them. I now was certified that these men
awaited only some signal from their Chief whom thou didst take to
guest within thy walls supposing him to be a merchant in oil; and
that after thou receivedst him hospitably the miscreant had
brought these men to murther thee and to plunder thy good and
spoil thy house. But I gave him no opportunity to win his wish.
The last jar I found full of oil and taking somewhat therefrom I
lit the lamp; then, putting a large cauldron upon the fire, I
filled it up with oil which I brought from the jar and made a
fierce blaze under it; and, when the contents were seething hot,
I took out sundry cansful with intent to scald them all to death,
and going to each jar in due order, I poured within them one by
one boiling oil. On this wise having destroyed them utterly, I
returned to the kitchen and having extinguished the lamps stood
by the window watching what might happen, and how that false
merchant would act next. Not long after I had taken my station,
the robber captain awoke and oft-times signalled to his thieves.
Then getting no reply he came downstairs and went out to the
jars, and finding that all his men were slain he fled through the
darkness I know not whither. So when he had clean disappeared I
was assured that, the door being double locked, he had scaled the
wall and dropped into the garden and made his escape. Then with
my heart at rest I slept." And Morgiana, after telling her story
to her master, presently added, "This is the whole truth I have
related to thee. For some days indeed have I had inkling of such
matter, but withheld it from thee deeming it inexpedient to risk
the chance of its meeting the neighbours' ears; now, however,
there is no help but to tell thee thereof. One day as I came to
the house-door I espied thereon a white chalk-mark, and on the
next day a red sign beside the white. I knew not the intent
wherewith the marks were made, nevertheless I set others upon the
entrances of sundry neighbours, judging that some enemy had done
this deed whereby to encompass my master's destruction. Therefore
I made the marks on all the other doors in such perfect
conformity with those I found, that it would be hard to
distinguish amongst them."--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Morgiana
continued to Ali Baba: "Judge now and see if these signs and all
this villainy be not the work of the bandits of the forest, who
marked our house that on such wise they might know it again. Of
these forty thieves there yet remain two others concerning whose
case I know naught; so beware of them, but chiefly of the third
remaining robber, their Captain, who fled hence alive. Take good
heed and be thou cautious of him, for, shouldst thou fall into
his hands, he will in no wise spare thee but will surely murther
thee. I will do all that lieth in me to save from hurt and harm
thy life and property, nor shall thy slave be found wanting in
any service to my lord." Hearing these words Ali Baba rejoiced
with exceeding joyance and said to her, "I am well pleased with
thee for this thy conduct; and say me what wouldst thou have me
do in thy behalf; I shall not fail to remember thy brave deed so
long as breath in me remaineth." Quoth she, "It behoveth us
before all things forthright to bury these bodies in the ground,
that so the secret be not known to any one." Hereupon Ali Baba
took with him his slave-boy Abdullah into the garden and there
under a tree they dug for the corpses of the thieves a deep pit
in size proportionate to its contents, and they dragged the
bodies (having carried off their weapons) to the fosse and threw
them in; then, covering up the remains of the seven and thirty
robbers they made the ground appear level and clean as it wont to
be. They also hid the leathern jars and the gear and arms and
presently Ali Baba sent the mules by ones and twos to the bazar
and sold them all with the able aid of his slave-boy Abdullah.
Thus the matter was hushed up nor did it reach the ears of any;
Ali Baba ceased not to be ill at ease lest haply the Captain or
the surviving two robbers should wreak their vengeance on his
head. He kept himself private with all caution and took heed that
none learn a word of what happened and of the wealth which he had
carried off from the bandits' cave. Meanwhile the Captain of the
thieves having escaped with his life, fled to the forest in hot
wrath and sore irk of mind, and his senses were scattered and the
colour of his visage vanished like ascending smoke. Then he
thought the matter over again and again, and at last he firmly
resolved that he needs must take the life of Ali Baba, else he
would lose all the treasure which his enemy, by knowledge of the
magical words, would take away and turn to his own use.
Furthermore, he determined that he would undertake the business
singlehanded; and, that after getting rid of Ali Baba, he would
gather together another band of banditti and would pursue his
career of brigandage, as indeed his forbears had done for many
generations. So he lay down to rest that night, and rising early
in the morning donned a dress of suitable appearance; then going
to the city alighted at a caravanserai, thinking to himself,
"Doubtless the murther of so many men hath reached the Wali's
ears, and Ali Baba hath been seized and brought to justice, and
his house is levelled and his good is confiscated. The townfolk
must surely have heard tidings of these matters." So he
straightway asked of the keeper of the Khan, "What strange things
have happened in the city during the last few days?" and the
other told him all that he had seen and heard, but the Captain
could not learn a whit of that which most concerned him. Hereby
he understood that Ali Baba was ware and wise, and that he had
not only carried away such store of treasure but he had also
destroyed so many lives and withal had come off scatheless;
furthermore, that he himself must needs have all his wits alert
not to fall into the hands of his foe and perish. With this
resolve the Captain hired a shop in the Bazar, whither he bore
whole bales of the finest stuffs and goodly merchandise from his
forest treasure house; and presently he took his seat within the
store and fell to doing merchant's business. By chance his place
fronted the booth of the defunct Kasim where his son, Ali Baba's
nephew, now traded; and the Captain, who called himself Khwajah
Hasan, soon formed acquaintance and friendship with the shop
keepers around about him and treated all with profuse civilities,
but he was especially gracious and cordial to the son of Kasim, a
handsome youth and a well-dressed, and oft-times he would sit and
chat with him for a long while. A few days after it chanced that
Ali Baba, as he was sometimes wont to do, came to see his nephew,
whom he found sitting in his shop. The Captain saw and recognised
him at sight and one morning he asked the young man, saying,
"Prithee tell me, who is he that ever and anon cometh to thee at
thy place of sale?" whereto the youth made answer, "He is my
uncle, the brother of my father." Whereupon the Captain showed
him yet greater favour and affection the better to deceive him
for his own devices, and gave him presents and made him sit at
meat with him and fed him with the daintiest of dishes. Presently
Ali Baba's nephew bethought him it was only right and proper that
he also should invite the merchant to supper, but whereas his own
house was small, and he was straitened for room and could not
make a show of splendour, as did Khwajah Hasan, he took counsel
with his uncle on the matter.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Ali Baba
replied to his nephew: "Thou sayest well: it behoveth thee to
entreat thy friend in fairest fashion even as he hath entreated
thee. On the morrow, which is Friday, shut thy shop as do all
merchants of repute; then, after the early meal, take Khwajah
Hasan to smell the air,[FN#306] and as thou walkest lead him
hither unawares; meanwhile I will give orders that Morgiana shall
make ready for his coming the best of viands and all necesseries
for a feast. Trouble not thyself on any wise, but leave the
matter in my hands." Accordingly on the next day, to wit, Friday,
the nephew of Ali Baba took Khwajah Hasan to walk about the
garden; and, as they were returning he led him by the street
wherein his uncle dwelt. When they came to the house the youth
stopped at the door and knocking said, "O my lord, this is my
second home: my uncle hath heard much of thee and of thy goodness
me-wards and desireth with exceeding desire to see thee; so,
shouldst thou consent to enter and visit him, I shall be truly
glad and thankful to thee." Albeit Khwajah Hasan rejoiced in
heart that he had thus found means whereby he might have access
to his enemy's house and household, and although he hoped soon to
attain his end by treachery, yet he hesitated to enter in and
stood to make his excuses and walk away But when the door was
opened by the slave-porter, Ali Baba's nephew seized his
companion's hand and after abundant persuasion led him in,
whereat he entered with great show of cheerfulness as though much
pleased and honoured. The house-master received him with all
favour and worship and asked him of his welfare, and said to him
"O my lord, I am obliged and thankful to thee for that thou hast
strewn favour to the son of my brother and I perceive that thou
regardest him with an affection even fonder than my own." Khwajah
Hasan replied with pleasant words and said, "Thy nephew vastly
taketh my fancy and in him I am well pleased, for that although
young in years yet he hath been endued by Allah with much of
wisdom." Thus they twain conversed with friendly conversation and
presently the guest rose to depart and said, "O my lord, thy
slave must now farewell thee; but on some future day--Inshallah
he will again wait upon thee." Ali Baba, however, would not let
him leave and asked, "Whither wendest thou, O my friend? I would
invite thee to my table and I pray thee sit at meat with us and
after hie thee home in peace. Perchance the dishes are not as
delicate as those whereof thou art wont to eat, still deign grant
me this request I pray thee and refresh thyself with my victual."
Quoth Khwajah Hasan, "O my lord I am beholden to thee for thy
gracious invitation, and with pleasure would I sit at meat with
thee, but for a special reason must I needs excuse myself; suffer
me therefore to depart for I may not tarry longer nor accept thy
gracious offer." Hereto the host made reply, "I pray thee, O my
lord, tell me what may be the reason so urgent and weighty?" And
Khwajah Hasan answered, "The cause is this: I must not, by order
of the physician, who cured me lately of my complaint, eat aught
of food prepared with salt." Quoth Ali Baba, "An this be all,
deprive me not, I pray thee, of the honour thy company will
confer upon me: as the meats are not yet cooked, I will forbid
the kitchener to make use of any salt. Tarry here awhile and I
will return anon to thee." So saying Ali Baba went in to Morgiana
and bade her not put salt into any one of the dishes; and she,
while busied with her cooking, fell to marvelling greatly at such
order and asked her master, "Who is he that eateth meat wherein
is no salt?" He answered, "What to thee mattereth it who he may
be? only do thou my bidding." She rejoined, " 'Tis well: all
shall be as thou wishest;" but in mind she wondered at the man
who made such strange request and desired much to look upon him.
Wherefore, when all the meats were ready for serving up, she
helped the slave-boy Abdullah to spread the table and set on the
meal; and no sooner did she see Khwajah Hasan than she knew who
he was, albeit he had disguised himself in the dress of a
stranger merchant; furthermore, when she eyed him attentively she
espied a dagger hidden under his robe. "So ho!" quoth she to
herself, "this is the cause why the villain eateth not of salt,
for that he seeketh an opportunity to slay my master whose mortal
enemy he is; howbeit I will be beforehand with him and despatch
him ere he find a chance to harm my lord."--And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Morgiana,
having spread a white cloth upon the table and served up the
meal, went back to the kitchen and thought out her plot against
the robber Captain. Now when Ali Baba and Khwajah Hasan had eaten
their sufficiency, the slave-boy Abdullah brought Morgiana word
to serve the dessert, and she cleared the table and set on fruit
fresh and dried in salvers, then she placed by the side of Ali
Baba a small tripod for three cups with a flagon of wine, and
lastly she went off with the slave-boy Abdullah into another
room, as though she would herself eat supper. Then Khwajah Hasan,
that is, the Captain of the robbers, perceiving that the coast
was clear, exulted mightily saying to himself, "The time hath
come for me to take full vengeance; with one thrust of my dagger
I will despatch this fellow, then escape across the garden and
wend my ways. His nephew will not adventure to stay my hand, for
an he do but move a finger or toe with that intent another stab
will settle his earthly account. Still must I wait awhile until
the slave-boy and the cook-maid shall have eaten and lain down to
rest them in the kitchen." Morgiana, however, watched him
wistfully and divining his purpose said in her mind, "I must not
allow this villain advantage over my lord, but by some means I
must make void his project and at once put an end to the life of
him." Accordingly, the trusty slave-girl changed her dress with
all haste and donned such clothes as dancers wear; she veiled her
face with a costly kerchief; around her head she bound a fine
turband, and about her middle she tied a waist cloth worked with
gold and silver wherein she stuck a dagger, whose hilt was rich
in filigree and jewelry. Thus disguised she said to the slave-boy
Abdullah, "Take now thy tambourine that we may play and sing and
dance in honour of our master's guest." So he did her bidding and
the twain went into the room, the lad playing and the lass
following. Then, making a low cong⁄e, they asked leave to perform
and disport and play; and Ali Baba gave permission, saying,
"Dance now and do your best that this our guest may be mirthful
and merry." Quoth Khwajah Hasan, "O my lord, thou dost indeed
provide much pleasant entertainment." Then the slave-boy Abdullah
standing by began to strike the tambourine whilst Morgiana rose
up and showed her perfect art and pleased them vastly with
graceful steps and sportive motion; and suddenly drawing the
poniard from her belt she brandished it and paced from side to
side, a spectacle which pleased them most of all. At times also
she stood before them, now clapping the sharp-edged dagger under
her armpit and then setting it against her breast. Lastly she
took the tambourine from the slave-boy Abdullah, and still
holding the poniard in her right she went round for largesse as
is the custom amongst merry makers. First she stood before Ali
Baba who threw a gold coin into the tambourine, and his nephew
likewise put in an Ashrafi; then Khwajah Hasan, seeing her about
to approach him, fell to pulling out his purse, when she
heartened her heart and quick as the blinding levee she plunged
the dagger into his vitals, and forthwith the miscreant fell back
stone dead. Ali Baba was dismayed and cried in his wrath, "O
unhappy, what is this deed thou hast done to bring about my
ruin!" But she replied, "Nay, O my lord, rather to save thee and
not to cause thee harm have I slain this man: loosen his garments
and see what thou wilt discover thereunder." So Ali Baba searched
the dead man's dress and found concealed therein a dagger. Then
said Morgiana, "This wretch was thy deadly enemy. Consider him
well: he is none other than the oil-merchant, the Captain of the
band of robbers. Whenas he came hither with intent to take thy
life, he would not eat thy salt; and when thou toldest me that he
wished not any in the meat I suspected him and at first sight I
was assured that he would surely do thee die; Almighty Allah be
praised Êtis even as I thought." Then Ali Baba lavished upon her
thanks and expressions of gratitude, saying, "Lo, these two times
hast thou saved me from his hand," and falling upon her neck he
cried, "See thou art free, and as reward for this thy fealty I
have wedded thee to my nephew." Then turning to the youth he
said, "Do as I bid thee and thou shalt prosper. I would that thou
marry Morgiana, who is a model of duty and loyalty: thou seest
now yon Khwajah Hasan sought thy friendship only that he might
find opportunity to take my life, but this maiden with her good
sense and her wisdom hath slain him and saved us." And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Ali Baba's
nephew straightway consented to marry Morgiana. After which the
three, raising the dead body bore it forth with all heed and
vigilance and privily buried it in the garden, and for many years
no one knew aught thereof. In due time Ali Baba married his
brother's son to Morgiana with great pomp, and spread a
bride-feast in most sumptuous fashion for his friends and
neighbours, and made merry with them and enjoyed singing and all
manner of dancing and amusements. He prospered in every
undertaking and Time smiled upon him and a new source of wealth
was opened to him. For fear of the thieves he had not once
visited the jungle-cave wherein lay the treasure, since the day
he had carried forth the corpse of his brother Kasim. But some
time after, he mounted his hackney one morning and journeyed
thither, with all care and caution, till finding no signs of man
or horse, and reassured in his mind he ventured to draw near the
door. Then alighting from his beast he tied it up to a tree, and
going to the entrance pronounced the words which he had not
forgotten, "Open, O Simsim!" Hereat, as was its wont, the door
flew open, and entering thereby he saw the goods and hoard of
gold and silver untouched and lying as he had left them. So he
felt assured that not one of all the thieves remained alive, and,
that save himself there was not a soul who knew the secret of the
place. At once he bound in his saddle-cloth a load of Ashrafis
such as his horse could bear and brought it home; and in after
days he showed the hoard to his sons and sons' sons and taught
them how the door could be caused to open and shut. Thus Ali Baba
and his household lived all their lives in wealth and joyance in
that city where erst he had been a pauper, and by the blessing of
that secret treasure he rose to high degree and dignities.--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and thirty-ninth Night.

Then by the command of King Shahryar Queen Shahrazad began to
tell in these words the story of





            ALI KHWAJAH AND THE MERCHANT OF BAGHDAD



Under the reign of Caliph Harun al-Rashid there dwelt in the city
of Baghdad a certain merchant, ÊAl› Khwﬂjah hight, who had a
small stock of goods wherewith he bought and sold and made a bare
livelihood, abiding alone and without a family in the house of
her forbears.  Now so it came to pass that each night for three
nights together he saw in a vision a venerable Shaykh who bespake
him thus, "Thou art beholden to make a pilgrimage to Meccah; why
abidest thou sunk in heedless slumber and farest not forth as it
behoveth thee?"[FN#307]  Hearing these words he became sore
startled and affrighted, so that he sold shop and goods and all
that he had; and, with firm intent to visit the Holy House of
Almighty Allah, he let his home on hire and joined a caravan that
was journeying to Meccah the Magnified.  But ere he left his
natal city he placed a thousand gold pieces, which were over and
above his need for the journey, within an earthen jar filled up
with Asﬂf›r›[FN#308] or Sparrow-olives; and, having made fast the
mouth thereof, he carried the jar to a merchant-friend of many
years standing and said, "Belike, O my brother, thou hast heard
tell that I purpose going with a caravan on pilgrimage to Meccah,
the Holy City; so I have brought a jar of olives the which, I
pray thee, preserve for me in trust against my return."  The
merchant at once arose and handing the key of his warehouse to
Ali Khwajah said, "Here, take the key and open the store and
therein place the jar anywhere thou choosest, and when thou shalt
come back thou wilt find it even as thou leftest it."  Hereupon
Ali Khwajah did his friend's bidding and locking up the door
returned the key to its master.  Then loading his travelling
goods upon a dromedary and mounting a second beast he fared forth
with the caravan.  They came at length to Meccah the Magnified,
and it was the month Z∑ al-Hijjah wherein myriads of Moslems hie
thither on pilgrimage and pray and prostrate before the Ka'abah-
temple.  And when he had circuited the Holy House and fulfilled
all the rites and ceremonies required of palmers, he set up a
shop for sale of merchandise.[FN#309]  By chance two merchants
passing along that street espied the fine stuffs and goods in Ali
Khwajah's booth and approved much of them and praised their
beauty and excellence.  Presently quoth one to other, "This man
bringeth here most rare and costly goods:  now in Cairo, the
capital of Egypt-land would he get full value for them, and far
more than in the markets of this city."  Hearing mention of
Cairo, Ali Khwajah conceived a sore longing to visit that famous
capital, so he gave up his intent of return Baghdad-wards and
purposed wayfaring to Egypt.  Accordingly he joined a caravan and
arriving thither was well-pleased with the place, both country
and city; and selling his merchandise he made great gain
therefrom.  Then buying other goods and stuffs he purposed to
make Damascus; but for one full month he tarried at Cairo and
visited her sanctuaries and saintly places and after leaving her
walls he solaced himself with seeing many famous cities distant
several days' journey from the capital along the banks of the
River Nilus.  Presently, bidding adieu to Egypt he arrived at the
Sanctified House,[FN#310] Jerusalem and prayed in the Temple of
Banu Isra'›l which the Moslems had re-edified.  In due time he
reached Damascus and observed that the city was well builded and
much peopled, and that the fields and meads were well-watered
with springs and channels and that the gardens and vergiers were
laden with flowers and fruits.  Amid such delights Ali Khwajah
hardly thought of Baghdad; withal he ceased not to pursue his
journey through Aleppo, Mosul and Shirﬂz, tarrying some time at
all of these towns, especially at Shirﬂz, till at length after
seven years of wayfaring he came back to Baghdad.--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Fortieth Night.

Then said she:--It behoveth thee now, O auspicious King, to hear
of the Baghdad merchant and his lack of probity.  For seven long
years he never once thought of Ali Khwajah or of the trust
committed to his charge; till one day as his wife sat at meat
with him at the evening meal, their talk by chance was of olives. 
Quoth she to him, "I would now fain have some that I may eat of
them;" and quoth he, "As thou speakest thereof I bethink me of
that Ali Khwajah who seven years ago fared on a pilgrimage to
Meccah, and ere he went left in trust with me a jar of Sparrow-
olives which still cumbereth the store-house.  Who knoweth where
he is or what hath betided him?  A man who lately returned with
the Hajj-caravan brought me word that Ali Khwajah had quitted
Meccah the Magnified with intent to journey on to Egypt.  Allah
Almighty alone knoweth an he be still alive or he be now dead;
however, if his olives be in good condition I will go bring some
hither that we may taste them: so give me a platter and a lamp
that I may fetch thee somewhat of them."  His wife, an honest
woman and an upright, made answer, "Allah forbid that thou
shouldst do a deed so base and break thy word and covenant.  Who
can tell?  Thou art not assured by any of his death; perchance he
may come back from Egypt safe and sound tomorrow or the day
after; then wilt thou, an thou cannot deliver unharmed to him
what he hath left in pledge, be ashamed of this thy broken troth
and we shall be disgraced before man and dishonoured in the
presence of thy friend.  I will not for my part have any hand in
such meanness nor will I taste the olives; furthermore, it
standeth not to reason that after seven years' keeping they
should be fit to eat.  I do implore thee to forswear this ill
purpose."  On such wise the merchant's wife protested and prayed
her husband that he meddle not with Ali Khwajah's olives, and
shamed him of his intent so that for the nonce he cast the matter
from his mind.  However, although the trader refrained that
evening from taking Ali Khwajah's olives, yet he kept the design
in memory until one day when, of his obstinacy and unfaith, he
resolved to carry out his project; and rising up walked  towards
the store-room dish in hand.  By chance he met his wife who said,
"I am no partner with thee in this ill-action:  in very truth
some evil shall befal thee an thou do such deed."  He heard her
but heeded her not; and, going to the store-room opened the jar
and found the olives spoiled and white with mould; but presently
he tilted up the jar and pouring some of its contents into the
dish, suddenly saw an Ashrafi fall from the vessel together with
the fruit.  Then, filled with greed, he turned out all that was
within into another jar and wondered with exceeding wonder to
find the lower half full of golden coins.  Presently, putting up
the moneys and the olives he closed the vessel and going back
said to his wife, "Thou spakest sooth, for I have examined the
jar and have found the fruit mouldy and foul of smell; wherefore
I returned it to its place and left it as it was aforetime." 
That night the merchant could not sleep a wink for thinking of
the gold and how he might lay hands thereon; and when morning
morrowed he took out all the Ashrafis and buying some fresh
olives in the Bazar filled up the jar with them and closed the
mouth and set it in its usual place.  Now it came to pass by
Allah's mercy that at the end of the month Ali Khwajah returned
safe and sound to Baghdad; and he first went to his old friend,
to wit, the merchant who, greeting him with feigned joy, fell on
his neck, but withal was sore troubled and perplexed at what
might happen.  After salutations and much rejoicing on either
part Ali Khwajah bespake the merchant on business and begged that
he might take back his jar of Asafiri-olives which he had placed
in charge of his familiar.  Quoth the merchant to Ali Khwajah, "O
my friend, I wot not where thou didst leave thy jar of olives;
but here is the key, go down to the store-house and take all that
is thine own."  So Ali Khwajah did as he was bidden and carrying
the jar from the magazine took his leave and hastened home; but,
when he opened the vessel and found not the gold coins, he was
distracted and overwhelmed with grief and made bitter
lamentation.  Then he returned to the merchant and said, "O my
friend, Allah, the All-present and the All-seeing, be my witness
that, when I went on my pilgrimage to Meccah the Magnified, I
left a thousand Ashrafis in that jar, and now I find them not. 
Canst thou tell me aught concerning them?  An thou in thy sore
need have made use of them, it mattereth not so thou wilt give
them back as soon as thou art able."  The merchant, apparently
pitying him, said, "O good friend, thou didst thyself with thine
hand set the jar inside the store-room.  I wist not that thou
hadst aught in it save olives; yet as thou didst leave it, so in
like manner didst thou find it and carry it away; and now thou
chargest me with theft of Ashrafis.  It seemeth strange and
passing strange that thou shouldst make such accusation.  When
thou wentest thou madest no mention of any money in the jar, but
saidst that it was full of olives, even as thou hast found it. 
Hadst thou left gold coins therein, then surely thou wouldst have
recovered them."  Hereupon Ali Khwajah begged hard with much
entreaty, saying, "Those thousand Ashrafis were all I owned, the
money earned by years of toil: I do beseech thee have pity on my
case and give them back to me."  Replied the merchant, waxing
wroth with great wrath, "O my friend, a fine fellow thou art to
talk of honesty and withal make such false and lying charge. 
Begone: hie thee hence and come not to my house again; for now I
know thee as thou art, a swindler and imposter."  Hearing this
dispute between Ali Khwajah and the merchant all the people of
the quarter came crowding to the shop.--And as the morn began to
dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-first Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
multitude which thronged about the merchant's shop warmly took up
the matter; and thus it became well known to all, rich and poor,
within the city of Baghdad how that one Ali Khwajah had hidden a
thousand Ashrafis within a jar of olives and had placed it on
trust with a certain merchant; moreover how, after pilgrimaging
to Meccah and seven years of travel the poor man had returned,
and that the rich man had gainsaid his words anent the gold and
was ready to make oath that he had not received any trust of the
kind.  At length, when naught else availed, Ali Khwajah was
constrained to bring the matter before the Kazi, and to claim one
thousand Ashrafis of his false friend.  The Judge asked, "What
witnesses hast thou who may speak for thee?"  and the plantiff
answered, "O my lord the Kazi, I feared to tell the matter to any
man lest all come to know of my secret.  Allah Almighty is my
sole testimony.  This merchant was my friend and I recked not
that he would prove dishonest and unfaithful."  Quoth the Judge,
"Then must I needs send for the merchant and hear what he saith
on oath;" and when the defendant came they made him swear by all
he deemed holy, facing Ka'abah-wards with hands uplifted, and he
cried, "I swear that I know naught of any Ashrafis belonging to
Ali Khwajah."[FN#311]  Hereat the Kazi pronounced him innocent
and dismissed him from court; and Ali Khwajah went home sad at
heart and said to himself, "Alas, what justice is this which hath
been meted out to me, that I should lose my money, and my just
cause be deemed unjust!  It hath been truly said, ÊHe loseth the
lave who sueth before a knave.' "  On the next day he drew out a
statement of his case; and, as the Caliph Harun al-Rashid was on
his way to Friday-prayers, he fell down on the ground before him
and presented to him the paper.  The Commander of the Faithful
read the petition and having understood the case deigned give
order saying, "To-morrow bring the accuser and the accused to the
audience-hall and place the petition before my presence, for I
myself will enquire into this matter."  That night the Prince of
True Believers, as was his wont, donned disguise to walk about
the squares of Baghdad and its streets and lanes and, accompanied
by Ja'afar the Barmaki and Masr∑r the Sworder of his vengeance,
proceeded to espy what happened in the city.  Immediately on
issuing forth he came upon an open place in the Bazar when he
heard the hubbub of children a-playing and saw at scanty distance
some ten or dozen boys making sport amongst themselves in the
moonlight;  and he stopped awhile to watch their diversion.  Then
one amongst the lads, a goodly and a fair-complexioned, said to
the others, "Come now and let us play the game of Kazi:  I will
be the Judge; let one of you be Ali Khwajah, and another the
merchant with whom he placed the thousand Ashrafis in pledge
before faring on his pilgrimage:  so come ye before me and let
each one plead his plea."  When the Caliph heard the name of Ali
Khwajah he minded him of the petition which had been presented to
him for justice against the merchant, and bethought him that he
would wait and see how the boy would perform the part of Kazi in
their game and upon what decision he would decide.  So the Prince
watched the mock-trial with keen interest saying to himself,
"This case hath verily made such stir within the city that even
the children know thereof and re-act it in their sports." 
Presently, he amongst the lads who took the part of Ali Khwajah
the plaintiff and his playmate who represented the merchant of
Baghdad accused of theft, advanced and stood before the boy who
as the Kazi sat in pomp and dignity.  Quoth the Judge, "O Ali
Khwajah, what is thy claim against this merchant?"  and the
complainant preferred his charge in a plea of full detail.  Then
said the Kazi to the boy who acted merchant, "What answerest thou
to this complaint and why didst thou not return the gold pieces?" 
The accused made reply even as the real defendant had done and
denied the charge before the Judge, professing himself ready to
take oath thereto.  Then said the boy-Kazi, "Ere thou swear on
oath that thou hast not taken the money, I would fain see for
myself the jar of olives which the plaintiff deposited with thee
on trust."  Then turning to the boy who represented Ali Khwajah
he cried, "Go thou and instantly produce the jar that I may
inspect it."  And when the vessel was brought the Kazi said to
the two contentious, "See now and say me:  be this the very jar
which thou, the plaintiff, leftest with the defendant?"  and both
answered that it was and the same.  Then said the self-
constituted Judge, "Open now the jar and bring hither some of the
contents that I may see the state in which the Asafiri-olives
actually are."  Then tasting of the fruit, "How is this?  I find
their flavour is fresh and their state excellent.  Surely during
the lapse of seven twelvemonths the olives would have become
mouldy and rotten.  Bring now before me two oil-merchants of the
town that they may pass opinion upon them."  Then two other of
the boys assumed the parts commanded and coming into court stood
before the Kazi, who asked, "Are ye olive-merchants by trade?" 
They answered, "We are and this hath been our calling for many
generations and in buying and selling olives we earn our daily
bread."  Then said the Kazi, "Tell me now, how long do olives
keep fresh and well-flavoured?"  and said they, "O my lord,
however carefully we keep them, after the third year they change
flavour and colour and become no longer fit for food, in fact
they are good only to be cast away."  Thereupon quoth the boy-
Kazi, "Examine me now these olives that are in this jar and say
me how old are they and what is their condition and savour."--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the two
boys who played the parts of oil-merchants pretended to take some
berries from the jar and taste them and presently they said, "O
our lord the Kazi, these olives are in fair condition and full-
flavoured."  Quoth the Kazi, "Ye speak falsely, for Êtis seven
years since Ali Khwajah put them in the jar as he was about to go
a-pilgrimaging;" and quoth they, "Say whatso thou wilt those
olives are of this year's growth, and there is not an oil-
merchant in all Baghdad but who will agree with us."  Moreover
the accused was made to taste and smell the fruits and he could
not but admit that it was even so as they had avouched.  Then
said the boy-Kazi to the boy-defendant, " ÊTis clear thou art a
rogue and a rascal, and thou hast done a deed wherefor thou
richly deservest the gibbet."  Hearing this the children frisked
about and clapped their hands with glee and gladness, then
seizing hold of him who acted as the merchant of Baghdad, they
led him off as to execution.  The Commander of the Faithful,
Harun al-Rashid, was greatly pleased at this acuteness of the boy
who had assumed the part of judge in the play, and commanded his
Wazir Ja'afar saying, "Mark well the lad who enacted the Kazi in
this mock-trial and see that thou produce him on the morrow:  he
shall try the case in my presence substantially and in real
earnest, even as we have heard him deal with it in play.  Summon
also the Kazi of this city that he may learn the administration
of justice from this child.  Moreover send word to Ali Khwajah
bidding him bring with him the jar of olives, and have also in
readiness two oil-merchants of the town."  Thus as they walked
along the Caliph gave orders to the Wazir and then returned to
his palace.  So on the morrow Ja'afar the Barmaki went to that
quarter of the town where the children had enacted the mock-trail
and asked the schoolmaster where his scholars might be, and he
answered, "They have all gone away, each to his home."  So the
minister visited the houses pointed out to him and ordered the
little ones to appear in his presence.  Accordingly they were
brought before him, when he said to them, "Who amongst you is he
that yesternight acted the part of Kazi in play and passed
sentence in the case of Ali Khwajah?"  The eldest of them
replied, " ÊTwas I, O my lord the Wazir;" and then he waxed pale,
not knowing why the question was put.  Cried the Minister, "Come
along with me; the Commander of the Faithful hath need of thee." 
At this the mother of the lad was sore afraid and wept; but
Ja'afar comforted her and said, "O my lady, have no fear and
trouble not thyself.  Thy son will soon return to thee in safety,
Inshallah--God willing--and methinks the Sultan will show much
favour unto him."  The woman's heart was heartened on hearing
these words of the Wazir and she joyfully dressed her boy in his
best attire and sent him off with the Wazir, who led him by the
hand to the Caliph's audience-hall and executed all the other
commandments which had been issued by his liege lord.  Then the
Commander of the Faithful, having taken seat upon the throne of
justice, set the boy upon a seat beside him, and as soon as the
contending parties appeared before him, that is Ali Khwajah and
the merchant of Baghdad, he commanded them to state each man his
case in presence of the child who should adjudge the suit.  So
the two, plaintiff and defendant recounted their contention
before the boy in full detail; and when the accused stoutly
denied the charge and was about to swear on oath that what he
said was true, with hands uplifted and facing Ka'abah-wards, the
child-Kazi prevented him, saying, "Enough!  swear not on oath
till thou art bidden; and first let the jar of olives be produced
in Court."  Forthwith the jar was brought forward and placed
before him; and the lad bade open it;  then, tasting one he gave
also to two oil-merchants who had been summoned, that they might
do likewise and declare how old was the fruit and whether its
savour was good or bad.  They did his bidding and said, "The
flavour of these olives hath not changed and they are of this
year's growth."  Then said the boy, "Methinks ye are mistaken,
for seven years ago Ali Khwajah put the olives into the jar: how
then could fruit of this year find their way therein?"  But they
replied, " ÊTis even as we say: an thou believe not our words
send straightway for other oil-merchants and make enquiry of
them, so shalt thou know if we speak sooth or lies."  But when
the merchant of Baghdad saw that he could no longer avail to
prove his innocence, he confessed everything; to wit, how he had
taken out the Ashrafis and filled the jar with fresh olives. 
Hearing this the boy said to the Prince of True Believers, "O
gracious sovereign, last night in play we tried this cause, but
thou alone has power to apply the penalty.  I have adjudged the
matter in thy presence and I humbly pray that thou punish this
merchant according to the law of the Koran and the custom of the
Apostle; and thou decree the restoring of his thousand gold
pieces to Ali Khwajah, for that he hath been proved entitled to
them."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
ordered the merchant of Baghdad to be taken away and be hanged,
after he should have made known where he had put the thousand
Ashrafis and that these should have been restored their rightful
owner, Ali Khwajah.  He also turned to the Kazi who had hastily
adjudged the case, and bade him learn from that lad to do his
duty more sedulously and conscientiously.  More-over the Prince
of True Believers embraced the boy, and ordered that the Wazir
give him a thousand pieces of gold from the royal treasury and
conduct him safely to his home and parents.[FN#312]  And after,
when the lad grew to man's estate, the Commander of the Faithful
made him one of his cup-companions and furthered his fortunes and
ever entreated him with the highmost honour.  But when Queen
Shahrazad had ended the story of Ali Khwajah and the merchant of
Baghdad she said, "Now, O auspicious King, I would relate a more
excellent history than any, shouldst thou be pleased to hear that
I have to say;" and King Shahryar replied, "By Allah! what an
admirable tale is this thou hast told:  my ears do long to hear
another as rare and commendable."  So Shahrazad began forthright
to recount the adventures of[FN#313]






                   PRINCE AHMAD AND THE FAIRY
                       PERI-BANU.[FN#314]



In days of yore and times long gone before there was a Sultan of
India who begat three sons; the eldest hight Prince Husayn, the
second Prince Ali, and the youngest Prince Ahmad; moreover he had
a niece, named Princess Nur al-Nihﬂr,[FN#315] the daughter of his
cadet brother who, dying early, left his only child under her
uncle's charge. The King busied himself with abundant diligence
about her instruction and took all care that she should be taught
to read and write, sew and embroider, sing and deftly touch all
instruments of mirth and merriment. This Princess also in beauty
and loveliness and in wit and wisdom far excelled all the maidens
of her own age in every land. She was brought up with the Princes
her cousins in all joyance; and they ate together and played
together and slept together; and the king had determined in his
mind that when she reached marriageable age he would give her in
wedlock to some one of the neighbouring royalties; but, when she
came to years of discretion, her uncle perceived that the three
Princes his sons were all three deep in love of her, and each
desired in his heart to woo and to win and to wed her. Wherefore
was the King sore troubled in mind and said to himself, "An I
give the Lady Nur al-Nihar in wedlock to any one of her cousins,
the other twain will be dissatisfied and murmur against my
decision; withal my soul cannot endure to see them grieved and
disappointed. And should I marry her to some stranger the three
Princes my sons will be sore distressed and saddened in soul;
nay, who knoweth that they may not slay themselves or go forth
and betake them to some far and foreign land? The matter is a
troublous and a perilous; so it behoveth me their sire to take
action on such wise that if one of them espouse her, the other
two be not displeased thereat." Long time the Sultan revolved the
matter in his mind; and at length he devised a device; and,
sending for the three princes, addressed them saying, "O my sons,
ye are in my opinion of equal merit one with other; nor can I
give preference to any of you and marry him to the Princess Nur
al-Nihar; nor yet am I empowered to wed her with all three. But I
have thought of one plan whereby she shall be wife to one of you,
and yet shall not cause aught of irk or envy to his brethren; so
may your mutual love and affection remain unabated, and one shall
never be jealous of the other's happiness. Brief, my device is
this:--Go ye and travel to distant countries, each one separating
himself from the others; and do ye bring me back the thing most
wondrous and marvellous of all sights ye may see upon your
wayfarings; and he who shall return with the rarest of
curiosities shall be husband to the Princess Nur al-Nihar.
Consent ye now to this proposal; and whatso of money ye require
for travel and for the purchase of objects seld-seen and
singular, take ye from the royal treasury as much as ye desire."
The three Princes, who were ever submissive to their sire,
consented with one voice to this proposal, and each was satisfied
and confident that he would bring the King the most extraordinary
of gifts and thereby win the Princess to wife. So the Sultan bade
give to each what moneys he wanted without stint or account, and
counselled them to make ready for the journey without stay or
delay and depart their home in the Peace of Allah.--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-fourth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the three
princely brothers forthright made them ready for journey and
voyage. So they donned disguise, preferring the dress of
wandering merchants; and, buying such things as they needed and
taking with them each his suite they mounted steeds of purest
blood and rode forth in a body from the palace. For several
stages they travelled the same road until, reaching a place where
it branched off in three different ways, they alighted at a Khan
and ate the evening meal. Then they made compact and covenant,
that whereas they had thus far travelled together they should at
break of day take separate roads and each wend his own way and
all seek different and distant regions, agreeing to travel for
the space of one year only, after which, should they be in the
land of the living, all three would rendezvous at that same
caravanserai and return in company to the King their sire.
Furthermore, they determined that the first who came back to the
Khan should await the arrival of the next, and that two of them
should tarry there in expectancy of the third. Then, all this
matter duly settled, they retired to rest, and when the morning
morrowed they fell on one another's necks and bade farewell; and,
lastly, mounting their horses, they rode forth each in his own
direction. Now Prince Husayn, the eldest, had oft heard recount
the wonders of the land Bishangarh[FN#316], and for a long while
had wished to visit it; so he took the road which led thither,
and, joining himself to a caravan journeying that way,
accompanied it by land and by water and traversed many regions,
desert wilds and stony wolds, dense jungles and fertile tracts,
with fields and hamlets and gardens and townships. After three
months spent in wayfare at length he made Bishangarh, a region
over-reigned by manifold rulers, so great was its extent and so
far reaching was its power. He put up at a Khan built specially
for merchants who came from the farthest lands, and from the folk
who dwelt therein he heard tell that the city contained a large
central market[FN#317] wherein men bought and sold all manner of
rarities and wondrous things. Accordingly, next day Prince Husayn
repaired to the Bazar and on sighting it he stood amazed at the
prospect of its length and width. It was divided into many
streets, all vaulted over but lit up by skylights; and the shops
on either side were substantially builded, all after one pattern
and nearly of the same size, while each was fronted by an awning
which kept off the glare and made a grateful shade. Within these
shops were ranged and ordered various kinds of wares; there were
bales of "woven air"[FN#318] and linens of finest tissue,
plain-white or dyed or adorned with life-like patterns wherefrom
beasts and trees and blooms stood out so distinctly that one
might believe them to be very ferals, bosquets and gardens. There
were moreover silken goods, brocaded stuffs, and finest satins
from Persia and Egypt of endless profusion; in the China
warehouses stood glass vessels of all kinds, and here and there
were stores wherein tapestries and thousands of foot-carpets lay
for sale. So Prince Husayn walked on from shop to shop and
marvelled much to see such wondrous things whereof he had never
even dreamt: and he came at length to the Goldsmiths' Lane and
espied gems and jewels and golden and silvern vessels studded
with diamonds and rubies, emeralds, pearls and other precious
stones, all so lustrous and dazzling bright that the stores were
lit up with their singular brilliancy. Hereat he said to himself,
"If in one street only there be such wealth and jewels so rare,
Allah Almighty and none save He knoweth what may be the riches in
all this city." He was not less astonished to behold the
Brahmins, how their women-kind for excess of opulence bedecked
themselves with the finest gems and were ornamented with the
richest gear from front to foot: their very slave-boys and
handmaids wore golden necklaces and bracelets and bangles studded
with precious stones. Along the length of one market street were
ranged hosts of flower-sellers; for all the folk, both high and
low, wore wreaths and garlands: some carried nosegays in hand,
other some bound fillets round their heads, while not a few had
ropes and festoons surrounding and hanging from their necks. The
whole place seemed one huge parterre of bloomery; even traders
set bouquets in every shop and stall, and the scented air was
heavy with perfume. Strolling to and fro Prince Husayn was
presently tired and would fain have sat him down somewhere to
rest awhile, when one of the merchants, noting his look of
weariness, with kindly courtesy prayed him be seated in his
store. After saluting him with the salam the stranger sat down;
and anon he saw a broker come that way, offer