ing for sale a
carpet some four yards square, and crying, "This be for sale; who
giveth me its worth; to wit, thirty thousand gold pieces?"--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-fifth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Prince
marvelled with excessive marvel at the price, and, beckoning the
dealer, examined his wares right well; then said he, "A carpet
such as this is selleth for a few silverlings. What special
virtue hath it that thou demand therefor the sum of thirty
thousand gold coins?" The broker, believing Husayn to be a
merchant man lately arrived at Bishangarh, answered him saying,
"O my lord, thinkest thou I price this carpet at too high a
value? My master hath bidden me not to sell it for less than
forty thousand Ashrafis." Quoth the Prince, "It surely cloth
possess some wondrous virtue, otherwise wouldst thou not demand
so prodigious a sum;" and quoth the broker, "'Tis true, O my
lord, its properties are singular and marvellous. Whoever sitteth
on this carpet and willeth in thought to be taken up and set down
upon other site will, in the twinkling of an eye, be borne
thither, be that place nearhand or distant many a day's journey
and difficult to reach."[FN#319] The Prince hearing these words
said to himself, "Naught so wonder-rare as this rug can I carry
back to the Sultan my sire to my gift, or any that afford him
higher satisfaction and delight. Almighty Allah be praised, the
aim of my wayLare is attained and hereby, Inshallah! I shall win
to my wish. This, if anything, will be to him a joy for ever."
Wherefore the Prince, with intent to buy the Flying Carpet,
turned to the broker and said, If indeed it have properties such
as thou describest, verily the price thou askest therefor is not
over much, and I am ready to pay thee the sum required." The
other rejoined, "An thou doubt my words I pray thee put them to
the test and by such proof remove thy suspicions. Sit now upon
this square of tapestry, and at thy mere wish and will it shall
transport us to the caravanserai wherein thou abidest: on this
wise shalt thou be certified of my words being sooth, and when
assured of their truth thou mayest count out to me, there and
then, but not before, the value of my wares." Accordingly, the
man spread out the carpet upon the ground behind his shop and
seated the Prince thereupon, he sitting by his side. Then, at the
mere will[FN#320] and wish of Prince Husayn, the twain were at
once transported as though borne by the throne of Solomon to the
Khan. So the eldest of the brothers joyed with exceeding joy to
think that he had won so rare a thing, whose like could nowhere
be found in the lands nor amongst the Kings; and his heart and
soul were gladdened for that he had come to Bishangarh and hit
upon such a prodigy. Accordingly he counted out the forty
thousand Ashrafis as payment for the carpet, and gave, moreover,
another twenty thousand by way of sweetmeat to the broker.
Furthermore, he ceased not saying to himself that the King on
seeing it would forthright wed him to the Princess Nur al-Nihar;
for it were clear impossible that either of his brothers, e'en
though they searched the whole world over and over, could find a
rarity to compare with this. He longed to take seat upon the
carpet that very instant and fly to his own country, or, at
least, to await his brothers at the caravanserai where they had
parted under promise and covenant, pledged and concluded, to meet
again at the year's end. But presently he bethought him that the
delay would be long and longsome, and much he feared lest he be
tempted to take some rash step; wherefore he resolved upon
sojourning in the country whose King and subjects he had ardently
desired to behold for many a day, and determined that he would
pass the time in sight-seeing and in pleasuring over the lands
adjoining. So Prince Husayn tarried in Bishangarh some months.
Now the King of that country was wont to hold a high court once
every week for hearing disputes and adjudging causes which
concerned foreign merchants; and thus the Prince ofttimes saw the
King, but to none would he tell a word of his adventure. However,
inasmuch as he was comely of countenance, graceful of gait, and
courteous of accost, stout hearted and strong, wise and ware and
witty, he was held by the folk in higher honour than the Sultan;
not to speak of the traders his fellows; and in due time he be
came a favourite at court and learned of the ruler himself all
matters concerning his kingdom and his grandeur and greatness.
The Prince also visited the most famous Pagodas[FN#321] of that
country. The first he saw was wrought in brass and orichalch of
most exquisite workmanship: its inner cell measured three yards
square and contained amiddlemost a golden image in size and
stature like unto a man of wondrous beauty; and so cunning was
the workmanship that the face seemed to fix its eyes, two immense
rubies of enormous value, upon all beholders no matter where they
stood.[FN#322] He also saw another idol-temple, not less strange
and rare than this, builded in a village on a plain surface of
some half acre long and broad, wherein bloomed lovely rose-trees
and jasmine and herb-basil and many other sweet-scented plants,
whose perfume made the air rich with fragrance. Around its court
ran a wall three feet high, so that no animal might stray
therein; and in the centre was a terrace well-nigh the height of
a man, all made of white marble and wavy alabaster, each and
every slab being dressed so deftly and joined with such nice
joinery that the whole pavement albeit covering so great a space,
seemed to the sight but a single stone. In the centre of the
terrace stood the domed fane towering some fifty cubits high and
conspicuous for many miles around: its length was thirty cubits
and its breadth twenty, and the red marbles of the revetment were
clean polished as a mirror, so that every image was reflected in
it to the life. The dome was exquisitely carved and sumptuously
ornamented without; and within were ranged in due rank and
sequence rows and rows of idols. To this, the Holy of Holies,
from morn till eve thousands of Brahmins, men and women, came
docking for daily worship. They had sports and diversions as well
as rites and ceremonies: some feasted and others danced, some
sang, others played on instruments of mirth and merriment, while
here and there were plays and revels and innocent merry-makings.
And hither at every season flocked from distant lands hosts of
pilgrims seeking to fulfil their vows and to perform their
orisons; all bringing gifts of gold and silver coin and presents
rare and costly which they offered to the gods in presence of the
royal officers.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-sixth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Husayn also saw a f€te once a year within the city of Bishangarh
and the Ryots all, both great and small, gathered together and
circumambulated the Pagodas; chiefly circuiting one which in size
and grandeur surpassed all others. Great and learned Pandits
versed in the Shﬂstras[FN#323] made journeys of four or five
months and greeted one another at that festival; thither too the
folk from all parts of India pilgrimaged in such crowds that
Prince Husayn was astounded at the sight; and, by reason of the
multitudes that thronged around the temples, he could not see the
mode in which the gods were worshipped. On one side of the
adjacent plain which stretched far and wide, stood a new-made
scaffolding of ample size and great magnificence, nine storeys
high, and the lower part supported by forty pillars; and here one
day in every week the King assembled his Wazirs for the purpose
of meting out justice to all strangers in the land. The palace
within was richly adorned and furnished with costly furniture:
without, upon the wall faces were limned homely landscapes and
scenes of foreign parts and notably all manner beasts and birds
and insects even gnats and flies, portrayed with such skill of
brain and cunning of hand that they seemed real and alive and the
country-folk and villagers seeing from afar paintings of lions
and tigers and similar ravenous beasts, were filled with awe and
dismay. On the other three sides of the scaffolding were
pavilions, also of wood, built for use of the commons,
illuminated and decorated inside and outside like the first, and
wroughten so cunningly that men could turn them round, with all
the people in them, and moving them about transfer them to
whatsoever quarter they willed. On such wise they shifted these
huge buildings by aid of machinery;[FN#324] and the folk inside
could look upon a succession of sports and games. Moreover, on
each side of the square elephants were ranged in ranks, the
number amounting to well nigh one thousand, their trunks and ears
and hinder parts being painted with cinnabar and adorned with
various lively figures; their housings were of gold brocade and
their howdahs purfled with silver, carrying minstrels who
performed on various instruments, whilst buffoons delighted the
crowd with their jokes and mimes played their most diverting
parts. Of all the sports, however, which the Prince beheld, the
elephant-show amused him most and Wiled him with the greatest
admiration. One huge beast, which could be wheeled about where
the keepers ever listed, for that his feet rested upon a post
which travelled on casters, held in his trunk a flageolet whereon
he played so sweetly well that all the people were fain to cry
Bravo! There was another but a smaller animal which stood upon
one end of a beam laid crosswise upon, and attached with hinges
to, a wooden block eight cubits high, and on the further end was
placed an iron weight as heavy as the elephant, who would press
down for some time upon the beam until the end touched the
ground, and then the weight would raise him up again.[FN#325]
Thus the beam swung like a see saw aloft and adown; and, as it
moved, the elephant swayed to and fro and kept time with the
bands of music, loudly trumpeting the while. The people moreover
could wheel about this elephant from place to place as he stood
balanced on the beam; and such exhibitions of learned elephants
were mostly made in presence of the King. Prince Husayn spent
well nigh a year in sight-seeing amongst the fairs and festivals
of Bishangarh; and, when the period of the fraternal compact drew
near, he spread his carpet upon the court-ground behind the Khan
wherein he lodged, and sitting thereon, together with his suite
and the steeds and all he had brought with him, mentally wished
that he might be transported to the caravanserai where the three
brothers had agreed to meet. No sooner had he formed the thought
than straightway, in the twinkling of an eye, the carpet rose
high in air and sped through space and carried them to the
appointed stead where, still garbed as a merchant he remained in
expectation of his brothers' coming. Hearken now, O auspicious
King, to what befel Prince Ali, the second brother of Prince
Husayn. On the third day after he had parted from the two others,
he also joined a caravan and journeyed towards Persia; then,
after a march of four months arriving at Shiraz, the capital of
Iran-land, he alighted at a Khan, he and his fellow-travellers
with whom he had made a manner of friendship; and, passing as a
jeweller, there took up his abode with them. Next day the traders
fared forth to buy wares and to sell their goods; but Prince Ali,
who had brought with him naught of vendible, and only the things
he needed, presently doffed his travelling dress, and in company
with a comrade of the caravan entered the chief Bazar, known as
the Bazistﬂn,[FN#326] or cloth-market. Ali strolled about the
place, which was built of brick and where all the shops had
arched roofs resting on handsome columns; and he admired greatly
to behold the splendid store-houses exposing for sale all manner
goods of countless value. He wondered much what wealth was in the
town if a single market street contained riches such as these.
And as the brokers went about crying their goods for sale, he saw
one of them hending in hand an ivory tube in length about a
cubit, which he was offering for sale at the price of thirty
thousand Ashrafis. Hearing such demand Prince Ali thought to
himself, "Assuredly this fellow is a fool who asketh such a price
for so paltry a thing."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-seventh Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince Ali
presently asked one of the shopkeepers with whom he had made
acquaintance, saying, "O my friend, is this man a maniac that he
asketh a sum of thirty thousand Ashrafis for this little pipe of
ivory? Surely none save an idiot would give him such a price and
waste upon it such a mint of money." Said the shop man, "O my
lord, this broker is wiser and warier than all the others of his
calling, and by means of him I have sold goods worth thousands of
sequins. Until yesterday he was in his sound senses; but I cannot
say what state is his to day and whether or no he have lost his
wits; but this wot I well, that if he ask thirty thousand for yon
ivory tube, 'twill be worth that same or even more. Howbeit we
shall see with our own eyes. Sit thee here and rest within the
shop until he pass this way." So Prince Ali abode where he was
bidden and presently the broker was seen coming up the street.
Then the shopman calling to him said, "O man, rare merit hath yon
little pipe; for all the folk are astounded to hear thee ask so
high a price therefor; nay more, this friend of mine thinketh
that thou art crazy." The broker, a man of sense, was on no wise
chafed at these words but answered with gentle speech, "O my
lord, I doubt not but that thou must deem me a madman to ask so
high a price, and set so great a value upon an article so mean;
but when I shall have made known to thee its properties and
virtues, thou wilt most readily consent to take it at that
valuation. Not thou alone but all men who have heard me cry my
cry laugh and name me ninny." So saying, the broker showed the
Spying Tube to Prince Ali and handing it to him said, "Examine
well this ivory, the properties of which I will explain to thee.
Thou seest that it is furnished with a piece of glass at either
end;[FN#327] and, shouldst thou apply one extremity thereof to
thine eye, thou shalt see what thing soe'er thou listest and it
shall appear close by thy side though parted from thee by many an
hundred of miles." Replied the Prince, "This passeth all
conception, nor can I believe it to be veridical until I shall
have tested it and I become satisfied that 'tis even as thou
sayest." Hereupon the broker placed the little tube in Prince
Ali's hand, and showing him the way to handle it said, "Whatso
thou mayest wish to descry will be shown to thee by looking
through this ivory." Prince Ali silently wished to sight his
sire, and when he placed the pipe close to his eye forthwith he
saw him hale and hearty, seated on his throne and dispensing
justice to the people of his dominion. Then the youth longed with
great longing to look upon his lady love the Princess Nur
al-Nihar; and straightway he saw her also sitting upon her bed,
sound and sane, talking and laughing, whilst a host of handmaids
stood around awaiting her commands. The Prince was astonished
exceedingly to behold this strange and wondrous spectacle, and
said to himself, "An I should wander the whole world over for ten
years or more and search in its every corner and cranny, I shall
never find aught so rare and precious as this tube of ivory."
Then quoth he to the broker, "The virtues of thy pipe I find are
indeed those thou hast described, and right willingly I give to
thee its price the thirty thousand Ashrafis." Replied the sales-
man, "O my lord, my master hath sworn an oath that he will not
part with it for less than forty thousand gold pieces." Here-upon
the Prince, understanding that the broker was a just man and a
true, weighed out to him the forty thousand sequins and became
master of the Spying Tube, enraptured with the thought that
assuredly it would satisfy his sire and obtain for him the hand
of Princess Nur al-Nihar. So with mind at ease Ali journeyed
through Shiraz and over sundry parts of Persia; and in fine, when
the year was well nigh spent he joined a caravan and, travelling
back to India, arrived safe and sound at the appointed
caravanserai whither Prince Husayn had foregone him. There the
twain tarried awaiting the third brother's safe return. Such, O
King Shahryar, is the story of the two brothers; and now I
beseech thee incline thine ear and hearken to what befel the
youngest, to wit Prince Ahmad; for indeed his adventure is yet
more peregrine and seld-seen of all. When he had parted from his
brothers, he took the road leading to Samarkand; and, arriving
there after long travel, he also like his brothers alighted at a
Khan. Next day he fared forth to see the market square, which
folk call the Bazistan, and he found it fairly laid out, the
shops wroughten with cunning workmanship and filled with rare
stuffs and precious goods and costly merchandise. Now as he
wandered to and fro he came across a broker who was hawking a
Magical Apple and crying aloud, "Who will buy this fruit, the
price whereof be thirty-five thousand gold pieces?" Quoth Prince
Ahmad to the man, "Prithee let me see the fruit thou holdest in
hand, and explain to me what hidden virtue it possesseth that
thou art asking for it so high a value." Quoth the other, smiling
and handing to him the apple, "Marvel not at this, O good my
lord: in sooth I am certified that when I shall have explained
its properties and thou shalt see how it advantageth all mankind,
thou wilt not deem my demand exorbitant; nay, rather thou wilt
gladly give a treasure house of gold so thou may possess
it."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-eighth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the broker
said moreover to Prince Ahmad, "Now hearken to me, O my lord, and
I will tell thee what of virtue lieth in this artificial apple.
If anyone be sick of a sickness however sore, nay more if he be
ill nigh unto death, and perchance he smell this pome, he will
forthwith recover and become well and whole of whatsoever disease
he had, plague or pleurisy, fever or other malignant distemper,
as though he never had been attacked; and his strength will
return to him forthright, and after smelling this fruit he will
be free from all ailment and malady so long as life shall remain
to him." Quoth Prince Ahmad, "How shall I be assured that what
thou speakest is truth? If the matter be even as thou sayest,
then verily I will give thee right gladly the sum thou
demandest." Quoth the broker, "O my lord, all men who dwell in
the parts about Samarkand know full well how there once lived in
this city a sage of wondrous skill who, after many years of toil
and travail, wrought this apple by mixing medicines from herbs
and minerals countless in number. All his good, which was great,
he expended upon it, and when he had perfected it he made whole
thousands of sick folk whom he directed only to smell the fruit.
But, alas! his life presently came to an end and death overtook
him suddenly ere he could save himself by the marvellous scent;
and, as he had won no wealth and left only a bereaved wife and a
large family of young children and dependents manifold, his widow
had no help but provide for them a maintenance by parting with
this prodigy." While the salesman was telling his tale to the
Prince a crowd of citizens gathered around them and one amongst
the folk, who was well known to the broker, came forward and
said, "A friend of mine lieth at home sick to the death: the
doctors and surgeons all despair of his life; so I beseech thee
let him smell this fruit that he may live." Hearing these words,
Prince Ahmad turned to the salesman and said, "O my friend, if
this sick man of whom thou hearest can recover strength by
smelling the apple, then will I straightway buy it of thee at a
valuation of forty thousand Ashrafis." The man had permission to
sell it for a sum of thirty-five thousand; so he was satisfied to
receive five thousand by way of brokerage, and he rejoined, "'Tis
well, O my lord, now mayest thou test the virtues of this apple
and be persuaded in thy mind: hundreds of ailing folk have I made
whole by means of it." Accordingly the Prince accompanied the
people to the sick man's house and found him lying on his bed
with the breath in his nostrils; but, as soon as the dying man
smelt the fruit, at once recovering strength he rose in perfect
health, sane and sound. Hereupon Ahmad bought the Magical Apple
of the dealer and counted out to him the forty thousand Ashrafis.
Presently, having gained the object of his travels, he resolved
to join some caravan marching Indiawards and return to his
father's home; but meanwhile he resolved to solace himself with
the sights and marvels of Samarkand. His especial joy was to gaze
upon the glorious plain highs Soghd,[FN#328] one of the wonders
of this world: the land on all sides was a delight to the sight,
emerald-green and bright, with crystal rills like the plains of
Paradise; the gardens bore all manner flowers and fruits and the
cities and palaces gladdened the stranger's gaze. After some days
Prince Ahmad joined a caravan of merchants wending Indiawards;
and, when his long and longsome travel was ended, he at last
reached the caravanserai where his two brothers, Husayn and Ali,
impatiently awaited his arrival. The three rejoiced with
exceeding joy to meet once more and fell on one another's necks;
thanking Allah who had brought them back safe and sound, hale and
hearty, after such prolonged and longsome absence. Then Prince
Husayn, being the eldest, turned to them and said, "Now it
behoveth us each to recount what hath betided him and announce
what rare thing he hath brought back and what be the virtues
thereof; and I, being the first-born, will be the foremost to
tell my adventures. I bring with me from Bishangarh, a carpet,
mean to look at, but such are its properties that should any sit
thereon and wish in mind to visit country or city, he will at
once be carried thither in ease and safety although it be distant
months, nay years of journey. I have paid forty thousand gold
pieces to its price; and, after seeing all the wonders of
Bishangarh-land, I took seat upon my purchase and willed myself
at this spot. Straightway I found myself here as I wished and
have tarried in this caravanserai three months awaiting your
arrival. The flying carpet is with me; so let him who listeth
make trial of it." When the senior Prince had made an end of
telling his tale, Prince Ali spake next and said, "O my brother,
this carpet which thou hast brought is marvel-rare and hath most
wondrous gifts; nor according to thy statement hath any in all
the world seen aught to compare with it." Then bringing forth the
Spying Tube, he pursued, "Look ye here, I too have bought for
forty thousand Ashrafis somewhat whose merits I will now show
forth to you."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-ninth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince Ali
enlarged upon the virtues of his purchase and said, "Ye see this
ivory pipe? By means of it man may descry objects hidden from his
sight and distant from him many a mile. 'Tis truly a most
wondrous matter and right worthy your inspection, and you two may
try it an ye will. Place but an eye close to the smaller glass
and form a wish in mind to see what thing soe'er your soul
desireth; and, whether it be near hand or distant many hundreds
of miles, this ivory will make the object look clear and close to
you." At these words Prince Husayn took the pipe from Prince Ali
and, applying his eye to one end as he had been directed, then
wished in his heart to behold the Princess Nur al-Nihar;[FN#329]
and the two brothers watched him to learn what he would say.
Suddenly they saw his face change colour and wither as a wilted
flower, while in his agitation and distress a flood of tears
gushed from his eyes; and, ere his brothers recovered from their
amazement and could enquire the cause of such strangeness, he
cried aloud, "Alas! and well away. We have endured toil and
travail, and we have travelled so far and wide hoping to wed the
Princess Nur al-Nihar. But 'tis all in vain: I saw her lying on
her bed death-sick and like to breathe her last and around her
stood her women all weeping and wailing in the sorest of sorrow.
O my brothers, an ye would see her once again for the last time,
take ye one final look through the glass ere she be no more."
Hereat Prince Ali seized the Spying Tube and peered through it
and found the condition of the Princess even as his brother
Husayn had described; so he presently passed it over to Prince
Ahmad, who also looked and was certified that the Lady Nur
al-Nihar was about to give up the ghost. So he said to his elder
brothers, "We three are alike love distraught for the Princess
and the dearest wish of each one is to win her. Her life is on
the ebb, still I can save her and make her whole if we hasten to
her without stay or delay." So saying he pulled from his pocket
the Magical Apple and showed it to them crying, "This thing is
not less in value than either the Flying Carpet or the Spying
Tube. In Samarkand I bought it for forty thousand gold pieces and
here is the best opportunity to try its virtues. The folk told me
that if a sick man hold it to his nose, although on the point of
death, he will wax at once well and hale again: I have myself
tested it, and now ye shall see for yourselves its marvel-cure
when I shall apply it to the case of Nur al-Nihar. Only, let us
seek her presence ere she die." Quoth Prince Husayn, "This were
an easy matter: my carpet shall carry us in the twinkling of an
eye straight to the bedside of our beloved. Do ye without
hesitation sit down with me thereupon, for there is room
sufficient to accommodate us three; we shall instantly be carried
thither and our servants can follow us." Accordingly, the three
Princes disposed themselves upon the Flying Carpet and each
willed in his mind to reach the bedside of Nur al-Nihar, when
instantly they found themselves within her apartment. The
handmaids and eunuchs in waiting were terrified at the sight and
marvelled how these stranger men could have entered the chamber;
and, as the Castratos were fain fall upon them, brand in hand,
they recognised the Princes and drew back still in wonderment at
their intrusion. Then the brothers rose forthright from the
Flying Carpet and Prince Ahmad came forwards and put the Magical
Apple to the nostrils of the lady, who lay stretched on the couch
in unconscious state; and as the scent reached her brain the
sickness left her and the cure was complete. She opened wide her
eyes and sitting erect upon her bed looked all around and chiefly
at the Princes as they stood before her; for she felt that she
had waxed hale and hearty as though she awoke after the sweetest
of slumber. Presently she arose from her couch and bade her
tire-women dress her the while they related to her the sudden
coming of the three Princes, her uncle's sons, and how Prince
Ahmad had made her smell something whereby she had recovered of
her illness. And after she had made the Ablution of Health she
joyed with exceeding joy to see the Princes and returned thanks
to them, but chiefly to Prince Ahmad in that he had restored her
to health and life.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Fiftieth Night.

Then she said:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
brothers also were gladdened with exceeding gladness to see the
Princess Nur al-Nihar recover so suddenly from mortal malady and,
presently taking leave of her, they fared to greet their father.
Meanwhile the Eunuchs had reported the whole matter to the
Sultan, and when the Princes came before him he rose and embraced
them tenderly and kissed them on their foreheads, filled with
satisfaction to see them again and to hear from them the welfare
of the Princess, who was dear to him as she had been his
daughter. Then the three brothers produced each one the wondrous
thing he had brought from his wayfare; and Prince Husayn first
showed the Flying Carpet which in the twinkling of an eye had
transported them home from far distant exile and said, "For
outward show this carpet hath no merit, but inasmuch as it
possesseth such wondrous virtue, methinks 'tis impossible to find
in all the world aught that can compare to it for rarity." Next,
Prince Ali presented to the King his Spying Tube and said, "The
mirror of Jamsh›d[FN#330] is as vain and naught beside this pipe,
by means whereof all things from East to West and from North to
South are made clearly visible to the ken of man." Last of all,
Prince Ahmad produced the Magical Apple which wondrously saved
the dear life of Nur al-Nihar and said, "By means of this fruit
all maladies and grievous distempers are at once made whole."
Thus each presented his rarity to the Sultan, saying, "O our
lord, deign examine well these gifts we have brought and do thou
pronounce which of them all is most excellent and admirable; so,
according to thy promise, he amongst us on whom thy choice may
fall shall marry the Princess Nur al-Nihar." When the King had
patiently listened to their several claims and had understood how
each gift took part in restoring health to his niece, for a while
he dove deep in the sea of thought and then answered, "Should I
award the palm of merit to Prince Ahmad, whose Magical Apple
cured the Princess, then should I deal unfairly by the other two.
Albeit his rarity restored her to life and health from mortal
illness, yet say me how had he known of her condition save by the
virtue of Prince Ali's Spying Tube? In like manner, but for the
Flying Carpet of Prince Husayn, which brought you three hither in
a moment's space, the Magical Apple would have been of no avail.
Wherefore 'tis my rede all three had like part and can claim
equal merit in healing her; for it were impossible to have made
her whole if any one thing of the three were wanting; furthermore
all three objects are wondrous and marvellous without one
surpassing other, nor can I, with aught of reason, assign
preference or precedence to any. My promise was to marry the Lady
Nur al-Nihar to him who should produce the rarest of rarities,
but although strange 'tis not less true that all are alike in the
one essential condition. The difficulty still remaineth and the
question is yet unsolved, whilst I fain would have the matter
settled ere the close of day, and without prejudice to any. So
needs must I fix upon some plan whereby I may be able to adjudge
one of you to be the winner, and bestow upon him the hand of
Princess Nur al-Nihar, according to my plighted word; and thus
absolve myself from all responsibility. Now I have resolved upon
this course of action; to wit, that ye should mount each one his
own steed and all of you be provided with bow and arrows; then do
ye ride forth to the Maydﬂn--the hippodrome--whither I and my
Ministers of State and Grandees of the kingdom and Lords of the
land will follow you. There in my presence ye shall each, turn by
turn, shoot a shaft with all your might and main; and he amongst
you whose arrow shall fly the farthest will be adjudged by me
worthiest to win the Princess Nur al-Nihar to wife." Accordingly
the three Princes, who could not gainsay the decision of their
sire nor question its wisdom and justice, backed their coursers,
and each taking his bow and arrows made straight for the place
appointed. The King also, when he had stored the presents in the
royal treasury, arrived there with his Wazirs and the dignitaries
of his realm; and as soon as all was ready, the eldest son and
heir, Prince Husayn, essayed his strength and skill and shot a
shaft far along the level plain. After him Prince Ali hent his
bow in hand and, discharging an arrow in like direction, overshot
the first; and lastly came Prince Ahmad's turn. He too aimed at
the same end, but such was the decree of Destiny, that although
the knights and courtiers urged on their horses to note where his
shaft might strike ground, withal they saw no trace thereof and
none of them knew if it had sunk into the bowels of earth or had
flown up to the confines of the sky. Some, indeed, there were who
with evil mind held that Prince Ahmad had not shot any bolt, and
that his arrow had never left his bow. So at last the King bade
no more search be made for it and declared himself in favour of
Prince Ali and adjudged that he should wed the Princess Nur
al-Nihar, forasmuch as his arrow had outsped that of Prince
Husayn. Accordingly, in due course the marriage rites and
ceremonies were performed after the law and ritual of the land
with exceeding pomp and grandeur. But Prince Husayn would not be
present at the bride-feast by reason of his dis appointment and
jealousy, for he had loved the Lady Nur al-Nihar with a love far
exceeding that of either of his brothers; and he doffed his
princely dress and donning the garb of a Fakir fared forth to
live a hermit's life. Prince Ahmad also burned with envy and
refused to join the wedding-feast; he did not, however, like
Prince Husayn, retire to a hermitage, but he spent all his days
in searching for his shaft to find where it had fallen. Now it so
fortuned that one morning he went again, alone as was his wont,
in quest thereof, and starting from the stead whence they had
shot their shafts reached the place where the arrows of Princes
Husayn and Ali had been found. Then going straight forwards he
cast his glances on every side over hill and dale to his right
and to his left.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-first Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Ahmad went searching for his shaft over hill and dale when, after
covering some three parasangs, suddenly he espied it lying flat
upon a rock.[FN#331] Hereat he marvelled greatly, wondering how
the arrow had flown so far, but even more so when he went up to
it and saw that it had not stuck in the ground but appeared to
have rebounded and to have fallen flat upon a slab of stone.
Quoth he to himself, "There must assuredly be some mystery in
this matter: else how could anyone shoot a shaft to such a
distance and find it fallen after so strange a fashion." Then,
threading his way amongst the pointed crags and huge boulders, he
presently came to a hollow in the ground which ended in a
subterraneous passage, and after pacing a few paces he espied an
iron door. He pushed this open with all ease, for that it had no
bolt, and entering, arrow in hand, he came upon an easy slope by
which he descended. But whereas he feared to find all pitch-dark,
he discovered at some distance a spacious square, a widening of
the cave, which was lighted on every side with lamps and
candelabra. Then advancing some fifty cubits or more his glance
fell upon a vast and handsome palace, and presently there issued
from within to the portico a lovely maiden lovesome and lovable,
a fairy-form robed in princely robes and adorned from front to
foot with the costliest of jewels. She walked with slow and
stately gait, withal graceful and blandishing, whilst around her
ranged her attendants like the stars about a moon of the
fourteenth night. Seeing this vision of beauty, Prince Ahmad
hastened to salute her with the salam and she returned it; then
coming forwards greeted him graciously and said in sweetest
accents, "Well come and welcome, O Prince Ahmad: I am pleased to
have sight of thee. How fareth it with thy Highness and why hast
thou tarried so long away from me?" The King's son marvelled
greatly to hear her name him by his name; for that he knew not
who she was, as they had never seen each other aforetime--how
then came she to have learnt his title and condition? Then
kissing ground before her he said, "O my lady, I owe thee much of
thanks and gratitude for that thou art pleased to welcome me with
words of cheer in this strange place where I, alone and a
stranger, durst enter with exceeding hesitation and trepidation.
But it perplexeth me sorely to think how thou camest to learn the
name of thy slave." Quoth she with a smile, "O my lord, come
hither and let us sit at ease within yon belvedere; and there I
will give an answer to thine asking." So they went thither,
Prince Ahmad following her footsteps; and on reaching it he was
filled with wonder to see its vaulted roof of exquisite
workmanship and adorned with gold and lapis lazuli[FN#332] and
paintings and ornaments, whose like was nowhere to be found in
the world. The lady seeing his astonishment said to the Prince,
"This mansion is nothing beside all my others which now, of my
free will, I have made thine own; and when thou seest them thou
shalt have just cause for wonderment. Then that sylph-like being
took seat upon a raised dais and with abundant show of affection
seated Prince Ahmad by her side. Presently quoth she, "Albeit
thou know me not, I know thee well, as thou shalt see with
surprise when I shall tell thee all my tale. But first it
behoveth me disclose to thee who I am. In Holy Writ belike thou
hast read that this world is the dwelling-place not only of men,
but also of a race hight the Jann in form likest to mortals. I am
the only daughter of a Jinn chief of noblest strain and my name
is Per›-Bﬂn∑. So marvel not to hear me tell thee who thou art and
who is the King thy sire and who is Nur al-Nihar, the daughter of
thine uncle. I have full knowledge of all concerning thyself and
thy kith and kin; how thou art one of three brothers who all and
each were daft for love of Princess Nur al-Nihar and strave to
win her from one another to wife. Furthermore thy sire deemed it
best to send you all far and wide over foreign lands, and thou
faredest to far Samarkand and broughtest back a Magical Apple
made with rare art and mystery which thou boughtest for forty
thousand Ashrafis; then by means whereof thou madest the Princess
thy lady-love whole of a grievous malady, whilst Prince Husayn,
thine elder brother, bought for the same sum of money a Flying
Carpet at Bishangarh, and Prince Ali also brought home a Spying
Tube from Shiraz-city. Let this suffice to show thee that naught
is hidden from me of all thy case; and now do thou tell me in
very truth whom dost thou admire the more, for beauty and
loveliness, me or the lady Nur al-Nihar thy brother's wife? My
heart longeth for thee with excessive longing and desireth that
we may be married and enjoy the pleasures of life and the joyance
of love. So say me, art thou also willing to wed me, or pinest
thou in preference for the daughter of thine uncle? In the
fulness of my affection for thee I stood by thy side unseen
during the archery meeting upon the plain of trial, and when thou
shottest thy shaft I knew that it would fall far short of Prince
Ali's,[FN#333] so I hent it in hand ere it touched ground and
carried it away from sight, and striking it upon the iron door
caused it rebound and lie flat upon the rock where thou didst
find it. And ever since that day I have been sitting in
expectancy, wotting well that thou wouldst search for it until
thou find it, and by such means I was certified of bringing thee
hither to me." Thus spake the beautiful maiden Peri-Banu who with
eyes full of love-longing looked up at Prince Ahmad; and then
with modest shame bent low her brow and averted her glance.--And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-Second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that when Prince
Ahmad heard these words of Peri-Banu he rejoiced with joy
exceeding, and said to himself, "The Princess Nur al-Nihar is not
within my power to win, and Peri-Banu doth outvie her in
comeliness of favour and in loveliness of form and in
gracefulness of gait." In short so charmed was he and captivated
that he clean forgot his love for his cousin; and, noting that
the heart of his new enchantress inclined towards him, he
replied, "O my lady, O fairest of the fair, naught else do I
desire save that I may serve thee and do thy bidding all my life
long. But I am of human and thou of non-human birth. Thy friends
and family, kith and kin, will haply be displeased with thee an
thou unite with me in such union." But she made answer, "I have
full sanction of my parents to marry as I list and whomsoever I
may prefer. Thou sayest that thou wilt be my servant, nay, rather
be thou my lord and master; for I myself and my life and all my
good are very thine, and I shall ever be thy bondswoman. Consent
now, I beseech thee, to accept me for thy wife: my heart doth
tell me thou wilt not refuse my request." Then Peri-Banu added,
"I have told thee already that in this matter I act with fullest
authority. Besides all this there is a custom and immemorial
usage with us fairy-folk that, when we maidens come to
marriageable age and years of understanding, each one may wed,
according the dictates of her heart, the person that pleaseth her
most and whom she judgeth likely to make her days happy Thus wife
and husband live with each other all their lives in harmony and
happiness. But if a girl be given away in marriage by the
parents, according to their choice and not hers, and she be mated
to a helpmate unmeet for her, because ill-shapen or ill-
conditioned or unfit to win her affection, then are they twain
likely to be at variance each with other for the rest of their
days; and endless troubles result to them from such ill-sorted
union. Nor are we bound by another law which bindeth modest
virgins of the race of Adam; for we freely announce our
preference to those we love, nor must we wait and pine to be
wooed and won." When Prince Ahmad heard these words of answer, he
rejoiced with exceeding joy and stooping down essayed to kiss the
skirt of her garment, but she prevented him, and in lieu of her
hem gave him her hand. The Prince clasped it with rapture and
according to the custom of that place, he kissed it and placed it
to his breast and upon his eyes. Hereat quoth the Fairy, smiling
a charming smile, "With my hand locked in thine plight me thy
troth even as I pledge my faith to thee, that I will alway true
and loyal be, nor ever prove faithless or fail of constancy." And
quoth the Prince, "O loveliest of beings, O dearling of my soul,
thinkest thou that I can ever become a traitor to my own heart, I
who love thee to distraction and dedicate to thee my body and my
sprite; to thee who art my queen, the very empress of me? Freely
I give myself to thee, do thou with me whatso thou wilt."
Hereupon Peri-Banu said to Prince Ahmad, "Thou art my husband and
I am thy wife.[FN#334] This solemn promise made between thee and
me standeth in stead of marriage-contract: no need have we of
Kazi, for with us all other forms and ceremonies are superfluous
and of no avail. Anon I will show thee the chamber where we shall
pass the bride-night; and methinks thou wilt admire it and
confess that there is none like thereto in the whole world of
men." Presently her handmaidens spread the table and served up
dishes of various kinds, and the finest wines in flagons and
goblets of gold dubbed with jewels. So they twain sat at meat and
ate and drank their sufficiency. Then Peri-Banu took Prince Ahmad
by the hand and led him to her private chamber wherein she slept;
and he stood upon the threshold amazed to see its magnificence
and the heaps of gems and precious stones which dazed his sight,
till recovering himself he cried, "Methinks there is not in the
universe a room so splendid and decked with costly furniture and
gemmed articles such as this." Quoth Peri-Banu, "An thou so
admire and praise this palace what wilt thou say when sighting
the mansions and castles of my sire the Jann-King? Haply too when
thou shalt behold my garden thou wilt be filled with wonder and
delight; but now 'tis over late to lead thee thither and night
approacheth." Then she ushered Prince Ahmad into another room
where the supper had been spread, and the splendour of this
saloon yielded in naught to any of the others; nay, rather it was
the more gorgeous and dazzling. Hundreds of wax candles set in
candelabra of the finest amber[FN#335] and the purest crystal,
ranged on all sides, rained floods of light, whilst golden
flowerpots and vessels of finest workmanship and priceless worth,
of lovely shapes and wondrous art, adorned the niches and the
walls.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that tongue of
man can never describe the magnificence of that room in which
bands of virgin Peris, loveliest of forms and fairest of
features, garbed in choicest garments played on sweet-toned
instruments of mirth and merriment or sang lays of amorous
significance to strains of heart bewitching music. Then they
twain, to wit the bride and bridegroom, sat down at meat, ever
and anon delaying to indulge in toyings and bashful love-play and
chaste caresses. Peri-Banu with her own hands passed the choicest
mouthfuls to Prince Ahmad and made him taste of each dish and
dainty, telling him their names and whereof they were composed.
But how shall I, O auspicious King Shahryar, avail to give thee
any notion of those Jinn-made dishes or to describe with due meed
of praise the delicious flavour of meats such as no mortal ever
tasted or ever beheld? Then, when both had supped, they drank the
choicest wines, and ate with relish sweet conserves and dry fruit
and a dessert of various delicacies. At length, when they had
their requirement of eating and drinking, they retired into
another room which contained a raised dais of the grandest,
bedecked with gold-purfled cushions and pillows wrought with
seed-pearl and Ach menian tapestries, whereupon they took seat
side by side for converse and solace. Then came in a troop of
Jinns and fairies who danced and sang before them with wondrous
grace and art; and this pretty show pleased Peri-Banu and Prince
Ahmad, who watched the sports and displays with ever-renewed
delight. At last the newly wedded couple rose and retired, weary
of revelry, to another chamber, wherein they found that the
slaves had dispread the genial bed, whose frame was gold studded
with jewels and whose furniture was of satin and sendal flowered
with the rarest embroidery. Here the guests who attended at the
marriage festival and the handmaids of the palace, ranged in two
lines, hailed the bride and bridegroom as they went within; and
then, craving dismissal, they all departed leaving them to take
their joyance in bed. On such wise the marriage-festival and
nuptial merry-makings were kept up day after day, with new dishes
and novel sports, novel dances and new music; and, had Prince
Ahmad lived a thousand years with mortal kind, never could he
have seen such revels or heard such strains or enjoyed such
love-liesse. Thus six months soon passed in the Fairy-land beside
Peri-Banu, whom he loved with a love so fond that he would not
lose her from his sight for a moment's space; but would feel
restless and ill-at-ease whenas he ceased to look upon her. In
like manner Peri-Banu was fulfilled with affection for him and
strove to please her bridegroom more and more every moment by new
arts of dalliance and fresh appliances of pleasure, until so
absorbing waxed his passion for her that the thought of home and
kindred, kith and kin, faded from his thoughts and fled his mind.
But after a time his memory awoke from slumber and at times he
found himself longing to look upon his father, albeit well did he
wot that it were impossible to find out how the far one fared
unless he went himself to visit him. So one day quoth he to
Peri-Banu, "An it be thy pleasure, I pray thee give me thy
command that I may leave thee for a few days to see my sire, who
doubtless grieveth at my long absence and suffereth all the
sorrows of separation from his son." Peri-Banu, hearing these
words was dismayed with sore dismay, for that she thought within
herself that this was only an excuse whereby he might escape and
leave her after enjoyment and possession had made her love pall
upon the palate of his mind. So quoth she in reply, "Hast thou
forgotten thy vows and thy plighted troth, that thou wishest to
leave me now? Have love and longing ceased to stir thee, whilst
my heart always throbbeth in raptures as it hath ever done at the
very thought of thee?" Replied the Prince, "O dearling of my
soul, my queen, my empress, what be these doubts that haunt thy
mind, and why such sad misgivings and sorrowful words? I know
full well that the love of thee and thine affection me-wards are
even as thou sayest; and did I not acknowledge this truth or did
I prove unthankful or fail to regard thee with a passion as warm
and deep, as tender and as true as thine own, I were indeed an
ingrate and a traitor of the darkest dye. Far be it from me to
desire severance from thee nor hath any thought of leaving thee
never to return at any time crossed my mind. But my father is now
an old man well shotten in years and he is sore grieved in mind
at this long separation from his youngest son. If thou wilt deign
command, I would fain go visit him and with all haste return to
thine arms; yet I would not do aught in this matter against thy
will; and such is my fond affection for thee that I would fain be
at all hours of the day and watches of the night by thy side nor
leave thee for a moment of time." Peri-Banu was somewhat
comforted by this speech; and from his looks, words and acts she
was certified that Prince Ahmad really loved her with fondest
love and that his heart was true as steel to her as was his
tongue. Whereupon she granted him leave and liberty to set forth
and see his sire, whilst at the same time she gave him strict
commandment not to tarry long with his kith and kin. Hearken now,
O auspicious King Shahryar, to what befel the Sultan of Hindostan
and how it fared with him after the marriage of Prince Ali to
Princess Nur al-Nihar.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that not seeing
Prince Husayn and Prince Ahmad for the space of many days the
Sultan waxed exceeding sad and heavy-hearted, and one morning
after Darbar,[FN#336] asked his Wazirs and Ministers what had
betided them and where they were. Hereto the councillors made
answer saying, "O our lord, and shadow of Allah upon earth, thine
eldest son and fruit of thy vitals and heir apparent to thine
Empire the Prince Husayn, in his disappointment and jealousy and
bitter grief hath doffed his royal robes to become a hermit, a
devotee, renouncing all worldly lusts and gusts. Prince Ahmad thy
third son also in high dudgeon hath left the city; and of him
none knoweth aught, whither he hath fled or what hath befallen
him." The King was sore distressed and bade them write without
stay or delay and forthright despatch firmans and commands to all
the Nabobs and Governors of the provinces, with strict
injunctions to make straight search for Prince Ahmad and to send
him to his sire the moment he was found. But, albeit the
commandments were carried out to the letter and all the seekers
used the greatest diligence none came upon any trace of him.
Then, with increased sadness of heart, the Sultan ordered his
Grand Wazir to go in quest of the fugitive and the Minister
replied, "Upon my head be it and mine eyes! Thy servant hath
already caused most careful research to be made in every quarter,
but not the smallest clue hath yet come to hand: and this matter
troubleth me the more for that he was de