ar to me as a son." The
Ministers and Grandees now understood that the King was
overwhelmed with woe, tearful-eyed and heavy-hearted by reason of
the loss of Prince Ahmad; whereupon bethought the Grand Wazir of
a certain witch famed for the Black Art who could conjure down
the stars from heaven; and who was a noted dweller in the
capital. So going to the Sultan he spake highly of her skill in
knowledge of the abstruse,[FN#337] saying "Let the King, I pray
thee, send for this sorceress and enquire of her concerning his
lost son." And the King replied, "'Tis well said: let her be
brought hither and haply she shall give me tidings of the Prince
and how he fareth." So they fetched the Sorceress and set her
before the Sultan, who said, "O my good woman, I would have thee
know that ever since the marriage of Prince Ali with the Lady Nur
al-Nihar, my youngest son Prince Ahmad,[FN#338] who was
disappointed in her love, hath disappeared from our sight and no
man knoweth aught of him. Do thou forthright apply thy magical
craft and tell me only this:--Is he yet alive or is he dead? An
he live I would learn where is he and how fareth he; moreover, I
would ask, Is it written in my book of Destiny that I shall see
him yet again?" To this the Witch made reply, "O Lord of the Age
and ruler of the times and tide, 'tis not possible for me at once
to answer all these questions which belong to the knowledge of
Hidden Things; but, if thy Highness deign grant me one day of
grace, I will consult my books of gramarye and on the morrow will
give thee a sufficient reply and a satisfactory." The Sultan to
this assented, saying, "An thou can give me detailed and adequate
answer, and set my mind at ease after this sorrow, thou shalt
have an exceeding great reward and I will honour thee with
highmost honour." Next day the Sorceress, accompanied by the
Grand Wazir, craved permission to appear before the presence, and
when it was granted came forward and said, "I have made ample
investigation by my art and mystery and I have assured myself
that Prince Ahmad is yet in the land of the living. Be not
therefore uneasy in thy mind on his account; but at present, save
this only, naught else can I discover regarding him, nor can I
say for sure where he be or how he is to be found." At these
words the Sultan took comfort, and hope sprang up within his
breast that he should see his son again ere he died. Now return
we to the story of Prince Ahmad. Whenas Peri-Banu understood that
he was bent upon visiting his sire and she was convinced that his
love her-wards remained firm and steadfast as before, she took
thought and determined that it would ill become her to refuse him
leave and liberty for such purpose; so she again pondered the
matter in her mind and debated with herself for many an hour till
at length, one day of the days, she turned to her husband and
said, "Albeit my heart consenteth not to part from thee for a
moment or to lose sight of thee for a single instant, still
inasmuch as thou hast ofttimes made entreaty of me and hast shown
thyself so solicitous to see thy sire, I will no longer baffle
thy wish. But this my favour will depend upon one condition;
otherwise I will never grant thy petition and give thee such
permission. Swear to me the most binding of oaths that thou wilt
haste thee back hither with all possible speed, and thou wilt not
by long absence cause me yearning grief and anxious waiting for
thy safe return to me." Prince Ahmad, well pleased to win his
wish, thanked her saying, "O my beloved, fear not for me after
any fashion and rest assured I will come back to thee with all
haste as soon as I shall have seen my sire; and life hath no
charms for me away from thy presence. Although I must needs be
severed from thee for a few days, yet will my heart ever turn to
thee and to thee only." These words of Prince Ahmad gladdened the
heart of Peri-Banu and drove away the darksome doubts and
mysterious misgivings which ever haunted her nightly dreams and
her daily musings.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
gladdened by these premises addressed her husband, Prince Ahmad,
"So now, as soon as thy heart desireth, go thou and pay thy
respects to thy sire; but ere thou set out I would charge thee
with one charge and look that on no wise thou forget my rede and
my counsel. Speak not to any a single word of this thy marriage
nor of the strange sights thou hast seen and the wonders thou
hast witnessed; but keep them carefully concealed from thy father
and thy brethren and from thy kith and kin, one and all. This
only shalt thou tell thy sire, so his mind may be set at ease
that thou art buxom and happy; also that thou hast returned home
for a while only with the object of seeing him and becoming
assured of his welfare." Then she gave orders to her people
bidding them make ready for the journey without delay; and when
all things were prepared she appointed twenty horsemen, armed
cap-a-pie and fully accoutred, to accompany her husband, and gave
him a horse of perfect form and proportions, swift as the
blinding leven or the rushing wind; and its housings and
furniture were bedeckt with precious ores and studded with
jewels. Then she fell on his neck and they embraced with warmest
love; and as the twain bade adieu, Prince Ahmad, to set her mind
at rest, renewed his protestations and sware to her again his
solemn oath. Then mounting his horse and followed by his suite
(all Jinn-born cavaliers) he set forth with mighty pomp and
circumstance, and riding diligently he soon reached his father's
capital. Here he was received with loud acclamations, the like of
which had never been known in the land. The Ministers and
Officers of State, the citizens and the Ryots all rejoiced with
exceeding joy to see him once more, and the folk left their work
and with blessings and low obeisances joined the cavalcade; and,
crowding around him on every side, escorted him to the palace
gates. When the Prince reached the threshold he dismounted and,
entering the audience-hall, fell at his father's feet and kissed
them in a transport of filial affection. The Sultan, well nigh
distraught for delight at the unexpected sight of Prince Ahmad,
rose from his throne and threw himself upon his son's neck
weeping for very joy and kissed his forehead saying, "O dear my
child, in despair at the loss of the Lady Nur al-Nihar thou didst
suddenly fly from thy home, and, despite all research, nor trace
nor sign of thee was to be found however sedulously we sought
thee; and I, distracted at thy disappearance, am reduced to this
condition in which thou seest me. Where hast thou been this long
while, and how hast thou lived all this time?" Replied Prince
Ahmad, "'Tis true, O my lord the King, that I was downhearted and
distressed to see Prince Ali gain the hand of my cousin, but that
is not the whole cause of my absence. Thou mayest remember how,
when we three brothers rode at thy command to yonder plain for a
trial of archery, my shaft, albeit the place was large and flat,
disappeared from sight and none could find where it had fallen.
Now so it fortuned that one day in sore heaviness of mind I fared
forth alone and unaccompanied to examine the ground thereabout
and try if haply I could find my arrow. But when I reached the
spot where the shafts of my brothers, Princes Husayn and Ali, had
been picked up, I made search in all directions, right and left,
before and behind, thinking that thereabouts mine also might come
to hand; but all my trouble was in vain: I found neither shaft
nor aught else. So walking onwards in obstinate research, I went
a long way, and at last despairing, I would have given up the
quest, for full well I knew that my bow could not have carried so
far, and indeed that 'twere impossible for any marksman to have
driven bolt or pile to such distance, when suddenly I espied it
lying flat upon a rock some four parasangs[FN#339] distant from
this place." The Sultan marvelled with much marvel at his words
and the Prince presently resumed, "So when I picked up the arrow,
O my lord, and considered it closely I knew it for the very one I
had shot, but admired in my mind how it had come to fly so far,
and I doubted not but that there was a somewhat mysterious about
the matter. While I thus reflected I came upon the place where I
have sojourned ever since that day in perfect solace and
happiness. I may not tell thee more of my tale than this; for I
came only to ease thy mind on my account, and now I pray thee
deign grant me thy supreme permission that I return forthright to
my home of delights. From time to time I will not cease to wait
upon thee and to enquire of thy welfare with all the affection of
a son." Replied the King, "O my child, the sight of thee hath
gladdened mine eyes; and I am now satisfied; and not unwillingly
I give thee leave to go, since thou art happy in some place so
near hand; but shouldst thou at any time delay thy coming hither,
say me, how shall I be able to get tidings of thy good health and
welfare?" And quoth Prince Ahmad, "O my lord the King, that which
thou requirest of me is part of my secret and this must remain
deep hidden in my breast: as I said before, I may not discover it
to thee nor say aught that might lead to its discovery. However,
be not uneasy in thy soul, for I will appear before thee full
many a time and haply I may irk thee with continual coming." "O
my son," rejoined the Sultan, "I would not learn thy secret an
thou would keep it from me, but there is one only thing I desire
of thee, which is, that ever and anon I may be assured of thine
enduring health and happiness. Thou hast my full permission to
hie thee home, but forget not at least once a month to come and
see me even as now thou dost, lest such forgetfulness cause me
anxiety and trouble, cark and care." So Prince Ahmad tarried with
his father three days full-told, but never for a moment did the
memory of the Lady Peri-Banu fade from his mind; and on the
fourth day he mounted horse and returned with the same pomp and
pageantry wherewith he came.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
joyed with exceeding joy at the sight of Prince Ahmad as he
returned to his home; and it seemed to her as though they had
been parted for three hundred years: such is love that moments of
separation are longsome and weary as twelvemonths. The Prince
offered much of excuses for his short absence and his words
delighted Peri-Banu yet the more. So these twain, lover and
beloved, passed the time in perfect happiness, taking their
pleasure one with other. Thus a month went by and Prince Ahmad
never once mentioned the name of his sire nor expressed a wish to
go visit him according to his promise. Noting this change, the
Lady Peri-Banu said to him one day, "Thou toldest me aforetime
that once in the beginning of each month thou wouldst fare forth
and travel to thy father's court and learn news of his welfare:
why then neglectest thou so to do, seeing that he will be
distressed and anxiously expecting thee?" Replied Prince Ahmad,
"'Tis even as thou sayest, but, awaiting thy command and thy
permission, I have forborne to propose the journey to thee." And
she made answer, "Let thy faring and thy returning rest not on my
giving thee liberty of leave. At the beginning of each month as
it cometh round, do thou ride forth, and from this time forwards
thou hast no need to ask permission of me. Stay with thy sire
three days full-told and on the fourth come back to me without
fail." Accordingly, on the next day betimes in the morning Prince
Ahmad took his departure and as aforetime rode forth with
abundant pomp and parade and repaired to the palace of the Sultan
his sire, to whom he made his obeisance. On like manner continued
he to do each month with a suite of horsemen larger and more
brilliant than before, whilst he himself was more splendidly
mounted and equipped. And whenever the Crescent appeared in the
Western sky he fondly farewelled his wife and paid his visit to
the King, with whom he tarried three whole days, and on the
fourth returned to dwell with Peri-Banu. But, as each and every
time he went, his equipage was greater and grander than the last,
at length one of the Wazirs, a favourite and cup-companion of the
King, was filled with wonderment and jealousy to see Prince Ahmad
appear at the palace with such opulence and magnificence. So he
said in himself, "None can tell whence cometh this Prince, and by
what means he hath obtained so splendid a suite." Then of his
envy and malice that Wazir fell to plying the King with deceitful
words and said, "O my liege lord and mighty sovran, it ill
becometh thee to be thus heedless of Prince Ahmad's proceedings.
Seest thou not how day after day his retinue increaseth in
numbers and puissance? What an he should plot against thee and
cast thee into prison, and take from thee the reins of the realm?
Right well thou wottest that inasmuch as thou didst wed Prince
Ali to the Lady Nur al-Nihar thou provokedest the wrath of Prince
Husayn and Prince Ahmad; so that one of them in the bitterness of
his soul renounced the pomps and vanities of this world and hath
become a Fakir, whilst the other, to wit; Prince Ahmad, appeareth
before thy presence in such inordinate power and majesty.
Doubtless they both seek their revenge; and, having gotten thee
into their power, the twain will deal treacherously with thee. So
I would have thee beware, and again I say beware; and seize the
forelock of opportunity ere it be too late; for the wise have
said,

'Thou canst bar a spring with a sod of clay * But when grown
'twill bear a big host away.'"

Thus spake that malicious Wazir; and presently he resumed, "Thou
knowest also that when Prince Ahmad would end his three days'
visits he never asketh thy leave nor farewelleth thee nor biddeth
adieu to any one of his family. Such conduct is the beginning of
rebellion and proveth him to be rancorous of heart. But 'tis for
thee in thy wisdom to decide." These words sank deep in the heart
of the simple-minded Sultan and grew a crop of the direst
suspicions. He presently thought within himself, "Who knoweth the
mind and designs of Prince Ahmad, whether they be dutiful or
undutiful towards me? Haply he may be plotting vengeance; so it
besitteth me to make enquiries concerning him, to discover where
he dwelleth and by what means he hath attained to such puissance
and opulence." Filled with these jealous thoughts, he sent in
private one day, unbeknown to the Grand Wazir who would at all
times befriend Prince Ahmad, to summon the Witch; and, admitting
her by a secret postern to his private chamber, asked of her
saying, "Thou didst aforetime learn by thy magical art that
Prince Ahmad was alive and didst bring me tidings of him. I am
beholden to thee for this good office, and now I would desire of
thee to make further quest into his case and ease my mind, which
is sore disturbed. Albeit my son still liveth and cometh to visit
me every month, yet am I clean ignorant of the place wherein he
dwelleth and whence he setteth out to see me; for that he keepeth
the matter close hidden from his sire. Go thou forthright and
privily, without the knowledge of any, my Wazirs and Nabobs, my
courtiers and my household; and make thou diligent research and
with all haste bring me word whereabouts he liveth. He now
sojourneth here upon his wonted visit; and, on the fourth day,
without leave-taking or mention of departure to me or to any of
the Ministers and Officers, he will summon his suite and mount
his steed; then will he ride to some little distance hence and
suddenly disappear. Do thou without stay or delay forego him on
the path and lie perdue in some convenient hollow hard by the
road whence thou mayest learn where he hometh; then quickly bring
me tidings thereof." Accordingly, the Sorceress departed the
presence of the King; and, after walking over the four parasangs,
she hid herself within a hollow of the rocks hard by the place
where Prince Ahmad had found his arrow, and there awaited his
arrival. Early on the morrow the Prince, as was his wont, set out
upon his journey without taking leave of his sire or fare welling
any of the Ministers. So when they drew nigh, the Sorceress
caught sight of the Prince and of the retinue that rode before
and beside him; and she saw them enter a hollow way which forked
into a many of by-ways; and so steep and dangerous were the
cliffs and boulders about the track that hardly could a footman
safely pace that path. Seeing this the Sorceress bethought her
that it must surely lead to some cavern or haply to a
subterraneous passage, or to a souterrain the abode of Jinns and
fairies; when suddenly the Prince and all his suite vanished from
her view. So she crept out of the hiding-place wherein she had
ensconced herself and wandered far and wide seeking, as
dillgently as she was able, but never finding the subterraneous
passage nor yet could she discern the iron door which Prince
Ahmad had espied, for none of human flesh and blood had power to
see this save he alone to whom it was made visible by the Fairy
Peri-Banu; furthermore it was ever concealed from the prying eyes
of womankind. Then said the Sorceress to herself, This toil and
moil have I undertaken to no purpose; yea, verily, I have failed
to find out that wherefor I came." So she went forthright back to
the Sultan and reported to him all that had betided her, how she
had lain in wait amid the cliffs and boulders and had seen the
Prince and suite ride up the most perilous of paths and, having
entered a hollow way, disappear in an eyetwinkling from her
sight. And she ended by saying, "Albeit I strove my utmost to
find out the spot wherein the Prince abideth, yet could I on no
wise succeed; and I pray thy Highness may grant me time to search
further into the matter and to find out this mystery which by
skill and caution on my part shall not long abide concealed."
Answered the Sultan, "Be it as thou wilt: I grant thee leisure to
make enquiry and after a time I shall await thy return
hither."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that moreover
the King largessed the Witch with a diamond of large size and of
great price, saying, "Take this stone to guerdon for thy trouble
and travail and in earnest of future favours; so, when thou shalt
return and bring me word that thou hast searched and found out
the secret, thou shalt have a Bakhshish of far greater worth and
I will make thy heart rejoice with choicest joy and honour thee
with highmost honour." So the Sorceress looked forwards to the
coming of the Prince, for well she knew that at the sight of each
crescent he rode home to visit his sire and was bound to abide
with him three days, even as the Lady Peri-Banu had permitted and
had enjoined him. Now when the moon had waxed and waned, on the
day before the Prince would leave home upon his monthly visit,
the Witch betook her to the rocks and sat beside the place whence
she imagined he would issue forth; and next morning early he and
his suite, composed of many a mounted knight with his esquire
a-foot, who now always accompanied him in increasing numbers,
rode forth gallantly through the iron doorway and passed hard by
the place where she lay in wait for him. The Sorceress crouched
low upon the ground in her tattered rags; and, seeing a heap by
his way, the Prince at first supposed that a slice of stone had
fallen from the rocks across his path. But as he drew nigh she
fell to weeping and wailing with might and main as though in sore
dolour and distress, and she ceased not to crave his countenance
and assistance with increase of tears and lamentations. The
Prince seeing her sore sorrow had pity on her, and reining in his
horse, asked her what she had to require of him and what was the
cause of her cries and lamentations. At this the cunning crone
but cried the more, and the Prince was affected with compassion
still livelier at seeing her tears and hearing her broken, feeble
words. So when the Sorceress perceived that Prince Ahmad had ruth
on her and would fain show favour to her, she heaved a heavy sigh
and in woeful tones, mingled with moans and groans, addressed him
in these false words, withal holding the hem of his garment and
at times stopping as if convulsed with pain, "O my lord and lord
of all loveliness, as I was journeying from my home in yonder
city upon an errand to such a place, behold, when I came thus far
upon my way, suddenly a hot fit of fever seized me and a
shivering and a trembling, so that I lost all strength and fell
down helpless as thou seest me; and still no power have I in hand
or foot to rise from the ground and to return to my place."
Replied the Prince, "Alas, O good woman, there is no house at
hand where thou mayest go and be fitly tended and tendered.
Howbeit I know a stead whither, an thou wilt, I can convey thee
and where by care and kindness thou shalt (Inshallah!) soon
recover of thy complaint. Come then with me as best thou canst."
With loud moans and groans the Witch made answer, "So weak am I
in every limb and helpless that I can by no means rise off the
ground or move save with the help of some friendly hand." The
Prince then bade one of his horsemen lift up the feeble and
ailing old woman and set her upon his steed; and the cavalier did
his lord's bidding forthright and mounted her astraddle upon the
crupper of his courser: then, Prince Ahmad rode back with her and
entering by the iron door carried her to his apartment and sent
for Peri-Banu. His wife hurriedly coming forth to the Prince
asked him in her flurry, "Is all well and wherefore hast thou
come back and what wouldst thou that thou hast sent for me?"
Prince Ahmad then told her of the old woman who was healthless
and helpless, adding, "Scarce had I set out on my journey when I
espied this ancient dame lying hard by the roadside, suffering
and in sore distress. My heart felt pity for her to see her in
such case and constrained me to bring her hither as I could not
leave her to die among the rocks; and I pray thee of thy bounty
take her in and give her medicines that she may soon be made
whole of this her malady. An thou wilt show this favour I shall
not cease to thank thee and be beholden to thee." --And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
looked at the old woman and charged a twain of her handmaidens
that they carry her into a room apart and tend her with the
tenderest care and the uttermost of diligence. The attendants did
as she bade them and transported the Sorceress to the place she
had designed. Then Peri-Banu addressed Prince Ahmad saying, "O my
lord, I am pleased to see thy pitiful kindness towards this
ancient dame, and I surely will look to her case even as thou
hast enjoined me; but my heart misgiveth me and much I fear some
evil will result from thy goodness. This woman is not so ill as
she doth make believe, but practiseth deceit upon thee and I ween
that some enemy or envier hath plotted a plot against me and
thee. Howbeit go now in peace upon thy journey." The Prince, who
on no wise took to heart the words of his wife, presently replied
to her, "O my lady, Almighty Allah forfend thee from all offence!
With thee to help and guard me I fear naught of ill: I know of no
foeman who would compass my destruction, for I bear no grudge
against any living being, and I foresee no evil at the hands of
man or Jann." Thereupon the Prince again took leave of Peri-Banu
and repaired with his attendants to the palace of his sire who,
by reason of the malice of his crafty Minister, was inwardly
afraid to see his son; but not the less he welcomed him with
great outward show of love and affection. Meanwhile the two fairy
handmaidens, to whom Peri-Banu had given charge of the Witch,
bore her away to a spacious room splendidly furnished; and laid
her on a bed having a mattress of satin and a brocaded coverlet.
Then one of them sat by her side whilst the other with all speed
fetched, in a cup of porcelain, an essence which was a sovereign
draught for ague and fever. Presently they raised her up and
seated her on the couch saying, "Drain thou this drink. It is the
water of the Lions' Fount and whoso tasteth of the same is
forthwith made whole of what disease soever he hath." The
Sorceress took the cup with great difficulty and after swallowing
the contents lay back on the bed; and the handmaidens spread the
quilt over her saying, "Now rest awhile and thou shalt soon feel
the virtues of this medicine." Then they left her to sleep for an
hour or so; but presently the Witch, who had feigned sickness to
the intent only that she might learn where Prince Ahmad abode and
might inform the Sultan thereof, being assured that she had
discovered all that she desired, rose up and summoning the
damsels said to them, "The drinking of that draught hath restored
to me all my health and strength: I now feel hale and hearty once
more and my limbs are filled with new life and vigour. So at once
acquaint your lady herewith, that I may kiss the hem of her robe
and return my thanks for her goodness me-wards, then depart and
hie me home again." Accordingly, the two handmaidens took the
Sorceress with them and showed her as they went along the several
apartments, each more magnificent and kingly than the other; and
at length they reached the belvedere which was the noblest saloon
of all, and fitted and filled with furniture exceeding costly and
curious. There sat Peri-Banu upon a throne which was adorned with
diamonds and rubies, emeralds, pearls and other gems of unwonted
size and water, whilst round about her stood fairies of lovely
form and features, robed in the richest raiments and awaiting
with folded hands her commandments. The Sorceress marvelled with
extreme marvel to see the splendour of the chambers and their
furniture, but chiefly when she beheld the Lady Peri-Banu seated
upon the jewelled throne; nor could she speak a word for
confusion and awe, but she bent down low and placed her head upon
Peri-Banu's feet. Quoth the Princess in soft speech and
reassuring tones, "O good woman, it pleaseth me greatly to see
thee a guest in this my palace, and I joy even more to learn that
thou be wholly quit of thy sickness. So now solace thy spirits
with walking all round about the place and my servants will
accompany thee and show thee what there is worthy of thine
inspection." Hereat the Witch again louted low and kissed the
carpet under Peri-Banu's feet, and took leave of her hostess in
goodly phrase and with great show of gratitude for her favours.
The handmaids then led her round the palace and displayed to her
all the rooms, which dazed and dazzled her sight so that she
could not find words to praise them sufficiently. Then she went
her ways and the fairies escorted her past the iron doorway
whereby Prince Ahmad had brought her in, and left her, bidding
her God-speed and blessing her; and the foul crone with many
thanks took the road to her own home. But when she had walked to
some distance she was minded to see the iron door, so might she
with ease know it again; so she went back, but lo and behold! the
entrance had vanished and was invisible to her as to all other
women. Accordingly, after searching on all sides and pacing to
and fro and finding nor sign nor trace of palace or portal, she
repaired in despair to the city and, creeping along a deserted
path-way, entered the palace, according to her custom, by the
private postern. When safely within she straightway sent word by
an eunuch to the Sultan, who ordered that she be brought before
him. She approached him with troubled countenance, whereat,
perceiving that she had failed to carry out her purpose, he
asked, "What news? Hast thou accomplished thy design or hast thou
been baffled therein?" --And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Sorceress, who was a mere creature of the malicious Wazir,
replied, "O King of kings, this matter have I fully searched out
even as thou gavest command, and I am about to tell thee all that
hath betided me. The signs of sorrow and marks of melancholy thou
notest upon my countenance are for other cause which narrowly
concerneth thy welfare." Then she began to recount her adventure
in these terms, "Now when I had reached the rocks I sat me down
feigning sickness; and, as Prince Ahmad passed that way and heard
my complaining and saw my grievous condition, he had compassion
on me. After some 'said and say' he took me with him by a
subterranean passage and through an iron door to a magnificent
palace and gave me in charge of a fairy, Peri-Banu hight, of
passing beauty and loveliness, such as human eye hath never yet
seen. Prince Ahmad bade her make me her guest for some few days
and bring me a medicine which would complete my cure, and she to
please him at once appointed handmaidens to attend upon me. So I
was certified that the twain were one flesh, husband and wife. I
feigned to be exceeding frail and feeble and made as though I had
not strength to walk or even to stand; whereat the two damsels
supported me, one on either side, and I was carried into a room
where they gave me somewhat to drink and put me upon a bed to
rest and sleep. Then thought I to myself:--'Verily I have gained
the object wherefor I had feigned sickness'; and I was assured
that it availed no more to practise deceit. Accordingly, after a
short while I arose and said to the attendants that the draught
which they had given me to drink had cut short the fever and had
restored strength to my limbs and life to my frame. Then they led
me to the presence of the Lady Peri-Banu, who was exceeding
pleased to see me once more hale and hearty, and bade her
handmaidens conduct me around the palace and show each room in
its beauty and splendour; after which I craved leave to wend my
ways and here am I again to work thy will." When thus she had
made known to the King all that had betided her, she resumed,
"Perchance, on hearing of the might and majesty, opulence and
magnificence of the Lady Peri-Banu, thou wilt be gladdened and
say within thyself, ''Tis well that Prince Ahmad is wedded to
this Fairy and hath gotten for himself such wealth and power;'
but to the thinking of this thy slave the matter is quite other.
It is not well, I dare avouch, that thy son should possess such
puissance and treasures, for who knoweth but that he may by good
aid of Peri-Banu bring about division and disturbance in the
realm? Beware of the wiles and malice of women. The Prince is
bewitched with love of her, and peradventure at her incitement he
may act towards thee otherwise than right, and lay hands on thy
hoards and seduce thy subjects and become master of thy kingdom;
and albeit he would not of his own free will do aught to his
father and his forbears save what was pious and dutiful, yet the
charms of his Princess may work upon him little by little and end
by making him a rebel and what more I may not say. Now mayest
thou see that the matter is a weighty, so be not heedless but
give it full consideration." Then the Sorceress made ready to
gang her gait when spake the King, saying, "I am beholden to thee
in two things; the first, that thou tookest upon thyself much
toil and travail, and on my behalf riskedst thy life to learn the
truth anent my son Prince Ahmad. Secondly, I am thankful for that
thou hast given me a rede so sound and such wholesome counsel."
So saying, he dismissed her with the highmost honour; but no
sooner had she left the palace than he, sore distraught, summoned
his second Wazir, the malicious Minister who had incited him
against Prince Ahmad, and when he and his friends appeared in the
presence he laid before them the whole matter and asked of them,
saying, "What is your counsel, and what must I do to protect
myself and my kingdom against the wiles of this Fairy?" Replied
one of his councillors, "'Tis but a trifling matter and the
remedy is simple and nearhand. Command that Prince Ahmad, who is
now within the city if not in the palace, be detained as one
taken prisoner. Let him not be put to death, lest haply the deed
may engender rebellion; but at any rate place him under arrest
and if he prove violent clap him in irons."--And as the morn
began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

         The end of the Six Hundred and Sixtieth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that this felon
counsel pleased the malicious Minister and all his fautors and
flatterers highly approved his rede. The Sultan kept silence and
made no reply, but on the morrow he sent and summoned the
Sorceress and debated with her whether he should or should not
cast Prince Ahmad into prison. Quoth she, "O King of kings, this
counsel is clean contrary to sound sense and right reason. An
thou throw Prince Ahmad into gaol, so must thou also do with all
his knights and their esquires; and inasmuch as they are Jinns
and Mﬂrids, who can tell their power of reprisals? Nor
prison-cells nor gates of adamant can keep them in; they will
forthwith escape and report such violence to the Fairy who, wroth
with extreme wrath to find her husband doomed to durance vile
like a common malefactor, and that too for no default or crime
but by a treacherous arrest, will assuredly deal the direst of
vengeance on thy head and do us a damage we shall not be able to
forfend. An thou wilt confide in me, I will advise thee how to
act, whereby thou mayest win thy wish and no evil will come nigh
thee or thy kingship. Thou knowest well that to Jinns and Fairies
is power given of doing in one short moment deeds marvellous and
wondrous, which mortals fail to effect after long years of toil
and trouble. Now whenas thou goest a-hunting or on other
expedition, thou requirest pavilions for thyself and many tents
for thy retinue and attendants and soldiery; and in making ready
and transporting such store much time and wealth are wastefully
expended. I would advise, O King of kings, that thou try Prince
Ahmad by the following test: do thou bid him bring to thee a
Shﬂhmiyﬂnah[FN#340] so long and so broad that it will cover and
lodge the whole of thy court and men-at-arms and camp-followers,
likewise the beasts of burthen; and yet it must be so light that
a man may hold it in the hollow of his hand and carry it
whithersoever he listeth." Then, after holding her peace for a
while, she added, still addressing the Sultan, "And as soon as
Prince Ahmad shall acquit himself of this commission, do thou
demand of him a somewhat still greater and more wondrous
wherewith I will make thee ware, and which he will find grievous
of execution. On this wise shalt thou fill thy treasury with rare
inventions and strange, the handicraft of Jﬂnn, nor will this
cease till such time in fine when thy son shall be at his wits'
end to carry out thy requirements. Then, humbled and abashed, he
will never dare to enter thy capital or even thy presence; and
thus shalt thou be saved from fear of harm at his hands, and thou
shalt not have need to put him in gaol or, worse still, to do him
dead." Hearing these words of wisdom, the Sultan made known the
Witch's device to his advisers and asked them what they deemed
thereof. They held their peace and answered not a word or good or
ill; while he himself highly approved it and said no more. Next
day Prince Ahmad came to visit the King, who welcomed him with
overflowing affection and clasping him to his bosom kissed him on
eyes and forehead. Long time they sat conversing on various
subjects, till at length the Sultan finding an occasion spake
thus, "O dear my son, O Ahmad, for many a day have I been sad at
heart and sorrowful of soul because of separation from thee, and
when thou camest back I was gladdened with great gladness at
sight of thee, and albeit thou didst and dost still withhold from
me the knowledge of thy whereabouts, I refrained from asking thee
or seeking to find out thy secret, since it was not according to
thy mind to tell me of thine abode. Now, however, I have heard
say that thou art wedded to a mighty Jinn›yah[FN#341], of passing
beauty; and the tidings please me with the highmost possible
pleasure. I desire not to learn aught from thee concerning thy
Fairy-wife save whatso thou wouldst entrust to me of thine own
free will; but, say me, should I at any time require somewhat of
thee, canst thou obtain it from her? Doth she regard thee with
such favour that she will not deny thee anything thou askest of
her?" Quoth the Prince, "O my lord, what dost thou demand of me?
My wife is devoted to her husband in heart and soul, so prithee
let me learn what it is thou wouldst have of me and her." Replied
the Sultan, Thou knowest that ofttimes I fare a-hunting or on
some foray and fray, when I have great need of tents and
pavilions and Shahmiyanahs, with herds and troops of camels and
mules and other beasts of burden to carry the camp from place to
place. I would, therefore, that thou bring me a tent so light
that a man may carry it in the hollow of his hand, and yet so
large that it may contain my court and all my host and camp and
suttlers and b‘t-animals. An thou wouldst ask the Lady for this
gift I know full well that she can give it; and hereby shalt thou
save me much of trouble in providing carriage for the tentage and
spare me much waste and loss of beasts and men." The Prince
replied, "O my sire the Sultan, trouble not thy thought. I will
at once make known thy wish to my wife, the Lady Peri-Banu; and,
albeit little I wot an fairies have the faculty of making a
pavilion such as thou describest, or indeed (supposing that they
have such power), an she will grant me or not grant me her
aidance; and, moreover, although I cannot promise thee such
present, yet whatsoever lieth in my ability to do, that will I
gladly do for thy service."--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-first Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that quoth the
King to Prince Ahmad, "Shouldst thou perchance fail in this
matter and bring me not the gift required, O my son, I will never
see thy face again. A sorry husband thou, in good sooth, if thy
wife refuse so mean a thing and hasten not to do all thou biddest
her do; giving thee to see that thou art of small value and
consequence in her eyes, and that her love for thee is a quantity
well nigh to naught. But do thou, O my child, go forth and
straightway ask her for the tent. An she give it thee know thou
she desireth thee and thou art the dearest of all things to her;
and I have been informed that she loveth thee with all her heart
and soul and will by no means refuse thee aught thou requirest,
were it even the balls of her eyes." Now Prince Ahmad was ever
wont to tarry three days each month with the Sultan his sire, and
return to his spouse on the fourth; but this time he stayed two
days only and farewelled his father on the third. As he passed
into the palace Peri-Banu could not but note that he was sad at
heart and downcast of face; so she asked of him, "Is all well
with thee? Why hast thou come to-day and not tomorrow from the
presence of the King thy father, and why carriest thou so triste
a countenance?" Whereupon, after kissing her brow and fondly
embracing her, he told her the whole matter, first to last, and
she made answer, "I will speedily set thy mind at rest, for I
would not see thee so saddened for a moment longer. Howbeit, O my
love, from this petition of the Sultan thy sire I am certified
that his end draweth nigh, and he will soon depart this world to
the mercy of Allah the Almighty.[FN#342] Some enemy hath done
this deed and much of mischief hath made for thee; and the result
is that thy father, all unmindful of his coming doom, cloth seek
diligently his own destruction." The Prince, anxious and alarmed,
thus answered his wife, "Almighty Allah be praised, the King my
liege lord is in the best of health and showeth no sign of
disorder or decrepitude: 'tis but this morning I left him hale
and hearty, and in very sooth I never saw him in better case.
Strange, indeed, that thou shouldst ken what shall betide him
before I have told thee aught concerning him, and especially how
he hath come to learn of our marriage and of our home." Quoth
Peri-Banu, "O my Prince, thou knowest what I said to thee whenas
I saw the old dame whom thou broughtest hither as one afflicted
with the ague and fever. That woman, who is a Witch of Satan's
breed, hath disclosed to thy father all he sought to learn
concerning this our dwelling-place. And notwithstanding that I
saw full clearly she was nor sick nor sorry, but only feigning a
fever, I gave her medicine to drink which cureth complaints of
all kinds, and she falsely made believe that by its virtues she
had recovered health and strength. So when she came to take leave
of me, I sent her with two of my damsels and bid them display to
her every apartment in the palace together with its furniture and
decorations, that she might better know the condition of me and
thee. Now all this did I on thy account only, for thou badest me
show compassion to the ancient woman and I was rejoiced to see
her departing safe and sound and in the best of spirits. Save her
alone, no human being had ever power to know aught of this place,
much less to come hither." Prince Ahmad hearing these words
thanked and praised her and said, "O sun-faced beauty, I would
beg of thee to grant me a boon whereof my father hath made
request of me; to wit, a Shahmiyanah of such dimensions that it
may shelter him and his many, his camp and bat-cattle and withal
may be carried in the hollow of the hand. An such marvel exist I
wot not, yet would I do my utmost to procure it, and carry it to
him right loyally." Quoth she, "Why trouble thyself for so small
a matter? I will forthright send for it and give it thee." Then
she summoned one of her handmaids who was treasurer to her and
said, "O Nur Jehﬂn,[FN#343] go thou at once and bring me a
pavilion of such and such a fashion." So she fared forth without
delay and as quickly came back with the pavilion which, at her
lady's bidding, she placed in the palm of Prince Ahmad's hand.
--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Ahmad hent the pavilion in hand and thought to himself, "What is
this Peri-Banu giveth me? Surely she doth make a mock of me." His
wife, however, reading his mind in his face fell to laughing
aloud, and asked, "What is it, O my dearling Prince? Dost thou
think that I am jesting and jibing at thee?" Then she continued,
addressing the treasurer Nur Jehan, "Take now yon tent from
Prince Ahmad and set it upon the plain that he may see its vast
size and know if it be such an one as required by the Sultan his
sire." The handmaid took the pavilion and pitched it afar from
the Palace; and yet one end thereof reached thereto from the
outer limit of the plain; and so immense was its size that (as
Prince Ahmad perceived) there was room therein for all the King's
court; and, were two armies ranged under it with their
camp-followers and b‘t-animals, one would on no wise crowd or
inconvenience the other. He then begged pardon of Peri-Banu
saying, "I wot not that the Shahmiyanah was so prodigious of
extent and of so marvellous a nature; wherefore I misdoubted when
first I saw it." The Treasurer presently struck the tent and
returned it to the palm of his hand; then, without stay or delay,
he took horse and followed by his retinue rode back to the royal
presence, where after obeisance and suit and service he presented
the tent. The Sultan also, at first sight of the gift, thought it
a small matter, but marvelled with extreme marvel to see its size
when pitched, for it would have shaded his capital and its
suburbs. He was not, however, wholly satisfied, for the size of
the pavilion now appeared to him superfluous; but his son assured
him that it would always fit itself to its contents. He thanked
the Prince for bringing him so rare a present, saying, "O my son,
acquaint thy consort with my obligation to her and offer my
grateful thanks for this her bounteous gift. Now indeed know I of
a truth that she doth love thee with the whole of her heart and
soul and all my doubts and fears are well nigh set at rest." Then
the King commanded they should pack up the tent and store it with
all care in the royal treasury. Now strange it is but true, that
when the Sultan received this rare present from the Prince, the
fear and doubt, the envy and jealousy of his son, which the Witch
and the malicious Wazir and his other illadvisers had bred in his
breast, waxed greater and livelier than before; because he was
now certified that in very truth the Jinniyah was gracious beyond
measure to her mate and that, notwithstanding the great wealth
and power of the sovereign, she could outvie him in mighty deeds
for the aidance of her husband. Accordingly, he feared with
excessive fear lest haply she seek opportunity to slay him in
favour of the Prince whom she might enthrone in his stead. So he
bade bring the Witch who had counselled him aforetime, and upon
whose sleight and malice he now mainly relied. When he related to
her the result of her rede, she took thought for a while; then,
raising her brow said, "O King of kings, thou troublest thyself
for naught: thou needest only command Prince Ahmad to bring thee
of the water of the Lions' Spring. He must perforce for his
honour's sake fulfil thy wish, and if he fail he will for very
shame not dare to show his face again at court. No better plan
than this canst thou adopt; so look to it nor loiter on thy way."
Next day at eventide, as the Sultan was seated in full Darbar
surrounded by his Wazirs and Ministers, Prince Ahmad came
forwards and making due obeisance took seat by his side and below
him. Hereat, the King addressed him, as was his wont, with great
show of favour saying, "It delighteth me mightily that thou hast
brought me the tent I required of thee; for surely in my Treasury
there be naught so rare and strange. Yet one other thing lack I,
and couldst thou bring it me I shall rejoice with joy exceeding.
I have heard tell that the Jinniyah, thy consort, maketh constant
use of a water which floweth from the Lions' Spring, the drinking
whereof doeth away with fevers and all other deadly diseases. I
know thou art anxious that I live in health; and thou wilt
gladden me by bringing somewhat of that water, so I may drink
thereof when occasion shall require, and well I wot that, as thou
valuest my love and affection thee wards, thou wilt not refuse to
grant me my request." Prince Ahmad on hearing this demand was
struck with surprise that his sire should so soon make a second
demand. So he kept silence awhile, thinking within himself, I
have managed by some means to obtain the tent from the Lady
Peri-Banu, but Allah only knoweth how she will now act, and
whether this fresh request will or will not rouse her wrath.
Howbeit I know that she will on no wise deny me any boon I may
ask of her." So after much hesitation Prince Ahmad made reply, "O
my lord the King, I have no power to do aught in this matter,
which resteth only with my spouse the Princess; yet will I
petition her to give the water; and, if she vouchsafe consent I
will bring it straight to thee. Indeed I cannot promise thee such
boon with all certainty: I would gladly do my endeavour in all
and everything that can benefit thee, but to ask her for this
water is a work more weighty than asking for the tent." Next day
the Prince took his departure and returned to Peri-Banu; and
after loving embraces and greetings quoth he, "O my lady and
light of my eyes, the Sultan my sire sendeth thee his grateful
thanks for the granting of his wish; to wit, the pavilion; and
now he adventureth himself once more and, certified of thy bounty
and beneficence, he would pray from thy hand the boon of a little
water from the Lions' Spring. Withal I would assure thee that an
the giving of this water please thee not, let the matter be clean
forgotten; for to do all thou willest is my one and only wish."
Peri-Banu made reply, "Methinks the Sultan, thy sire, would put
both me and thee to the test by requiring such boons as those
suggested to him by the Sorceress." --And as the morn began to
dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
said further to Prince Ahmad, "Natheless I will grant this
largesse also as the Sultan hath set his mind upon it, and no
harm shall come therefrom to me or to thee, albe 'tis a matter of
great risk and danger, and it is prompted by not a little of
malice and ungraciousness. But give careful heed to my words, nor
neglect thou aught of them, or thy destruction is certain-sure. I
now will tell thee what to do. In the hall of yonder castle which
riseth on that mountain is a fountain sentinelled by four lions
fierce and ravening; and they watch and ward the path that
leadeth thereto, a pair standing on guard whilst the other two
take their turn to rest, and thus no living thing hath power to
pass by them. Yet will I make known to thee the means whereby
thou mayest win thy wish without any hurt or harm befalling thee
from the furious beasts." Thus saying she drew from an ivory box
a clew of thread and, by means of a needle one of those wherewith
she had been plying her work, made thereof a ball. This she
placed in the hands of her husband, and said, "First, be thou
careful that thou keep about thee with all diligence this ball,
whose use I shall presently explain to thee. Secondly, choose for
thyself two horses of great speed, one for thine own riding,
whilst on the other thou shalt load the carcass of a freshly
slaughtered sheep cut into four quarters. In the third place,
take with thee a phial wherewith I will provide thee, and this is
for carrying the water which thou, Inshallah--God willing--shalt
bring back. As soon as the morn shall morrow do thou arise with
the light and go forth riding thy chosen steed and leading the
other alongside of thee by the reins. When thou shalt reach the
iron portals which open upon the castle-court, at no great
distance from the gate, do thou cast the ball of thread upon the
ground before thee. Forthwith it will begin rolling onwards of
its own will towards the castle door; and do thou follow it
through the open entrance until such time as it stop its course.
At this moment thou shalt see the four lions; and the two that
wake and watch will rouse the twain that sleep and rest. All four
will turn their jaws to the ground and growl and roar with
hideous howlings, and make as though about to fall upon thee and
tear thee limb from limb. However, fear not nor be dismayed, but
ride boldly on and throw to the ground from off the led-horse the
sheep's quarters, one to each lion. See that thou alight not from
thy steed, but gore his ribs with thy shovel stirrup[FN#344] and
ride with all thy might and main up to the basin which gathereth
the water. Here dismount and fill the phial whilst the lions will
be busied eating. Lastly, return with all speed and the beasts
will not prevent thy passing by them." Next day, at peep of morn,
Prince Ahmad did according to all that Peri-Banu had bidden him
and rode forth to the castle. Then, having passed through the
iron portals and crossed the court and opened the door, he
entered the hall, where he threw the quarters of the sheep before
the lions, one to each, and speedily reached the Spring. He
filled his phial with water from the basin and hurried back with
all haste. But when he 