had ridden some little distance he turned
about and saw two of the guardian lions following upon his track;
however, he was on no wise daunted but drew his sabre from the
sheath to prepare him for self-protection. Hereat one of the
twain seeing him bare his brand for defence, retired a little way
from the road and, standing at gaze, nodded his head and wagged
his tail, as though to pray the Prince to put up his scymitar and
to assure him that he might ride in peace and fear no peril. The
other lion then sprang forwards ahead of him and kept close him,
and the two never ceased to escort him until they reached the
city, nay even the gate of the Palace. The second twain also
brought up the rear till Prince Ahmad had entered the
Palace-door; and, when they were certified of this, all four went
back by the way they came. Seeing such wondrous spectacle, the
towns-folk all fled in dire dismay, albeit the enchanted beasts
molested no man; and presently some mounted horsemen espying
their lord riding alone and unattended came up to him and helped
him alight. The Sultan was sitting in his audience-hall
conversing with his Wazirs and Ministers when his son appeared
before him; and Prince Ahmad, having greeted him and blessed him
and, in dutiful fashion, prayed for his permanence of existence
and prosperity and opulence, placed before his feet the phial
full of the water from the Lions' Spring, saying, "Lo, I have
brought thee the boon thou desiredst of me. This water is most
rare and hard to obtain; nor is there in all thy Treasure-house
aught so notable and of such value as this. If ever thou fall ill
of any malady (Almighty Allah forfend this should be in thy
Destiny!) then drink a draught thereof and forthwith thou shalt
be made whole of whatso distemper thou hast." When Prince Ahmad
had made an end of speaking, the Sultan, with all love and
affection, grace and honour, embraced him and kissed his head;
then, seating him on his right said, "O my son, I am beholden to
thee, beyond count and measure, for that thou hast adventured thy
life and brought this water with great irk and risk from so
perilous a place." Now the Witch had erewhile informed the King
concerning the Lions' Spring and of the mortal dangers which
beset the site; so that he knew right well how gallant was his
son's derring-do; and presently he said, "Say me, O my child, how
couldst thou venture thither and escape from the lions and
broughtest back the water, thyself remaining safe and sound?"
--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Prince
replied, "By thy favour, O my lord the Sultan, have I returned in
safety from that stead mainly because I did according to the
bidding of my spouse, the Lady Peri-Banu; and I have brought the
water from the Lions' Spring only by carrying out her commands."
Then he made known to his father all that had befallen him in
going and returning; and when the Sultan noted the pre-eminent
valiance and prowess of his son he only feared the more, and the
malice and the rancour, envy and jealousy which filled his heart
waxed tenfold greater than before. However, dissembling his true
sentiments he dismissed Prince Ahmad and betaking him to his
private chamber at once sent word to bid the Witch appear in the
presence; and when she came, he told her of the Prince's visit
and all about the bringing of the water from the Lions' Spring.
She had already heard somewhat thereof by reason of the hubbub in
the city at the coming of the lions; but, as soon as she had
given ear to the whole account, she marvelled with mighty marvel
and, after whispering in the Sultan's ear her new device, said to
him in triumph, "O King of kings, this time thou shalt lay a
charge on the Prince and such commandment methinks will trouble
him and it shall go hard with him to execute aught thereof."
"Thou sayest well," replied the Sovran, "now indeed will I try
this plan thou hast projected for me." Wherefore, next day whenas
Prince Ahmad came to the presence of his sire, the King said to
him, "O dear my child, it delighteth me exceedingly to see thy
virtue and valour and the filial love wherewith thou art
fulfilled, good gifts chiefly shown by obtaining for me the two
rarities I asked of thee. And now one other and final requirement
I have of thee; and, shouldst thou avail to satisfy my desire, I
shall be wellpleased in my beloved son and render thanks to him
for the rest of my days." Prince Ahmad answered, "What is the
boon thou requirest? I will for my part do thy bidding as far as
in me lieth." Then quoth the King in reply to the Prince, "I
would fain have thee bring me a man of size and stature no more
than three feet high, with beard full twenty ells in length, who
beareth on his shoulder a quarter staff of steel, thirteen score
pounds in weight, which he wieldeth with ease and swingeth around
his head without wrinkle on brow, even as men wield cudgels of
wood." On this wise the Sultan, led astray by the Doom of Destiny
and heedless alike of good and evil, asked that which should
bring surest destruction upon himself. Prince Ahmad also, with
blind obedience out of pure affection to his parent, was ready to
supply him with all he required unknowing what was prepared for
him in the Secret Purpose. Accordingly he said, "O my sire the
Sultan, I trow me 'twill be hard to find, all the world over, a
man such as thou desirest, still I will work my best to do thy
bidding." Thereupon the Prince retired from the presence and
returned, as usual, to his palace where he greeted Peri-Banu with
love and gladness; but his face was troubled and his heart was
heavy at the thought of the King's last behest. Perceiving his
pre-occupation the Princess asked him, saying, "O dear my lord,
what tidings bringest thou for me to-day?" Hereto replied he,
"The Sultan at each visit requireth of me some new thing and
burtheneth me with his requests; and to-day he purposeth to try
me and, in the hopes of putting me to shame, he asketh somewhat
which 'twere vain to hope I can find in all the world." Thereupon
Prince Ahmad told her all the King had said to him.--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
hearing these words said to the Prince, "Trouble not thyself at
all in this matter. Thou didst venture at great risk to carry off
for thy father water from the Lions' Spring and thou succeededst
in winning thy wish. Now this task is on no wise more difficult
or dangerous than was that: nay 'tis the easier for that he thou
describest is none other than Shabbar, my brothergerman. Although
we both have the same parents, yet it pleased Almighty Allah to
enform us in different figures and to make him unlike his sister
as being in mortal mould can be. Moreover he is valiant and
adventurous, always seeking some geste and exploit whereby to
further my interest, and right willingly doth he carry out whatso
he undertaketh. He is shaped and formed as the Sultan thy sire
hath described, nor useth he any weapons save the Nabb∑t[FN#345]
or quarter staff of steel. And see now I will send for him, but
be not thou dismayed at sighting him." Replied Prince Ahmad, "If
he be in truth thine own brother what matter how he looketh? I
shall be pleased to see him as when one welcometh a valued friend
or a beloved kinsman. Wherefore should I fear to look upon him?"
Hearing these words Peri-Banu despatched one of her attendants
who brought to her from her private treasury a chafing-dish of
gold; then she bade a fire be lit therein, and sending for a
casket of noble metals studded with gems, the gift of her
kinsmen, she took therefrom some incense and cast it upon the
flames. Herewith issued a dense smoke spireing high in air and
spreading all about the palace; and a few moments after,
Peri-Banu who had ceased her conjurations cried, "Lookye my
brother Shabbar cometh! canst thou distinguish his form?" The
Prince looked up and saw a mannikin in stature dwarfish and no
more than three feet high, and with a boss on breast and a hump
on back; withal he carried himself with stately mien and majestic
air. On his right shoulder was borne his quarter staff of steel
thirteen score pounds in weight. His beard was thick and twenty
cubits in length but arranged so skilfully that it stood clear
off from the ground; he wore also a twisted pair of long
mustachios curling up to his ears, and all his face was covered
with long pile. His eyes were not unlike unto pig's eyes; and his
head, on which was placed a crown-like coiffure, was enormous of
bulk, contrasting with the meanness of his stature. Prince Ahmad
sat calmly beside his wife, the Fairy, and felt no fear as the
figure approached; and presently Shabbar walked up and glancing
at him asked Peri-Banu saying, "Who be this mortal who sitteth
hard by thee?" Hereto she replied, "O my brother, this is my
beloved husband, Prince Ahmad, son of the Sultan of Hindostan. I
sent thee not an invitation to the wedding as thou wast then
engaged on some great expedition; now, however, by the grace of
Almighty Allah thou hast returned triumphant and victorious over
thy foes, wherefore I have summoned thee upon a matter which
nearly concerneth me." Hearing these words Shabbar looked
graciously at Prince Ahmad, saying, "O my beloved sister, is
there any service I can render to him?" and she replied, "The
Sultan his sire desireth ardently to see thee, and I pray thee go
forthright to him and take the Prince with thee by way of guide."
Said he, "This instant I am ready to set forth;" but said she,
"Not yet, O my brother. Thou art fatigued with journeying; so
defer until the morrow thy visit to the King, and this evening I
will make known to thee all that concerneth Prince Ahmad."
Presently the time came; so Peri-Banu informed her brother
Shabbar concerning the King and his ill-counsellors; but she
dwelt mainly upon the misdeeds of the old woman, the Witch; and
how she had schemed to injure Prince Ahmad and despitefully
prevent his going to city or court, and she had gained such
influence over the Sultan that he had given up his will to hers
and ceased not doing whatso she bade him. Next day at dawn
Shabbar the Jinn and Prince Ahmad set out together upon a visit
to the Sultan; and when they had reached the city gates, all the
folk, nobles and commons, were struck with consternation at the
dwarf's hideous form; and, flying on every side in affright and
running into shops and houses, barred the doors and closed the
casements and hid themselves therein. So panic-stricken indeed
was their flight that many feet lost shoes and sandals in
running, while from the heads of others their loosened turbands
fell to earth. And when they twain approached the palace through
streets and squares and market-places desolate as the Desert of
Samﬂwah,[FN#346] all the keepers of the gates took to their heels
at sight of Shabbar and fled, so there was none to hinder their
entering. They walked straight on to the audience-chamber where
the Sultan was holding Darbar, and they found in attendance on
him a host of Ministers and Councillors, great and small, each
standing in his proper rank and station. They too on seeing
Shabbar speedily took flight in dire dismay and hid themselves;
also the guards had deserted their posts nor cared in any way to
let or stay the twain. The Sovran still sat motionless on his
throne, where Shabbar went up to him with lordly mien and royal
dignity and cried, "O King, thou hast expressed a wish to see me;
and lo, I am here. Say now what wouldst thou have me do?"--And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the King
made no reply to Shabbar, but held up his hands before his eyes
that he might not behold that frightful figure, and turning his
head would fain have fled in terror. Shabbar was filled with fury
at this rudeness on the part of the Sultan, and was wroth with
exceeding wrath to think that he had troubled himself to come at
the bidding of such a craven, who now on seeing him would fain
run away. So the Jinn, without an instant's delay, raised his
quarter staff of steel, and, swinging it twice in air, before
Prince Ahmad could reach the throne or on any wise interfere,
struck the Sultan so fiercely upon the poll that his skull was
smashed and his brains were scattered over the floor. And when
Shabbar had made an end of this offender, he savagely turned upon
the Grand Wazir who stood on the Sultan's right and incontinently
would have slain him also, but the Prince craved pardon for his
life and said, "Kill him not: he is my friend and hath at no time
said one evil word against me. But such is not the case with the
others, his fellows." Hearing these words the infuriated Shabbar
fell upon the Ministers and ill-counsellors on either side, to
wit, all who had devised evil devices against Prince Ahmad, and
slew them each and every and suffered none to escape save only
those who had taken flight and hidden themselves. Then, going
from the hall of justice to the courtyard, the Dwarf said to the
Wazir whose life the Prince had saved, "Harkye, there is a Witch
who beareth enmity against my brother, the husband of my sister.
See that thou produce her forthright; likewise the villain who
filled his father's mind with hate and malice, envy and jealousy
against him, so may I quite them in full measure for their
misdeeds." The Grand Wazir produced them all, first the
Sorceress, and then the malicious minister with his rout of
fautors and flatterers, and Shabbar felled them one after the
other with his quarter staff of steel and killed them pitilessly,
crying to the Sorceress, "This is the end of all thy machinations
with the King, and this is the fruit of thy deceit and treachery;
so learn not to feign thyself sick." And in the blindness of his
passion he would have slain all the inhabitants of the city, but
Prince Ahmad prevented him and pacified him with soft and
flattering words. Hereupon Shabbar habited his brother in the
royal habit and seated him on the throne and proclaimed him
Sultan of Hindostan. The people all, both high and low, rejoiced
with exceeding joy to hear these tidings, for Prince Ahmad was
beloved by every one; so they crowded to swear fealty and bring
presents and Nazarﬂnahs[FN#347] and raised shouts of acclamation
crying out, "Long live King Ahmad!" When all this was done,
Shabbar sent for his sister, Peri-Banu, and made her Queen under
the title of Shahr-Banu;[FN#348] and in due time taking leave of
her and of King Ahmad, the Jinni returned to his own home. And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that after these
things King Ahmad summoned Prince Ali his brother and Nur
al-Nihar and made him governor of a large city hard by the
capital, and dismissed him thither in high state and splendour.
Also he commissioned an official to wait upon Prince Husayn and
tell him all the tidings, and sent word saying, "I will appoint
thee ruler over any capital or country thy soul desireth; and, if
thou consent, I will forward thee letters of appointment." But
inasmuch as the Prince was wholly content and entirely happy in
Darwaysh-hood, he cared naught for rule or government or aught of
worldly vanities; so he sent back the official with his duty and
grateful thanks, requesting that he might be left to live his
life in solitude and renunciation of matters mundane. Now when
Queen Shahrazad had made an end of telling her story and yet the
night was not wholly spent, King Shahryar spake saying, "This thy
story, admirable and most wonderful, hath given me extreme
delight; and I pray thee do thou tell us another tale till such
time as the last hours of this our night be passed." She replied,
"Be it as thou wilt, O auspicious King: I am thy slave to do as
thou shalt bid." Then she began to relate the tale of





                THE TWO SISTERS WHO ENVIED THEIR
                        CADETTE[FN#349]



In days of yore and in times long gone before there lived a king
of Persia, Khusrau Shﬂh hight, renowned for justice and
righteousness. His father, dying at a good old age, had left him
sole heir to all the realm and, under his rule, the tiger and the
kid drank side by side at the same Ghﬂt;[FN#350] and his treasury
was ever full and his troops and guards were numberless. Now it
was his wont to don disguise and, attended by a trusty Wazir, to
wander about the street at night-time. Whereby things seld-seen
and haps peregrine became known to him, the which, should I tell
thee all thereof, O auspicious King, would weary thee beyond
measure. So he took seat upon the throne of his forbears and when
the appointed days of mourning were ended, according to the
custom of that country, he caused his exalted name, that is
Khusrau Shah, be struck upon all the coins of the kingdom and
entered into the formula of public prayer.[FN#351] And when
stablished in his sovranty he went forth as aforetime on one
evening accompanied by his Grand Wazir, both in merchant's habit,
walking the streets and squares, the markets and lanes, the
better to note what might take place both of good and of bad. By
chance they passed, as the night darkened, through a quarter
where dwelt people of the poorer class; and as they walked on,
the Shah heard inside a house women talking with loud voices;
then going near, he peeped in by the door-chink, and saw three
fair sisters who having supped together were seated on a divan
talking one to other. The King thereupon applied his ear to the
crack and listened eagerly to what they said, and heard each and
every declaring what was the thing she most desired.[FN#352]
Quoth the eldest, "I would I were married to the Shah's head
Baker for then should I ever have bread to eat, the whitest and
choicest in the city, and your hearts would be fulfilled with
envy and jealousy and malice at my good luck." Quoth the second,
"I would rather wive with the Shah's chief Kitchener and eat of
dainty dishes that are placed before his Highness, wherewith the
royal bread which is common throughout the Palace cannot compare
for gust and flavour." And quoth the third and youngest of the
three, and by far the most beautiful and lively of them all, a
maiden of charming nature, full of wit and humour; sharp-witted,
wary and wise, when her turn came to tell her wish, "O sisters,
my ambition is not as ordinary as yours. I care not for fine
bread nor glutton-like do I long for dainty dishes. I look to
somewhat nobler and higher: indeed I would desire nothing less
than to be married by the King and become the mother of a
beautiful Prince, a model of form and in mind as masterful as
valorous. His hair should be golden on one side and silvern on
the other: when weeping he should drop pearls in place of tears,
and when laughing his rosy lips should be fresh as the blossom
new-blown." The Shah was amazed with exceeding amazement to hear
the wishes of the three sisters, but chiefly of the youngest and
determined in himself that he would gratify them all. Wherefore
quoth he to the Grand Wazir, "Mark well this house And on the
morrow bring before me these maidens whom we Heard discoursing;"
and quoth the Wazir, "O Asylum of the Universe, I hear but to
obey." Thereupon the twain walked back to the palace and laid
them down to rest. When morning morrowed, the Minister went for
the sisters and brought them to the King, who, after greeting
them and heartening their hearts, said to them in kindly tone, "O
ye maidens of weal, last night what was it that in merry word and
jest ye spake one to other? Take heed ye tell the Shah every whit
in full detail, for all must become known to us; something have
we heard, but now the King would have ye recount your discourse
to his royal ears."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that at these
words of the Shah the sisters, confused and filled with shame,
durst not reply but stood before him silent with heads bent low;
and despite all questioning and encouragement they could not
pluck up courage. However, the youngest was of passing comeliness
in form and feature and forthwith the Shah became desperately
enamoured of her; and of his live began reassuring them and
saying, "O ye Princesses of fair ones, be not afraid nor troubled
in thought; nor let bashfulness or shyness prevent you telling
the Shah what three wishes you wished, for fain would he fulfil
them all." Thereat they threw themselves at his feet and, craving
his pardon for their boldness and freedom of speech, told him the
whole talk, each one repeating the wish she had wished; and on
that very day Khusrau Shah married the eldest sister to his chief
Baker, and the second sister to his head Cook, and bade make all
things ready for his own wedding with the youngest sister. So
when the preparations for the royal nuptials had been made after
costliest fashion, the King's marriage was celebrated with royal
pomp and pageantry, and the bride received the titles of Light of
the Harem and Bﬂn∑ of Irﬂn-land. The other two maidens were
likewise married, one to the King's Baker the other to his Cook,
after a manner according to their several degrees in life and
with little show of grandeur and circumstance. Now it had been
only right and reasonable that these twain having won each her
own wish, should have passed their time in solace and happiness,
but the decree of Destiny doomed otherwise; and, as soon as they
saw the grand estate whereto their youngest sister had risen, and
the magnificence of her marriage-festival, their hearts were
fired with envy and jealousy and sore despite and they resolved
upon giving the rein to their hatred and malignancy and to work
her some foul mischief. On this wise they remained for many
months consumed with rancour, day and night; and they burned with
grief and anger whenever they sighted aught of her superior style
and state. One morning as the two met at the Hammﬂm and found
privacy and opportunity, quoth the eldest sister to the second,
"A grievous thing it is indeed that she, our youngest sister, no
lovelier than ourselves, should thus be raised to the dignity and
majesty of Queendom and indeed the thought is overhard to bear."
Quoth the other, "O sister mine, I also am perplexed and
displeased at this thing, and I know not what of merit the Shah
could have seen in her that he was tempted to choose her for his
consort. She ill befitteth that high estate with that face like a
monkey's favour; and, save her youth, I know nothing that could
commend her to his Highness that he should so exalt her above her
fellows. To my mind thou and not she art fit to share the royal
bed; and I nurse a grudge against the King for that he hath made
this jade his Queen." And the eldest sister rejoined, "I likewise
marvel beyond all measure; and I swear that thy youth and beauty,
thy well-shaped figure and lovely favour and goodliness of gifts
past challenge or compare, might well have sufficed to win the
King and have tempted him to wed and bed with thee and make thee
his crowned Queen and Sovran Lady in lieu of taking to his arms
this paltry strumpet. Indeed he hath shown no sense of what is
right and just in leaving thee disappointed; and on this account
only the matter troubleth me with exceeding trouble."--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the two
sisters took counsel each with other how they might abase their
youngest sister in the Shah's sight and cause her downfall and
utter ruin. Day and night they conned over the matter in their
minds and spoke at great length about it when they ever met
together, and pondered endless plans to injure the Queen their
sister, and if possible bring about her death; but they could fix
upon none. And, whilst they bore this despite and hatred towards
her and diligently and deliberately sought the means of
gratifying their bitter envy, hatred and malice, she on the other
hand regarded them with the same favour and affection as she had
done before marriage and thought only how to advantage their low
estate. Now when some months of her wedded life had passed, the
fair Queen was found to be with child whereof the glad tidings
filled the Shah with joy; and straightway he commanded all the
people of the capital and throughout the while Empire keep
holiday with feasts and dancing and every manner jollity as
became so rare and important an occasion. But as soon as the news
came to the ears of the two Envious Sisters they were constrained
perforce to offer their congratulations to the Queen; and, after
a long visit, as the twain were about to crave dismissal they
said, "Thanks be to Almighty Allah, O our sister, who hath shown
us this happy day. One boon have we to ask of thee: to wit, that
when the time shall come for thee to be delivered of a child, we
may assist as midwives at thy confinement, and be with thee and
nurse thee for the space of forty days." The Queen in her
gladness made reply, "O sisters mine, I fain would have it so;
for at a time of such need I know f none on whom to rely with
such dependence as upon you. During my coming trial your presence
with me will be most welcome and opportune; but I can do only
what thing the Shah biddeth anor can I do aught save by his
leave. My advice is thus:--Make known this matter to your mates
who have always access to the royal presence, and let them
personally apply for your attendance as midwives; I doubt not but
that the Shah will give you leave to assist me and remain by my
side, considering the fond relationship between us three." Then
the two sisters returned home full of evil thoughts and malice,
and told their wishes to their husbands who, in turn, bespake
Khusrau Shah, and proffered their petition with all humility,
little knowing what was hidden from them in the Secret Purpose.
The King replied, "When I shall have thought the matter over in
my mind, I will give you suitable orders." So saying he privately
visited the Queen and to her said, "O my lady, an it please thee,
methinks Êtwould be well to summon thy sisters and secure their
aidance, when thou shalt be labouring of child, in lieu of any
stranger: and if thou be of the same mind as myself let me at
once learn and take steps to obtain their consent and concert ere
thy time arriveth. They will wait on thee with more loving care
than any hired nurse and thou wilt find thyself the safer in
their hands." Replied the Queen, "O my lord the Shah, I also
venture to think that Êtwould be well to have my sisters by my
side and not mere aliens at such an hour." Accordingly he sent
sword to them and from that day they dwelt within the palace to
make all ready for the expected confinement; and on this wise
they found means to carry out their despiteful plot which during
so many days they had devised to scanty purpose. When her full
tale of months had been told, the Banu was brought to bed of a
man-child marvellous in beauty, whereat the fire of envy and
hatred was kindled with redoubled fury in the sisters' breasts.
So they again took counsel not suffered ruth nor natural
affection to move their cruel hearts; and presently, with great
care and secrecy, they wrapped the new-born in a bit of blanket
and putting him into a basket cast him into a canal which flowed
hard by the Queen's apartment.[FN#353] They then placed a dead
puppy in the place of the prince and showed it to the other
midwives and nurses, averring that the Queen had given birth to
such abortion. When these untoward tidings reached the King's ear
he was sore discomforted and waxed wroth with exceeding wrath.--
And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Seventieth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the King,
enflamed with sudden fierceness, drew his sword and would have
slain his Queen had not the Grand Wazir, who happened to be in
his presence at the time, restrained his rage and diverted him
from his unjust design and barbarous purpose. Quoth he, "O Shadow
of Allah upon earth, this mishap is ordained of the Almighty Lord
whose will no man hath power to gainsay. The Queen is guiltless
of offence against thee, for what is born of her is born without
her choice, and she indeed hath no hand therein." With this and
other sage counsels he dissuaded his lord from carrying out his
fell purpose and saved the guiltless Queen from a sudden and
cruel death. Meanwhile the basket wherein lay the newly-born
Prince was carried by the current into a rivulet which flowed
through the royal gardens; and, as the Intendant of the pleasure
grounds and pleasaunces chanced to walk along the bank, by the
decree of Destiny he caught sight of the basket floating by, and
he called a gardener, bidding him lay hold of it and bring it to
him that he might see what was therein. The man ran along the
rivulet side; and, with a long stick drawing the basket to land,
showed it to the Intendant who opened it and beheld within a new-
born babe, a boy of wondrous beauty wrapped in a bit of blanket;
at which sight he was astounded beyond measure of surprise. Now
it chanced that the Intendant, who was one of the Emirs and who
stood high in favour with the Sovran, had no children: withal he
never ceased offering prayers and vows to Almighty Allah that he
might have a son to keep alive his memory and continue his name.
Delighted at the sight he took home the basket with the babe and
giving it to his wife said, "See how Allah hath sent to us this
man-child which I just now found floating upon the waters; and do
thou apply thee forthright and fetch a wet-nurse to give him milk
and nourish him; and bring him up with care and tenderness as
though he were thine own." So the Intendant's wife took charge of
the child with great gladness and reared him with her whole
heart, diligently as though born of her own womb; nor did the
Intendant say aught to any, or seek to find out whose might be
the child lest haply some one claim and take it from him. He was
certified in his mind that the boy came from the Queen's quarter
of the palace, but deemed inexpedient to make too strict enquiry
concerning the matter; and he and his spouse kept the secret with
all secrecy. A year after this the Queen gave birth to a second
son, when her sisters, the Satanesses full of spite, did with
this babe, even as they had done by the first: they wrapped it in
a cloth and set it in a basket which they threw into the stream,
then gave out that the Queen had brought forth a kitten. But once
more, by the mercy of Allah Almighty, this boy came to the hands
of that same Intendant of the gardens who carried him to his wife
and placed him under her charge with strict injunctions to take
care of the second foundling sedulously as she had done with the
first. The Shah, enraged to hear the evil tidings, again rose up
to slay the Queen; but as before the Grand Wazir prevented him
and calmed his wrath with words of wholesome rede and a second
time saved the unhappy mother's life. And after another year had
gone by the Banu was brought to bed and this time bore a daughter
by whom the sisters did as they had done by her brothers: they
set the innocent inside a basket and threw her into the stream;
and the Intendant found her also and took her to his wife and
bade her rear the infant together with the other two castaways.
Hereupon the Envious Sisters, wild with malice, reported that the
Queen had given birth to a musk-ratling;[FN#354] whereat King
Khusrau could no longer stay his wrath and indignation. So he
cried in furious rage to the Grand Wazir, "What, shall the Shah
suffer this woman, who beareth naught but vermin and abortions,
to share the joys of his bed? Nay more, the King can no longer
allow her to live, else she will fill the palace with monstrous
births: in very sooth, she is herself a monster, and it behoveth
us to rid this place of such unclean creature and accursed." So
saying the Shah commanded them do her to death; but the ministers
and high officers of estate who stood before the presence fell at
the royal feet and besought pardon and mercy for the Queen. The
Grand Wazir also said with folded hands, "O Shﬂhihshﬂh[FN#355]--O
King of the kings--thy slave would fain represent that Êtis not
in accordance with the course of justice or the laws of the land
to take the life of a woman for no fault of her own. She cannot
interfere with Destiny, nor can she prevent unnatural births such
as have thrice betided her; and such mishaps have oftentimes
befallen other women, whose cases call for compassion and not
punishment. An the King be displeased with her then let him cease
to live with her, and the loss of his gracious favour will be a
penalty dire enough; and, if the Shah cannot suffer the sight of
her, then let her be confined in some room apart, and let her
expiate her offence by alms deed and charity until ÊIzrﬂ›l, the
Angel of Death, separate her soul from her flesh." Hearing these
words of counsel from his aged Councillor, Khusrau Shah
recognised that it had been wrong to slay the Queen, for that she
could on no wise do away with aught that was determined by Fate
and Destiny; and presently he said to the Grand Wazir, "Her life
is spared at thine intercession, O wise man and ware; yet will
the King doom her to a weird which, haply, is hardly less hard to
bear than death. And now do thou forthright make ready, by the
side of the Cathedral-mosque, a wooden cage with iron bars and
lock the Queen therein as one would confine a ferocious wild
beast.[FN#356] Then every Mussulman who wendeth his way to public
prayers Shall spit in her face ere he set foot within the fane,
and if any fail to carry out this command he shall be punished in
like manner. So place guards and inspectors to enforce obedience
and let me hear if there be aught of gainsaying." The Wazir durst
not make reply but carried out the Shah's commandments; and this
punishment inflicted upon the blameless Queen had far better
befitted her Envious Sisters.--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

      The End of the Six Hundred and Seventy-first Night.

Then said she--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the cage was
made ready with all speed; and, when the forty days after
purification of child-bed[FN#357] had come to an end, the Banu
was locked therein; and, according to the King's commandment, all
who came to prayer in the Great Mosque would first spit in her
face. The hapless woman, well knowing that she as not worthy of
this ignominy, bore her sufferings with all patience and
fortitude; nor were they few who deemed her blameless and
undeserving to endure these torments and tortures inflicted upon
her by the Shah; and they pitied her and offered prayers and made
vows for her release. Meanwhile the Intendant of the gardens and
his wife brought up the two Princes and the Princess with all
love and tenderness; and, as the children grew in years, their
love for these adopted ones increased in like proportion. They
gave the eldest Prince the name Bahman,[FN#358], and to his
brother Parwez,[FN#359], and as the maiden was of rare of beauty
and passing of loveliness and graciousness, they called her
Per›zﬂdah.[FN#360] When the Princes became of years to receive
instruction, the Intendant of the gardens appointed tutors and
masters to teach them reading and writing and all the arts and
sciences: the Princess also, showing like eagerness to acquire
knowledge, was taught letters by the same instructors, and soon
could read and write with as perfect fluency and fluency as could
her brothers. Then they were placed under the most learned of the
Philosophers and the Olema, who taught them the interpretation of
the Koran and the sayings of the Apostle; the science of geometry
as well as poetry and history, and even the abstruse sciences and
the mystic doctrines of the Enlightened; and their teachers were
astonished to find how soon and how far all three made progress
in their studies and bid fair to outstrip even the sages however
learned. Moreover, they all three were reared to horsemanship and
skill in the chase, to shooting with shafts and lunging with
lance and sway with sabre and jerking the Jer›d, with other manly
and warlike sports. Besides all this the Princess Perizadah was
taught to sing and play on various instruments of mirth and
merriment, wherein she became the peerless pearl of her age and
time. The Intendant was exceeding glad of heart to find his
adopted children prove themselves such proficients in every
branch of knowledge; and presently, forasmuch as his lodging was
small and unfit for the growing family, he bought at a little
distance from the city a piece of land sufficiently large to
contain fields and meadows and copses. Here he fell to building a
mansion of great magnificence; and busied himself day and night
with supervising the architects and masons and other artificers.
He adorned the walls inside and out with sculptural work of the
finest and paintings of the choicest, and he fitted every
apartment with richest furniture. In the front of his mansion he
bade lay out a garden and stocked it with scented flowers and
fragrant shrubs and fruit trees whose produce was as that of
Paradise. There was moreover a large park girt on all sides by a
high wall wherein he reared game, both fur and feather, as sport
for the two Princes and their sister. And when the mansion was
finished and fit for habitation, the Intendant, who had
faithfully served the Shah for many generations of men, craved
leave of his lord that he might bid adieu to the city and take up
his abode in his new country seat; and the King, who had always
looked upon him with the eye of favour, granted to him the
required boon right heartily; furthermore, to prove his high
opinion of his old servant and his services, he inquired of him
if he had aught to request that it might granted to him. Replied
the other, "O my liege lord, thy slave desireth naught save that
he may spend the remnant of his days under the shadow of the
Shah's protection, with body and soul devoted to his service,
even as I served the side before the son," The Shah dismissed him
with words of thanks and comfort, when he left the city and
taking with him the two Princes and their sister, he carried them
to his newly-built mansion. Some years before this time his wife
had departed to the mercy of Allah, and he had passed only five
or six months in his second home when he too suddenly felt sick
and was admitted into the number of those who have found ruth.
Withal he had neglected every occasion of telling his three
foundlings the strange tale of their birth and how he had carried
them to his home as castaways and had reared them as rearlings
and had cherished them as his own children. But he had time to
charge them, ere he died, that they three should never cease to
live together in love and honour and affection and respect one
towards other. The loss of their protector caused them to grieve
with bitter grief for they all thought he was their real father;
so they bewailed them and buried him as befitted; after which the
two brothers and their sister dwelt together in peace and plenty.
But one day of the days the Princes, who were full of daring and
of the highest mettle, rode forth a-hunting and Princess
Perizadah was left alone at home when an ancient woman--And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Seventy-second Night.

Then said she--I have heard, O auspicious King, that perchance an
ancient woman of the Moslems, a recluse and a devotee, came to
the door and begged leave to enter within and repeat her prayers,
as it was then the canonical hour and she had but time to make
the Wuz∑-ablution. Perizadah bade being her and saluted her with
the salam and kindly welcomed her; then, when the holy woman had
made an end of her orisons, the handmaids of the Princess, at her
command, conducted her all through the house and grounds, and
displayed to her the rooms with their furniture and fittings, and
lastly the garden and orchard and game-park. She was well pleased
with all she saw and said within herself, "The man who built this
mansion and laid out these parterres and vergiers was verily an
accomplished artist and a wight of marvellous skill." At last the
slaves led her back to the Princess who, awaiting her return, was
sitting in the belvedere; and quoth she to the devotee, "Come, O
good my mother, do thou sit beside me and make me happy by the
company of a pious recluse whom I am fortunate enough to have
entertained unawares, and suffer I listen to thy words of grace
and thereby gain no small advantage in this world and the next.
Thou hast chosen the right path and straight whereon to walk, and
that which all men strive for and pine for." The holy woman would
fain have seated herself at the feet of the Princess, but she
courteously arose and took her by the hand and constrained her to
sit beside her. Quoth she, "O my lady, mine eyes never yet beheld
one so well-mannered as thou art: indeed, I am unworthy to sit
with thee, natheless, as thou biddest, I will e'en do thy
bidding." As they sat conversing each with other the slave-girls
set before them a table whereon were placed some platters of
bread and cakes with saucers full of fruits both fresh and dried,
and various kinds of cates and sweetmeats. The Princess took one
of the cakes and giving it to the good woman said, "O my mother,
refresh thyself herewith and eat of the fruits such as thou
likest. ÊTis now long since thou didst leave thy home and I trow
thou hast not tasted aught of food upon the road." Replied the
holy woman, "O lady of gentle birth, I am not wont to taste of
dainty dishes such as these, but I can ill refuse thy provision,
since Allah the Almighty deigneth send me food and support by so
liberal and generous a hand as thine." And when they twain had
eaten somewhat and cheered their hearts, the Princess asked the
devotee concerning the manner of her worship and of her austere
life; whereto she made due answer and explained according to her
knowledge. The Princess then exclaimed, "Tell me, I pray thee,
what thou thinkest of this mansion and the fashion of its
building and the furniture and the appurtenances; and say me is
all perfect and appropriate, or is aught still lacking in mansion
or garden?" And she replied, "Since thou deignest ask my opinion,
I confess to thee that both the buildings and the parterres are
finished and furnished to perfection; and the belongings are in
the best of taste and in the highest of ordinance. Still to my
thinking there be three things here wanting, which if thou hadst
the place would be most complete." The Princess Perizadah adjured
her saying, "O my aunt, I beseech thee tell me what three
articles yet are lacking, that I may lose no pains nor toil to
obtain them;" and as the maiden pressed her with much intreaty,
the devotee was constrained to tell her. Quoth she, "O gentle
lady, the first thing is the Speaking-Bird, called Bulbul-i-
hazﬂr-dﬂstﬂn;[FN#361] he is very rare and hard to find but,
whenever he poureth out his melodious notes, thousands of birds
fly to him from every side and join him in his harmony. The next
thing is the Singing-Tree, whose smooth and glossy leaves when
shaken by the wind and rubbed against one another send forth
tuneful tones which strike the ear like the notes of sweet-voices
minstrels ravishing the heart of all who listen. The third thing
is the Golden-Water of transparent purity, whereon should but one
drop be dripped into a basin and this be placed inside the garden
it presently will fill the vessel brimful and will spout upwards
in gerbes playing like a fountain that jets: moreover it never
ceaseth playing, and all the water as it shooteth up falleth back
again inside the basin, not one gout thereof being lost." Replied
the Princess, "I doubt not but thou knowest for a certainty the
very spot where these wondrous things are to be found; and I pray
thee tell me now the place and means whereby I may take action to
obtain them."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Seventy-third Night.

Then said she--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the holy
woman thus answered the Princess, "These three rarities are not
to be found, save on the boundary-line that lieth between the
land of Hind and the confining countries, a score of marches
along the road that leadeth Eastwards from this mansion. Let him
who goeth forth in quest of them ask the first man he meeteth on
the twentieth stage concerning the spot where he may find the
Speaking-Bird, the Singing-Tree and the Golden-Water; and he will
direct the seeker where to come upon all three." When she had
made an end of speaking the Devotee, with many blessings and
prayers and vows for her well-being, farewelled the lady
Perizadah and fared forth homewards. The Princess, however,
ceased not to ponder her words and ever to dwell in memory upon
the relation of the holy woman who, never thinking that her
hostess had asked for information save by way of curiosity, nor
really purposed in mind to set forth with intent of finding the
rarities, ahd heedlessly told all she knew and had given a clue
to the discovery. But Perizadah kept these matters deeply graven
on the tablets of her heart with firm resolution to follow the
directions and, by all means in her power, to gain possession of
these three wonders. Withal, the more she reflected the harder
appeared the enterprise, and her fear of failing only added to
her unease. Now whilst she sat perplexed with anxious thought and
anon terrified with sore affright, her brothers rode back from
the hunting-ground; and they marvelled much to see her sad of
semblance and low-spirited, wondering the while what it was that
troubles her. Presently quoth Prince Bahman, "O sister mine, why
art thou so heavy of heart this day? Almighty Allah forbid thou
ill in health or that aught have betided thee to cause thy
displeasure or to make thee melancholy. Tell us I beseech thee
what it is, that we may be sharers in thy sorrow and be alert to
aid thee." The Princess answered not a word, but after long
silence raised her head and looked up at her brothers; then
casting down her eyes she said in curt phrase that naught was
amiss with her. Quoth Prince Bahman, "Full well I wot that there
is a somewhat on my mind which thou hesitateth to tell us; and
now hear me swear a strong oath that I will never leave thy side
till thou shalt have told us what cause it is that troubleth
thee. Haply thou art aweary of our affection and thou wouldest
undo the fraternal tie which hath united us from our infancy."
When she saw her brothers so distressed and distraught, she was
compelled to speak and said, "Albeit, O my dearlings, to tell you
wherefore I am sad and sorrowful may cause you grief, still there
is no help but I explain the matter to you twain. This mansion,
which our dear father (who hath found ruth) builded for us, is
perfect in every attribute nor lacketh it any condition of
comfort or completion. Howbeit I have found out by chance this
day that there are yet three things which, were they set within
these walls, of the house and grounds, would make our place
beyond compare, and in the wide world there would be naught with
it to pair. These three things are the Speaking-Bird an the
Singing-Tree and the Golden- Water; and ever since I heard of
them my heart is filled with extreme desire to place them within
our domain and excessive longing to obtain them by any means
within my power. It now behoveth you to help me with your best
endeavour and to consider what person will aid me in getting
possession of these rarities." Replied Prince Bahman, "My life
and that of my brother are at thy service to carry out thy
purpose with heart and soul; and, couldst thou give me but a clue
to the place where these strange things are found, I would sally
forth in quest of them at day-break as soon as the morning shall
morrow." When Prince Parwez understood that his brother was about
to make this journey, he spake saying, "O my brother, thou art
eldest of us, so do thou stay at home while I go forth to seek
for these three things and bring them to our sister. And indeed
it were more fitting for me to undertake a task which may occupy
me for years." Replied Prince Bahman, "I have full confidence in
thy strength and prowess, and whatso I am able to perform thou
canst do as well as I can. Still it is my firm resolve to fare
forth upon this adventure alone and unaided, and thou must stay
and take care of our sister and our house." So next day Prince
Bahman learned from the Princess the road whereon he was to
travel and the marks and signs whereby to find the place.
Presently, he donned armour and arms and bidding the twain adieu,
he took horse and was about to ride forth with the stoutest of
hearts, whereat Princess Perizadah's eyes brimmed with tears and
in faltering accents she addressed him saying, "O dear my
brother, this bitter separation is heart-breaking; and sore
sorrowful am I to see thee part from us. This disunion and thine
absence in a distant land cause me grief and woe far exceeding
that wherewith I mourned and pined for the rarities wherefor thou
quittest us. If only we might have some news of thee from day to
day then would I fell somewhat comforted and consoled; but not
Êtis clear otherwise and regret is of none avail."--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night.

Then she said--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Bahman made answer in these words: "O sister mine, I am fully
determined in mind to attempt this derring-do; be thou not
however anxious or alarmed, for Inshallah--God willing--I shall
return successful and triumphant. After my departure shouldst
thou at any time feel in fear for my safety, then by this token
which I leave thee thou shalt know of my fate and lot, good or
evil." Then, drawing from his waist-shawl a little hunting-knife
like a whittle, he gave it to Princess Perizadah, saying, "Take
now this blade and keep it ever by thee; and shouldst thou at any
day or hour be solicitous concerning my condition, draw it from
its sheath; and if the steel be clean and bright as Êtis now then
know that I am alive and safe and sound; but an thou find stains
of blood thereon then shalt thou know that I am slain, and naught
remaineth for thee to do save to pray for me as for one dead."
With these words of solace the Prince departed on his journey,
and travelled straight along the road to India, turning nor to
right hand nor to left but ever keeping the same object in view.
Thus a score of days was spent in journeying from the land of
Iran, and upon the twentieth he reached the end of his travel.
Here he suddenly sighted an ancient man of frightful aspect
sitting beneath a tree hard by his thatched hut wherein he was
wont to shelter himself from the rains of spring and the heats of
summer and the autumnal miasmas and the wintry frosts. So shotten
in years was this Shaykh that hair and beard, mustachios and
whiskers were white as snow, and the growth of his upper lip was
so long and so thick that it covered and concealed his mouth,
while his beard swept the ground and the nails of his hands and
feet had grown to resemble the claws of a wild beast. Upon his
head he wore a broad-brimmed hat of woven palm-leaves like that
of a Malﬂbﬂr fisherman, and all his remaining habit was a strip
of matting girded around his waist. Now this Shaykh was a
Darwaysh who for many years had fled the world and all worldly
pleasures; who lived a holy life of poverty and chastit