y and
other-worldliness whereby his semblance had become such as I, O
auspicious King, have described to thee. From early dawn that day
Prince Bahman had been watchful and vigilant, ever looking on all
sides to descry some one who could supply him with information
touching the whereabouts of the rarities he sought; and this was
the first human being he had sighted on that stage, the twentieth
and last of his journey. So he rode up to him, being assured that
the Shaykh must be the wight of whom the holy woman had spoken.
Then Prince Bahman dismounting and making low obeisance to the
Darwaysh, said, "I my father, Allah Almighty prolong thy years
and grant thee all thy wishes!" Whereto the Fakir made answer but
in accents so indistinct that the Prince could not distinguish a
single word he said; and presently Bahman understood that his
moustache was on such wise closed and concealed his mouth that
his utterance became indistinct and he only muttered when he
would have spoken. He therefore haltered his horse to a tree and
pulling out a pair of scissors said, "O holy man, thy lips are
wholly hidden by this overlong hair; suffer me, I pray thee, clip
the bristling growth which overspreadeth thy face and which is so
long and thick that thou art fearsome to behold; nay, more like
to a bear than to a human being." The Darwaysh with a nod
consented, and when the Prince had clipped it and trimmed the
growth, his face once more looked young and fresh as that of a
man in the prime of youth. Presently quoth Bahman to him, "Would
Heaven that I had a mirror wherein to show thee thy face, so
wouldst thou see how youthful thou seemest, and how thy favour
hath become far more like that of folk than whilom it was." These
flattering words pleased the Darwaysh who smiling said, "I thank
thee much for this thy goodly service and kindly offices; and, if
in return, I can do aught of favour for thee, I pray thee let me
know, and I will attempt to satisfy thee in all things with my
very heart and soul." Then said the Prince, "O holy man, I have
come hither from far distant lands along a toilsome road in quest
of three things; to wit, a certain Speaking-Bird, a Singing-Tree
and a Golden-Water; and this know I for certain that they are all
to be found hard by this site."--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Seventy-Fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Prince,
turning to the Darwaysh, continued, "O Devotee, albeit well I wot
that the three things I seek are in this land and nearhand, yet I
know not the exact spot wherein to find them. An thou have true
information concerning the place and will inform me thereof, I on
my part will never forget thy kindness, and I shall have the
satisfaction of feeling that this long and toilsome wayfare hath
not been wholly vain." Hearing these words of the Prince, the
Darwaysh changed countenance and his face waxed troubled and his
colour wan; then he bent his glance downwards and sat in deepest
silence. Whereat the other said, "O holy father, dost thou not
understand the words wherewith I have bespoken thee? An thou art
ignorant of the matter prithee let me know straightway that I may
again fare onwards until such time as I find a man who can inform
me thereof." After a long pause the Darwaysh made reply, "O
stranger, Êtis true I ken full well the site whereof thou are in
search; but I hold thee dear in that thou hast been of service to
me; and I am loath for thine own sake to tell thee where to find
that stead." And the Prince rejoined, "Say me, O Fakir, why dost
thou withhold this knowledge from me, and wherefore art thou not
lief to let me learn it?" Replied the other, "'Tis a hard road to
travel and full of perils and dangers. Besides thyself many have
come hither and have asked the path of me, and I refused to tell
them, but they heeded not my warning and pressed me sore and
compelled me to disclose the secret which I would have buried in
my breast. Know, O my son, that all those braves have perished in
their pride and not one of them hath returned to me safe and
sound. Now, an thy life be dear to thee, follow my counsel and
fare no further, but rather turn thee back without stay or delay
and make for house and home and family." Hereto Prince Bahman,
stern in resolution, made reply, "Thou hast after kindly guise
and friendly fashion advised me with the best of advice; and I,
having heard all thou hast to day, do thank thee gratefully. But
I reck not one jot or tittle of what dangers affront me, nor
shall thy threats however fatal deter me from my purpose:
moreover, if thieves or foemen haply fall upon me, I am armed at
point and can and will protect myself, for I am certified that
none can outvie me in strength and stowre." To this the Fakir
made reply, "The beings who will cut thy path and bar thy
progress to that place are unseen of man, nor will they appear to
thee on any wise: how then canst thou defend thyself against
them?" And he replied, "So be it, still I fear not and I pray
thee only show me the road thither." When the Darwaysh was
assured that the Prince had fully determined in mind to attempt
the exploit and would by no means turn or be turned back from
carrying out his purpose, he thrust his hand into a bag which lay
hard by and took therefrom a ball, and said, "Alas, O my son,
thou wilt not accept my counsel and I needs must let thee follow
thy wilful way. Take this ball and, mounting thy horse, throw it
in front of thee, and as long as it shall roll onwards do thou
ride after it, but when it shall stop at the hill-foot dismount
from thy horse and throw the reins upon his neck and leave him
alone, for he will stay there without moving until such time as
thou return. Then manfully breast the ascent, and on either side
of the path, right and left, thou shalt see a scatter of huge
black boulders. Here the sound of many voices in confused clamour
and frightful will suddenly strike thine ears, to raise thy wrath
and to fill thee with fear and hinder thy higher course uphill.
Have a heed that thou be not dismayed, also beware, and again say
I beware, lest thou turn they head at any time, and cast a look
backwards. An thy courage fail thee, or thou allow thyself one
glance behind thee, thou shalt be transformed that very moment
into a black rock; for know thou, O Prince, that all those stones
which thou shalt see strewn upon thy way were men whilome and
braves like thyself, who went forth with intent to gain the three
things thou seekest, but frightened at those sounds lost human
shape and became black boulders. However, shouldst thou reach the
hill-top sae and sound, thou shalt find on the very summit a cage
and perched therein the Speaking-Bird ready to answer all thy
queries. So ask of him where thou mayest find the Singing-Tree
and the Golden-Water, and he will tell thee all thou requirest.
When thou shalt safely have seized all three thou wilt be free
from further danger; yet, inasmuch as thou hast not yet set out
upon this journey give ear to my counsel. I beg of thee to desist
from this thy purpose and return home in peace whilst thou hast
yet the power."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Prince
made answer to the Darwaysh, "Until, O thou holy man, such time
as I win to my purpose I will not go back; no, never; therefore
adieu." So he mounted his horse and threw the ball in front of
him; and it rolled forward at racing-speed and he, with gaze
intent thereupon, rode after it and did not suffer it to gain
upon him. When it had reached the hill whereof the Darwaysh
spake, it ceased to make further way, whereupon the Prince
dismounted and throwing the reins on his horse's neck left him
and fared on afoot to the slope. As far as he could see, the line
of his path from the hill-foot to the head was strown with a
scatter of huge black boulders; withal his heart felt naught of
fear. He had not taken more than some four or five paces before a
hideous din and a terrible hubbub of many voices arose, even as
the Darwaysh had forewarned him. Prince Bahman, however, walked
on valiantly with front erect and fearless tread, but he saw no
living thing and heard only the Voices[FN#362] sounding all
around him. Some said, "Who is yon fool man and whence hath he
come?" Stop him, let him not pass!" Others shouted out, "Fall on
him, seize this zany and slay him!" Then the report waxed louder
and louder still, likest to the roar of thunder, and many Voices
yelled out, "Thief! Assassin! Murderer!" Another muttered in
taunting undertones, "Let him be, fine fellow that he is! Suffer
him to pass on, for he and he only shall get the cage and the
Speaking-Bird." The Prince feared naught but advanced hot foot
with his wonted verve and spirit; presently, however, when the
Voices kept approaching nearer and nearer to him and increased in
number on every side, he was sore perplexed. His legs began to
tremble, he staggered and in fine overcome by fear he clean
forgot the warning of the Darwaysh and looked back, whereat he
was incontinently turned to stone like the scores of knights and
adventurers who had foregone him. Meantime the Princess Perizadah
ever carried the hunting-knife, which Bahman her brother had
given her, sheathed as it was in her maiden zone. She had kept it
there ever since he set out upon his perilous expedition, and
whenever she felt disposed she would bare the blade and judge by
its sheen how fared her brother. Now until that day when he was
transmewed to stone she found it, as often as she looked at it,
clean and bright; but on the very evening when that evil fate
betided him perchance Prince Parwez said to Perizadah, "O sister
mine, give me I pray thee the hunting-knife that I may see how
goeth it with our brother." She took it from her waist-belt and
handed it to him; and as soon as he unsheathed the knife lo and
behold! he saw gouts of gore begin to drop from it. Noting this
he dashed the hunting-knife down and burst out into loud
lamentations, whilst the Princess who divined what had happened
shed a flood of bitter tears and cried with sighs and sobs,
"Alas, O my brother, thou hast given thy life for me. Ah, woe is
me and well-away! why did I tell thee of the Speaking-Bird and
the Singing-Tree and the Golden- Water? Wherefore did I ask that
holy woman how she liked our home, and hear of those three things
in answer to my question? Would to Heaven she had never crossed
our threshold and darkened our doors! Ungrateful hypocrite, dost
thou requite me on such wise for the favour and the honour I was
fain to show thee; and what made me ask of thee the means whereby
to win these things? If now I obtain possession of them what will
they advantage me, seeing that my brother Bahman is no more? What
should I ever do with them?" Thus did Perizadah indulge her grief
bewailing her sad fate; while Parwez in like manner moaned for
his brother Bahman with exceeding bitter mourning. At last the
Prince, who despite his sorrow was assured that his sister still
ardently desired to possess the three marvels, turned to
Perizadah and said, "It behoveth me, O my sister, to set out
forthright and to discover whether Bahman our brother met his
death by doom of Destiny, or whether some enemy have slain him;
and if he hath been killed then must I take full vengeance on his
murtherer." Perizadah besought him with much weeping and wailing
not to leave her, and said, "O joy of my heart, Allah upon thee,
follow not in the footsteps of our dear departed brother or quit
me in order to attempt a journey so rife in risks. I care naught
for those things in my fear lest I lose thee also while
attempting such enterprise." But Prince Parwez would in no wise
listen to her lament and next day took leave of her, but ere he
fared she said to him, "The hunting-knife which Bahman left with
me was the means of informing us concerning the mishap which
happened to him; but, say me how I shall know what happeneth to
thee?" Then he produced a string of pearls which numbered one
hundred and said, "As long as thou shalt see these pearls all
parted one from other and each running loose upon the string,
then do thou know that I am alive; but an thou shouldst find them
fixed and adhering together then be thou ware that I am dead."
The Princess taking the string of pearls hung it around her neck,
determined to observe it hour after hour and find out how it
fared with her second brother. After this Prince Parwez set out
upon his travels and at the twentieth stage came to the same spot
where Bahman had found the Darwaysh and saw him there in like
condition. Then, after saluting him with the salam, the Prince
asked, "Canst thou tell me where to find the Speaking-Bird and
the Singing-Tree and the Golden-Water; and by what manner of
means I may get possession of them? An thou can I pray thee
inform me of this matter."--And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till

     The end of the Six Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Darwaysh strave to stay Prince Parwez from his design and shewed
him all the dangers on the way. Quoth he, "Not many days ago one
like unto thee in years and in features came hither and enquired
of me concerning the matter you now seekest. I warned him of the
perils of the place and would have weaned him from his wilful
ways, but he paid no wise heed to my warnings and refused to
accept my counsel. He went off with full instructions from me on
how to find those things he sought; but as yet he hath not
returned, and doubtless he also hath perished like the many who
preceded him upon that perilous enterprise." Then said Prince
Parwez, "O holy father, I know the man of whom thou speakest, for
that he was my brother; and I learned that he was dead, but have
no inkling of the cause whereby he died." Replied the Darwaysh,
"O my lord, I can inform thee on this matter; he hath been
transmewed into a black stone, like the others of whom I just now
spake to thee. If thou wilt not accept my advice and act
accordingly to my counsel thou also shalt perish by the same
means as did thy brother; and I solemnly forewarn thee to desist
from this endeavour." Prince Parwez having pondered these words,
presently made reply, "O Darwaysh, I thank thee again and again
and am much beholden to thee that thou art fain of my welfare and
thou hast given me the kindest of counsel and the friendliest of
advice; nor am I worthy of such favours bestowed upon a stranger.
But now remaineth naught for me to beseech that thou wilt point
out the path, for I am fully purposed to fare forwards and in no
wise to desist from my endeavour. I pray thee favour me with full
instructions for the road even as thou favouredst my brother."
Then said the Darwaysh, "An thou wilt not lend ear to my warnings
and do as I desire thee, it mattereth to me neither mickle nor
little. Choose for thyself and I by doom of Destiny must perforce
forward thy attempt and albeit, by reason of my great age and
infirmities, I may not conduct thee to the place I will not
grudge thee a guide." Then Prince Parwez mounted his horse and
the Darwaysh taking one of many balls from out his scrip placed
it in the youth's hands, directing him the while what to do, as
he had counselled his brother Bahman; and, after giving him much
advice and many warnings he ended with saying, "O my lord, have a
heed not to be perplexed and terrified by the threatening
Voices[FN#363], and sounds from unseen beings, which shall strike
thine ear; but advance dauntless to the hill-top where thou shalt
find the cage with the Speaking-Bird and the Singing-Tree and the
Golden-Water." The Fakir then bid him adieu with words of good
omen and the Prince set forth. He threw the ball upon the ground
before him and, as it rolled up the path, he urged his horse to
keep pace with it. But when he reached the hill-foot and saw that
the ball had stopped and lay still, he dismounted forthright and
paused awhile ere he should begin to climb and conned well in his
mind the directions, one and all, given to him by the Darwaysh.
Then, with firm courage and fast resolve, he set out afoot to
reach the hill-top. But hardly had he begun to climb before he
heard a voice beside him threatening him in churlish tongue and
crying, "O youth of ill-omen, stand still that I may trounce thee
for this thine insolence." Hearing these insulting words of the
Invisible Speaker, Prince Parwez felt his blood boil over; he
could not refrain his rage and in his passion he clean forgot the
words of wisdom wherewith the Fakir was warned him. He seized his
sword and drawing it from the scabbard, turned about to slay the
man who durst insult him in such wise; but he saw no one and, in
the act of looking back both he and his horse became black
stones. Meanwhile the Princess ceased not at all hours of the day
and watches of the night to consult the string of pearls which
Parwez had left her; she counted them overnight when she retired
to rest, she slept with them around her neck during the hours of
darkness, and when she awoke at the dawn of day she first of all
consulted them and noted their condition. Now at the very hour
when her second brother was turned to stone she found the pearls
sticking one to other so close together that she might not move a
single bead apart from its fellows and she knew thereby that
Prince Parwez also was lost to her for ever.--And as the morn
began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Seventy-eight Night.

Then said she:˚I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Princess
Perizadah was sore grieved at so sudden a blow and said to
herself, "Ah! Woe is me and well-away! How bitter will be living
without the love of such brothers whose youthtide was sacrificed
for me! ÊTis but right that I share their fate whate'er be my
lot; else what shall I have to say on the Day of Doom and the
Resurrection of the Dead and the Judgment of Mankind?" Wherefore
next morning, without further let or stay, she donned disguise of
man's attire; and, warning her women and slaves that she would be
absent on an errand for a term of days during which they would be
in charge of the house and goods, she mounted her hackney and set
out alone and unattended. Now, inasmuch as she was skilled in
horsemanship and had been wont to accompany her brothers when
hunting and hawking, she was better fitted than other women to
bear the toils and travails of travel. So on the twentieth day
she arrived safe and sound at the hermitage-hut where, seeing the
same Shaykh, she took seat beside him and after salaaming to him
and greeting him she asked him, "O holy father, suffer me to rest
and refresh myself awhile in this site of good omen; then deign
point out to me, I pray thee, the direction of the place, at no
far distance herefrom, wherein are found a certain Speaking-Bird
and a Singing-Tree and a Golden-Water. An thou wilt tell me I
shall deem this the greatest of favour." Replied the Darwaysh,
"Thy voice revealeth to me that thou art a woman and no man,
albeit attired in male's apparel. Well I wot the stead whereof
thou speakest and which containeth the marvellous things thou
hast named. But say me, what is thy purpose in asking me?" The
Princess made reply, "I have been told many a tale anent these
rare and wondrous things, and I would fain get possession of them
and bear them to my home and make them its choicest adornments."
And said the Fakir, "O my daughter, in very truth these matters
are exceeding rare and admirable: right fit are they for fair
ones like thyself to win and take back with thee, but thou hast
little inkling of the dangers manifold and dire that encompass
them. Better far were it for thee to cast away this vain thought
and go back by the road thou camest." Replied the Princess, "O
holy father and far-famed anchorite, I come from a distant land
whereto I will nevermore return, except after winning my wish;
no, never! I pray thee tell me the nature of those dangers and
what they be, that hearing thereof my heart may judge if I have
or have not the strength and the spirit to meet them." Then the
Shaykh described to the Princess all the risks of the road as
erst he had informed Princes Bahman and Parwez; and he ended with
saying, "The dangers will display themselves as soon as thou
shalt begin to climb the hill-head where is the home of the
Speaking-Bird. Then, if thou be fortunate enough to seize him, he
will direct thee where to find the Singing-Tree and the Golden-
Water. All the time thou climbest the hill, Voices from throats
unseen and accents fierce and fell shall resound in thine ears.
Furthermore, thou shalt see black rocks and boulders strewn upon
thy path; and these, thou must know, are the transformed bodies
of men who with exceeding courage attempted the same enterprise,
but filled with sudden fear and tempted to turn and to look
backwards were changed into stones. Now do thou steadily bear in
mind what was their case. At the first the listened to those
fearful sounds and cursings with firm souls, but anon their
hearts and minds misgave them, or, haply, they fumed with fury to
hear the villain words addressed to them and they turned about
and gazed behind them, whereat both men and horses became black
boulders." But when the Darwaysh had told her every whit, the
Princess made reply, "From what thou sayest it seemeth clear to
me that these Voices can do nothing but threaten and frighten by
their terrible din; furthermore that there is naught to prevent a
man climbing up the hill, nor is there any fear of any one
attacking him; all he hath to do is on no account to look behind
him." And after a short pause she presently added, "O Fakir,
albeit a woman yet I have both nerve and thews to carry me
through this adventure. I shall not heed the Voices not be
enraged thereat, neither will they have any power to dismay me:
moreover, I have devised a device whereby my success on this
point is assured." "And what wilt thou do?" asked he, and she
answered, "I will stop mine ears with cotton so may not my mind
be disturbed and reason perturbed by hearing those awesome
sounds." The Fakir marvelled with great marvel and presently
exclaimed, "O my lady, methinks thou art destined to get
possession of the things thou seekest. This plan hath not
occurred to any hitherto[FN#364] and hence it is haply that one
and all have failed miserably and have perished in the attempt.
Take good heed to thyself, however, not run any risk other than
the enterprise requireth." She replied, "I have no cause for fear
since this one and only danger is before me to prevent happy
issue. My heart doth bear me witness that I shall surely gain the
guerdon wherefor I have undertaken such toil and trouble, But now
do thou tell me what I must do, and whither to win my wish I must
wend." The Darwaysh once more besought her to return home, but
Perizadah refused to listen and remained as firm and resolute as
before; so when he saw that she was fully bent upon carrying out
her purpose he exclaimed, "Depart, O my daughter, in the peace of
Almighty Allah and His blessing; and may He defend thy youth and
beauty from all danger." Then taking from his bag a ball he gave
it her and said, "When thou art seated in saddle throw this
before thee and follow it whitherso it lead thee; and when it
shall stop at the hill-foot then dismount and climb the slope.
What will happen after I have already told thee."--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Princess after farewelling the Fakir straightway bestrode her
steed and threw the ball in front of his hooves as she had been
bidden do. It rolled along before her in the direction of the
hill and she urged her hackney to keep up with it, until reaching
the hill it suddenly stopped. Hereat the Princess dismounted
forthwith and having carefully plugged both her ears with cotton,
began to breast the slope with fearless heart and dauntless soul;
and as soon as she had advanced a few steps a hubbub of voices
broke out all around her, but she heard not a sound, by reason of
her hearing being blunted by the cotton-wool. Then hideous cries
arose with horrid din, still she heard them not; and at last they
grew to a storm of shouts and shrieks and groans and moans
flavoured with foul language such as shameless women use when
railing one at other. She caught now and then an echo of the
sounds but recked naught thereof and only laughed and said to
herself, "What care I for their scoffs and jeers and fulsome
taunts? Let them hoot on and bark and bay as they may: this at
least shall not turn me from my purpose." As she approached the
goal the path became perilous in the extreme and the air was so
filled with an infernal din and such awful sounds that even
Rustam would have quailed thereat and the bold spirit of
Asfandiyar[FN#365] have quaked with terror. The Princess,
however, pressed on with uttermost speed and dauntless heart till
she neared the hill-top and espied above her the cage in which
the Speaking-Bird was singing with melodious tones; but, seeing
the Princess draw nigh, he broke out despite his puny form in
thundering tones and cried, "Return, O fool: hie thee back not
dare come nearer." Princess Perizadah heeded not his clamour a
whit but bravely reached the hill-top, and running over the level
piece of ground made for the cage and seized it saying, "At last
I have thee and thou shalt not escape me." She then pulled out
the cotton-wool wherewith she had stopped her ears, and heard the
Speaking-Bird reply in gentle accents, "O lady valiant and noble,
be of good cheer for no harm or evil shall betide thee, as hath
happened to those who essayed to make me their prize. Albeit I am
encaged I have much secret knowledge of what happeneth in the
world of men and I an content to become thy slave, and for thee
to be my liege lady. Moreover I am more familiar with all that
concerneth thee even than thou art thyself; and one day of the
days I will do thee a service which shall deserve thy gratitude.
What is now thy command? Speak that I may fulfil thy wish."
Princess Perizadah was gladdened by these words, but in the midst
of her joy she grieved at the thought of how she had lost her
brothers whom she loved with a love so dear, and anon she said to
the Speaking-Bird, "Full many a thing I want, but first tell me
of the Golden-Water, of which I have heard so much, be nigh unto
this place and if so do thou show me where to find it." The Bird
directed her accordingly and the Princess took a silver flagon
she had brought with her and filled it brimful from the magical
fount. Then quoth she to the Bird, "The third and last prize I
have come to seek is the Singing- Tree; discover to me where that
also can be found." The Bird replied, "O Princess of fair ones,
behind thy back in yonder clump that lieth close at hand groweth
the Tree;" so she went forthright to the copse and found the Tree
she sought singing with sweetest toned voice. But inasmuch as it
was huge in girth she returned to her slave the Bird and said,
"The Tree indeed I found but Êtis lofty and bulky; how then shall
I pull it up?" and he made answer, "Pluck but a branchlet of the
Tree and plant it in thy garden; Êtwill at once take root and in
shortest time be as gross and fair a growth as that in yonder
copse." So the Princess broke off a twig, and now that she had
secured the three things, whereof the holy woman spake to her,
she was exceeding joyful and turning to the Bird said, "I have in
very deed won my wish, but one thing is yet wanting to my full
satisfaction. My brothers who ventured forth with this same
purpose are lying hereabouts turned into black stones; and I fain
would have them brought to life again and the twain return with
me in all satisfaction and assurance of success. Tell me now some
plan whereby mine every desire may be fulfilled."--And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

        The end of the Six Hundred and Eightieth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Speaking-Bird replied, "O Princess, trouble not thyself, the
thing is easy. Sprinkle some of the Golden-Water from the flagon
upon the black stones lying round about, and by virtue thereof
each and every shall come to life again, thy two brothers as well
as the others." So Princess Perizadah's heart was set at rest and
taking the three prizes with her she fared forth and scattered a
few drops from the silver flagon upon each black stone as she
passed it when, lo and behold! they came to life as men and
horses. Amongst them were her brothers who she at once knew and
falling on their necks she embraced them, and asked in tones of
surprise, "O my brothers, what do ye here?" To this they
answered, "We lay fast asleep." Quoth she, "Strange indeed that
ye take delight in slumber away from me and ye forget the purpose
wherefor ye left me; to wit, the winning of the Speaking-Bird and
the Singing-Tree and the Golden-Water. Did ye not see this place
all bestrown with dark hued rocks? Look now and say if there be
aught left of them. These men and horses now standing around us
were all black stones as ye yourselves also were; but, by the
boon of Almighty Allah, all have come to life again and await the
signal to depart. And if now ye wish to learn by what strange
miracle both ye and they have recovered human shape, know ye that
it hath been wrought by virtue of a water contained in this
flagon which I sprinkled in the rocks with leave of the Lord of
all Living. When I had gained possession of this cage and its
Speaking-Bird, and also of the Singing-Tree, a wand whereof ye
see in my hand, and lastly of the Golden-Water, I would not take
them home with me unless ye twain could also bear me company; so
I asked of this Bird the means whereby ye could be brought to
life again. He made me drop some drops of the Golden-Water on the
boulders and when I had done this ye two like all the others
returned to life and to your proper forms." Hearing these her
words the Princes Bahman and Parwez thanked and praised their
sister Perizadah; and all the other she had saved showered thanks
and blessings on her hear saying with one accord, "O our lady, we
are now thy slaves; nor can a lifelong service repay the debt of
gratitude we owe thee for this favour thou hast shown us. Command
and we are ready to obey thee with our hearts and our souls."
Quoth Perizadah, "The bringing back to life of these my brothers
were my aim and purpose, and in so doing ye too have profited
thereby; and I accept your acknowledgements as another pleasure.
But now do ye mount each and every man his horse and ride back by
the way ye came to your homes in Allah's peace." On this wise the
Princess dismissed them and made herself ready to depart; but, as
she was about to bestride her steed, Prince Bahman asked
permission of her that he might hold in hand the cage and ride in
front of her. She answered, "Not so, O brother mine; this Bird is
now my slave and I will carry him myself. An thou wilt, take thou
this twig with thee, but hold the cage only till I am seated in
saddle." She then mounted her hackney and, placing the cage
before her on the pommel, bade her brother Parwez take charge of
the Golden-Water in the silver flagon and carry it with all ease
and the Prince did her bidding without gainsaying. And when they
were all ready to ride forth, including the knights and the
squires whom Perizadah had brought to life by sprinkling the
Water the Princess turned to them and said, "Why delay we our
departure and how is it that none offereth to lead us?" Bur as
all hesitated she gave command, "Now let him amongst you number
whose noblesse and high degree entitle him to such distinction
fare before us and show us the way." Then all with one accord
replied, "O Princes of fair ones, there be none amongst us worthy
of such honour, nor may any wight dare to ride before thee." So
when she saw that none amongst them claimed preeminence or right
of guidance, and none desired to take precedence of the rest, she
made excuse and said, "O my lords, Êtis not for me by right to
lead the way, but since ye order I must needs obey." Accordingly
she pushed on to the front, and after came her brothers and
behind them the rest. And as they journeyed on all desired to see
the holy man, and thank him for his favours and friendly rede,
but when they reached the spot where he dwelt they found him
dead, and they knew not if old age had taken him away, or if he
perished in his prise because the Princess Perizadah had found
and carried off the three things whereof he had been appointed by
Destiny guard and guide.--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Eighty-first Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that all the
company rode on, and as each one arrived at the road which led
him to his natal land he took leave of the Lady Perizadah and
went his way, until all were gone and the Princess and her
brothers were the only left. At last they reached their journey's
end safe and sound, and on entering their mansion Perizadah hung
the cage inside the garden hard by the belvedere and no sooner
did the Speaking-Bird begin to sing than flights of ring-doves
and bulbuls and nightingales and skylarks and parrots and other
songsters came flocking around him from afar and anear. Likewise
she set the twig, which she had taken from the Singing-Tree, in a
choice parterre also hard by the belvedere, and forthright it
took root and put forth boughs and buds and grew goodly in
growth, till it became a trunk as large as that from which she
had plucked the twig, whilst from its leafage went forth
bewitching sounds rivalling the music of the parent tree. She
lastly bid them carve her a basin of pure white marble and set it
in the centre of the pleasure grounds; then she poured therein
the Golden-Water and forthright it filled the bowl and sot
upwards like a spouting fountain some twenty feet in height;
moreover the gerbes and jets fell back whence they came and not
one drop was lost: whereby the working of the waters was unbroken
and ever similar. Now but few days passed ere the report of these
three wonders was bruited abroad and flocked the folk daily from
the city to solace themselves with the sight, and the gates stood
always open wide and all who came had entrance to the house and
gardens and free leave to walk about at will and see these
rarities which affected them with admiration and delight. Then
also, as soon as both the Princes had recovered from the toils of
travel, they began to go a-hunting as heretofore; and it chanced
one day they rode forth several miles from home and were both
busies in the chase, when the Shah of Iran-land came by decree of
Destiny to the same place for the same purpose. The Princes,
seeing a band of knights and huntsmen drawing near, were fain to
ride home and to avoid such meeting; so they left the hunting-
grounds and turned them homewards. But as Fate and lot would have
it they hit upon the very road whereby King Khusrau Shah was
coming, and so narrow was the path that they could not avoid the
horsemen by wheeling round and wending another way. So they drew
rein perforce and dismounting the salaamed and did obeisance to
the Shah and stood between his hands with heads held low. The
Sovran, seeing the horses' fine trappings and the Princes' costly
garments, thought that the two youths were in the suite of his
Wazirs and his Ministers of state and much wished to look upon
their faces; he therefore bade them raise their heads and stand
upright in the presence and they obeyed his bidding with modest
mien and downcast eyes. He was charmed to behold their comeliness
of favour and their graceful forms and their noble air and their
courtly mien; and, after gazing at them for some time in not a
little wonder and admiration, he asked them who they were and
when might be their names and where they abode. Hereto Prince
Bahman made reply, "O Asylum of the Universe, we are the sons of
one whose life was spent in serving the Shah, the Intendant of
the royal gardens and pleasaunces. As his days grew to a close he
builded him a home without the town for us to dwell in till we
should grow to man's estate and become fit to do thy Highness
suit and service and carry out thy royal commands." The Shah
furthermore asked them, "How is it that ye go a-hunting? This is
a special sport of Kings and is not meant for the general of his
subjects and dependants." Prince Bahman rejoined, "O Refuge of
the World, we are yet young in years and being brought up at home
we know little of courtly customs; but, as we look to bear arms
in the armies of the Shah we fain would train our bodies to toil
and moil." This answer was honoured by the royal approof and the
King rejoined, "The Shah would see how ye deal with noble game;
so choose ye whatever quarry ye will and bring it down in the
presence." The Princes hereat remounted their horses and joined
the Sovran; and when they reached the thickmost of the forest,
Prince Bahman started a tiger and Prince Parwez rode after a
bear; and the twain used their spears with such skill and good
will that each killed his quarry and laid it at the Shah's feet.
Then entering the wood again Prince Bahman slew a bear, and
Prince Parwez, a tiger[FN#366] and did as before; but when they
would have ridden off the third time the King forbade them
saying, "What! would ye strip the royal preserve of all the game?
This be enough and more than enough, that Shah wished only to put
your valour to the proof and having seen it with his own eyes he
is fully satisfied. Come now with us and stand before us as we
sit at meat." Prince Bahman made reply, "We are not worthy of the
high honour and dignity wherewith thou favourest us thy humble
servants. We dutifully and humbly petition thy Highness to hold
us excused for this day; but if the Asylum of the Universe deign
appoint some other time thy slaves will right gladly execute thy
auspicious orders."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Eighty-Second Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that Khusrau
Shah, astonished at their refusal, asked the cause thereof when
Prince Bahman answered, "May I be thy sacrifice,[FN#367] O King
of kings, we have at home an only sister; and all three are bound
together with bonds of the fondest affection; so we brothers go
not anywhere without consulting her nor doth she aught save
according to our counsel." The King was pleased to see such
fraternal love and union and presently quoth he, "By the head of
the Shah,[FN#368] he freely giveth you leave to go to-day:
consult your sister and meet the Shadow of Allah[FN#369] to-
morrow at this hunting-ground, and tell him what she saith and if
she content to let to twain and wait upon the Shah at meat." So
the Princes farewelled and prayed for him; then rode back home;
but they both forgot to tell their sister how they had fallen in
with the King; and of all that passed between them they
remembered not one word.[FN#370] Next day again they went
ahunting and on returning from the chase the Shah enquired of
them, "Have ye consulted with your sister if ye may serve the
King, and what saith she thereto? Have ye obtained permission
from her?" On hearing these words the Princes waxed aghast with
fear; the colour of their faces changed, and each began to look
into the other's eyes. Then Bahman said, "Pardon, O Refuge of the
World, this our transgression. We both forgot the command and
remembered not to tell her sister." Replied the King, "It
mattereth not! ask her to-day and bring me word tomorrow." But it
so happened that on that day also they forgot the message yet the
King was not annoyed at their shortness of memory, but taking
from his pocket three little balls of gold, and tying them in a
kerchief of sillk he handed them to Prince Bahman saying, "Put
these balls in thy waist shawl, so shalt thou not forget to ask
thy sister; and if perchance the matter escape thy memory, when
thou shalt go to bed and take off thy girdle, haply the sound of
them falling to the ground will remind thee of thy promise."
Despite this strict injunction of the Shadow of Allah the Princes
on that day also clean forgot the order and the promise they had
made to the King. When, however, night came on, and Prince Bahman
went to his bed-chamber for sleep, he loosed his girdle and down
fell the golden balls and at the sound the message of the Shah
flashed across his thought. So he and his brother Parwez at once
hastened to Perizadah's bower, where she was about retiring to
rest; and, with many excuses for troubling her at so unseasonable
an hour, reported to her all that happened. She lamented their
thoughtlessness which for three successive days had caused them
to forget the royal behest and ended with saying, "Fortune hath
favoured you, O my brothers, and brought you suddenly to the
notice of the Asylum of the Universe, a chance which often hath
led to the height of good. It grieveth me sore that on your over
regard for our fraternal love and union ye did not take service
with the King when he deigned command you. Moreover ye have far
greater cause for regret and repentance than I in that ye failed
to plead a sufficient excuse and that which ye offered must have
sounded rude and churlish. A right dangerous thing it is to
thwart Kingly wishes. In his extreme condescension the Shah
commandeth you to take service with him and ye, in rebelling
against his exalted orders have done foolishly and ye have caused
me much trouble of mind. Howbeit I will sue counsel from my slave
the Speaking-Bird and see what he may say; for when I have ever
any hard and weighty question to decide I fail not to ask his
advice." Hereupon the Princess set the cage by her side and after
telling her slave all that her brothers have made known to her,
asked admonition of him regarding what they should do. The
Speaking-Bird made answer, "It behoveth the Princes to gratify
the Shah in all things he requireth of them; moreover, let them
make ready a feast for the King and humbly pray them to visit
this house, and thereby testify to him loyalty and devotion to
his royal person." Then said the Princess, "O Bird, my brothers
are most dear to me nor would I suffer them leave my sight for
one moment if it were possible; and Allah forfend that this
daring on their part do injury to our love and affection." Said
the Speaking-Bird, "I have counselled thee for the best and have
offered thee the right rede; nor do thou fear aught in following
it, for naught save good shall come therefrom." "But," quoth the
Princess, "an the Shadow of Allah honour us by crossing the
threshold of this house needs must I present myself before him
with face unveiled?"[FN#371] "By all means," quoth the Speaking-
Bird, "this will not harm thee, nay rather Êtwill be to thine
advantage."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Eighty-third Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that early next
day the two Princes Bahman and Parwez rode as aforetime to the
hunting-ground and met Khusrau Shah, who asked them, saying,
"What answer bring ye from your sister?" Hereupon the elder
brother advancing said, "O shadow of Allah, verily we are thy
slaves and whatever thou deign bid that we are ready to obey.
These less than the least have referred the matter to their
sister and have obtained their consent; nay more, she blamed and
chided them for that they did not hurry to carry out the commands
of the Refuge of the World the moment they were delivered.
Therefore being sore displeased at us, she desireth us on her
behalf to plead forgiveness with the Shﬂhinshah[FN#372] for this
offence by us offered." Replied the King, "No crime have ye
committed to call forth the royal displeasure: nay more, it
delighteth the Shadow of Allah exceedingly to see the love ye
twain bear towards your sister." Hearing such words of
condescension and kindliness from the Shah, the Princes held
their peace and hung their heads for shame groundwards; and the
King who that day was not keen, according to his custom, after
the chase, whenever he saw the brothers hold aloof, called them
to his presence and heartened their hearts with words of favour;
and presently, when a-weary of sport, he turned the head of his
steed palace-ward and deigned order the Princes to ride by his
side. The Wazirs and Councillors and Courtiers one and all fumed
with envy and jealousy to see two unknowns entreated with such
especial favour; and as they rode at the head of the suite adown
the market-street all eyes were turned upon the youths and men
asked one of other, "Who be the two who ride beside the Shah?
Belong they to this city, or come they from some foreign land?"
And the folk praised and blessed them saying, "Allah send our
King of kings two Princes as godly and gallant as are these twain
who ride beside him. If our hapless Queen who languisheth in
durance had brought forth sons, by Allah's favour they would now
be of the same age as these young lords." But as soon as the
cavalcade reached the palace the King alighted from his horse and
led the Princes to his private chamber, a splendid retreat
magnificently furnished, wherein a table had been spread with
sumptuous meats and rarest cates; and having seated himself
thereat he motioned them to do likewise. Hereupon the brothers
making low obeisance also took their seats and ate in well-bred
silence with respectful mien. Then the Shah, desiring to warm
then into talk[FN#373] and thereby to test their wit and wisdom,
addressed them on themes galore and asked of them many questions;
and, inasmuch as they had been taught well and trained in every
art and science, they answered with propriety and perfect ease.
The Shah struck with admiration bitterly regretted that Almighty
Allah had not vouchsafed to him sons so handsome in semblance and
so apt and so learned as these twain; and, for the pleasure of
listening to them, he lingered at meat longer than he was wont to
do. And when he rose from table and retired with them to his
private apartment he still sat longwhile talking with them and at
last in his admiration he exclaimed, "Never until this day have I
set eyes on youths so well brought up and so comely and so
capable as are these, and methinks Êtwere hard to find their
equals anywhere." In fine quoth he, "The time waxeth late, so now
let us cheer our hearts with music." And forthright the royal
band of minstrels and musicians began to sing and perform upon
instruments of mirth and merriment, whilst dancing-girls and boys
displayed their skill, and mimes and mummers played their parts.
The Princes enjoyed the spectacle with extreme joy and the last
hours of the afternoon passed in royal revelry and regale. But
when the sun had set and evening came on, the youths craved
dismissal from the Shah with many expressions of gratitude for
the exalted favours he had deigned bestow on them; and ere they
fared forth the King of kings bespake them, saying, "Come ye
again on the morrow to our hunting-ground as heretofore, and
thence return to the palace. By the beard of the Shah, he fain
would have you always with him, and solace him with your
companionship and converse." Prince Bahman, prostrating himself
before the presence, answered, "'Tis the very end and aim of all
our wishes, O Shadow of Allah upon Earth, that on the morrow when
thou shalt come from the chase and pass by our poor house, thou
graciously deign enter and rest in it awhile, thereby conferring
the highmost of honours upon ourselves and upon our sister.
Albeit the place is not worthy of the Shahinshah's exalted
presence, yet at times do mighty Kings condescend to visit the
huts of their slaves." The King, ever more and more enchanted
with their comeliness and pleasant speech, vouchsafed a most
gracious answer, saying, "The dwelling place of youths in your
estate and degree will certainly be goodly and right worthy of
you; and the Shah willingly consenteth for the morrow to become
the guest of you twain and of your sister whom, albeit he have
not yet seen, he is assured to find perfect in all gifts of body
and mind. Do ye twain therefore about early dawn-tide expect the
Shah at the usual trysting-place." The Princes then craved leave
to wend their ways; and going home said to their sister, "O
Perizadah, the Shah hath decreed that to-morrow he will come to
our house and rest here awhile after the hunt." Said she, "An so
it be, needs must we see to it that all be made ready for a royal
banquet and we may not be put to shame when the Shadow of Allah
shall deign shade us. There is no help but that in this matter I
ask of my slave, the Speaking-Bird, what counsel he would give;
and that I prepare according thereto such meats as are meet for
him and are pleasing to the royal palate."--And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the Princes
both approved of her plan and went to seek repose; whereupon
Perizadah sent for the cage and setting it before her said, "O
Bird, the Shah hath made a promise and hath decreed that he will
deign honour this our house on the morrow, wherefore we must
needs make ready for our liege lord the best of banquets and I
bid thee say me what dishes should the kitcheners cook for him?"
The Speaking-Bird replied, "O my lady, thou hast the most skilful
of cooks and confectioners. Do thou bid them dress for thee the
choicest dainties, but above all others see thou with thine own
eyes that they set before the Shah a dish of new green cucumbers
stuffed with pearls." Quoth the Princess in utter wonderment,
"Never until this time heard I of such a dainty! How? Cucumbers
with a filling of pearls! And what will the King, who cometh to
eat bread and not to gaze on stones, say to such meat?
Furthermore, I have not in my possession pearls enough to serve
for even a single cucumber." Replied the Speaking-Bird, "This
were an easy matter: do thou dread naught but only act as I shall
advise thee. I seek not aught save thy welfare and would on no
wise counsel thee to thy disadvantage. As for the pearls thou
shalt collect them on this wise: go thou to-morrow betimes to the
pleasure-gardens and bid a hole be dug at the foot of the first
tree in the avenue by thy right hand, and there shalt thou find
of pearls as large a store as thou shalt require." So after dawn
on the next day Princess Perizadah bade a gardener-lad accompany
her and fared to the sire within the pleasure-gardens whereof the
Speaking-Bird had told her. Here the boy dug a hole both deep and
wide when suddenly his spade struck upon somewhat hard, and he
removed with his hands the earth and discovered to view a golden
casket well nigh one foot square. Hereupon the young gardener
showed it to the Princess who explained, "I brought thee with me
for this very reason. Take heed and see that no harm come to it,
but dig it out and bring it to me with all care." When the lad
did her bidding she opened it forthright and found it filled with
pearls and unions fresh from the sea, round as rings and all of
one and the same size perfectly fitted for the purpose which the
Speaking-Bird had proposed. Perizadah rejoiced with extreme joy
at the sight and taking up the box walked back with it to the
house; and the Princes who had seen their sister faring forth
betimes with the gardener-lad and had wondered why she went to
the park thus early unaccording to her wonted custom, catching
sight of her from the casement quickly donned their walking
dresses and came to meet her. And as the two brothers walked
forwardes they saw the Princess approaching them with somewhat
unusual under her arm, which when they met, proved to be a golden
casket whereof they