 knew naught. Quoth they, "O our sister at
early light we espied thee going to the pleasure- grounds with a
gardener-lad empty handed, but now thou bringest back this golden
casket; so disclose to us where and how thou hast found it; and
haply there may be some hoard close hidden in the parterre?"
Perizadah replied, "Sooth ye say, O my brothers: I took this lad
with me and made him dig under a certain tree where we came upon
this box of pearls, at the sight whereof methinks your hearts
will be delighted." The Princess straightway opened the box and
her brothers sighting the pearls and unions were amazed with
extreme amazement and rejoiced greatly to see them. Quoth the
Princess, "Come now ye twain with me, for that I have in hand a
weighty matter;" and quoth Prince Bahman, "What is there to do? I
pray thee tell us without delay for never yet hast thou kept
aught of thy life from us." She made reply, "O my brothers, I
have naught to hide from you, nor think ye any ill of me, for I
am now about to tell you all the tale." Then she made known to
them what advice the Speaking-Bird had given to her; and they,
conning the matter over in this minds, marvelled much why her
slave had bidden them set a dish of green cucumbers stuffed with
pearls before the Shah, nor could they devise any reason for it.
Presently the Princess resumed, "The Speaking-Bird indeed is wise
and ware; so methinks this counsel must be for our advantage; and
at any rate it cannot be without some object and purpose. It
therefore behoveth us to do even as he hath commanded." Hereupon
the Princess went to her own chamber and summoning the head cook
said to him, "This day the Shah, the Shadow of Allah upon Earth,
will condescend here to eat the noon-meal. So do thou take heed
that the meats be of choiest flavour and fittest to set before
the Asylum of the World, but of all the dishes there is one thou
alone must make and let not another have a hand therein. This
shall be of the freshest green cucumbers with a stuffing of
unions and pearls."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the head
Cook listened to this order of the Princess with wonderment and
said in himself, "Who ever heard of such a dish or dreamed of
ordering such a one." The Lady seeing his astonishment betrayed
in his semblance without the science of thought-reading,[FN#374]
said to him, "It seemeth from thy countenance that thou deemest
me daft of wit to give thee such order. I know that no one ever
tasted a dish of the kind, but what is that to thee? Do thou e'en
as thou art bidden. Thou seest this box brimful on pearls; so
take of them as many as thou needest for the dish, and what
remaineth over leave in the box." The Kitchener who could answer
nothing in his confusion and amazement, chose as many precious
stones as he required, and presently fared away to superintend
the meats being cooked and made ready for the feast. Meanwhile
the Princess when over the house and grounds and gave directions
to the slaves about the ordinance thereof, leading especial
attention to the carpets and divans, the lamps and all other
furniture. Next day at break of dawn Princes Bahman and Parwez
rode forth in rich attire to the appointed place where they first
met the Shah, who was also punctual to his promise and vouchsafed
to join them in the hunt. Now when the sun had risen high and its
rays waxed hot, the King gave up the chase, and set forth with
the Princes to their house; and as they drew nigh thereto the
cadet pushed forwards and sent word to the Princess that the
Asylum of the World was coming in all good omen. Accordingly, he
hastened to receive him and stood waiting his arrival at the
inner entrance; and after, when the King rode up to the gate and
dismounting within the court stepped over the threshold of the
house-door, she fell down at his feet and did worship. Hereat her
brothers said, "O Asylum of the World, this is our sister of whom
we spake;" and the Shah with gracious kindness and condescension
raised her by the hand, and when he saw her face he marvelled
much at its wondrous comeliness and loveliness. He thought in
himself, "How like she is to her brothers in favour and form, and
I trow there be none of all my lieges in city or country who can
compare with them for beauty and noble bearing. This country-
house also exceedeth all that I have ever seen in splendour and
grandeur." The Princess then led the Shah through the house and
showed him all the magnificence thereof, while he rejoiced with
extreme joy at everything that met his sight. So when King
Khusrau had considered whatso was in the mansion he said to the
Princess, "This home of thine is far grander than any palace
owned by the Shah, who would now stroll about the pleasure-
garden, never doubting but that it will be delightsome at the
house." Hereat the Princess threw wide open the door whence the
grounds could be seen; and at once the King beheld before and
above all other things, the fountain which cast up incessantly,
in gerbes and jets, water clear as crystal withal golden of hue.
Seeing such prodigy he cried, "This is indeed a glorious gusher:
never before saw I one so admirable. But say me where is its
source, and by what means doth it shoot up in spurts so high?
Whence cometh this constant supply and in what fashion was it
formed? The Shah would fain see it near hand." "O King of kings,
and Lord of the lands," quoth the Princess, "be pleased to do
whatso thou desirest." Thereupon they went up to the fountain and
the Shah stood gazing upon it with delight when behold, he heard
a concert of sugar-sweet voices choiring with the harmony and
melody of wit-ravishing music. So he turned him around and gazed
about him to discover the singers, but no one was in sight; and
albeit he looketh both hard and near all was in vain, he heard
the voices but he could descry no songster. At length completely
baffled he exclaimed, "Whence come these most musical of sounds;
and rise they from the bowels of earth or are they floating in
the depths of air? They fill the heart with rapture, but
strangely surprise the senses to see that no one singer is in
sight." Replied the Princess with a smile "O Lord of lords, there
are no minstrels here and the strains which strike the Shah's ear
come from yonder tree. Deign walk on, I pray thee, and examine it
well." So be advanced thereto, ever more and more enchanted with
the music, and he gazed now at the Golden-Water and now at the
Singing-Tree till lost in wonderment and amazement; then, "O
Allah," said he to himself, "is all this Nature-made or magical,
for in very deed the place is full of mystery?" Presently,
turning to the Princess quoth he, "O my lady, prithee whence came
ye by this wondrous tree which hath been planted in the
middlemost of this garden: did anyone bring it from some far
distant land as a rare gift, and by what name is it known?" Quoth
Perizadah in reply, "O King of kings, this marvel hight Singing-
Tree groweth not in our country. ÊTwere long to recount whence
and by what means I obtained it; and suffice it for the present
to say that the Tree, together with the Golden-Water and the
Speaking-Bird, were all found by me at one and the same time.
Deign now accompany thy slave and look upon this third rarity;
and when the Shah shall have rested and recovered from the toils
and travails of hunting, the tale of these three strange things
shall be told to the Asylum of the World in fullest detail."
Hereto the King replied, "All the Shah's fatigue hath gone for
gazing upon these wonders; and now to visit the Speaking-Bird."--
And as the morning began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

       The end of the Six Hundred and Eighty-sixth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Princess took the King and when she had shown to him the
Speaking-Bird, they returned to the garden where he never ceased
considering the fountain with extreme surprise and presently
exclaimes, "How is this? No spring whence cometh all this water
meeteth the Shah's eye, and no channel; nor is there any
reservoir large enough to contain it." She replied, "Thou
speakest sooth, O King of kings! This jetting font hath no
source; and it springeth from a small marble basin which I filled
from a single flagon of the Golden-Water; and by the might of
Allah Almighty it increased and waxed copious until it shot up in
this huge gerbe which the Shah seeth. Furthermore it ever playeth
day and night; and, marvellous to relate, the water falling back
from that height into the basin minisheth not in quantity nor is
aught of it spilt or wasted." Hereat the King, filled with wonder
and astonishment, bade go back to the Speaking-Bird; whereupon
the Princess led him to the belvedere whence he looked out upon
thousands of all manner fowls carolling in the trees and filling
air with their hymns and prises of the Creator; so he asked his
guide, "O my lady, whence come these countless songsters which
haunt yonder tree and make the welkin resound with their
melodious notes; yet they affect none other of the trees?" Quoth
Perizadah, "O King of kings, they are all attracted by the
Speaking-Bird and flock hither to accompany his song; and for
that his cage hangeth to the window of this belvedere they prefer
only the nearest of the trees; and here he may be heard singing
sweeter notes than any of the others, nay in a plaint more
musical than that of any nightingale." And as the Shah drew nigh
the cage and gave ear to the Bird's singing, the Princess called
to her captive saying, "Ho, my slave the Bird, dost thou not
perceive the Asylum of the Universe is here that thou payest him
not due homage and worship?" Hearing these words the Speaking-
Bird forthright ceased his shrilling and at the same moment all
the other songsters sat in deepest silence; for they were loyal
to their liege lord nor durst any one utter a note when he held
his peace. The Speaking-Bird then spake in human voice saying, "O
great King, may Almighty Allah by His Might and Majesty accord
thee health and happiness;" so the Shah returned the salutation
and the Slave of Princess Perizadah ceased not to shower
blessings upon his head. Meanwhile the tables were spread after
sumptuous fashion and the choicest meats were set before the
company which was seated in due order and degree, the Shah
placing himself hard by the Speaking-Bird and close to the
casement where the cage was hung. Then the dish of green
cucumbers having been set before him, he put forth his hand to
help himself, but drew it back in wonderment when he saw that the
cucumbers, ranged in order upon the plate, were stuffed with
pearls which appeared at either end. He asked the Princess and
her brothers, "What is this dish? It cannot be meant for food;
then wherefore is it placed before the Shah? Explain to me, I
command you, what this thing meaneth." They could not give an
answer unknowing what reply to make, and as all held their peace
the Speaking-Bird answered for them saying, "O King of the Age
and the Time, dost thou deem it strange to see a dish of
cucumbers stuffed with pearls? How much stranger then it is that
thou wast not astonished to hear that the Queen thy Consort had,
contrary to the laws of Allah's ordinance, given birth to such
animals as dog and cat and musk-rat. This should have caused thee
far more of wonder, for who hath ever heard of woman bearing such
as these?" Hereat the Shah made answer to the Speaking-Bird, "All
that thou sayest is right indeed and I know that such things are
not after the law of Almighty Allah; but I believed the reports
of the midwives, the wise women who were with the Queen such time
she was brought to bed, for they were not strangers but her own
sisters, born of the same parents as herself. How then could I do
otherwise than trust their words?" Quoth the Speaking-Bird, "O
King of kings, indeed the truth of the matter is not hidden from
me. Albeit they be the sisters of thy Queen, yet seeing the royal
favours and affection towards their cadette they were consumed
with anger and hatred and despite by reason of their envy and
jealousy. So they devised evil devices against her and their
deceits at last succeeded in diverting thy thoughts from her, and
in hiding her virtues from thy sight. Now are their malice and
treason made manifest to thee; and, if thou require further
proof, do thou summon them and question them of the case. They
cannot hide it from thee and will be reduced to confess and crave
thy pardon."--And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Eighty-seventh Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Speaking-Bird also said to Khusrau Shah, "These two royal
brothers so comely and stalwart and this lovely Princess, their
sister, are thine own lawful children to whom the Queen thy
Consort gave birth. The midwives, thy sisters-in-law, by reason
of the blackness of their hearts and faces bore them away as soon
as they were born: indeed every time a child was given to thee
they wrapped it in a bit of blanket and putting it in a basket
committed it to the stream which floweth by the palace to the
intent that it might die an obscure death. But it so fortuned
that the Intendant of thy royal gardens espied these baskets one
and all as they floated past his grounds, and took charge of the
infants he found therein. He then caused them to be nursed and
reared with all care and, whilst they were growing up to man's
estate, he looked to their being taught every art and science;
and whilst his life endured he dealt with them and brought them
up in love and tenderness as though they had been his very own.
And now, O Khusrau Shah, wake from thy sleep of ignorance and
heedlessness, and know that these two Princes Bahman and Parwez
and the Princess Perizadah their sister are thine own issue and
thy rightful heirs." When the King heard these words and was
assured of the purport being true and understood the evil doing
of those Satans, his sisters-in-law, he said, "O Bird, I am
indeed persuaded of thy soothfastness, for when I first saw these
youths at the hunting-ground my bowels yearned with affection
towards them and my heart felt constrained to love them as though
they had been my own seed. Both they and their sister have drawn
my affections to them as a magnet draweth iron: and the voice of
blood crieth to me and compelleth me to confess the tie and to
acknowledge that they are my true children, borne in the womb of
my Queen, whose direful Destiny I have been the means of carrying
out." Then turning to the Princes and their sister he said with
tearful eyes and broken voice, "Ye are my children and henceforth
do ye regard me as your father." At this they ran to him with
rare delight and falling on his neck embraced him. Then they all
sat down to meat and when they had finished eating, Khusrau Shah
said to them, "O my children, I must now leave you, but
Inshallah--Allah willing--I will come again to-morrow and bring
with me the Queen your mother." So saying he farewelled them
fondly and mounting his horse departed to his palace; and no
sooner had he seated himself upon his throne than he summoned the
Grand Wazir and commanded him saying, "Do thou send this instant
and bind in heaviest bonds those vile women, the sisters of my
Queen; for their ill deeds have at last come to light and they
deserve to die the death of murtherers. Let the Sworder
forthright make sharp his sword; for the ground thirsteth for
their blood. Go see thyself that they are beheaded without stay
or delay: await not other order, but instantly obey my
commandment." The Grand Wazir went forth at one and in his
presence the Envious Sisters were decapitated and this underwent
fit punishment for their malice and their evil doing. After this,
Khusrau Shah with his retinue walked afoot to the Cathedral-
mosque whereby the Queen had been imprisoned for so many years in
bitter grief and tenderly embraced her. Then seeing her sad
plight and her careworn countenance and wretched attire he wept
and cried, "Allah Almighty forgive me this mine unjust and
wrongful dealing towards thee. I have put to death thy sisters
who deceitfully and despitefully raised my wrath and anger
against thee, the innocent, the guiltless; and they have received
due retribution for their misdeeds."--And as the morn began to
dawn Shahrazad held her peace till

      The end of the Six Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night.

Then said she:--I have heard, O auspicious King that the King
spake kindly and fondly to his Consort, and told her all that had
betided him, and what the Speaking-Bird had made known to him,
ending with these words, "Come now with me to the palace where
thou shalt thee thy two sons and daughter grown up to become the
loveliest of things. Hie with me and embrace them and take them
to thy bosom, for they are our children, the light of our etes.
But first do thou repair to the Hammam and don thy royal robes
and jewels." Meanwhile tidings of these events were noised about
the city how the King had at length shown due favour to the
Queen, and had released her from bondage with his own hands and
prayed forgiveness for the wrongs he had done to her; and how the
Princes and the Princess had been proved to be her true-born
children, and also how Khusrau Shah had punished her sisters who
conspired against her; so joy and gladness prevailed both in city
and kingdom, and all the folk blessed the Shah's Bﬂn∑ and cursed
the Satanesses her sisters. And next day when the Queen had
bathed in the Hammam and had donned royal dress and regal jewels,
she went to meet her children together with the King who led up
to her the Princes Bahman and Parwez and the Princess Perizadah
and said, "See, here are thy children, fruit of thy womb and core
of thy heart, thine own very sons and thy daughter: embrace them
with all a mother's love and extend thy favour and affection to
them even as I have done. When thou didst give them birth, thine
illomened sisters bore them away from thee and cast them into
yonder stream and said that thou hadst been delivered first of a
puppy, then of a kitten and lastly of a musk-ratling. I cannot
console myself for having credited their calumnies and the only
recompense I can make is to place in thine embrace these three
thou broughtest forth, and whom Allah Almighty hath restored to
us and hath made right worthy to be called our children." Then
the Princes and Princess fell upon their mother's neck and fondly
embraced her weeping tear-floods of joy. After this the Shah and
the Banu sai down to meat together with their children; and when
they had made an end of eating, King Khusrau Shah repaired to the
garden with his Consort that he might show her the Singing-Tree
and the fountain of Golden-Water, whereat the Queen was filled
with wonder and delight. Next they turned to the belvedere and
visited the Speaking-Bird of whom, as they sat at meat, the King
had spoken to her in highest praise, and the Queen rejoiced in
his sweet voice and melodious singing. And when they had seen all
these things, the King mounted horse, Prince Bahman riding on his
right hand and on his left Prince Parwez, while the Queen took
Princess Perizadah with her inside her litter, and thus they set
forth for the palace. As the royal cavalcade passed the city
walls and entered the capital with royal pomp and circumstance,
the subjects who had heard the glad tidings thronged in
multitudes to see their progress and volleyed shouts of
acclamation; and as the lieges had grieved aforetime to see the
Queen-consort imprisoned, so now the rejoiced with exceeding joy
to find her free once more. But chiefly they marvelled to look
upon the Speaking-Bird, for the Princess carried the cage with
her, and as they rode along thousands of sweet-toned songsters
came swarming round them from every quarter, and flew as an
escort to the cage, filling the air with marvellous music; while
flocks of others, perching upon the trees and the housetops,
carolled and warbled as it were to greet their lord's cage
accompanying the royal cavalcade. And when the palace was
reached, the Shah and his Queen and his children sat down to a
sumptuous banquet; and the city was illuminated, and everywhere
dancings and merry-makings testified to the joy of the lieges;
and for many days these revels and rejoicings prevailed
throughout the capital and the kingdom where every man was blithe
and happy and had feastings and festivities in his house, After
these festivals King Khusrau Shah made his elder son Bahman heir
to his throne and kingdom and committed to his hands the affairs
of state in their entirety, and the Prince administered affairs
with such wisdom and success that the greatness and glory of the
realm were increased twofold. The Shah also entrusted to his
youngest son Parwez the charge of his army, both of horsemen and
foot-soldiers; and Princess Perizadah was given by her sire in
marriage to a puissant King who reigned over a mighty country;
and lastly the Queen-mother forgot in perfect joy and happiness
the pangs of her captivity. Destiny ever afterwards endowed them,
one and all, with days the most delectable and they led the
liefest of lives until at last there came to them the Destroyer
of delights and the Sunderer of societies and the Depopulator of
palaces and the Garnerer of graveyards and the Reaper for
Resurrection-day, and they became as though they had never been.
So laud be to the Lord who dieth not and who knoweth no shadow of
change. 





End of Volume 9.




                           Appendix.




      VARIANTS AND ANALOGUES OF THE TALES In VOLUME XIII.

                       By W. A. Clouston.




                The Tale of Zayn Al-Asnam--p. 1.



This story is a compound of two distinct tales, namely, the Dream of Riches
and the Quest of the Ninth Image. It has always been one of the most popular
of the tales in our common version of the "Arabian Nights," with this
advantage, that it is perhaps the only one of the whole collection in which
something like a moral purpose may be discovered--"a virtuous woman is more
precious than fine gold." Baron de Sacy has remarked of The Nights, that in
the course of a few years after Galland's version appeared "it filled Europe
with its fame, though offering no object of moral or philosophical interest,
and detailing stories merely for the pleasure of relating them." But this last
statement is not quite accurate: Shahrazad relates her stories merely to
prolong her own life.

It is a curious fact--and one perhaps not very generally known--that the Tale
of Zayn al-Asnﬂm is one of two (the other being that of Khudﬂdﬂd) which
Galland repudiated, as having been foisted into his 8th volume without his
knowledge, as he expressly asserts in the "Avertissement" to the 9th vol.,
promising to remove them in a second edition, which, however, he did not live
to see. I understand that M. Herrmann Zotenberg purposes showing, in his
forthcoming edition of "Aladdin," that these two histoires (including that of
the Princess of Daryﬂbﬂr, which is interwoven with the tale of Khudﬂdﬂd and
his Brothers) were Turkish tales translated by M. Petis de la Croix and were
intended to appear in his "Mille et un Jours," which was published, after his
death, in 1710; and that, like most of the tales in that work, they were
derived from the Turkish collection entitled "Al-Farﬂj ba'd al-Shiddah," or
Joy after Affliction. But that Turkish story-book is said to be a translation
of the Persian collection entitled "Hazﬂr ∑ Yek R∑z" (the Thousand and One
Days), which M. Petis rendered into French.

In the preface to Petis' work it is stated that during his residence in
Persia, in 1675, he made a transcript of the "Hazﬂr ∑ Yek R∑z," by permission
of the author, a dervish named Mukhlis, of Isfahﬂn. That transcript has not, I
understand, been found; but Sir William Ouseley brought a manuscript from
Persia which contained a portion of the "Hazﬂr ∑ Yek R∑z," and which he says
("Travels" vol. ii. p. 21, note) agreed so far with the French version. And it
does seem strange that Petis should go to the Turkish book for tales to
include in his "Mille et un Jours" when he had before him a complete copy of
the Persian original, and even if he did so, how came his French rendering of
the tales in question into the hands of Galland's publisher? The tales are not
found in Petis' version, which is regularly divided into 1001 Days, and the
Turkish work, judging from the titles of the eleven first tales, of which I
have seen a transcript by M. Zotenberg, has a number of stories which do not
occur in the Persian.[FN#375] But I think it very unlikely that the tales of
Khudﬂdﬂd and the Princess foisted into Galland's 8th volume, were translated
from the Turkish collection. In Galland the story of the Princess Daryﬂbﬂr is
inserted in that of Khudﬂdﬂd; while in the Turkish story-book they are
separate tales, the 6th recital being under the title, "Of the Vaz›r with the
Daughter of the Prince of Daryﬂbﬂn," and the 9th story is "Of the Sons of the
Sovereign of Harrﬂn with Khudﬂdﬂd." This does not seem to support the
assertion that these tales in Galland were derived from the Turkish versions:
and it is not to be supposed, surely, that the translator of the versions in
Galland conceived the idea of fusing the two stories together?

The first part of the tale of Zaun al-Asnam--the Dream of Riches--is an
interesting variant of the tale in The Nights, vol. iv. p. 289, where (briefly
to recapitulate, for purposes of comparison by-and-by) a man of Baghdad,
having lost all his wealth and become destitute, dreams one night that a
figure appeared before him and told him that his fortune was in Cairo. To that
city he went accordingly, and as it was night when he arrived, he took shelter
in a mosque. A party of thieves just then had got into an adjacent house from
that same mosque, and the inmates, discovering them, raised such an outcry as
to bring the police at once on the spot. The thieves contrive to get away, and
the wal›, finding only the man of Baghdad in the mosque, causes him to be
seized and severely beaten after which he sends him to prison, where the poor
fellow remains thirty days, when the wal› sends for him and begins to question
him. The man tells his story, at which the wal› laughs, calls him an ass for
coming so far because of a dream, and adds that he himself had had a similar
dream of a great treasure buried in the garden of such a house in Baghdad, but
he was not so silly as to go there. The poor man recognises his own house and
garden from the wal›'s description, and being set at liberty returns to
Baghdad, and finds the treasure on the very spot indicated.

Lane, who puts this story (as indeed he has done with much better ones) among
his notes, states that it is also related by El-Ishﬂk›, who flourished during
the reign of the Khal›f El-Ma'm∑n (9th century), and his editor Edward Stanley
Poole adds that he found it also in a MS. of Lane's entitled "Murshid ez-Z∑war
ilﬂ el-Abrar," with the difference that it is there related of an Egyptian
saint who travelled to Baghdad, and was in the same manner directed to his own
house in El-Fustﬂt.

The same story is told in the 6th book of the "Masnav›," an enormously long
suf› poem, written in Persian, by Jelﬂd ed-Din, the founder of the sect of
Muslim devotees generally known in Europe as the Dancing Dervishes, who died
in 1272. This version differs from the Arabian in but a few and unimportant
details: Arriving at Cairo, destitute and hungry, he resolves to beg when it
is dark, and is wandering about, "one foot forward, one foot backwards," for a
third of the night, when suddenly a watchman pounces on him and beats him with
fist and stick--for the people having been plagued with robbers, the Khal›f
had given orders to cut off the head of any one found abroad at night. The
wretched man begs for mercy till he has told his story, and when he has
finished the watchman acquaints him of a similar dream he had had of treasure
at Baghdad.[FN#376]
 
A Turkish variant occurs in the "History of the Forty Vaz›rs," where a poor
water-carrier of Cairo, named Nu'mﬂn, presents his son's teacher with his only
camel, which he used daily for carrying his skins of water, as a reward for
instructing the lad in the Kurﬂn, and his wife rails at him for his folly in
no measured terms. In his sleep a white haired old man appears to him in a
dream and tells him to go to Damascus, where he would find his portion. After
this has occurred three times in succession, poor Nu'mﬂn, spite of his wife's
remonstrances, sets out for Damascus, enters a mosque there, and receives a
loaf of bread from a man who had been baking, and having eaten it falls
asleep. Returning home, his wife reviles him for giving away a camel and doing
other mad things. But again the venerable old man appears to him thrice in a
dream, and bids him dig close by himself, and there he would find his
provision. When he takes shovel and pick-axe to dig, his wife's tongue is more
bitter than before, and after he had laboured a while and begins to feel
somewhat fatigued, when he asks her to take a short spell at the work, she
mocks him and calls him anything but a wise man. But on his laying bare a
stone slab, she thinks there must be something beneath it, and offers to
relieve him. "Nu'mﬂn," quoth she "thou'rt weary now." "No, I'm rested, says
he. In the end he discovers a well, goes down into it, and finds a jar full of
sequins, upon seeing which his wife clasps him lovingly round the neck,
exclaiming, "O my noble little hubby! Blessed be God for thy luck and thy
fortune!" Her tune changes, however, when the honest water-carrier tells her
that he means to carry the treasure to the King, which he does, and the King
having caused the money to be examined, the treasure is found to have the
following legend written on it: "This is an alms from God to Nu'mﬂn, by reason
of his respect for the Kurﬂn."[FN#377]

This curious story, which dates, as we have seen, at least as far back as the
9th century appears to be spread over Europe. Mr. E. Sidney Hartland, in an
able paper treating of several of its forms in "The Antiquary" for February,
1887, pp. 45-48, gives a Sicilian version from Dr. Pitre's collection, which
is to this effect:

A poor fellow at Palermo, who got his living by salting tunny and selling it
afterwards dreamt one night that a person came to him and said that if he
wished to find his fortune he would find it under the bridge of the Teste.
Thither he goes and sees a man in rags and is beginning to retire when the man
calls him back, informs him that he is his fortune and bids him go at midnight
of that same night to the place where he had deposited his casks of tunny, dig
there, and whatever he found was his own. The tunny-seller gets a pick-axe and
at midnight begins to dig. He comes upon a large flat stone, which he raises
and discovers a staircase; he descends, and at the bottom finds an immense
treasure of gold. In brief, he becomes so rich that he lends the King of Spain
"a million," to enable him to carry on his wars; the King makes him Viceroy of
Sicily, and by-and by, being unable to repay the loan, raises him to the
highest royal dignities.

Johannes Fungerus, in his "Etymologicon Latino-Gr cum," published at Leyden in
1607, in art. Somnus, gravely relates the story, with a young Dutchman for the
hero and as having happened "within the memory of our fathers, both as it has
been handed down in truthful and honourable fashion as well as frequently told
to me."[FN#378] His "true story" may thus be rendered:

A certain young man of Dort, in Holland, had squandered his wealth and all his
estate and having contracted a debt, was unable to pay it. A certain one
appeared to him in a dream, and advised him to betake himself to Kempen, and
there on the bridge he would receive information from some one as to the way
in which he should be extricated from his difficulties. He went there, and
when he was in a sorrowful mood and thinking upon what had been told him and
promenaded almost the whole day, a common beggar, who was asking alms, pitying
his condition, sat down and asked him, "Why so sad?" Thereupon the dreamer
explained to him his sad and mournful fate, and why he had come there
forsooth, under the impulse of a dream, he had set out thither, and was
expecting God as if by a wonder, to unravel this more than Gordian knot. The
mendicant answered "Good Heaven! are you so mad and foolish as to rely on a
dream, which is emptier than nothing, and journey hither? I should betake
myself to Dort, to dig up a treasure buried under such a tree in such a man's
garden (now this garden had belonged to the dreamer's father), likewise
revealed to me in a dream." The other remained silent and pondering all that
had been said to him, then hastened with all speed to Dort, and under the
aforesaid tree found a great heap of money, which freed him from his
obligations, and having paid off all his debts, he set up in a more sumptuous
style than before.

The second part of the tale, or novelette, of "The Spectre Barber," by Musaeus
(1735-1788), is probably an elaboration of some German popular legend closely
resembling the last-cited version, only in this instance the hero does not
dream, but is told by a ghost, in reward for a service he had done it (or
him), to tarry on the great bridge over the Weser, at the time when day and
night are equal, for a friend who would instruct him what he must do to
retrieve his fortune. He goes there at dawn, and walks on the bridge till
evening comes, when there remained no one but himself and a wooden legged
soldier to whom he had given a small coin in the early morning, and who
ventured at length to ask him why he had promenaded the bridge all day. The
youth at first said he was waiting for a friend, but on the old soldier
remarking that he could be no friend who would keep him waiting so long, he
said that he had only dreamt he was to meet some friend (for he did not care
to say anything about his interview with the ghost), the old fellow observed
that he had had many dreams, but put not the least faith in them. "But my
dream," quoth the youth, "was a most remarkable one." "It couldn't have been
so remarkable as one I had many years ago," and so on, as usual, with this
addition, that the young man placed the old soldier in a snug little cottage
and gave him a comfortable annuity for life--taking care, we may be sure, not
to tell him a word as to the result of acting upon his dream.

To what extent Musaeus has enlarged his original material it is impossible to
say; but it is well known that, like Hans Andersen in later times, he did
"improve and add to such popular tales and traditions as he dealt with--a
circumstance which renders him by no means trustworthy for folk-lore purposes.

In Denmark our well-travelled little tale does duty in accounting for the
building of a parish church, as we learn from Thorpe, in his "Northern
Mythology," vol. ii. p. 253:

Many years ago there lived in Errits˜, near Frederica, a very poor man who one
day said, "If I had a large sum of money, I would build a church for the
parish." The following night he dreamed that if he went to the south bridge at
Veile he would make his fortune. He followed the intimation and strolled
backwards and forwards on the bridge until it grew late, but without seeing
any sign of good fortune. When just on the point of returning, he was accosted
by an officer, who asked him why he had spent a whole day so on the bridge. He
told him his dream, on hearing which the officer related to him in return that
he also on the preceding night had dreamed that in a barn in Errits˜,
belonging to a man whose name he mentioned, a treasure lay buried. Now the
name he mentioned was the man's own, who prudently kept his own counsel,
hastened home, and found the treasure in a barn. The man was faithful to his
word, and built the church.[FN#379]

Equally at home, as we have seen, in Sicily, Holland, Germany, and Denmark,
the identical legend is also domiciled in Scotland and England. Thus Robert
Chambers, in his "Popular Rhymes of Scotland," ed. 1826, p. 56, speaking of
Dundonald Castle, in Ayrshire, the ancient seat of King Robert II., relates
the following local tradition:

Donald, the builder, was originally a poor man, but had the faculty of
dreaming lucky dreams. Upon one occasion he dreamed thrice in one night that
if he were to go to London Bridge he would make a fortune. He went
accordingly, and saw a man looking over the parapet of the bridge, whom he
accosted courteously, and after a little conversation, intrusted him with the
secret of the occasion of his visiting London Bridge. The stranger told him
that he had made a very foolish errand, for he had himself once had a similar
vision, which directed him to go to a certain spot in Ayrshire, in Scotland,
where he would find a vast treasure, and for his part he had never once
thought of obeying the injunction. From his description of the spot, however,
the sly Scot at once perceived that the treasure in question must be concealed
nowhere but in his own humble kail-yard at home, to which he immediately
repaired, in full expectation of finding it. Nor was he disappointed; for
after destroying many good and promising cabbages, and completely cracking
credit with his wife, who considered him as mad, he found a large potful of
gold coin, with which he built a stout castle for himself, and became the
founder of a flourishing family.

"This absurd story," adds Chambers, "is localised in almost every district of
Scotland always referring to London Bridge, and Hogg (the Ettrick Shepherd)
has worked up the fiction in a very amusing manner in one of his 'Winter
Evening Tales,' substituting the Bridge at Kelso for that of London."

But the legend of the Chapman, or Pedlar, of Swaffam, in Norfolk, handed down,
as it has been, from one credulous generation to another, with the most minute
details and perfect local colour, throws quite into the shade all other
versions or variants of the ancient tale of the poor man of Baghdad.
Blomfield, in his "History of Norfolk," 8vo ea., vol. vi. 211-213, reproduces
it as follows, from Sir Roger Twysden's "Reminiscences":

"The story of the Pedlar of Swaffam Market is in substance this: That dreaming
one night, if he went to London, he should certainly meet with man upon London
Bridge which should tell him good news; he was so perplexed in his mind that
till he set upon his journey he could have no rest. To London therefore he
hastes, and walked upon the Bridge for some hours, where being espied by a
shopkeeper and asked what he wanted, he answered, 'You may well ask me that
question, for truly (quoth he) I am come hither upon a very vain errand,' and
so told the story of his dream which occasioned his journey. Whereupon the
shopkeeper replied, 'Alas, good friend, should I have heeded dreams I might
have proved myself as very a fool as thou hast; for 'tis not long since that I
dreamt that at a place called Swaffam Market, in Norfolk, dwells one John
Chapman, a pedlar, who hath a tree in his back yard, under which is buried a
pot of money. Now, therefore if I should have made a journey thither to dig
for such hidden treasure, judge you whether I should not have been counted a
fool.' To whom the Pedlar cunningly said, 'Yes, truly: I will therefore return
home and follow my business, not heeding such dreams hence-forward.' But when
he came home (being satisfied that his dream was fulfilled), he took occasion
to dig in that place, and accordingly found a large pot full of money, which
he prudently concealed, putting the pot among the rest of his brass. After a
time, it happened that one who came to his house, and beholding the pot,
observed an inscription upon it, which being in Latin he interpreted it, that
under that there was another twice as good.[FN#380] Of this inscription the
Pedlar was before ignorant, or at least minded it not; but when he heard the
meaning of it, he said, ' 'Tis very true, in the shop where I bought this pot
stood another under it which was twice as big'; but considering that it might
tend to his further profit to dig deeper in the same place where he found
that, he fell again to work and discovered such a pot as was intimated by the
inscription, full of old coin; notwithstanding all which, he so concealed his
wealth that the neighbours took no notice of it. But not long after the
inhabitants of Swaffam resolving to re-edify their church, and having
consulted the workmen about the charge, they made a levy, wherein they taxed
the Pedlar according to no other rate but what they had formerly done. But he,
knowing his own ability, came to the church and desired the workmen to show
him their model and to tell him what they esteemed the charge of the north
aisle would amount to, which when they told him, he presently undertook to pay
them for building it, and not only that, but for a very tall and beautiful
tower steeple.

"This is the tradition of the inhabitants, as it was told me there. And in
testimony thereof, there was then his picture, with his wife and three
children, in every window of the aisle, with an inscription running through
the bottom of all those windows, viz., 'Orate pro bono statu Johannis
Chapman.... Uxoris ejus, et Liberorum quorum, qui quidem Johannes hanc alam
cum fenestris tecto et . . . fieri fecit.' It was in Henry the Seventh's time,
but the year I now remember not, my notes being left with Mr. William
Sedgwicke, who trickt the pictures, he being then with me. In that aisle is
his seat, of an antique form, and on each side the entrance, the statue of the
Pedlar of about a foot in length, with pack on his back, very artificially
[?artistically] cut. This was sent me from Mr. William Dugdale, of Blyth Hall,
in Warwickshire, in a letter dated Jan. 29th, 1652-3, which I have since
learned from others to have been most True.˚Roger Twysden."

Mr. William E. A. Axon, in "The Antiquary," vol. xi. p. 168, gives the same
version, with some slight variations, from a work entitled "New Help to
Discourse," which he says was often printed between 1619 and 1696: The dream
was "doubled and tripled," and the Pedlar stood on the bridge for two or three
days; but no mention is made of his finding a second pot of money: "he found
an infinite mass of money, with part of which he re-edified the church, having
his statue therein to this day, cut out in stone, with his pack on his back
and his dog at his heels, his memory being preserved by the same form or
picture in most of the glass windows in taverns and alehouses in that town to
this day." The story is also told of a cobbler in Somersetshire (in an article
on Dreams, "Saturday Review," Dec. 28, 1878), who dreamt three nights in
succession that if he went to London Bridge he would there meet with something
to his advantage. For three days he walked over the bridge, when at length a
stranger came up to him, and asked him why he had been walking from end to end
of the bridge for these three days, offering nothing for sale nor purchasing
aught. The man having told him of his strange dream, the stranger said that he
too had dreamt of a lot of gold buried in a certain orchard in such a place in
Somersetshire. Upon this the cobbler returned home and found the pot of gold
under an apple-tree. He now sent his son to school, where he learnt Latin, and
when the lad had come home for his holidays, he happened to look at the pot
that had contained the gold and seeing some writing on it he said, "Father, I
can show you what I have learnt at school is of some use." He then translated
the Latin inscription on the pot thus: "Look under and you will find better "
They did look under and a large quantity of gold was found. Mr. Axon gives a
version of the legend in the Yorkshire dialect in "The Antiquary," vol. xii.
pp. 121-2, and there is a similar story connected with the parish church of
Lambeth.[FN#381]

Regarding the Norfolk tradition of the lucky and generous Pedlar, Blomfield
says that the north side of the church of Swaffam (or Sopham) was certainly
built by one John Chapman, who was churchwarden in 1462; but he thinks that
the figures of the pedlar, etc., were only put "to set forth the name of the
founder: such rebuses are frequently met with on old works." The story is also
told in Abraham de la Prynne's Diary under date Nov. 10, 1699, as "a constant
tradition" concerning a pedlar in Soffham.

Such is the close resemblance between the Turkish version of the Dream and
that in the tale of Zayn al-Asnam that I am disposed to consider both as
having been derived from the same source, which, however, could hardly have
been the story told by El-Ishﬂki. In Zayn al-Asnam a shaykh appears to the
prince in a dream and bids him hie to Egypt, where he will find heaps of
treasure; in the Turkish story the shaykh appears to the poor water-carrier
three times and bids him go to Damascus for the like purpose. The prince
arrives at Cairo and goes to sleep in a mosque, when the shayka again presents
himself before him in a dream and tells him that he has done well in obeying
him--he had only made a trial of his courage: "now return to thy capital and I
will make thee wealthy,"-- in the Turkish story the water-carrier also goes
into a mosque at Damascus and receives a loaf of bread there from a baker.
When the prince returns home the shaykh appears to him once more and bids him
take a pickaxe and go to such a palace of his sire and dig in such a place,
where he should find riches,--in the Turkish story the water-carrier having
returned to his own house, the shaykh comes to him three times more and bids
him search near to where he is and he should find wealth. The discovery by
Zayn al-Asnam of his father's hidden treasure, after he had recklessly
squandered all his means, bears some analogy to the well-known ballad of the
"Heir of Linne," who, when reduced to utter poverty, in obedience to his dying
father's injunction, should such be his hap, went to hang himself in the
"lonely lodge" and found there concealed a store of gold.

With regard to the second part of the tale of Zayn al-Asnam--the Quest of the
Ninth Image--and the Turkish version of which my friend Mr. Gibb has kindly
furnished us with a translation from the mystical work of 'Al› 'Az›z Efendi,
the Cretan, although no other version has hitherto been found,[FN#382] I have
little doubt that the story is of either Indian or Persian extraction, images
and pictures being abhorred by orthodox (or sunni) Muslims generally; and such
also, I think, should we consider all the Arabian tales of young men becoming
madly enamoured of beautiful girls from seeing their portraits--though we can
readily believe that an Arab as well as a Persian or Indian youth might fall
in love with a pretty maid from a mere description of her personal charms, as
we are told of the Bedouin coxcomb Amarah in the Romance of Antar. If the
Turkish version, which recounts the adventures of the Prince Abd es-Samed in
quest of the lacking image (the tenth, not the ninth, as in the Arabian) was
adapted from Zayn al-Asnam, the author has made considerable modifications in
re-telling the fascinating story, and, in my opinion, it is not inferior to
the Arabian version. In the Turkish, the Prince's father appears to him in a
vision of the night,[FN#383] and conducts him to the treasure-vault, where he
sees the vacant pedestal and on it the paper in which his father directs him
to go to Cairo and seek counsel of the Shaykh Mubarak, who would instruct him
how to obtain the lacking image; and the prince is commissioned by the shaykh
to bring him a spotless virgin who has never so much as longed for the
pleasures of love, when he should receive the image for his reward. The shaykh
gives him a mirror which should remain clear when held before such a virgin,
but become dimmed when reflecting the features of another sort of girl; also a
purse which should be always full of money.[FN#384] In the Arabian story the
Shaykh Mubarak accompanies Zayn al-Asnam in his quest of the image to the land
of Jinnistﬂn, the King whereof it is who requires the prince to procure him a
pure virgin and then he would give him the lacking image. In the Turkish
version the prince Abd es-Samed proceeds on the adventure alone, and after
visiting many places without success he goes to Baghdad, where by means of the
Imam he at last finds the desiderated virgin, whom he conducts to Mubarak. In
the Arabian story the Imam, Abu Bakr (Haji Bakr in the Turkish), is at first
inimical towards the prince and the shaykh but after being propitiated by a
present of money he is all complaisance, and, as in the Turkish, introduces
the prince to the fallen vaz›r, the father of the spotless virgin. The sudden
conversion of the Imam from a bitter enemy to an obliging friend is related
with much humour: one day denouncing the strangers to the folk assembled in
the mosque as cutpurses and brigands, and the next day withdrawing his
statement, which he says had been made on the information of one of the
prince's enviers, and cautioning the people against entertaining aught but
reverence for the strangers. This amusing episode is omitted in the Turkish
version. In one point the tale of Zayn al-Asnam has the advantage of that of
Abd es-Samed: it is much more natural, or congruous, that the King of the
Genii should affect to require the chaste maiden and give the prince a magical
mirror which would test her purity, and that the freed slave Mubarak should
accompany the prince in his quest.




            Aladdin; Or, the Wonderful Lamp--p. 31.



Those scholars who declared a number of the tales in Galland's "Mille et une
Nuits" to be of his own invention, because they were not found in any of the
Arabic MS. texts of The Nights preserved in European libraries, were
unconsciously paying that learned and worthy man a very high compliment, since
the tales in question are among the best in his work and have ever been, and
probably will continue to be, among the most popular favourites. But that fact
that Galland seized the first opportunity of intimating that two of those
tales were not translated or inserted by himself ought to have been alone
amply sufficient presumptive evidence of his good faith with regard to the
others.

A friendly reviewer of my "Popular Tales and Fictions" etc. states that modern
collectors of European Mırchen, though "working from 100 to 150 years after
the appearance of the 'Thousand and One Nights,' in European literature, have
not found the special versions therein contained distributed widely and
profusely throughout Europe," and that my chapter on Aladdin is proof
sufficient that they have not done so. The reviewer goes on to say that I cite
"numerous variants, but, save one from Rome, variants of the theme, not of the
version; some again, such as the Mecklenburg and Danish forms, are more
primitive in tone; and all lack those effective and picturesque details which
are the charm of the Arabian story, and which a borrower only interested in
the story as a story might just be expected to retain.''[FN#385]

But it is not contended that the folk-tales of Europe owe much, if indeed
anything at all, to the "Arabian Nights," which is not only as it now exists a
comparatively modern work--Baron de Sacy has adduced good reasons for placing
the date of its composition in the middle of the 9th century of the Hijra, or
about 1446 A.D. but was first made known in Europe so late as the first
quarter of the last century. Several of the tales, and incidents of the tales,
in the "Thousand and One Nights" were current in Europe in the 12th century--
imported by the Moors of Spain, and by European travellers, pilgrims, and
minstrels from the East. Thus the Arabian tale of the Ebony (or Enchanted)
Horse is virtually identical with the Hispano-French romance of Cleomades and
Claremonde; that of Prince Kamar al Zaman is fairly represented by the romance
of Peter of Provence and the Fair Maguelone. The episode of Astol