father.

[FN#376] A translation of this version, omitting the moral
reflections interspersed, is given by Professor E. B. Cowell in
the "Journal of Philology," 1876, vol. vi. p. 193. The great
Persian mystic tells another story of a Dream of Riches, which,
though only remotely allied to our tale, is very curious:

               The Fakir and the Hidden Treasure.

Notwithstanding the clear evidence of God's bounty, engendering
those spiritual tastes in men, philosophers and learned men, wise
in their own conceit, obstinately shut their eyes to it, and look
afar off for what is really close to them, so that they incur the
penalty of being "branded on the nostrils" [Kurﬂn, lxviii. 16],
adjudged against unbelievers. This is illustrated by the story of
the poor Fak›r who prayed to God that he might be fed without
being obliged to work for his food. A divine voice came to him in
his sleep and directed him to go to the house of a certain scribe
and take a certain writing he should find there. He did so, and
on reading the writing found that it contained directions for
discovering a hidden treasure. The directions were as follows:
"Go outside the city to the dome which covers the tomb of the
martyr, turn your back to the tomb and face towards Mecca, place
an arrow in your bow, and where the arrow falls dig for the
treasure." But before the Fak›r had time to commence the search
the rumour of the writing and its purport had reached the King,
who at once sent and took it away from the Fak›r, and began to
search for the treasure on his own account. After shooting many
arrows and digging in all directions the King failed to find the
treasure, and got weary of searching, and returned the writing to
the Fak›r. Then the Fak›r tried what he could do, but failed to
hit the spot where the treasure was buried. At last despairing of
success by his own unaided efforts, he cast his care upon God,
and implored the divine assistance. Then a voice from heaven came
to him saying, "You were directed to fix an arrow in your bow,
but not to draw your bow with all your might, as you have been
doing. Shoot as gently as possible, that the arrow may fall close
to you, for hidden treasure is indeed 'nearer to you than your
neck-vein'" [Kurﬂn, l. 15]. Men overlook the spiritual treasures
close to them, and for this reason it is that prophets have no
honour in their own countries.--Mr. F: H. Whinfield's Abridgment
of "The Masnavi-i Ma'navi." (London, 1887.)

[FN#377] See Mr. Gibb's translation (London: Redway), p. 278

[FN#378] "Rem qu  contigit patrum memori‘ ut veram ita dignam
relatu et s penumero mihi assertam ab hominibus fide dignis
apponam."

[FN#379] Thorpe says that a nearly similar legend is current at
Tanslet, on the island of Alsen.

[FN#380] The common tradition is, it was in English rhyme, viz.

          "Where this stood
          Is another as good;"

or, as some will have it:

          "Under me doth lie
          Another much richer than I."

[FN#381] Apropos to dreams, there is a very amusing story,
entitled "Which was the Dream ?" in Mr. F. H. Balfour's "Leaves
from my Chinese Scrap Book," p. 106-7 (London: Tr≥bner, 1887).

[FN#382] The story in the Turkish collection, "Al-Faraj ba'd
al-Shiddah," where it forms the 8th recital, is doubtless
identical with our Arabian version, since in both the King of the
Genie figures, which is not the case in Mr. Gibb's story.

[FN#383] Although this version is not preceded, as in the
Arabian, by the Dream of Riches, yet that incident occurs, I
understand, in separate form in the work of 'Al› Az›z.

[FN#384] Sir Richard has referred, in note 1, p. 18, to numerous
different magical tests of chastity, etc., and I may here add one
more, to wit, the cup which Oberon, King of the Fairies, gave to
Duke Huon of Bordeaux (according to the romance which recounts
the marvellous adventures of that renowned Knight), which filled
with wine in the hand of any man who was out of "deadly sin" and
attempted to drink out of it, but was always empty in the hands
of a sinful man. Charlemagne was shown to be sinful by this test,
while Duke Huon, his wife, and a companion were proved to be free
from sin.--In my "Popular Tales and Fictions" the subject of
inexhaustible purses etc. is treated pretty fully--they
frequently figure in folk-tales, from Iceland to Ceylon, from
Japan to the Hebrides.

[FN#385]  "The Athenaeum," April 23,1887, p. 542.

[FN#386]  See M. Eugene L⁄v€que's "Les Mythes et les L⁄gendes de
l'Inde et la Perse" (Paris, 1880), p. 543, where the two are
printed side by side. This was pointed out more than seventy
years ago by Henry Weber in his Introduction to "Tales of the
East," edited by him.

[FN#387]  Also in the romance of Duke Huon of Bordeaux and the
old French romance of the Chevalier Berinus. The myth was widely
spread in the Middle Ages.

[FN#388]  Cf. the magic horn that Duke Huon of Bordeaux received
from Oberon, King of the Fairies, which caused even the Soudan of
Babylon to caper about in spite of himself, and similar musical
instruments in a hundred different tales, such as the old English
poem of "The Friar and the Boy," the German tale (in Grimm) of
"The Jew among Thorns," the "Pied Piper of Hamelin," &c.

[FN#389]  Not distantly related to stories of this class are
those in which the hero becomes possessed of some all-bestowing
object--a purse, a box, a table-cloth, a sheep, a donkey, etc.--
which being stolen from him he recovers by means of a magic club
that on being commended rattles on the pate and ribs of the thief
and compels him to restore the treasure.

[FN#390]  The Dwarf had told the soldier, on leaving him after
killing the old witch, that should his services be at any other
time required, he had only to light his pipe at the Blue Light
and he should instantly appear before him. The tobacco-pipe must
be considered as a recent and quite unnecessary addition to the
legend: evidently all the power of summoning the Dwarf was in the
Blue Light, since he tells the soldier when he first appears
before him in the well that he must obey its lord and master.

[FN#391]  Belli signifies famous, or notorious.

[FN#392]  This young lady's notion of the "function" of Prayer
was, to say the least peculiar, in thus addressing her petition
to the earth instead of to Heaven.

[FN#393]  The gentle, amiable creature! 

[FN#394] Chamley-bill was, says Dr. Chodzko, a fort built by
Kurrogl∑, the ruins of which are still to be seen in the valley
of Salmas, a district in the province of Aderbaijan.

[FN#395]  i.e. Kuvera, the god of wealth.

[FN#396]  The attendants of Kuvera. a Buddhistic idea.

[FN#397]  That every man has his "genius" of good or evil fortune
is, I think, essentially idea.

[FN#398]  Such being the case, what need was there for the
apparition presenting itself every morning?--but no matter!

[FN#399] Pandit S. M. Nat⁄sa Sﬂstr›, in "Indian Notes and
Queries," for March, 1887, says that women swallow large numbers
of an insect called pillai-puchchi (son-insect: gryllas) in the
hope of bearing sons, they will also drink the water squeezed
from the loin-cloth of a sanyﬂs› [devotee] after washing it for
him!--Another correspondent in the same periodical. Pandit
Putl›bﬂi K. Raghunathj⁄, writes that Hindu women, for the purpose
of having children, especially a son, observe the fourth lunar
day of every dark fortnight as a fast and break their fast only
after seeing the moon, generally before 9 or 10 p.m. A dish of
twenty-one small, marble-like balls of rice is prepared, in one
of which is put some salt. The whole dish is then served up to
the woman, and while eating it she should first lay her hands on
the ball containing salt, as it is believed to be a positive sign
that she will be blessed with a son. In that case she should give
up eating the rest, but otherwise she should go on eating till
she lays her hands on the salted ball. The Pandit adds, that the
observance of this ball depends on the wish of the woman. She may
observe it on only one, five, seven, eleven, or twenty-one lunar
fourth days, or chaturth›. Should she altogether fail in picking
out the salted ball first, she may be sure of remaining barren
all her life long.

[FN#400] I am glad to see among Messrs. Tr≥bner & Co.'s
announcements of forthcoming publications Mr. Knowles' collection
of "Folk-Tales of Kashm›r" in popular handy volume form.

[FN#401] A holy man whose austerities have obtained for him
supernatural powers.

[FN#402] Also called "Story of the King and his Four Ministers."
There is another but wholly different Tamil romance entitled the
"Alak⁄sa Kathﬂ," in which a king's daughter becomes a disembodied
evil spirit, haunting during the night a particular choultry (or
serai) for travellers, and if they do not answer aright to her
cries she strangles them and vampyre-like sucks their blood.

[FN#403] The Pandit informs me that his "Folk-Lore in Southern
India" will be completed at press and issued shortly at Bombay.
(London agents, Messrs. Tr≥bner & Co.)

[FN#404] In the "Kathﬂ Sarit Sﬂgara," Book ii., ch. 14, when the
King of Vatsa receives the hand of Vasavadatta, "like a beautiful
shoot lately budded on the creeper of love," she walks round the
fire, keeping it to the right, on which Prof. Tawney remarks that
"the practice of walking round an object of reverence, with the
right hand towards it, has been exhaustively discussed by Dr.
Samuel Fergusson in his paper 'On the ceremonial turn called
Desiul,' published in the Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy,
for March 1877 (vol. i., series ii., No. 12). He shows it to have
existed among the ancient Romans as well as the Celts.... Dr.
Fergusson is of opinion that this movement was a symbol of the
cosmical rotation, an imitation of the apparent course of the sun
in the heavens."

[FN#405] The affection of parents for their children is often a
blind instinct, and sometimes selfish, though, after all, there
is doubtless truth in these lines:

          "A mother's love!
          If there be one thing pure,
          Where all beside is sullied,
          That can endure
          When all else pass away:
          If there be aught
          Surpassing human deed, or word, or thought,
          It is a mother's love!"

[FN#406] Surma is a collyrium applied to the edges of the eyelids
to increase the lustre of the eyes. A Persian poet, addressing
the damsel of whom he is enamoured, says, "For eyes so
intoxicated with love's nectar what need is there of surma?"--
This part of the story seems to be garbled; in another text of
the romance of Hatim Ta'› it is only after the surma has been
applied to the covetous man's eyes that he beholds the hidden
treasures.

[FN#407] The first part of the story of the Young King of the
Black Isles, in The Nights, bears some analogy to this, but there
the paramour is only "half-killed" and the vindictive queen
transforms her husband from the waist downwards into marble.

[FN#408] On the Sources of some of Galland's Tales.  By Henry
Charles Coote, F.S.A. "Folklore Record," 1881, vol. iii. Part 2,
p. 186.

[FN#409] See Thorpe's "Yule Tide Stories," Bohn's ed., pp. 481-
486.˚Thorpe says that "for many years the Dummburg was the abode
of robbers, who slew the passing travellers and merchants whom
they perceived on the road from Leipsig to Brunswick, and heaped
together the treasures of the plundered churches and the
surrounding country, which they concealed in subterranean
caverns."  The peasantry would therefore regard the spot with
superstitious awe, and once such a tale as that of Ali Baba got
amongst them, the robbers' haunt in their neighbourhood would
soon become the scene of the poor woodcutter's adventure.

[FN#410] A Persian poet says:

          "He who violates the rights of the bread and salt
          Breaks, for his wretched self, head and neck."

[FN#411] Miss Busk reproduces the proper names as they are
transliterated in J≥lg's German version of those Kalmuk and
Mongolian Tales--from which a considerable portion of her book
was rendered--thus: Ardschi Bordschi, Rakschasas, etc., but
drollest of all is "Ramajana" (Ramayana), which is right in
German but not in English.

[FN#412] The apocryphal gospels and the Christian hagiology are
largely indebted to Buddhism, e.g., the Descent into Hell, of
which there is such a graphic account in the Gospel of Nicodemus,
seems to have been adapted from ancient Buddhist legends, now
embodied in the opening chapters of a work entitled,
"Kﬂranda-vy∑ha," which contain a description of the Boddhisattva
Avalokiteswara's descent into the hell Av›chi, to deliver the
souls there held captive by Yama, the lord of the lower world.
(See a paper by Professor E. R. Cowell, LL.D., in the "Journal of
Philology," 1876, vol. vi. pp. 222-231.) This legend also exists
in Telugu, under the title of "Sﬂnanda Charitra," of which the
outline is given in Taylor's "Catalogue Raisonn⁄ of Oriental MSS.
in the Government Library, Madras," vol. ii. p. 643: Sﬂnanda, the
son of Purna Vitta and Bhadra Datta, heard from munis accounts of
the pains of the wicked, and wishing to see for himself, went to
Yama-puri. His coming had been announced by Nﬂrada. Yama showed
the stranger the different lots of mankind in a future state, in
details. Sﬂnanda was touched with compassion for the miseries
that he witnessed, and by the use of the five and six lettered
spells he delivered those imprisoned souls and took them with him
to Kailasa. Yama went to Siva and complained, but Siva civilly
dismissed the appeal.--Under the title of "The Harrowing of
Hell," the apocryphal Christian legend was the theme of a Miracle
Play in England during the Middle Ages, and indeed it seems to
have been, in different forms, a popular favourite throughout
Europe. Thus in a German tale Strong Hans goes to the Devil in
hell and wants to serve him, and sees the pains in which souls
are imprisoned standing beside the fire. Full of pity, he lifts
up the lids and sets the souls free, on which the Devil at once
drives him away. A somewhat similar notion occurs in an Icelandic
tale of the Sin Sacks, in Powell and Magn∑sson's collection
(second series, p. 48). And in T. Crofton Croker's "Fairy Legends
and Traditions of the South of Ireland," ed. 1828, Part. ii. p.
30 ff., we read of Soul Cages at the bottom of the sea,
containing the spirits of drowned sailors, which the bold hero
Jack Docherty set free.

[FN#413] The Rabbins relate that among the Queen of Sheba's tests
of Solomon's sagacity she brought before him a number of boys and
girls apparelled all alike, and desired him to distinguish those
of one sex from those of the other, as they stood in his
presence. Solomon caused a large basin of water to be fetched in,
and ordered them all to wash their hands. By this expedient he
discovered the boys from the girls, since the former washed
merely their hands, while the latter washed also their arms.

[FN#414] Dr. W. Grimm, in the notes to his "Kinder und
Hausmırchen," referring to the German form of the story (which we
shall come to by and-by), says, "The Parrot, which is the fourth
story in the Persian Touti Nameh, bears some resemblance to
this"--the Parrot is the reciter of all the stories in the
collection, not the title of this particular tale.

[FN#415] To Sir Richard Burton's interesting note on the
antiquity of the lens and its applied use to the telescope and
microscope may be added a passage or two from Sir William
Drummond's "Origines; or, Remarks on the Origin of several
Empires, States, and Cities," 1825, vol. ii. pp. 246-250. This
writer appears to think that telescopes were not unknown to the
ancients and adduces plausible evidence in support of his
opinion. "Moschopalus," he says, "an ancient grammarian, mentions
four instruments with which the astronomers of antiquity were
accustomed to observe the stars--the catoptron, the dioptron, the
eisoptron and the enoptron." He supposes the catoptron to have
been the same with the astrolabe. "The dioptron seems to have
been so named from a tube through which the observer looked. Were
the other two instruments named from objects being reflected in a
mirror placed within them? Aristotle says that the Greeks
employed mirrors when they surveyed the celestial appearances.
May we not conclude from this circumstance that astronomers were
not always satisfied with looking through empty tubes?" He thinks
the ancients were acquainted with lenses and has collected
passages from various writers which corroborate his opinion,
besides referring to the numerous uses to which glass was applied
in the most remote ages. He goes on to say:

"Some of the observations of the ancients must appear very
extraordinary, if magnifying glasses had never been known among
them. The boldness with which the Pythagoreans asserted that the
surface of the moon was diversified by mountains and valleys can
hardly be accounted for, unless Pythagoras had been convinced of
the fact by the help of telescopes, which might have existed in
the observatories of Egypt and Chaldea before those countries
were conquered and laid waste by the Persians. Pliny (L. 11) says
that 1600 stars had been counted in the 72 constellations, and by
this expression I can only understand him to mean the 72 dodecans
into which the Egyptians and Chaldeans divided the zodiac. Now
this number of stars could never have been counted in the zodiac
without the assistance of glasses. Ptolemy reckoned a much less
number for the whole heavens The missionaries found many more
stars marked in the Chinese charts of the heavens than formerly
existed in those which were in use in Europe. Suidas, at the word
{Greek} (glass), indicates, in explaining a passage in
Aristophanes, that burning mirrors were occasionally made of
glass. Now how can we suppose burning mirrors to have been made
of glass without supposing the magnifying powers of glass to have
been known? The Greeks, as Plutarch affirms, employed metallic
mirrors, either plane, or convex, or concave, according to the
use for which they were intended. If they could make burning
mirrors of glass, they could have given any of these forms to
glass. How then could they have avoided observing that two
glasses, one convex and the other concave, placed at a certain
distance from each other, magnified objects seen through them?
Numerous experiments must have been made with concave and convex
glasses before burning mirrors made of glass could have been
employed. If astronomers never knew the magnifying powers of
glass, and never placed lenses in the tubes of the dioptrons,
what does Strabo (L. 3, c. 138) mean when he says: 'Vapours
produce the same effects as the tubes in magnifying objects of
vision by refraction?'"

Mr. W. F. Thompson, in his translation of the "Ahlak-i-Jalaly,"
from the Persian of Fak›r Jﬂn› Muhammad (15th century), has the
following note on the Jﬂm-i-Jﬂmshid and other magical mirrors:
"Jﬂmsh›d, the fourth of the Kaianian dynasty, the Soloman of the
Persians. His cup was said to mirror the world, so that he could
observe all that was passing elsewhere--a fiction of his own for
state purposes, apparently, backed by the use of artificial
mirrors. Nizﬂm› tells that Alexander invented the steel mirror,
by which he means, of course, that improved reflectors were used
for telescopy in the days of Archimedes, but not early enough to
have assisted Jﬂmsh›d, who belongs to the fabulous and
unchronicled age. In the romance of Beyjan and Manija, in the
"Shah Nﬂma," this mirror is used by the great Khosr∑ for the
purpose of discovering the place of the hero's imprisonment:

           "The mirror in his hand revolving shook,
           And earth's whole surface glimmered in his look;
           Nor less the secrets of the starry sphere,
           The what, the when, the bow depicted clear,
           From orbs celestial to the blade of grass,
           All nature floated in the magic glass." 

[FN#416] We have been told this king had three daughters.

[FN#417] See in "Blackwood's Magazine," vol. iv., 1818, 1819, a
translation, from the Danish of J. L. Rasmussen, of "An
Historical and Geographical Essay on the trade and commerce of
the Arabians and Persians with Russia and Scandinavia during the
Middle Ages.--But learned Icelanders, while England was still
semi-civilized, frequently made very long journeys into foreign
lands: after performing the pilgrimage to Rome, they went to
Syria, and some penetrated into Central Asia.

[FN#418] This, of course, is absurd, as each was equally
interested in the business; but it seems to indicate a vague
reminiscence of the adventures of the Princes in the story of The
Envious Sisters.

[FN#419] There is a naivete about this that is particularly
refreshing.

[FN#420] This recalls the fairy Meliora, in the romance of
Partenopex de Blois. who "knew of ancient tales a countless
store."

[FN#421] In a Norwegian folk-tale the hero receives from a dwarf
a magic ship that could enlarge itself so as to contain any
number of men, yet could be earned m the pocket.

[FN#422] The Water of Life, the Water of Immortality, the
Fountain of Youth--a favourite and wide-spread myth during the
Middle Ages. In the romance of Sir Huon of Bordeaux the hero
boldly encounters a griffin, and after a desperate fight, in
which he is sorely wounded, slays the monster. Close at hand he
discovers a clear fountain, at the bottom of which is a gravel of
precious stones. "Then he dyde of his helme and dranke of the
water his fyll, and he had no sooner dranke therof but
incontynent he was hole of all his woundys." Nothing more
frequently occurs in folk tales than for the hero to be required
to perform three difficult and dangerous tasks--sometimes
impossible, without supernatural assistance.

[FN#423] "Say, will a courser of the Sun
       All gently with a dray-horse run?"

[FN#424] Ting: assembly of notables--of udallers, &c. The term
survives in our word hustings; and in Ding-wall--Ting-val; where
tings were held.

[FN#425] The last of the old Dublin ballad-singers, who assumed
the respectable name of Zozimus, and is said to have been the
author of the ditties wherewith he charmed his street auditors,
was wont to chant the legend of the Finding of Moses in a version
which has at least the merit of originality:

          "In Egypt's land, upon the banks of Nile,
          King Pharaoh's daughter went to bathe in style;
          She took her dip, then went unto the land,
          And, to dry her royal pelt, she ran along the strand.

          A bulrush tripped her, whereupon she saw
          A smiling baby in a wad of straw;
          She took it up, and said, in accents mild--
          Tare an' agurs, girls! which av yez owns this child?"

The Babylonian analogue, as translated by the Rev. Prof. A. H.
Sayce, in the first vol. of the "Folk-Lore Journal" (1883), is as
follows:

"Sargon, the mighty monarch, the King of Aganﬁ, am I. My mother
was a princess; my father I knew not, my father's brother loved
the mountain-land. In the city of Azipiranu, which on the bank of
the Euphrates lies, my mother, the princess, conceived me, in an
inaccessible spot she brought me forth. She placed me in a basket
of rushes, with bitumen the door of my ark she closed. She
launched me on the river, which drowned me not. The river bore me
along, to Akki, the irrigator, it brought me. Akki, the
irrigator, in the tenderness of his heart, lifted me up. Akki,
the irrigator, as his own child brought me up. Akki, the
irrigator, as his gardener appointed me, and in my gardenership
the goddess Istar loved me. For 45 years the kingdom I have
ruled, and the black headed (Accadian) race have governed."

[FN#426] This strange notion may have been derived from some
Eastern source, since it occurs in Indian fictions; for example,
in Dr. Rﬂjendralﬂla Mitra's "Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of
Nepﬂl," p. 304, we read that "there lived in the village of
Vﬂsava a rich householder who had born unto him a son with a
jewelled ring in his ear." And in the "Mahﬂbhﬂrata" we are told
of a king who had a son from whose body issued nothing but gold--
the prototype of the gold-laying goose.

[FN#427] Connected with this romance is the tale of "The Six
Swans," in Grimm's collection-- see Mrs. Hunt's English
translation, vol. i. p. 192.

[FN#428] Mahb∑b. a piece of gold, value about 10 francs, replaces
the dinﬂr of old tales. Those in Egypt are all since the time of
the Turks: 9, 7, or 6 1/2 frs. according to issue.--Note by
Spitta Bey. 

[FN#429] Here again we have the old superstition of "blood
speaking to blood," referred to by Sir Richard, ante, p. 347,
note 1. It often occurs in Asiatic stories. Thus in the Persian
"Bakhtyﬂr Nﬂma," when the adopted son of the robber chief is
brought with other captives, before the king (he is really the
king's own son, whom he and the queen abandoned in their flight
through the desert), his majesty's bowels strangely yearned
towards the youth, and in the conclusion this is carried to
absurdity: when Bakhtyﬂr is found to be the son of the royal
pair, "the milk sprang from the breasts of the queen," as she
looked on him--albeit she must then have been long past
child-bearing!

[FN#430] The enchanted pitcher does duty here for the witches'
broomstick and the fairies' rush of European tales, but a similar
conveyance is, I think, not unknown to Western folk-lore.

[FN#431] In a Norse story the hero on entering a forbidden room
in a troll's house finds a horse with a pan of burning coals
under his nose and a measure of corn at his tail, and when he
removes the coals and substitutes the corn, the horse becomes his
friend and adviser.

[FN#432] M. Dozon does not think that Muslim customs allow of a
man's marrying three sisters at once; but we find the king does
the same in the modern Arab version.

[FN#433] London: Macmillan and Co., p. 236 ff.

[FN#434] This recalls the biblical legend of the widow's cruse,
which has its exact counterpart in Singhalese folk-lore.

[FN#435] This recalls the story of the herd-boy who cried "Wolf!
wolf!"

[FN#436] Again the old notion of maternal and paternal instincts;
but the children don't often seem in folk-tales, to have a
similar impulsive affection for their unknown parents.

[FN#437] Colotropis gigantea.

[FN#438] Rﬂkshashas and rﬂkshas›s are male and female demons or
ogres, in the Hind∑ mythology.

[FN#439] Literally, the king of birds, a fabulous species of
horse remarkable for swiftness, which plays an important part in
Tamil stories and romances.

[FN#440] Here we have a parallel to the biblical legend of the
passage of the Israelites dryshod

[FN#441] Demons, ogres, trolls, giants, et hoc genus omne, never
fail to discover the presence of human beings by their keen sense
of smelling. "Fee, faw, fum! I smell the blood of a British man,"
cries a giant when the renowned hero Jack is concealed in his
castle. "Fum! fum! sento odor christianum," exclaims an ogre in
Italian folk tales. "Femme, je sens la viande fraØche, la chair
de chr⁄tien!" says a giant to his wife in French stories.

[FN#442] In my popular "Tales and Fictions" a number of examples
are cited of life depending on some extraneous object--vol. i.
pp. 347-351.

[FN#443] In the Tamil story-book, the English translation of
which is called "The Dravidian Nights' Entertainments," a
wandering princess, finding the labour-pains coming upon her,
takes shelter in the house of a dancing-woman, who says to the
nurses, "If she gives birth to a daughter, it is well [because
the woman could train her to follow her own profession'], but if
a son, I do not want him;--close her eyes, remove him to a place
where you can kill him, and throwing a bit of wood on the ground
tell her she has given birth to it."--I daresay that a story
similar to the Bengali version exists among the Tamils.

[FN#444] It is to be hoped we shall soon have Sir Richard
Burton's promised complete English translation of this work,
since one half is, I understand, already done.










Title: The Day of the Confederacy, A Chronicle of the Embattled South

Author: Nathaniel W. Stephenson

THIS BOOK, VOLUME 30 IN THE CHRONICLES OF AMERICA SERIES, ALLEN
JOHNSON, EDITOR, WAS DONATED TO PROJECT GUTENBERG BY THE JAMES J.
KELLY LIBRARY OF ST. GREGORY'S UNIVERSITY; THANKS TO ALEV AKMAN.

THE DAY OF THE CONFEDERACY, A CHRONICLE OF THE EMBATTLED SOUTH
BY NATHANIEL W. STEPHENSON

New Haven: Yale University Press
Toronto: Glasgow, Brook & Co.
London: Humphrey Milford
Oxford University Press

1919


CONTENTS

I. THE SECESSION MOVEMENT

II. THE DAVIS GOVERNMENT

III. THE FALL OF KING COTTON

IV. THE REACTION AGAINST RICHMOND

V. THE CRITICAL YEAR

VI. LIFE IN THE CONFEDERACY

VII. THE TURNING OF THE TIDE

VIII. A GAME OF CHANCE

IX. DESPERATE REMEDIES X. DISINTEGRATION

XI. AN ATTEMPTED REVOLUTION

XII. THE LAST WORD

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE



THE DAY OF THE CONFEDERACY

Chapter I. The Secession Movement

The secession movement had three distinct stages. The first,
beginning with the news that Lincoln was elected, closed with the
news, sent broadcast over the South from Charleston, that Federal
troops had taken possession of Fort Sumter on the night of the
28th of December. During this period the likelihood of secession
was the topic of discussion in the lower South. What to do in
case the lower South seceded was the question which perplexed the
upper South. In this period no State north of South Carolina
contemplated taking the initiative. In the Southeastern and Gulf
States immediate action of some sort was expected. Whether it
would be secession or some other new course was not certain on
the day of Lincoln's election. Various States earlier in the year
had provided for conventions of their people in the event of a
Republican victory. The first to assemble was the convention of
South Carolina, which organized at Columbia, on December 17,
1860. Two weeks earlier Congress had met. Northerners and
Southerners had at once joined issue on their relation in the
Union. The House had appointed its committee of thirty-three to
consider the condition of the country. So unpromising indeed from
the Southern point of view had been the early discussions of this
committee that a conference of Southern members of Congress had
sent out their famous address To Our Constituents: "The argument
is exhausted. All hope of relief in the Union . . . is
extinguished, and we trust the South will not be deceived by
appearances or the pretense of new guarantees. In our judgment
the Republicans are resolute in the purpose to grant nothing that
will or ought to satisfy the South. We are satisfied the honor,
safety, and independence of the Southern people require the
organization of a Southern Confederacy--a result to be obtained
only by separate state secession." Among the signers of this
address were the two statesmen who had in native talent no
superiors at Washington--Judah P. Benjamin of Louisiana and
Jefferson Davis of Mississippi.

The appeal To Our Constituents was not the only assurance of
support tendered to the convention of South Carolina. To
represent them at this convention the governors of Alabama and
Mississippi had appointed delegates. Mr. Hooker of Mississippi
and Mr. Elmore of Alabama made addresses before the convention on
the night of the 17th of December. Both reiterated views which
during two days of lobbying they had disseminated in Columbia "on
all proper occasions." Their argument, summed up in Elmore's
report to Governor Moore of Alabama, was "that the only course to
unite the Southern States in any plan of cooperation which could
promise safety was for South Carolina to take the lead and secede
at once without delay or hesitation...that the only effective
plan of cooperation must ensue after one State had seceded and
presented the issue when the plain question would be presented to
the other Southern States whether they would stand by the
seceding State engaged in a common cause or abandon her to the
fate of coercion by the arms of the Government of the United
States."

Ten years before, in the unsuccessful secession movement of 1850
and 1851, Andrew Pickens Butler, perhaps the ablest South
Carolinian then living, strove to arrest the movement by exactly
the opposite argument. Though desiring secession, he threw all
his weight against it because the rest of the South was averse.
He charged his opponents, whose leader was Robert Barnwell Rhett,
with aiming to place the other Southern States "in such
circumstances that, having a common destiny, they would be
compelled to be involved in a common sacrifice." He protested
that "to force a sovereign State to take a position against its
consent is to make of it a reluctant associate.... Both
interest and honor must require the Southern States to take
council together."

That acute thinker was now in his grave. The bold enthusiast whom
he defeated in 1851 had now no opponent that was his match. No
great personality resisted the fiery advocates from Alabama and
Mississippi. Their advice was accepted. On December 20, 1860,
the cause that ten years before had failed was successful. The
convention, having adjourned from Columbia to Charleston, passed
an ordinance of secession.

Meanwhile, in Georgia, at a hundred meetings, the secession issue
was being hotly discussed. But there was not yet any certainty
which way the scale would turn. An invitation from South Carolina
to join in a general Southern convention had been declined by the
Governor in November. Governor Brown has left an account
ascribing the comparative coolness and deliberation of the hour
to the prevailing impression that President Buchanan had pledged
himself not to alter the military status at Charleston. In an
interview between South Carolina representatives and the
President, the Carolinians understood that such a pledge was
given. "It was generally understood by the country," says
Governor Brown, "that such an agreement...had been entered
Into...and that Governor Floyd of Virginia, then Secretary of
War, had expressed his determination to resign his position in
the Cabinet in case of the refusal of the President to carry out
the agreement in good faith. The resignation of Governor Floyd
was therefore naturally looked upon, should it occur, as a signal
given to the South that reinforcements were to be sent to
Charleston and that the coercive policy had been adopted by the
Federal Government."

While the "canvass in Georgia for members of the State convention
was progressing with much interest on both sides," there came
suddenly the news that Anderson had transferred his garrison from
Fort Moultrie to the island fortress of Sumter. That same day
commissioners from South Carolina, newly arrived at Washington,
sought in vain to persuade the President to order Anderson back
to Moultrie. The Secretary of War made the subject an issue
before the Cabinet. Unable to carry his point, two days later he
resigned.*

* The President had already asked for Floyd's resignation because
of financial irregularities, and Floyd was shrewd enough to use
Anderson's coup as an excuse for resigning. See Rhodes, "History
of the United States," vol. II pp. 225, 236 (note).

The Georgia Governor, who had not hitherto been in the front rank
of the aggressives, now struck a great blow. Senator Toombs had
telegraphed from Washington that Fort Pulaski, guarding the
Savannah River, was "in danger." The Governor had reached the
same conclusion. He mustered the state militia and seized Fort
Pulaski. Early in the morning on January 3,1861, the fort was
occupied by Georgia troops. Shortly afterward, Brown wrote to a
commissioner sent by the Governor of Alabama to confer with him:
"While many of our most patriotic and intelligent citizens in
both States have doubted the propriety of immediate secession, I
feel quite confident that recent events have dispelled those
doubts from the minds of most men who have, till within the past
few days, honestly sustained them." The first stage of the
secession movement was at an end; the second had begun.

A belief that Washington had entered upon a policy of aggression
swept the lower South. The state conventions assembling about
this time passed ordinances of secession--Mississippi, January 9;
Florida, January 10; Alabama, January 11; Georgia, January 19;
Louisiana, January 26; Texas, February 1. But this result was not
achieved without considerable opposition. In Georgia the
Unionists put up a stout fight. The issue was not upon the right
to secede--virtually no one denied the right--but upon the wisdom
of invoking the right. Stephens, gloomy and pessimistic, led the
opposition. Toombs came down from Washington to take part with
the secessionists. From South Carolina and Alabama, both
ceaselessly active for secession, commissioners appeared to lobby
at Milledgeville, as commissioners of Alabama and Mississippi had
lobbied at Columbia. Besides the out-and-out Unionists, there
were those who wanted to temporize, to threaten the North, and to
wait for developments. The motion on which these men and the
Unionists made their last stand together went against them 164 to
133. Then at last came the square question: Shall we secede? Even
on this question, the minority was dangerously large. Though the
temporizers came over to the secessionists, and with them came
Stephens, there was still a minority of 89 irreconcilables
against the majority numbering 208.

"My allegiance," said Stephens afterwards, "was, as I considered
it, not due to the United States, or to the people of the United
States, but to Georgia, in her sovereign capacity. Georgia had
never parted with her right to demand the ultimate allegiance of
her citizens."

The attempt in Georgia to restrain impetuosity and advance with
deliberation was paralleled in Alabama, where also the
aggressives were determined not to permit delay. In the Alabama
convention, the conservatives brought forward a plan for a
general Southern convention to be held at Nashville in February.
It was rejected by a vote of 54 to 45. An attempt to delay
secession until after the 4th of March was defeated by the same
vote.

The determination of the radicals to precipitate the issue
received interesting criticism from the Governor of Texas, old
Sam Houston. To a commissioner from Alabama who was sent out to
preach the cause in Texas the Governor wrote, in substance, that
since Alabama would not wait to consult the people of Texas he
saw nothing to discuss at that time, and he went on to say:

Recognizing as I do the fact that the sectional tendencies of the
Black Republican party call for determined constitutional
resistance at the hands of the united South, I also feel that the
million and a half of noble-hearted, conservative men who have
stood by the South, even to this hour, deserve some sympathy and
support. Although we have lost the day, we have to recollect that
our conservative Northern friends cast over a quarter of a
million more votes against the Black Republicans than we of the
entire South. I cannot declare myself ready to desert them as
well as our Southern brethren of the border (and such, I believe,
will be the sentiment of Texas) until at least one firm attempt
has been made to preserve our constitutional rights within the
Union.

Nevertheless, Houston was not able to control his State.
Delegates from Texas attended the later sessions of a general
Congress of the seceding States which, on the invitation of
Alabama, met at Montgomery on the 4th of February. A contemporary
document of singular interest today is the series of resolutions
adopted by the Legislature of North Carolina, setting forth that,
as the State was a member of the Federal Union, it could not
accept the invitation of Alabama but should send delegates for
the purpose of persuading the South to effect a readjustment on
the basis of the Crittenden Compromise as modified by the
Legislature of Virginia. The commissioners were sent, were
graciously received, were accorded seats in the Congress, but
they exerted no influence on the course of its action.

The Congress speedily organized a provisional Government for the
Confederate States of America. The Constitution of the United
States, rather hastily reconsidered, became with a few inevitable
alterations the Constitution of the Confederacy.* Davis was
unanimously elected President; Stephens, Vice-President.
Provision was made for raising an army. Commissioners were
dispatched to Washington to negotiate a treaty with the United
States; other commissioners were sent to Virginia to attempt to
withdraw that great commonwealth from the Union.

* To the observer of a later age this document appears a thing of
haste. Like the framers of the Constitution of 1787, who omitted
from their document some principles which they took for granted,
the framers of 1861 left unstated their most distinctive views.
The basal idea upon which the revolution proceeded, the right of
secession, is not to be found in the new Constitution. Though the
preamble declares that the States are acting in their sovereign
and independent character, the new Confederation is declared
"permanent." In the body of the document are provisions similar
to those in the Federal Constitution enabling a majority of
two-thirds of the States to amend at their pleasure, thus
imposing their will upon the minority. With three notable
exceptions the new Constitution, subsequent to the preamble, does
little more than restate the Constitution of 1787 rearranged so
as to include those basal principles of the English law added to
the earlier Constitution by the first eight amendments. The three
exceptions are the prohibitions (1) of the payment of bounties,
(2) of the levying of duties to promote any one form of industry,
and (3) of appropriations for internal improvements. Here was a
monument to the battle over these matters in the Federal
Congress. As to the mechanism of the new Government it was the
same as the old except for a few changes of detail. The
presidential term was lengthened to six years and the President
was forbidden to succeed himself. The President was given the
power to veto items in appropriation bills. The African
slave-trade was prohibited.

The upper South was thus placed in a painful situation. Its
sympathies were with the seceding States. Most of its people felt
also that if coercion was attempted, the issue would become for
Virginia and North Carolina, no less than for South Carolina and
Alabama, simply a matter of self-preservation. As early as
January, in the exciting days when Floyd's resignation was being
interpreted as a call to arms, the Virginia Legislature had
resolved that it would not consent to the coercion of a seceding
State. In May the Speaker of the North Carolina Legislature
assured a commissioner from Georgia that North Carolina would
never consent to the movement of troops "from or across" the
State to attack a seceding State. But neither Virginia nor North
Carolina in this second stage of the movement wanted to secede.
They wanted to preserve the Union, but along with the Union they
wanted the principle of local autonomy. It was a period of tense
anxiety in those States of the upper South. The frame of mind of
the men who loved the Union but who loved equally their own
States and were firm for local autonomy is summed up in a letter
in which Mrs. Robert E. Lee describes the anguish of her husband
as he confronted the possibility of a divided country.

The real tragedy of the time lay in the failure of the advocates
of these two great principles--each so necessary to a far-flung
democratic country in a world of great powers!--the failure to
coordinate them so as to insure freedom at home and strength
abroad. The principle for which Lincoln stood has saved Americans
in the Great War from playing such a trembling part as that of
Holland. The principle which seemed to Lee even more essential,
which did not perish at Appomattox but was transformed and not
destroyed, is what has kept us from becoming a western Prussia.
And yet if only it had been possible to coordinate the two
without the price of war! It was not possible because of the
stored up bitterness of a quarter century of recrimination. But
Virginia made a last desperate attempt to preserve the Union by
calling the Peace Convention. It assembled at Washington the day
the Confederate Congress met at Montgomery. Though twenty-one
States sent delegates, it was no more able to effect a working
scheme of compromise than was the House committee of thirty-three
or the Senate committee of thirteen, both of which had striven,
had failed, and had gone their ways to a place in the great
company of historic futilities.

And so the Peace Convention came and went, and there was no
consolation for the troubled men of the upper South who did not
want to secede but were resolved not to abandon local autonomy.
Virginia was the key to the situation. If Virginia could be
forced into secession, the rest of the upper South would
inevitably follow. Therefore a Virginia hothead, Roger A. Pryor,
being in Charleston in those wavering days, poured out his heart
in fiery words, urging a Charleston crowd to precipitate war, in
the certainty that Virginia would then have to come to their aid.
When at last Sumter was fired upon and Lincoln called for
volunteers, the second stage of the secession movement ended in a
thunderclap. The third period was occupied by the second group of
secessions: Virginia on the 17th of April, North Carolina and
Arkansas during May, Tennessee early in June.

Sumter was the turning-point. The boom of the first cannon
trained on the island fortress deserves all the rhetoric it has
inspired. Who was immediately responsible for that firing which
was destiny? Ultimate responsibility is not upon any person. War
had to be. If Sumter had not been the starting-point, some other
would have been found. Nevertheless the question of immediate
responsibility, of whose word it was that served as the signal to
begin, has produced an historic controversy.

When it was known at Charleston that Lincoln would attempt to
provision the fort, the South Carolina authorities referred the
matter to the Confederate authorities. The Cabinet, in a fateful
session at Montgomery, hesitated--drawn between the wish to keep
their hold upon the moderates of the North, who were trying to
stave off war, and the desire to precipitate Virginia into the
lists. Toombs, Secretary of State in the new Government, wavered;
then seemed to find his resolution and came out strong against a
demand for surrender. "It is suicide, murder, and will lose us
every friend at the North.... It is unnecessary; it puts us
in the wrong; it is fatal," said he. But the Cabinet and the
President decided to take the risk. To General Pierre Beauregard,
recently placed in command of the militia assembled at
Charleston, word was sent to demand the surrender of Fort Sumter.

On Thursday, the 7th of April, besides his instructions from
Montgomery, Beauregard was in receipt of a telegram from the
Confederate commissioners at Washington, repeating newspaper
statements that the Federal relief expedition intended to land a
force "which will overcome all opposition." There seems no doubt
that Beauregard did not believe that the expedition was intended
merely to provision Sumter. Probably every one in Charleston
thought that the Federal authorities were trying to deceive them,
that Lincoln's promise not to do more than provision Sumter was a
mere blind. Fearfulness that delay might render Sumter
impregnable lay back of Beauregard's formal demand, on the 11th
of April, for the surrender of the fort. Anderson refused but
"made some verbal observations" to the aides who brought him the
demand. In effect he said that lack of supplies would compel him
to surrender by the fifteenth. When this information was taken
back to the city, eager crowds were in the streets of Charleston
discussing the report that a bombardment would soon begin. But
the afternoon passed; night fell; and nothing was done. On the
beautiful terrace along the sea known as East Battery, people
congregated, watching the silent fortress whose brick walls rose
sheer from the midst of the harbor. The early hours of the night
went by and as midnight approached and still there was no flash
from either the fortress or the shore batteries which threatened
it, the crowds broke up.

Meanwhile there was anxious consultation at the hotel where
Beauregard had fixed his headquarters. Pilots came in from the
sea to report to the General that a Federal vessel had appeared
off the mouth of the harbor. This news may well explain the hasty
dispatch of a second expedition to Sumter in the middle of the
night. At half after one, Friday morning, four young men, aides
of Beauregard, entered the fort. Anderson repeated his refusal to
surrender at once but admitted that he would have to surrender
within three days. Thereupon the aides held a council of war.
They decided that the reply was unsatisfactory and wrote out a
brief note which they handed to Anderson informing him that the
Confederates would open "fire upon Fort Sumter in one hour from
this time." The note was dated 3:20 A.M. The aides then proceeded
to Fort Johnston on the south side of the harbor and gave the
order to fire.

The council of the aides at Sumter is the dramatic detail that
has caught the imagination of historians and has led them, at
least in some cases, to yield to a literary temptation. It is so
dramatic--that scene of the four young men holding in their
hands, during a moment of absolute destiny, the fate of a people;
four young men, in the irresponsible ardor of youth, refusing to
wait three days and forcing war at the instant! It is so dramatic
that one cannot judge harshly the artistic temper which is unable
to reject it. But is the incident historic? Did the four young
men come to Sumter without definite instructions? Was their
conference really anything more than a careful comparing of notes
to make sure they were doing what they were intended to do? Is
not the real clue to the event a message from Beauregard to the
Secretary of War telling of his interview with the pilots? *

*A chief authority for the dramatic version of the council of the
aides is that fiery Virginian, Roger A. Pryor. He and another
accompanied the official messengers, the signers of the note to
Anderson, James Chestnut and Stephen Lee. Years afterwards Pryor
told the story of the council in a way to establish its dramatic
significance. But would there be anything strange if a veteran
survivor, looking back to his youth, as all of us do through more
or less of mirage yielded to the unconscious artist that is in us
all and dramatized this event unaware?

Dawn was breaking gray, with a faint rain in the air, when the
first boom of the cannon awakened the city. Other detonations
followed in quick succession. Shells rose into the night from
both sides of the harbor and from floating batteries. How lightly
Charleston slept that night may be inferred from the accounts in
the newspapers. "At the report of the first gun," says the
Courier, "the city was nearly emptied of its inhabitants who
crowded the Battery and the wharves to witness the conflict."

The East Battery and the lower harbor of the lovely city of
Charleston have been preserved almost without alteration. What
they are today they were in the breaking dawn on April 12, 1861.
Business has gone up the rivers between which Charleston lies and
has left the point of the city's peninsula, where East Battery
looks outward to the Atlantic, in its perfect charm. There large
houses, pillared, with high piazzas, stand apart one from another
among gardens. With few exceptions they were built before the
middle of the century and all, with one exception, show the
classical taste of those days. The mariner, entering the spacious
inner sea that is Charleston Harbor, sights this row of stately
mansions even before he crosses the bar seven miles distant.
Holding straight onward up into the land he heads first for the
famous little island where, nowadays, in their halo of thrilling
recollection, the walls of Sumter, rising sheer from the bosom of
the water, drowse idle. Close under the lee of Sumter, the
incoming steersman brings his ship about