 and chooses, probably,
the eastward of two huge tentacles of the sea between which lies
the city's long but narrow peninsula. To the steersman it shows a
skyline serrated by steeples, fronted by sea, flanked southward
by sea, backgrounded by an estuary, and looped about by a sickle
of wooded islands.  This same scene, so far as city and nature
go, was beheld by the crowds that swarmed East Battery, a
flagstone marine parade along the seaward side of the boulevard
that faces Sumter; that filled the windows and even the
housetops; that watched the bombardment with the eagerness of an
audience in an amphitheater; that applauded every telling shot
with clapping of hands and waving of shawls and handkerchiefs.
The fort lay distant from them about three miles, but only some
fifteen hundred yards from Fort Johnston on one side and about a
mile from Fort Moultrie on the other. From both of these latter,
the cannon of those days were equal to the task of harassing
Sumter. Early in the morning of the 12th of April, though not
until broad day had come, did Anderson make reply. All that day,
at first under heavily rolling cloud and later through curiously
misty sunshine, the fire and counterfire continued. "The
enthusiasm and fearlessness of the spectators," says the
Charleston Mercury, "knew no bounds." Reckless observers even put
out in small boats and roamed about the harbor almost under the
guns of the fort. Outside the bar, vessels of the relieving
squadron were now visible, and to these Anderson signaled for
aid. They made an attempt to reach the fort, but only part of the
squadron had arrived; and the vessels necessary to raise the
siege were not there. The attempt ended in failure. When night
came, a string of rowboats each carrying a huge torch kept watch
along the bar to guard against surprise from the sea.

On that Friday night the harbor was swept by storm. But in spite
of torrents of rain East Battery and the rooftops were thronged.
"The wind was inshore and the booming was startlingly distinct."
At the height of the bombardment, the sky above Sumter seemed to
be filled with the flashes of bursting shells. But during this
wild night Sumter itself was both dark and silent. Its casements
did not have adequate lamps and the guns could not be used except
by day. When morning broke, clear and bright after the night's
storm, the duel was resumed.

The walls of Sumter were now crumbling. At eight o'clock Saturday
morning the barracks took fire. Soon after it was perceived from
the shore that the flag was down. Beauregard at once sent offers
of assistance. With Sumter in flames above his head, Anderson
replied that he had not surrendered; he declined assistance; and
he hauled up his flag. Later in the day the flagstaff was shot in
two and again the flag fell, and again it was raised. Flames had
been kindled anew by red-hot shot, and now the magazine was in
danger. Quantities of powder were thrown into the sea. Still the
rain of red-hot shot continued. About noon, Saturday, says the
Courier, "flames burst out from every quarter of Sumter and
poured from many of its portholes...the wind was from the
west driving the smoke across the fort into the embrasures where
the gunners were at work." Nevertheless, "as if served with a new
impulse," the guns of Sumter redoubled their fire. But it was not
in human endurance to keep on in the midst of the burning fort.
This splendid last effort was short. At a quarter after one,
Anderson ceased firing and raised a white flag. Negotiations
followed ending in terms of surrender--Anderson to be allowed to
remove his garrison to the fleet lying idle beyond the bar and to
salute the flag of the United States before taking it down. The
bombardment had lasted thirty-two hours without a death on either
side. The evacuation of the fort was to take place next day.

The afternoon of Sunday, the 14th of April, was a gala day in the
harbor of Charleston. The sunlight slanted across the roofs of
the city, sparkled upon the sea. Deep and rich the harbor always
looks in the spring sunshine on bright afternoons. The filmy
atmosphere of these latitudes, at that time of year, makes the
sky above the darkling, afternoon sea a pale but luminous
turquoise. There is a wonderful soft strength in the peaceful
brightness of the sun. In such an atmosphere the harbor was
flecked with brilliantly decked craft of every description, all
in a flutter of flags and carrying a host of passengers in gala
dress. The city swarmed across the water to witness the ceremony
of evacuation. Wherry men did a thriving business carrying
passengers to the fort.

Anderson withdrew from Sumter shortly after two o'clock amid a
salute of fifty guns. The Confederates took possession. At half
after four a new flag was raised above the battered and
fire-swept walls.



Chapter II. The Davis Government

It has never been explained why Jefferson Davis was chosen
President of the Confederacy. He did not seek the office and did
not wish it. He dreamed of high military command. As a study in
the irony of fate, Davis's career is made to the hand of the
dramatist. An instinctive soldier, he was driven by circumstances
three times to renounce the profession of arms for a less
congenial civilian life. His final renunciation, which proved to
be of the nature of tragedy, was his acceptance of the office of
President. Indeed, why the office was given to him seems a
mystery. Rhett was a more logical candidate. And when Rhett,
early in the lobbying at Montgomery, was set aside as too much of
a radical, Toombs seemed for a time the certain choice of the
majority. The change to Davis came suddenly at the last moment.
It was puzzling at the time; it is puzzling still.

Rhett, though doubtless bitterly disappointed, bore himself with
the savoir faire of a great gentleman. At the inauguration, it
was on Rhett's arm that Davis leaned as he entered the hall of
the Confederate Congress. The night before, in a public address,
Yancey had said that the man and the hour were met. The story of
the Confederacy is filled with dramatic moments, but to the
thoughtful observer few are more dramatic than the conjunction of
these three men in the inauguration of the Confederate President.
Beneath a surface of apparent unanimity they carried, like
concealed weapons, points of view that were in deadly antagonism.
This antagonism had not revealed itself hitherto. It was destined
to reveal itself almost immediately. It went so deep and spread
so far that unless we understand it, the Confederate story will
be unintelligible.

A strange fatality destined all three of these great men to
despair. Yancey, who was perhaps most directly answerable of the
three for the existence of the Confederacy, lost influence almost
from the moment when his dream became established. Davis was
partly responsible, for he promptly sent him out of the country
on the bootless English mission. Thereafter, until his death in
1863, Yancey was a waning, overshadowed figure, steadily lapsing
into the background. It may be that those critics are right who
say he was only an agitator. The day of the mere agitator was
gone. Yancey passed rapidly into futile but bitter antagonism to
Davis. In this attitude he was soon to be matched by Rhett.

The discontent of the Rhett faction because their leader was not
given the portfolio of the State Department found immediate
voice. But the conclusion drawn by some that Rhett's subsequent
course sprang from personal vindictiveness is trifling. He was
too large a personality, too well defined an intellect, to be
thus explained. Very probably Davis made his first great blunder
in failing to propitiate the Rhett faction. And yet few things
are more certain than that the two men, the two factions which
they symbolized, could not have formed a permanent alliance. Had
Rhett entered the Cabinet he could not have remained in it
consistently for any considerable time. The measures in which,
presently, the Administration showed its hand were measures in
which Rhett could not acquiesce. From the start he was
predestined to his eventual position--the great, unavailing
genius of the opposition.

As to the comparative ignoring of these leaders of secession by
the Government which secession had created, it is often said that
the explanation is to be found in a generous as well as politic
desire to put in office the moderates and even the conservatives.
Davis, relatively, was a moderate. Stephens was a conservative.
Many of the most pronounced opponents of secession were given
places in the public service. Toombs, who received the portfolio
of State, though a secessionist, was conspicuously a moderate
when compared with Rhett and Yancey. The adroit Benjamin, who
became Attorney-General, had few points in common with the great
extremists of Alabama and South Carolina.

However, the dictum that the personnel of the new Government was
a triumph for conservatism over radicalism signifies little.
There was a division among Southerners which scarcely any of them
had realized except briefly in the premature battle over
secession in 1851. It was the division between those who were
conscious of the region as a whole and those who were not.
Explain it as you will, there was a moment just after the
secession movement succeeded when the South seemed to realize
itself as a whole, when it turned intuitively to those men who,
as time was to demonstrate, shared this realization. For the
moment it turned away from those others, however great their part
in secession, who lacked this sense of unity.

At this point, geography becomes essential. The South fell,
institutionally, into two grand divisions: one, with an old and
firmly established social order, where consciousness of the
locality went back to remote times; another, newly settled, where
conditions were still fluid, where that sense of the sacredness
of local institutions had not yet formed.

A typical community of the first-named class was South Carolina.
Her people had to a remarkable degree been rendered
state-conscious partly by their geographical neighbors, and
partly by their long and illustrious history, which had been
interwoven with great European interests during the colonial era
and with great national interests under the Republic. It is
possible also that the Huguenots, though few in numbers, had
exercised upon the State a subtle and pervasive influence through
their intellectual power and their Latin sense for institutions.

In South Carolina, too, a wealthy leisure class with a passion
for affairs had cultivated enthusiastically that fine art which
is the pride of all aristocratic societies, the service of the
State as a profession high and exclusive, free from vulgar taint.
In South Carolina all things conspired to uphold and strengthen
the sense of the State as an object of veneration, as something
over and above the mere social order, as the sacred embodiment of
the ideals of the community. Thus it is fair to say that what has
animated the heroic little countries of the Old World Switzerland
and Serbia and ever-glorious Belgium--with their passion to
remain themselves, animated South Carolina in 1861. Just as
Serbia was willing to fight to the death rather than merge her
identity in the mosaic of the Austrian Empire, so this little
American community saw nothing of happiness in any future that
did not secure its virtual independence.

Typical of the newer order in the South was the community that
formed the President of the Confederacy. In the history of
Mississippi previous to the war there are six great names--Jacob
Thompson, John A. Quitman, Henry S. Foote, Robert J. Walker,
Sergeant S. Prentiss, and Jefferson Davis. Not one of them was
born in the State. Thompson was born in North Carolina; Quitman
in New York; Foote in Virginia; Walker in Pennsylvania; Prentiss
in Maine; Davis in Kentucky. In 1861 the State was but forty-four
years old, younger than its most illustrious sons--if the paradox
may be permitted. How could they think of it as an entity
existing in itself, antedating not only themselves but their
traditions, circumscribing them with its all-embracing,
indisputable reality? These men spoke the language of state
rights. It is true that in politics, combating the North, they
used the political philosophy taught them by South Carolina. But
it was a mental weapon in political debate; it was not for them
an emotional fact.

And yet these men of the Southwest had an ideal of their own as
vivid and as binding as the state ideal of the men of the eastern
coast. Though half their leaders were born in the North, the
people themselves were overwhelmingly Southern. From all the
older States, all round the huge crescent which swung around from
Kentucky coastwise to Florida, immigration in the twenties and
thirties had poured into Mississippi. Consequently the new
community presented a composite picture of the whole South, and
like all composite pictures it emphasized only the factors common
to all its parts. What all the South had in common, what made a
man a Southerner in the general sense--in distinction from a
Northerner on the one hand, or a Virginian, Carolinian, Georgian,
on the other--could have been observed with clearness in
Mississippi, just before the war, as nowhere else. Therefore, the
fulfillment of the ideal of Southern life in general terms was
the vision of things hoped for by the new men of the Southwest.
The features of that vision were common to them all--country
life, broad acres, generous hospitality, an aristocratic system.
The temperaments of these men were sufficiently buoyant to enable
them to apprehend this ideal even before it had materialized.
Their romantic minds could see the gold at the end of the
rainbow. Theirs was not the pride of administering a
well-ordered, inherited system, but the joy of building a new
system, in their minds wholly elastic, to be sure, but still
inspired by that old system.

What may be called the sense of Southern nationality as opposed
to the sense of state rights, strictly speaking, distinguished
this brilliant young community of the Southwest. In that
community Davis spent the years that appear to have been the most
impressionable of his life. Belonging to a "new" family just
emerging into wealth, he began life as a West Pointer and saw
gallant service as a youth on the frontier; resigned from the
army to pursue a romantic attachment; came home to lead the life
of a wealthy planter and receive the impress of Mississippi; made
his entry into politics, still a soldier at heart, with the
philosophy of state rights on his lips, but in his heart that
sense of the Southern people as a new nation, which needed only
the occasion to make it the relentless enemy of the rights of the
individual Southern States. Add together the instinctive military
point of view and this Southern nationalism that even in 1861 had
scarcely revealed itself; join with these a fearless and haughty
spirit, proud to the verge of arrogance, but perfectly devoted,
perfectly sincere; and you have the main lines of the political
character of Davis when he became President. It may be that as he
went forward in his great undertaking, as antagonisms developed,
as Rhett and others turned against him, Davis hardened. He lost
whatever comprehension he once had of the Rhett type. Seeking to
weld into one irresistible unit all the military power of the
South, he became at last in the eyes of his opponents a monster,
while to him, more and more positively, the others became mere
dreamers.

It took about a year for this irrepressible conflict within the 
Confederacy to reveal itself. During the twelve months following
Davis's election as provisional President, he dominated the
situation, though the Charleston Mercury, the Rhett organ, found
opportunities to be sharply critical of the President. He
assembled armies; he initiated heroic efforts to make up for the
handicap of the South in the manufacture of munitions and
succeeded in starting a number of munition plants; though
powerless to prevent the establishment of the blockade, he was
able during that first year to keep in touch with Europe, to
start out Confederate privateers upon the high seas, and to
import a considerable quantity of arms and supplies. At the
close of the year the Confederate armies were approaching
general efficiency, for all their enormous handicap, almost if
not quite as rapidly as were the Union armies. And the one great 
event of the year on land, the first battle of Manassas, or Bull
Run, was a signal Confederate victory.

To be sure Davis was severely criticized in some quarters for
not adopting an aggressive policy. The Confederate Government,
whether wisely or foolishly, had not taken the people into its
confidence and the lack of munitions was not generally
appreciated. The easy popular cries were all sounded: "We are
standing still!" "The country is being invaded!" "The President
is a do-nothing!" From the coast regions especially, where the
blockade was felt in all its severity, the outcry was loud.

Nevertheless, the South in the main was content with the
Administration during most of the first year. In November, when
the general elections were held, Davis was chosen without
opposition as the first regular Confederate President for six
years, and Stephens became the Vice-President. The election was
followed by an important change in the Southern Cabinet. Benjamin
became Secretary of War, in succession to the first War
Secretary, Leroy P. Walker. Toombs had already left the
Confederate Cabinet. Complaining that Davis degraded him to the
level of a mere clerk, he had withdrawn the previous July. His
successor in the State Department was R. M. T. Hunter of
Virginia, who remained in office until February, 1862, when his
removal to the Confederate Senate opened the way for a further
advancement of Benjamin.

Richmond, which had been designated as the capital soon after the
secession of Virginia, was the scene of the inauguration, on
February 22, 1862. Although the weather proved bleak and rainy,
an immense crowd gathered around the Washington monument, in
Capitol Square, to listen to the inaugural address. By this time
the confidence in the Government, which was felt generally at the
time of the election, had suffered a shock. Foreign affairs were
not progressing satisfactorily. Though England had accorded to
the Confederacy the status of a belligerent, this was poor
consolation for her refusal to make full recognition of the new
Government as an independent power. Dread of internal distress
was increasing. Gold commanded a premium of fifty percent.
Disorder was a feature of the life in the cities. It was known
that several recent military events had been victories for the
Federals. A rumor was abroad that some great disaster had taken
place in Tennessee. The crowd listened anxiously to hear the
rumor denied by the President. But it was not denied. The tense
listeners noted two sentences which formed an admission that the
situation was grave: "A million men, it is estimated, are now
standing in hostile array and waging war along a frontier of
thousands of miles. Battles have been fought, sieges have been
conducted, and although the contest is not ended, and the tide
for the moment is against us, the final result in our favor is
not doubtful."

Behind these carefully guarded words lay serious alarm, not only
with regard to the operations at the front but as to the
composition of the army. It had been raised under various laws
and its portions were subject to conflicting classifications; it
was partly a group of state armies, partly a single Confederate
army. None of its members had enlisted for long terms. Many
enlistments would expire early in 1862. The fears of the
Confederate Administration with regard to this matter, together
with its alarm about the events at the front, were expressed by
Davis in a frank message to the Southern Congress, three days
later. "I have hoped," said he, "for several days to receive
official reports in relation to our discomfiture at Roanoke
Island and the fall of Fort Donelson. They have not yet reached
Me.... The hope is still entertained that our reported losses
at Fort Donelson have been greatly exaggerated...." He went
on to condemn the policy of enlistments for short terms, "against
which," said he, "I have steadily contended"; and he enlarged
upon the danger that even patriotic men, who intended to
reenlist, might go home to put their affairs in order and that
thus, at a critical moment, the army might be seriously reduced.
The accompanying report of the Confederate Secretary of War
showed a total in the army of 340,250 men. This was an inadequate
force with which to meet the great hosts which were being
organized against it in the North. To permit the slightest
reduction of the army at that moment seemed to the Southern
President suicidal.

But Davis waited some time longer before proposing to the
Confederate Congress the adoption of conscription. Meanwhile, the
details of two great reverses, the loss of Roanoke Island and the
loss of Fort Donelson, became generally known. Apprehension
gathered strength. Newspapers began to discuss conscription as
something inevitable. At last, on March 28, 1862, Davis sent a
message to the Confederate Congress advising the conscription of
all white males between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five. For
this suggestion Congress was ripe, and the first Conscription Act
of the Confederacy was signed by the President on the 16th of
April. The age of eligibility was fixed as Davis had advised; the
term of service was to be three years; every one then in service
was to be retained in service during three years from the date of
his original enlistment.

This statute may be thought of as a great victory on the part of
the Administration. It was the climax of a policy of
centralization in the military establishment to which Davis had
committed himself by the veto, in January, of "A bill to
authorize the Secretary of War to receive into the service of the
Confederate States a regiment of volunteers for the protection of
the frontier of Texas." This regiment was to be under the control
of the Governor of the State. In refusing to accept such troops,
Davis laid down the main proposition upon which he stood as
military executive to the end of the war, a proposition which
immediately set debate raging: "Unity and cooperation by the
troops of all the States are indispensable to success, and I must
view with regret this as well as all other indications of a
purpose to divide the power of States by dividing the means to be
employed in efforts to carry on separate operations."

In these military measures of the early months of 1862 Davis's
purpose became clear. He was bent upon instituting a strong
government, able to push the war through, and careless of the
niceties of constitutional law or of the exact prerogatives of
the States. His position was expressed in the course of the year
by a Virginia newspaper: "It will be time enough to distract the
councils of the State about imaginary violations of
constitutional law by the supreme government when our
independence is achieved, established, and acknowledged. It will
not be until then that the sovereignty of the States will be a
reality." But there were many Southerners who could not accept
this point of view. The Mercury was sharply critical of the veto
of the Texas Regiment Bill. In the interval between the Texas
veto and the passing of the Conscription Act, the state
convention of North Carolina demanded the return of North
Carolina volunteers for the defense of their own State. No sooner
was the Conscription Act passed than its constitutionality was
attacked. As the Confederacy had no Supreme Court, the question
came up before state courts. One after another, several state
supreme courts pronounced the act constitutional and in most of
the States the constitutional issue was gradually allowed to
lapse.

Nevertheless, Davis had opened Pandora's box. The clash between
State and Confederate authority had begun. An opposition party
began to form. In this first stage of its definite existence, the
opposition made an interesting attempt to control the Cabinet.
Secretary Benjamin, though greatly trusted by the President,
seems never to have been a popular minister. Congress attempted
to load upon Benjamin the blame for Roanoke Island and Fort
Donelson. In the House a motion was introduced to the effect that
Benjamin had "not the confidence of the people of the Confederate
States nor of the army...and that we most respectfully
request his retirement" from the office of Secretary of War.
Friends of the Administration tabled the motion. Davis extricated
his friend by taking advantage of Hunter's retirement and
promoting Benjamin to the State Department. A month later a
congressional committee appointed to investigate the affair of
Roanoke Island exonerated the officer in command and laid the
blame on his superiors, including "the late Secretary of War."

With Benjamin safe in the Department of State, with the majority
in the Confederate Congress still fairly manageable, with the
Conscription Act in force, Davis seemed to be strong enough in
the spring of 1862 to ignore the gathering opposition. And yet
there was another measure, second only in the President's eyes to
the Conscription Act, that was to breed trouble. This was the
first of the series of acts empowering him to suspend the
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. Under this act he was
permitted to set up martial law in any district threatened with
invasion. The cause of this drastic measure was the confusion and
the general demoralization that existed wherever the close
approach of the enemy created a situation too complex for the
ordinary civil authorities. Davis made use of the power thus
given to him and proclaimed martial law in Richmond, in Norfolk,
in parts of South Carolina, and elsewhere. It was on Richmond
that the hand of the Administration fell heaviest. The capital
was the center of a great camp; its sudden and vast increase in
population bad been the signal for all the criminal class near
and far to hurry thither in the hope of a new field of
spoliation; to deal with this immense human congestion, the local
police were powerless; every variety of abominable contrivance to
entrap and debauch men for a price was in brazen operation. The
first care of the Government under the new law was the cleansing
of the capital. General John H. Winder, appointed military
governor, did the job with thoroughness. He closed the barrooms,
disarmed the populace, and for the time at least swept the city
clean of criminals. The Administration also made certain
political arrests, and even imprisoned some extreme opponents of
the Government for "offenses not enumerated and not cognizable
under the regular process of law." Such arrests gave the enemies
of the Administration another handle against it. As we shall see
later, the use that Davis made of martial law was distorted by a
thousand fault-finders and was made the basis of the charge that
the President was aiming at absolute power.

At the moment, however, Davis was master of the situation. The
six months following April 1, 1862, were doubtless, from his own
point of view, the most satisfactory part of his career as
Confederate President. These months were indeed filled with
peril. There was a time when McClellan's advance up the Peninsula
appeared so threatening that the archives of the Government were
packed on railway cars prepared for immediate removal should
evacuation be necessary. There were the other great disasters
during that year, including the loss of New Orleans. The
President himself experienced a profound personal sorrow in the
death of his friend, Albert Sidney Johnston, in the bloody fight
at Shiloh. It was in the midst of this time that tried men's
souls that the Richmond Examiner achieved an unenvied
immortality for one of its articles on the Administration. At a
moment when nothing should have been said to discredit in any way
the struggling Government, it described Davis as weak with fear
telling his beads in a corner of St. Paul's Church. This paper,
along with the Charleston Mercury, led the Opposition. Throughout
Confederate history these two, which were very ably edited, did
the thinking for the enemies of Davis. We shall meet them time
and again.

A true picture of Davis would have shown the President resolute
and resourceful, at perhaps the height of his powers. He
recruited and supplied the armies; he fortified Richmond; he
sustained the great captain whom he had placed in command while
McClellan was at the gates. When the tide had turned and the Army
of the Potomac sullenly withdrew, baffled, there occurred the one
brief space in Confederate history that was pure sunshine. In
this period took place the splendid victory of Second Manassas.
The strong military policy of the Administration had given the
Confederacy powerful armies. Lee had inspired them with victory.
This period of buoyant hope culminated in the great offensive
design which followed Second Manassas. It was known that the
Northern people, or a large part of them, had suffered a
reaction; the tide was setting strong against the Lincoln
Government; in the autumn, the Northern elections would be held.
To influence those elections and at the same time to drive the
Northern armies back into their own section; to draw Maryland and
Kentucky into the Confederate States; to fall upon the invaders
in the Southwest and recover the lower Mississippi--to accomplish
all these results was the confident expectation of the President
and his advisers as they planned their great triple offensive in
August, 1862. Lee was to invade Maryland; Bragg was to invade
Kentucky; Van Dorn was to break the hold of the Federals in the
Southwest. If there is one moment that is to be considered the
climax of Davis's career, the high-water mark of Confederate
hope, it was the moment of joyous expectation when the triple
offensive was launched, when Lee's army, on a brilliant autumn
day, crossed the Potomac, singing "Maryland, my Maryland".



Chapter III. The Fall Of King Cotton

While the Confederate Executive was building up its military
establishment, the Treasury was struggling with the problem of
paying for it. The problem was destined to become insoluble. From
the vantage-point of a later time we can now see that nothing
could have provided a solution short of appropriation and
mobilization of the whole industrial power of the country along
with the whole military power--a conscription of wealth of every
kind together with conscription of men. But in 1862 such an idea
was too advanced for any group of Americans. Nor, in that year,
was there as yet any certain evidence that the Treasury was
facing an impossible situation. Its endeavors were taken
lightly--at first, almost gaily-because of the profound illusion
which permeated Southern thought that Cotton was King. Obviously,
if the Southern ports could be kept open and cotton could
continue to go to market, the Confederate financial problem was
not serious. When Davis, soon after his first inauguration, sent
Yancey, Rost, and Mann as commissioners to Europe to press the
claims of the Confederacy for recognition, very few Southerners
had any doubt that the blockade, would be short-lived. "Cotton is
King" was the answer that silenced all questions. Without
American cotton the English mills would have to shut down; the
operatives would starve; famine and discontent would between them
force the British ministry to intervene in American affairs.
There were, indeed, a few far-sighted men who perceived that this
confidence was ill-based and that cotton, though it was a power
in the financial world, was not the commercial king. The majority
of the population, however, had to learn this truth from keen
experience.

Several events of 1861 for a time seemed to confirm this
illusion. The Queen's proclamation in the spring, giving the
Confederacy the status of a belligerent, and, in the autumn, the
demand by the British Government for the surrender of the
commissioners, Mason and Slidell, who had been taken from a
British packet by a Union cruiser--both these events seemed to
indicate active British sympathy. In England, to be sure, Yancey
became disillusioned. He saw that the international situation was
not so simple as it seemed; that while the South had powerful
friends abroad, it also had powerful foes; that the British
anti-slavery party was a more formidable enemy than he had
expected it to be; and that intervention was not a foregone
conclusion. The task of an unrecognized ambassador being too
annoying for him, Yancey was relieved at his own request and
Mason was sent out to take his place. A singular little incident
like a dismal prophecy occurred as Yancey was on his way home. He
passed through Havana early in 1862, when the news of the
surrender of Fort Donelson had begun to stagger the hopes and
impair the prestige of the Confederates. By the advice of the
Confederate agent in Cuba, Yancey did not call on the Spanish
Governor but sent him word that "delicacy alone prompted his
departure without the gratification of a personal interview." The
Governor expressed himself as "exceedingly grateful for the noble
sentiment which prevented" Yancey from causing international
complications at Havana.

The history of the first year of Confederate foreign affairs is
interwoven with the history of Confederate finance. During that
year the South became a great buyer in Europe. Arms, powder,
cloth, machinery, medicines, ships, a thousand things, had all to
be bought abroad. To establish the foreign credit of the new
Government was the arduous task of the Confederate Secretary of
the Treasury, Christopher G. Memminger. The first great campaign
of the war was not fought by armies. It was a commercial campaign
fought by agents of the Federal and Confederate governments and
having for its aim the cornering of the munitions market in
Europe. In this campaign the Federal agents had decisive
advantages: their credit was never questioned, and their enormous
purchases were never doubtful ventures for the European sellers.
In some cases their superior credit enabled them to overbid the
Confederate agents and to appropriate large contracts which the
Confederates had negotiated but which they could not hold because
of the precariousness of their credit. And yet, all things
considered, the Confederate agents made a good showing. In the
report of the Secretary of War in February, 1862, the number of
rifles contracted for abroad was put at 91,000, of which 15,000
had been delivered. The chief reliance of the Confederate
Treasury for its purchases abroad was at first the specie in the
Southern branch of the United States Mint and in Southern banks.
The former the Confederacy seized and converted to its own use.
Of the latter it lured into its own hands a very large proportion
by what is commonly called "the fifteen million loan"--an issue
of
eight percent bonds authorized in February, 1861. Most of this
specie seems to have been taken out of the country by the
purchase of European commodities. A little, to be sure, remained,
for there was some gold still at home when the Confederacy fell.
But the sum was small.

In addition to this loan Memminger also persuaded Congress on
August 19, 1861, to lay a direct tax--the "war tax," as it was
called--of one-half of one per cent on all property except
Confederate bonds and money. As required by the Constitution this
tax was apportioned among the States, but if it assumed its
assessment before April 1, 1862, each State was to have a
reduction of ten per cent. As there was a general aversion to the
idea of Confederate taxation and a general faith in loans, what
the States did, as a rule, was to assume their assessment, agree
to pay it into the Treasury, and then issue bonds to raise the
necessary funds, thus converting the war tax into a loan.

The Confederate, like the Union, Treasury did not have the
courage to force the issue upon taxation and leaned throughout
the war largely upon loans. It also had recourse to the perilous
device of paper money, the gold value of which was not
guaranteed. Beginning in March, 1861, it issued under successive
laws great quantities of paper notes, some of them interest
bearing, some not. It used these notes in payment of its domestic
obligations. The purchasing value of the notes soon started on a
disastrous downward course, and in 1864 the gold dollar was worth
thirty paper dollars. The Confederate Government thus became
involved in a problem of self-preservation that was but half
solved by the system of tithes and impressment which we shall
encounter later. The depreciation of these notes left
governmental clerks without adequate salaries and soldiers
without the means of providing for their families. During most of
the war, women and other noncombatants had to support the
families or else rely upon local charity organized by state or
county boards.

Long before all the evils of paper money were experienced, the
North, with great swiftness, concentrated its naval forces so as
to dominate the Southern ports which had trade relations with
Europe. The shipping ports were at once congested with cotton to
the great embarrassment of merchants and planters. Partly to
relieve them, the Confederate Congress instituted in May, 1861,
what is known today as "the hundred million loan." It was the
first of a series of "produce loans." The Treasury was authorized
to issue eight percent bonds, to fall due in twenty years, and
to sell them for specie or to exchange them for produce or
manufactured articles. In the course of the remaining months of
1861 there were exchanged for these bonds great quantities of
produce including some 400,000 bales of cotton.

In spite of the distress of the planters, however, the illusion
of King Cotton's power does not seem to have been seriously
impaired during 1861. In fact, strange as it now seems, the frame
of mind of the leaders appears to have been proof, that year,
against alarm over the blockade. For two reasons, the Confederacy
regarded the blockade at first as a blessing in disguise. It was
counted on to act as a protective tariff in stimulating
manufactures; and at the same time the South expected
interruption of the flow of cotton towards Europe to make England
feel her dependence upon the Confederacy. In this way there would
be exerted an economic coercion which would compel intervention.
Such reasoning lay behind a law passed in May forbidding the
export of cotton except through the seaports of the Confederacy.
Similar laws were enacted by the States. During the summer, many
cotton factors joined in advising the planters to hold their
cotton until the blockade broke down. In the autumn, the Governor
of Louisiana forbade the export of cotton from New Orleans. So
unshakeable was the illusion in 1861, that King Cotton had
England in his grip! The illusion died hard. Throughout 1862, and
even in 1863, the newspapers published appeals to the planters to
give up growing cotton for a time, and even to destroy what they
had, so as to coerce the obdurate Englishmen.

Meanwhile, Mason had been accorded by the British upper classes
that generous welcome which they have always extended to the
representative, of a people fighting gallantly against odds.
During the hopeful days of 1862--that Golden Age of
Confederacy--Mason, though not recognized by the English
Government, was shown every kindness by leading members of the
aristocracy, who visited him in London and received him at their
houses in the country. It was during this period of buoyant hope
that the Alabama was allowed to go to sea from Liverpool in July,
1862. At the same time Mason heard his hosts express undisguised
admiration for the valor of the soldiers serving under Jackson
and Lee. Whether he formed any true impression of the other side
of British idealism, its resolute opposition to slavery, may be
questioned. There seems little doubt that he did not perceive the
turning of the tide of English public opinion, in the autumn of
1862, following the Emancipation Proclamation and the great
reverses of September and October--Antietam-Sharpsburg,
Perryville, Corinth--the backflow of all three of the Confederate
offensives.

The cotton famine in England, where perhaps a million people were
in actual want through the shutting down of cotton mills, seemed
to Mason to be "looming up in fearful proportions." "The public
mind," he wrote home in November, 1862, "is very much disturbed
by the prospect for the winter; and I am not without hope that it
will produce its effects on the councils of the government." Yet
it was the uprising of the British working people in favor of the
North that contributed to defeat the one important attempt to
intervene in American affairs. Napoleon III had made an offer of
mediation which was rejected by the Washington Government early
the next year. England and Russia had both declined to
participate in Napoleon's scheme, and their refusal marks the
beginning of the end of the reign of King Cotton.

At Paris, Slidell was even more hopeful than Mason. He had won
over Emile Erlanger, that great banker who was deep in the
confidence of Napoleon. So cordial became the relations between
the two that it involved their families and led at last to the
marriage of Erlanger's son with Slidell's daughter. Whether owing
to Slidell's eloquence, or from secret knowledge of the Emperor's
designs, or from his own audacity, Erlanger toward the close of
1862 made a proposal that is one of the most daring schemes of
financial plunging yet recorded. If the Confederate Government
would issue to him bonds secured by cotton, Erlanger would
underwrite the bonds, put the proceeds of their sale to the
credit of the Confederate agents, and wait for the cotton until
it could run the blockade or until peace should be declared. The
Confederate Government after some hesitation accepted his plan
and issued fifteen millions of "Erlanger bonds," bearing seven
percent, and put them on sale at Paris, London. Amsterdam, and
Frankfort.

As a purchaser of these bonds was to be given cotton eventually
at a valuation of sixpence a pound, and as cotton was then
selling in England for nearly two shillings; the bold gamble
caught the fancy of speculators. There was a rush to take up the
bonds and to pay the first installment. But before the second
installment became due a mysterious change in the market took
place and the price of the bonds fell. Holders became alarmed and
some even proposed to forfeit their bonds rather than pay on May
1, 1863, the next installment of fifteen percent of the purchase
money. Thereupon Mason undertook to "bull" the market. Agents of
the United States Government were supposed to be at the bottom of
the drop in the bonds. To defeat their schemes the Confederate
agents bought back large amounts in bonds intending to resell.
The result was the expenditure of some six million dollars with
practically no effect on the market. These "Erlanger bonds" sold
slowly through 1863 and even in 1864, and netted a considerable
amount to the foreign agents of the Confederacy.

The comparative failure of the Erlanger loan marks the downfall
of King Cotton. He was an exploded superstition. He was unable,
despite the cotton famine, to coerce the English workingmen into
siding with a country which they regarded, because of its support
of slavery, as inimical to their interests. At home, the
Government confessed the powerlessness of King Cotton by a change
of its attitude toward export. During the latter part of the war,
the Government secured the meager funds at its disposal abroad by
rushing cotton in swift ships through the blockade. So important
did this traffic become that the Confederacy passed stringent
laws to keep the control in its own hands. One more cause of
friction between the Confederate and the State authorities was
thus developed: the Confederate navigation laws prevented the
States from running the blockade on their own account.

The effects of the blockade were felt at the ends of the earth.
India became an exporter of cotton. Egypt also entered the
competition. That singular dreamer, Ismail Pasha, whose reign
made Egypt briefly an exotic nation, neither eastern nor western,
found one of his opportunities in the American War and the
failure of the cotton supply.



Chapter IV. The Reaction Against Richmond

A popular revulsion of feeling preceded and followed the great
period of Confederate history--these six months of Titanic effort
which embraced between March and September, 1862, splendid
success along with catastrophes. But there was a marked
difference between the two tides of popular emotion. The wave of
alarm which swept over the South after the surrender of Fort
Donelson was quickly translated into such a high passion for
battle that the march of events until the day of Antietam
resounded like an epic. The failure of the triple offensive which
closed this period was followed in very many minds by the
appearance of a new temper, often as valiant as the old but far
more grim and deeply seamed with distrust. And how is this
distrust, of which the Confederate Administration was the object,
to be accounted for?

Various answers to this question were made at the time. The laws
of the spring of 1862 were attacked as unconstitutional. Davis
was held responsible for them and also for the slow equipment of
the army. Because the Confederate Congress conducted much of its
business in secret session, the President was charged with a love
of mystery and an unwillingness to take the people into his
confidence. Arrests under the law suspending the writ of habeas
corpus were made the texts for harangues on liberty. The right of
freedom of speech was dragged in when General Van Dorn, in the
Southwest, threatened with suppression any newspaper that
published anything which might impair confidence in a commanding
officer. How could he have dared to do this, was the cry, unless
the President was behind him? And when General Bragg assumed a
similar attitude toward the press, the same cry was raised.
Throughout the summer of victories, even while the thrilling
stories of Seven Pines, the Peninsula, Second Manassas, were
sounding like trumpets, these mutterings of discontent formed an
ominous accompaniment.

Yancey, speaking of the disturbed temper of the time, attributed
it to the general lack of information on the part of Southern
people as to what the Confederate Government was doing. His
proposed remedy was an end of the censorship which that
Government was attempting to maintain, the abandonment of the
secret sessions of its Congress, and the taking of the people
into its full confidence. Now a Senator from Alabama, he
attempted, at the opening of the congressional session in the
autumn of 1862, to abolish secret sessions, but in his efforts he
was not successful.

There seems little doubt that the Confederate Government had
blundered in being too secretive. Even from Congress, much
information was withheld. A curious incident has preserved what
appeared to the military mind the justification of this
reticence. The Secretary of War refused to comply with a request
for information, holding that be could not do so "without
disclosing the strength of our armies to many persons of
subordinate position whose secrecy cannot be relied upon." "I beg
leave to remind you," said he, "of a report made in response to a
similar one from the Federal Congress, communicated to them in
secret session, and now a part of our archives."

How much the country was in the dark with regard to some vital
matters is revealed by an attack on the Confederate
Administration which was made by the Charleston Mercury, in
February. The Southern Government was accused of unpardonable
slowness in sending agents to Europe to purchase munitions. In
point of fact, the Confederate Government had been more prompt
than the Union Government in rushing agents abroad. But the
country was not permitted to know this. Though the Courier was a
government organ in Charleston, it did not meet the charges of
the Mercury by disclosing the facts about the arduous attempts of
the Confederate Government to secure arms in Europe. The reply of
the Courier to the Mercury, though spirited, was all in general
terms. "To shake confidence in Jefferson Davis," said the
Courier, "is...to bring 'hideous ruin and combustion' down
upon our dearest hopes and interests." It made "Mr. Davis and his
defensive policy" objects of all admiration; called Davis "our
Moses." It was deeply indignant because it had been "reliably
informed that men of high official position among us" were
"calling for a General Convention of the Confederate States to
depose him and set up a military Dictator in his place." The
Mercury retorted that, as to the plot against "our Moses," there
was no evidence of its existence except the Courier's assertion.
Nevertheless, it considered Davis "an incubus to the cause." The
controversy between the Mercury and the Courier at Charleston was
paralleled at Richmond by the constant bickering between the
government organ, the Enquirer, and the Examiner, which shares
with the Mercury the first place among the newspapers hostile to
Davis.*

* The Confederate Government did not misapprehend the attitude of
the intellectual opposition. Its foreign organ, The Index,
published in London, characterized the leading Southern papers
for the enlightenment of the British public. While the Enquirer
and the Courier were singled out as the great champions of the
Confederate Government, the Examiner and the Mercury were
portrayed as its arch enemies. The Examiner was called the
"Ishmael of the Southern press." The Mercury was described as
"almost rabid on the subject of state rights."

Associated with the Examiner was a vigorous writer having
considerable power of the old-fashioned, furious sort, ever ready
to foam at the mouth. If he had had more restraint and less
credulity, Edward A. Pollard might have become a master of the
art of vituperation. Lacking these qualities, he never rose far
above mediocrity. But his fury was so determined and his
prejudice so invincible that his writings have something of the
power of conviction which fanaticism wields. In midsummer, 1862,
Pollard published a book entitled The First Year of the War,
which was commended by his allies in Charleston as showing no
"tendency toward unfairness of statement" and as expressing views
"mainly in accordance with popular opinion."

This book, while affecting to be an historical review, was
skillfully designed to discredit the Confederate Administration.
Almost every disaster, every fault of its management was
traceable more or less directly to Davis. Kentucky had been
occupied by the Federal army because of the "dull expectation" in
which the Confederate Government had stood aside waiting for
things somehow to right themselves. The Southern Congress had
been criminally slow in coming to conscription, contenting itself
with an army of 400,000 men that existed "on paper." "The most
distressing abuses were visible in the ill-regulated hygiene of
our camps." According to this book, the Confederate
Administration was solely to blame for the loss of Roanoke
Island. In calling that disaster "deeply humiliating," as he did
in a message to Congress, Davis was trying to shield his favorite
Benjamin at the cost of gallant soldiers who had been sacrificed
through his incapacity. Davis's promotion of Benjamin to the
State Department was an act of "ungracious and reckless defiance
of popular sentiment." The President was "not the man to consult
the sentiment and wisdom of the people; he desired to signalize
the infallibility of his own intellect in every measure of the
revolution and to identify, from motives of vanity, his own
personal genius with every event and detail of the remarkable
period of history in which he had been called upon to act. This
imperious conceit seemed to swallow up every other idea in his
mind." The generals "fretted under this pragmatism" of one whose
"vanity" directed the war "from his 