cushioned seat in Richmond"
by means of the one formula, "the defensive policy."

One of Pollard's chief accusations against the Confederate
Government was its failure to enforce the conscription law. His
paper, the Examiner, as well as the Mercury, supported Davis in
the policy of conscription, but both did their best, first, to
rob him of the credit for it and, secondly, to make his conduct
of the policy appear inefficient. Pollard claimed for the
Examiner the credit of having originated the policy of
conscription; the Mercury claimed it for Rhett.

In other words, an aggressive war party led by the Examiner and
the Mercury had been formed in those early days when the
Confederate Government appeared to be standing wholly on the
defensive, and when it had failed to confide to the people the
extenuating circumstance that lack of arms compelled it to stand
still whether it would or no. And yet, after this Government had
changed its policy and had taken up in the summer of 1862 an
offensive policy, this party--or faction, or what you
will--continued its career of opposition. That the secretive
habit of the Confederate Government helped cement the opposition
cannot be doubted. It is also likely that this opposition gave a
vent to certain jealous spirits who had missed the first place in
leadership.

Furthermore, the issue of state sovereignty had been raised. In
Georgia a movement had begun which was distinctly different from
the Virginia-Carolina movement of opposition, a movement for
which Rhett and Pollard had scarcely more than disdainful
tolerance, and not always that. This parallel opposition found
vent, as did the other, in a political pamphlet. On the subject
of conscription Davis and the Governor of Georgia--that same
Joseph E. Brown who had seized Fort Pulaski in the previous
year--exchanged a rancorous correspondence. Their letters were
published in a pamphlet of which Pollard said scornfully that it
was hawked about in every city of the South. Brown, taking alarm
at the power given the Confederate Government by the Conscription
Act, eventually defined his position, and that of a large
following, in the extreme words: "No act of the Government of the
United States prior to the secession of Georgia struck a blow at
constitutional liberty so fell as has been stricken by the
conscript acts."

There were other elements of discontent which were taking form as
early as the autumn of 1862 but which were not yet clearly
defined. But the two obvious sources of internal criticism just
described were enough to disquiet the most resolute
administration. When the triple offensive broke down, when the
ebb-tide began, there was already everything that was needed to
precipitate a political crisis. And now the question arises
whether the Confederate Administration had itself to blame. Had
Davis proved inadequate in his great undertaking?

The one undeniable mistake of the Government previous to the
autumn of 1862 was its excessive secrecy. As to the other
mistakes attributed to it at the time, there is good reason to
call them misfortunes. Today we can see that the financial
situation, the cotton situation, the relations with Europe, the
problem of equipping the armies, were all to a considerable
degree beyond the control of the Confederate Government. If there
is anything to be added to its mistaken secrecy as a definite
cause of irritation, it must be found in the general tone given
to its actions by its chief directors. And here there is
something to be said.

With all his high qualities of integrity, courage, faithfulness,
and zeal, Davis lacked that insight into human life which marks
the genius of the supreme executive. He was not an artist in the
use of men. He had not that artistic sense of his medium which
distinguishes the statesman from the bureaucrat. In fact, he had
a dangerous bent toward bureaucracy. As Reuben Davis said of him,
"Gifted with some of the highest attributes of a statesman, he
lacked the pliancy which enables a man to adapt his measures to
the crisis." Furthermore, he lacked humor; there was no
safety-valve to his intense nature; and he was a man of delicate
health. Mrs. Davis, describing the effects which nervous
dyspepsia and neuralgia had upon him, says he would come home
from his office "fasting, a mere mass of throbbing nerves, and
perfectly exhausted." And it cannot be denied that his mind was
dogmatic. Here are dangerous lines for the character of a leader
of revolution--the bureaucratic tendency, something of rigidity,
lack of humor, physical wretchedness, dogmatism. Taken together,
they go far toward explaining his failure in judging men, his
irritable confidence in himself.

It is no slight detail of a man's career to be placed side by
side with a genius of the first rank without knowing it. But
Davis does not seem ever to have appreciated that the man
commanding in the Seven Days' Battles was one of the world's
supreme characters. The relation between Davis and Lee was always
cordial, and it brought out Davis's character in its best light.
Nevertheless, so rooted was Davis's faith in his own abilities
that he was capable of saying, at a moment of acutest anxiety,
"If I could take one wing and Lee the other, I think we could
between us wrest a victory from those people." And yet, his
military experience embraced only the minor actions of a young
officer on the Indian frontier and the gallant conduct of a
subordinate in the Mexican War. He had never executed a great
military design. His desire for the military life was, after all,
his only ground for ranking himself with the victor of Second
Manassas. Davis was also unfortunate in lacking the power to
overcome men and sweep them along with him--the power Lee showed
so conspicuously. Nor was Davis averse to sharp reproof of the
highest officials when he thought them in the wrong. He once
wrote to Joseph E. Johnston that a letter of his contained
"arguments and statements utterly unfounded" and "insinuations as
unfounded as they were unbecoming."

Davis was not always wise in his choice of men. His confidence in
Bragg, who was long his chief military adviser, is not sustained
by the military critics of a later age. His Cabinet, though not
the contemptible body caricatured by the malice of Pollard, was
not equal to the occasion. Of the three men who held the office
of Secretary of State, Toombs and Hunter had little if any
qualification for such a post, while the third, Benjamin, is the
sphinx of Confederate history.

In a way, Judah P. Benjamin is one of the most interesting men in
American politics. By descent a Jew, born in the West Indies, he
spent his boyhood mainly at Charleston and his college days at
Yale. He went to New Orleans to begin his illustrious career as a
lawyer, and from Louisiana entered politics. The facile keenness
of his intellect is beyond dispute. He had the Jewish clarity of
thought, the wonderful Jewish detachment in matters of pure mind.
But he was also an American of the middle of the century. His
quick and responsive nature--a nature that enemies might call
simulative--caught and reflected the characteristics of that
singular and highly rhetorical age. He lives in tradition as the
man of the constant smile, and yet there is no one in history
whose state papers contain passages of fiercer violence in days
of tension. How much of his violence was genuine, how much was a
manner of speaking, his biographers have not had the courage to
determine. Like so many American biographers they have avoided
the awkward questions and have glanced over, as lightly as
possible, the persistent attempts of Congress to drive him from
office.

Nothing could shake the resolution of Davis to retain Benjamin in
the Cabinet. Among Davis's loftiest qualities was his sense of
personal loyalty. Once he had given his confidence, no amount of
opposition could shake his will but served rather to harden him.
When Benjamin as Secretary of War passed under a cloud, Davis led
him forth resplendent as Secretary of State. Whether he was wise
in doing so, whether the opposition was not justified in its
distrust of Benjamin, is still an open question. What is certain
is that both these able men, even before the crisis that arose in
the autumn of 1862, had rendered themselves and their Government
widely unpopular. It must never be forgotten that Davis entered
office without the backing of any definite faction. He was a
"dark horse," a compromise candidate. To build up a stanch
following, to create enthusiasm for his Administration, was a
prime necessity of his first year as President. Yet he seems not
to have realized this necessity. Boldly, firmly, dogmatically, he
gave his whole thought and his entire energy to organizing the
Government in such a way that it could do its work efficiently.
And therein may have been the proverbial rift within the lute. To
Davis statecraft was too much a thing of methods and measures,
too little a thing of men and passions.

During the autumn of 1862 and the following winter the disputes
over the conduct of the war began to subside and two other themes
became prominent: the sovereignty of the States, which appeared
to be menaced by the Government, and the personality of Davis,
whom malcontents regarded as a possible despot. Contrary to
tradition, the first note of alarm over state rights was not
struck by its great apostle Rhett, although the note was sounded
in South Carolina in the early autumn. There existed in this
State at that time an extra assembly called the "Convention,"
which had been organized in 1860 for the general purpose of
seeing the State through the "revolution." In the Convention, in
September, 1862, the question of a contest with the Confederate
Government on the subject of a state army was definitely raised.
It was proposed to organize a state army and to instruct the
Legislature to "take effectual measures to prevent the agents of
the Confederate Government from raising troops in South Carolina
except by voluntary enlistment or by applying to the Executive of
the State to call out the militia as by law organized, or some
part of it to be mustered into the Confederate service." This
proposal brought about a sharp debate upon the Confederate
Government and its military policy. Rhett made a remarkable
address, which should of itself quiet forever the old tale that
he was animated in his opposition solely by the pique of a
disappointed candidate for the presidency. Though as sharp as
ever against the Government and though agreeing wholly with the
spirit of the state army plan, he took the ground that
circumstances at the moment rendered the organization of such an
army inopportune. A year earlier he would have strongly supported
the plan. In fact, in opposition to Davis he had at that time, he
said, urged an obligatory army which the States should be
required to raise. The Confederate Administration, however, had
defeated his scheme. Since then the situation had changed and had
become so serious that now there was no choice but to submit to
military necessity. He regarded the general conscription law as
"absolutely necessary to save" the Confederacy "from utter
devastation if not final subjugation. Right or wrong, the policy
of the Administration had left us no other alternative...."

The dominant attitude in South Carolina in the autumn of 1862 is
in strong contrast, because of its firm grasp upon fact, with the
attitude of the Brown faction in Georgia. An extended history of
the Confederate movement--one of those vast histories that
delight the recluse and scare away the man of the world--would
labor to build up images of what might be called the
personalities of the four States that continued from the
beginning to the end parts of the effective Confederate
system--Virginia, the two Carolinas, and Georgia. We are prone to
forget that the Confederacy was practically divided into separate
units as early as the capture of New Orleans by Farragut, but a
great history of the time would have a special and thrilling
story of the conduct of the detached western unit, the isolated
world of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas--the "Department of the
Trans-Mississippi"--cut off from the main body of the Confederacy
and hemmed in between the Federal army and the deep sea. Another
group of States--Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama--became so soon,
and remained so long, a debatable land, on which the two armies
fought, that they also had scant opportunity for genuine
political life. Florida, small and exposed, was absorbed in its
gallant achievement of furnishing to the armies a number of
soldiers larger than its voting population.

Thus, after the loss of New Orleans, one thing with another
operated to confine the area of full political life to Virginia
and her three neighbors to the South. And yet even among these
States there was no political solidarity or unanimity of opinion,
for the differences in their past experience, social structure,
and economic conditions made for distinct points of view. In
South Carolina, particularly, the prevailing view was that of
experienced, disillusioned men who realized from the start that
secession had burnt their bridges, and that now they must win the
fight or change the whole current of their lives. In the midst of
the extraordinary conditions of war, they never talked as if
their problems were the problems of peace. Brown, on the other
hand, had but one way of reasoning--if we are to call it
reasoning--and, with Hannibal at the gates, talked as if the
control of the situation were still in his own hands.

While South Carolina, so grimly conscious of the reality of war
and the danger of internal discord, held off from the issue of
state sovereignty, the Brown faction in Georgia blithely pressed
it home. A bill for extending the conscription age which was
heartily advocated by the Mercury was as heartily condemned by
Brown. To the President he wrote announcing his continued
opposition to a law which he declared "encroaches upon the
reserved rights of the State and strikes down her sovereignty at
a single blow." Though the Supreme Court of Georgia pronounced
the conscription acts constitutional, the Governor and his
faction did not cease to condemn them. Linton Stephens, as well
as his famous kinsman, took up the cudgels. In a speech before
the Georgia Legislature, in November, Linton Stephens borrowed
almost exactly the Governor's phraseology in denying the
necessity for conscription, and this continued to be the note of
their faction throughout the war. "Conscription checks
enthusiasm," was ever their cry; "we are invincible under a
system of volunteering, we are lost with conscription."

Meanwhile the military authorities looked facts in the face and
had a different tale to tell. They complained that in various
parts of the country, especially in the mountain districts, they
were unable to obtain men. Lee reported that his army melted away
before his eye and asked for an increase of authority to compel
stragglers to return. At the same time Brown was quarreling with
the Administration as to who should name the officers of the
Georgia troops. Zebulon B. Vance, the newly elected Governor of
North Carolina and an anti-Davis man, said to the Legislature:
"It is mortifying to find entire brigades of North Carolina
soldiers commanded by strangers, and in many cases our own brave
and war-worn colonels are made to give place to colonels from
distant States." In addition to such indications of discontent a
vast mass of evidence makes plain the opposition to conscription
toward the close of 1862 and the looseness of various parts of
the military system.

It was a moment of intense excitement and of nervous strain. The
country was unhappy, for it had lost faith in the Government at
Richmond. The blockade was producing its effect. European
intervention was receding into the distance. One of the
characteristics of the editorials and speeches of this period is
a rising tide of bitterness against England. Napoleon's proposal
in November to mediate, though it came to naught, somewhat
revived the hope of an eventual recognition of the Confederacy
but did not restore buoyancy to the people of the South. The
Emancipation Proclamation, though scoffed at as a cry of
impotence, none the less increased the general sense of crisis.

Worst of all, because of its immediate effect upon the temper of
the time, food was very scarce and prices had risen to
indefensible heights. The army was short of shoes. In the
newspapers, as winter came on, were to be found touching
descriptions of Lee's soldiers standing barefoot in the snow. A
flippant comment of Benjamin's, that the shoes had probably been
traded for whiskey, did not tend to improve matters. Even though
short of supplies themselves, the people as a whole eagerly
subscribed to buy shoes for the army.

There was widespread and heartless speculation in the supplies.
Months previous the Courier had made this ominous editorial
remark: "Speculators and monopolists seem determined to force the
people everywhere to the full exercise of all the remedies
allowed by law." In August, 1862, the Governor of Florida wrote
to the Florida delegation at Richmond urging them to take steps
to meet the "nefarious smuggling" of speculators who charged
extortionate prices. In September, he wrote again begging for
legislation to compel millers, tanners, and saltmakers to offer
their products at reasonable rates. As these men were exempt from
military duty because their labor was held to be a public
service, feeling against them ran high. Governor Vance proposed a
state convention to regulate prices for North Carolina and by
proclamation forbade the export of provisions in order to prevent
the seeking of exorbitant prices in other markets. Davis wrote to
various Governors urging them to obtain state legislation to
reduce extortion in the food business. In the provisioning of the
army the Confederate Government had recourse to impressment and
the arbitrary fixing of prices. Though the Attorney-General held
this action to be constitutional, it led to sharp contentions;
and at length a Virginia court granted an injunction to a
speculator who had been paid by the Government for flour less
than it had cost him.

In an attempt to straighten out this tangled situation, the
Confederate Government began, late, in 1862, by appointing as its
new Secretary of War,* James A. Seddon of Virginia--at that time
high in popular favor. The Mercury hailed his advent with
transparent relief, for no appointment could have seemed to it
more promising. Indeed, as the new year (1863) opened the Mercury
was in better humor with the Administration than perhaps at any
other time during the war. To the President's message it gave
praise that was almost cordial. This amicable temper was
short-lived, however, and three months later the heavens had
clouded

* There were in all six Secretaries of War: Leroy P. Walker,
until September 16, 1861; Judah P. Benjamin, until March 18,
1862; George W. Randolph, until November 17, 1868; Gustavus W.
Smith (temporarily), until November 21, 1862; James A. Seddon,
until February 6, 1865; General John C. Breckinridge, again, for
the Government had entered upon a course that consolidated the
opposition in anger and distrust.


Early in 1863 the Confederate Government presented to the country
a program in which the main features were three. Of these the two
which did not rouse immediate hostility in the party of the
Examiner and the Mercury were the Impressment Act of March, 1863
(amended by successive acts), and the act known as the Tax in
Kind, which was approved the following month. Though the
Impressment Act subsequently made vast trouble for the
Government, at the time of its passage its beneficial effects
were not denied. To it was attributed by the Richmond Whig the
rapid fall of prices in April, 1863. Corn went down at Richmond
from $12 and $10 a bushel to $4.20, and flour dropped in North
Carolina from $45 a barrel to $25. Under this act commissioners
were appointed in each State jointly by the Confederate President
and the Governor with the duty of fixing prices for government
transactions and of publishing every two months an official
schedule of the prices to be paid by the Government for the
supplies which it impressed.

The new Tax Act attempted to provide revenues which should not be
paid in depreciated currency. With no bullion to speak of, the
Confederate Congress could not establish a circulating medium
with even an approximation to constant value. Realizing this
situation, Memminger had advised falling back on the ancient
system of tithes and the support of the Government by direct
contributions of produce. After licensing a great number of
occupations and laying a property tax and an income tax, the new
law demanded a tenth of the produce of all farmers. On this law
the Mercury pronounced a benediction in an editorial on The Fall
of Prices, which it attributed to "the healthy influence of the
tax bill which has just become law."* 

* The fall of prices was attributed by others to a funding act,
--one of several passed by the Confederate Congress--which, in
March, 1863, aimed by various devices to contract the volume of
the currency. It was very generally condemned, and it anticipated
the yet more drastic measure, the Funding Act of 1864, which will
be described later.


Had these two measures been the whole program of the Government,
the congressional session of the spring of 1863 would have had a
different significance in Confederate history. But there was a
third measure that provoked a new attack on the Government. The
gracious words of the Mercury on the tax in kind came as an
interlude in the midst of a bitter controversy. An editorial of
the 12th of March headed "A Despotism over the Confederate States
Proposed in Congress" amounted to a declaration of war. From this
time forward the opposition and the Government drew steadily
further and further apart and their antagonism grew steadily more
relentless.

What caused this irrevocable breach was a bill introduced into
the House by Ethelbert Barksdale of Mississippi, an old friend of
President Davis. This bill would have invested the President with
authority to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus
in any part of the Confederacy, whenever in his judgment such
suspension was desirable. The first act suspending the privilege
of habeas corpus had long since expired and applied only to such
regions as were threatened with invasion. It had served usefully
under martial law in cleansing Richmond of its rogues, and also
had been in force at Charleston. The Mercury had approved it and
had exhorted its readers to take the matter sensibly as an
inevitable detail of war. Between that act and the act now
proposed the Mercury saw no similarity. Upon the merits of the
question it fought a furious journalistic duel with the Enquirer,
the government organ at Richmond, which insisted that President
Davis would not abuse his power. The Mercury replied that if he
"were a second Washington, or an angel upon earth, the
degradation such a surrender of our rights implies would still be
abhorrent to every freeman." In retort the Enquirer pointed out
that a similar law had been enacted by another Congress with no
bad results. And in point of fact the Enquirer was right, for in
October, 1862, after the expiration of the first act suspending
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, Congress passed a
second giving to the President the immense power which was now
claimed for him again. This second act was in force several
months. Then the Mercury made the astounding declaration that it
had never heard of the second act, and thereupon proceeded to
attack the secrecy of the Administration with renewed vigor.

On this issue of reviving the expired second Habeas Corpus Act, a
battle royal was fought in the Confederate Congress. The forces
of the Administration defended the new measure on the ground
that various regions were openly seditious and that conscription
could not be enforced without it. This argument gave a new text
for the cry of "despotism." The congressional leader of the
opposition was Henry S. Foote, once the rival of Davis in
Mississippi and now a citizen of Tennessee. Fierce, vindictive,
sometimes convincing, always shrewd, he was a powerful leader of
the rough and ready, buccaneering sort. Under his guidance the
debate was diverted into a rancorous discussion of the conduct of
the general's in the execution of martial law. Foote pulled out
all the stops in the organ of political rhetoric and went in for
a chant royal of righteous indignation. The main object of this
attack was General Hindman and his doings in Arkansas. Those were
still the days of pamphleteering. Though General Albert Pike had
written a severe pamphlet condemning Hindman, to this pamphlet
the Confederate Government had shut its eyes. Foote, however,
flourished it in the face of the House. He thundered forth his
belief that Hindman was worse even than the man most detested in
the South, than "beast Butler himself, for the latter is only
charged with persecuting and oppressing the avowed enemies of his
Government, while Hindman, if guilty as charged, has practised
cruelties unnumbered" on his people. Other representatives spoke
in the same vein. Baldwin of Virginia told harrowing tales of
martial law in that State. Barksdale attempted to retaliate,
sarcastically reminding him of a recent scene of riot and
disorder which proved that martial law, in any effective form,
did not exist in Virginia. He alluded to a riot, ostensibly for
bread, in which an Amazonian woman had led a mob to the pillaging
of the Richmond jewelry shops, a riot which Davis himself had
quelled by meeting the rioters and threatening to fire upon them.
But sarcasm proved powerless against Foote. His climax was a
lurid tale of a soldier who while marching past his own house
heard that his wife was dying, who left the ranks for a last word
with her, and who on rejoining the command, "hoping to get
permission to bury her," was shot as a deserter. And there was no
one on the Government benches to anticipate Kipling and cry out
"flat art!" Resolutions condemning martial law were passed by a
vote of 45 to 27.

Two weeks later the Mercury preached a burial sermon over the
Barksdale Bill, which had now been rejected by the House.
Congress was about to adjourn, and before it reassembled
elections for the next House would be held. "The measure is dead
for the present," said the Mercury, "but power is ever restive
and prone to accumulate power; and if the war continues, other
efforts will doubtless be made to make the President a Dictator.
Let the people keep their eyes steadily fixed on their
representatives with respect to this vital matter; and should the
effort again be made to suspend the Habeas Corpus Act, demand
that a recorded vote should show those who shall strike down
their liberties."



 Chapter V. The Critical Year

The great military events of the year 1863 have pushed out of
men's memories the less dramatic but scarcely less important
civil events. To begin with, in this year two of the greatest
personalities in the South passed from the political stage: in
the summer Yancey died; and in the autumn, Rhett went into
retirement.

The ever malicious Pollard insists that Yancey's death was due
ultimately to a personal encounter with a Senator from Georgia on
the floor of the Senate. The curious may find the discreditable
story embalmed in the secret journal of the Senate, where are the
various motions designed to keep the incident from the knowledge
of the world. Whether it really caused Yancey's death is another
question. However, the moment of his passing has dramatic
significance. Just as the battle over conscription was fully
begun, when the fear that the Confederate Government had arrayed
itself against the rights of the States had definitely taken
shape, when this dread had been reenforced by the alarm over the
suspension of habeas corpus, the great pioneer of the secession
movement went to his grave, despairing of the country he had
failed to lead. His death occurred in the same month as the
Battle of Gettysburg, at the very time when the Confederacy was
dividing against itself.

The withdrawal of Rhett from active life was an incident of the
congressional elections. He had consented to stand for Congress
in the Third District of South Carolina but was defeated. The
full explanation of the vote is still to be made plain; it seems
clear, however, that South Carolina at this time knew its own
mind quite positively. Five of the six representatives returned
to the Second Congress, including Rhett's opponent, Lewis M.
Ayer, had sat in the First Congress. The subsequent history of
the South Carolina delegation and of the State Government shows
that by 1863 South Carolina had become, broadly speaking, on
almost all issues an anti-Davis State. And yet the largest
personality and probably the ablest mind in the State was
rejected as a candidate for Congress. No character in American
history is a finer challenge to the biographer than this powerful
figure of Rhett, who in 1861 at the supreme crisis of his life
seemed the master of his world and yet in every lesser crisis was
a comparative failure. As in Yancey, so in Rhett, there was
something that fitted him to one great moment but did not fit him
to others. There can be little doubt that his defeat at the polls
of his own district deeply mortified him. He withdrew from
politics, and though he doubtless, through the editorship of one
of his sons, inspired the continued opposition of the Mercury to
the Government, Rhett himself hardly reappears in Confederate
history except for a single occasion during the debate a year
later upon the burning question of arming the slaves.

The year was marked by very bitter attacks upon President Davis
on the part of the opposition press. The Mercury revived the
issue of the conduct of the war which had for some time been
overshadowed by other issues. In the spring, to be sure, things
had begun to look brighter, and Chancellorsville had raised Lee's
reputation to its zenith. The disasters of the summer, Gettysburg
and Vicksburg, were for a time minimized by the Government and do
not appear to have caused the alarm which their strategic
importance might well have created. But when in the latter days
of July the facts became generally known, the Mercury arraigned
the President's conduct of the war as "a vast complication of
incompetence and folly"; it condemned the whole scheme of the
Northern invasion and maintained that Lee should have stood on
the defensive while twenty or thirty thousand men were sent to
the relief of Vicksburg. These two ideas it bitterly reiterated
and in August went so far as to quote Macaulay's famous passage
on Parliament's dread of a decisive victory over Charles and to
apply it to Davis in unrestrained language that reminds one of
Pollard.

Equally unrestrained were the attacks upon other items of the
policy of the Confederate Government. The Impressment Law began
to be a target. Farmers who were compelled to accept the prices
fixed by the impressment commissioners cried out that they were
being ruined. Men of the stamp of Toombs came to their assistance
with railing accusations such as this: "I have heard it said that
we should not sacrifice liberty to independence, but I tell you,
my countrymen, that the two are inseparable....  If we lose
our liberty we shall lose our independence....  I would rather
see the whole country the cemetery of freedom than the habitation
of slaves." Protests which poured in upon the Government insisted
that the power to impress supplies did not carry with it the
power to fix prices. Worthy men, ridden by the traditional ideas
of political science and unable to modify these in the light of
the present emergency, wailed out their despair over the
"usurpation" of Richmond.

The tax in kind was denounced in the same vein. The licensing
provisions of this law and its income tax did not satisfy the
popular imagination. These provisions concerned the classes that
could borrow. The classes that could not borrow, that had no
resources but their crops, felt that they were being driven to
the wall. The bitter saying went around that it was "a rich man's
war and a poor man's fight." As land and slaves were not directly
taxed, the popular discontent appeared to have ground for its
anger. Furthermore, it must never be forgotten that this was the
first general tax that the poor people of the South were ever
conscious of paying. To people who knew the tax-gatherer as
little more than a mythical being, he suddenly appeared like a
malevolent creature who swept off ruthlessly the tenth of their
produce. It is not strange that an intemperate reaction against
the planters and their leadership followed. The illusion spread
that they were not doing their share of the fighting; and as rich
men were permitted to hire substitutes to represent them in the
army, this really baseless report was easily propped up in the
public mind with what appeared to be reason.

In North Carolina, where the peasant farmer was a larger
political factor than in any other State, this feeling against
the Confederate Government because of the tax in kind was most
dangerous. In the course of the summer, while the military
fortunes of the Confederacy were toppling at Vicksburg and
Gettysburg, the North Carolina farmers in a panic of
self-preservation held numerous meetings of protest and
denunciation. They expressed their thoughtless terror in
resolutions asserting that the action of Congress "in secret
session, without consulting with their constituents at home,
taking from the hard laborers of the Confederacy one-tenth of the
people's living, instead of taking back their own currency in
tax, is unjust and tyrannical." Other resolutions called the tax
"unconstitutional, anti-republican, and oppressive"; and still
others pledged the farmers "to resist to the bitter end any such
monarchical tax."

A leader of the discontented in North Carolina was found in W. W.
Holden, the editor of the Raleigh Progress, who before the war
had attempted to be spokesman for the men of small property by
advocating taxes on slaves and similar measures. He proposed as
the conclusion of the whole matter the opening of negotiations
for peace. We shall see later how deep-seated was this singular
delusion that peace could be had for the asking. In 1863,
however, many men in North Carolina took up the suggestion with
delight. Jonathan Worth wrote in his diary, on hearing that the
influential North Carolina Standard had come out for peace: "I
still abhor, as I always did, this accursed war and the wicked
men, North and South, who inaugurated it. The whole country at
the North and the South is a great military despotism." With such
discontent in the air, the elections in North Carolina drew near.
The feeling was intense and riots occurred. Newspaper offices
were demolished--among them Holden's, to destroy which a
detachment of passing soldiers converted itself into a mob. In
the western counties deserters from the army, combined in bands,
were joined by other deserters from Tennessee, and terrorized the
countryside. Governor Vance, alarmed at the progress which this
disorder was making, issued a proclamation imploring his
rebellious countrymen to conduct in a peaceable manner their
campaign for the repeal of obnoxious laws.

The measure of political unrest in North Carolina was indicated
in the autumn when a new delegation to Congress was chosen. Of
the ten who composed it, eight were new men. Though they did not
stand for a clearly defined program, they represented on the
whole anti-Davis tendencies. The Confederate Administration had
failed to carry the day in the North Carolina elections; and in
Georgia there were even more sweeping evidences of unrest. Of the
ten representatives chosen for the Second Congress nine had not
sat in the First, and Georgia now was in the main frankly
anti-Davis. There had been set up at Richmond a new organ of the
Government called the Sentinel, which was more entirely under the
presidential shadow than even the Enquirer and the Courier.
Speaking of the elections, the Sentinel deplored the "upheaval of
political elements" revealed by the defeat of so many tried
representatives whose constituents had not returned them to the
Second Congress.

What was Davis doing while the ground was thus being cut from
under his feet? For one thing he gave his endorsement to the
formation of "Confederate Societies" whose members bound
themselves to take Confederate money as legal tender. He wrote a
letter to one such society in Mississippi, praising it for
attempting "by common consent to bring down the prices of all
articles to the standard of the soldiers' wages" and adding that
the passion of speculation had "seduced citizens of all classes
from a determined prosecution of the war to an effort to amass
money." The Sentinel advocated the establishment of a law fixing
maximum prices. The discussion of this proposal seems to make
plain the raison d'etre for the existence of the Sentinel. Even
such stanch government organs as the Enquirer and the Courier
shied at the idea, but the Mercury denounced it vigorously,
giving long extracts from Thiers, and discussed the mistakes, of
the French Revolution with its "law of maximum."

Davis, however, did not take an active part in the political
campaign, nor did the other members of the Government. It was not
because of any notion that the President should not leave the
capital that Davis did not visit the disaffected regions of North
Carolina when the startled populace winced under its first
experience with taxation. Three times during his Administration
Davis left Richmond on extended journeys: late in 1862, when
Vicksburg had become a chief concern of the Government, he went
as far afield as Mississippi in order to get entirely in touch
with the military situation in those parts; in the month of
October, 1863, when there was another moment of intense military
anxiety, Davis again visited the front; and of a third journey
which he undertook in 1864, we shall hear in time. It is to be
noted that each of these journeys was prompted by a military
motive; and here, possibly, we get an explanation of his
inadequacy as a statesman. He could not lay aside his interest in
military affairs for the supremely important concerns of civil
office; and he failed to understand how to ingratiate his
Administration by personal appeals to popular imagination.

In October, 1863,--the very month in which his old rival Rhett
suffered his final defeat,--Davis undertook a journey because
Bragg, after his great victory at Chickamauga, appeared to be
letting slip a golden opportunity, and because there were reports
of dissension among Bragg's officers and of general confusion in
his army. After he had, as he thought, restored harmony in the
camp, Davis turned southward on a tour of appeal and inspiration.
He went as far as Mobile, and returning bent his course through
Charleston, where, at the beginning of November, less than two
weeks after Rhett's defeat, Davis was received with all due
formalities. Members of the Rhett family were among those who
formally received the President at the railway station. There was
a parade of welcome, an official reception, a speech by the
President from the steps of the city hall, and much applause by
friends of the Administration. But certain ominous signs were not
lacking. The Mercury, for example, tucked away in an obscure
column its account of the event, while its rival, the Courier,
made the President's visit the feature of the day.

Davis returned to Richmond, early in November, to throw himself
again with his whole soul into problems that were chiefly
military. He did not realize that the crisis had come and gone
and that he had failed to grasp the significance of the internal
political situation. The Government had failed to carry the
elections and to secure a working majority in Congress. Never
again was it to have behind it a firm and confident support, The
unity of the secession movement had passed away. Thereafter the
Government was always to be regarded with suspicion by the
extreme believers in state sovereignty and by those who were
sullenly convinced that the burdens of the war were unfairly
distributed. And there were not wanting men who were ready to
construe each emergency measure as a step toward a coup d'etat.



Chapter VI. Life In The Confederacy

When the fortunes of the Confederacy in both camp and council
began to ebb, the life of the Southern people had already
profoundly changed. The gallant, delightful, carefree life of the
planter class had been undermined by a war which was eating away
its foundations. Economic no less than political forces were
taking from the planter that ideal of individual liberty as dear
to his heart as it had been, ages before, to his feudal
prototype. One of the most important details of the changing
situation had been the relation of the Government to slavery. The
history of the Confederacy had opened with a clash between the
extreme advocates of slavery--the slavery-at-any-price men--and
the Administration. The Confederate Congress had passed a bill
ostensibly to make effective the clause in its constitution
prohibiting the African slave-trade. The quick eye of Davis had
detected in it a mode of evasion, for cargoes of captured slaves
were to be confiscated and sold at public auction. The President
had exposed this adroit subterfuge in his message vetoing the
bill, and the slavery-at-any-price men had not sufficient
influence in Congress to override the veto, though they muttered
against it in the public press.

The slavery-at-any-price men did not again conspicuously show
their hands until three years later when the Administration
included emancipation in its policy. The ultimate policy of
emancipation was forced upon the Government by many
considerations but more particularly by the difficulty of
securing labor for military purposes. In a country where the
supply of fighting men was limited and the workers were a class
apart, the Government had to employ the only available laborers
or confess its inability to meet the industrial demands of war.
But the available laborers were slaves. How could their services
be secured? By purchase? Or by conscription? Or by temporary
impressment?

Though Davis and his advisers were prepared to face all the
hazards involved in the purchase or confiscation of slaves, the
traditional Southern temper instantly recoiled from the
suggestion. A Government possessed of great numbers of slaves,
whether bought or appropriated, would have in its hands a
gigantic power, perhaps for industrial competition with private
owners, perhaps even for organized military control. Besides, the
Government might at any moment by emancipating its slaves upset
the labor system of the country. Furthermore, the opportunities
for favoritism in the management of state-owned slaves were
beyond calculation. Considerations such as these therefore
explain the watchful jealousy of the planters toward the
Government whenever it proposed to acquire property in slaves.

It is essential not to attribute this social-political dread of
government ownership of slaves merely to the clutch of a wealthy
class on its property. Too many observers, strangely enough, see
the latter motive to the exclusion of the former. Davis himself
was not, it would seem, free from this confusion. He insisted
that neither slaves nor land were taxed by the Confederacy, and
between the lines he seems to attribute to the planter class the
familiar selfishness of massed capital. He forgot that the tax in
kind was combined with an income tax. In theory, at least, the
slave and the land--even non-farming land--were taxed. However,
the dread of a slave-owning Government prevented any effective
plan for supplying the army with labor except through the
temporary impressment of slaves who were eventually to be
returned to their owners. The policy of emancipation had to wait.

Bound up in the labor question was the question of the control of
slaves during the war. In the old days when there were plenty of
white men in the countryside, the roads were carefully patrolled
at night, and no slave ventured to go at large unless fully
prepared to prove his identity. But with the coming of war the
comparative smallness of the fighting population made it likely
from the first that the countryside everywhere would be stripped
of its white guardians. In that event, who would be left to
control the slaves? Early in the war a slave police was provided
for by exempting from military duty overseers in the ratio
approximately of one white to twenty slaves. But the marvelous
faithfulness of the slaves, who nowhere attempted to revolt, made
these precautions unnecessary. Later laws exempted one overseer
on every plantation of fifteen slaves, not so much to perform
patrol duty as to increase the productivity of plantation labor.

This "Fifteen Slave" Law was one of many instances that were
caught up by the men of small property as evidence that the
Government favored the rich. A much less defensible law, and one
which was bitterly attacked for the same reason, was the
unfortunate measure permitting the hiring of substitutes by men
drafted into the army. Eventually, the clamor against this law
caused its repeal, but before that time it had worked untold harm
as apparent evidence of "a rich man's war and a poor man's
fight." Extravagant stories of the avoidance of military duty by
the ruling class, though in the main they were mere fairy tales,
changed the whole atmosphere of Southern life. The old glad
confidence uniting the planter class with the bulk of the people
had been impaired. Misapprehension appeared on both sides. Too
much has been said lately, however, in justification of the
poorer classes who were thus wakened suddenly to a distrust of
the aristocracy; and too little has been said of the proud recoil
of the aristocracy in the face of a sudden, credulous perversion
of its motives--a perversion inspired by the pinching of the
shoe, and yet a shoe that pinched one class as hard as it did
another. It is as unfair to charge the planter with selfishness
in opposing the appropriation of slaves as it is to make the same
charge against the small farmers for resisting tithes. In face of
the record, the planter comes off somewhat the better of the two;
but it must be remembered that he had the better education, the
larger mental horizon.

The Confederacy had long recognized women of all classes as the
most dauntless defenders of the cause. The women of the upper
classes passed without a tremor from a life of smiling ease to a
life of extreme hardship. One day, their horizon was without a
cloud; another day, their husbands and fathers had gone to the
front. Their luxuries had disappeared, and they were reduced to
plain hard living, toiling in a thousand ways to find provision
and clothing, not only for their own children but for the poorer
families of soldiers. The women of the poor throughout the South
deserve similar honor. Though the physical shock of the change
may not have been so great, they had to face the same deep
realities--hunger and want, anxiety over the absent soldiers,
solicitude for children, grief for the dead. One of the pathetic
aspects of Confederate life was the household composed of several
families, all women and children, huddled together without a man
or even a half-grown lad to be their link with the mill and the
market. In those regions where there were few slaves and the
exemption of overseers did not operate, such households were
numerous.

The great privations which people endured during the Confederacy
have passed into familiar tradition. They are to be traced mainly
to three causes: to the blockade, to the inadequate system of
transportation, and to the heartlessness of speculators. The
blockade was the real destroyer of the South. Besides ruining the
whole policy based on King Cotton, besides impeding to a vast
extent the inflow of munitions from Europe, it also deprived
Southern life of numerous articles which were hard to
relinquish--not only such luxuries as tea and coffee, but also
such utter necessities as medicines. And though the native herbs
were diligently studied, though the Government established
medical laboratories with results that were not inconsiderable,
the shortage of medicines remained throughout the war a
distressing feature of Southern life. The Tredegar Iron Works at
Richmond and a foundry at Selma, Alabama,were the only mills in
the South capable of casting the heavy ordnance necessary for
military purposes. And the demand for powder mills and gun
factories to provide for the needs of the army was scarcely
greater than the demand for cotton mills and commercial foundries
to supply the wants of the civil population. The Government
worked without ceasing to keep pace with the requirements of the
situation, and, in view of the immense difficulties which it had
to face, it was fairly successful in supplying the needs of the
army. Powder was provided by the Niter and Mining Bureau; lead
for Confederate bullets was collected from many sources--even
from
the window-weights of the houses; iron was brought from the mines
of Alabama; guns came from newly built factories; and machines
and tools were part of the precious freight of the
blockade-runners. Though the poorly equipped mills turned a
portion of the cotton crop into textiles, and though everything
that was possible was done to meet the needs of the people, the
supply of manufactures was sadly inadequate. The universal
shortage was betrayed by the limitation of the size of most
newspapers to a single sheet, and the desperate situation clearly
and completely revealed by the way in which, as a last resort,
the Confederates were compelled to repair their railroads by
pulling up the rails of one road in order to repair another that
the necessities of war rendered indispensable.

The railway system, if such it can be called, was one of the
weaknesses of the Confederacy. Before the war the South had not
felt the need of elaborate interior communication, for its
commerce in the main went seaward, and thence to New England or
to Europe. Hitherto the railway lines had seen no reason for
merging their local character in extensive combinations. Owners
of short lines were inclined by tradition to resist even the
imperative necessities of war and their stubborn conservatism was
frequently encouraged by the shortsighted parochialism of the
towns. The same pitiful narrowness that led the peasant farmer to
threaten rebellion against the tax in kind led his counterpart in
the towns to oppose the War Department in its efforts to
establish through railroad lines because they threatened to
impair local business interests. A striking instance of this
disinclination towards cooperation is the action of Petersburg.
Two railroads terminated at this point but did not connect, and
it was an ardent desire of the military authorities to link the
two and convert them into one. The town, however, unable to see
beyond its boundaries and resolute in its determination to save
its transfer business, successfully obstructed the needs of the
army.*

* See an article on "The Confederate Government and the
Railroads" in the "American Historical Review," July, 1917, by
Charles W. Ramsdell.


As a result of this lack of efficient organization an immense
congestion resulted all along the railroads. Whether this, rather
than a failure in supply, explains the approach of famine in the
latter part of the war, it is today very difficult to determine.
In numerous state papers of the time, the assertion was
reiterated that the yield of food was abundant and that the
scarcity of food at many places, including the cities and the
battle fronts, was due to defects in transportation. Certain it
is that the progress of supplies from one point to another was
intolerably slow.

All this want of coordination facilitated speculation. We shall
see hereafter how merciless this speculatio