n became and we shall
even hear of profits on food rising to more than four hundred per
cent. However, the oft-quoted prices of the later years--when,
for instance, a pair of shoes cost a hundred dollars--signify
little, for they rested on an inflated currency. None the less
they inspired the witticism that one should take money to market
in a basket and bring provisions home in one's pocketbook.
Endless stories could be told of speculators hoarding food and
watching unmoved the sufferings of a famished people. Said Bishop
Pierce, in a sermon before the General Assembly of Georgia, on
Fast Day, in March, 1863: "Restlessness and discontent
prevail.... 
Extortion, pitiless extortion is making havoc in the land.
We are devouring each other. Avarice with full barns puts the
bounties of Providence under bolts and bars, waiting with eager
longings for higher prices.... The greed of gain...stalks
among us unabashed by the heroic sacrifice of our women or the
gallant deeds of our soldiers. Speculation in salt and bread and
meat runs riot in defiance of the thunders of the pulpit, and
executive interference and the horrors of threatened famine." In
1864, the Government found that quantities of grain paid in under
the tax as new-grown were mildewed. It was grain of the previous
year which speculators had held too long and now palmed off on
the Government to supply the army.

Amid these desperate conditions the fate of soldiers' families
became everywhere, a tragedy. Unless the soldier was a land-owner
his family was all but helpless. With a depreciated currency and
exaggerated prices, his pay, whatever his rank, was too little to
count in providing for his dependents. Local charity, dealt out
by state and county boards, by relief associations, and by the
generosity of neighbors, formed the barrier between his family
and starvation. The landless soldier, with a family at home in
desperate straits, is too often overlooked when unimaginative
people heap up the statistics of "desertion" in the latter half
of the war.

It was in this period, too, that amid the terrible shrinkage of
the defensive lines "refugeeing" became a feature of Southern
life. From the districts over which the waves of war rolled back
and forth helpless families--women, children, slaves--found
precarious safety together with great hardship by withdrawing to
remote places which invasion was little likely to reach. An
Odyssey of hard travel, often by night and half secret, is part
of the war tradition of thousands of Southern families. And here,
as always, the heroic women, smiling, indomitable, are the center
of the picture. Their flight to preserve the children was no
small test of courage. Almost invariably they had to traverse
desolate country, with few attendants, through forests, and
across rivers, where the arm of the law was now powerless to
protect them. Outlaws, defiant of the authorities both civil and
military,--ruthless men of whom we shall hear again,--roved those
great unoccupied spaces so characteristic of the Southern
countryside. Many a family legend preserves still the sense of
breathless caution, of pilgrimage in the night-time intently
silent for fear of these masterless men. When the remote
rendezvous had been reached, there a colony of refugees drew
together in a steadfast despair, unprotected by their own
fighting men. What strange sad pages in the history of American
valor were filled by these women outwardly calm, their children
romping after butterflies in a glory of sunshine, while horrid
tales drifted in of deeds done by the masterless men in the
forest just beyond the horizon, and far off on the soul's
horizon fathers, husbands, brothers, held grimly the lines of
last defense!



Chapter VII. The Turning Of The Tide

The buoyancy of the Southern temper withstood the shock of
Gettysburg and was not overcome by the fall of Vicksburg. Of the
far-reaching significance of the latter catastrophe in particular
there was little immediate recognition. Even Seddon, the
Secretary of War, in November, reported that "the communication
with the Trans-Mississippi, while rendered somewhat precarious
and insecure, is found by no means cut off or even seriously
endangered." His report was the same sort of thing as those
announcements of "strategic retreats" with which the world has
since become familiar. He even went so far as to argue that on
the whole the South had gained rather than lost; that the control
of the river was of no real value to the North; that the loss of
Vicksburg "has on our side liberated for general operations in
the field a large army, while it requires the enemy to maintain
cooped up, inactive, in positions insalubrious to their soldiers,
considerable detachments of their forces."

Seddon attempted to reverse the facts, to show that the
importance of the Mississippi in commerce was a Northern not a
Southern concern. He threw light upon the tactics of the time by
his description of the future action of Confederate sharpshooters
who were to terrorize such commercial crews as might attempt to
navigate the river; he also told how light batteries might move
swiftly along the banks and, at points commanding the channel,
rain on the passing steamer unheralded destruction. He was silent
upon the really serious matter, the patrol of the river by
Federal gunboats which rendered commerce with the
Trans-Mississippi all but impossible.

This report, dated the 26th of November, gives a roseate view of
the war in Tennessee and enlarges upon that dreadful battle of
Chickamauga which "ranks as one of the grandest victories of the
war." But even as the report was signed, Bragg was in full
retreat after his great disaster at Chattanooga. On the 30th of
November the Administration at Richmond received from him a
dispatch that closed with these words: "I deem it due to the
cause and to myself to ask for relief from command and an
investigation into the causes of the defeat." In the middle of
December, Joseph E. Johnston was appointed to succeed him.

Whatever had been the illusions of the Government, they were now
at an end. There was no denying that the war had entered a new
stage and that the odds were grimly against the South. Davis
recognized the gravity of the situation, and in his message to
Congress in December, 1863, he admitted that the
Trans-Mississippi was practically isolated. This was indeed a
great catastrophe, for hereafter neither men nor supplies could
be drawn from the far Southwest. Furthermore, the Confederacy had
now lost its former precious advantage of using Mexico as a means
of secret trade with Europe.

These distressing events of the four months between Vicksburg and
Chattanooga established also the semi-isolation of the middle
region of the lower South. The two States of Mississippi and
Alabama entered upon the most desperate chapter of their history.
Neither in nor out of the Confederacy, neither protected by the
Confederate lines nor policed by the enemy, they were subject at
once to the full rigor of the financial and military demands of
the Administration of Richmond and to the full ruthlessness of
plundering raids from the North. Nowhere can the contrast between
the warfare of that day and the best methods of our own time be
observed more clearly than in this unhappy region. At the opening
of 1864 the effective Confederate lines drew an irregular zigzag
across the map from a point in northern Georgia not far below
Chattanooga to Mobile. Though small Confederate commands still
operated bravely west of this line, the whole of Mississippi and
a large part of Alabama were beyond aid from Richmond. But the
average man did not grasp the situation. When a region is
dominated by mobile armies the appearance of things to the
civilian is deceptive. Because the powerful Federal armies of the
Southwest, at the opening of 1864, were massed at strategic
points from Tennessee to the Gulf, and were not extended along an
obvious trench line, every brave civilian would still keep up his
hope and would still insist that the middle Gulf country was far
from subjugation, that its defense against the invader had not
become hopeless.

Under such conditions, when the Government at Richmond called
upon the men of the Southwest to regard themselves as mere
sources of supply, human and otherwise, mere feeders to a theater
of war that did not include their homes, it was altogether
natural that they should resent the demand. All the tragic
confusion that was destined in the course of the fateful year
1864 to paralyze the Government at Richmond was already apparent
in the middle Gulf country when the year began. Chief among these
was the inability of the State and Confederate Governments to
cooperate adequately in the business of conscription. The two
powers were determined rivals struggling each to seize the major
part of the manhood of the community. While Richmond, looking on
the situation with the eye of pure strategy, wished to draw
together the full man-power of the South in one great unit, the
local authorities were bent on retaining a large part of it for
home defense.

In the Alabama newspapers of the latter half of 1863 strange
incidents are to be found throwing light on the administrative
duel. The writ of habeas corpus, as was so often the case in
Confederate history, was the bone of contention. We have seen
that the second statute empowering the President to proclaim
martial law and to suspend the operation of the writ had expired
by limitation in February, 1863. The Alabama courts were
theoretically in full operation, but while the law was in force
the military authorities had acquired a habit of arbitrary
control. Though warned from Richmond in general orders that they
must not take unto themselves a power vested in the President
alone, they continued their previous course of action. It
thereupon became necessary to issue further general orders
annulling "all proclamations of martial law by general officers
and others" not invested by law with adequate authority.

Neither general orders nor the expiration of the statute,
however, seemed able to put an end to the interference with the
local courts on the part of local commanders. The evil apparently
grew during 1863. A picturesque instance is recorded with extreme
fullness by the Southern Advertiser in the autumn of the year. In
the minutely circumstantial account, we catch glimpses of one
Rhodes moving heaven and earth to prove himself exempt from
military service. After Rhodes is enrolled by the officers of the
local military rendezvous, the sheriff attempts to turn the
tables by arresting the Colonel in command. The soldiers rush to
defend their Colonel, who is ill in bed at a house some distance
away. The judge who had issued the writ is hot with anger at this
military interference in civil affairs. Thereupon the soldiers
seize him, but later, recognizing for some unexplained reason the
majesty of the civil law, they release him. And the hot-tempered
incident closes with the Colonel's determination to carry the
case to the Supreme Court of the State.

The much harassed people of Alabama had still other causes of
complaint during this same year. Again the newspapers illumine
the situation. In the troubled autumn, Joseph Wheeler swept
across the northern counties of Alabama and in a daring ride,
with Federal cavalry hot on his trail, reached safety beyond the
Tennessee River. Here his pursuers turned back and, as their
horses had been broken by the swiftness of the pursuit, returning
slowly, they "gleaned the country" to replace their supplies.
Incidentally they pounced upon the town of Huntsville. "Their
appearance here," writes a local correspondent, "was so sudden
and...the contradictory reports of their whereabouts" had
been so baffling that the townspeople had found no time to
secrete things. The whole neighborhood was swept clean of cattle
and almost clean of provision. "We have not enough left," the
report continues, "to haul and plow with...and milch cows are
non est." Including "Stanley's big raid in July," this was the
twenty-first raid which Huntsville had endured that year. The
report closes with a bitter denunciation of the people of
southern Alabama who as yet do not know what war means, who are
accused of complete hardness of heart towards their suffering
fellow-countrymen and of caring only to make money out of war
prices.

When Davis sent his message to the Southern Congress at the
opening of the session of 1864, the desperate plight of the
middle Gulf country was at once a warning and a menace to the
Government. If the conditions of that debatable land should
extend eastward, there could be little doubt that the day of the
Confederacy was nearing its close. To remedy the situation west
of the main Confederate line, to prevent the growth of a similar
condition east of it, Davis urged Congress to revive the statute
permitting martial law and the suspension of the writ of habeas
corpus. The President told Congress that in parts of the
Confederacy "public meetings have been held, in some of which a
treasonable design is masked by a pretense of devotion of state
sovereignty, and in others is openly avowed...a strong
suspicion is entertained that secret leagues and associations are
being formed. In certain localities men of no mean position do
not hesitate to avow their disloyalty and hostility to our cause,
and their advocacy of peace on the terms of submission and the
abolition of slavery."

This suspicion on the part of the Confederate Government that it
was being opposed by organized secret societies takes us back to
debatable land and to the previous year. The Bureau of
Conscription submitted to the Secretary of War a report from its
Alabama branch relative to "a sworn secret organization known to
exist and believed to have for its object the encouragement of
desertion, the protection of deserters from arrest, resistance to
conscription, and perhaps other designs of a still more dangerous
character." To the operations of this insidious foe were
attributed the shifting of the vote in the Alabama elections, the
defeat of certain candidates favored by the Government, and the
return in their stead of new men "not publicly known." The
suspicions of the Government were destined to further
verification in the course of 1864 by the unearthing of a
treasonable secret society in southwestern Virginia, the members
of which were "bound to each other for the prosecution of their
nefarious designs by the most solemn oaths. They were under
obligation to encourage desertions from the army, and to pass and
harbor all deserters, escaped prisoners, or spies; to give
information to the enemy of the movements of our troops, of
exposed or weakened positions, of inviting opportunities of
attack, and to guide and assist the enemy either in advance or
retreat." This society bore the grandiloquent name "Heroes of
America" and had extended its operations into Tennessee and North
Carolina.

In the course of the year further evidence was collected which
satisfied the secret service of the existence of a mysterious and
nameless society which had ramifications throughout Tennessee,
Alabama, and Georgia. A detective who joined this "Peace
Society," as it was called, for the purpose of betraying its
secrets, had marvelous tales to tell of confidential information
given to him by members, of how Missionary Ridge had been lost
and Vicksburg had surrendered through the machinations of this
society.*

* What classes were represented in these organizations it is
difficult if not impossible to determine. They seem to have been
involved in the singular "peace movement" which is yet to be
considered. This fact gives a possible clue to the problem of
their membership. A suspiciously large number of the "peace" men
were original anti-secessionists, and though many, perhaps most,
of these who opposed secession became loyal servants of the
Confederacy, historians may have jumped too quickly to the
assumption that the sincerity of all of these men was above
reproach.

In spite of its repugnance to the suspension of the writ of
habeas corpus, Congress was so impressed by the gravity of the
situation that early in 1864 it passed another act "to suspend
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus in certain cases."
This was not quite the same as that sweeping act of 1862 which
had set the Mercury irrevocably in opposition. Though this act of
1864 gave the President the power to order the arrest of any
person suspected of treasonable practices, and though it released
military officers from all obligation to obey the order of any
civil court to surrender a prisoner charged with treason, the new
legislation carefully defined a list of cases in which alone this
power could be lawfully used. This was the last act of the sort
passed by the Confederate Congress, and when it expired by
limitation ninety days after the next meeting of Congress it was
not renewed.

With regard to the administration of the army, Congress can
hardly be said to have met the President more than half way. The
age of military service was lowered to seventeen and was raised
to fifty. But the President was not given--though he had asked
for it--general control over exemptions. Certain groups, such as
ministers, editors, physicians, were in the main exempted; one
overseer was exempted on each plantation where there were fifteen
slaves, provided he gave bond to sell to the Government at
official prices each year one hundred pounds of either beef or
bacon for each slave employed and provided he would sell all his
surplus produce either to the Government or to the families of
soldiers. Certain civil servants of the Confederacy were also
exempted as well as those whom the governors of States should
"certify to be necessary for the proper administration of the
State Government." The President was authorized to detail for
nonmilitary service any members of the Confederate forces "when
in his judgment, justice, equity, and necessity, require such
details."

This statute retained two features that had already given rise to
much friction, and that were destined to be the cause of much
more. It was still within the power of state governors to impede
conscription very seriously. By certifying that a man was
necessary to the civil administration of a State, a Governor
could place him beyond the legal reach of the conscripting
officers. This provision was a concession to those who looked on
Davis's request for authority over exemption as the first step
toward absolutism. On the other hand the statute allowed the
President a free hand in the scarcely less important matter of
"details." Among the imperative problems of the Confederacy,
where the whole male population was needed in the public service,
was the most economical separation of the two groups, the
fighters and the producers. On the one hand there was the
constant demand for recruits to fill up the wasted armies; on the
other, the need for workers to keep the shops going and to secure
the harvest. The two interests were never fully coordinated.
Under the act of 1864, no farmer, mechanic, tradesman, between
the ages of seventeen and fifty, if fit for military service,
could remain at his work except as a "detail" under orders of the
President: he might be called to the colors at a moment's notice.
We shall see, presently, how the revoking of details, toward the
end of what may truly be called the terrible year, was one of the
major incidents of Confederate history.

Together with the new conscription act, the President approved on
February 17, 1864, a reenactment of the tax in kind, with some
slight concessions to the convenience of the farmers. The
President's appeal for a law directly taxing slaves and land had
been ignored by Congress, but another of his suggestions had been
incorporated in the Funding Act. The state of the currency was
now so grave that Davis attributed to it all the evils growing
out of the attempts to enforce impressment. As the value of the
paper dollar had by this time shrunk to six cents in specie and
the volume of Confederate paper was upward of seven hundred
millions, Congress undertook to reduce the volume and raise the
value by compelling holders of notes to exchange them for bonds.
By way of driving the note-holders to consent to the exchange,
provision was made for the speedy taxation of notes for one-third
their face value.

Such were the main items of the government program for 1864.
Armed with this, Davis braced himself for the great task of
making head against the enemies that now surrounded the
Confederacy. It is an axiom of military science that when one
combatant possesses the interior line, the other can offset this
advantage only by exerting coincident pressure all round, thus
preventing him from shifting his forces from one front to
another. On this principle, the Northern strategists had at last
completed their gigantic plan for a general envelopment of the
whole Confederate defense both by land and sea. Grant opened
operations by crossing the Rapidan and telegraphing Sherman to
advance into Georgia.

The stern events of the spring of 1864 form such a famous page in
military history that the sober civil story of those months
appears by comparison lame and impotent. Nevertheless, the
Confederate Government during those months was at least equal to
its chief obligation: it supplied and recruited the armies. With
Grant checked at Cold Harbor, in June, and Sherman still unable
to pierce the western line, the hopes of the Confederates were
high.

In the North there was corresponding gloom. This was the moment
when all Northern opponents of the war drew together in their
last attempt to shatter the Lincoln Government and make peace
with the Confederacy. The value to the Southern cause of this
Northern movement for peace at any price was keenly appreciated
at Richmond. Trusted agents of the Confederacy were even then in
Canada working deftly to influence Northern sentiment. The
negotiations with those Northern secret societies which
befriended the South belong properly in the story of Northern
politics and the presidential election of 1864. They were
skillfully conducted chiefly by Jacob Thompson and C. C. Clay.
The reports of these agents throughout the spring and summer were
all hopeful and told of "many intelligent men from the United
States" who sought them out in Canada for political
consultations. They discussed "our true friends from the Chicago
(Democratic) convention" and even gave names of those who, they
were assured, would have seats in McClellan's Cabinet. They were
really not well informed upon Northern affairs, and even after
the tide had turned against the Democrats in September, they were
still priding themselves on their diplomatic achievement, still
confident they had helped organize a great political power, had
"given a stronger impetus to the peace party of the North than
all other causes combined, and had greatly reduced the strength
of the war party."

While Clay and Thompson built their house of cards in Canada, the
Richmond Government bent anxious eyes on the western battlefront.
Sherman, though repulsed in his one frontal attack at Kenesaw
Mountain, had steadily worked his way by the left flank of the
Confederate army, until in early July he was within six miles of
Atlanta. All the lower South was a-tremble with apprehension.
Deputations were sent to Richmond imploring the removal of
Johnston from the western command. What had he done since his
appointment in December but retreat? Such was the tenor of public
opinion. "It is all very well to talk of Fabian policy," said one
of his detractors long afterward, "and now we can see we were
rash to say the least. But at the time, all of us went wrong
together. Everybody clamored for Johnston's removal." Johnston
and Davis were not friends; but the President hesitated long
before acting. And yet, with each day, political as well as
military necessity grew more imperative. Both at Washington and
Richmond the effect that the fighting in Georgia had on Northern
opinion was seen to be of the first importance. Sherman was
staking everything to break the Confederate line and take
Atlanta. He knew that a great victory would have incalculable
effect on the Northern election. Davis knew equally well that the
defeat of Sherman would greatly encourage the peace party in the
North. But he had no general of undoubted genius whom he could
put in Johnston's place. However, the necessity for a bold stroke
was so undeniable, and Johnston appeared so resolute to continue
his Fabian policy, that Davis reluctantly took a desperate chance
and superseded him by Hood.

During August, though the Democratic convention at Chicago drew
up its platform favoring peace at any price, the anxiety of the
Southern President did not abate his activities. The safety of
the western line was now his absorbing concern. And in mid-August
that line was turned, in a way, by Farragut's capture of Mobile
Bay. As the month closed, Sherman, despite the furious blows
delivered by Hood, was plainly getting the upper hand. North and
South, men watched that tremendous duel with the feeling that the
foundations of things were rocking. At last, on the 2d of
September, Sherman, victorious, entered Atlanta.



Chapter VIII. A Game Of Chance

With dramatic completeness in the summer and autumn of 1864, the
foundations of the Confederate hope one after another gave way.
Among the causes of this catastrophe was the failure of the
second great attempt on the part of the Confederacy to secure
recognition abroad. The subject takes us back to the latter days
of 1862, when the center of gravity in foreign affairs had
shifted from London to Paris. Napoleon III, at the height of his
strange career, playing half a dozen dubious games at once, took
up a new pastime and played at intrigue with the Confederacy. In
October he accorded a most gracious interview to Slidell. He
remarked that his sympathies were entirely with the South but
added that, if he acted alone, England might trip him up. He
spoke of his scheme for joint intervention by England, France,
and Russia. Then he asked why we had not created a navy. Slidell
snapped at the bait. He said that the Confederates would be glad
to build ships in France, that "if the Emperor would give only
some kind of verbal assurance that the police would not observe
too closely when we wished to put on guns and men we would gladly
avail ourselves of it." To this, the imperial trickster replied,
"Why could you not have them built as for the Italian Government?
I do not think it would be difficult but will consult the
Minister of Marine about it."

Slidell left the Emperor's presence confident that things would
happen. And they did. First came Napoleon's proposal of
intervention, which was declined before the end of the year by
England and Russia. Then came his futile overtures to the
Government at Washington, his offer of mediation--which was
rejected early in 1863. But Slidell remained confident that
something else would happen. And in this expectation also he was
not disappointed. The Emperor was deeply involved in Mexico and
was busily intriguing throughout Europe. This was the time when
Erlanger, standing high in the favor of the Emperor, made his
gambler's proposal to the Confederate authorities about cotton.
Another of the Emperor's friends now enters the play. On January
7, 1863, M. Arman, of Bordeaux, "the largest shipbuilder in
France," had called on the Confederate commissioner: M. Arman
would be happy to build ironclad ships for the Confederacy, and
as to paying for them, cotton bonds might do the trick.

No wonder Slidell was elated, so much so that he seems to have
given little heed to the Emperor's sinister intimation that the
whole affair must be subterranean. But the wily Bonaparte had not
forgotten that six months earlier he had issued a decree of
neutrality forbidding Frenchmen to take commissions from either
belligerent "for the armament of vessels of war or to accept
letters of marque, or to cooperate in any way whatsoever in the
equipment or arming of any vessel of war or corsair of either
belligerent." He did not intend to abandon publicly this cautious
attitude--at least, not for the present. And while Slidell at
Paris was completely taken in, the cooler head of A. Dudley Mann,
Confederate commissioner at Brussels, saw what an international
quicksand was the favor of Napoleon. It was about this time that
Napoleon, having dispatched General Forey with a fresh army to
Mexico, wrote the famous letter which gave notice to the world of
what he was about. Mann wrote home in alarm that the Emperor
might be expected to attempt recovering Mexico's ancient areas
including Texas. Slidell saw in the Forey letter only "views...
which will not be gratifying to the Washington Government."

The adroit Arman, acting on hints from high officers of the
Government, applied for permission to build and arm ships of war,
alleging that he intended to send them to the Pacific and sell
them to either China or Japan. To such a laudable expression of
commercial enterprise, one of his fellows in the imperial ring,
equipped with proper authority under Bonaparte, hastened to give
official approbation, and Erlanger came forward by way of
financial backer. There were conferences of Confederate agents;
contracts were signed; plans were agreed upon; and the work was
begun.

There was no more hopeful man in the Confederate service than
Slidell when, in the full flush of pride after Chancellorsville,
he appealed to the Emperor to cease waiting on other powers and
recognize the Confederacy. Napoleon accorded another gracious
interview but still insisted that it was impossible for him to
act alone. He said that he was "more fully convinced than ever of
the propriety of a general recognition by the European powers of
the Confederate States but that the commerce of France and the
interests of the Mexican expedition would be jeopardized by a
rupture with the United States" and unless England would stand
by him he dared not risk such an eventuality. In point of fact,
he was like a speculator who is "hedging" on the stock exchange,
both buying and selling, and trying to make up his mind on which
cast to stake his fortune. At the same time he threw out once
more the sinister caution about the ships. He said that the
ships might be built in France but that their destination must
be concealed.

That Napoleon's choice just then, if England had supported him,
would have been recognition of the Confederacy, cannot be
doubted. The tangle of intrigue which he called his foreign
policy was not encouraging. He was deeply involved in Italian
politics, where the daring of Garibaldi had reopened the struggle
between clericals and liberals. In France itself the struggle
between parties was keen. Here, as in the American imbroglio, he
found it hard to decide with which party to break. The chimerical
scheme of a Latin empire in Mexico was his spectacular device to
catch the imagination, and incidentally the pocketbook, of
everybody. But in order to carry out this enterprise he must be
able to avert or withstand the certain hostility of the United
States. Therefore, as he told Slidell, "no other power than
England possessed a sufficient navy" to pull his chestnuts out
of the fire. The moment was auspicious, for there was a revival
of the "Southern party" in England. The sailing of the Alabama 
from Liverpool during the previous summer had encouraged the
Confederate agents and their British friends to undertake
further shipbuilding.

While M. Arman was at work in France, the Laird Brothers were at
work in England and their dockyards contained two ironclad rams
supposed to outclass any vessels of the United States navy.
Though every effort had been made to keep secret the ultimate
destination of these rams, the vigilance of the United States
minister, reinforced by the zeal of the "Northern party,"
detected strong circumstantial evidence pointing toward a
Confederate contract with the Lairds. A popular agitation ensued
along with demands upon the Government to investigate. To mask
the purposes of the Lairds, Captain James Bullock, the able
special agent of the Confederate navy, was forced to fall lack
upon the same tactics that were being used across the Channel,
and to sell the rams, on paper, to a firm in France. Neither he
nor Slidell yet appreciated what a doubtful refuge was the shadow
of Napoleon's wing.

Nevertheless the British Government, by this time practically
alined with the North, continued its search for the real owner of
the Laird rams. The "Southern party," however, had not quite
given up hope, and the agitation to prevent the sailing of the
rams was a keen spur to its flagging zeal. Furthermore the
prestige of Lee never was higher than it was in June, 1863, when
the news of Chancellorsville was still fresh and resounding in
every mind. It had given new life to the Confederate hope: Lee
would take Washington before the end of the summer; the Laird
rams would go to sea; the Union would be driven to the wall. So
reasoned the ardent friends of the South. But one thing was
lacking--a European alliance. What a time for England to
intervene!

While Slidell was talking with the Emperor, he had in his pocket
a letter from J. A. Roebuck, an English politician who wished to
force the issue in the House of Commons. As a preliminary to
moving the recognition of the Confederacy, he wanted authority to
deny a rumor going the rounds in London, to the effect that
Napoleon had taken position against intervention. Napoleon, when
he had seen the letter, began a negotiation of some sort with
this politician. It is needless to enter into the complications
that ensued, the subsequent recriminations, and the question as
to just what Napoleon promised at this time and how many of his
promises he broke. He was a diplomat of the old school, the
school of lying as a fine art. He permitted Roebuck to come over
to Paris for an audience, and Roebuck went away with the
impression that Napoleon could be relied upon to back up a new
movement for recognition. When, however, Roebuck brought the
matter before the Commons at the end of the month and encountered
an opposition from the Government that seemed to imply an
understanding with Napoleon which was different from his own, he
withdrew his motion (in July). Once more the scale turned against
the Confederacy, and Gettysburg was supplemented by the seizure
of the Laird rams by the British authorities. These events
explain the bitter turn given to Confederate feeling toward
England in the latter part of 1863. On the 4th of August Benjamin
wrote to Mason that "the perusal of the recent debates in
'Parliament satisfies the President" that Mason's "continued
residence in London is neither conducive to the interests nor
consistent with the dignity of this government," and directed him
to withdraw to Paris.

Confederate feeling, as it cooled toward England, warmed toward
France. Napoleon's Mexican scheme, including the offer of a
ready-made imperial crown to Maximilian, the brother of the
Emperor of Austria, was fully understood at Richmond; and with
Napoleon's need of an American ally, Southern hope revived. It
was further strengthened by a pamphlet which was translated and
distributed in the South as a newspaper article under the title
France, Mexico, and the Confederate States. The reputed author,
Michel Chevalier, was an imperial senator, another member of the
Napoleon ring, and highly trusted by his shifty master. The
pamphlet, which emphasized the importance of Southern
independence as a condition of Napoleon's "beneficent aims" in
Mexico, was held to have been inspired, and the imperial denial
was regarded as a mere matter of form.

What appeared to be significant of the temper of the Imperial
Government was a decree of a French court in the case of certain
merchants who sought to recover insurance on wine dispatched to
America and destroyed in a ship taken by the Alabama. Their plea
was that they were insured against loss by "pirates." The court
dismissed their suit and assessed costs against them. Further
evidence of Napoleon's favor was the permission given to the
Confederate cruiser Florida to repair at Brest and even to make
use of the imperial dockyard. The very general faith in
Napoleon's promises was expressed by Davis in his message to
Congress in December: "Although preferring our own government and
institutions to those of other countries, we can have no
disposition to contest the exercise by them of the same right of
self-government which we assert for ourselves. If the Mexican
people prefer a monarchy to a republic, it is our plain duty
cheerfully to acquiesce in their decision and to evince a sincere
and friendly interest in their prosperity.... The Emperor of
the French has solemnly disclaimed any purpose to impose on
Mexico a form of government not acceptable to the nation...."
In January, 1864, hope of recognition through support of
Napoleon's Mexican policy moved the Confederate Congress to adopt
resolutions providing for a Minister to the Mexican Empire and
giving him instructions with regard to a presumptive treaty. To
the new post Davis appointed General William Preston.

But what, while hope was springing high in America, was taking
place in France? So far as the world could say, there was little
if anything to disturb the Confederates; and yet, on the horizon,
a cloud the size of a man's hand had appeared. M. Arman had
turned to another member of the Legislative Assembly, a sound
Bonapartist like himself, M. Voruz, of Nantes, to whom he had
sublet a part of the Confederate contract. The truth about the
ships and their destination thus became part of the archives of
the Voruz firm. No phase of Napoleonic intrigue could go very far
without encountering dishonesty, and to the confidential clerk of
M. Voruz there occurred the bright idea of doing something for
himself with this valuable diplomatic information. One fine day
the clerk was missing and with him certain papers. Then there
ensued a period of months during which the firm and their
employers could only conjecture the full extent of their loss.

In reality, from the Confederate point of view, everything was
lost. Again the episode becomes too complex to be followed in
detail. Suffice it to say that the papers were sold to the United
States; that the secret was exposed; that the United States made
a determined assault upon the Imperial Government. In the midst
of this entanglement, Slidell lost his head, for hope deferred
when apparently within reach of its end is a dangerous councilor
of state. In his extreme anxiety, Slidell sent to the Emperor a
note the blunt rashness of which the writer could not have
appreciated. Saying that he feared the Emperor's subordinates
might play into the hands of Washington, he threw his fat in the
fire by speaking of the ships as "now being constructed at
Bordeaux and Nantes for the government of the Confederate States"
and virtually claimed of Napoleon a promise to let them go to
sea. Three days later the Minister of Foreign Affairs took him
sharply to task because of this note, reminding him that "what
had passed with the Emperor was confidential" and dropping the
significant hint that France could not be forced into war by
"indirection." According to Slidell's version of the interview
"the Minister's tone changed completely" when Slidell replied
with "a detailed history of the affair showing that the idea
originated with the Emperor." Perhaps the Minister knew more than
he chose to betray. From this hour the game was up. Napoleon's
purpose all along seems to have been quite plain. He meant to
help the South to win by itself, and, after it had won, to use it
for his own advantage. So precarious was his position in Europe
that he dared not risk an American war without England's aid, and
England had cast the die. In this way, secrecy was the condition
necessary to continued building of the ships. Now that the secret
was out, Napoleon began to shift his ground. He sounded the
Washington Government and found it suspiciously equivocal as to
Mexico. To silence the French republicans, to whom the American
minister had supplied information about the ships, Napoleon tried
at first muzzling the press. But as late as February, 1864, he
was still carrying water on both shoulders. His Minister of
Marine notified the builders that they must get the ships out of
France, unarmed, under fictitious sale to some neutral country.
The next month, reports which the Confederate commissioners sent
home became distinctly alarming. Mann wrote from Brussels:
"Napoleon has enjoined upon Maximilian to hold no official
relations with our commissioners in Mexico." Shortly after this
Slidell received a shock that was the beginning of the end:
Maximilian, on passing through Paris on his way to Mexico,
refused to receive him.

The Mexican project was now being condemned by all classes in
France. Nevertheless, the Government was trying to float a
Mexican loan, and it is hardly fanciful to think that on this
loan the last hope of the Confederacy turned. Despite the popular
attitude toward Mexico, the loan was going well when the House of
Representatives of the United States dealt the Confederacy a
staggering blow. It passed unanimous resolutions in the most grim
terms, denouncing the substitution of monarchical for republican
government in Mexico under European auspices. When this action
was reported in France, the Mexican loan collapsed.

Napoleon's Italian policy was now moving rapidly toward the
crisis which it reached during the following summer when he
surrendered to the opposition and promised to withdraw the French
troops from Rome. In May, when the loan collapsed, there was
nothing for it but to throw over his dear friends of the
Confederacy. Presently he had summoned Arman before him, "rated
him severely," and ordered him to make bona fide sales of the
ships to neutral powers. The Minister of Marine professed
surprise and indignation at Arman's trifling with the neutrality
of the Imperial Government. And that practically was the end of
the episode.

Equally complete was the breakdown of the Confederate
negotiations with Mexico. General Preston was refused
recognition. In those fierce days of July when the fate of
Atlanta was in the balance, the pride and despair of the
Confederate Government flared up in a haughty letter to Preston
reminding him that "it had never been the intention of this
Government to offer any arguments to the new Government of Mexico
...nor to place itself in any attitude other than that of
complete equality," and directing him to make no further
overtures to the Mexican Emperor.

And then came the debacle in Georgia. On that same 20th of
September when Benjamin poured out in a letter to Slidell his
stored-up bitterness denouncing Napoleon, Davis, feeling the last
crisis was upon him, left Richmond to join the army in Georgia.
His frame of mind he had already expressed when he said, "We have
no friends abroad."



Chapter IX. Desperate Remedies

The loss of Atlanta was the signal for another conflict of
authority within the Confederacy. Georgia was now in the
condition in which Alabama had found herself in the previous
year. A great mobile army of invaders lay encamped on her soil.
And yet there was still a state Government established at the
capital. Inevitably the man who thought of the situation from the
point of view of what we should now call the general staff, and
the man who thought of it from the point of view of a citizen of
the invaded State, suffered each an intensification of feeling,
and each became determined to solve the problem in his own way.
The President of the Confederacy and the Governor of Georgia
represented these incompatible points of view.

The Governor, Joseph E. Brown, is one of the puzzling figures of
Confederate history. We have already encountered him as a dogged
opponent of the Administration. With the whole fabric of Southern
life toppling about his ears, Brown argued, quibbled, evaded, and
became a rallying-point of disaffection. That more eminent
Georgian, Howell Cobb, applied to him very severe language, and
they became engaged in a controversy over that provision of the
Conscription Act which exempted state officials from military
service. While the Governor of Virginia was refusing certificates
of exemption to the minor civil officers such as justices of the
peace, Brown by proclamation promised his "protection" to the
most insignificant civil servants. "Will even your Excellency,"
demanded Cobb, "certify that in any county of Georgia twenty
justices of the peace and an equal number of constables are
necessary for the proper administration of the state
government?" The Bureau of Conscription estimated that Brown
kept out of the army approximately 8000 eligible men. The truth
seems to be that neither by education nor heredity was this
Governor equipped to conceive large ideas. He never seemed
conscious of the war as a whole, or of the Confederacy as a
whole. To defend Georgia and, if that could not be done, to make
peace for Georgia--such in the mind of Brown was the aim of the
war. His restless jealousy of the Administration finds its
explanation in his fear that it would denude his State of men.
The seriousness of Governor Brown's opposition became apparent
within a week of the fall of Atlanta. Among Hood's forces were
some 10,000 Georgia militia. Brown notified Hood that these
troops had been called out solely with a view to the defense of
Atlanta, that since Atlanta had been lost they must now be
permitted "to return to their homes and look for a time after
important interests," and that therefore he did "withdraw said
organizations" from Hood's command. In other words, Brown was
afraid that they might be taken out of the State. By proclamation
he therefore gave the militia a furlough of thirty days. Previous
to the issue of this proclamation, Seddon had written to Brown
making requisition for his 10,000 militia to assist in a pending
campaign against Sherman. Two days after his proclamation had
appeared, Brown, in a voluminous letter full of blustering
rhetoric and abounding in sneers at the President, demanded
immediate reinforcements by order of the President and threatened
that, if they were not sent, he would recall the Georgia troops
from the army of Lee and would command "all the sons of Georgia
to return to their own State and within their own limits to rally
round her glorious flag."

So threatening was the situation in Georgia that Davis attempted
to take it into his own hands. In a grim frame of mind he left
Richmond for the front. The resulting military arrangements do
not of course belong strictly to the subject matter of this
volume; but the brief tour of speechmaking which Davis made in
Georgia and the interior of South Carolina must be noticed; for
his purpose seems to have been to put the military point of view
squarely before the people. He meant them to see how the soldier
looked at the situation, ignoring all demands of locality, of
affiliation, of hardship, and considering only how to meet and
beat the enemy. In his tense mood he was not always fortunate in
his expressions. At Augusta, for example, he described
Beauregard, whom he had recently placed in general command over
Georgia and South Carolina, as one who would do whatever the
President told him to do. But this idea of military
self-effacement was not happily worded, and the enemies of Davis
seized on his phraseology as further evidence of his instinctive
autocracy. The Mercury compared him to the Emperor of Russia and
declared the tactless remark to be "as insulting to General
Beauregard as it is false and presumptuous in the President."

Meanwhile Beauregard was negotiating with Brown.  Though they
came to an understanding about the disposition of the militia,
Brown still tried to keep control of the state troops. When
Sherman was burning Atlanta preparatory to the March to the Sea,
Brown addressed to the Secretary of War another interminable
epistle, denouncing the Confederate authorities and asserting
his willingness to fight both the South and the North if they
did not both cease invading his rights. But the people of 
Georgia were better balanced than their Governor. Under the
leadership of such men as Cobb they rose to the occasion and did
their part in what proved a vain attempt to  conduct a "people's
war." Their delegation at Richmond sent out a stirring appeal
assuring them that Davis was doing for them all it was possible
to do. "Let every man fly to arms," said the appeal. "Remove
your negroes, horses, cattle, and provisions from before
Sherman's army, and burn what you cannot carry. Burn all bridges
and block up the roads in his route. Assail the invader in
front, flank, and rear, by night and by day. Let him have no
rest."


The Richmond Government was unable to detach any considerable
force from the northern front. Its contribution to the forces in
Georgia was accomplished by such pathetic means as a general
order calling to the colors all soldiers furloughed or in
hospital, "except those unable to travel"; by revoking all
exemptions to farmers, planters, and mechanics, except munitions
workers; and by placing one-fifth of the ordnance and mining
bureau in the battle service.

All the world knows how futile were these endeavors to stop the
whirlwind of desolation that was Sherman's march. He spent his
Christmas Day in Savannah. Then the center of gravity shifted
from Georgia to South Carolina. Throughout the two desperate
months that closed 1864 the authorities of South Carolina had
vainly sought for help from Richmond. Twice the Governor made
official request for the return to South Carolina of some of her
own troops who were at the front in Virginia. Davis first evaded
and then refused the request. Lee had informed him that if the
forces on the northern front were reduced, the evacuation of
Richmond would become inevitable.

The South Carolina Government, in December, 1864, seems to have
concluded that the State must save itself. A State Conscription
Act was passed placing all white males between the ages of
sixteen and sixty at the disposal of the state authorities for
emergency duty. An Exemption Act set forth a long list of persons
who should not be liable to conscription by the Confederate
Government. Still a third act regulated the impressment of slaves
for work on fortifications so as to enable the state authorities
to hold a check upon the Confederate authorities. The
significance of the three statutes was interpreted by a South
Carolina soldier, General John S. Preston, in a letter to the
Secretary of War that was a wail of despair. "This legislation
is an explicit declaration that this State does not intend to
contribute another soldier or slave to the public defense, except
on such terms its may be dictated by her authorities. The example
will speedily be followed by North Carolina and Georgia, the
Executives of those States having already assumed the position."

The division between the two parties in South Carolina had now
become bitter. To Preston the men behind the State Exemption Act
appeared as "designing knaves." The Mercury, on the other hand,
was never more relentless toward Davis than in the winter of
1864-1865. However, none or almost none of the anti-Davis men in
South Carolina made the least suggestion of giving up the
struggle. To fight to the end but also to act as a check upon the
central Government--as the new Governor, Andrew G. Magrath, said
in his inaugural address in December, 1864,--was the aim of the
dominant party in South Carolina. How far the State Government
and the Confederate Government had drifted apart is shown by two
comments which were made in January, 1865. Lee complained that
the South Carolina regiments, "much reduced by hard service,"
were not being recruited up to their proper strength because of
the measures adopted in the southeastern States to retain
conscripts at home. About the same date the Mercury arraigned
Davis for leaving South Carolina defenseless in the face of
Sherman's coming offensive, and asked whether Davis intende