d to
surrender the Confederacy.

And in the midst of this critical period, the labor problem
pushed to the fore again. The revocation of industrial details,
necessary as it was, had put almost the whole male population--in
theory, at least--in the general Confederate army. How
far-reaching was the effect of this order may be judged from the
experience of the Columbia and Augusta Railroad Company. This
road was building through the interior of the State a new line
which was rendered imperatively necessary by Sherman's seizure of
the lines terminating at Savannah. The effect of the revocation
order on the work in progress was described by the president of
the road in a letter to the Secretary of War:

"In July and August I made a fair beginning and by October we had
about 600 hands. General Order No. 77 took off many of our
contractors and hands. We still had increased the number of hands
to about 400 when Sherman started from Atlanta. The military
authorities of Augusta took about 300 of them to fortify that
city. These contractors being from Georgia returned with their
slaves to their homes after being discharged at Augusta. We still
have between 500 and 600 hands at work and are adding to the
force every week.

"The great difficulty has been in getting contractors exempt or
definitely detailed since Order No. 77. I have not exceeded eight
or nine contractors now detailed. The rest are exempt from other
causes or over age."

It was against such a background of economic confusion that
Magrath wrote to the Governor of North Carolina making a
revolutionary proposal. Virtually admitting that the Confederacy
had been shattered, and knowing the disposition of those in
authority to see only the military aspects of any given
situation, he prophesied two things: that the generals would soon
attempt to withdraw Lee's army south of Virginia, and that the
Virginia troops in that army would refuse to go. "It is natural
under the circumstances," said he, "that they would not." He
would prepare for this emergency by an agreement among the
Southeastern and Gulf States to act together irrespective of
Richmond, and would thus weld the military power of these States
into "a compact and organized mass."

Governor Vance, with unconscious subtlety, etched a portrait of
his own mind when he replied that the crisis demanded
"particularly the skill of the politician perhaps more than that
of the great general." He adroitly evaded saying what he really
thought of the situation but he made two explicit
counter-proposals. He suggested that a demand should be made for
the restoration of General Johnston and for the appointment of
General Lee to "full and absolute command of all the forces of
the Confederacy." On the day on which Vance wrote to Magrath, the
Mercury lifted up its voice and cried out for a Lee to take
charge of the Government and save the Confederacy. About the same
time Cobb wrote to Davis in the most friendly way, warning him
that he had scarcely a supporter left in Georgia, and that, in
view of the great popular reaction in favor of Johnston,
concessions to the opposition were an imperative necessity. "By
accident," said he, "I have become possessed of the facts in
connection with the proposed action of the Governors of certain
States." He disavowed any sympathy with the movement but warned
Davis that it was a serious menace.

Two other intrigues added to the general political confusion. One
of these, the "Peace Movement," will be considered in the next
chapter. The other was closely connected with the alleged
conspiracy to depose Davis and set up Lee as dictator. If the
traditional story, accepted by able historians, may be believed,
William C. Rives, of the Confederate Congress, carried in
January, 1865, to Lee from a congressional cabal an invitation to
accept the role of Cromwell. The greatest difficulty in the way
of accepting the tradition is the extreme improbability that any
one who knew anything of Lee would have been so foolish as to
make such a proposal. Needless to add, the tradition includes
Lee's refusal to overturn the Government. There can be no doubt,
however, that all the enemies of Davis in Congress and out of it,
in the opening months of 1865, made a determined series of
attacks upon his Administration. Nor can there be any doubt that
the popular faith in Lee was used as their trump card. To that
end, a bill was introduced to create the office of commanding
general of the Confederate armies. The bill was generally
applauded, and every one assumed that the new office was to be
given to Lee. On the day after the bill had passed the Senate the
Virginia Legislature resolved that the appointment of General Lee
to supreme command would "reanimate the spirit of the armies as
well as the people of the several States and...inspire
increased confidence in the final success of the cause." When the
bill was sent to the President, it was accompanied by a
resolution asking him to restore Johnston. While Davis was
considering this bill, the Virginia delegation in the House,
headed by the Speaker, Thomas S. Bocock, waited upon the
President, informed him what was really wanted was a change of
Cabinet, and told him that three-fourths of the House would
support a resolution of want of confidence in the Cabinet. The
next day Bocock repeated the demand in a note which Davis
described as a "warning if not a threat."

The situation of both President and country was now desperate.
The program with which the Government had entered so hopefully
upon this fated year had broken down at almost every point. In
addition to the military and administrative disasters, the
financial and economic situation was as bad as possible. So
complete was the financial breakdown that Secretary Memminger,
utterly disheartened, had resigned his office, and the Treasury
was now administered by a Charleston merchant, George A.
Trenholm. But the financial chaos was wholly beyond his control.
The government notes reckoned in gold were worth about three
cents on the dollar. The Government itself avoided accepting
them. It even bought up United States currency and used it in
transacting the business of the army. The extent of the financial
collapse was to be measured by such incidents as the following
which is recounted in a report that had passed under Davis's eye
only a few weeks before the "threat" of Bocock was uttered:
"Those holding the four per cent certificates complain that the
Government as far as possible discredits them. Fractions of
hundreds cannot be paid with them. I saw a widow lady, a few days
since, offer to pay her taxes of $1,271.31 with a certificate of
$1,300. The tax-gatherer refused to give her the change of
$28.69. She then offered the whole certificate for the taxes.
This was refused. This apparent injustice touched her far more
than the amount of the taxes."

A letter addressed to the President from Griffin, Georgia,
contained this dreary picture:

"Unless something is done and that speedily, there will be
thousands of the best citizens of the State and heretofore as
loyal as any in the Confederacy, that will not care one cent
which army is victorious in Georgia.... Since August last
there have been thousands of cavalry and wagon trains feeding
upon our cornfields and for which our quartermasters and officers
in command of trains, regiments, battalions, companies, and
squads, have been giving the farmers receipts, and we were all
told these receipts would pay our government taxes and tithing;
and yet not one of them will be taken by our collector....
And yet we are threatened with having our lands sold for taxes.
Our scrip for corn used by our generals will not be taken....
How is it that we have certified claims upon our Government, past
due ten months, and when we enter the quartermaster's office we
see placed up conspicuously in large letters "no funds." Some of
these said quartermasters [who] four years ago were not worth the
clothes upon their backs, are now large dealers in lands,
negroes, and real estate."

There was almost universal complaint that government contractors
were speculating in supplies and that the Impressment Law was
used by officials to cover their robbery of both the Government
and the people. Allowing for all the panic of the moment, one is
forced to conclude that the smoke is too dense not to cover a
good deal of fire. In a word, at the very time when local
patriotism everywhere was drifting into opposition to the general
military command and when Congress was reflecting this widespread
loss of confidence, the Government was loudly charged with
inability to restrain graft. In all these accusations there was
much injustice. Conditions that the Government was powerless to
control were cruelly exaggerated, and the motives of the
Government were falsified. For all this exaggeration and
falsification the press was largely to blame. Moreover, the
press, at least in dangerously large proportion, was schooling
the people to hold Davis personally responsible for all their
suffering. General Bragg was informed in a letter from a
correspondent in Mobile that "men have been taught to look upon
the President as an inexorably self-willed man who will see the
country to the devil before giving up an opinion or a purpose."
This deliberate fostering of an anti-Davis spirit might seem less
malicious if the fact were not known that many editors detested
Davis because of his desire to abolish the exemption of editors
from conscription. Their ignoble course brings to mind one of the
few sarcasms recorded of Lee--the remark that the great mistake
of the South was in making all its best military geniuses editors
of newspapers. But it must be added in all fairness that the
great opposition journals, such as the Mercury, took up this new
issue with the President because they professed to see in his
attitude toward the press a determination to suppress freedom of
speech, so obsessed was the opposition with the idea that Davis
was a monster! Whatever explanations may be offered for the
prevalence of graft, the impotence of the Government at Richmond
contributed to the general demoralization. In regions like
Georgia and Alabama, the Confederacy was now powerless to control
its agents. Furthermore, in every effort to assume adequate
control of the food situation the Government met the continuous
opposition of two groups of opponents--the unscrupulous parasites
and the bigots of economic and constitutional theory. Of the
activities of the first group, one incident is sufficient to tell
the whole story. At Richmond, in the autumn of 1864, the grocers
were selling rice at two dollars and a half a pound. It happened
that the Governor of Virginia was William Smith, one of the
strong men of the Confederacy who has not had his due from the
historians. He saw that even under the intolerable conditions of
the moment this price was shockingly exorbitant. To remedy
matters, the Governor took the State of Virginia into business,
bought rice where it was grown, imported it, and sold it in
Richmond at fifty cents a pound, with sufficient profit to cover
all costs of handling.

Nevertheless, when Smith urged the Virginia Legislature to assume
control of business as a temporary measure, be was at once
assailed by the second group--those martinets of
constitutionalism who would not give up their cherished
Anglo-Saxon tradition of complete individualism in government.
The Administration lost some of its staunchest supporters the
moment its later organ, the Sentinel, began advocating the
general regulation of prices. With ruin staring them in the face,
these devotees of tradition could only reiterate their ancient
formulas, nail their colors to the mast, end go down, satisfied
that, if they failed with these principles, they would have
failed still more terribly without them. Confronting the
practical question how to prevent speculators from charging 400
per cent profit, these men turned grim but did not abandon their
theory. In the latter part of 1864 they aligned themselves with
the opposition when the government commissioners of impressment
fixed an official schedule that boldly and ruthlessly cut under
market prices. The attitude of many such people was expressed by
the Montgomery Mail when it said:

"The tendency of the age, the march of the American people, is
toward monarchy, and unless the tide is stopped we shall reach
something worse than monarchy.

"Every step we have taken during the past four years has been in
the direction of military despotism.

"Half our laws are unconstitutional."

Another danger of the hour was the melting away of the
Confederate army under the very eyes of its commanders. The
records showed that there were 100,000 absentees. And though the
wrathful officials of the Bureau of Conscription labeled them all
"deserters," the term covered great numbers who had gone home to
share the sufferings of their families.

Such in brief was the fateful background of the congressional
attack upon the Administration in January, 1865. Secretary
Seddon, himself a Virginian, believing that he was the main
target of the hostility of the Virginia delegation, insisted upon
resigning. Davis met this determination with firmness, not to say
infatuation, and in spite of the congressional crisis, exhausted
every argument to persuade Seddon to remain in office. He denied
the right of Congress to control his Cabinet, but he was finally
constrained to allow Seddon to retire. The bitterness inspired by
these attempts to coerce the President may be gauged by a remark
attributed to Mrs. Davis. Speaking of the action of Congress in
forcing upon him the new plan for a single commanding general of
all the armies, she is said to have exclaimed, "I think I am the
proper person to advise Mr. Davis and if I were he, I would die
or be hung before I would submit to the humiliation."

Nevertheless the President surrendered to Congress. On January
26, 1865, he signed the bill creating the office of commanding
general and at once bestowed the office upon Lee. It must not be
supposed, however, that Lee himself had the slightest sympathy
with the congressional cabal which had forced upon the President
this reorganization of the army. In accepting his new position he
pointedly ignored Congress by remarking, "I am indebted alone to
the kindness of His Excellency, the President, for my nomination
to this high and arduous office."

The popular clamor for the restoration of Johnston had still to
be appeased. Disliking Johnston and knowing that the opposition
was using a popular general as a club with which to beat himself,
Davis hesitated long but in the end yielded to the inevitable. To
make the reappointment himself, however, was too humiliating. He
left it to the new commander-in-chief, who speedily restored
Johnston to command.



Chapter X. Disintegration

While these factions, despite their disagreements, were making
valiant efforts to carry on the war, other factions were
stealthily cutting the ground from under them. There were two
groups of men ripe for disaffection--original Unionists
unreconciled to the Confederacy and indifferentists conscripted
against their will.

History has been unduly silent about these disaffected men. At
the time so real was the belief in state rights that
contemporaries were reluctant to admit that any Southerner, once
his State had seceded, could fail to be loyal to its commands.
Nevertheless in considerable areas--such, for example, as East
Tennessee--the majority remained to the end openly for the Union,
and there were large regions in the South to which until quite
recently the eye of the student had not been turned. They were
like deep shadows under mighty trees on the face of a brilliant
landscape. When the peasant Unionist who had been forced into the
army deserted, however, he found in these shadows a nucleus of
desperate men ready to combine with him in opposition to the
local authorities.

Thus were formed local bands of free companions who pillaged the
civilian population. The desperadoes whom the deserters joined
have been described by Professor Dodd as the "neglected
byproducts" of the old regime. They were broken white men, or the
children of such, of the sort that under other circumstances have
congregated in the slums of great cities. Though the South lacked
great cities, nevertheless it had its slum--a widespread slum,
scattered among its swamps and forests. In these fastnesses were
the lowest of the poor whites, in whom hatred of the dominant
whites and vengeful malice against the negro burned like slow
fires. When almost everywhere the countryside was stripped of its
fighting men, these wretches emerged from their swamps and
forests, like the Paris rabble emerging from its dens at the
opening of the Revolution. But unlike the Frenchmen, they were
too sodden to be capable of ideas. Like predatory wild beasts
they revenged themselves upon the society that had cast them off,
and with utter heartlessness they smote the now defenseless
negro. In the old days, with the country well policed, the slaves
had been protected against their fury, but war now changed all.
The negro villages--or "streets," as the term was--were without
arms and without white police within call. They were ravaged by
these marauders night after night, and negroes were not the only
victims, for in remote districts even murder of the whites became
a familiar horror.

The antiwar factions were not necessarily, however, users of
violence. There were some men who cherished a dream which they
labeled "reconstruction"; and there were certain others who
believed in separate state action, still clinging to the illusion
that any State had it in its power to escape from war by
concluding a separate peace with the United States.

Yet neither of these illusions made much headway in the States
-that had borne the strain of intellectual leadership. Virginia
and South Carolina, though seldom seeing things eye to eye and
finally drifting in opposite directions, put but little faith in
either "reconstruction" or separate peace. Their leaders had
learned the truth about men and nations; they knew that life is a
grim business; they knew that war had unloosed passions that had
to spend themselves and that could not be talked away.

But there was scattered over the Confederacy a population which
lacked experience of the world and which included in the main
those small farmers and semi-peasants who under the old regime
were released from the burden of taxation and at the same time
excluded from the benefits of education. Among these people the
illusions of the higher classes were reflected without the
ballast of mentality. Ready to fight on any provocation, yet
circumscribed by their own natures, not understanding life,
unable to picture to themselves different types and conditions,
these people were as prone as children to confuse the world of
their own desire with the world of fact. When hardship came, when
taxation fell upon them with a great blow, when the war took a
turn that necessitated imagination for its understanding and
faith for its pursuit, these people with childlike simplicity
immediately became panic-stricken. Like the similar class in the
North, they had measureless faith in talk. Hence for them, as for
Horace Greeley and many another, sprang up the notion that if
only all their sort could be brought together for talk and talk
and yet more talk, the Union could be "reconstructed" just as it
used to be, and the cruel war would end. Before their eyes, as
before Greeley in 1864, danced the fata morgana of a convention
of all the States, talking, talking, talking.

The peace illusion centered in North Carolina, where the people
were as enthusiastic for state sovereignty as were any
Southerners. They had seceded mainly because they felt that this
principle had been attacked. Having themselves little if any
intention to promote slavery, they nevertheless were prompt to
resent interference with the system or with any other Southern
institution. Jonathan Worth said that they looked on both
abolition and secession as children of the devil, and he put the
responsibility for the secession of his State wholly upon Lincoln
and his attempt to coerce the lower South. This attitude was
probably characteristic of all classes in North Carolina. There
also an unusually large percentage of men lacked education and
knowledge of the world. We have seen how the first experience
with taxation produced instant and violent reaction. The peasant
farmers of the western counties and the general mass of the
people began to distrust the planter class. They began asking if
their allies, the other States, were controlled by that same
class which seemed to be crushing them by the exaction of tithes.
And then the popular cry was raised: Was there after all anything
in the war for the masses in North Carolina? Had they left the
frying-pan for the fire? Could they better things by withdrawing
from association with their present allies and going back alone
into the Union? The delusion that they could do so whenever they
pleased and on the old footing seems to have been widespread. One
of their catch phrases was "the Constitution as it is and the
Union as it was." Throughout 1863, when the agitation against
tithes was growing every day, the "conservatives" of North
Carolina, as their leaders named them, were drawing together in a
definite movement for peace. This project came to a head during
the next year in those grim days when Sherman was before Atlanta.
Holden, that champion of the opposition to tithes, became a
candidate for Governor against Vance, who was standing for
reelection. Holden stated his platform in the organ of his party
"If the people of North Carolina are for perpetual conscriptions,
impressments and seizures to keep up a perpetual, devastating and
exhausting war, let them vote for Governor Vance, for he is
for`fighting it out now; but if they believe, from the bitter
experience of the last three years, that the sword can never end
it, and are in favor of steps being taken by the State to urge
negotiations by the general government for an honorable and
speedy peace, they must vote for Mr. Holden."

As Holden, however, was beaten by a vote that stood about three
to one, Governor Vance continued in power, but just what he stood
for and just what his supporters understood to be his policy
would be hard to say. A year earlier he was for attempting to
negotiate peace, but though professing to have come over to the
war party he was never a cordial supporter of the Confederacy. In
a hundred ways he played upon the strong local distrust of
Richmond, and upon the feeling that North Carolina was being
exploited in the interests of the remainder of the South. To
cripple the efficiency of Confederate conscription was one of his
constant aims. Whatever his views of the struggle in which he was
engaged, they did not include either an appreciation of Southern
nationalism or the strategist's conception of war. Granted that
the other States were merely his allies, Vance pursued a course
that might justly have aroused their suspicion, for so far as he
was able he devoted the resources of the State wholly to the use
of its own citizens. The food and the manufactures of North
Carolina were to be used solely by its own troops, not by troops
of the Confederacy raised in other States. And yet, subsequent to
his reelection, he was not a figure in the movement to negotiate
peace.

Meanwhile in Georgia, where secession had met with powerful
opposition, the policies of the Government had produced
discontent not only with the management of the war but with the
war itself. And now Alexander H. Stephens becomes, for a season,
very nearly the central figure of Confederate history. Early in
1864 the new act suspending the writ of habeas corpus had aroused
the wrath of Georgia, and Stephens had become the mouthpiece of
the opposition. In an address to the Legislature, he condemned in
most exaggerated language not only the Habeas Corpus Act but also
the new Conscription Act. Soon afterward he wrote a long letter
to Herschel V. Johnson, who, like himself, had been an enemy of
secession in 1861. He said that if Johnson doubted that the
Habeas Corpus Act was a blow struck at the very "vitals of
liberty," then he "would not believe though one were to rise from
the dead." In this extraordinary letter Stephens went on "most
confidentially" to state his attitude toward Davis thus "While I
do not and never have regarded him as a great man or statesman on
a large scale, or a man of any marked genius, yet I have regarded
him as a man of good intentions, weak and vacillating, timid,
petulant, peevish, obstinate, but not firm. Am now beginning to
doubt his good intentions.... His whole policy on the
organization and discipline of the army is perfectly consistent
with the hypothesis that he is aiming at absolute power."

That a man of Stephens's ability should have dealt in fustian
like this in the most dreadful moment of Confederate history is a
psychological problem that is not easily solved. To be sure,
Stephens was an extreme instance of the martinet of
constitutionalism. He reminds us of those old-fashioned generals
of whom Macaulay said that they preferred to lose a battle
according to rule than win it by an exception. Such men find it
easy to transform into a bugaboo any one who appears to them to
be acting irregularly. Stephens in his own mind had so
transformed the President. The enormous difficulties and the
wholly abnormal circumstances which  surrounded Davis counted
with Stephens for nothing at all, and he reasoned about the
Administration as if it were operating in a vacuum. Having come
to this extraordinary position, Stephens passed easily into a
role that verged upon treason.*

* There can be no question that Stephens never did anything which
in his own mind was in the least disloyal. And yet it was
Stephens who, in the autumn of 1864, was singled out by artful
men as a possible figurehead in the conduct of a separate peace
negotiation with Sherman. A critic very hostile to Stephens and
his faction might here raise the question as to what was at
bottom the motive of Governor Brown, in the autumn of 1864, in
withdrawing the Georgia militia from Hood's command. Was there
something afoot that has never quite revealed itself on the broad
pages of history? As ordinarily told, the story is simply that
certain desperate Georgians asked Stephens to be their ambassador
to Sherman to discuss terms; that Sherman had given them
encouragement; but that Stephens avoided the trap, and so nothing
came of it. The recently published correspondence of Toombs,
Stephens, and Cobb, however, contains one passage that has rather
a startling sound. Brown, writing to Stephens regarding his
letter refusing to meet Sherman, says, "It keeps the door open
and I think this is wise." At the same time he made a public
statement that "Georgia has power to act independently but her
faith is pledged by implication to her Southern sisters...
will triumph with her Southern sisters or sink with them in
common ruin." It is still to be discovered what "door" Stephens
was supposed to have kept open.  Peace talk was now in the air,
and especially was there chatter about reconstruction. The
illusionists seemed unable to perceive that the reelection of
Lincoln had robbed them of their last card. These dreamers did
not even pause to wonder why after the terrible successes of the
Federal army in Georgia, Lincoln should be expected to reverse
his policy and restore the Union with the Southern States on the
old footing. The peace mania also invaded South Carolina and was
espoused by one of its Congressmen, Mr. Boyce, but he made few
converts among his own people. The Mercury scouted the idea;
clear-sighted and disillusioned, it saw the only alternatives to
be victory or subjugation. Boyce's argument was that the South
had already succumbed to military despotism and would have to
endure it forever unless it accepted the terms of the invaders.
News of Boyce's attitude called forth vigorous protest from the
army before Petersburg, and even went so far afield as New York,
where it was discussed in the columns of the Herald.

In the midst of the Northern elections, when Davis was hoping
great things from the anti-Lincoln men, Stephens had said in
print that he believed Davis really wished the Northern peace
party defeated, whereupon Davis had written to him demanding
reasons for this astounding charge. To the letter, which had
missed Stephens at his home and had followed him late in the year
to Richmond, Stephens wrote in the middle of December a long
reply which is one of the most curious documents in American
history. He justified himself upon two grounds. One was a
statement which Davis had made in a speech at Columbia, in
October, indicating that he was averse to the scheme of certain
Northern peace men for a convention of all the States. Stephens
insisted that such a convention would have ended the war and
secured the independence of the South. Davis cleared himself on
this charge by saying that the speech at Columbia "was delivered
after the publication of McClellan's letter avowing his purpose
to force reunion by war if we declined reconstruction when
offered, and therefore warned the people against delusive hopes
of peace from any other influence than that to be exerted by the
manifestation of an unconquerable spirit."

As Stephens professed to have independence and not reconstruction
for his aim, he had missed his mark with this first shot. He
fared still worse with the second. During the previous spring a
Northern soldier captured in the southeast had appealed for
parole on the ground that he was a secret emissary to the
President from the peace men of the North. Davis, who did not
take him seriously, gave orders to have the case investigated,
but Stephens, whose mentality in this period is so curiously
overcast, swallowed the prisoner's story without hesitation. He
and Davis had a considerable amount of correspondence on the
subject. In the fierce tension of the summer of 1864 the War
Department went so far as to have the man's character
investigated, but the report was unsatisfactory. He was not
paroled and died in prison. This episode Stephens now brought
forward as evidence that Davis had frustrated an attempt of the
Northern peace party to negotiate. Davis contented himself with
replying, "I make no comment on this."

The next step in the peace intrigue took place at the opening of
the next year, 1865. Stephens attempted to address the Senate on
his favorite topic, the wickedness of the suspension of habeas
corpus; was halted by a point of parliamentary law; and when the
Senate sustained an appeal from his decision, left the chamber in
a pique. Hunter, now a Senator, became an envoy to placate him
and succeeded in bringing him back. Thereupon Stephens poured out
his soul in a furious attack upon the Administration. He ended by
submitting resolutions which were just what he might have
submitted four years earlier before a gun had been fired, so
entirely had his mind crystallized in the stress of war! These
resolutions, besides reasserting the full state rights theory,
assumed the readiness of the North to make peace and called for a
general convention of all the States to draw up some new
arrangement on a confessed state rights basis. More than a month
before, Lincoln had been reelected on an unequivocal
nationalistic platform. And yet Stephens continued to believe
that the Northerners did not mean what they said and that in
congregated talking lay the magic which would change the world of
fact into the world of his own desire.

At this point in the peace intrigue the ambiguous figure of
Napoleon the Little reappears, though only to pass ghostlike
across the back of the stage. The determination of Northern
leaders to oppose Napoleon had suggested to shrewd politicians a
possible change of front. That singular member of the Confederate
Congress, Henry S. Foote, thought he saw in the Mexican imbroglio
means to bring Lincoln to terms. In November he had introduced
into the House resolutions which intimated that "it might become
the true policy of...the Confederate States to consent to the
yielding of the great principle embodied in the Monroe Doctrine."
The House referred his resolutions to the Committee on Foreign
Affairs, and there they slumbered until January.

Meanwhile a Northern politician brought on the specter of
Napoleon for a different purpose. Early in January, 1865, Francis
P. Blair made a journey to Richmond and proposed to Davis a plan
of reconciliation involving the complete abandonment of slavery,
the reunion of all the States, and an expedition against Mexico
in which Davis was to play the leading role. Davis cautiously
refrained from committing himself, though he gave Blair a letter
in which he expressed his willingness to enter into negotiations
for peace between "the two countries." The visit of Blair gave
new impetus to the peace intrigue. The Confederate House
Committee on Foreign Affairs reported resolutions favoring an
attempt to negotiate with the United States so as to "bring into
view" the possibility of cooperation between the United States
and the Confederacy to maintain the Monroe Doctrine. The same day
saw another singular incident. For some reason that has never
been divulged Foote determined to counterbalance Blair's visit to
Richmond by a visit of his own to Washington. In attempting to
pass through the Confederate lines he was arrested by the
military authorities. With this fiasco Foote passes from the
stage of history.

The doings of Blair, however, continued to be a topic of general
interest throughout January. The military intrigue was now
simmering down through the creation of the office of commanding
general. The attempt of the congressional opposition to drive the
whole Cabinet from office reached a compromise in the single
retirement of the Secretary of War. Before the end of the month
the peace question was the paramount one before Congress and the
country. Newspapers discussed the movements of Blair, apparently
with little knowledge, and some of the papers asserted hopefully
that peace was within reach. Cooler heads, such as the majority
of the Virginia Legislature, rejected this idea as baseless. The
Mercury called the peace party the worst enemy of the South. Lee
was reported by the Richmond correspondent of the Mercury as not
caring a fig for the peace project. Nevertheless the rumor
persisted that Blair had offered peace on terms that the
Confederacy could accept. Late in the month, Davis appointed
Stephens, Hunter, and John A. Campbell commissioners to confer
with the Northern authorities with regard to peace.

There followed the famous conference of February 3, 1865, in the
cabin of a steamer at Hampton Roads, with Seward and Lincoln. The
Confederate commissioners represented two points of view: that of
the Administration, unwilling to make peace without independence;
and that of the infatuated Stephens who clung to the idea that
Lincoln did not mean what he said, and who now urged "an
armistice allowing the States to adjust themselves as suited
their interests. If it would be to their interests to reunite,
they would do so." The refusal of Lincoln to consider either of
these points of view--the refusal so clearly foreseen by
Davis--put an end to the career of Stephens. He was "hoist with
his own petard."

The news of the failure of the conference was variously received.
The Mercury rejoiced because there was now no doubt how things
stood. Stephens, unwilling to cooperate with the Administration,
left the capital and went home to Georgia. At Richmond, though
the snow lay thick on the ground, a great public meeting was held
on the 6th of February in the precincts of the African Church.
Here Davis made an address which has been called his greatest and
which produced a profound impression. A wave of enthusiasm swept
over Richmond, and for a moment the President appeared once more
to be master of the situation. His immense audacity carried the
people with him when, after showing what might be done by more
drastic enforcement of the conscription laws, he concluded: "Let
us then unite our hands and our hearts, lock our shields
together, and we may well believe that before another summer
solstice falls upon us, it will be the enemy that will be asking
us for conferences and occasions in which to make known our
demands."



Chapter XI. An Attempted Revolution

Almost from the moment when the South had declared its
independence voices had been raised in favor of arming the
negroes. The rejection of a plan to accomplish this was one of
the incidents of Benjamin's tenure of the portfolio of the War
Department; but it was not until the early days of 1864, when the
forces of Johnston lay encamped at Dalton, Georgia, that the
arming of the slaves was seriously discussed by a council of
officers. Even then the proposal had its determined champions,
though there were others among Johnston's officers who regarded
it as "contrary to all true principles of chivalric warfare," and
their votes prevailed in the council by a large majority.

From that time forward the question of arming the slaves hung
like a heavy cloud over all Confederate thought of the war. It
was discussed in the army and at home around troubled firesides.
Letters written from the trenches at Petersburg show that it was
debated by the soldiers, and the intense repugnance which the
idea inspired in some minds was shown by threats to leave the
ranks if the slaves were given arms.

Amid the pressing, obvious issues of 1864, this project hardly
appears upon the face of the record until it was alluded to in
Davis's message to Congress in November, 1864, and in the annual
report of the Secretary of War. The President did not as yet ask
for slave soldiers. He did, however, ask for the privilege of
buying slaves for government use--not merely hiring them from
their owners as had hitherto been done--and for permission, if
the Government so desired, to emancipate them at the end of their
service. The Secretary of War went farther, however, and
advocated negro soldiers, and he too suggested their emancipation
at the end of service.

This feeling of the temper of the country, so to speak, produced
an immediate response. It drew Rhett from his retirement and
inspired a letter in which he took the Government severely to
task for designing to remove from state control this matter of
fundamental importance. Coinciding with the cry for more troops
with which to confront Sherman, the topic of negro soldiers
became at once one of the questions of the hour. It helped to
focus that violent anti-Davis movement which is the conspicuous
event of December, 1864, and January, 1865. Those who believed
the President unscrupulous trembled at the thought of putting
into his hands a great army of hardy barbarians trained to
absolute obedience. The prospect of such a weapon held in one
firm hand at Richmond seemed to those opponents of the President
a greater menace to their liberties than even the armies of the
invaders. It is quite likely that distrust of Davis and dread of
the use he might make of such a weapon was increased by a letter
from Benjamin to Frederick A. Porcher of Charleston, a supporter
of the Government, who had made rash suggestions as to the
extra-constitutional power that the Administration might be
justified by circumstances in assuming. Benjamin deprecated such
suggestions but concluded with the unfortunate remark: "If the
Constitution is not to be our guide I would prefer to see it
suppressed by a revolution which should declare a dictatorship
during the war, after the manner of ancient Rome, leaving to the
future the care of reestablishing firm and regular government."
In the State of Virginia, indeed, the revolutionary suggestions
of the President's message and the Secretary's report were
promptly taken up and made the basis of a political program,
which Governor Smith embodied in his message to the
Legislature--a document that will eventually take its place among
the most interesting state papers of the Confederacy. It should
be noted that the suggestions thrown out in this way by the
Administration to test public feeling involved three distinct
questions: Should the slaves be given arms? Should they, if
employed as soldiers, be given their freedom? Should this
revolutionary scheme, if accepted at all, be handled by the
general Government or left to the several States? On the last of
the three questions the Governor of Virginia was silent; by
implication he treated the matter as a concern of the States.
Upon the first and second questions, however, he was explicit and
advised arming the slaves. He then added:

"Even if the result were to emancipate our slaves, there is not a
man who would not cheerfully put the negro into the Army rather
than become a slave himself to our hated and vindictive foe. It
is, then, simply a question of time. Has the time arrived when
this issue is fairly before us? ...For my part standing before
God and my country, I do not hesitate to say that I would arm
such portion of our able-bodied slave population as may be
necessary, and put them in the field, so as to have them ready
for the spring campaign, even if it resulted in the freedom of
those thus organized. Will I not employ them to fight the negro
force of the enemy? Aye, the Yankees themselves, who already
boast that they have 200,000 of our slaves in arms against us.
Can we hesitate, can we doubt, when the question is, whether the
enemy shall use our slaves against us or we use them against him;
when the question may be between liberty and independence on the
one hand, or our subjugation and utter ruin on the other?"

With their Governor as leader for the Administration, the
Virginians found this issue the absorbing topic of the hour. And
now the great figure of Lee takes its rightful place at the very
center of Confederate history, not only military but civil, for
to Lee the Virginia politicians turned for advice.* In a letter
to a State Senator of Virginia who had asked for a public
expression of Lee's views because "a mountain of prejudices, 
growing out of our ancient modes of regarding the institution of 
Southern slavery will have to be met and overcome" in order to 
Attain unanimity, Lee discussed both the institution of slavery 
and the situation of the moment. He plainly intimated that
slavery 
should be placed under state control; and, assuming such control,

he considered "the relation of master and slave...the best that
can exist between the black and white races while intermingled as
at present in this country." He went on to show, however, that
military necessity now compelled a revolution in sentiment on
this subject, and he came at last to this momentous conclusion:

* Lee now revealed himself in his previously overlooked capacity
of statesman. Whether his abilities in this respect equaled his
abilities as a soldier need not here be considered; it is said
that he himself had no high opinion of them. However, in the
advice which he gave at this final moment of crisis, he expressed
a definite conception of the articulation of civil forces in such
a system as that of the Confederacy. He held that all initiative
upon basal matters should remain with the separate States, that
the function of the general Government was to administer, not to
create conditions, and that the proper power to constrain the
State Legislatures was the flexible, extra-legal power of public
opinion.

"Should the war continue under existing circumstances, the enemy
may in course of time penetrate our country and get access to a
large part of our negro population. It is his avowed policy to
convert the able-bodied men among them into soldiers, and to
emancipate all.... His progress will thus add to his numbers,
and at the same time destroy slavery in a manner most pernicious
to the welfare of our people. Their negroes will be used to hold
them in subjection, leaving the remaining force of the enemy free
to extend his conquest. Whatever may be the effect of our
employing negro troops, it cannot be as mischievous as this. If
it end in subverting slavery it will be accomplished by
ourselves, and we can devise the means of alleviating the evil
consequences to both races. I think, therefore, we must decide
whether slavery shall be extinguished by our enemies and the
slaves be used against us, or use them ourselves at the risk of
the effects which may be produced upon our social
institutions..."

"The reasons that induce me to recommend the employment of negro
troops at all render the effect of the measures...upon
slavery immaterial, and in my opinion the best means of securing
the efficiency and fidelity of this auxiliary force would be to
accompany the measure with a well-digested plan of gradual and
general emancipation. As that will be the result of the
continuance of the war, and will certainly occur if the enemy
succeed, it seems to me most advisable to adopt it at once, and
thereby obtain all the benefits that will accrue to our cause..."

"I can only say in conclusion, that whatever measures are to be
adopted should be adopted at once. Every day's delay increases
the difficulty. Much time will be required to organize and
discipline the men, and action may be deferred until it is too
late."

Lee wrote these words on January 11, 1865. At that time a fresh
wave of despondency had gone over the South because of Hood's
rout at Nashville; Congress was debating intermittently the
possible arming of the slaves; and the newspapers were
prophesying that the Administration would presently force the
issue. It is to be observed that Lee did not advise Virginia to
wait for Confederate action. He advocated emancipation by the
State. After all, to both Lee and Smith, Virginia was their
"country."

During the next sixty days Lee rejected two great
opportunities--or, if you will, put aside two great temptations.
If tradition is to be trusted, it was during January that Lee
refused to play the role of Cromwell by declining to intervene
directly in general Confederate politics. But there remained open
the possibility of his intervention in Virginia politics, and the
local crisis was in its own way as momentous as the general
crisis. What if Virginia had accepted the views of Lee and
insisted upon the immediate arming of the slaves? Virginia,
however, did not do so; and Lee, having made public his position,
refrained from further participation. Politically speaking, he
maintained a splendid isolation at the head of the armies.

Through January and February the Virginia crisis continued
undetermined. In this period of fateful hesitation, the
"mountains of prejudice" proved too great to be undermined even
by the influence of Lee. When at last Virginia enacted a law
permitting the arming of her slaves, no provision was made for
their manumission.

Long before the passage of this act in Virginia, Congress had
become the center of the controversy. Davis had come to the point
where no tradition however cherished would stand, in his mind,
against the needs of the moment. To reinforce the army in great
strength was now his supreme concern, and he saw but one way to
do it. As a last resort he was prepared to embrace the bold plan
which so many people still regarded with horror and which as late
as the previous November he himself had opposed. He would arm the
slaves. On February 10, 1865, bills providing for the arming of
the slaves were introduced both in the House and in the Senate.

On this issue all the forces both of the Government and the
opposition fought their concluding duel in which were involved
all the other basal issues that had distracted the country since
1862. Naturally there was a bewildering criss-cross of political
motives. There were men who, like Smith and Lee, would go along
with the Government on emancipation, provided it was to be
carried out by the free will of the States. There were others who
preferred subjugation to the arming of the slaves; and among
these there were clashings of motive. Then, too, there were those
who were willing to arm the slaves but were resolved not to give
them their freedom.

The debate brings to the front of the political stage the figure
of R. M. T. Hunter. Hitherto his part has not been conspicuous
either as Secretary of State or as Senator from Virginia. He now
becomes, in the words of Davis, "a chief obstacle" to the passage
of the Senate bill which would have authorized a levy of negro
troops and provided for their manumission by the War Department
with the consent of the State in which they should be at the time
of the proposed manumission. After long discussion, this bill was
indefinitely postponed. Meanwhile a very different bill had
dragged through the House. While it was under debate, another
appeal was made to Lee. Barksdale, who came as near as any one to
being the leader of the Administration, sought Lee's aid. Again
the General urged the enrollment of negro soldiers and their
eventual manumission, but added this immensely significant
proviso:

"I have no doubt that if Congress would authorize their [the
negroes'] reception into service, and empower the President to
call upon individuals or States for such as they are willing to
contribute, with the condition of emancipation to all enrolled, a
sufficient number would be forthcoming to enable us to try the
experiment [of determining whether the slaves would make good
soldiers]. If it proved successful, most of the objections to the
measure would disappear, and if individuals still remained
unwilling to send their negroes to the army, the force of public
opinion in the States would soon bring about such legislation as
would remove all obstacles. I think the matter should be left, as
far as possible, to the people and to the States, which alone can
legislate as the necessities of this particular service may
require."

The fact that Congress had before it this advice from Lee
explains why all factions accepted a compromise bill, passed on
the 9th of March, approved by the President on the 13th of March,
and issued to the country in a general order on the 23d of March.
It empowered the President to "ask for and accept from the owners
of slaves" the service of such number of negroes as he saw fit,
and if sufficient number were not offered to "call on each State
...for her quota of 300,000 troops...to be raised from
such classes of the population, irrespective of color, in each
State as the proper authorities thereof may determine." However,
"nothing in this act shall be construed to authorize a change in
the relation which the said slaves shall bear toward their
owners, except by consent of the owners and of the States in
which they may reside and in pursuance of the laws thereof."

The results of this act were negligible. Its failure to offer the
slave-soldier his freedom was at once seized upon by critics as
evidence of the futility of the course of the Administration. The
sneer went round that the negro was to be made to fight for his
own captivity. Pollard--whose words, however, must be taken with
a
grain of salt--has left this account of recruiting under the new
act: "Two companies of blacks, organized from some negro
vagabonds in Richmond, were allowed to give balls at the Libby
Prison and were exhibited in fine fresh uniforms on Capitol
Square as decoys to obtain recruits. But the mass of their
colored brethren looked on the parade with unenvious eyes, and
little boys exhibited the early prejudices of race by pelting the
fine uniforms with mud."

Nevertheless both Davis and Lee busied themselves in the endeavor
to raise black troops. Governor Smith cooperated with them. And
in the mind of the President there was no abandonment of the
program of emancipation, which was now his cardinal policy. Soon
after the passage of the act, he wrote to Smith: "I am happy to
receive your assurance of success [in raising black troops], as
well as your promise to seek legislation to secure unmistakable
freedom to the slave who shall enter the Army, with a right to
return to his old home, when he shall have