 been honorably
discharged from military service."

While this final controversy was being fought out in Congress,
the enthusiasm for the Administration had again ebbed. Its
recovery of prestige had run a brief course and was gone, and now
in the midst of the discussion over the negro soldiers' bills,
the opposition once more attacked the Cabinet, with its old
enemy, Benjamin, as the target. Resolutions were introduced into
the Senate declaring that "the retirement of the Honorable Judah
P. Benjamin from the State Department will be subservient of the
public interests"; in the House resolutions were offered
describing his public utterances as "derogatory to his position
as a high public functionary of the Confederate Government, a
reflection on the motives of Congress as a deliberative body, and
an insult to public opinion."

So Congress wrangled and delayed while the wave of fire that was
Sherman's advance moved northward through the Carolinas. Columbia
had gone up in smoke while the Senate debated day after
day--fifteen in all--what to do with the compromise bill sent up
to it from the House. It was during this period that a new
complication appears to have been added to a situation which was
already so hopelessly entangled, for this was the time when
Governor Magrath made a proposal to Governor Vance for a league
within the Confederacy, giving as his chief reason that
Virginia's interests were parting company with those of the lower
South. The same doubt of the upper South appears at various times
in the Mercury. And through all the tactics of the opposition
runs the constant effort to discredit Davis. The Mercury scoffed
at the agitation for negro soldiers as a mad attempt on the part
of the Administration to remedy its "myriad previous blunders."

In these terrible days, the mind of Davis hardened. He became
possessed by a lofty and intolerant confidence, an absolute
conviction that, in spite of all appearances, he was on the
threshold of success. We may safely ascribe to him in these days
that illusory state of mind which has characterized some of the
greatest of men in their over-strained, concluding periods. His
extraordinary promises in his later messages, a series of vain
prophecies beginning with his speech at the African Church,
remind one of Napoleon after Leipzig refusing the Rhine as a
boundary. His nerves, too, were all but at the breaking point. He
sent the Senate a scolding message because of its delay in
passing the Negro Soldiers' Bill. The Senate answered in a report
that was sharply critical of his own course. Shortly afterward
Congress adjourned refusing his request for another suspension of
the writ of habeas corpus.

Davis had hinted at important matters he hoped soon to be able to
submit to Congress. What he had in mind was the last, the
boldest, stroke of this period of desperation. The policy of
emancipation he and Benjamin had accepted without reserve. They
had at last perceived, too late, the power of the anti-slavery
movement in Europe. Though they had already failed to coerce
England through cotton and had been played with and abandoned by
Napoleon, they persisted in thinking that there was still a
chance for a third chapter in their foreign affairs.

The agitation to arm the slaves, with the promise of freedom, had
another motive besides the reinforcement of Lee's army: it was
intended to serve as a basis for negotiations with England and
France. To that end D. J. Kenner was dispatched to Europe early
in 1865. Passing through New York in disguise, he carried word of
this revolutionary program to the Confederate commissioners
abroad. A conference at Paris was held by Kenner, Mason, and
Slidell. Mason, who had gone over to England to sound Palmerston
with regard to this last Confederate hope, was received on the
14th of March. On the previous day, Davis had accepted temporary
defeat, by signing the compromise bill which omitted
emancipation. But as there was no cable operating at the time,
Mason was not aware of this rebuff. In his own words, he "urged
upon Lord P. that if the President was right in his impression
that there was some latent, undisclosed obstacle on the part of
Great Britain to recognition, it should be frankly stated, and we
might, if in our power to do so, consent to remove it."
Palmerston, though his manner was "conciliatory and kind,"
insisted that there was nothing "underlying" his previous
statements, and that he could not, in view of the facts then
existing, regard the Confederacy in the light of an independent
power. Mason parted from him convinced that "the most ample
concessions on our part in the matter referred to would have
produced no change in the course determined on by the British
Government with regard to recognition." In a subsequent interview
with Lord Donoughmore, he was frankly told that the offer of
emancipation had come too late.

The dispatch in which Mason reported the attitude of the British
Government never reached the Confederate authorities. It was
dated the 31st of March. Two days later Richmond was evacuated by
the Confederate Government.



Chapter XII. The Last Word

The evacuation of Richmond broke the back of the Confederate
defense. Congress had adjourned. The legislative history of the
Confederacy was at an end. The executive history still had a few
days to run. After destroying great quantities of records, the
government officials had packed the remainder on a long train
that conveyed the President and what was left of the civil
service to Danville. During a few days, Danville was the
Confederate capital. There, Davis, still unable to conceive
defeat, issued his pathetic last Address to the People of the
Confederate States. His mind was crystallized. He was no longer
capable of judging facts. In as confident tones as ever he
promised his people that they should yet prevail; he assured
Virginians that even if the Confederate army should withdraw
further south the withdrawal would be but temporary, and that
"again and again will we return until the baffled and exhausted
enemy shall abandon in despair his endless and impossible task of
making slaves of a people resolved to be free."

The surrender at Appomattox on April 9, 1865, compelled another
migration of the dwindling executive company. General Johnston
had not yet surrendered. A conference which he had with the
President and the Cabinet at Greensboro ended in giving him
permission to negotiate with Sherman. Even then Davis was still
bent on keeping up the fight; yet, though he believed that
Sherman would reject Johnston's overtures, he was overtaken at
Charlotte on his way South by the crushing news of Johnston's
surrender. There the executive history of the Confederacy came to
an end in a final Cabinet meeting. Davis, still blindly resolute
to continue the struggle, was deeply distressed by the
determination of his advisers to abandon it. In imminent danger
of capture, the President's party made its way to Abbeville,
where it broke up, and each member sought safety as best he
could. Davis with a few faithful men rode to Irwinsville,
Georgia, where, in the early morning of the l0th of May, he was
surprised and captured. But the history of the Confederacy was
not quite at an end. The last gunshots were still to be fired far
away in Texas on the 13th of May. The surrender of the forces of
the Trans-Mississippi on May 26, 1865, brought the war to a
definite conclusion.

There remains one incident of these closing days, the
significance of which was not perceived until long afterward,
when it immediately took its rightful place among the determining
events of American history. The unconquerable spirit of the Army
of Northern Virginia found its last expression in a proposal
which was made to Lee by his officers. If he would give the word,
they would make the war a duel to the death; it should drag out
in relentless guerrilla struggles; and there should be no
pacification of the South until the fighting classes had been
exterminated. Considering what those classes were, considering
the qualities that could be handed on to their posterity, one
realizes that this suicide of a whole people, of a noble fighting
people, would have maimed incalculably the America of the future.
But though the heroism of this proposal of his men to die on
their shields had its stern charm for so brave a man as Lee, he
refused to consider it. He would not admit that he and his people
had a right thus to extinguish their power to help mold the
future, no matter whether it be the future they desired or not.
The result of battle must be accepted. The Southern spirit must
not perish, luxuriating blindly in despair, but must find a new
form of expression, must become part of the new world that was to
be, must look to a new birth under new conditions. In this spirit
he issued to his army his last address:

"After four years of arduous service, marked by unsurpassed
courage and fortitude, the Army of Northern Virginia has been
compelled to yield to overwhelming numbers and resources. I need
not tell the survivors of so many hard-fought battles, who have
remained steadfast to the last, that I have consented to the
result from no distrust of them; but feeling that valor and
devotion could accomplish nothing that could compensate for the
loss that would have attended the continuation of the contest, I
determined to avoid the useless sacrifice of those whose past
services have endeared them to their countrymen.... I bid you
an affectionate farewell."

How inevitably one calls to mind, in view of the indomitable
valor of Lee's final decision, those great lines from Tennyson:

"Tho' much is taken, much abides; and tho'

We are not now that strength which in old days

Moved earth and heaven; that which we are, we are;

One equal temper of heroic hearts,

Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will." 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

There is no adequate history of the Confederacy. It is rumored
that a distinguished scholar has a great work approaching
completion. It is also rumored that another scholar, well
equipped to do so, will soon bring out a monumental life of
Davis. But the fact remains that as yet we lack a comprehensive
review of the Confederate episode set in proper perspective.
Standard works such as the "History of the United States from the
Compromise of 1850", by J. F. Rhodes (7 vols., 1893-1908), even
when otherwise as near a classic as is the work of Mr. Rhodes,
treat the Confederacy so externally as to have in this respect
little value. The one searching study of the subject, "The
Confederate States of America," by J. C. Schwab (1901), though
admirable in its way, is wholly overshadowed by the point of view
of the economist. The same is to be said of the article by
Professor Schwab in the 11th edition of "The Encyclopaedia
Britannica."

Two famous discussions of the episode by participants are: "The
Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government," by the President of
the Confederacy (2 vols., 1881), and "A Constitutional View of
the Late War Between the States," by Alexander H. Stephens (2
vols., 1870). Both works, though invaluable to the student, are
tinged with controversy, each of the eminent authors aiming to
refute the arguments of political antagonists.

The military history of the time has so overshadowed the civil,
in the minds of most students, that we are still sadly in need of
careful, disinterested studies of the great figures of
Confederate civil affairs. "Jefferson Davis," by William E. Dodd
("American Crisis Biographies," 1907), is the standard life of
the President, superseding older ones. Not so satisfactory in the
same series is "Judah P. Benjamin," by Pierce Butler (1907), and
"Alexander H. Stephens," by Louis Pendleton (1907). Older works
which are valuable for the material they contain are: "Memoir of
Jefferson Davis," by his Wife (1890); "The Life and Times of
Alexander H. Stephens," by R. M. Johnston and W. M. Browne
(1878); "The Life and Times of William Lowndes Yancey," by J. W.
Du Bose (1891); "The Life, Times, and Speeches of Joseph E.
Brown," by Herbert Fielder (1883); "Public Life and Diplomatic
Correspondence of James M. Mason," by his Daughter (1903); "The
Life and Time of C. G. Memminger," by H. D. Capers (1893). The
writings of E. A. Pollard cannot be disregarded, but must be
taken as the violent expression of an extreme partisan. They
include a "Life of Jefferson Davis" (1869) and "The Lost Cause"
(1867). A charming series of essays is "Confederate Portraits,"
by Gamaliel Bradford (1914). Among books on special topics that
are to be recommended are: "The Diplomatic History of the
Southern Confederacy" by J. M. Callahan (1901); "France and the
Confederate Navy," by John Bigelow (1888); and "The Secret
Service of the Confederate States in Europe," by J. D. Bulloch (2
vols., 1884). There is a large number of contemporary accounts of
life in the Confederacy. Historians have generally given
excessive attention to "A Rebel War Clerk's Diary at the
Confederate States Capital," by J. B. Jones (2 vols., 1866) which
has really neither more nor less value than a Richmond newspaper.
Conspicuous among writings of this type is the delightful "Diary
from Dixie," by Mrs. Mary B. Chestnut (1905) and "My Diary, North
and South," by W. H. Russell (1861).

The documents of the civil history, so far as they are accessible
to the general reader, are to be found in the three volumes
forming the fourth series of the "Official Records of the Union
and Confederate Armies" (128 vols., 1880-1901); the "Journals of
the Congress of the Confederate States" (8 vols., 1904) and
"Messages and Papers of the Confederacy," edited by J. D.
Richardson (2 vols., 1905). Four newspapers are of first
importance: the famous opposition organs, the Richmond Examiner
and the Charleston Mercury, which should be offset by the two
leading organs of the Government, the Courier of Charleston and
the Enquirer of Richmond. The Statutes of the Confederacy have
been collected and published; most of them are also to be found
in the fourth series of the Official Records.

Additional bibliographical references will be found appended to
the articles on the "Confederate States of America," "Secession,"
and "Jefferson Davis," in "The Encyclopaedia Britannica," 11th
edition. 











WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER I.

HANDICAPPED


One may use the Old Man of the Sea,
 For a partner or patron,
But helpless and hapless is he
Who is ridden, inextricably,
 By a fond old mer-matron.


The Warden house was more impressive in appearance than its neighbors. 
It had "grounds," instead of a yard or garden; it had wide pillared
porches and "galleries," showing southern antecedents; moreover, it had
a cupola, giving date to the building, and proof of the continuing
ambitions of the builders.

The stately mansion was covered with heavy flowering vines, also with
heavy mortgages.  Mrs. Roscoe Warden and her four daughters reposed
peacefully under the vines, while Roscoe Warden, Jr., struggled
desperately under the mortgages.

A slender, languid lady was Mrs. Warden, wearing her thin but still
brown hair in "water-waves" over a pale high forehead. She was sitting
on a couch on the broad, rose-shaded porch, surrounded by billowing
masses of vari-colored worsted.  It was her delight to purchase skein on
skein of soft, bright-hued wool, cut it all up into short lengths, tie
them together again in contrasting colors, and then crochet this hashed
rainbow into afghans of startling aspect.  California does not call for
afghans to any great extent, but "they make such acceptable presents,"
Mrs. Warden declared, to those who questioned the purpose of her work;
and she continued to send them off, on Christmases, birthdays, and minor
weddings, in a stream of pillowy bundles.  As they were accepted, they
must have been acceptable, and the stream flowed on.

Around her, among the gay blossoms and gayer wools, sat her four
daughters, variously intent.  The mother, a poetic soul, had named them
musically and with dulcet rhymes: Madeline and Adeline were the two
eldest, Coraline and Doraline the two youngest.  It had not occurred to
her until too late that those melodious terminations made it impossible
to call one daughter without calling two, and that "Lina" called them
all.

"Mis' Immerjin," said a soft voice in the doorway, "dere pos'tively
ain't no butter in de house fer supper."

"No butter?" said Mrs. Warden, incredulously.  "Why, Sukey, I'm sure we
had a tub sent up last--last Tuesday!"

"A week ago Tuesday, more likely, mother," suggested Dora.

"Nonsense, Dora!  It was this week, wasn't it, girls?"  The mother
appealed to them quite earnestly, as if the date of that tub's delivery
would furnish forth the supper-table; but none of the young ladies save
Dora had even a contradiction to offer.

"You know I never notice things," said the artistic Cora; and "the
de-lines," as their younger sisters called them, said nothing.

"I might borrow some o' Mis' Bell?" suggested Sukey; "dat's nearer 'n'
de sto'."

"Yes, do, Sukey," her mistress agreed.  "It is so hot.  But what have
you done with that tubful?"

"Why, some I tuk back to Mis' Bell for what I borrered befo'--I'm always
most careful to make return for what I borrers--and yo' know, Mis'
Warden, dat waffles and sweet potaters and cohn bread dey do take
butter; to say nothin' o' them little cakes you all likes so well--_an'_
de fried chicken, _an'_--"

"Never mind, Sukey; you go and present my compliments to Mrs. Bell, and
ask her for some; and be sure you return it promptly.  Now, girls, don't
let me forget to tell Ross to send up another tub."

"We can't seem to remember any better than you can, mother," said
Adeline, dreamily.  "Those details are so utterly uninteresting."

"I should think it was Sukey's business to tell him," said Madeline with
decision; while the "a-lines" kept silence this time.

"There!  Sukey's gone!" Mrs. Warden suddenly remarked, watching the
stout figure moving heavily away under the pepper trees.  "And I meant
to have asked her to make me a glass of shrub!  Dora, dear, you run and
get it for mother."

Dora laid down her work, not too regretfully, and started off.

"That child is the most practical of any of you," said her mother; which
statement was tacitly accepted.  It was not extravagant praise.

Dora poked about in the refrigerator for a bit of ice.  She ho no idea
of the high cost of ice in that region--it came from "the store," like
all their provisions.  It did not occur to her that fish and milk and
melons made a poor combination in flavor; or that the clammy,
sub-offensive smell was not the natural and necessary odor of
refrigerators.  Neither did she think that a sunny corner of the back
porch near the chimney, though convenient, was an ill-selected spot for
a refrigerator.  She couldn't find the ice-pick, so put a big piece of
ice in a towel and broke it on the edge of the sink; replaced the
largest fragment, used what she wanted, and left the rest to filter
slowly down through a mass of grease and tea-leaves; found the raspberry
vinegar, and made a very satisfactory beverage which her mother received
with grateful affection.

"Thank you, my darling," she said. "I wish you'd made a pitcherful."

"Why didn't you, Do?" her sisters demanded.

"You're too late," said Dora, hunting for her needle and then for her
thimble, and then for her twist; "but there's more in the kitchen."

"I'd rather go without than go into the kitchen," said Adeline; "I do
despise a kitchen."  And this seemed to be the general sentiment; for no
one moved.

"My mother always liked raspberry shrub," said Mrs. Warden; "and your
Aunt Leicester, and your Raymond cousins."

Mrs. Warden had a wide family circle, many beloved relatives,
"connections" of whom she was duly proud and "kin" in such widening
ramifications that even her carefully reared daughters lost track of
them.

"You young people don't seem to care about your cousins at all!" pursued
their mother, somewhat severely, setting her glass on the railing, from
whence it was presently knocked off and broken.

"That's the fifth!" remarked Dora, under breath.

"Why should we, Ma?" inquired Cora.  "We've never seen one of
them--except Madam Weatherstone!"

"We'll never forget _her!"_ said Madeline, with delicate decision,
laying down the silk necktie she was knitting for Roscoe.  "What
_beautiful_ manners she had!"

"How rich is she, mother?  Do you know?" asked Dora.

"Rich enough to do something for Roscoe, I'm sure, if she had a proper
family spirit," replied Mrs. Warden.  "Her mother was own cousin to my
grandmother--one of the Virginia Paddingtons.  Or she might do something
for you girls."

"I wish she would!" Adeline murmured, softly, her large eyes turned to
the horizon, her hands in her lap over the handkerchief she was marking
for Roscoe.

"Don't be ungrateful, Adeline," said her mother, firmly.  "You have a
good home and a good brother; no girl ever had a better."

"But there is never anything going on," broke in Coraline, in a tone of
complaint; "no parties, no going away for vacations, no anything."

"Now, Cora, don't be discontented!  You must not add a straw to dear
Roscoe's burdens," said her mother.

"Of course not, mother; I wouldn't for the world.  I never saw her but
that once; and she wasn't very cordial.  But, as you say, she might do
_something._  She might invite us to visit her."

"If she ever comes back again, I'm going to recite for her," said, Dora,
firmly.

Her mother gazed fondly on her youngest.  "I wish you could, dear," she
agreed.  "I'm sure you have talent; and Madam Weatherstone would
recognize it.  And Adeline's music too.  And Cora's art.  I am very
proud of my girls."

Cora sat where the light fell well upon her work.  She was illuminating
a volume of poems, painting flowers on the margins, in appropriate
places--for Roscoe.

"I wonder if he'll care for it?" she said, laying down her brush and
holding the book at arm's length to get the effect.

"Of course he will!" answered her mother, warmly.  "It is not only the
beauty of it, but the affection!  How are you getting on, Dora?"

Dora was laboring at a task almost beyond her fourteen years, consisting
of a negligee shirt of outing flannel, upon the breast of which she was
embroidering a large, intricate design--for Roscoe.  She was an
ambitious child, but apt to tire in the execution of her large projects.

"I guess it'll be done," she said, a little wearily. "What are you going
to give him, mother?"

"Another bath-robe; his old one is so worn.  And nothing is too good for
my boy."

"He's coming," said Adeline, who was still looking down the road; and
they all concealed their birthday work in haste.

A tall, straight young fellow, with an air of suddenly-faced maturity
upon him, opened the gate under the pepper trees and came toward them.

He had the finely molded features we see in portraits of handsome
ancestors, seeming to call for curling hair a little longish, and a rich
profusion of ruffled shirt.  But his hair was sternly short, his shirt
severely plain, his proudly carried head spoke of effort rather than of
ease in its attitude.

Dora skipped to meet him, Cora descended a decorous step or two. 
Madeline and Adeline, arm in arm, met him at the piazza edge, his mother
lifted her face.

"Well, mother, dear!"  Affectionately he stooped and kissed her, and she
held his hand and stroked it lovingly. The sisters gathered about with
teasing affection, Dora poking in his coat-pocket for the stick candy
her father always used to bring her, and her brother still remembered.

"Aren't you home early, dear?" asked Mrs. Warden.

"Yes; I had a little headache"--he passed his hand over his
forehead--"and Joe can run the store till after supper, anyhow."  They
flew to get him camphor, cologne, a menthol-pencil.  Dora dragged forth
the wicker lounge.  He was laid out carefully and fanned and fussed over
till his mother drove them all away.

"Now, just rest," she said. "It's an hour to supper time yet!"  And she
covered him with her latest completed afghan, gathering up and carrying
away the incomplete one and its tumultuous constituents.

He was glad of the quiet, the fresh, sweet air, the smell of flowers
instead of the smell of molasses and cheese, soap and sulphur matches. 
But the headache did not stop, nor the worry that caused it.  He loved
his mother, he loved his sisters, he loved their home, but he did not
love the grocery business which had fallen so unexpectedly upon him at
his father's death, nor the load of debt which fell with it.

That they need never have had so large a "place" to "keep up" did not
occur to him.  He had lived there most of his life, and it was home. 
That the expenses of running the household were three times what they
needed to be, he did not know.  His father had not questioned their
style of living, nor did he.  That a family of five women might, between
them, do the work of the house, he did not even consider.

Mrs. Warden's health was never good, and since her husband's death she
had made daily use of many afghans on the many lounges of the house.
Madeline was "delicate," and Adeline was "frail"; Cora was "nervous,"
Dora was "only a child."  So black Sukey and her husband Jonah did the
work of the place, so far as it was done; and Mrs. Warden held it a
miracle of management that she could "do with one servant," and the
height of womanly devotion on her daughters' part that they dusted the
parlor and arranged the flowers.

Roscoe shut his eyes and tried to rest, but his problem beset him
ruthlessly.  There was the store--their one and only source of income. 
There was the house, a steady, large expense.  There were five women to
clothe and keep contented, beside himself.  There was the unappeasable
demand of the mortgage--and there was Diantha.

When Mr. Warden died, some four years previously, Roscoe was a lad of
about twenty, just home from college, full of dreams of great service to
the world in science, expecting to go back for his doctor's degree next
year.  Instead of which the older man had suddenly dropped beneath the
burden he had carried with such visible happiness and pride, such
unknown anxiety and straining effort; and the younger one had to step
into the harness on the spot.

He was brave, capable, wholly loyal to his mother and sisters, reared in
the traditions of older days as to a man's duty toward women.  In his
first grief for his father, and the ready pride with which he undertook
to fill his place, he had not in the least estimated the weight of care
he was to carry, nor the time that he must carry it.  A year, a year or
two, a few years, he told himself, as they passed, and he would make
more money; the girls, of course, would marry; he could "retire" in time
and take up his scientific work again.  Then--there was Diantha.

When he found he loved this young neighbor of theirs, and that she loved
him, the first flush of happiness made all life look easier.  They had
been engaged six months--and it was beginning to dawn upon the young man
that it might be six years--or sixteen years--before he could marry.

He could not sell the business--and if he could, he knew of no better
way to take care of his family.  The girls did not marry, and even when
they did, he had figured this out to a dreary certainty, he would still
not be free.  To pay the mortgages off, and keep up the house, even
without his sisters, would require all the money the store would bring
in for some six years ahead.  The young man set his teeth hard and
turned his head sharply toward the road.

And there was Diantha.

She stood at the gate and smiled at him.  He sprang to his feet,
headacheless for the moment, and joined her.  Mrs. Warden, from the
lounge by her bedroom window, saw them move off together, and sighed.

"Poor Roscoe!" she said to herself.  "It is very hard for him.  But he
carries his difficulties nobly.  He is a son to be proud of."  And she
wept a little.

Diantha slipped her hand in his offered arm--he clasped it warmly with
his, and they walked along together.

"You won't come in and see mother and the girls?"

"No, thank you; not this time.  I must get home and get supper. 
Besides, I'd rather see just you."

He felt it a pity that there were so many houses along the road here,
but squeezed her hand, anyhow.

She looked at him keenly.  "Headache?" she asked.

"Yes; it's nothing; it's gone already."

"Worry?" she asked.

"Yes, I suppose it is," he answered.  "But I ought not to worry.  I've
got a good home, a good mother, good sisters, and--you!"  And he took
advantage of a high hedge and an empty lot on either side of them.

Diantha returned his kiss affectionately enough, but seemed preoccupied,
and walked in silence till he asked her what she was thinking about.

"About you, of course," she answered, brightly. "There are things I want
to say; and yet--I ought not to."

"You can say anything on earth to me," he answered.

"You are twenty-four," she began, musingly.

"Admitted at once."

"And I'm twenty-one and a half."

"That's no such awful revelation, surely!"

"And we've been engaged ever since my birthday," the girl pursued.

"All these are facts, dearest."

"Now, Ross, will you be perfectly frank with me?  May I ask you an--an
impertinent question?"

"You may ask me any question you like; it couldn't be impertinent."

"You'll be scandalised, I know--but--well, here goes.  What would you
think if Madeline--or any of the girls--should go away to work?"

He looked at her lovingly, but with a little smile on his firm mouth.

"I shouldn't allow it," he said.

"O--allow it?  I asked you what you'd think."

"I should think it was a disgrace to the family, and a direct reproach
to me," be answered.  "But it's no use talking about that.  None of the
girls have any such foolish notion.  And I wouldn't permit it if they
had."

Diantha smiled.  "I suppose you never would permit your wife to work?"

"My widow might have to--not my wife."  He held his fine head a trifle
higher, and her hand ached for a moment.

"Wouldn't you let me work--to help you, Ross?"

"My dearest girl, you've got something far harder than that to do for
me, and that's wait."

His face darkened again, and he passed his hand over his forehead. 
"Sometimes I feel as if I ought not to hold you at all!" he burst out,
bitterly.  "You ought to be free to marry a better man."

"There aren't any!" said Diantha, shaking her head slowly from side to
side.  "And if there were--millions--I wouldn't marry any of 'em.  I
love _you,"_ she firmly concluded.

"Then we'll just _wait,"_ said he, setting his teeth on the word, as if
he would crush it.  "It won't be hard with you to help.  You're better
worth it than Rachael and Leah together."  They walked a few steps
silently.

"But how about science?" she asked him.

"I don't let myself think of it.  I'll take that up later.  We're young
enough, both of us, to wait for our happiness."

"And have you any idea--we might as well face the worst--how many years
do you think that will be, dearest?"

He was a little annoyed at her persistence.  Also, though he would not
admit the thought, it did not seem quite the thing for her to ask.  A
woman should not seek too definite a period of waiting.  She ought to
trust--to just wait on general principles.

"I can face a thing better if I know just what I'm facing," said the
girl, quietly, "and I'd wait for you, if I had to, all my life.  Will it
be twenty years, do you think?"

He looked relieved.  "Why, no, indeed, darling.  It oughtn't to be at
the outside more than five.  Or six," he added, honest though reluctant.

"You see, father had no time to settle anything; there were outstanding
accounts, and the funeral expenses, and the mortgages.  But the business
is good; and I can carry it; I can build it up."  He shook his broad
shoulders determinedly.  "I should think it might be within five,
perhaps even less. Good things happen sometimes--such as you, my heart's
delight."

They were at her gate now, and she stood a little while to say
good-night.  A step inside there was a seat, walled in by evergreen,
roofed over by the wide acacia boughs.  Many a long good-night had they
exchanged there, under the large, brilliant California moon.  They sat
there, silent, now.

Diantha's heart was full of love for him, and pride and confidence in
him; but it was full of other feelings, too, which he could not fathom. 
His trouble was clearer to her than to him; as heavy to bear.  To her
mind, trained in all the minutiae of domestic economy, the Warden family
lived in careless wastefulness.  That five women--for Dora was older
than she had been when she began to do housework--should require
servants, seemed to this New England-born girl mere laziness and pride. 
That two voting women over twenty should prefer being supported by their
brother to supporting themselves, she condemned even more sharply. 
Moreover, she felt well assured that with a different family to
"support," Mr. Warden would never have broken down so suddenly and
irrecoverably.  Even that funeral--her face hardened as she thought of
the conspicuous "lot," the continual flowers, the monument (not wholly
paid for yet, that monument, though this she did not know)--all that
expenditure to do honor to the man they had worked to death (thus
brutally Diantha put it) was probably enough to put off their happiness
for a whole year.

She rose at last, her hand still held in his.  "I'm sorry, but I've got
to get supper, dear," she said, "and you must go.  Good-night for the
present; you'll be round by and by?"

"Yes, for a little while, after we close up," said he, and took himself
off, not too suddenly, walking straight and proud while her eves were on
him, throwing her a kiss from the corner; but his step lagging and his
headache settling down upon him again as he neared the large house with
the cupola.

Diantha watched him out of sight, turned and marched up the path to her
own door, her lips set tight, her well-shaped head as straightly held as
his.  "It's a shame, a cruel, burning shame!" she told herself
rebelliously.  "A man of his ability.  Why, he could do anything, in his
own work!  And he loved it so!

"To keep a grocery store--

""And nothing to show for all that splendid effort!

"They don't do a thing?  They just _live_--and 'keep house!'  All those
women!

"Six years?  Likely to be sixty!  But I'm not going to wait!"



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER II.

AN UNNATURAL DAUGHTER


The brooding bird fulfills her task,
 Or she-bear lean and brown;
All parent beasts see duty true,
All parent beasts their duty do,
We are the only kind that asks
 For duty upside down.


The stiff-rayed windmill stood like a tall mechanical flower, turning
slowly in the light afternoon wind; its faint regular metallic squeak
pricked the dry silence wearingly.  Rampant fuchsias, red-jewelled,
heavy, ran up its framework, with crowding heliotrope and nasturtiums. 
Thick straggling roses hung over the kitchen windows, and a row of dusty
eucalyptus trees rustled their stiff leaves, and gave an ineffectual
shade to the house.

It was one of those small frame houses common to the northeastern
states, which must be dear to the hearts of their dwellers.  For no
other reason, surely, would the cold grey steep-roofed little boxes be
repeated so faithfully in the broad glow of a semi-tropical landscape. 
There was an attempt at a "lawn," the pet ambition of the transplanted
easterner; and a further attempt at "flower-beds," which merely served
as a sort of springboard to their far-reaching products.

The parlor, behind the closed blinds, was as New England parlors are;
minus the hint of cosiness given by even a fireless stove; the little
bedrooms baked under the roof; only the kitchen spoke of human living,
and the living it portrayed was not, to say the least, joyous.  It was
clean, clean with a cleanness that spoke of conscientious labor and
unremitting care.  The zinc mat under the big cook-stove was scoured to
a dull glimmer, while that swart altar itself shone darkly from its
daily rubbing.

There was no dust nor smell of dust; no grease spots, no litter
anywhere.  But the place bore no atmosphere of contented pride, as does
a Dutch, German or French kitchen, it spoke of Labor, Economy and
Duty--under restriction.

In the dead quiet of the afternoon Diantha and her mother sat there
sewing.  The sun poured down through the dangling eucalyptus leaves. 
The dry air, rich with flower odors, flowed softly in, pushing the white
sash curtains a steady inch or two.  Ee-errr!--Ee-errr!--came the faint
whine of the windmill.

To the older woman rocking in her small splint chair by the rose-draped
window, her thoughts dwelling on long dark green grass, the shade of
elms, and cows knee-deep in river-shallows; this was California--hot,
arid, tedious in endless sunlight--a place of exile.

To the younger, the long seam of the turned sheet pinned tightly to her
knee, her needle flying firmly and steadily, and her thoughts full of
pouring moonlight through acacia boughs and Ross's murmured words, it
was California--rich, warm, full of sweet bloom and fruit, of boundless
vitality, promise, and power--home!

Mrs. Bell drew a long weary sigh, and laid down her work for a moment.

"Why don't you stop it Mother dear?  There's surely no hurry about these
things."

"No--not particularly," her mother answered, "but there's plenty else to
do."  And she went on with the long neat hemming.  Diantha did the "over
and over seam" up the middle.

"What _do_ you do it for anyway, Mother--I always hated this job--and
you don't seem to like it."

"They wear almost twice as long, child, you know.  The middle gets worn
and the edges don't.  Now they're reversed.  As to liking it--"  She
gave a little smile, a smile that was too tired to be sarcastic, but
which certainly did not indicate pleasure.

"What kind of work do you like best--really?" her daughter inquired
suddenly, after a silent moment or two.

"Why--I don't know," said her mother.  "I never thought of it.  I never
tried any but teaching.  I didn't like that.  Neither did your Aunt
Esther, but she's still teaching."

"Didn't you like any of it?" pursued Diantha.

"I liked arithmetic best.  I always loved arithmetic, when I went to
school--used to stand highest in that."

"And what part of housework do you like best?" the girl persisted.

Mrs. Bell smiled again, wanly.  "Seems to me sometimes as if I couldn't
tell sometimes what part I like least!" she answered.  Then with sudden
heat--"O my Child!  Don't you marry till Ross can afford at least one
girl for you!"

Diantha put her small, strong hands behind her head and leaned back in
her chair.  "We'll have to wait some time for that I fancy," she said. 
"But, Mother, there is one part you like--keeping accounts!  I never saw
anything like the way you manage the money, and I believe you've got
every bill since yon were married."

"Yes--I do love accounts," Mrs. Bell admitted.  "And I can keep run of
things.  I've often thought your Father'd have done better if he'd let
me run that end of his business."

Diantha gave a fierce little laugh.  She admired her father in some
ways, enjoyed him in some ways, loved him as a child does if not
ill-treated; but she loved her mother with a sort of passionate pity
mixed with pride; feeling always nobler power in her than had ever had a
fair chance to grow.  It seemed to her an interminable dull tragedy;
this graceful, eager, black-eyed woman, spending what to the girl was
literally a lifetime, in the conscientious performance of duties she did
not love.

She knew her mother's idea of duty, knew the clear head, the steady
will, the active intelligence holding her relentlessly to the task; the
chafe and fret of seeing her husband constantly attempting against her
judgment, and failing for lack of the help he scorned.  Young as she
was, she realized that the nervous breakdown of these later years was
wholly due to that common misery of "the square man in the round hole."

She folded her finished sheet in accurate lines and laid it away--taking
her mother's also.  "Now you sit still for once, Mother dear, read or
lie down.  Don't you stir till supper's ready."

And from pantry to table she stepped, swiftly and lightly, setting out
what was needed, greased her pans and set them before her, and proceeded
to make biscuit.

Her mother watched her admiringly.  "How easy you do it!" she said.  "I
never could make bread without getting flour all over me.  You don't
spill a speck!"

Diantha smiled.  "I ought to do it easily by this time.  Father's got to
have hot bread for supper--or thinks he has!--and I've made 'em--every
night when I was at home for this ten years back!"

"I guess you have," said Mrs. Bell proudly.  "You were only eleven when
you made your first batch.  I can remember just as well!  I had one of
my bad headaches that night--and it did seem as if I couldn't sit up! 
But your Father's got to have his biscuit whether or no.  And you said,
'Now Mother you lie right still on that sofa and let me do it!  I can!' 
And you could!--you did!  They were bettern' mine that first time--and
your Father praised 'em--and you've been at it ever since."

"Yes," said Diantha, with a deeper note of feeling than her mother
caught, "I've been at it ever since!"

"Except when you were teaching school," pursued her mother.

"Except when I taught school at Medville," Diantha corrected.  "When I
taught here I made 'em just the same."

"So you did," agreed her mother.  "So you did!  No matter how tired you
were--you wouldn't admit it.  You always were the best child!"

"If I was tired it was not of making biscuits anyhow.  I was tired
enough of teaching school though.  I've got something to tell you,
presently, Mother."

She covered the biscuits with a light cloth and set them on the shelf
over the stove; then poked among the greasewood roots to find what she
wanted and started a fire.  "Why _don't_ you get an oil stove?  Or a
gasoline?  It would be a lot easier."

"Yes," her mother agreed.  "I've wanted one for twenty years; but you
know your Father won't have one in the house.  He says they're
dangerous.  What are you going to tell me, dear?  I do hope you and Ross
haven't quarrelled."

"No indeed we haven't, Mother.  Ross is splendid.  Only--"

"Only what, Dinah?"

"Only he's so tied up!" said the girl, brushing every chip from the
hearth.  "He's perfectly helpless there, with that mother of his--and
those four sisters."

"Ross is a good son," said Mrs. Bell, "and a good brother.  I never saw
a better.  He's certainly doing his duty.  Now if his father'd lived you
two could have got married by this time maybe, though you're too young
yet."

Diantha washed and put away the dishes she had used, saw that the pantry
was in its usual delicate order, and proceeded to set the table, with
light steps and no clatter of dishes.

"I'm twenty-one," she said.

"Yes, you're twenty-one," her mother allowed.  "It don't seem possible,
but you are.  My first baby!" she looked at her proudly

"If Ross has to wait for all those girls to marry--and to pay his
father's debts--I'll be old enough," said Diantha grimly.

Her mother watched her quick assured movements with admiration, and
listened with keen sympathy.  "I know it's hard, dear child.  You've
only been engaged six months--and it looks as if it might be some years
before Ross'll be able to marry.  He's got an awful load for a boy to
carry alone."

"I should say he had!" Diantha burst forth.  "Five helpless women!--or
three women, and two girls.  Though Cora's as old as I was when I began
to teach.  And not one of 'em will lift a finger to earn her own
living."

"They weren't brought up that way," said Mrs. Bell.  "Their mother don't
approve of it.  She thinks the home is the place for a woman--and so
does Ross--and so do I," she added rather faintly.

Diantha put her pan of white puff-balls into the oven, sliced a quantity
of smoked beef in thin shavings, and made white sauce for it, talking
the while as if these acts were automatic.  "I don't agree with Mrs.
Warden on that point, nor with Ross, nor with you, Mother," she said,
"What I've got to tell you is this--I'm going away from home.  To work."

Mrs. Bell stopped rocking, stopped fanning, and regarded her daughter
with wide frightened eyes.

"Why Diantha!" she said.  "Why Diantha!  You wouldn't go and leave your
Mother!"

Diantha drew a deep breath and stood for a moment looking at the feeble
little woman in the chair.  Then she went to her, knelt down and hugged
her close--close.

"It's not because I don't love you, Mother.  It's because I do.  And
it's not because I don't love Ross either:--it's because I _do._  I want
to take care of you, Mother, and make life easier for you as long as you
live.  I want to help him--to help carry that awful load--and I'm
going--to--do--it!"

She stood up hastily, for a step sounded on the back porch.  It was only
her sister, who hurried in, put a dish on the table, kissed her mother
and took another rocking-chair.

"I just ran in," said she, "to bring those berries.  Aren't they
beauties?  The baby's asleep.  Gerald hasn't got in yet.  Supper's all
ready, and I can see him coming time enough to run back.  Why, Mother! 
What's the matter?  You're crying!"

"Am I?" asked Mrs. Bell weakly; wiping her eyes in a dazed way.

"What are you doing to Mother, Diantha?" demanded young Mrs. Peters. 
"Bless me! I thought you and she never had any differences! I was always
the black sheep, when I was at home.  Maybe that's why I left so early!"

She looked very pretty and complacent, this young matron and mother of
nineteen; and patted the older woman's hand affectionately, demanding,
"Come--what's the trouble?"

"You might as well know now as later," said her sister.  "I have decided
to leave home, that's all."

"To leave home!"  Mrs. Peters sat up straight and stared at her.  "To
leave home!--And Mother!"

"Well?" said Diantha, while the tears rose and ran over from her
mother's eyes.  "Well, why not?  You left home--and Mother--before you
were eighteen."

"That's different!" said her sister sharply.  "I left to be married,--to
have a home of my own.  And besides I haven't gone far!  I can see
Mother every day."

"That's one reason I can go now better than later on," Diantha said. 
"You are close by in case of any trouble."

"What on earth are you going for?  Ross isn't ready to marry yet, is
he?"

"No--nor likely to be for years.  That's another reason I'm going."

"But what _for,_ for goodness sake."

"To earn money--for one thing."

"Can't you earn money enough by teaching?" the Mother broke in eagerly. 
"I know you haven't got the same place this fall--but you can get
another easy enough."

Diantha shook her head.  "No, Mother, I've had enough of that.  I've
taught for four years.  I don't like it, I don't do well, and it
exhausts me horribly.  And I should never get beyond a thousand or
fifteen hundred dollars a year if I taught for a lifetime."

"Well, I declare!" said her sister.  "What do you _expect_ to get?  I
should think fifteen hundred dollars a year was enough for any woman!"

Diantha peered into the oven and turned her biscuit pan around.

"And you're meaning to leave home just to make money, are you?"

"Why not?" said Diantha firmly.  "Henderson did--when he was eighteen. 
None of you blamed him."

"I don't see what that's got to do with it," her mother ventured. 
"Henderson's a boy, and boys have to go, of course.  A mother expects
that.  But a girl--Why, Diantha! How can I get along without you! With
my health!"

"I should think you'd be ashamed of yourself to think of such a thing!"
said young Mrs. Peters.

A slow step sounded outside, and an elderly man, tall, slouching,
carelessly dressed, entered, stumbling a little over the rag-mat at the
door.

"Father hasn't got used to that rug in fourteen years!" said his
youngest daughter laughingly.  "And Mother will straighten it out after
him!  I'm bringing Gerald up on better principles.  You should just see
him wait on me!"

"A man should be master in his own household," Mr. Bell proclaimed,
raising a dripping face from the basin and looking around for the
towel--which his wife handed him.

"You won't have much household to be master of presently," said Mrs.
Peters provokingly.  "Half of it's going to leave."

Mr. Bell came out of his towel and looked from one to the other for some
explanation of this attempted joke, "What nonsense are you talking?" he
demanded.

"I think it's nonsense myself," said the pretty young woman--her hand on
the doorknob.  "But you'd better enjoy those biscuits of Di's while you
can--you won't get many more!  There's Gerald--good night!"  And off she
ran.

Diantha set the plateful on the table, puffy, brown, and crisply
crusted.  "Supper's ready," she said.  "Do sit down, Mother," and she
held the chair for her.  "Minnie's quite right, Father, though I meant
not to tell you till you'd had supper.  I am going away to work."

Mr. Bell regarded his daughter with a stern, slow stare; not so much
surprised as annoyed by an untimely jesting.  He ate a hot biscuit in
two un-Fletcherized mouthfuls, and put more sugar in his large cup of
tea.  "You've got your Mother all worked up with your nonsense," said
he.  "What are you talking about anyway?"

Diantha met his eyes unflinchingly.  He was a tall old man, still
handsome and impressive in appearance, had been the head of his own
household beyond question, ever since he was left the only son of an
idolizing mother.  But he had never succeeded in being the head of
anything else.  Repeated failures in the old New England home had
resulted in his ruthlessly selling all the property there; and bringing
his delicate wife and three young children to California.  Vain were her
protests and objections.  It would do her good--best place in the world
for children--good for nervous complaints too.  A wife's duty was to
follow her husband, of course.  She had followed, willy nilly; and it
was good for the children--there was no doubt of that.

Mr. Bell had profited little by his venture.  They had the ranch, the
flowers and fruit and ample living of that rich soil; but he had failed
in oranges, failed in raisins, failed in prunes, and was now failing in
wealth-promising hens.

But Mrs. Bell, though an ineffectual housekeeper, did not fail in the
children.  They had grown up big and vigorous, sturdy, handsome
creatures, especially the two younger ones.  Diantha was good-looking
enough.  Roscoe Warden thought her divinely beautiful.  But her young
strength had been heavily taxed from childhood in that complex process
known as "helping mother."  As a little child she had been of constant
service in caring for the babies; and early developed such competence in
the various arts of house work as filled her mother with fond pride, and
even wrung from her father some grudging recognition.  That he did not
value it more was because he expected such competence in women, all
women; it was their natural field of ability, their duty as wives and
mothers.  Also as daughters.  If they failed in it that was by illness
or perversity.  If they succeeded--that was a matter of course.

He ate another of Diantha's excellent biscuits, his greyish-red whiskers
slowly wagging; and continued to eye her disapprovingly.  She said
nothing, but tried to eat; and tried still harder to make her heart go
quietly, her cheeks keep cool, and her eyes dry.  Mrs. Bell also strove
to keep a cheerful countenance; urged food upon her family; even tried
to open some topic of conversation; but her gentle words trailed off
into unnoticed silence.

Mr. Bell ate until he was satisfied and betook himself to a comfortable
chair by the lamp, where he unfolded the smart local paper and lit his
pipe.  "When you've got through with the dishes, Diantha," he said
coldly, "I'll hear about this proposition of yours."

Diantha cleared the table, lowered the leaves, set it back against the
wall, spreading the turkey-red cloth upon it.  She washed the
dishes,--her kettle long since boiling, scalded them, wiped them, set
them in their places; washed out the towels, wiped the pan and hung it
up, s