 fuel, could be reduced by nine-tenths; and
beyond all that comes our incredible waste in individual purchasing. 
What twenty families spend on individual patronage of small retailers,
could be reduced by more than half if bought by competent persons in
wholesale quantities.  Moreover, our whole food supply would rise in
quality as well as lower in price if it was bought by experts.

"To what does all this lead?" asked Diantha pleasantly.

Nobody said anything, but the visible attitude of the house seemed to
say that it led straight to perdition.

"The solution for which so many are looking is no new scheme of any
sort; and in particular it is not that oft repeated fore-doomed failure
called "co-operative housekeeping."

At this a wave of relief spread perceptibly.  The irritation roused by
those preposterous figures and accusations was somewhat allayed.  Hope
was relit in darkened countenances.

"The inefficiency of a dozen tottering households is not removed by
combining them," said Diantha.  This was of dubious import.  "Why should
we expect a group of families to "keep house" expertly and economically
together, when they are driven into companionship by the fact that none
of them can do it alone."

Again an uncertain reception.

"Every family is a distinct unit," the girl continued.  "Its needs are
separate and should be met separately.  The separate house and garden
should belong to each family, the freedom and group privacy of the home.
 But the separate home may be served by a common water company, by a
common milkman, by a common baker, by a common cooking and a common
cleaning establishment.  We are rapidly approaching an improved system
of living in which the private home will no more want a cookshop on the
premises than a blacksmith's shop or soap-factory.  The necessary work
of the kitchenless house will be done by the hour, with skilled labor;
and we shall order our food cooked instead of raw.  This will give to
the employees a respectable well-paid profession, with their own homes
and families; and to the employers a saving of about two-thirds of the
expense of living, as well as an end of all our difficulties with the
servant question.  That is the way to elevate--to enoble domestic
service.  It must cease to be domestic service--and become world
service."

Suddenly and quietly she sat down.

Miss Eagerson was on her feet.  So were others.

"Madam President!  Madam President!" resounded from several points at
once.  Madam Weatherstone--Mrs. Thaddler--no! yes--they really were both
on their feet.  Applause was going on--irregularly--soon dropped.  Only,
from the group in the gallery it was whole-hearted and consistent.

Mrs. Dankshire, who had been growing red and redder as the paper
advanced, who had conferred in alarmed whispers with Mrs. Ree, and Miss
Massing, who had even been seen to extend her hand to the gavel and
finger it threateningly, now rose, somewhat precipitately, and came
forward.

"Order, please!  You will please keep order.  You have heard the--we
will now--the meeting is now open for discussion, Mrs. Thaddler!"  And
she sat down.  She meant to have said Madam Weatherstone, by Mrs.
Thaddler was more aggressive.

"I wish to say," said that much beaded lady in a loud voice, "that I was
against this--unfortunate experiment--from the first.  And I trust it
will never be repeated!"  She sat down.

Two tight little dimples flickered for an instant about the corners of
Diantha's mouth.

"Madam Weatherstone?" said the President, placatingly.

Madam Weatherstone arose, rather sulkily, and looked about her.  An
agitated assembly met her eye, buzzing universally each to each.

"Order!" said Mrs. Dankshire, "ORDER, please!" and rapped three times
with the gavel.

"I have attended many meetings, in many clubs, in many states," said
Madam Weatherstone, "and have heard much that was foolish, and some
things that were dangerous.  But I will say that never in the course of
all my experience have I heard anything so foolish and so dangerous, as
this.  I trust that the--doubtless well meant--attempt to throw light on
this subject--from the wrong quarter--has been a lesson to us all.  No
club could survive more than one such lamentable mistake!"  And she sat
down, gathering her large satin wrap about her like a retiring Caesar.

"Madam President!" broke forth Miss Eagerson.  "I was up first--and have
been standing ever since--"

"One moment, Miss Eagerson," said Mrs. Dankshire superbly, "The Rev. Dr.
Eltwood."

If Mrs. Dankshire supposed she was still further supporting the cause of
condemnation she made a painful mistake.  The cloth and the fine bearing
of the young clergyman deceived her; and she forgot that he was said to
be "advanced" and was new to the place.

"Will you come to the platform, Dr. Eltwood?"

Dr. Eltwood came to the platform with the easy air of one to whom
platforms belonged by right.

"Ladies," he began in tones of cordial good will, "both employer and
employed!--and gentlemen--whom I am delighted to see here to-day!  I am
grateful for the opportunity so graciously extended to me"--he bowed six
feet of black broadcloth toward Mrs. Dankshire--"by your honored
President.

"And I am grateful for the opportunity previously enjoyed, of listening
to the most rational, practical, wise, true and hopeful words I have
ever heard on this subject.  I trust there will be enough open-minded
women--and men--in Orchardina to make possible among us that higher
business development of a great art which has been so convincingly laid
before us.  This club is deserving of all thanks from the community for
extending to so many the privilege of listening to our valued
fellow-citizen--Miss Bell."

He bowed again--to Miss Bell--and to Mrs. Dankshire, and resumed his
seat, Miss Eagerson taking advantage of the dazed pause to occupy the
platform herself.

"Mr. Eltwood is right!" she said.  "Miss Bell is right!  This is the
true presentation of the subject, 'by one who knows.'  Miss Bell has
pricked our pretty bubble so thoroughly that we don't know where we're
standing--but she knows!  Housework is a business--like any other
business--I've always said so, and it's got to be done in a business
way.  Now I for one--" but Miss Eagerson was rapped down by the
Presidential gavel; as Mrs. Thaddler, portentous and severe, stalked
forward.

"It is not my habit to make public speeches," she began, "nor my desire;
but this is a time when prompt and decisive action needs to be taken. 
This Club cannot afford to countenance any such farrago of mischievous
nonsense as we have heard to-day.  I move you, Madam President, that a
resolution of condemnation be passed at once; and the meeting then
dismissed!"

She stalked back again, while Mrs. Marrow of Boston, in clear, cold
tones seconded the motion.

But another voice was heard--for the first time in that assembly--Mrs.
Weatherstone, the pretty, delicate widower daughter-in-law of Madam
Weatherstone, was on her feet with "Madam President!  I wish to speak to
this motion."

"Won't you come to the platform, Mrs. Weatherstone?" asked Mrs.
Dankshire graciously, and the little lady came, visibly trembling, but
holding her head high.

All sat silent, all expected--what was not forthcoming.

"I wish to protest, as a member of the Club, and as a woman, against the
gross discourtesy which has been offered to the guest and speaker of the
day.  In answer to our invitation Miss Bell has given us a scholarly and
interesting paper, and I move that we extend her a vote of thanks."

"I second the motion," came from all quarters.

"There is another motion before the house," from others.

Cries of "Madam President" arose everywhere, many speakers were on their
feet.  Mrs. Dankshire tapped frantically with the little gavel, but Miss
Eagerson, by sheer vocal power, took and held the floor.

"I move that we take a vote on this question," she cried in piercing
tones.  "Let every woman who knows enough to appreciate Miss Bell's
paper--and has any sense of decency--stand up!"

Quite a large proportion of the audience stood up--very informally. 
Those who did not, did not mean to acknowledge lack of intelligence and
sense of decency, but to express emphatic disapproval of Miss Eagerson,
Miss Bell and their views.

"I move you, Madam President," cried Mrs. Thaddler, at the top of her
voice, "that every member who is guilty of such grossly unparlimentary
conduct be hereby dropped from this Club!"

"We hereby resign!" cried Miss Eagerson.  "_We_ drop _you!_  We'll have
a New Woman's Club in Orchardina with some warmth in its heart and some
brains in its head--even if it hasn't as much money in its pocket!"

Amid stern rappings, hissings, cries of "Order--order," and frantic
"Motions to adjourn" the meeting broke up; the club elements dissolving
and reforming into two bodies as by some swift chemical reaction.

Great was the rejoicing of the daily press; some amusement was felt,
though courteously suppressed by the men present, and by many not
present, when they heard of it.

Some ladies were so shocked and grieved as to withdraw from club-life
altogether.  Others, in stern dignity, upheld the shaken standards of
Home and Culture; while the most conspicuous outcome of it all was the
immediate formation of the New Woman's Club of Orchardina.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER VIII.


Behind the straight purple backs and smooth purple legs on the box
before them, Madam Weatherstone and Mrs. Weatherstone rolled home
silently, a silence of thunderous portent.  Another purple person opened
the door for them, and when Madam Weatherstone said, "We will have tea
on the terrace," it was brought them by a fourth.

"I was astonished at your attitude, Viva," began the old lady, at
length.  "Of course it was Mrs. Dankshire's fault in the first place,
but to encourage that,--outrageous person!  How could you do it!"

Young Mrs. Weatherstone emptied her exquisite cup and set it down.

"A sudden access of courage, I suppose," she said.  "I was astonished at
myself."

"I wholly disagree with you!" replied her mother-in-law.  "Never in my
life have I heard such nonsense.  Talk like that would be dangerous, if
it were not absurd!  It would destroy the home!  It would strike at the
roots of the family."

Viva eyed her quietly, trying to bear in mind the weight of a tradition,
the habits of a lifetime, the effect of long years of uninterrupted
worship of household gods.

"It doesn't seem so to me," she said slowly, "I was much interested and
impressed.  She is evidently a young woman of knowledge and experience,
and put her case well.  It has quite waked me up."

"It has quite upset you!" was the reply.  "You'll be ill after this, I
am sure.  Hadn't you better go and lie down now?  I'll have some dinner
sent to you."

"Thank you," said Viva, rising and walking to the edge of the broad
terrace.  "You are very kind.  No.  I do not wish to lie down.  I
haven't felt so thoroughly awake in--" she drew a pink cluster of
oleander against her cheek and thought a moment--"in several years." 
There was a new look about her certainly.

"Nervous excitement," her mother-in-law replied.  "You're not like
yourself at all to-night.  You'll certainly be ill to-morrow!"

Viva turned at this and again astonished the old lady by serenely
kissing her.  "Not at all!" she said gaily.  "I'm going to be well
to-morrow.  You will see!"

She went to her room, drew a chair to the wide west window with the far
off view and sat herself down to think.  Diantha's assured poise, her
clear reasoning, her courage, her common sense; and something of
tenderness and consecration she discerned also, had touched deep chords
in this woman's nature.  It was like the sound of far doors opening,
windows thrown up, the jingle of bridles and clatter of hoofs, keen
bugle notes.  A sense of hope, of power, of new enthusiasm, rose in her.

Orchardina Society, eagerly observing "young Mrs. Weatherstone" from her
first appearance, had always classified her as "delicate."  Beside the
firm features and high color of the matron-in-office, this pale quiet
slender woman looked like a meek and transient visitor.  But her white
forehead was broad under its soft-hanging eaves of hair, and her chin,
though lacking in prognathous prominence or bull-dog breadth, had a
certain depth which gave hope to the physiognomist.

She was strangely roused and stirred by the afternoon's events.  "I'm
like that man in 'Phantastes'," she thought contemptuously, "who stayed
so long in that dungeon because it didn't occur to him to open the door!
 Why don't I--?" she rose and walked slowly up and down, her hands
behind her.  "I will!" she said at last.

Then she dressed for dinner, revolving in her mind certain suspicions
long suppressed, but now flaming out in clear conviction in the light of
Diantha's words.  "Sleeping in, indeed!" she murmured to herself.  "And
nobody doing anything!"

She looked herself in the eye in the long mirror.  Her gown was an
impressive one, her hair coiled high, a gold band ringed it like a
crown.  A clear red lit her checks.

She rang.  Little Ilda, the newest maid, appeared, gazing at her in shy
admiration.  Mrs. Weatherstone looked at her with new eyes.  "Have you
been here long?" she asked.  "What is your name?"

"No, ma'am," said the child--she was scarce more.  "Only a week and two
days.  My name is Ilda."

"Who engaged you?"

"Mrs. Halsey, ma'am."

"Ah," said Mrs. Weatherstone, musing to herself, "and I engaged Mrs.
Halsey!"  "Do you like it here?" she continued kindly.

"Oh yes, ma'am!" said Ilda.  "That is--" she stopped, blushed, and
continued bravely.  "I like to work for you, ma'am."

"Thank you, Ilda.  Will you ask Mrs. Halsey to come to me--at once,
please."

Ilda went, more impressed than ever with the desirability of her new
place, and mistress.

As she was about to pass the door of Mr. Matthew Weatherstone, that
young gentleman stepped out and intercepted her.  "Whither away so fast,
my dear?" he amiably inquired.

"Please let one pass, sir!  I'm on an errand.  Please, sir?"

"You must give me a kiss first!" said he--and since there seemed no
escape and she was in haste, she submitted.  He took six--and she ran
away half crying.

Mrs. Halsey, little accustomed to take orders from her real mistress,
and resting comfortably in her room, had half a mind to send an excuse.

"I'm not dressed," she said to the maid.

"Well she is!" replied Ilda, "dressed splendid.  She said 'at once,
please.'"

"A pretty time o' day!" said the housekeeper with some asperity, hastily
buttoning her gown; and she presently appeared, somewhat heated, before
Mrs. Weatherstone.

That lady was sitting, cool and gracious, her long ivory paper-cutter
between the pages of a new magazine.

"In how short a time could you pack, Mrs. Halsey?" she inquired.

"Pack, ma'am?  I'm not accustomed to doing packing.  I'll send one of
the maids.  Is it your things, ma'am?"

"No," said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "It is yours I refer to.  I wish you to
pack your things and leave the house--in an hour.  One of the maids can
help you, if necessary.  Anything you cannot take can be sent after you.
 Here is a check for the following month's wages."

Mrs. Halsey was nearly a head taller than her employer, a stout showy
woman, handsome enough, red-lipped, and with a moist and crafty eye. 
This was so sudden a misadventure that she forgot her usual caution. 
"You've no right to turn me off in a minute like this!" she burst forth.
 "I'll leave it to Madam Weatherstone!"

"If you will look at the terms on which I engaged you, Mrs. Halsey, you
will find that a month's warning, or a month's wages, was specified. 
Here are the wages--as to the warning, that has been given for some
months past!"

"By whom, Ma'am?"

"By yourself, Mrs. Halsey--I think you understand me.  Oscar will take
your things as soon as they are ready."

Mrs. Halsey met her steady eye a moment--saw more than she cared to
face--and left the room.

She took care, however, to carry some letters to Madam Weatherstone, and
meekly announced her discharge; also, by some coincidence, she met Mr.
Matthew in the hall upstairs, and weepingly confided her grievance to
him, meeting immediate consolation, both sentimental and practical.

When hurried servants were sent to find their young mistress they
reported that she must have gone out, and in truth she had; out on her
own roof, where she sat quite still, though shivering a little now and
then from the new excitement, until dinner time.

This meal, in the mind of Madam Weatherstone, was the crowning factor of
daily life; and, on state occasions, of social life.  In her cosmogony
the central sun was a round mahogany table; all other details of
housekeeping revolved about it in varying orbits.  To serve an endless
series of dignified delicious meals, notably dinners, was, in her eyes,
the chief end of woman; the most high purpose of the home.

Therefore, though angry and astounded, she appeared promptly when the
meal was announced; and when her daughter-in-law, serene and royally
attired, took her place as usual, no emotion was allowed to appear
before the purple footman who attended.

"I understood you were out, Viva," she said politely.

"I was," replied Viva, with equal decorum.  "It is charming outside at
this time in the evening--don't you think so?"

Young Matthew was gloomy and irritable throughout the length and breadth
of the meal; and when they were left with their coffee in the drawing
room, he broke out, "What's this I hear about Mrs. Halsey being fired
without notice?"

"That is what I wish to know, Viva," said the grandmother.  "The poor
woman is greatly distressed.  Is there not some mistake?"

"It's a damn shame," said Matthew.

The younger lady glanced from one to the other, and wondered to see how
little she minded it.  "The door was there all the time!" she thought to
herself, as she looked her stepson in the eye and said, "Hardly
drawing-room language, Matthew.  Your grandmother is present!"

He stared at her in dumb amazement, so she went on, "No, there is no
mistake at all.  I discharged Mrs. Halsey about an hour before dinner. 
The terms of the engagement were a month's warning or a month's wages. 
I gave her the wages."

"But! but!" Madam Weatherstone was genuinely confused by this sudden
inexplicable, yet perfectly polite piece of what she still felt to be in
the nature of 'interference' and 'presumption.'  "I have had no fault to
find with her."

"I have, you see," said her daughter-in-law smiling.  "I found her
unsatisfactory and shall replace her with something better presently. 
How about a little music, Matthew?  Won't you start the victrolla?"

Matthew wouldn't.  He was going out; went out with the word.  Madam
Weatherstone didn't wish to hear it--had a headache--must go to her
room--went to her room forthwith.  There was a tension in the
athmosphere that would have wrung tears from Viva Weatherstone a week
ago, yes, twenty-four hours ago.

As it was she rose to her feet, stretching herself to her full height,
and walked the length of the great empty room.  She even laughed a
little.  "It's open!" said she, and ordered the car.  While waiting for
it she chatted with Mrs. Porne awhile over the all-convenient telephone.

*

Diantha sat at her window, watching the big soft, brilliant moon behind
the eucalyptus trees.  After the close of the strenuous meeting, she had
withdrawn from the crowd of excited women anxious to shake her hand and
engage her on the spot, had asked time to consider a number of good
opportunities offered, and had survived the cold and angry glances of
the now smaller but far more united Home and Culture Club.  She declined
to talk to the reporters, and took refuge first in an open car.  This
proved very unsatisfactory, owing to her sudden prominence.  Two
persistent newspaper men swung themselves upon the car also and insisted
on addressing her.

"Excuse me, gentlemen," she said, "I am not acquainted with you."

They eagerly produced their cards--and said they were "newspaper men."

"I see," said Diantha, "But you are still men?  And gentlemen, I
suppose?  I am a woman, and I do not wish to talk with you."

"Miss Bell Declines to Be Interviewed," wrote the reporters, and spent
themselves on her personal appearance, being favorably impressed
thereby.

But Miss Bell got off at the next corner and took a short cut to the
house where she had rented a room.  Reporters were waiting there, two
being women.

Diantha politely but firmly declined to see them and started for the
stairs; but they merely stood in front of her and asked questions.  The
girl's blood surged to her cheeks; she smiled grimly, kept absolute
silence, brushed through them and went swiftly to her room, locking the
door after her.

The reporters described her appearance--unfavorably this time; and they
described the house--also unfavorably.  They said that "A group of
adoring-eyed young men stood about the doorway as the flushed heroine of
the afternoon made her brusque entrance."  These adorers consisted of
the landlady's Johnny, aged thirteen, and two satellites of his, still
younger.  They _did_ look at Diantha admiringly; and she _was_ a little
hurried in her entrance--truth must be maintained.

Too irritated and tired to go out for dinner, she ate an orange or two,
lay down awhile, and then eased her mind by writing a long letter to
Ross and telling him all about it.  That is, she told him most of it,
all the pleasant things, all the funny things; leaving out about the
reporters, because she was too angry to be just, she told herself.  She
wrote and wrote, becoming peaceful as the quiet moments passed, and a
sense grew upon her of the strong, lasting love that was waiting so
patiently.

"Dearest," her swift pen flew along, "I really feel much encouraged.  An
impression has been made.  One or two men spoke to me afterward; the
young minister, who said such nice things; and one older man, who looked
prosperous and reliable.  'When you begin any such business as you have
outlined, you may count on me, Miss Bell,' he said, and gave me his
card.  He's a lawyer--P. L. Wiscomb; nice man, I should think.  Another
big, sheepish-looking man said, 'And me, Miss Bell.'  His name is
Thaddler; his wife is very disagreeable.  Some of the women are
favorably impressed, but the old-fashioned kind--my!  'If hate killed
men, Brother Lawrence!'--but it don't."

She wrote herself into a good humor, and dwelt at considerable length on
the pleasant episode of the minister and young Mrs. Weatherstone's
remarks.  "I liked her," she wrote.  "She's a nice woman--even if she is
rich."

There was a knock at her door.  "Lady to see you, Miss."

"I cannot see anyone," said Diantha; "you must excuse me."

"Beg pardon, Miss, but it's not a reporter; it's--."  The landlady
stretched her lean neck around the door edge and whispered hoarsely,
"It's young Mrs. Weatherstone!"

Diantha rose to her feet, a little bewildered.  "I'll be right down,"
she said.  But a voice broke in from the hall, "I beg your pardon, Miss
Bell, but I took the liberty of coming up; may I come in?"

She came in, and the landlady perforce went out.  Mrs. Weatherstone held
Diantha's hand warmly, and looked into her eyes.  "I was a schoolmate of
Ellen Porne," she told the girl.  "We are dear friends still; and so I
feel that I know you better than you think.  You have done beautiful
work for Mrs. Porne; now I want you to do to it for me.  I need you."

"Won't you sit down?" said Diantha.

"You, too," said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "Now I want you to come to
me--right away.  You have done me so much good already.  I was just a
New England bred school teacher myself at first, so we're even that far.
 Then you took a step up--and I took a step down."

Diantha was a little slow in understanding the quick fervor of this new
friend; a trifle suspicious, even; being a cautious soul, and somewhat
overstrung, perhaps.  Her visitor, bright-eyed and eager, went on.  "I
gave up school teaching and married a fortune.  You have given it up to
do a more needed work.  I think you are wonderful.  Now, I know this
seems queer to you, but I want to tell you about it.  I feel sure you'll
understand.  At home, Madam Weatherstone has had everything in charge
for years and years, and I've been too lazy or too weak, or too
indifferent, to do anything.  I didn't care, somehow.  All the machinery
of living, and no _living_--no good of it all!  Yet there didn't seem to
be anything else to do.  Now you have waked me all up--your paper this
afternoon--what Mr. Eltwood said--the way those poor, dull, blind women
took it.  And yet I was just as dull and blind myself!  Well, I begin to
see things now.  I can't tell you all at once what a difference it has
made; but I have a very definite proposition to make to you.  Will you
come and be my housekeeper, now--right away--at a hundred dollars a
month?"

Diantha opened her eyes wide and looked at the eager lady as if she
suspected her nervous balance.

"The other one got a thousand a year--you are worth more.  Now, don't
decline, please.  Let me tell you about it.  I can see that you have
plans ahead, for this business; but it can't hurt you much to put them
off six months, say.  Meantime, you could be practicing.  Our place at
Santa Ulrica is almost as big as this one; there are lots of servants
and a great, weary maze of accounts to be kept, and it wouldn't be bad
practice for you--now, would it?"

Diantha's troubled eyes lit up.  "No--you are right there," she said. 
"If I could do it!"

"You'll have to do just that sort of thing when you are running your
business, won't you?" her visitor went on.  "And the summer's not a good
time to start a thing like that, is it?"

Diantha meditated.  "No, I wasn't going to.  I was going to start
somewhere--take a cottage, a dozen girls or so--and furnish labor by the
day to the other cottages."

"Well, you might be able to run that on the side," said Mrs.
Weatherstone.  "And you could train my girls, get in new ones if you
like; it doesn't seem to me it would conflict.  But to speak to you
quite frankly, Miss Bell, I want you in the house for my own sake.  You
do me good."

They discussed the matter for some time, Diantha objecting mainly to the
suddenness of it all.  "I'm a slow thinker," she said, "and this is
so--so attractive that I'm suspicious of it.  I had the other thing all
planned--the girls practically engaged."

"Where were you thinking of going?" asked Mrs. Weatherstone.

"To Santa Ulrica."

"Exactly!  Well, you shall have your cottage and our girls and give them
part time.  Or--how many have you arranged with?"

"Only six have made definite engagements yet."

"What kind?"

"Two laundresses, a cook and three second maids; all good ones."

"Excellent!  Now, I tell you what to do.  I will engage all those girls.
 I'm making a change at the house, for various reasons.  You bring them
to me as soon as you like; but you I want at once.  I wish you'd come
home with me to-night!  Why don't you?"

Diantha's scanty baggage was all in sight.  She looked around for an
excuse.  Mrs. Weatherstone stood up laughing.

"Put the new address in the letter," she said, mischievously, "and come
along!"

*

And the purple chauffeur, his disapproving back ineffectual in the
darkness, rolled them home.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER IX.

"SLEEPING IN."


Men have marched in armies, fleets have borne them,
 Left their homes new countries to subdue;
Young men seeking fortune wide have wandered--
 We have something new.

Armies of young maidens cross our oceans;
 Leave their mother's love, their father's care;
Maidens, young and helpless, widely wander,
 Burdens new to bear.

Strange the land and language, laws and customs;
 Ignorant and all alone they come;
Maidens young and helpless, serving strangers,
 Thus we keep the Home.

When on earth was safety for young maidens
 Far from mother's love and father's care?
We preserve The Home, and call it sacred--
 Burdens new they bear.


The sun had gone down on Madam Weatherstone's wrath, and risen to find
it unabated.  With condensed disapprobation written on every well-cut
feature, she came to the coldly gleaming breakfast table.

That Mrs. Halsey was undoubtedly gone, she had to admit; yet so far
failed to find the exact words of reproof for a woman of independent
means discharging her own housekeeper when it pleased her.

Young Mathew unexpectedly appeared at breakfast, perhaps in anticipation
of a sort of Roman holiday in which his usually late and apologetic
stepmother would furnish the amusement.  They were both surprised to
find her there before them, looking uncommonly fresh in crisp, sheer
white, with deep-toned violets in her belt.

She ate with every appearance of enjoyment, chatting amiably about the
lovely morning--the flowers, the garden and the gardeners; her efforts
ill seconded, however.

"Shall I attend to the orders this morning?" asked Madam Weatherstone
with an air of noble patience.

"O no, thank you!" replied Viva.  "I have engaged a new housekeeper."

"A new housekeeper!  When?"  The old lady was shaken by this
inconceivable promptness.

"Last night," said her daughter-in-law, looking calmly across the table,
her color rising a little.

"And when is she coming, if I may ask?"

"She has come.  I have been with her an hour already this morning."

Young Mathew smiled.  This was amusing, though not what he had expected.
 "How extremely alert and businesslike!" he said lazily.  "It's becoming
to you--to get up early!"

"You can't have got much of a person--at a minute's notice," said his
grandmother.  "Or perhaps you have been planning this for some time?"

"No," said Viva.  "I have wanted to get rid of Mrs. Halsey for some
time, but the new one I found yesterday."

"What's her name?" inquired Mathew.

"Bell--Miss Diantha Bell," she answered, looking as calm as if
announcing the day of the week, but inwardly dreading the result
somewhat.  Like most of such terrors it was overestimated.

There was a little pause--rather an intense little pause; and
then--"Isn't that the girl who set 'em all by the ears yesterday?" asked
the young man, pointing to the morning paper.  "They say she's a
good-looker."

Madam Weatherstone rose from the table in some agitation.  "I must say I
am very sorry, Viva, that you should have been so--precipitate!  This
young woman cannot be competent to manage a house like this--to say
nothing of her scandalous ideas.  Mrs. Halsey was--to my mind--perfectly
satisfactory.  I shall miss her very much."  She swept out with an
unanswerable air.

"So shall I," muttered Mat, under his breath, as he strolled after her;
"unless the new one's equally amiable."

Viva Weatherstone watched them go, and stood awhile looking after the
well-built, well-dressed, well-mannered but far from well-behaved young
man.

"I don't _know_," she said to herself, "but I do feel--think--imagine--a
good deal.  I'm sure I hope not!  Anyway--it's new life to have that
girl in the house."

That girl had undertaken what she described to Ross as "a large order--a
very large order."

"It's the hardest thing I ever undertook," she wrote him, "but I think I
can do it; and it will be a tremendous help.  Mrs. Weatherstone's a
brick--a perfect brick!  She seems to have been very unhappy--for ever
so long--and to have submitted to her domineering old mother-in-law just
because she didn't care enough to resist.  Now she's got waked up all of
a sudden--she says it was my paper at the club--more likely my awful
example, I think! and she fired her old housekeeper--I don't know what
for--and rushed me in.

"So here I am.  The salary is good, the work is excellent training, and
I guess I can hold the place.  But the old lady is a terror, and the
young man--how you would despise that Johnny!"

The home letters she now received were rather amusing.  Ross, sternly
patient, saw little difference in her position.  "I hope you will enjoy
your new work," he wrote, "but personally I should prefer that you did
not--so you might give it up and come home sooner.  I miss you as you
can well imagine.  Even when you were here life was hard enough--but
now!--

"I had a half offer for the store the other day, but it fell through. 
If I could sell that incubus and put the money into a ranch--fruit,
hens, anything--then we could all live on it; more cheaply, I think; and
I could find time for some research work I have in mind.  You remember
that guinea-pig experiment I want so to try?"

Diantha remembered and smiled sadly.  She was not much interested in
guinea-pigs and their potential capacities, but she was interested in
her lover and his happiness.  "Ranch," she said thoughtfully; "that's
not a bad idea."

Her mother wrote the same patient loving letters, perfunctorily hopeful.
 Her father wrote none--"A woman's business--this letter-writin'," he
always held; and George, after one scornful upbraiding, had "washed his
hands of her" with some sense of relief.  He didn't like to write
letters either.

But Susie kept up a lively correspondence.  She was attached to her
sister, as to all her immediate relatives and surroundings; and while
she utterly disapproved of Diantha's undertaking, a sense of sisterly
duty, to say nothing of affection, prompted her to many letters.  It did
not, however, always make these agreeable reading.

"Mother's pretty well, and the girl she's got now does nicely--that
first one turned out to be a failure.  Father's as cranky as ever.  We
are all well here and the baby (this was a brand new baby Diantha had
not seen) is just a Darling!  You ought to be here, you unnatural Aunt! 
Gerald doesn't ever speak of you--but I do just the same.  You hear from
the Wardens, of course.  Mrs. Warden's got neuralgia or something; keeps
them all busy.  They are much excited over this new place of yours--you
ought to hear them go on!  It appears that Madam Weatherstone is a
connection of theirs--one of the F. F. V's, I guess, and they think
she's something wonderful.  And to have _you_ working _there!_--well,
you can just see how they'd feel; and I don't blame them.  It's no use
arguing with you--but I should think you'd have enough of this
disgraceful foolishness by this time and come home!"

Diantha tried to be very philosophic over her home letters; but they
were far from stimulating.  "It's no use arguing with poor Susie!" she
decided.  "Susie thinks the sun rises and sets between kitchen, nursery
and parlor!

"Mother can't see the good of it yet, but she will later--Mother's all
right.

"I'm awfully sorry the Wardens feel so--and make Ross unhappy--but of
course I knew they would.  It can't be helped.  It's just a question of
time and work."

And she went to work.

*

Mrs. Porne called on her friend most promptly, with a natural eagerness
and curiosity.

"How does it work?  Do you like her as much as you thought?  Do tell me
about it, Viva.  You look like another woman already!"

"I certainly feel like one," Viva answered.  "I've seen slaves in
housework, and I've seen what we fondly call 'Queens' in housework; but
I never saw brains in it before."

Mrs. Porne sighed.  "Isn't it just wonderful--the way she does things! 
Dear me!  We do miss her!  She trained that Swede for us--and she does
pretty well--but not like 'Miss Bell'!  I wish there were a hundred of
her!"

"If there were a hundred thousand she wouldn't go round!" answered Mrs.
Weatherstone.  "How selfish we are!  _That_ is the kind of woman we all
want in our homes--and fuss because we can't have them."

"Edgar says he quite agrees with her views," Mrs. Porne went on. 
"Skilled labor by the day--food sent in--.  He says if she cooked it he
wouldn't care if it came all the way from Alaska!  She certainly can
cook!  I wish she'd set up her business--the sooner the better."

Mrs. Weatherstone nodded her head firmly.  "She will.  She's planning. 
This was really an interruption--her coming here, but I think it will be
a help--she's not had experience in large management before, but she
takes hold splendidly.  She's found a dozen 'leaks' in our household
already."

"Mrs. Thaddler's simply furious, I hear," said the visitor.  "Mrs. Ree
was in this morning and told me all about it.  Poor Mrs. Ree!  The home
is church and state to her; that paper of Miss Bell's she regards as
simple blasphemy."

They both laughed as that stormy meeting rose before them.

"I was so proud of you, Viva, standing up for her as you did.  How did
you ever dare?"

"Why I got my courage from the girl herself.  She was--superb!  Talk of
blasphemy!  Why I've committed _lese majeste_ and regicide and the
Unpardonable Sin since that meeting!"  And she told her friend of her
brief passage at arms with Mrs. Halsey.  "I never liked the woman," she
continued; "and some of the things Miss Bell said set me thinking.  I
don't believe we half know what's going on in our houses."

"Well, Mrs. Thaddler's so outraged by 'this scandalous attack upon the
sanctities of the home' that she's going about saying all sorts of
things about Miss Bell.  O look--I do believe that's her car!"

Even as they spoke a toneless voice announced, "Mr. and Mrs. Thaddler,"
and Madam Weatherstone presently appeared to greet these visitors.

"I think you are trying a dangerous experiment!" said Mrs. Thaddler to
her young hostess.  "A very dangerous experiment!  Bringing that young
iconoclast into your home!"

Mr. Thaddler, stout and sulky, sat as far away as he could and talked to
Mrs. Porne.  "I'd like to try that same experiment myself," said he to
her.  "You tried it some time, I understand?"

"Indeed we did--and would still if we had the chance," she replied.  "We
think her a very exceptional young woman."

Mr. Thaddler chuckled.  "She is that!" he agreed.  "Gad!  How she did
set things humming!  They're humming yet--at our house!"

He glanced rather rancorously at his wife, and Mrs. Porne wished, as she
often had before, that Mr. Thaddler wore more clothing over his domestic
afflictions.

"Scandalous!" Mrs. Thaddler was saying to Madam Weatherstone.  "Simply
scandalous!  Never in my life did I hear such absurd--such
outrageous--charges against the sanctities of the home!"

"There you have it!" said Mr. Thaddler, under his breath.  "Sanctity of
the fiddlesticks!  There was a lot of truth in what that girl said!" 
Then he looked rather sheepish and flushed a little--which was needless;
easing his collar with a fat finger.

Madam Weatherstone and Mrs. Thaddler were at one on this subject; but
found it hard to agree even so, no love being lost between them; and the
former gave evidence of more satisfaction than distress at this
"dangerous experiment" in the house of her friends.  Viva sat silent,
but with a look of watchful intelligence that delighted Mrs. Porne.

"It has done her good already," she said to herself.  "Bless that girl!"

Mr. Thaddler went home disappointed in the real object of his call--he
had hoped to see the Dangerous Experiment again.  But his wife was well
pleased.

"They will rue it!" she announced.  "Madam Weatherstone is ashamed of
her daughter-in-law--I can see that!  _She_ looks cool enough.  I don't
know what's got into her!"

"Some of that young woman's good cooking," her husband suggested.

"That young woman is not there as cook!" she replied tartly.  "What she
_is_ there for we shall see later!  Mark my words!"

Mr. Thaddler chuckled softly.  "I'll mark 'em!" he said.

Diantha had her hands full.  Needless to say her sudden entrance was
resented by the corps of servants accustomed to the old regime.  She had
the keys; she explored, studied, inventoried, examined the accounts,
worked out careful tables and estimates.  "I wish Mother were here!" she
said to herself.  "She's a regular genius for accounts.  I _can_ do
it--but it's no joke."

She brought the results to her employer at the end of the week.  "This
is tentative," she said, "and I've allowed margins because I'm new to a
business of this size.  But here's what this house ought to cost you--at
the outside, and here's what it does cost you now."

Mrs. Weatherstone was impressed.  "Aren't you a little--spectacular?"
she suggested.

Diantha went over it carefully; the number of rooms, the number of
servants, the hours of labor, the amount of food and other supplies
required.

"This is only preparatory, of course," she said.  "I'll have to check it
off each month.  If I may do the ordering and keep all the accounts I
can show you exactly in a month, or two at most."

"How about the servants?" asked Mrs. Weatherstone.

There was much to say here, questions of competence, of impertinence, of
personal excellence with "incompatibility of temper."  Diantha was given
a free hand, with full liberty to experiment, and met the opportunity
with her usual energy.

She soon discharged the unsatisfactory ones, and substituted the girls
she had selected for her summer's experiment, gradually adding others,
till the household was fairly harmonious, and far more efficient and
economical.  A few changes were made among the men also.

By the time the family moved down to Santa Ulrica, there was quite a new
spirit in the household.  Mrs. Weatherstone fully approved of the Girls'
Club Diantha had started at Mrs. Porne's; and it went on merrily in the
larger quarters of the great "cottage" on the cliff.

"I'm very glad I came to you, Mrs. Weatherstone," said the girl.  "You
were quite right about the experience; I did need it--and I'm getting
it!"

She was getting some of which she made no mention.

As she won and held the confidence of her subordinates, and the growing
list of club members, she learned their personal stories; what had
befallen them in other families, and what they liked and disliked in
their present places.

"The men are not so bad," explained Catharine Kelly, at a club meeting,
meaning the men servants; "they respect an honest girl if she respects
herself; but it's the young masters--and sometimes the old ones!"

"It's all nonsense," protested Mrs. James, widowed cook of long
standing.  "I've worked out for twenty-five years, and I never met no
such goings on!"

Little Ilda looked at Mrs. James' severe face and giggled.

"I've heard of it," said Molly Connors, "I've a cousin that's workin' in
New York; and she's had to leave two good places on account of their
misbehavin' theirselves.  She's a fine girl, but too good-lookin'."

Diantha studied types, questioned them, drew them out, adjusted facts to
theories and theories to facts.  She found the weakness of the whole
position to lie in the utter ignorance and helplessness of the
individual servant.  "If they were only organized," she thought--"and
knew their own power!--Well; there's plenty of time."

As her acquaintance increased, and as Mrs. Weatherstone's interest in
her plans increased also, she started the small summer experiment she
had planned, for furnishing labor by the day.  Mrs. James was an
excellent cook, though most unpleasant to work with.  She was quite able
to see that getting up frequent lunches at three dollars, and dinners at
five dollars, made a better income than ten dollars a week even with
several days unoccupied.

A group of younger women, under Diantha's sympathetic encouragement,
agreed to take a small cottage together, with Mrs. James as a species of
chaperone; and to go out in twos and threes as chambermaids and
waitresses at 25 cents an hour.  Two of them could set in perfect order
one of the small beach cottage in an hour's time; and the occupants,
already crowded for room, were quite willing to pay a little more in
cash "not to have a servant around."  Most of them took their meals out
in any case.

It was a modest attempt, elastic and easily alterable and based on the
special conditions of a shore resort: Mrs. Weatherstone's known interest
gave it social backing; and many ladies who heartily disapproved of
Diantha's theories found themselves quite willing to profit by this very
practical local solution of the "servant question."

The "club girls" became very popular.  Across the deep hot sand they
ploughed, and clattered along the warping boardwalks, in merry pairs and
groups, finding the work far more varied and amusing than the endless
repetition in one household.  They had pleasant evenings too, with
plenty of callers, albeit somewhat checked and chilled by rigorous Mrs.
James.

"It is both foolish and wicked!" said Madam Weatherstone to her
daughter-in-law, "Exposing a group of silly girls to such danger and
temptations!  I understand there is singing and laughing going on at
that house until half-past ten at night."

"Yes, there is," Viva admitted.  "Mrs. James insists that they shall all
be in bed at eleven--which is very wise.  I'm glad they have good
times--there's safety in numbers, you know."

"There will be a scandal in this community before long!" said the old
lady solemnly.  "And it grieves me to think that this household will be
responsible for it!"

Diantha heard all this from the linen room while Madam Weatherstone
buttonholed her daughter-in-law in the hall; and in truth the old lady
meant that she should hear what she said.

"She's right, I'm afraid!" said Diantha to herself--"there will be a
scandal if I'm not mighty careful and this household will be responsible
for it!"

Even as she spoke she caught Ilda's childish giggle in the lower hall,
and looking over the railing saw her airily dusting the big Chinese
vases and coquetting with young Mr. Mathew.

Later on, Diantha tried seriously to rouse her conscience and her common
sense.  "Don't you see, child, that it can't do you anything but harm? 
You can't carry on with a man like that as you can with one of your own
friends.  He is not to be trusted.  One nice girl I had here simply left
the place--he annoyed her so."

Ilda was a little sulky.  She had been quite a queen in the small
Norwegian village she was born in.  Young men were young men--and they
might even--perhaps!  This severe young housekeeper didn't know
everything.  Maybe she was jealous!

So Ilda was rather unconvinced, though apparently submissive, and
Diantha kept a careful eye upon her.  She saw to it that Ilda's room had
a bolt as well as key in the door, and kept the room next to it empty;
frequently using it herself, unknown to anyone.  "I hate to turn the
child off," she said to herself, conscientiously revolving the matter. 
"She isn't doing a thing more than most girls do--she's only a little
fool.  And he's not doing anything I can complain of--yet."

But she worried over it a good deal, and Mrs. Weatherstone noticed it.

"Doesn't your pet club house go well, 'Miss Bell?'  You seem troubled
about something."

"I am," Diantha admitted.  "I believe I'll have to tell you about
it--but I hate to.  Perhaps if you'll come and look I shan't have to say
much."

She led her to a window that looked on the garden, the rich, vivid,
flower-crowded garden of Southern California by the sea.  Little Ilda,
in a fresh black frock and snowy, frilly cap and apron, ran out to get a
rose; and while she sniffed and dallied they saw Mr. Mathew saunter out
and join her.

The girl was not as severe with him as she ought to have been--that was
evident; but it was also evident that she was frightened and furious
when he suddenly held her fast and kissed her with much satisfaction. 
As soon as her arms were free she gave him a slap that sounded smartly
even at that distance; and ran crying into the house.

"She's foolish, I admit," said Diantha,--"but she doesn't realize her
danger at all.  I've tried to make her.  And now I'm more worried than
ever.  It seems rather hard to discharge her--she needs care."

"I'll speak to that young man myself," said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "I'll
speak to his grandmother too!"

"O--would you?" urged Diantha.  "She wouldn't believe anything except
that the girl 'led him on'--you know that.  But I have an idea that we
could convince her--if you're willing to do something rather
melodramatic--and I think we'd better do it to-night!"

"What's that?" asked her employer; and Diantha explained.  It was
melodramatic, but promised to be extremely convincing.

"Do you think he'd dare! under my roof?" hotly demanded Madam
Weatherstone.

"I'm very much afraid it wouldn't be the first time," Diantha
reluctantly assured her.  "It's no use being horrified.  But if we could
only make _sure_--"

"If we could only make his grandmother sure!" cried Madam Weatherstone. 
"That would save me a deal of trouble and misunderstanding.  See here--I
think I can manage it--what makes you think it's to-night?"

"I can't be absolutely certain--" Diantha explained; and told her the
reasons she had.

"It does look so," her employer admitted.  "We'll try it at any rate."

Urging her mother-in-law's presence on the ground of needing her
experienced advice, Mrs. Weatherstone brought the august lady to the
room next to Ilda's late that evening, the housekeeper in attendance.

"We mustn't wake the servants," she said in an elaborate whisper.  "They
need sleep, poor things!  But I want to consult you about these
communicating doors and the locksmith is coming in the morning.--you see
this opens from this side."  She turned the oiled key softly in the
lock.  "Now Miss Bell thinks they ought to be left so--so that the girls
can visit one another if they like--what do you think?"

"I think you are absurd to bring me to the top floor, at this time of
night, for a thing like this!" said the old lady.  "They should be
permanently locked, to my mind!  There's no question about it."

Viva, still in low tones, discussed this point further; introduced the
subject of wall-paper or hard finish; pointed out from the window a tall
eucalyptus which she thought needed heading; did what she could to keep
her mother-in-law on the spot; and presently her efforts were rewarded.

A sound of muffled speech came from the next room--a man's voice dimly
heard.  Madam Weatherstone raised her head like a warhorse.

"What's this!  What's this!" she said in a fierce whisper.

Viva laid a hand on her arm.  "Sh!" said she.  "Let us make sure!" and
she softly unlatched the door.

A brilliant moon flooded the small chamber.  They could see little Ilda,
huddled in the bedclothes, staring at her door from which the key had
fallen.  Another key was being inserted--turned--but the bolt held.

"Come and open it, young lady!" said a careful voice outside.

"Go away!  Go away!" begged the girl, low and breathlessly.  "Oh how
_can_ you!  Go away quick!"

"Indeed, I won't!" said the voice.  "You come and open it."

"Go away," she cried, in a soft but frantic voice.  "I--I'll scream!"

"Scream away!" he answered.  "I'll just say I came up to see what the
screaming's about, that's all.  You open the door--if you don't want
anybody to know I'm here!  I won't hurt you any--I just want to talk to
you a minute."

Madam Weatherstone was speechless with horror, her daughter-in-law
listened with set lips.  Diantha looked from one to the other, and at
the frightened child before them who was now close to the terrible door.

"O please!--_please!_ go away!" she cried in desperation.  "O what shall
I do!  What shall I do!"

"You can't do anything," he answered cheerfully.  "And I'm coming in
anyhow.  You'd better keep still about this for your own sake.  Stand
from under!"  Madam Weatherstone marched into the room.  Ilda, with a
little cry, fled out of it to Diantha.

There was a jump, a scramble, two knuckly hands appeared, a long leg was
put through the transom, two legs wildly wriggling, a descending body,
and there stood before them, flushed, dishevelled, his coat up to his
ears--Mat Weatherstone.

He did not notice the stern rigidity of the figure which stood between
him and the moonlight, but clasped it warmly to his heart.--"Now I've
got you, Ducky!" cried he, pressing all too affectionate kisses upon the
face of his grandmother.

Young Mrs. Weatherstone turned on the light.

It was an embarrassing position for the gentleman.

He had expected to find a helpless cowering girl; afraid to cry out
because her case would be lost if she did; begging piteously that he
would leave her; wholly at his mercy.

What he did find was so inexplicable as to reduce him to gibbering
astonishment.  