
Then I pay a laundress one day, $2, and her two meals, $.50, making
$23.50.  Then I have two maids, for an hour a day, to clean; $.50 a day
for six days, $3, and one maid Sunday, $.25.  $26.75 in all.  So we only
make $1.25.

_But!_ there's another room!  We have the cook's room for an extra
guest; I use it most for a sewing room, though and the kitchen is a sort
of day nursery now.  The house seems as big again!"

"But the food?" eagerly inquired Mrs. Ree.  "Is it as good as your own? 
Is it hot and tempting?"

Mrs. Ree was fascinated by the new heresy.  As a staunch adherent of the
old Home and Culture Club, and its older ideals, she disapproved of the
undertaking, but her curiosity was keen about it.

Mrs. Porne smiled patiently.  "You remember Diantha Bell's cooking I am
sure, Mrs. Ree," she said.  "And Julianna used to cook for dinner
parties--when one could get her.  My Swede was a very ordinary cook, as
most of these untrained girls are.  Do take off your hat and have dinner
with us,--I'll show you," urged Mrs. Porne.

"I--O I mustn't," fluttered the little woman.  "They'll expect me at
home--and--surely your--supply--doesn't allow for guests?"

"We'll arrange all that by 'phone," her hostess explained; and she
promptly sent word to the Ree household, then called up Union House and
ordered one extra dinner.

"Is it--I'm dreadfully rude I know, but I'm _so_ interested!  Is
it--expensive?"

Mrs. Porne smiled.  "Haven't you seen the little circular?  Here's one,
'Extra meals to regular patrons 25 cents.'  And no more trouble to order
than to tell a maid."

Mrs. Ree had a lively sense of paltering with Satan as she sat down to
the Porne's dinner table.  She had seen the delivery wagon drive to the
door, had heard the man deposit something heavy on the back porch, and
was now confronted by a butler's tray at Mrs. Porne's left, whereon
stood a neat square shining object with silvery panels and bamboo
trimmings.

"It's not at all bad looking, is it?" she ventured.

"Not bad enough to spoil one's appetite," Mr. Porne cheerily agreed.

"Open, Sesame!  Now you know the worst."

Mrs. Porne opened it, and an inner front was shown, with various small
doors and drawers.

"Do you know what is in it?" asked the guest.

"No, thank goodness, I don't," replied her hostess.  "If there's
anything tiresome it is to order meals and always know what's coming! 
That's what men get so tired of at restaurants; what they hate so when
their wives ask them what they want for dinner.  Now I can enjoy my
dinner at my own table, just as if I was a guest."

"It is--a tax--sometimes," Mrs. Ree admitted, adding hastily, "But one
is glad to do it--to make home attractive."

Mr. Porne's eyes sought his wife's, and love and contentment flashed
between them, as she quietly set upon the table three silvery plates.

"Not silver, surely!" said Mrs. Ree, lifting hers, "Oh, aluminum."

"Aluminum, silver plated," said Mr. Porne.  "They've learned how to do
it at last.  It's a problem of weight, you see, and breakage.  Aluminum
isn't pretty, glass and silver are heavy, but we all love silver, and
there's a pleasant sense of gorgeousness in this outfit."

It did look rather impressive; silver tumblers, silver dishes, the whole
dainty service--and so surprisingly light.

"You see she knows that it is very important to please the eye as well
as the palate," said Mr. Porne.  "Now speaking of palates, let us all
keep silent and taste this soup."  They did keep silent in supreme
contentment while the soup lasted.  Mrs. Ree laid down her spoon with
the air of one roused from a lovely dream.

"Why--why--it's like Paris," she said in an awed tone.

"Isn't it?" Mr. Porne agreed, "and not twice alike in a month, I think."

"Why, there aren't thirty kinds of soup, are there?" she urged.

"I never thought there were when we kept servants," said he.  "Three was
about their limit, and greasy, at that."

Mrs. Porne slipped the soup plates back in their place and served the
meat.

"She does not give a fish course, does she?" Mrs. Ree observed.

"Not at the table d'hote price," Mrs. Porne answered.  "We never
pretended to have a fish course ourselves--do you?"  Mrs. Ree did not,
and eagerly disclaimed any desire for fish.  The meat was roast beef,
thinly sliced, hot and juicy.

"Don't you miss the carving, Mr. Porne?" asked the visitor.  "I do so
love to see a man at the head of his own table, carving."

"I do miss it, Mrs. Ree.  I miss it every day of my life with devout
thankfulness.  I never was a good carver, so it was no pleasure to me to
show off; and to tell you the truth, when I come to the table, I like to
eat--not saw wood."   And Mr. Porne ate with every appearance of
satisfaction.

"We never get roast beef like this I'm sure," Mrs. Ree admitted, "we
can't get it small enough for our family."

"And a little roast is always spoiled in the cooking.  Yes this is far
better than we used to have," agreed her hostess.

Mrs. Ree enjoyed every mouthful of her meal.  The soup was hot.  The
salad was crisp and the ice cream hard.  There was sponge cake, thick,
light, with sugar freckles on the dark crust.  The coffee was perfect
and almost burned the tongue.

"I don't understand about the heat and cold," she said; and they showed
her the asbestos-lined compartments and perfectly fitting places for
each dish and plate.  Everything went back out of sight; small leavings
in a special drawer, knives and forks held firmly by rubber fittings,
nothing that shook or rattled.  And the case was set back by the door
where the man called for it at eight o'clock.

"She doesn't furnish table linen?"

"No, there are Japanese napkins at the top here.  We like our own
napkins, and we didn't use a cloth, anyway."

"And how about silver?"

"We put ours away.  This plated ware they furnish is perfectly good.  We
could use ours of course if we wanted to wash it.  Some do that and some
have their own case marked, and their own silver in it, but it's a good
deal of risk, I think, though they are extremely careful."

Mrs. Ree experienced peculiarly mixed feelings.  As far as food went,
she had never eaten a better dinner.  But her sense of Domestic
Aesthetics was jarred.

"It certainly tastes good," she said.  "Delicious, in fact.  I am
extremely obliged to you, Mrs. Porne, I'd no idea it could be sent so
far and be so good.  And only five dollars a week, you say?"

"For each person, yes."

"I don't see how she does it.  All those cases and dishes, and the
delivery wagon!"

That was the universal comment in Orchardina circles as the months
passed and Union House continued in existence--"I don't see how she does
it!"



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER XII

LIKE A BANYAN TREE


The Earth-Plants spring up from beneath,
 The Air-Plants swing down from above,
  But the Banyan trees grow
  Both above and below,
 And one makes a prosperous grove.


In the fleeting opportunities offered by the Caffeteria, and in longer
moments, rather neatly planned for, with some remnants of an earlier
ingenuity, Mr. Thaddler contrived to become acquainted with Mrs. Bell. 
Diantha never quite liked him, but he won her mother's heart by frank
praise of the girl and her ventures.

"I never saw a smarter woman in my life," he said; "and no airs.  I tell
you, ma'am, if there was more like her this world would be an easier
place to live in, and I can see she owes it all to you, ma'am."

This the mother would never admit for a moment, but expatiated loyally
on the scientific mind of Mr. Henderson Bell, still of Jopalez.

"I don't see how he can bear to let her out of his sight," said Mr.
Thaddler.

"Of course he hated to let her go," replied the lady.  "We both did. 
But he is very proud of her now."

"I guess there's somebody else who's proud of her, too," he suggested. 
"Excuse me, ma'am, I don't mean to intrude, but we know there must be a
good reason for your daughter keeping all Orchardina at a distance. 
Why, she could have married six times over in her first year here!"

"She does not wish to give up her work," Mrs. Bell explained.

"Of course not; and why should she?  Nice, womanly business, I am sure. 
I hope nobody'd expect a girl who can keep house for a whole township to
settle down to bossing one man and a hired girl."

In course of time he got a pretty clear notion of how matters stood, and
meditated upon it, seriously rolling his big cigar about between pursed
lips.  Mr. Thaddler was a good deal of a gossip, but this he kept to
himself, and did what he could to enlarge the patronage of Union House.

The business grew.  It held its own in spite of fluctuations, and after
a certain point began to spread steadily.  Mrs. Bell's coming and Mr.
Eltwood's ardent championship, together with Mr. Thaddler's, quieted the
dangerous slanders which had imperilled the place at one time.  They
lingered, subterraneously, of course.  People never forget slanders.  A
score of years after there were to be found in Orchardina folk who still
whispered about dark allegations concerning Union House; and the papers
had done some pretty serious damage; but the fame of good food, good
service, cheapness and efficiency made steady headway.

In view of the increase and of the plans still working in her mind,
Diantha made certain propositions to Mr. Porne, and also to Mrs. Porne,
in regard to a new, specially built club-house for the girls.

"I have proved what they can do, with me to manage them, and want now to
prove that they can do it themselves, with any matron competent to
follow my directions.  The house need not be so expensive; one big
dining-room, with turn-up tables like those ironing-board seat-tables,
you know--then they can dance there.  Small reception room and office,
hall, kitchen and laundry, and thirty bedrooms, forty by thirty, with an
"ell" for the laundry, ought to do it, oughtn't it?"

Mrs. Porne agreed to make plans, and did so most successfully, and Mr.
Porne found small difficulty in persuading an investor to put up such a
house, which visibly could be used as a boarding-house or small hotel,
if it failed in its first purpose.

It was built of concrete, a plain simple structure, but fine in
proportions and pleasantly colored.

Diantha kept her plans to herself, as usual, but they grew so fast that
she felt a species of terror sometimes, lest the ice break somewhere.

"Steady, now!" she would say.  "This is real business, just plain
business.  There's no reason why I shouldn't succeed as well as Fred
Harvey.  I will succeed.  I am succeeding."

She kept well, she worked hard, she was more than glad to have her
mother with her; but she wanted something else, which seemed farther off
than ever.  Her lover's picture hung on the wall of her bedroom, stood
on her bureau, and (but this was a secret) a small one was carried in
her bosom.

Rather a grim looking young woman, Diantha, with the cares of the world
of house-keepers upon her proud young shoulders; with all the stirring
hopes to be kept within bounds, all the skulking fears to be resisted,
and the growing burden of a large affair to be carried steadily.

But when she woke, in the brilliant California mornings, she would lie
still a few moments looking at the face on the wall and the face on the
bureau; would draw the little picture out from under her pillow and kiss
it, would say to herself for the thousandth time, "It is for him, too."

She missed him, always.

The very vigor of her general attitude, the continued strength with
which she met the days and carried them, made it all the more needful
for her to have some one with whom she could forget every care, every
purpose, every effort; some one who would put strong arms around her and
call her "Little Girl."  His letters were both a comfort and a pain.  He
was loyal, kind, loving, but always that wall of disapproval.  He loved
her, he did not love her work.

She read them over and over, hunting anew for the tender phrases, the
things which seemed most to feed and comfort her.  She suffered not only
from her loneliness, but from his; and most keenly from his sternly
suppressed longing for freedom and the work that belonged to him.

"Why can't he see," she would say to herself, "that if this succeeds, he
can do his work; that I can make it possible for him?  And he won't let
me.  He won't take it from me.  Why are men so proud?  Is there anything
so ignominious about a woman that it is disgraceful to let one help you?
 And why can't he think at all about the others?  It's not just us, it's
all people.  If this works, men will have easier times, as well as
women.  Everybody can do their real work better with this old primitive
business once set right."

And then it was always time to get up, or time to go to bed, or time to
attend to some of the numberless details of her affairs.

She and her mother had an early lunch before the caffeteria opened, and
were glad of the afternoon tea, often held in a retired corner of the
broad piazza.  She sat there one hot, dusty afternoon, alone and
unusually tired.  The asphalted street was glaring and noisy, the cross
street deep in soft dust, for months unwet.

Failure had not discouraged her, but increasing success with all its
stimulus and satisfaction called for more and more power.  Her mind was
busy foreseeing, arranging, providing for emergencies; and then the
whole thing slipped away from her, she dropped her head upon her arm for
a moment, on the edge of the tea table, and wished for Ross.

From down the street and up the street at this moment, two men were
coming; both young, both tall, both good looking, both apparently
approaching Union House.  One of them was the nearer, and his foot soon
sounded on the wooden step.  The other stopped and looked in a shop
window.

Diantha started up, came forward,--it was Mr. Eltwood.  She had a vague
sense of disappointment, but received him cordially.  He stood there,
his hat off, holding her hand for a long moment, and gazing at her with
evident admiration.  They turned and sat down in the shadow of the
reed-curtained corner.

The man at the shop window turned, too, and went away.

Mr. Eltwood had been a warm friend and cordial supporter from the epoch
of the Club-splitting speech.  He had helped materially in the slow,
up-hill days of the girl's effort, with faith and kind words.  He had
met the mother's coming with most friendly advances, and Mrs. Bell found
herself much at home in his liberal little church.

Diantha had grown to like and trust him much.

"What's this about the new house, Miss Bell?  Your mother says I may
know."

"Why not?" she said.  "You have followed this thing from the first. 
Sugar or lemon?  You see I want to disentangle the undertakings, set
them upon their own separate feet, and establish the practical working
of each one."

"I see," he said, "and 'day service' is not 'cooked food delivery.'"

"Nor yet 'rooms for entertainment,' she agreed.  "We've got them all
labelled, mother and I.  There's the 'd. s.' and 'c. f. d.' and 'r. f.
e.' and the 'p. p.'  That's picnics and parties.  And more coming."

"What, more yet?  You'll kill yourself, Miss Bell.  Don't go too fast. 
You are doing a great work for humanity.  Why not take a little more
time?"

"I want to do it as quickly as I can, for reasons," answered Diantha.

Mr. Eltwood looked at her with tender understanding.  "I don't want to
intrude any further than you are willing to want me," he said, "but
sometimes I think that even you--strong as you are--would be better for
some help."

She did not contradict him.  Her hands were in her lap, her eyes on the
worn boards of the piazza floor.  She did not see a man pass on the
other side of the street, cast a searching glance across and walk
quickly on again.

"If you were quite free to go on with your beautiful work," said Mr.
Eltwood slowly, "if you were offered heartiest appreciation, profound
respect, as well as love, of course; would you object to marrying, Miss
Bell?" asked in an even voice, as if it were a matter of metaphysical
inquiry.  Mrs. Porne had told him of her theory as to a lover in the
home town, wishing to save him a long heart ache, but he was not sure of
it, and he wanted to be.

Diantha glanced quickly at him, and felt the emotion under his quiet
words.  She withdrew her eyes, looking quite the other way.

"You are enough of a friend to know, Mr. Eltwood," she said, "I rather
thought you did know.  I am engaged."

"Thank you for telling me; some one is greatly to be congratulated," he
spoke sincerely, and talked quietly on about less personal matters,
holding his tea untasted till it was cold.

"Do let me give you some that is hot," she said at last, "and let me
thank you from my heart for the help and strength and comfort you have
been to me, Mr. Eltwood."

"I'm very glad," he said; and again, "I am very glad."  "You may count
upon anything I can do for you, always," he continued.  "I am proud to
be your friend."

He held her hand once more for a moment, and went away with his head up
and a firm step.  To one who watched him go, he had almost a triumphant
air, but it was not triumph, only the brave beginning of a hard fight
and a long one.

Then came Mrs. Bell, returned from a shopping trip, and sank down in a
wicker rocker, glad of the shade and a cup of tea.  No, she didn't want
it iced.  "Hot tea makes you cooler," was her theory.

"You don't look very tired," said the girl.  "Seems to me you get
stronger all the time."

"I do," said her mother.  "You don't realize, you can't realize,
Diantha, what this means to me.  Of course to you I am an old woman, a
back number--one has to feel so about one's mother.  I did when I
married, and my mother then was five years younger than I am now."

"I don't think you old, mother, not a bit of it.  You ought to have
twenty or thirty years of life before you, real life."

"That's just what I'm feeling," said Mrs. Bell, "as if I'd just begun to
live!  This is so _different!_  There is a big, moving thing to work
for.  There is--why Diantha, you wouldn't believe what a comfort it is
to me to feel that my work here is--really--adding to the profits!"

Diantha laughed aloud.

"You dear old darling," she said, "I should think it was!  It is
_making_ the profits."

"And it grows so," her mother went on.  "Here's this part so well
assured that you're setting up the new Union House!  Are you _sure_
about Mrs. Jessup, dear?"

"As sure as I can be of any one till I've tried a long time.  She has
done all I've asked her to here, and done it well.  Besides, I mean to
keep a hand on it for a year or two yet--I can't afford to have that
fail."

Mrs. Jessup was an imported aunt, belonging to one of the cleverest
girls, and Diantha had had her in training for some weeks.

"Well, I guess she's as good as any you'd be likely to get," Mrs. Bell
admitted, "and we mustn't expect paragons.  If this can't be done by an
average bunch of working women the world over, it can't be done--that's
all!"

"It can be done," said the girl, calmly.  "It will be done.  You see."

"Mr. Thaddler says you could run any kind of a business you set your
hand to," her mother went on.  "He has a profound respect for your
abilities, Dina."

"Seems to me you and Mr. Thaddler have a good deal to say to each other,
motherkins.  I believe you enjoy that caffeteria desk, and all the
compliments you get."

"I do," said Mrs. Bell stoutly.  "I do indeed!  Why, I haven't seen so
many men, to speak to, since--why, never in my life!  And they are very
amusing--some of them.  They like to come here--like it immensely.  And
I don't wonder.  I believe you'll do well to enlarge."

Then they plunged into a discussion of the winter's plans.  The day
service department and its employment agency was to go on at the New
Union House, with Mrs. Jessup as manager; the present establishment was
to be run as a hotel and restaurant, and the depot for the cooked food
delivery.

Mrs. Thorvald and her husband were installed by themselves in another
new venture; a small laundry outside the town.  This place employed
several girls steadily, and the motor wagon found a new use between
meals, in collecting and delivering laundry parcels.

"It simplifies it a lot--to get the washing out of the place and the
girls off my mind," said Diantha.  "Now I mean to buckle down and learn
the hotel business--thoroughly, and develop this cooked food delivery to
perfection."

"Modest young lady," smiled her mother.  "Where do you mean to stop--if
ever?"

"I don't mean to stop till I'm dead," Diantha answered; "but I don't
mean to undertake any more trades, if that is what you mean.  You know
what I'm after--to get 'housework' on a business basis, that's all; and
prove, prove, PROVE what a good business it is.  There's the cleaning
branch--that's all started and going well in the day service.  There's
the washing--that's simple and easy.  Laundry work's no mystery.  But
the food part is a big thing.  It's an art, a science, a business, and a
handicraft.  I had the handicraft to start with; I'm learning the
business; but I've got a lot to learn yet in the science and art of it."
 

"Don't do too much at once," her mother urged.  "You've got to cater to
people as they are."

"I know it," the girl agreed.  "They must be led, step by step--the
natural method.  It's a big job, but not too big.  Out of all the women
who have done housework for so many ages, surely it's not too much to
expect one to have a special genius for it!"

Her mother gazed at her with loving admiration.

"That's just what you have, Dina--a special genius for housework.  I
wish there were more of you!"

"There are plenty of me, mother dear, only they haven't come out.  As
soon as I show 'em how to make the thing pay, you'll find that we have a
big percentage of this kind of ability.  It's all buried now in the
occasional 'perfect housekeeper.'

"But they won't leave their husbands, Dina."

"They don't need to," the girl answered cheerfully.  "Some of them
aren't married yet; some of them have lost their husbands, and _some_ of
them"--she said this a little bitterly--"have husbands who will be
willing to let their wives grow."

"Not many, I'm afraid," said Mrs. Bell, also with some gloom.

Diantha lightened up again.  "Anyhow, here you are, mother dear!  And
for this year I propose that you assume the financial management of the
whole business at a salary of $1,000 'and found.'  How does that suit
you?"

Mrs. Bell looked at her unbelievingly.

"You can't afford it, Dina!"

"Oh, yes, I can--you know I can, because you've got the accounts.  I'm
going to make big money this year."

"But you'll need it.  This hotel and restaurant business may not do
well."

"Now, mother, you _know_ we're doing well.  Look here!"  And Diantha
produced her note-book.

"Here's the little laundry place; its fittings come to so much, wages so
much, collection and delivery so much, supplies so much--and already
enough patronage engaged to cover.  It will be bigger in winter, a lot,
with transients, and this hotel to fall back on; ought to clear at least
a thousand a year.  The service club don't pay me anything, of course;
that is for the girls' benefit; but the food delivery is doing better
than I dared hope."

Mrs. Bell knew the figures better than Diantha, even, and they went over
them carefully again.  If the winter's patronage held on to equal the
summer's--and the many transient residents ought to increase it--they
would have an average of twenty families a week to provide for--one
hundred persons.

The expenses were:


Food for 100 at $250 a week.  Per capita.   $600
---
per year $13,000

Labor--delivery man.  $600
Head cook.  $600
Two assistant cooks.  $1,040
Three washers and packers.  $1,560
Office girl.  $520
---
Per year $4,320

Rent, kitchen, office, etc.  $500
Rent of motor.  $300
Rent of cases.  $250
Gasolene and repairs.  $630
---
Per year $1,680

Total.  $19,000


"How do you make the gasolene and repairs as much as that?" asked Mrs.
Bell.

"It's margin, mother--makes it even money.  It won't be so much,
probably."

The income was simple and sufficient.  They charged $5.00 a week per
capita for three meals, table d'hote, delivered thrice daily.  Frequent
orders for extra meals really gave them more than they set down, but the
hundred-person estimate amounted to $26,000 a year.

"Now, see," said Diantha triumphantly; "subtract all that expense list
(and it is a liberal one), and we have $7,000 left.  I can buy the car
and the cases this year and have $1,600 over!  More; because if I do buy
them I can leave off some of the interest, and the rent of kitchen and
office comes to Union House!  Then there's all of the extra orders. 
It's going to pay splendidly, mother!  It clears $70 a year per person. 
Next year it will clear a lot more."

It did not take long to make Mrs. Bell admit that if the business went
on as it had been going Diantha would be able to pay her a salary of a
thousand dollars, and have five hundred left--from the food business
alone.

There remained the hotel, with large possibilities.  The present simple
furnishings were to be moved over to New Union House, and paid for by
the girls in due time.  With new paint, paper, and furniture, the old
house would make a very comfortable place.

"Of course, it's the restaurant mainly--these big kitchens and the
central location are the main thing.  The guests will be mostly
tourists, I suppose."

Diantha dwelt upon the prospect at some length; and even her cautious
mother had to admit that unless there was some setback the year had a
prospect of large success.

"How about all this new furnishing?" Mrs. Bell said suddenly.  "How do
you cover that?  Take what you've got ahead now?"

"Yes; there's plenty," said Diantha.  "You see, there is all Union House
has made, and this summer's profit on the cooked food--it's plenty."

"Then you can't pay for the motor and cases as you planned," her mother
insisted.

"No, not unless the hotel and restaurant pays enough to make good.  But
I don't _have_ to buy them the first year.  If I don't, there is $5,500
leeway."

"Yes, you are safe enough; there's over $4,000 in the bank now," Mrs.
Bell admitted.  "But, child," she said suddenly, "your father!"

"Yes, I've thought of father," said the girl, "and I mean to ask him to
come and live at the hotel.  I think he'd like it.  He could meet people
and talk about his ideas, and I'm sure I'd like to have him."

"They talked much and long about this, till the evening settled about
them, till they had their quiet supper, and the girls came home to their
noisy one; and late that evening, when all was still again, Diantha came
to the dim piazza corner once more and sat there quite alone.

Full of hope, full of courage, sure of her progress--and aching with
loneliness.

She sat with her head in her hands, and to her ears came suddenly the
sound of a familiar step--a well-known voice--the hands and the lips of
her lover.

"Diantha!"  He held her close.

"Oh, Ross!  Ross!  Darling!  Is it true?  When did you come?  Oh, I'm so
glad!  So _glad_ to see you!"

She was so glad that she had to cry a little on his shoulder, which he
seemed to thoroughly enjoy.

"I've good news for you, little girl," he said.  "Good news at last! 
Listen, dear; don't cry.  There's an end in sight.  A man has bought out
my shop.  The incubus is off--I can _live_ now!"

He held his head up in a fine triumph, and she watched him adoringly.

"Did you--was it profitable?" she asked.

"It's all exchange, and some cash to boot.  Just think!  You know what
I've wanted so long--a ranch.  A big one that would keep us all, and let
me go on with my work.  And, dear--I've got it!  It's a big fruit ranch,
with its own water--think of that!  And a vegetable garden, too, and
small fruit, and everything.  And, what's better, it's all in good
running order, with a competent ranchman, and two Chinese who rent the
vegetable part.  And there are two houses on it--_two_.  One for mother
and the girls, and one for us!"

Diantha's heart stirred suddenly.

"Where is it, dear?" she whispered.

He laughed joyfully.  "It's _here!"_ he said.  "About eight miles or so
out, up by the mountains; has a little canyon of its own--its own little
stream and reservoir.  Oh, my darling!  My darling!"

They sat in happy silence in the perfumed night.  The strong arms were
around her, the big shoulder to lean on, the dear voice to call her
"little girl."

The year of separation vanished from their thoughts, and the long years
of companionship opened bright and glorious before them.

"I came this afternoon," he said at length, "but I saw another man
coming.  He got here first.  I thought--"

"Ross!  You didn't!  And you've left me to go without you all these
hours!"

"He looked so confident when he went away that I was jealous," Ross
admitted, "furiously jealous.  And then your mother was here, and then
those cackling girls.  I wanted you--alone."

And then he had her, alone, for other quiet, happy moments.  She was so
glad of him.  Her hold upon his hand, upon his coat, was tight.

"I don't know how I've lived without you," she said softly.

"Nor I," said he.  "I haven't lived.  It isn't life--without you.  Well,
dearest, it needn't be much longer.  We closed the deal this afternoon. 
I came down here to see the place, and--incidentally--to see you!"

More silence.

"I shall turn over the store at once.  It won't take long to move and
settle; there's enough money over to do that.  And the ranch pays,
Diantha!  It really _pays,_ and will carry us all.  How long will it
take you to get out of this?"

"Get out of--what?" she faltered.

"Why, the whole abominable business you're so deep in here.  Thank God,
there's no shadow of need for it any more!"

The girl's face went white, but he could not see it.  She would not
believe him.

"Why, dear," she said, "if your ranch is as near as that it would be
perfectly easy for me to come in to the business--with a car.  I can
afford a car soon."

"But I tell you there's no need any more," said he.  "Don't you
understand?  This is a paying fruit ranch, with land rented to
advantage, and a competent manager right there running it.  It's simply
changed owners.  I'm the owner now!  There's two or three thousand a
year to be made on it--has been made on it!  There is a home for my
people--a home for us!  Oh, my beloved girl!  My darling!  My own
sweetheart!  Surely you won't refuse me now!"

Diantha's head swam dizzily.

"Ross," she urged, "you don't understand!  I've built up a good business
here--a real successful business.  Mother is in it; father's to come
down; there is a big patronage; it grows.  I can't give it up!"

"Not for me?  Not when I can offer you a home at last?  Not when I show
you that there is no longer any need of your earning money?" he said
hotly.

"But, dear--dear!" she protested.  "It isn't for the money; it is the
work I want to do--it is my work!  You are so happy now that you can do
your work--at last!  This is mine!"

When he spoke again his voice was low and stern.

"Do you mean that you love--your work--better than you love me?"

"No!  It isn't that!  That's not fair!" cried the girl.  "Do you love
your work better than you love me?  Of course not!  You love both.  So
do I.  Can't you see?  Why should I have to give up anything?"

"You do not have to," he said patiently.  "I cannot compel you to marry
me.  But now, when at last--after these awful years--I can really offer
you a home--you refuse!"

"I have not refused," she said slowly.

His voice lightened again.

"Ah, dearest!  And you will not!  You will marry me?"

"I will marry you, Ross!"

"And when?  When, dearest?"

"As soon as you are ready."

"But--can you drop this at once?"

"I shall not drop it."

Her voice was low, very low, but clear and steady.

He rose to his feet with a muffled exclamation, and walked the length of
the piazza and back.

"Do you realize that you are saying no to me, Diantha?"

"You are mistaken, dear.  I have said that I will marry you whenever you
choose.  But it is you who are saying, 'I will not marry a woman with a
business.'"

"This is foolishness!" he said sharply.  "No man--that is a man--would
marry a woman and let her run a business."

"You are mistaken," she answered.  "One of the finest men I ever knew
has asked me to marry him--and keep on with my work!"

"Why didn't you take him up?"

"Because I didn't love him."  She stopped, a sob in her voice, and he
caught her in his arms again.

It was late indeed when he went away, walking swiftly, with a black
rebellion in his heart; and Diantha dragged herself to bed.

She was stunned, deadened, exhausted; torn with a desire to run after
him and give up--give up anything to hold his love.  But something,
partly reason and partly pride, kept saying within her: "I have not
refused him; he has refused me!"



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER XIII.

ALL THIS.


They laid before her conquering feet
 The spoils of many lands;
Their crowns shone red upon her head
 Their scepters in her hands.

She heard two murmuring at night,
 Where rose-sweet shadows rest;
And coveted the blossom red
 He laid upon her breast.


When Madam Weatherstone shook the plentiful dust of Orchardina from her
expensive shoes, and returned to adorn the more classic groves of
Philadelphia, Mrs. Thaddler assumed to hold undisputed sway as a social
leader.

The Social Leader she meant to be; and marshalled her forces to that
end.  She Patronized here, and Donated there; revised her visiting list
with rigid exclusiveness; secured an Eminent Professor and a Noted
Writer as visitors, and gave entertainments of almost Roman
magnificence.

Her husband grew more and more restive under the rising tide of social
exactions in dress and deportment; and spent more and more time behind
his fast horses, or on the stock-ranch where he raised them.  As a
neighbor and fellow ranchman, he scraped acquaintance with Ross Warden,
and was able to render him many small services in the process of
settling.

Mrs. Warden remembered his visit to Jopalez, and it took her some time
to rearrange him in her mind as a person of wealth and standing.  Having
so rearranged him, on sufficient evidence, she and her daughters became
most friendly, and had hopes of establishing valuable acquaintance in
the town.  "It's not for myself I care," she would explain to Ross,
every day in the week and more on Sundays, "but for the girls.  In that
dreadful Jopalez there was absolutely _no_ opportunity for them; but
here, with horses, there is no reason we should not have friends.  You
must consider your sisters, Ross!  Do be more cordial to Mr. Thaddler."

But Ross could not at present be cordial to anybody.  His unexpected
good fortune, the freedom from hated cares, and chance to work out his
mighty theories on the faithful guinea-pig, ought to have filled his
soul with joy; but Diantha's cruel obstinacy had embittered his cup of
joy.  He could not break with her; she had not refused him, and it was
difficult in cold blood to refuse her.

He had stayed away for two whole weeks, in which time the guinea-pigs
nibbled at ease and Diantha's work would have suffered except for her
mother's extra efforts.  Then he went to see her again, miserable but
stubborn, finding her also miserable and also stubborn.  They argued
till there was grave danger of an absolute break between them; then
dropped the subject by mutual agreement, and spent evenings of
unsatisfying effort to talk about other things.

Diantha and her mother called on Mrs. Warden, of course, admiring the
glorious view, the sweet high air, and the embowered loveliness of the
two ranch houses.  Ross drew Diantha aside and showed her "theirs"--a
lovely little wide-porched concrete cottage, with a red-tiled roof, and
heavy masses of Gold of Ophir and Banksia roses.

He held her hand and drew her close to him.

He kissed her when they were safe inside, and murmured: "Come,
darling--won't you come and be my wife?"

"I will, Ross--whenever you say--but--!"  She would not agree to give up
her work, and he flung away from her in reckless despair.  Mrs. Warden
and the girls returned the call as a matter of duty, but came no more;
the mother saying that she could not take her daughters to a Servant
Girls' Club.

And though the Servant Girls' Club was soon removed to its new quarters
and Union House became a quiet, well-conducted hotel, still the two
families saw but little of each other.

Mrs. Warden naturally took her son's side, and considered Diantha an
unnatural monster of hard-heartedness.

The matter sifted through to the ears of Mrs. Thaddler, who rejoiced in
it, and called upon Mrs. Warden in her largest automobile.  As a mother
with four marriageable daughters, Mrs. Warden was delighted to accept
and improve the acquaintance, but her aristocratic Southern soul was
inwardly rebellious at the ancestorlessness and uncultured moneyed pride
of her new friend.

"If only Madam Weatherstone had stayed!" she would complain to her
daughters.  "She had Family as well as Wealth."

"There's young Mrs. Weatherstone, mother--" suggested Dora.

"A nobody!" her mother replied.  "She has the Weatherstone money, of
course, but no Position; and what little she has she is losing by her
low tastes.  She goes about freely with Diantha Bell--her own
housekeeper!"

"She's not her housekeeper now, mother--"

"Well, it's all the same!  She _was!_  And a mere general servant before
that!  And now to think that when Ross is willing to overlook it all and
marry her, she won't give it up!"

They were all agreed on this point, unless perhaps that the youngest had
her inward reservations.  Dora had always liked Diantha better than had
the others.

Young Mrs. Weatherstone stayed in her big empty house for a while, and
as Mrs. Warden said, went about frequently with Diantha Bell.  She liked
Mrs. Bell, too--took her for long stimulating rides in her comfortable
car, and insisted that first one and then the other of them should have
a bit of vacation at her seashore home before the winter's work grew too
heavy.

With Mrs. Bell she talked much of how Diantha had helped the town.

"She has no idea of the psychic effects, Mrs. Bell," said she.  "She
sees the business, and she has a great view of all it is going to do for
women to come; but I don't think she realizes how much she is doing
right now for women here--and men, too.  There were my friends the
Pornes; they were 'drifting apart,' as the novels have it--and no
wonder.  Isabel was absolutely no good as a housekeeper; he naturally
didn't like it--and the baby made it all the worse; she pined for her
work, you see, and couldn't get any time for it.  Now they are as happy
as can be--and it's just Diantha Bell's doings.  The housework is off
Isabel's shoulders.

"Then there are the Wagrams, and the Sheldons, and the Brinks--and ever
so many more--who have told me themselves that they are far happier than
they ever were before--and can live more cheaply.  She ought to be the
happiest girl alive!"

Mrs. Bell would agree to this, and quite swelled with happiness and
pride; but Mrs. Weatherstone, watching narrowly, was not satisfied.

When she had Diantha with her she opened fire direct.  "You ought to be
the happiest, proudest, most triumphant woman in the world!" she said. 
"You're making oodles of money, your whole thing's going well, and look
at your mother--she's made over!"

Diantha smiled and said she was happy; but her eyes would stray off to
the very rim of the ocean; her mouth set in patient lines that were not
in the least triumphant.

"Tell me about it, my friend," said her hostess.  "Is it that he won't
let you keep on with the business?"

Diantha nodded.

"And you won't give it up to marry him?"

"No," said Diantha.  "No.  Why should I?  I'd marry him--to-morrow!" 
She held one hand with the other, tight, but they both shook a little. 
"I'd be glad to.  But I will not give up my work!"

"You look thin," said Mrs. Weatherstone.

"Yes--"

"Do you sleep well?"

"No--not very."

"And I can see that you don't eat as you ought to.  Hm!  Are you going
to break down?"

"No," said Diantha, "I am not going to break down.  I am doing what is
right, and I shall go on.  It's a little hard at first--having him so
near.  But I am young and strong and have a great deal to do--I shall do
it."

And then Mrs. Weatherstone would tell her all she knew of the intense
satisfaction of the people she served, and pleasant stories about the
girls.  She bought her books to read and such gleanings as she found in
foreign magazines on the subject of organized house-service.

Not only so, but she supplied the Orchardina library with a special
bibliography on the subject, and induced the new Woman's Club to take up
a course of reading in it, so that there gradually filtered into the
Orchardina mind a faint perception that this was not the freak of an
eccentric individual, but part of an inevitable business development,
going on in various ways in many nations.

As the winter drew on, Mrs. Weatherstone whisked away again, but kept a
warm current of interest in Diantha's life by many letters.

Mr. Bell came down from Jopalez with outer reluctance but inner
satisfaction.  He had rented his place, and Susie had three babies now. 
Henderson, Jr., had no place for him, and to do housework for himself
was no part of Mr. Bell's plan.

In Diantha's hotel he had a comfortable room next his wife's, and a
capacious chair in the firelit hall in wet weather, or on the shaded
piazza in dry.  The excellent library was a resource to him; he found
some congenial souls to talk with; and under the new stimulus succeeded
at last in patenting a small device that really worked.  With this, and
his rent, he felt inclined to establish a "home of his own," and the
soul of Mrs. Bell sank within her.  Without allowing it to come to an
issue between them, she kept the question open for endless discussion;
and Mr. Bell lived on in great contentment under the impression that he
was about to move at almost any time.  To his friends and cronies he
dilated with pride on his daughter's wonderful achievements.

"She's as good as a boy!" he would declare.  "Women nowadays seem to do
anything they want to!"  And he rigidly paid his board bill with a
flourish.

Meanwhile the impressive gatherings at Mrs. Thaddler's, and the humbler
tea and card parties of Diantha's friends, had a new topic as a
shuttlecock.

A New York company had bought one of the largest and finest blocks in
town--the old Para place--and was developing it in a manner hitherto
unseen.  The big, shabby, neglected estate began to turn into such a
fairyland as only southern lands can know.  The old live-oaks were
untouched; the towering eucalyptus trees remained in ragged majesty; but
an army of workmen was busy under guidance of a master of beauty.

One large and lovely building rose, promptly dubbed a hotel by the
unwilling neighbors; others, smaller, showed here and there among the
trees; and then a rose-gray wall of concrete ran around the whole, high,
tantalizing, with green boughs and sweet odors coming over it.  Those
who went in reported many buildings, and much activity.  But, when the
wall was done, and each gate said "No admittance except on business,"
then the work of genii was imagined, and there was none to contradict.

It was a School of Theosophy; it was a Christian Science College; it was
a Free-Love Colony; it was a Secret Society; it was a thousand wonders.

"Lot of little houses and one big one," the employees said when
questioned.

"Hotel and cottages," the employers said when questioned.

They made no secret of it, they were too busy; but the town was
unsatisfied.  Why a wall?  What did any honest person want of a wall? 
Yet the wall cast a pleasant shadow; there were seats here and there
between buttresses, and, as the swift California season advanced, roses
and oleanders nodded over the top, and gave hints of beauty and richness
more subtly stimulating than all the open glory of the low-hedged
gardens near.

Diantha's soul was stirred with secret envy.  Some big concern was about
to carry out her dream, or part of it--perhaps to be a huge and
overflowing rival.  Her own work grew meantime, and flourished as well
as she could wish.

The food-delivery service was running to its full capacity; the girls
got on very well under Mrs. Jessup, and were delighted to have a house
of their own with the parlors and piazzas all to themselves, and a
garden to sit in as well.  If this depleted their ranks by marriage, it
did not matter now, for there was a waiting list in training all the
time.

Union House kept on evenly and profitably, and Diantha was beginning to
feel safe and successful; but the years looked long before her.

She was always cheered by Mrs. Weatherstone's letters; and Mrs. Porne
came to see her, and to compare notes over their friend's success.  For
Mrs. Weatherstone had been presented at Court--at more than one court,
in fact; and Mrs. Weatherstone had been proposed to by a Duke--and had
refused him!  Orchardina well-nigh swooned when this was known.

She had been studying, investigating, had become known in scientific as
well as social circles, and on her way back the strenuous upper layer of
New York Society had also made much of her.  Rumors grew of her
exquisite costumes, of her unusual jewels, of her unique entertainments,
of her popularity everywhere she went.

Other proposals, of a magnificent nature, were reported, with more
magnificent refusals; and Orchardina began to be very proud of young
Mrs. Weatherstone and to wish she would come back.

She did at last, bringing an Italian Prince with her, and a Hoch
Geborene German Count also, who alleged they were travelling to study
the country, but who were reputed to have had a duel already on the
beautiful widow's account.

All this was long-drawn gossip but bore some faint resemblance to the
facts.  Viva Weatherstone at thirty was a very different woman front the
pale, sad-eyed girl of four years earlier.  And when the great house on
the avenue was arrayed in new magnificence, and all Orchardina--that
dared--had paid its respects to her, she opened the season, as it were,
with a brilliant dinner, followed by a reception and ball.

All Orchardina came--so far as it had been invited.  There was the
Prince, sure enough--a pleasant, blue-eyed young man.  And there was the
Count, bearing visible evidence of duels a-plenty in earlier days.  And
there was Diantha Bell--receiving, with Mrs. Porne and Mrs.
Weatherstone.  All Orchardina stared.  Diantha had been at the
dinner--that was clear.  And now she stood there in her soft, dark
evening dress, the knot of golden acacias nestling against the black
lace at her bosom, looking as fair and sweet as if she had never had a
care in her life.

Her mother thought her the most beautiful thing she had ever seen; and
her father, though somewhat critical, secretly thought so, too.

Mrs. Weatherstone cast many a loving look at the tall girl beside her in
the intervals of "Delighted to see you's," and saw that her double
burden had had no worse effect than to soften the lines of the mouth and
give a hint of pathos to the clear depths of her eyes.

The foreign visitors were much interested in the young Amazon of
Industry, as the Prince insisted on calling her; and even the German
Count for a moment forgot his ancestors in her pleasant practical talk.

Mrs. Weatherstone had taken pains to call upon the Wardens--claiming a
connection, if not a relationship, and to invite them all.  And as the
crowd grew bigger and bigger, Diantha saw Mrs. Warden at last
approaching with her four daughters--and no one else.  She greeted them
politely and warmly; but Mrs. Weatherstone did more.

Holding them all in a little group beside her, she introduced her noble
visitors to them; imparted the further information that their brother
was _fiance_ to Miss Bell.  "I don't see him," she said, looking about. 
"He will come later, of course.  Ah, Miss Madeline!  How proud you all
must feel of your sister-in-law to be!"

Madeline blushed and tried to say she was.

"Such a remarkable young lady!" said the Count to Adeline.  "You will
admire, envy, and imitate!  Is it not so?"

"Your ladies of America have all things in your hands," said the Prince
to Miss Cora.  "To think that she has done so much, and is yet so
young--and so beautiful!"

"I know you're all as proud as you can be," Mrs. Weatherstone continued
to Dora.  "You see, Diantha has been heard of abroad."

They all passed on presently, as others came; but Mrs. Warden's head was
reeling.  She wished she could by any means get at Ross, and _make_ him
come, which he had refused to do.

"I can't, mother," he had said.  "You go--all of you.  Take the girls. 
I'll call for you at twelve--but I won't go in."

Mr. and Mrs. Thaddler were there--but not happy.  She was not, at least,
and showed it; he was not until an idea struck him.  He dodged softly
out, and was soon flying off, at dangerous speed over the moon-white
country roads.

He found Ross, dressed and ready, sulking blackly on his shadowy porch.

"Come and take a spin while you wait," said Mr. Thaddler.

"Thanks, I have to go in town later."

"I'll take you in town."

"Thank you, but I have to take the horses in and bring out my mother and
the girls."

"I'll bring you all out in the car.  Come on--it's a great night."

So Ross rather reluctantly came.

He sat back on the luxurious cushions, his arms folded sternly, his
brows knit, and the stout gentleman at his side watched him shrewdly.

"How does the ranch go?" he asked.

"Very well, thank you, Mr. Thaddler."

"Them Chinks pay up promptly?"

"As prompt as the month comes round.  Their rent is a very valuable part
of the estate."

"Yes," Mr. Thaddler pursued.  "They have a good steady market for their
stuff.  And the chicken man, too.  Do you know who buys 'em?"

Ross did not.  Did not greatly care, he intimated.

"I should think you'd be interested--you ought to--it's Diantha Bell."

Ross started, but said nothing.

"You see, I've taken a great interest in her proposition ever since she
sprung it on us," Mr. Thaddler confided.  "She's got the goods all
right.  But there was plenty against her here--you know what women are! 
And I made up my mind the supplies should be good and steady, anyhow. 
She had no trouble with her grocery orders; that was easy.  Meat I
couldn't handle--except indirectly--a little pressure, maybe, here and
there."  And he chuckled softly.  "But this ranch I bought on purpose."

Ross turned as if he had been stung.

"You!" he said.

"Yes, me.  Why not?  It's a good property.  I got it all fixed right,
and then I bought your little upstate shop--lock, stock and barrel--and
gave you this for it.  A fair exchange is no robbery.  Though it would
be nice to have it all in the family, eh?"

Ross was silent for a few turbulent moments, revolving this far from
pleasing information.

"What'd I do it for?" continued the unasked benefactor.  "What do you
_think_ I did it for?  So that brave, sweet little girl down here could
have her heart's desire.  She's established her business--she's proved
her point--she's won the town--most of it; and there's nothing on earth
to make her unhappy now but your pigheadedness!  Young man, I tell you
you're a plumb fool!"

One cannot throw one's host out of his own swift-flying car; nor is it
wise to jump out one's self.

"Nothing on earth between you but your cussed pride!" Mr. Thaddler
remorselessly went on.  "This ranch is honestly yours--by a square deal.
 Your Jopalez business was worth the money--you ran it honestly and
extended the trade.  You'd have made a heap by it if you could have
unbent a little.  Gosh!  I limbered up that store some in twelve
months!"  And the stout man smiled reminiscently.

Ross was still silent.

"And now you've got what you wanted--thanks to her, mind you, thanks to
her!--and you ain't willing to let her have what she wants!"

The young man moistened his lips to speak.

"You ain't dependent on her in any sense--I don't mean that.  You earned
the place all right, and I don't doubt you'll make good, both in a
business way and a scientific way, young man.  But why in Hades you
can't let her be happy, too, 