is more'n I can figure!  Guess you get your
notions from two generations back--and some!"

Ross began, stumblingly.  "I did not know I was indebted to you, Mr.
Thaddler."

"You're not, young man, you're not!  I ran that shop of yours a
year--built up the business and sold it for more than I paid for this. 
So you've no room for heroics--none at all.  What I want you to realize
is that you're breaking the heart of the finest woman I ever saw.  You
can't bend that girl--she'll never give up.  A woman like that has got
more things to do than just marry!  But she's pining for you all the
same.

"Here she is to-night, receiving with Mrs. Weatherstone--with those
Bannerets, Dukes and Earls around her--standing up there like a Princess
herself--and her eyes on the door all the time--and tears in 'em, I
could swear--because you don't come!"

*

They drew up with a fine curve before the carriage gate.

"I'll take 'em all home--they won't be ready for some time yet," said
Mr. Thaddler.  "And if you two would like this car I'll send for the
other one."

Ross shook hands with him.  "You are very kind, Mr. Thaddler," he said. 
"I am obliged to you.  But I think we will walk."

Tall and impressive, looking more distinguished in a six-year-old
evening suit than even the Hoch Geborene in his uniform, he came at
last, and Diantha saw him the moment he entered; saw, too, a new light
in his eyes.

He went straight to her.  And Mrs. Weatherstone did not lay it up
against him that he had but the briefest of words for his hostess.

"Will you come?" he said.  "May I take you home--now?"

She went with him, without a word, and they walked slowly home, by far
outlying paths, and long waits on rose-bowered seats they knew.

The moon filled all the world with tender light and the orange blossoms
flooded the still air with sweetness.

"Dear," said he, "I have been a proud fool--I am yet--but I have come to
see a little clearer.  I do not approve of your work--I cannot approve
of it--but will you forgive me for that and marry me?  I cannot live any
longer without you?"

"Of course I will," said Diantha.



WHAT DIANTHA DID


CHAPTER XIV.

AND HEAVEN BESIDE.


They were married while the flowers were knee-deep over the sunny slopes
and mesas, and the canyons gulfs of color and fragrance, and went for
their first moon together to a far high mountain valley hidden among
wooded peaks, with a clear lake for its central jewel.

A month of heaven; while wave on wave of perfect rest and
world-forgetting oblivion rolled over both their hearts.

They swam together in the dawn-flushed lake, seeing the morning mists
float up from the silver surface, breaking the still reflection of thick
trees and rosy clouds, rejoicing in the level shafts of forest filtered
sunlight.  They played and ran like children, rejoiced over their picnic
meals; lay flat among the crowding flowers and slept under the tender
starlight.

"I don't see," said her lover, "but that my strenuous Amazon is just as
much a woman as--as any woman!"

"Who ever said I wasn't?" quoth Diantha demurely.

A month of perfect happiness.  It was so short it seemed but a moment;
so long in its rich perfection that they both agreed if life brought no
further joy this was Enough.

Then they came down from the mountains and began living.

*

Day service is not so easily arranged on a ranch some miles from town. 
They tried it for a while, the new runabout car bringing out a girl in
the morning early, and taking Diantha in to her office.

But motor cars are not infallible; and if it met with any accident there
was delay at both ends, and more or less friction.

Then Diantha engaged a first-class Oriental gentleman, well recommended
by the "vegetable Chinaman," on their own place.  This was extremely
satisfactory; he did the work well, and was in all ways reliable; but
there arose in the town a current of malicious criticism and
protest--that she "did not live up to her principles."

To this she paid no attention; her work was now too well planted, too
increasingly prosperous to be weakened by small sneers.

Her mother, growing plumper now, thriving continuously in her new lines
of work, kept the hotel under her immediate management, and did
bookkeeping for the whole concern.  New Union Home ran itself, and
articles were written about it in magazines; so that here and there in
other cities similar clubs were started, with varying success.  The
restaurant was increasingly popular; Diantha's cooks were highly skilled
and handsomely paid, and from the cheap lunch to the expensive banquet
they gave satisfaction.

But the "c. f. d."  was the darling of her heart, and it prospered
exceedingly.  "There is no advertisement like a pleased customer," and
her pleased customers grew in numbers and in enthusiasm.  Family after
family learned to prize the cleanliness and quiet, the odorlessness and
flylessness of a home without a kitchen, and their questioning guests
were converted by the excellent of the meals.

Critical women learned at last that a competent cook can really produce
better food than an incompetent one; albeit without the sanctity of the
home.

"Sanctity of your bootstraps!" protested one irascible gentleman.  "Such
talk is all nonsense!  I don't want _sacred_ meals--I want good
ones--and I'm getting them, at last!"

"We don't brag about 'home brewing' any more," said another, "or 'home
tailoring,' or 'home shoemaking.'  Why all this talk about 'home
cooking'?"

What pleased the men most was not only the good food, but its clock-work
regularity; and not only the reduced bills but the increased health and
happiness of their wives.  Domestic bliss increased in Orchardina, and
the doctors were more rigidly confined to the patronage of tourists.

Ross Warden did his best.  Under the merciless friendliness of Mr.
Thaddler he had been brought to see that Diantha had a right to do this
if she would, and that he had no right to prevent her; but he did not
like it any the better.

When she rolled away in her little car in the bright, sweet mornings, a
light went out of the day for him.  He wanted her there, in the
home--his home--his wife--even when he was not in it himself.  And in
this particular case it was harder than for most men, because he was in
the house a good deal, in his study, with no better company than a
polite Chinaman some distance off.

It was by no means easy for Diantha, either.  To leave him tugged at her
heart-strings, as it did at his; and if he had to struggle with
inherited feelings and acquired traditions, still more was she beset
with an unexpected uprising of sentiments and desires she had never
dreamed of feeling.

With marriage, love, happiness came an overwhelming instinct of
service--personal service.  She wanted to wait on him, loved to do it;
regarded Wang Fu with positive jealousy when he brought in the coffee
and Ross praised it.  She had a sense of treason, of neglected duty, as
she left the flower-crowned cottage, day by day.

But she left it, she plunged into her work, she schooled herself
religiously.

"Shame on you!" she berated herself.  "Now--_now_ that you've got
everything on earth--to weaken!  You could stand unhappiness; can't you
stand happiness?"  And she strove with herself; and kept on with her
work.

After all, the happiness was presently diluted by the pressure of this
blank wall between them.  She came home, eager, loving, delighted to be
with him again.  He received her with no complaint or criticism, but
always an unspoken, perhaps imagined, sense of protest.  She was full of
loving enthusiasm about his work, and he would dilate upon his harassed
guinea-pigs and their development with high satisfaction.

But he never could bring himself to ask about her labors with any
genuine approval; she was keenly sensitive to his dislike for the
subject, and so it was ignored between them, or treated by him in a vein
of humor with which he strove to cover his real feeling.

When, before many months were over, the crowning triumph of her effort
revealed itself, her joy and pride held this bitter drop--he did not
sympathize--did not approve.  Still, it was a great glory.

The New York Company announced the completion of their work and the
_Hotel del las Casas_ was opened to public inspection.  "House of the
Houses!  That's a fine name!" said some disparagingly; but, at any rate,
it seemed appropriate.  The big estate was one rich garden, more
picturesque, more dreamily beautiful, than the American commercial mind
was usually able to compass, even when possessed of millions.  The hotel
of itself was a pleasure palace--wholly unostentatious, full of gaiety
and charm, offering lovely chambers for guests and residents, and every
opportunity for healthful amusement.  There was the rare luxury of a big
swimming-pool; there were billiard rooms, card rooms, reading rooms,
lounging rooms and dancing rooms of satisfying extent.

Outside there were tennis-courts, badminton, roque, even croquet; and
the wide roof was a garden of Babylon, a Court of the Stars, with views
of purple mountains, fair, wide valley and far-flashing rim of sea. 
Around it, each in its own hedged garden, nestled "Las Casas"--the
Houses--twenty in number, with winding shaded paths, groups of rare
trees, a wilderness of flowers, between and about them.  In one corner
was a playground for children--a wall around this, that they might shout
in freedom; and the nursery thereby gave every provision for the
happiness and safety of the little ones.

The people poured along the winding walls, entered the pretty cottages,
were much impressed by a little flock of well-floored tents in another
corner, but came back with Ohs! and Ahs! of delight to the large
building in the Avenue.

Diantha went all over the place, inch by inch, her eyes widening with
admiration; Mr. and Mrs. Porne and Mrs. Weatherstone with her.  She
enjoyed the serene, well-planned beauty of the whole; approved heartily
of the cottages, each one a little different, each charming in its quiet
privacy, admired the plentiful arrangements for pleasure and gay
association; but her professional soul blazed with enthusiasm over the
great kitchens, clean as a hospital, glittering in glass and copper and
cool tiling, with the swift, sure electric stove.

The fuel all went into a small, solidly built power house, and came out
in light and heat and force for the whole square.

Diantha sighed in absolute appreciation.

"Fine, isn't it?" said Mr. Porne.

"How do you like the architecture?" asked Mrs. Porne.

"What do you think of my investment?" said Mrs. Weatherstone.  Diantha
stopped in her tracks and looked from one to the other of them.

"Fact.  I control the stock--I'm president of the Hotel del las Casas
Company.  Our friends here have stock in it, too, and more that you
don't know.  We think it's going to be a paying concern.  But if you can
make it go, my dear, as I think you will, you can buy us all out and own
the whole outfit!"

It took some time to explain all this, but the facts were visible
enough.

"Nothing remarkable at all," said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "Here's Astor with
three big hotels on his hands--why shouldn't I have one to play with? 
And I've got to employ _somebody_ to manage it!"

*

Within a year of her marriage Diantha was at the head of this pleasing
Centre of Housekeeping.  She kept the hotel itself so that it was a joy
to all its patrons; she kept the little houses homes of pure delight for
those who were so fortunate as to hold them; and she kept up her "c. f.
d." business till it grew so large she had to have quite a fleet of
delivery wagons.

Orchardina basked and prospered; its citizens found their homes happier
and less expensive than ever before, and its citizenesses began to wake
up and to do things worth while.

*

Two years, and there was a small Ross Warden born.

She loved it, nursed it, and ran her business at long range for some six
months.  But then she brought nurse and child to the hotel with her,
placed them in the cool, airy nursery in the garden, and varied her busy
day with still hours by herself--the baby in her arms.

Back they came together before supper, and found unbroken joy and peace
in the quiet of home; but always in the background was the current of
Ross' unspoken disapproval.

Three years, four years.

There were three babies now; Diantha was a splendid woman of thirty,
handsome and strong, pre-eminently successful--and yet, there were times
when she found it in her heart to envy the most ordinary people who
loved and quarreled and made up in the little outlying ranch houses
along the road; they had nothing between them, at least.

Meantime in the friendly opportunities of Orchardina society, added to
by the unexampled possibilities of Las Casas (and they did not scorn
this hotel nor Diantha's position in it), the three older Miss Wardens
had married.  Two of them preferred "the good old way," but one tried
the "d. s."  and the "c. f. d." and liked them well.

Dora amazed and displeased her family, as soon as she was of age, by
frankly going over to Diantha's side and learning bookkeeping.  She
became an excellent accountant and bade fair to become an expert manager
soon.

Ross had prospered in his work.  It may be that the element of
dissatisfaction in his married life spurred him on, while the unusual
opportunities of his ranch allowed free effort.  He had always held that
the "non-transmissability of acquired traits" was not established by any
number of curtailed mice or crop-eared rats.  "A mutilation is not an
acquired trait," he protested.  "An acquired trait is one gained by
exercise; it modifies the whole organism.  It must have an effect on the
race.  We expect the sons of a line of soldiers to inherit their
fathers' courage--perhaps his habit of obedience--but not his wooden
leg."

To establish his views he selected from a fine family of guinea-pigs two
pair; set the one, Pair A, in conditions of ordinary guinea-pig bliss,
and subjected the other, Pair B, to a course of discipline.  They were
trained to run.  They, and their descendants after them, pair following
on pair; first with slow-turning wheels as in squirrel cages, the wheel
inexorably going, machine-driven, and the luckless little gluttons
having to move on, for gradually increasing periods of time, at
gradually increasing speeds.  Pair A and their progeny were sheltered
and fed, but the rod was spared; Pair B were as the guests at
"Muldoon's"--they had to exercise.  With scientific patience and
ingenuity, he devised mechanical surroundings which made them jump
increasing spaces, which made them run always a little faster and a
little farther; and he kept a record as carefully as if these little
sheds were racing stables for a king.

Several centuries of guinea-pig time went by; generation after
generation of healthy guinea-pigs passed under his modifying hands; and
after some five years he had in one small yard a fine group of the
descendants of his gall-fed pair, and in another the offspring of the
trained ones; nimble, swift, as different from the first as the
razor-backed pig of the forest from the fatted porkers in the sty.  He
set them to race--the young untrained specimens of these distant
cousins--and the hare ran away from the tortoise completely.

Great zoologists and biologists came to see him, studied, fingered,
poked, and examined the records; argued and disbelieved--and saw them
run.

"It is natural selection," they said.  "It profited them to run."

"Not at all," said he.  "They were fed and cared for alike, with no gain
from running."

"It was artificial selection," they said.  "You picked out the speediest
for your training."

"Not at all," said he.  "I took always any healthy pair from the trained
parents and from the untrained ones--quite late in life, you understand,
as guinea-pigs go."

Anyhow, there were the pigs; and he took little specialized piglets
scarce weaned, and pitted them against piglets of the untrained lot--and
they outran them in a race for "Mama."  Wherefore Mr. Ross Warden found
himself famous of a sudden; and all over the scientific world the
Wiesmanian controversy raged anew.  He was invited to deliver a lecture
before some most learned societies abroad, and in several important
centers at home, and went, rejoicing.

Diantha was glad for him from the bottom of her heart, and proud of him
through and through.  She thoroughly appreciated his sturdy opposition
to such a weight of authority; his long patience, his careful, steady
work.  She was left in full swing with her big business, busy and
successful, honored and liked by all the town--practically--and quite
independent of the small fraction which still disapproved.  Some people
always will.  She was happy, too, in her babies--very happy.

The Hotel del las Casas was a triumph.

Diantha owned it now, and Mrs. Weatherstone built others, in other
places, at a large profit.

Mrs. Warden went to live with Cora in the town.  Cora had more time to
entertain her--as she was the one who profited by her sister-in-law's
general services.

Diantha sat in friendly talk with Mrs. Weatherstone one quiet day, and
admitted that she had no cause for complaint.

"And yet--?" said her friend.

Young Mrs. Warden smiled.  "There's no keeping anything from you, is
there?  Yes--you're right.  I'm not quite satisfied.  I suppose I ought
not to care--but you see, I love him so!  I want him to _approve_ of
me!--not just put up with it, and bear it!  I want him to _feel_ with
me--to care.  It is awful to know that all this big life of mine is just
a mistake to him--that he condemns it in his heart."

"But you knew this from the beginning, my dear, didn't you?"

"Yes--I knew it--but it is different now.  You know when you are
_married_--"

Mrs. Weatherstone looked far away through the wide window.  "I do know,"
she said.

Diantha reached a strong hand to clasp her friend's.  "I wish I could
give it to you," she said.  "You have done so much for me!  So much! 
You have poured out your money like water!"

"My money!  Well I like that!" said Mrs. Weatherstone.  "I have taken my
money out of five and seven per cent investments, and put it into ten
per cent ones, that's all.  Shall I never make you realize that I am a
richer woman because of you, Diantha Bell Warden!  So don't try to be
grateful--I won't have it!  Your work has _paid_ remember--paid me as
well as you; and lots of other folks beside.  You know there are
eighteen good imitations of Union House running now, in different
cities, and three 'Las Casas!' all succeeding--and the papers are
talking about the dangers of a Cooked Food Trust!"

They were friends old and tried, and happy in mutual affection.  Diantha
had many now, though none quite so dear.  Her parents were
contented--her brother and sister doing well--her children throve and
grew and found Mama a joy they never had enough of.

Yet still in her heart of hearts she was not wholly happy.

*

Then one night came by the last mail, a thick letter from Ross--thicker
than usual.  She opened it in her room alone, their room--to which they
had come so joyously five years ago.

He told her of his journeying, his lectures, his controversies and
triumphs; rather briefly--and then:

"My darling, I have learned something at last, on my travels, which will
interest you, I fancy, more than the potential speed of all the
guinea-pigs in the world, and its transmissability.

"From what I hear about you in foreign lands; from what I read about you
wherever I go; and, even more, from what I see, as a visitor, in many
families; I have at last begun to grasp the nature and importance of
your work.

"As a man of science I must accept any truth when it is once clearly
seen; and, though I've been a long time about it, I do see at last what
brave, strong, valuable work you have been doing for the world.  Doing
it scientifically, too.  Your figures are quoted, your records studied,
your example followed.  You have established certain truths in the
business of living which are of importance to the race.  As a student I
recognize and appreciate your work.  As man to man I'm proud of
you--tremendously proud of you.  As your husband!  Ah! my love!  I am
coming back to you--coming soon, coming with my Whole Heart, Yours! 
Just wait, My Darling, till I get back to you!

"Your Lover and Husband."

Diantha held the letter close, with hands that shook a little.  She
kissed it--kissed it hard, over and over--not improving its appearance
as a piece of polite correspondence.

Then she gave way to an overmastering burst of feeling, and knelt down
by the wide bed, burying her face there, the letter still held fast.  It
was a funny prayer, if any human ear had heard it.

"Thank you!" was all she said, with long, deep sobbing sighs between. 
"Thank you!--O--thank you!"








This etext was produced by Laura Shaffer and J.C. Byers
(jcbyers@capitalnet.com).




            The Discovery of The Source of the Nile
                                
                     by John Hanning Speke
                                
                                
                                
                                
John Hanning Speke, born 1827.  Served in the Punjab but left
in 1854 to explore Somaliland.  Discovered Lake Tanganyika with
Burton, and Lake Victoria independently.  Was, with Grant,
the first European to cross equatorial africa.  Died 1864.




Editor's Note



John Hanning Speke was a man of thirty-six, when his Nile Journal
appeared.  He had entered the army in 1844, and completed ten
years of service in India, serving through the Punjab Campaign. 
Already he had conceived the idea of exploring Africa, before his
ten years were up, and on their conclusion he was appointed a
member of the expedition preparing to start under Sir Richard
(then Lieutenant Burton) for the Somali country.  He was wounded
by the Somalis, and returned to England on sick leave; the
Crimean War then breaking out, be served through it, and later,
December 1856, joined another expedition under Burton.  Then it
was that the possibility of the source of the Nile being traced
to one of the inland lakes seems to have struck him.

Burton's illness prevented him accompanying Speke on the latter's
visit to the lake now known as Victoria Nyanza.  During this
expedition Speke reached the most southerly point of the lake,
and gave it its present name.  Speke arrived back in England in
the spring of 1859, Burton being left behind on account of his
illness.  The relations between the two had become strained, and
this was accentuated by Speke's hast to publish the account of
his explorations.  He was given the command of another expedition
which left England in April 1860, in company with Captain James
Augustus Grant, to ascertain still further if the Victoria Nyanza
were indeed the source of the Nile.  He met Sir Samuel Baker, to
whom he gave valuable assistance, and who with his clue
discovered the third lake, Albert Nyanza.

Speke telegraphed early in 1863, that the Nile source was traced. 
Returning to England that year he met with an ovation, and
addressed a special meeting of the Geographical Society, and the
same year, 1863, published his "Journal of the Discovery of the
Nile."  Opposed in his statements by Burton and M'Queen (The Nile
Basin, 1864"), it was arranged that he and Burton should meet for
a debate, when on the very day fixed, Speke accidentally shot
himself while out partridge-shooting.

Sir R. Murchison, addressing the Royal Geographical Society that
year, speaks of Speke's discovery of the source of the Nile as
solving the "problem of all ages."

Only two books were published by Speke--the "Journal" of 1863,
which follows, and its sequel--"What Led to the Discovery of the
Source of the Nile," which appeared in the year of his death,
1864.




Introduction.



In the following pages I have endeavoured to describe all that
appeared to me most important and interesting among the events
and the scenes that came under my notice during my sojourn in the
interior of Africa.  If my account should not entirely harmonise
with preconceived notions as to primitive races, I cannot help
it. I profess accurately to describe native Africa--Africa in
those places where it has not received the slightest impulse,
whether for good or evil, from European civilisation.  If the
picture be a dark one, we should, when contemplating these sons
of Noah, try and carry our mind back to that time when our poor
elder brother Ham was cursed by his father, and condemned to be
the slave of both Shem and Japheth; for as they were then, so
they appear to be now-- a strikingly existing proof of the Holy
Scriptures.  But one thing must be remembered: Whilst the people
of Europe and Asia were blessed by communion with God through the
medium of His prophets, and obtained divine laws to regulate
their ways and keep them in mind of Him who made them, the
Africans were excluded from this dispensation, and consequently
have no idea of an overruling Providence or a future state; they
therefore trust to luck and to charms, and think only of self-
preservation in this world. Whatever, then, may be said against
them for being too avaricious or too destitute of fellow-feeling,
should rather reflect on ourselves, who have been so much better
favoured, yet have neglected to teach them, than on those who,
whilst they are sinning, know not what they are doing.  To say a
negro is incapable of instruction, is a mere absurdity; for those
few boys who have been educated in our schools have proved
themselves even quicker than our own at learning; whilst, amongst
themselves, the deepness of their cunning and their power of
repartee are quite surprising, and are especially shown in their
proficiency for telling lies most appropriately in preference to
truth, and with an off-handed manner that makes them most
amusing.

With these remarks, I now give, as an appropriate introduction to
my narrative--(1.) An account of the general geographical
features of the countries we are about to travel in, leaving the
details to be treated under each as we successively pass through
them; (2.) A general view of the atmospheric agents which wear
down and so continually help to reduce the continent, yet at the
same time assist to clothe it with vegetation; (3.) A general
view of the Flora; and, lastly, that which consumes it, (4.) Its
Fauna; ending with a few special remarks on the Wanguana, or men
freed from slavery.


Geography

The continent of Africa is something like a dish turned upside
down, having a high and flat central plateau, with a higher rim
of hills surrounding it; from below which, exterially, it
suddenly slopes down to the flat strip of land bordering on the
sea.  A dish, however, is generally uniform in shape--Africa is
not. For instance, we find in its centre a high group of hills
surrounding the head of the Tanganyika Lake, composed chiefly of
argillaceous sandstones which I suppose to be the Lunae Montes of
Ptolemy, or the Soma Giri of the ancient Hindus.  Further,
instead of a rim at the northern end, the country shelves down
from the equator to the Mediterranean Sea; and on the general
surface of the interior plateau there are basins full of water
(lakes), from which, when rains overflow them, rivers are formed,
that, cutting through the flanking rim of hills, find their way
to the sea.


Atmospheric Agents

On the east coast, near Zanzibar, we find the rains following the
track of the sun, and lasting not more than forty days on any
part that the sun crosses; whilst the winds blow from south-west
or north-east, towards the regions heated by its vertical
position. But in the centre of the continent, within 5§ of the
equator, we find the rains much more lasting.  For instance, at
5§ south latitude, for the whole six months that the sun is in
the south, rain continues to fall, and I have heard that the same
takes place at 5§ north; whilst on the equator, or rather a
trifle to northward of it, it rains more or less the whole year
round, but most at the equinoxes, as shown in the table on the
following page.  The winds, though somewhat less steady, are
still very determinable.  With an easterly tending, they deflect
north and south, following the sun. In the drier season they blow
so cold that the sun's heat is not distressing; and in
consequence of this, and the average altitude of the plateau,
which is 3000 feet, the general temperature of the atmosphere is
very pleasant, as I found from experience; for I walked every
inch of the journey dressed in thick woollen clothes, and slept
every night between blankets.

The Number of Days on which Rain fell (more or less) during the
March of the East African Expedition from Zanzibar to Gondokoro.

1860      Days on     1861        Days on   1862         Days on
           which                   which                  which
         rain fell               rain fell              rain fell

 ***       ***         January     19         January       14
 ***       ***         February    21         February[FN#1]12
 ***       ***         March       17         March         21
 ***       ***         April       17         April         27
 ***       ***         May          3         May           26
 ***       ***         June         0         June          20
 ***       ***         July         1         July          22
 ***       ***         August       1         August        20
 ***       ***         September    9         September     18
 October    2          October     11         October       27
 November   0          November    17         November      20
 December  20          December    16         December       6



Flora

From what has been said regarding the condition of the
atmosphere, it may readily be imagined that Africa, in those
parts, after all, is not so bad as people supposed it was; for,
when so much moisture falls under a vertical sun, all vegetable
life must grow up almost spontaneously.  It does so on the
equator in the most profuse manner; but down at 5§ south, where
there are six months' drought, the case is somewhat different;
and the people would be subject to famines if they did not take
advantage of their rainy season to lay in sufficient stores for
the fine: and here we touch on the misfortune of the country; for
the negro is too lazy to do so effectively, owing chiefly, as we
shall see presently, to want of a strong protecting government. 
One substantial fact has been established, owing to our having
crossed over ten degrees of latitude in the centre of the
continent, or from 5§ south to 5§ north latitude, which is this:
There exists a regular gradation of fertility, surprisingly rich
on the equator, but decreasing systematically from it; and the
reason why this great fertile zone is confined to the equatorial
regions, is the same as that which has constituted it the great
focus of water or lake supply, whence issue the principal rivers
of Africa.  On the equator lie the rainbearing influences of the
Mountains of the Moon.  The equatorial line is, in fact, the
centre of atmospheric motion.


Fauna

In treating of this branch of natural history, we will first take
man--the true curly-head, flab-nosed, pouch-mouthed negro--not
the Wahuma.[FN#2]  They are well distributed all over these
latitudes, but are not found anywhere in dense communities. 
Their system of government is mostly of the patriarchal
character.  Some are pastorals, but most are agriculturalists;
and this difference, I believe, originates solely from want of a
stable government, to enable them to reap what they produce; for
where the negro can save his cattle, which is his wealth, by
eating grain, he will do it.  In the same way as all animals,
whether wild or tame, require a guide to lead their flocks, so do
the negroes find it necessary to have chiefs over their villages
and little communities, who are their referees on all domestic or
political questions. They have both their district and their
village chiefs, but, in the countries we are about to travel
over, no kings such as we shall find that the Wahuma have.  The
district chief is absolute, though guided in great measure by his
"grey-beards," who constantly attend his residence, and talk over
their affairs of state.  These commonly concern petty internal
matters; for they are too selfish and too narrow-minded to care
for anything but their own private concerns. The grey-beards
circulate the orders of the chief amongst the village chiefs, who
are fined when they do not comply with them; and hence all orders
are pretty well obeyed.

One thing only tends to disorganise the country, and that is war,
caused, in the first instance, by polygamy, producing a family of
half-brothers, who, all aspiring to succeed their father, fight
continually with one another, and make their chief aim slaves and
cattle; whilst, in the second instance, slavery keeps them ever
fighting and reducing their numbers.  The government revenues are
levied, on a very small scale, exclusively for the benefit of the
chief and his grey-beards.  For instance, as a sort of land-tax,
the chief has a right to drink free from the village brews of
pombe (a kind of beer made by fermentation), which are made in
turn by all the villagers successively.  In case of an elephant
being killed, he also takes a share of the meat, and claims one
of its tusks as his right; further, all leopard, lion, or zebra
skins are his by right.  On merchandise brought into the country
by traders, he has a general right to make any exactions he
thinks he has the power of enforcing, without any regard to
justice or a regulated tariff. This right is called Hongo, in the
plural Mahongo.  Another source of revenue is in the effects of
all people condemned for sorcery, who are either burnt, or
speared and cast into the jungles, and their property seized by
the grey-beards for their chief.

As to punishments, all irreclaimable thieves or murderers are
killed and disposed of in the same manner as these sorcerers;
whilst on minor thieves a penalty equivalent to the extent of the
depredation is levied.  Illicit intercourse being treated as
petty larceny, a value is fixed according to the value of the
woman--for it must be remembered all women are property.  Indeed,
marriages are considered a very profitable speculation, the
girl's hand being in the father's gift, who marries her to any
one who will pay her price.  This arrangement, however, is not
considered a simple matter of buying and selling, but delights in
the high-sounding title of "dowry." Slaves, cows, goats, fowls,
brass wire, or beads, are the usual things given for this species
of dowry.  The marriage-knot, however, is never irretrievably
tied; for if the wife finds a defect in her husband, she can
return to her father by refunding the dowry; whilst the husband,
if he objects to his wife, can claim half-price on sending her
home again, which is considered fair, because as a second-hand
article her future value would be diminished by half. By this
system, it must be observed, polygamy is a source of wealth,
since a man's means are measured by the number of his progeny;
but it has other advantages besides the dowry, for the women work
more than the men do, both in and out of doors; and, in addition
to the females, the sons work for the household until they marry,
and in after life take care of their parents in the same way as 
in the first instance the parents took care of them.

Twins are usually hailed with delight, because they swell the
power of the family, though in some instances they are put to
death. Albinos are valued, though their colour is not admired. 
If death occurs in a natural manner, the body is usually either
buried in the village or outside.  A large portion of the negro
races affect nudity, despising clothing as effeminate; but these
are chiefly the more boisterous roving pastorals, who are too
lazy either to grow cotton or strip the trees of their bark. 
Their young women go naked; but the mothers suspend a little tail
both before and behind. As the hair of the negro will not grow
long, a barber might be dispensed with, were it not that they
delight in odd fashions, and are therefore continually either
shaving it off altogether, or else fashioning it after the most
whimsical designs.  No people in the world are so proud and
headstrong as the negroes, whether they be pastoral or
agriculturalists.  With them, as with the rest of the world,
"familiarity breeds contempt"; hospitality lives only one day;
for though proud of a rich or white visitor--and they implore him
to stop, that they may keep feeding their eyes on his
curiosities--they seldom give more than a cow or a goat, though
professing to supply a whole camp with provisions.

Taking the negroes as a whole, one does not find very marked or
much difference in them.  Each tribe has its characteristics, it
is true. For instance, one cuts his teeth or tattoos his face in
a different manner from the others; but by the constant
intermarriage with slaves, much of this effect is lost, and it is
further lost sight of owing to the prevalence of migrations
caused by wars and the division of governments.  As with the
tribal marks so with their weapons; those most commonly in use
are the spear, assage, shield, bow and arrow.  It is true some
affect one, some the other; but in no way do we see that the
courage of tribes can be determined by the use of any particular
weapon: for the bravest use the arrow, which is the more dreaded;
while the weakest confine themselves to the spear.  Lines of
traffic are the worst tracks (there are no roads in the districts
here referred to) for a traveller to go upon, not only because
the hospitality of the people has been damped by frequent
communication with travellers, but, by intercourse with the semi-
civilised merchant, their natural honour and honesty are
corrupted, their cupidity is increased, and the show of firearms
ceases to frighten them.

Of paramount consideration is the power held by the magician
(Mganga), who rules the minds of the kings as did the old popes
of Europe.  They, indeed, are a curse to the traveller; for if it
suits their inclinations to keep him out of the country, they
have merely to prognosticate all sorts of calamities--as
droughts, famines, or wars--in the event of his setting eyes on
the soil, and the chiefs, people, and all, would believe them;
for, as may be imagined, with men unenlightened, supernatural and
imaginary predictions work with more force than substantial
reasons.  Their implement of divination, simple as it may appear,
is a cow's or antelope's horn (Uganga), which they stuff with
magic powder, also called Uganga. Stuck into the ground in front
of the village, it is supposed to have sufficient power to ward
off the attacks of an enemy.

By simply holding it in the hand, the magician pretends he can
discover anything that has been stolen or lost; and instances
have been told of its dragging four men after it with
irresistible impetus up to a thief, when it be-laboured the
culprit and drove him out of his senses.  So imbued are the
natives' minds with belief in the power of charms, that they pay
the magician for sticks, stones, or mud, which he has doctored
for them.  They believe certain flowers held in the hand will
conduct them to anything lost; as also that the voice of certain
wild animals, birds, or beasts, will insure them good-luck, or
warn them of danger.  With the utmost complacency our sable
brother builds a dwarf hut in his fields, and places some grain
on it to propitiate the evil spirit, and suffer him to reap the
fruits of his labour, and this too they call Uganga or church.

These are a few of the more innocent alternatives the poor
negroes resort to in place of a "Saviour."  They have also many
other and more horrible devices.  For instance, in times of
tribulation, the magician, if he ascertains a war is projected by
inspecting the blood and bones of a fowl which he has flayed for
that purpose, flays a young child, and having laid it lengthwise
on a path, directs all the warriors, on proceeding to battle, to
step over his sacrifice and insure themselves victory.  Another
of these extra barbarous devices takes place when a chief wishes
to make war on his neighbour by his calling in a magician to
discover a propitious time for commencing.  The doctor places a
large earthen vessel, half full of water, over a fire, and over
its mouth a grating of sticks, whereon he lays a small child and
a fowl side by side, and covers them over with a second large
earthen vessel, just like the first, only inverted, to keep the
steam in, when he sets fire below, cooks for a certain period of
time, and then looks to see if his victims are still living or
dead--when, should they be dead, the war must be deferred, but,
otherwise commenced at once.

These extremes, however, are not often resorted to, for the
natives are usually content with simpler means, such as flaying a
goat, instead of a child, to be walked over; while, to prevent
any evil approaching their dwellings a squashed frog, or any
other such absurdity, when place on the track, is considered a
specific.

How the negro has lived so many ages without advancing, seems
marvellous, when all the countries surrounding Africa are so
forward in comparison; and judging from the progressive state of
the world, one is led to suppose that the African must soon
either step out from his darkness, or be superseded by a being
superior to himself. Could a government be formed for them like
ours in India, they would be saved; but without it, I fear there
is very little chance; for at present the African neither can
help himself nor will he be helped about by others, because his
country is in such a constant state of turmoil he has too much
anxiety on hand looking out for his food to think of anything
else.  As his fathers ever did, so does he. He works his wife,
sells his children, enslaves all he can lay hands upon, and,
unless when fighting for the property of others, contents himself
with drinking, singing, and dancing like a baboon to drive dull
care away.  A few only make cotton cloth, or work in wood, iron,
copper, or salt; their rule being to do as little as possible,
and to store up nothing beyond the necessities of the next
season, lest their chiefs or neighbours should covet and take it
from them.

Slavery, I may add, is one great cause of laziness, for the
masters become too proud to work, lest they should be thought
slaves themselves.  In consequence of this, the women look after
the household work--such as brewing, cooking, grinding corn,
making pottery and baskets, and taking care of the house and the
children, besides helping the slaves whilst cultivating, or even
tending the cattle sometimes.

Now, descending to the inferior order of creation, I shall
commence with the domestic animals first, to show what the
traveller may expect to find for his usual support.  Cows, after
leaving the low lands near the coast, are found to be plentiful
everywhere, and to produce milk in small quantities, from which
butter is made. Goats are common all over Africa; but sheep are
not so plentiful, nor do they show such good breeding--being
generally lanky, with long fat tails.  Fowls, much like those in
India, are abundant everywhere.  A few Muscovy ducks are
imported, also pigeons and cats.  Dogs, like the Indian pariah,
are very plentiful, only much smaller; and a few donkeys are
found in certain localities.  Now, considering this good supply
of meat, whilst all tropical plants will grow just as well in
central equatorial Africa as they do in India, it surprises the
traveller there should be any famines; yet such is too often the
case, and the negro, with these bounties within his reach, is
sometimes found eating dogs, cats, rats, porcupines, snakes,
lizards, tortoises, locusts, and white ants, or is forced to seek
the seeds of wild grasses, or to pluck wild herbs, fruits, and
roots; whilst at the proper seasons they hunt the wild elephant,
buffalo, giraffe, zebra, pigs, and antelopes; or, going out with
their arrows, have battues against the guinea-fowls and small
birds.

The frequency with which collections of villages are found all
over the countries we are alluding to, leaves but very little
scope for the runs of wild animals, which are found only in dense
jungles, open forests, or praires generally speaking, where hills
can protect them, and near rivers whose marshes produce a thick
growth of vegetation to conceal them from their most dreaded
enemy--man. The prowling, restless elephant, for instance, though
rarely seen, leaves indications of his nocturnal excursions in
every wilderness, by wantonly knocking down the forest-trees. 
The morose rhinoceros, though less numerous, are found in every
thick jungle.  So is the savage buffalo, especially delighting in
dark places, where he can wallow in the mud and slake his thirst
without much trouble; and here also we find the wild pig.

The gruff hippopotamus is as widespread as any, being found
wherever there is water to float him; whilst the shy giraffe and
zebra affect all open forests and plains where the grass is not
too long; and antelopes, of great variety in species and habits,
are found wherever man will let them alone and they can find
water.  The lion is, however, rarely heard--much more seldom
seen.  Hyenas are numerous, and thievishly inclined.  Leopards,
less common, are the terror of the villagers.  Foxes are not
numerous, but frighten the black traveller by their ill-omened
bark.  Hares, about half the size of English ones--there are no
rabbits--are widely spread, but not numerous; porcupines the
same.  Wild cats, and animals of the ferret kind, destroy game. 
Monkeys of various kinds and squirrels harbour in the trees, but
are rarely seen.  Tortoises and snakes, in great variety, crawl
over the ground, mostly after the rains.  Rats and lizards--there
are but few mice--are very abundant, and feed both in the fields
and on the stores of the men.

The wily ostrich, bustard, and florikan affect all open places.
The guinea-fowl is the most numerous of all game-birds. 
Partridges come next, but do not afford good sport; and quails
are rare. Ducks and snipe appear to love Africa less than any
other country; and geese and storks are only found where water
most abounds.  Vultures are uncommon; hawks and crows much
abound, as in all other countries; but little birds, of every
colour and note, are discoverable in great quantities near water
and by the villages. Huge snails and small ones, as well as
fresh-water shells, are very abundant, though the conchologist
would find but little variety to repay his labours; and insects,
though innumerable, are best sought for after the rains have set
in.[FN#3]


The Wanguana or Freed Men

The Wa-n-guana, as their name implies, are men freed from
slavery; and as it is to these singular negroes acting as hired
servants that I have been chiefly indebted for opening this large
section of Africa, a few general remarks on their character
cannot be out of place here.

Of course, having been born in Africa, and associated in
childhood with the untainted negroes, they retain all the
superstitious notions of the true aborigines, though somewhat
modified, and even corrupted, by that acquaintance with the outer
world which sharpens their wits.

Most of these men were doubtless caught in wars, as may be seen
every day in Africa, made slaves of, and sold to the Arabs for a
few yards of common cloth, brass wire, or beads.  They would then
be taken to the Zanzibar market, resold like horses to the
highest bidder, and then kept in bondage by their new masters,
more like children of his family than anything else.  In this new
position they were circumcised to make Mussulmans of them, that
their hands might be "clean" to slaughter their master's cattle,
and extend his creed; for the Arabs believe the day must come
when the tenets of Mohammed will be accepted by all men.

The slave in this new position finds himself much better off than
he ever was in his life before, with this exception, that as a
slave he feels himself much degraded in the social scale of
society, and his family ties are all cut off from him--probably
his relations have all been killed in the war in which he was
captured.  Still, after the first qualms have worn off, we find
him much attached to his master, who feeds him and finds him in
clothes in return for the menial services which he performs.  In
a few years after capture, or when confidence has been gained by
the attachment shown by the slave, if the master is a trader in
ivory, he will intrust him with the charge of his stores, and
send him all over the interior of the continent to purchase for
him both slaves and ivory; but should the master die, according
to the Mohammedan creed the slaves ought to be freed.  In Arabia
this would be the case; but at Zanzibar it more generally happens
that the slave is willed to his successor.

The whole system of slaveholding by the Arabs in Africa, or
rather on the coast or at Zanzibar, is exceedingly strange; for
the slaves, both in individual physical strength and in numbers,
are so superior to the Arab foreigners, that if they chose to
rebel, they might send the Arabs flying out of the land.  It
happens, however, that they are spell-bound, not knowing their
strength any more than domestic animals, and they even seem to
consider that they would be dishonest if they ran away after
being purchased, and so brought pecuniary loss on their owners.

There are many positions into which the slave may get by the
course of events, and I shall give here, as a specimen, the
ordinary case of one who has been freed by the death of his
master, that master having been a trader in ivory and slaves in
the interior.  In such a case, the slave so freed in all
probability would commence life afresh by taking service as a
porter with other merchants, and in the end would raise
sufficient capital to commence trading himself-- first in slaves,
because they are the most easily got, and then in ivory.  All his
accumulations would then go to the Zanzibar market, or else to
slavers looking out off the coast.  Slavery begets slavery.  To
catch slaves is the first thought of every chief in the interior;
hence fights and slavery impoverish the land, and that is the
reason both why Africa does not improve, and why we find men of
all tribes and tongues on the coast.  The ethnologist need only
go to Zanzibar to become acquainted with all the different tribes
to the centre of the continent on that side, or to Congo to find
the other half south of the equator there.

Some few freed slaves take service in vessels, of which they are
especially fond; but most return to Africa to trade in slaves and
ivory.  All slaves learn the coast language, called at Zanzibar
Kisuahili; and therefore the traveller, if judicious in his
selections, could find there interpreters to carry him throughout
the eastern half of South Africa.  To the north of the equator
the system of language entirely changes.

Laziness is inherent in these men, for which reason, although
extremely powerful, they will not work unless compelled to do so.
Having no God, in the Christian sense of the term, to fear or
worship, they have no love for truth, honour, or honesty.
Controlled by no government, nor yet by home ties, they have no
reason to think of or look to the future.  Any venture attracts
them when hard-up for food; and the more roving it is, the better
they like it.  The life of the sailor is most particularly
attractive to the freed slave; for he thinks, in his conceit,
that he is on an equality with all men when once on the muster-
rolls, and then he calls all his fellow-Africans "savages." 
Still the African's peculiarity sticks to him: he has gained no
permanent good.  The association of white men and the glitter of
money merely dazzle him. He apes like a monkey the jolly Jack
Tar, and spends his wages accordingly.  If chance brings him back
again to Zanzibar, he calls his old Arab master his father, and
goes into slavery with as much zest as ever.

I have spoken of these freed men as if they had no religion. This
is p