ractically true, though theoretically not so; for the Arabs,
on circumcising them, teach them to repeat the words Allah and
Mohammed, and perhaps a few others; but not one in ten knows what
a soul means, nor do they expect to meet with either reward or
punishment in the next world, though they are taught to regard
animals as clean and unclean, and some go through the form of a
pilgrimage to Mecca.  Indeed the whole of their spiritual
education goes into oaths and ejaculations--Allah and Mohammed
being as common in their mouths as damn and blast are with our
soldiers and sailors. The long and short of this story is, that
the freed men generally turn out a loose, roving, reckless set of
beings, quick-witted as the Yankee, from the simple fact that
they imagine all political matters affect them, and therefore
they must have a word in every debate.  Nevertheless they are
seldom wise; and lying being more familiar to their constitution
than truth-saying, they are for ever concocting dodges with the
view, which they glory in of successfully cheating people. 
Sometimes they will show great kindness, even bravery amounting
to heroism, and proportionate affection; at another time, without
any cause, they will desert and be treacherous to their sworn
friends in the most dastardly manner. Whatever the freak of the
moment is, that they adopt in the most thoughtless manner, even
though they may have calculated on advantages beforehand in the
opposite direction.  In fact, no one can rely upon them even for
a moment.  Dog wit, or any silly remarks, will set them giggling. 
Any toy will amuse them.  Highly conceited of their personal
appearance, they are for ever cutting their hair in different
fashions, to surprise a friend; or if a rag be thrown away, they
will all in turn fight for it to bind on their heads, then on
their loins or spears, peacocking about with it before their
admiring comrades.  Even strange feathers or skins are treated by
them in the same way.

Should one happen to have anything specially to communicate to
his master in camp, he will enter giggling, sidle up to the pole
of a hut, commence scratching his back with it, then stretch and
yawn, and gradually, in bursts of loud laughter, slip down to the
ground on his stern, when he drums with his hands on the top of a
box until summoned to know what he has at heart, when he delivers
himself in a peculiar manner, laughs and yawns again, and, saying
it is time to go, walks off in the same way as he came.  At other
times when he is called, he will come sucking away at the spout
of a tea-pot, or, scratching his naked arm-pits with a table-
knife, or, perhaps, polishing the plates for dinner with his
dirty loin-cloth.  If sent to market to purchase a fowl, he comes
back with a cock tied by the legs to the end of a stick, swinging
and squalling in the most piteous manner.  Then, arrived at the
cook-shop, he throws the bird down on the ground, holds its head
between his toes, plucks the feathers to bare its throat, and
then, raising a prayer, cuts its head off.

But enough of the freed man in camp; on the march he is no
better. If you give him a gun and some ammunition to protect him
in case of emergencies, he will promise to save it, but forthwith
expends it by firing it off in the air, and demands more, else he
will fear to venture amongst the "savages."  Suppose you give him
a box of bottles to carry, or a desk, or anything else that
requires great care, and you caution him of its contents, the
first thing he does is to commence swinging it round and round,
or putting it topsy-turvy on the top of his head, when he will
run off at a jog-trot, singing and laughing in the most provoking
manner, and thinking no more about it than if it were an old
stone; even if rain were falling, he would put it in the best
place to get wet through.  Economy, care, or forethought never
enters his head; the first thing to hand is the right thing for
him; and rather then take the trouble even to look for his own
rope to tie up his bundle, he would cut off his master's tent-
ropes or steal his comrade's. His greatest delight is in the fair
sex, and when he can't get them, next comes beer, song, and a
dance.

Now, this is a mild specimen of the "rowdy" negro, who has
contributed more to open Africa to enterprise and civilisation
than any one else.  Possessed of a wonderful amount of loquacity,
great risibility, but no stability--a creature of impulse--a
grown child, in short--at first sight it seems wonderful how he
can be trained to work; for there is now law, no home to bind
him--he could run away at any moment; and presuming on this, he
sins, expecting to be forgiven.  Great forbearance, occasionally
tinctured with a little fatherly severity, is I believe, the best
dose for him; for he says to his master, in the most childish
manner, after sinning, "You ought to forgive and to forget; for
are you not a big man who should be above harbouring spite,
though for a moment you may be angry?  Flog me if you like, but
don't keep count against me, else I shall run away; and what will
you do then?"

The language of this people is just as strange as they are
themselves.  It is based on euphony, from which cause it is very
complex, the more especially so as it requires one to be
possessed of a negro's turn of mind to appreciate the system, and
unravel the secret of its euphonic concord.  A Kisuahili grammar,
written by Dr. Krapf, will exemplify what I mean.  There is one
peculiarity, however, to which I would direct the attention of
the reader most particularly, which is, that Wa prefixed to the
essential word of a country, means men or people; M prefixed,
means man or individual; U, in the same way, means place or
locality; and Ki prefixed indicates the language.  Example:--
Wagogo, is the people of Gogo; Mgogo, is a Gogo man; Ugogo, is
the country of Gogo; and Kigogo, the language of Gogo.

The only direction here necessary as regards pronunciation of
native words refers to the u, which represents a sound
corresponding to that of the oo in woo.





                    Journal of the Discovery
                               of 
                     The Source of the Nile
                                
                                
                                
                                
                           Chapter 1



                   London to Zanzibar, 1859  
                                
The design--The Preparations--Departure--The Cape--The Zulu
Kafirs-- Turtle-Turning--Capture of a Slaver--Arrive at Zanzibar-
-Local Politics and News Since Last Visit--Organisation of the
Expedition.

My third expedition in Africa, which was avowedly for the purpose
of establishing the truth of my assertion that the Victoria
N'yanza, which I discovered on the 30th July 1858, would
eventually prove to be the source of the Nile, may be said to
have commenced on the 9th May 1859, the first day after my return
to England from my second expedition, when, at the invitation of
Sir. R. I. Murchison, I called at his house to show him my map
for the information of the Royal Geographical Society.  Sir
Roderick, I need only say, at once accepted my views; and,
knowing my ardent desire to prove to the world, by actual
inspection of the exit, that the Victoria N'yanza was the source
of the Nile, seized the enlightened view, that such a discovery
should not be lost to the glory of England and the Society of
which he was President; and said to me, "Speke, we must send you
there again."  I was then officially directed, much against my
own inclination, to lecture at the Royal Geographical Society on
the geography of Africa, which I had, as the sole surveyor of the
second expedition, laid down on our maps.[FN#4]  A council of the
Geographical Society was now convened to ascertain what projects
I had in view for making good my discovery by connecting the lake
with the Nile, as also what assistance I should want for that
purpose.

Some thought my best plan would be to go up the Nile, which
seemed to them the natural course to pursue, especially as the
Nile was said, though nobody believed it, to have been navigated
by expeditions sent out by Mehemet Ali, Viceroy of Egypt, up to
3§ 22ï north latitude.  To this I objected, as so many had tried
it and failed, from reasons which had not transpired; and, at the
same time, I said that if they would give me œ5000 down at once,
I would return to Zanzibar at the end of the year, March to Kaze
again, and make the necessary investigations of the Victoria
lake.  Although, in addition to the journey to the source of the
river, I also proposed spending three years in the country,
looking up tributaries, inspecting watersheds, navigating the
lake, and making collections on all branches of natural history,
yet œ5000 was thought by the Geographical Society too large a sum
to expect from the Government; so I accepted the half, saying
that, whatever the expedition might cost, I would make good the
rest, as, under any circumstances, I would complete what I had
begun, or die in the attempt.

My motive for deferring the journey a year was the hope that I
might, in the meanwhile, send on fifty men, carrying beads and
brass wire, under charge of Arab ivory-traders, to Karague, and
fifty men more, in the same way, to Kaze; whilst I, arriving in
the best season for travelling (May, June, or July), would be
able to push on expeditiously to my depots so formed, and thus
escape the great disadvantages of travelling with a large caravan
in a country where no laws prevail to protect one against
desertions and theft. Moreover, I knew that the negroes who would
have to go with me, as long as they believed I had property in
advance, would work up to it willingly, as they would be the
gainers by doing so; whilst, with nothing before them, they would
be always endeavouring to thwart my advance, to save them from a
trouble which their natural laziness would prompt them to escape
from.

This beautiful project, I am sorry to say, was doomed from the
first; for I did not get the œ2500 grant of money or appointment
to the command until fully nine months had elapsed, when I wrote
to Colonel Rigby, our Consul at Zanzibar, to send on the first
instalment of property towards the interior.

As time then advanced, the Indian branch of the Government very
graciously gave me fifty artillery carbines, with belts and
sword-bayonets attached, and 20,000 rounds of ball ammunition.
They lent me as many surveying instruments as I wanted; and,
through Sir George Clerk, put at my disposal some rich presents,
in gold watches, for the chief Arabs who had so generously
assisted us in the last expedition.  Captain Grant, hearing that
I was bound on this journey, being an old friend and brother
sportsman in India, asked me to take him with me, and his
appointment was settled by Colonel Sykes, then chairman of a
committee of the Royal Geographical Society, who said it would
only be "a matter of charity" to allow me a companion.

Much at the same time, Mr Petherick, an ivory merchant, who had
spent many years on the Nile, arrived in England, and
gratuitously offered, as it would not interfere with his trade,
to place boats at Gondokoro, and send a party of men up the White
River to collect ivory in the meanwhile, and eventually to assist
me in coming down. Mr Petherick, I may add, showed great zeal for
geographical exploits, so, as I could not get money enough to do
all that I wished to accomplish myself, I drew out a project for
him to ascend the stream now known as the Usua river (reported to
be the larger branch of the Nile), and, if possible, ascertain
what connection it had with my lake.  This being agreed to, I did
my best, through the medium of Earl de Grey (then President of
the Royal Geographical Society), to advance him money to carry
out this desirable object.

The last difficulty I had now before me was to obtain a passage
to Zanzibar.  The Indian Government had promised me a vessel of
war to convey me from Aden to Zanzibar, provided it did not
interfere with the public interests.  This doubtful proviso
induced me to apply to Captain Playfair, Assistant-Political at
Aden, to know what Government vessel would be available; and
should there be none, to get for me a passage by some American
trader.  The China war, he assured me, had taken up all the
Government vessels, and there appeared no hope left for me that
season, as the last American trader was just then leaving for
Zanzibar.  In this dilemma it appeared that I must inevitably
lose the travelling season, and come in for the droughts and
famines.  The tide, however, turned in my favour a little; for I
obtained, by permission of the Admiralty, a passage in the
British screw steam-frigate Forte, under orders to convey Admiral
Sir H. Keppel to his command at the Cape; and Sir Charles Wood
most obligingly made a request that I should be forwarded thence
to Zanzibar in one of our slaver-hunting cruisers by the earliest
opportunity.

On the 27th April, Captain Grant and I embarked on board the new
steam-frigate Forte, commanded by Captain E. W. Turnour, at
Portsmouth; and after a long voyage, touching at Madeira and Rio
de Janeiro, we arrived at the Cape of Good Hope on the 4th July.
Here Sir George Grey, the Governor of the colony, who took a warm
and enlightened interest in the cause of the expedition, invited
both Grant and myself to reside at his house.  Sir George had
been an old explorer himself--was once wounded by savages in
Australia, much in the same manner as I had been in the Somali
country--and, with a spirit of sympathy, he called me his son,
and said he hoped I would succeed.  Then, thinking how best he
could serve me, he induced the Cape Parliament to advance to the
expedition a sum of œ300, for the purpose of buying baggage-
mules; and induced Lieut.-General Wynyard, the Commander-in-
Chief, to detach ten volunteers from the Cape Mounted Rifle Corps
to accompany me. When this addition was made to my force, of
twelve mules and ten Hottentots, the Admiral of the station
placed the screw steam-corvette Brisk at my disposal, and we all
sailed for Zanzibar on the 16th July, under the command of
Captain A. F. de Horsey-- the Admiral himself accompanying us, on
one of his annual inspections to visit the east coast of Africa
and the Mauritius. In five days more we touched at East London,
and, thence proceeding north, made a short stay at Delagoa Bay,
where I first became acquainted with the Zulu Kafirs, a naked set
of negroes, whose national costume principally consists in having
their hair trussed up like a hoop on the top of the head, and an
appendage like a thimble, to which they attach a mysterious
importance.  They wear additional ornaments, charms, &c., of
birds' claws, hoofs and horns of wild animals tied on with
strings, and sometimes an article like a kilt, made of loose
strips of skin, or the entire skins of vermin strung close
together.  These things I have merely noticed in passing, because
I shall hereafter have occasion to allude to a migratory people,
the Watuta, who dressing much in the same manner, extend from
Lake N'yassa to Uzinza, and may originally have been a part of
this same Kafir race, who are themselves supposed to have
migrated from the regions at present occupied by the Gallas. Next
day (the 28th) we went on to Europa, a small island of coralline,
covered with salsolacious shrubs, and tenanted only by sea-birds,
owls, finches, rats, and turtles.  Of the last we succeeded in
turning three, the average weight of each being 360 lb., and we
took large numbers of their eggs.

We then went to Mozambique, and visited the Portuguese Governor,
John Travers de Almeida, who showed considerable interest in the
prospects of the expedition, and regretted that, as it cost so
much money to visit the interior from that place, his officers
were unable to go there.  One experimental trip only had been
accomplished by Mr Soares, who was forced to pay the Makua chiefs
120 dollars footing, to reach a small hill in view of the sea,
about twenty-five miles off.

Leaving Mozambique on the 9th August, bound for Johanna, we came
the next day, at 11.30 A.M., in sight of a slaver, ship-rigged,
bearing on us full sail, but so distant from us that her mast-
tops were only just visible.  As quick as ourselves, she saw who
we were and tried to escape by retreating.  This manoeuvre left
no doubt what she was, and the Brisk, all full of excitement,
gave chase at full speed, and in four hours more drew abreast of
her.  A great commotion ensued on board the slaver.  The sea-
pirates threw overboard their colours, bags, and numerous boxes,
but would not heave-to, although repeatedly challenged, until a
gun was fired across her bows. Our boats were then lowered, and
in a few minutes more the "prize" was taken, by her crew being
exchanged for some of our men, and we learnt all about her from
accurate reports furnished by Mr Frere, the Cape Slave
Commissioner.  Cleared from Havannah as "the Sunny South,"
professing to be destined for Hong-Kong, she changed her name to
the Manuela, and came slave-hunting in these regions. The
slaver's crew consisted of a captain, doctor, and several
sailors, mostly Spaniards.  The vessel was well stored with
provisions and medicines; but there was scarcely enough room in
her, though she was said to be only half freighted, for the 544
creatures they were transporting.  The next morning, as we
entered Pamoni harbour by an intricate approach to the rich
little island hill Johanna, the slaver, as she followed us,
stranded, and for a while caused considerable alarm to everybody
but her late captain. He thought his luck very bad, after
escaping so often, to be taken thus; for his vessel's power of
sailing were so good, that, had she had the wind in her favour,
the Brisk, even with the assistance of steam, could not have come
up with her.  On going on board her, I found the slaves to be
mostly Wahiyow.  A few of them were old women, but all the rest
children.  They had been captured during wars in their own
country, and sold to Arabs, who brought them to the coast, and
kept them half-starved until the slaver arrived, when they were
shipped in dhows and brought off to the slaver, where, for nearly
a week, whilst the bargains were in progress, they were kept
entirely without food.  It was no wonder then, every man of the
Brisk who first looked upon them did so with a feeling of
loathing and abhorrence of such a trade.  All over the vessel,
but more especially below, old women, stark naked, were dying in
the most disgusting "ferret-box" atmosphere; while all those who
had sufficient strength were pulling up the hatches, and tearing
at the salt fish they found below, like dogs in a kennel.

On the 15th the Manuela was sent to the Mauritius, and we, after
passing the Comoro Islands, arrived at our destination, Zanzibar-
- called Lunguja by the aborigines, the Wakhadim--and Unguja by
the present Wasuahili.

On the 17th, after the anchor was cast, without a moment's delay
I went off to the British Consulate to see my old friend Colonel
Rigby.  He was delighted to see us; and, in anticipation of our
arrival, had prepared rooms for our reception, that both Captain
Grant and myself might enjoy his hospitality until arrangements
could be made for our final start into the interior.  The town,
which I had left in so different a condition sixteen months
before, was in a state of great tranquillity, brought about by
the energy of the Bombay Government on the Muscat side, and
Colonel Rigby's exertions on this side, in preventing an
insurrection Sultan Majid's brothers had created with a view of
usurping his government.

The news of the place was as follows:--In addition to the
formerly constituted consulates--English, French, and American--a
fourth one, representing Hamburg, had been created.  Dr Roscher,
who during my absence had made a successful journey to the
N'yinyezi N'yassa, or Star Lake, was afterwards murdered by some
natives in Uhiyow; and Lieutentant-Colonel Baron van der Decken,
another enterprising German, was organising an expedition with a
view to search for the relics of his countryman, and, if
possible, complete the project poor Roscher had commenced.

Slavery had received a severe blow by the sharp measures Colonel
Rigby had taken in giving tickets of emancipation to all those
slaves whom our Indian subjects the Banyans had been secretly
keeping, and by fining the masters and giving the money to the
men to set them up in life.  The interior of the continent had
been greatly disturbed, owing to constant war between the natives
and Arab ivory merchants.  Mguru Mfupi (or Short-legs), the chief
of Khoko in Ugogo, for instance, had been shot, and Manua Sera
(the Tippler), who succeeded the old Sultan Fundi Kira, of
Unyanyembe, on his death, shortly after the late expedition left
Kaze, was out in the field fighting the Arabs.  Recent letters
from the Arabs in the interior, however, gave hopes of peace
being shortly restored.  Finally, in compliance with my request--
and this was the most important item of news to myself--Colonel
Rigby had sent on, thirteen days previously, fifty-six loads of
cloth and beads, in charge of two of Ramji's men, consigned to
Musa at Kaze.

To call on the Sultan, of course, was our first duty.  He
received us in his usually affable manner; made many trite
remarks concerning our plans; was surprised, if my only object in
view was to see the great river running out of the lake, that I
did not go by the more direct route across the Masai country and
Usoga; and then, finding I wished to see Karague, as well as to
settle many other great points of interest, he offered to assist
me with all the means in his power.

The Hottentots, the mules, and the baggage having been landed,
our preparatory work began in earnest.  It consisted in proving
the sextants; rating the watches; examining the compasses and
boiling thermometers; making tents and packsaddles; ordering
supplies of beads, cloth, and brass wire; and collecting servants
and porters.

Sheikh Said bin Salem, our late Cafila Bashi, or caravan captain,
was appointed to that post again, as he wished to prove his
character for honour and honesty; and it now transpired that he
had been ordered not to go with me when I discovered the Victoria
N'yanza.  Bombay and his brother Mabruki were bound to me of old,
and the first to greet me on my arrival here; while my old
friends the Beluchs begged me to take them again.  The
Hottentots, however, had usurped their place.  I was afterwards
sorry for this, though, if I ever travel again, I shall trust to
none but natives, as the climate of Africa is too trying to
foreigners.  Colonel Rigby, who had at heart as much as anybody
the success of the expedition, materially assisted me in
accomplishing my object--that men accustomed to discipline and a
knowledge of English honour and honesty should be enlisted, to
give confidence to the rest of the men; and he allowed me to
select from his boat's crew any men I could find who had served
as men-of-war, and had seen active service in India.

For this purpose my factotum, Bombay, prevailed on Baraka, Frij,
and Rahan--all of them old sailors, who, like himself, knew
Hindustani--to go with me.  With this nucleus to start with, I
gave orders that they should look out for as many Wanguana (freed
men-- i.e., men emancipated from slavery) as they could enlist,
to carry loads, or do any other work required of them, and to
follow men in Africa wherever I wished, until our arrival in
Egypt, when I would send them back to Zanzibar.  Each was to
receive one year's pay in advance, and the remainder when their
work was completed.

While this enlistment was going on here, Ladha Damji, the
customs' master, was appointed to collect a hundred pagazis
(Wanyamuezi porters) to carry each a load of cloth, beads, or
brass wire to Kaze, as they do for the ivory merchants. 
Meanwhile, at the invitation of the Admiral, and to show him some
sport in hippopotamus-shooting, I went with him in a dhow over to
Kusiki, near which there is a tidal lagoon, which at high tide is
filled with water, but at low water exposes sand islets covered
with mangrove shrub.  In these islets we sought for the animals,
knowing they were keen to lie wallowing in the mire, and we
bagged two. On my return to Zanzibar, the Brisk sailed for the
Mauritius, but fortune sent Grant and myself on a different
cruise.  Sultan Majid, having heard that a slaver was lying at
Pangani, and being anxious to show his good faith with the
English, begged me to take command of one his vessels of war and
run it down.  Accordingly, embarking at noon, as soon as the
vessel could be got ready, we lay-to that night at Tombat, with a
view of surprising the slaver next morning; but next day, on our
arrival at Pangani, we heard that she had merely put in to
provision there three days before, and had let immediately
afterwards.  As I had come so far, I thought we might go ashore
and look at the town, which was found greatly improved since I
last saw it, by the addition of several coralline houses and a
dockyard.  The natives were building a dhow with Lindi and
Madagascar timber.  On going ashore, I might add, we were
stranded on the sands, and, coming off again, nearly swamped by
the increasing surf on the bar of the river; but this was a
trifle; all we thought of was to return to Zanzibar, and hurry on
our preparations there.  This, however, was not so easy: the sea
current was running north, and the wind was too light to propel
our vessel against it; so, after trying in vain to make way in
her, Grant and I, leaving her to follow, took to a boat, after
giving the captain, who said we would get drowned, a letter, to
say we left the vessel against his advice.

We had a brave crew of young negroes to pull us; but, pull as
they would, the current was so strong that we feared, if we
persisted, we should be drawn into the broad Indian Ocean; so,
changing our line, we bore into the little coralline island,
Maziwa, where, after riding over some ugly coral surfs, we put in
for the night. There we found, to our relief, some fisherman, who
gave us fish for our dinner, and directions how to proceed.

Next morning, before daylight, we trusted to the boat and our
good luck.  After passing, without landmarks to guide us, by an
intricate channel, through foaming surfs, we arrived at Zanzibar
in the night, and found that the vessel had got in before us.

Colonel Rigby now gave me a most interesting paper, with a map
attached to it, about the Nile and the Mountains of the Moon. It
was written by Lieutenant Wilford, from the "Purans" of the
Ancient Hindus.  As it exemplifies, to a certain extent, the
supposition I formerly arrived at concerning the Mountains of the
Moon being associated with the country of the Moon, I would fain
draw the attention of the reader of my travels to the volume of
the "Asiatic Researches" in which it was published.[FN#5]  It is
remarkable that the Hindus have christened the source of the Nile
Amara, which is the name of a country at the north-east corner of
the Victoria N'yanza.  This, I think, shows clearly, that the
ancient Hindus must have had some kind of communication with both
the northern and southern ends of the Victoria N'yanza.

Having gone to work again, I found that Sheikh Said had brought
ten men, four of whom were purchased for one hundred dollars,
which I had to pay; Bombay, Baraka, Frij, and Rahan had brought
twenty-six more, all freed men; while the Sultan Majid, at the
suggestion of Colonel Rigby, gave me thirty-four men more, who
were all raw labourers taken from his gardens.  It was my
intention to have taken one hundred of this description of men
throughout the whole journey; but as so many could not be found
in Zanzibar, I still hoped to fill up the complement in
Unyamuezi, the land of the Moon, from the large establishments of
the Arab merchants residing there.  The payment of these men's
wages for the first year, as well as the terms of the agreement
made with them, by the kind consent of Colonel Rigby were now
entered in the Consular Office books, as a security to both
parties, and a precaution against disputes on the way.  Any one
who saw the grateful avidity with which they took the money, and
the warmth with which they pledged themselves to serve me
faithfully through all dangers and difficulties, would, had he
had no dealings with such men before, have thought that I had a
first-rate set of followers.  I lastly gave Sheikh Said a double-
barrelled rifle by Blissett, and distributed fifty carbines among
the seniors of the expedition, with the condition that they would
forfeit them to others more worthy if they did not behave well,
but would retain possession of them for ever if they carried them
through the journey to my satisfaction.

On the 21st, as everything was ready on the island, I sent Sheikh
Said and all the men, along with the Hottentots, mules, and
baggage, off in dhows to Bagamoyo, on the opposite mainland. 
Colonel Rigby, with Captain Grant and myself, then called on the
Sultan, to bid him adieu, when he graciously offered me, as a
guard of honour to escort me through Uzaramo, one jemadar and
twenty-five Beluch soldiers. These I accepted, more as a
government security in that country against the tricks of the
natives, than for any accession they made to our strength.  His
highness then places his 22-gun corvette, "Secundra Shah," at our
disposal, and we went all three over to Bagamoyo, arriving on the
25th.  Immediately on landing, Ladha and Sheikh Said showed us
into a hut prepared for us, and all things looked pretty well. 
Ladha's hundred loads of beads, cloths, and brass wire were all
tied up for the march, and seventy-five pagazis (porters from the
Moon country) had received their hire to carry these loads to
Kaze in the land of the Moon.  Competition, I found, had raised
these men's wages, for I had to pay, to go even as far as Kaze,
nine and a quarter dollars a-head!--as Masudi and some other
merchants were bound on the same line as myself, and all were
equally in a hurry to be off and avoid as much as possible the
famine we knew we should have to fight through at this late
season. Little troubles, of course, must always be expected, else
these blacks would not be true negroes.  Sheikh Said now reported
it quite impossible to buy anything at a moderate rate; for, as I
was a "big man," I ought to "pay a big price;" and my men had all
been obliged to fight in the bazaar before they could get even
tobacco at the same rate as other men, because they were the
servants of the big man, who could afford to give higher wages
than any one else. The Hottentots, too, began to fall sick, which
my Wanguana laughingly attributed to want of grog to keep their
spirits up, as these little creatures, the "Tots," had frequently
at Zanzibar, after heavy potations, boasted to the more sober
free men, that they "were strong, because they could stand plenty
drink."  The first step now taken was to pitch camp under large
shady mango-trees, and to instruct every man in his particular
duty.  At the same time, the Wanguana, who had carbines, were
obliged to be drilled in their use and formed into companies,
with captains of ten, headed by General Baraka, who was made
commander-in-chief.

On the 30th September, as things were looking more orderly, I
sent forward half of the property, and all the men I had then
collected, to Ugeni, a shamba, or garden, two miles off; and on
the 2nd October, after settling with Ladha for my "African
money," as my pagazis were completed to a hundred and one, we
wished Rigby adieu, and all assembled together at Ugeni, which
resembles the richest parts of Bengal.






                           Chapter II



                            Uzaramo

The Nature of the Country--The Order of March--The Beginning of
our Taxation--Sultan Lion's Claw, and Sultan Monkey's Tail--The
Kingani --Jealousies and Difficulties in the Camp--The Murderer
of M. Maizan.

We were now in U-za-Ramo, which may mean the country of Ramo,
though I have never found any natives who could enlighten me on
the derivation of this obviously triple word.  The extent of the
country, roughly speaking, stretches from the coast to the
junction or bifurcation of the Kingani and its upper branch the
Mgeta river, westwards; and from the Kingani, north, to the
Lufigi river, south; though in the southern portions several
subtribes have encroached upon the lands.  There are no hills in
Uzaramo; but the land in the central line, formed like a ridge
between the two rivers, furrow fashion, consists of slightly
elevated flats and terraces, which, in the rainy season, throw
off their surplus waters to the north and south by nullahs into
these rivers.  The country is uniformly well covered with trees
and large grasses, which, in the rainy season, are too thick,
tall, and green to be pleasant; though in the dry season, after
the grasses have been burnt, it is agreeable enough, though not
pretty, owing to the flatness of the land.  The villages are not
large or numerous, but widely spread, consisting generally of
conical grass huts, while others are gable-ended, after the
coast-fashion--a small collection of ten or twenty comprising one
village.  Over these villages certain headmen, titled Phanze,
hold jurisdiction, who take black-mail from travellers with high
presumption when they can.  Generally speaking, they live upon
the coast, and call themselves Diwans, headsmen, and subjects of
the Sultan Majid; but they no sooner hear of the march of a
caravan than they transpose their position, become sultans in
their own right, and levy taxes accordingly.

The Wazaramo are strictly agriculturists; they have no cows, and
but few goats.  They are of low stature and thick set and their
nature tends to the boisterous.  Expert slavehunters, they mostly
clothe themselves by the sale of their victims on the coast,
though they do business by the sale of goats and grain as well. 
Nowhere in the interior are natives so well clad as these
creatures.  In dressing up their hair, and otherwise smearing
their bodies with ochreish clay, they are great dandies.  They
always keep their bows and arrows, which form their national arm,
in excellent order, the latter well poisoned, and carried in
quivers nicely carved. To intimidate a caravan and extort a hongo
or tax, I have seen them drawn out in line as if prepared for
battle; but a few soft words were found sufficient to make them
all withdraw and settle the matter at issue by arbitration in
some appointed place.  A few men without property can cross their
lands fearlessly, though a single individual with property would
stand no chance, for they are insatiable thieves.  But little is
seen of these people on the journey, as the chiefs take their
taxes by deputy, partly out of pride, and partly because they
think they can extort more by keeping in the mysterious distance. 
At the same time, the caravan prefers camping in the jungles
beyond the villages to mingling with the inhabitants, where rows
might be engendered.  We sometimes noticed Albinos, with greyish-
blue eyes and light straw-coloured hair.  Not unfrequently we
would pass on the track side small heaps of white ashes, with a
calcined bone or two among them.  These, we were told, were the
relics of burnt witches.  The caravan track we had now to travel
on leads along the right bank of the Kingani valley, overlooking
Uzegura, which, corresponding with Uzaramo, only on the other
side of the Kigani, extends northwards to the Pangani river, and
is intersected in the centre by the Wami river, of which more
hereafter.

Starting on a march with a large mixed caravan, consisting of 1
corporal and 9 privates, Hottentots--1 jemadar and 25 privates,
Beluchs--1 Arab Cafila Bashi and 75 freed slaves--1 Kirangozi, or
leader, and 100 negro porters--12 mules untrained, 3 donkeys, and
22 goats--one could hardly expect to find everybody in his place
at the proper time for breaking ground; but, at the same time, it
could hardly be expected that ten men, who had actually received
their bounty-money, and had sworn fidelity, should give one the
slip the very first day.  Such, however, was the case.  Ten out
of the thirty-six given by the Sultan ran away, because they
feared that the white men, whom they believed to be cannibals,
were only taking them into the interior to eat them; and one
pagazi, more honest than the freed men, deposited his pay upon
the ground, and ran away too.  Go we must, however; for one
desertion is sure to lead to more; and go we did.  Our procession
was in this fashion: The Kirangozi, with a load on his shoulder,
led the way, flag in hand, followed by the pagazis carrying
spears of bows and arrows in their hands, and bearing their share
of the baggage in the shape either of bolster-shaped loads of
cloth and beads covered with matting, each tied into the fork of
a three-pronged stick, or else coils of brass or copper wire tied
in even weights to each end of sticks which they laid on the
shoulder; then helter-skelter came the
Wanguana, carrying carbines in their hands, and boxes, bundles,
tents, cooking-pots--all the miscellaneous property--on their
heads; next the Hottentots, dragging the refractory mules laden
with ammunition-boxes, but very lightly, to save the animals for
the future; and, finally, Sheikh Said and the Beluch escort;
while the goats, sick women, and stragglers, brought up the rear. 
From first to last, some of the sick Hottentots rode the hospital
donkeys, allowing the negroes to tug their animals; for the
smallest ailment threw them broadcast on their backs.  In a
little while we cleared from the rich gardens, mango clumps, and
cocoa-but trees, which characterise the fertile coast-line. After
traversing fields of grass well clothed with green trees, we
arrived at the little settlement of Bomani, where camp was
formed, and everybody fairly appointed to his place.  The process
of camp-forming would be thus: Sheikh Said, with Bombay under
him, issues cloths to the men for rations at the rate of one-
fourth load a-day (about 15 lb.) amongst 165; the Hottentots cook
our dinners and their own, or else lie rolling on the ground
overcome with fatigue; the Beluchs are supposed to guard the
camp, but prefer gossip and brightening their arms.  Some men are
told off to look after the mules, donkeys, and goats, whilst out
grazing; the rest have to pack the kit, pitch our tents, cut
boughs for huts, and for fencing in the camp--a thing rarely
done, by-the-by.  After cooking, when the night has set it, the
everlasting dance begins, attended with clapping of hands and
jingling small bells strapped to the legs--the whole being
accompanied by a constant repetition of senseless words, which
stand in place of the song to the negroes; for song they have
none, being mentally incapacitated for musical composition,
though as timists they are not to be surpassed.

What remains to be told is the daily occupation of Captain Grant,
myself, and our private servants.  Beginning at the foot: Rahan,
a very peppery little negro, who had served in a British man-of-
war at the taking of Rangoon, was my valet; and Baraka, who had
been trained much in the same manner, but had seen engagements at
Multan, was Captain Grant's.  They both knew Hindustani; but
while Rahan's services at sea had been short, Baraka had served
nearly all his life with Englishmen--was the smartest and most
intelligent negro I ever saw--was invaluable to Colonel Rigby as
a detector of slave-traders, and enjoyed his confidence
completely--so much so, that he said, on parting with him, that
he did not know where he should be able to find another man to
fill his post.  These two men had now charge of our tents and
personal kit, while Baraka was considered the general of the
Wanguana forces, and Rahan a captain of ten.

My first occupation was to map the country.  This is done by
timing the rate of march with a watch, taking compass-bearings
along the road, or on any conspicuous marks--as, for instance,
hills off it --and by noting the watershed--in short, all
topographical objects. On arrival in camp every day came the
ascertaining, by boiling a thermometer, of the altitude of the
station above the sea-level; of the latitude of the station by
the meridian altitude of the star taken with a sextant; and of
the compass variation by azimuth. Occasionally there was the
fixing of certain crucial stations, at intervals of sixty miles
or so, by lunar observations, or distances of the moon either
from the sun or from certain given stars, for determining the
longitude, by which the original-timed course can be drawn out
with certainty on the map by proportion. Should a date be lost,
you can always discover it by taking a lunar distance and
comparing it with the Nautical Almanac, by noting the time when a
star passes the meridian if your watch is right, or by observing
the phases of the moon, or her rising or setting, as compared
with the Nautical Almanac.  The rest of my work, besides
sketching and keeping a diary, which was the most troublesome of
all, consisted in making geological and zoological collections.
With Captain Grant rested the botanical collections and
thermometrical registers.  He also boiled one of the
thermometers, kept the rain-gauge, and undertook the photography;
but after a time I sent the instruments back, considering this
work too severe for the climate, and he tried instead sketching
with watercolours-- the results of which form the chief part of
the illustrations in this book.  The rest of our day went in
breakfasting after the march was over--a pipe, to prepare us for
rummaging the fields and villages to discover their contents for
scientific purposes-- dinner close to sunset, and tea and pipe
before turning in at night.

A short stage brought us to Ikamburu, included in the district of
Nzasa, where there is another small village presided over by
Phanze Khombe la Simba, meaning Claw of Lion.  He, immediately
after our arrival, sent us a present of a basket of rice, value
one dollar, of course expecting a return--for absolute generosity
is a thing unknown to the negro.  Not being aware of the value of
the offering, I simply requested the Sheikh to give him four
yards of American sheeting, and thought no more about the matter,
until presently I found the cloth returned.  The "Sultan" could
not think of receiving such a paltry present from me, when on the
former journey he got so much; if he showed this cloth at home,
nobody would believe him, but would say he took much more and
concealed it from his family, wishing to keep all his goods to
himself.  I answered that my footing in the country had been paid
for on the last journey, and unless he would accept me as any
other common traveller, he had better walk away; but the little
Sheikh, a timid, though very gentlemanly creature, knowing the
man, and dreading the consequences of too high a tone, pleaded
for him, and proposed as a fitting hongo, one dubuani, one
sahari, and eight yards merikani, as the American sheeting is
called here.  This was pressed by the jemadar, and acceded to by
myself, as the very utmost I could afford. Lion's Claw, however,
would not accept it; it was too far below the mark of what he got
last time.  He therefore returned the cloths to the Sheikh, as he
could get no hearing from myself, and retreated in high dudgeon,
threatening the caravan with a view of his terrible presence on
the morrow.  Meanwhile the little Sheikh, who always carried a
sword fully two-thirds the length of himself, commenced casting
bullets for his double-barrelled rifle, ordered the Wanguana to
load their guns, and came wheedling up to me for one more cloth,
as it was no use hazarding the expedition's safety for four yards
of cloth.  This is a fair specimen of tax-gathering, within
twelve miles of the coast, by a native who claims the protection
of Zanzibar.  We shall soon see what they are further on.  The
result of experience is, that, ardent as the traveller is to see
the interior of Africa, no sooner has he dealings with the
natives, than his whole thoughts tend to discovering some road
where he won't be molested, or a short cut, but long march, to
get over the ground.

Quite undisturbed, we packed and marched as usual, and soon
passed Nzasa close to the river, which is only indicated by a
line of trees running through a rich alluvial valley.  We camped
at the little settlement of Kizoto, inhospitably presided over by
Phanze Mukia ya Nyani or Monkey's Tail, who no sooner heard of
our arrival than he sent a demand for his "rights."  One dubani
was issued, with orders than no one need approach me again,
unless he wanted to smell my powder.  Two taxes in five miles was
a thing unheard of; and I heard no more about the matter, until
Bombay in the evening told me how Sheikh Said, fearing awkward
consequences, had settled to give two dubuani, one being taken
from his own store.  Lion's Claw also turned up again, getting
his cloths of yesterday--one more being added from the Sheikh's
stores--and he was then advised to go off quietly, as I was a
fire-eater whom nobody dared approach after my orders had been
issued.  This was our third march in Uzaramo; we had scarcely
seen a man of the country, and had no excessive desire to do so.

Deflecting from the serpentine course of the Kingani a little, we
crossed a small bitter rivulet, and entered on the elevated
cultivation of Kiranga Ranga, under Phanze Mkungu-pare, a very
mild man, who, wishing to give no offence, begged for a trifling
present. He came in person, and his manner having pleased us, I
have him one sahari, four yards merikani, and eight yards kiniki,
which pleased our friend so much that he begged us to consider
his estate our own, even to the extent of administering his
justice, should any Mzaramo be detected stealing from us.  Our
target-practice, whilst instructing the men, astonished him not a
little, and produced an exclamation that, with so many guns, we
need fear nothing, go where we would.  From this place a good
view is obtained of Uzegura. Beyond the flat alluvial valley of
the Kingani, seven to eight miles broad, the land rises suddenly
to a table-land of no great height, on which trees grow in
profusion.  In fact it appeared, as far as the eye could reach,
the very counterpart of that where we stood, with the exception
of a small hill, very distant, called Phongue.

A very welcome packet of quinine and other medicines reached us
here from Rigby, who, hearing our complaints that the Hottentots
could only be kept alive by daily potions of brandy and quinine,
feared our supplies were not enough, and sent us more.

We could not get the Sultan's men to chum with the Wanguana
proper; they were shy, like wild animals--built their huts by
themselves-- and ate and talked by themselves, for they felt
themselves inferiors; and I had to nominate one of their number
to be their chief, answerable for the actions of the whole. 
Being in the position of "boots" to the camp, the tending of
goats fell to their lot.  Three goats were missing this evening,
which the goatherds could not account for, nor any of their men. 
Suspecting that they were hidden for a private feast, I told
their chief to inquire farther, and report.  The upshot was, that
the man was thrashed for intermeddling, and came back only with
his scars.  This was a nice sort of insubordination, which of
course could not be endured. The goatherd was pinioned and
brought to trial, for the double offence of losing the goats and
rough-handling his chief. The tricking scoundrel--on quietly
saying he could not be answerable for other men's actions if they
stole goats, and he could not recognise a man as his chief whom
the Sheikh, merely by a whim of his own, thought proper to
appoint--was condemned to be tied up for the night with the
prospect of a flogging in the morning. Seeing his fate, the
cunning vagabond said, "Now I do see it was by your orders the
chief was appointed, and not by a whim of Sheikh Said's; I will
obey him for the future;" and these words were hardly pronounced
than the three missing goats rushed like magic into camp, nobody
of course knowing where they came from.

Skirting along the margin of the rising ground overlooking the
river, through thick woods, cleared in places for cultivation, we
arrived at Thumba Lhere.  The chief here took a hongo of three
yards merikani and two yards kiniki without much fuss, for he had
no power.  The pagazis struck, and said they would not move from
this unless I gave them one fundo or ten necklaces of beads each
daily, in lieu of rations, as they were promised by Ladha on the
coast that I would do so as soon as they had made four marches. 
This was an obvious invention, concocted to try my generosity,
for I had given the kirangozi a goat, which is customary, to
"make the journey prosperous"--had suspended a dollar to his neck
in recognition of his office, and given him four yards merikani,
that he might have a grand feast with his brothers; while neither
the Sheikh, myself, nor any one else in the camp, had heard of
such a compact. With high words the matter dropped, African
fashion.

The pagazis would not start at the appointed time, hoping to
enforce their demands of last night; so we took the lead and
started, followed by the Wanguana.  Seeing this, the pagazis
cried out with one accord: "The master is gone, leaving the
responsibility of his property in our hands; let us follow, let
us follow, for verily he is our father;" and all came hurrying
after us.  Here the river, again making a bend, is lost to sight,
and we marched through large woods and cultivated fields to
Muhugue, observing, as we passed long, the ochreish colour of the
earth, and numerous pits which the copal-diggers had made
searching for their much-valued gum.  A large coast-bound
caravan, carrying ivory tusks with double-toned bells suspended
to them, ting-tonging as they moved along, was met on the way;
and as some of the pagazis composing it were men who had formerly
taken me to the Victoria N'yanza, warm recognitions passed
between us.  The water found here turned our brandy and tea as
black as ink.  The chief, being a man of small pretensions, took
only one sahari and four yards merikani.

Instead of going on to the next village we halted in this jungly
place for the day, that I might comply with the desire of the
Royal Geographical Society to inspect Muhonyera, and report if
there were really any indications of a "raised sea-beach" there,
such as their maps indicate.  An inspection brought me to the
conclusion that no mind but one prone to discovering sea-beaches
in the most unlikely places could have supposed for a moment that
one existed here. The form and appearance of the land are the
same as we have seen everywhere since leaving Bomani--a low
plateau subtended by a bank cut down by the Kingani river, and
nothing more.  There are no pebbles; the soil is rich reddish
loam, well covered with trees, bush, and grass, in which some
pigs and antelopes are found. From the top of this enbankment we
gain the first sight of the East Coast Range, due west of us,
represented by the high elephant's-back hill, Mkambaku, in
Usagara, which, joining Uraguru, stretches northwards across the
Pangani river to Usumbara and the Kilimandjaro, and southwards,
with a westerly deflection, across the Lufiji to Southern
N'yassa.  What course the range takes beyond those two extremes,
the rest of the world knows as well as I. Another conspicuous
landmark here is Kidunda (the little hill), which is the
southernmost point of a low chain of hills, also tending
northwards, and representing an advance-guard to the higher East
Coast Range in its rear.  At night, as we had no local "sultans"
to torment us, eight more men of sultan Majid's donation ran
away, and, adding injury to injury, took with them all our goats,
fifteen in number.  This was a sad loss.  We could keep ourselves
on guinea-fowls or green pigeons, doves, etc.; but the Hottentots
wanted nourishment much more than ourselves, and as their dinner
always consisted of what we left, "short-common