s" was the fate in
store for them.  The Wanguana, instead of regarding these poor
creatures as soldiers, treated them like children; and once, as a
diminutive Tot--the common name they go by--was exerting himself
to lift his pack and place it on his mule, a fine Herculean
Mguana stepped up behind, grasped Tot, pack and all, in his
muscular arms, lifted the whole over his head, paraded the Tot
about, struggling for release, and put him down amidst the
laughter of the camp, then saddled his mule and patted him on the
back.

After sending a party of Beluch to track down the deserters and
goats, in which they were not successful, we passed through the
village of Sagesera, and camped one mile beyond, close to the
river. Phanze Kirongo (which means Mr Pit) here paid us his
respects, with a presentation of rice.  In return he received
four yards merikani and one dubuani, which Bombay settled, as the
little Sheikh, ever done by the sultans, pleaded indisposition,
to avoid the double fire he was always subjected to on these
occasions, by the sultans grasping on the one side, and my
resisting on the other; for I relied on my strength, and thought
it very inadvisable to be generous with my cloth to the prejudice
of future travellers, by decreasing the value of merchandise, and
increasing proportionately the expectations of these negro
chiefs.  From the top of the bank bordering on the valley, a good
view was obtainable of the Uraguru hills, and the top of a very
distant cone to its northward; but I could see no signs of any
river joining the kingani on its left, though on the former
expedition I heard that the Mukondokua river, which was met with
in Usagara, joined the Kingani close to Sagesera, and actually
formed its largest head branch. Neither could Mr Pit inform me
what became of the Mukondokua, as the Wazaramo are not given to
travelling.  He had heard of it from the traders, but only knew
himself of one river beside the Kingani. It was called Wami in
Uegura, and mouths at Utondue, between the ports of Whindi and
Saadani.  To try and check the desertions of Sultan Majid's men,
I advised--ordering was of no use--that their camp should be
broken up, and they should be amalgamated with the Wanguana; but
it was found that the two would not mix.  In fact, the whole
native camp consisted of so many clubs of two, four, six, or ten
men, who originally belonged to one village or one master, or
were united by some other family tie which they preferred keeping
intact; so they cooked together, ate together, slept together,
and sometimes mutinied together.  The amalgamation having failed,
I wrote some emanicipation tickets, called the Sultan's men all
up together, selected the best, gave them these tickets,
announced that their pay and all rewards would be placed for the
future on the same conditions as those of the Wanguana, and as
soon as I saw any signs of improvement in the rest, they would
all be treated in the same manner; but should they desert, they
would find my arm long enough to arrest them on the coast and put
them into prison.

During this march we crossed three deep nullahs which drain the
Uzaramo plateau, and arrived at the Makutaniro, or junction of
this line with those of Mboamaji and Konduchi, which traverse
central Uzaramo, and which, on my former return journey, I went
down. The gum-copal diggings here cease.  The Dum palm is left
behind; the large rich green-leaved trees of the low plateau give
place to the mimosa; and now, having ascended the greater decline
of the Kingani river, instead of being confined by a bank, we
found ourselves on flat open-park land, where antelopes roam at
large, buffalo and zebra are sometimes met with, and guinea-fowl
are numerous.  The water for the camp is found in the river, but
supplies of grain come from the village of Kipora farther on.

A march through the park took us to a camp by a pond, from which,
by crossing the Kingani, rice and provisions for the men were
obtained on the opposite bank.  One can seldom afford to follow
wild animals on the line of march, otherwise we might have bagged
some antelopes to-day, which, scared by the interminable singing,
shouting, bell-jingling, horn-blowing, and other such merry
noises of the moving caravan, could be seen disappearing in the
distance.

Leaving the park, we now entered the riches part of Uzaramo,
affording crops as fine as any part of India.  Here it was, in
the district of Dege la Mhora, that the first expedition to this
country, guided by a Frenchman, M. Maizan, came to a fatal
termination, that gentleman having been barbarously murdered by
the sub-chief Hembe.  The cause of the affair was distinctly
explained to me by Hembe himself, who, with his cousin Darunga,
came to call upon me, presuming, as he was not maltreated by the
last expedition, that the matter would now be forgotten.  The two
men were very great friends of the little Sheikh, and as a
present was expected, which I should have to pay, we all talked
cheerfully and confidentially, bringing in the fate of Maizan for
no other reason than to satisfy curiosity.  Hembe, who lives in
the centre of an almost impenetrable thicket, confessed that he
was the murderer, but said the fault did not rest with him, as he
merely carried out the instructions of his father, Mzungera, who,
a Diwan on the coast, sent him a letter directing his actions. 
Thus it is proved that the plot against Maizan was concocted on
the coast by the Arab merchants--most likely from the same motive
which has induced one rival merchant to kill another as the best
means of checking rivalry or competition. When Arabs--and they
are the only class of people who would do such a deed--found a
European going into the very middle of their secret trading-
places, where such large profits were to be obtained, they would
never suppose that the scientific Maizan went for any other
purpose than to pry into their ivory stores, bring others into
the field after him, and destroy their monopoly.  The Sultan of
Zanzibar, in those days, was our old ally Said Said, commonly
called the Emam of Muscat; and our Consul, Colonel Hamerton, had
been M. Maizan's host as long as he lived upon the coast.  Both
the Emam and Consul were desirous of seeing the country surveyed,
and did everything in their power to assist Maizan, the former
even appointing the Indian Musa to conduct him safely as far as
Unyamuezi; but their power was not found sufficient to damp the
raging fire of jealousy in the ivory-trader's heart.  Musa
commenced the journey with Maizan, and they travelled together a
march or two, when one of Maizan's domestic establishment fell
sick and stopped his progress.  Musa remained with him eight or
ten days, to his own loss in trade and expense in keeping up a
large establishment, and then they parted by mutual consent,
Maizan thinking himself quite strong enough to take care of
himself.  This separation was, I believe, poor Maizan's death-
blow.  His power, on the Emam's side, went with Musa's going, and
left the Arabs free to carry out their wicked wills.

The presents I had to give here were one sahari and eight yards
merikani to Hembe, and the same to Darunga, for which they gave a
return in grain.  Still following close to the river--which,
unfortunately, is so enshrouded with thick bush that we could
seldom see it--a few of the last villages in Uzaramo were passed.
Here antelopes reappear amongst the tall mimosa, but we let them
alone in prosecution of the survey, and finally encamped opposite
the little hill of Kidunda, which lying on the left bank of the
Kingani, stretches north, a little east, into Uzegura.  The hill
crops out through pisolitic limestone, in which marine fossils
were observable.  It would be interesting to ascertain whether
this lime formation extends down the east coast of Africa from
the Somali country, where also, on my first expedition, I found
marine shells in the limestone, especially as a vast continuous
band of limestone is known to extend from the Tagus, through
Egypt and the Somali country, to the Burrumputra.  To obtain food
it was necessary here to ferry the river and purchase from the
Wazaramo, who, from fear of the passing caravans, had left their
own bank and formed a settlement immediately under this pretty
little hill--rendered all the more enchanting to our eyes, as it
was the first we had met since leaving the sea-coast.  The Diwan,
or head man, was a very civil creature; he presented us freely
with two fine goats--a thing at that time we were very much in
want of--and took, in return, without any comments, one dubani
and eight yards merikani.

The next day, as we had no further need of our Beluch escort, a
halt was made to enable me to draw up a "Progress Report," and
pack all the specimens of natural history collected on the way,
for the Royal Geographical Society.  Captain Grant, taking
advantage of the spare time, killed for the larder two buck
antelopes, and the Tots brought in, in high excited triumph, a
famous pig.

This march, which declines from the Kingani a little, leads
through rolling, jungly ground, full of game, to the tributary
stream Mgeta. It is fordable in the dry season, but has to be
bridged by throwing a tree across it in the wet one.  Rising in
the Usagara hills to the west of the hog-backed Mkambaku, this
branch intersects the province of Ukhutu in the centre, and
circles round until it unites with the Kingani about four miles
north of the ford.  Where the Kingani itself rises, I never could
find out; though I have heard that its sources lies in a gurgling
spring on the eastern face of the Mkambaku, by which account the
Mgeta is made the longer branch of the two.




                          Chapter III



                            Usagara

Nature of the Country--Resumption of the March--A Hunt--Bombay
and Baraka--The Slave-Hunters--The Ivory-Merchants--Collection of
Natural-History Specimens--A Frightened Village--Tracking a Mule.

Under U-Sagara, or, as it might be interpreted, U-sa-Gara--
country of Gara--is included all the country lying between the
bifurcation of the Kingani and Mgeta rivers east, and Ugogo, the
first country on the interior plateau west,--a distance of a
hundred miles. On the north it is bounded by the Mukondokua, or
upper course of the Wami river and on the south by the Ruaha, or
northern great branch of the Lufiji river.  It forms a link of
the great East Coast Range; but though it is generally
comprehended under the single name Usagara, many sub-tribes
occupy and apply their own names to portions of it; as, for
instance, the people on whose ground we now stood at the foot of
the hills, are Wa-Khutu, and their possessions consequently are
U-Khutu, which is by far the best producing land hitherto alluded
to since leaving the sea-coast line.  Our ascent by the river,
though quite imperceptible to the eye, has been 500 feet. From
this level the range before us rises in some places to 5000 to
6000 feet, not as one grand mountain, but in two detached lines,
lying at an angle of 45 degrees from N.E. to S.W., and separated
one from the other by elevated valleys, tables, and crab-claw
spurs of hill which incline towards the flanking rivers.  The
whole having been thrown up by volcanic action, is based on a
strong foundation of granite and other igneous rocks, which are
exposed in many places in the shape of massive blocks; otherwise
the hill-range is covered in the upper part with sandstone, and
in the bottoms with alluvial clay.  This is the superficial
configuration of the land as it strikes the eye; but, knowing the
elevation of the interior plateau to be only 2500 feet above the
sea immediately on the western flank of these hills, whilst the
breath of the chain is 100 miles, the mean slope of incline of
the basal surface must be on a gradual rise of twenty feet per
mile.  The hill tops and sides, where not cultivated, are well
covered with bush and small trees, amongst which the bamboo is
conspicuous; whilst the bottoms, having a soil deeper and richer,
produce fine large fig-trees of exceeding beauty, the huge
calabash, and a variety of other trees.  Here, in certain places
where water is obtainable throughout the year, and wars, or
slave-hunts more properly speaking, do not disturb the industry
of the people, cultivation thrives surprisingly; but such a boon
is rarely granted them.  It is in consequence of these
constantly- recurring troubles that the majority of the Wasagara
villages are built on hill-spurs, where the people can the better
resist attack, or, failing, disperse and hide effectually.  The
normal habitation is the small conical hut of grass.  These
compose villages, varying in number according to the influence of
their head men.  There are, however, a few mud villages on the
table-lands, each built in a large irregular square of chambers
with a hollow yard in the centre, known as tembe.

As to the people of these uplands, poor, meagre-looking wretches,
they contrast unfavourably with the lowlanders on both sides of
them.  Dingy in colour, spiritless, shy, and timid, they invite
attack in a country where every human being has a market value,
and are little seen by the passing caravan.  In habits they are
semi-pastoral agriculturalists, and would be useful members of
society were they left alone to cultivate their own possessions,
rich and beautiful by nature, but poor and desolate by force of
circumstance.  Some of the men can afford a cloth, but the
greater part wear an article which I can only describe as a grass
kilt. In one or two places throughout the passage of these hills
a caravan may be taxed, but if so, only to a small amount; the
villagers more frequently fly to the hill-tops as soon as the
noise of the advancing caravan is heard, and no persuasions will
bring them down again, so much ground have they, from previous
experience, to fear treachery.  It is such sad sights, and the
obvious want of peace and prosperity, that weary the traveller,
and make him every think of pushing on to his journey's end from
the instant he enters Africa until he quits the country.

Knowing by old experience that the beautiful green park in the
fork of these rivers abounded in game of great variety and in
vast herds, where no men are ever seen except some savage hunters
sitting in the trees with poisoned arrows, or watching their
snares and pitfalls, I had all along determined on a hunt myself,
to feed and cheer the men, and also to collect some specimens for
the home museums. In the first object we succeeded well, as "the
bags" we made counted two brindled gnu, four water-boc, one
pallah-boc, and one pig,-- enough to feed abundantly the whole
camp round.  The feast was all the better relished as the men
knew well that no Arab master would have given them what he could
sell; for if a slave shot game, the animals would be the
master's, to be sold bit by bit among the porters, and
compensated from the proceeds of their pay.  In the variety and
number of our game we were disappointed, partly because so many
wounded got away, and partly because we could not find what we
knew the park to contain, in addition to what we killed--namely,
elephants, rhinoceros, giraffes, buffaloes, zebra, and many
varieties of antelopes, besides lions and hyenas.  In fact, "the
park," as well as all the adjacent land at the foot of the hills,
is worth thinking of, with a view to a sporting tour as well as
scientific investigation.

A circumstance arose here, which, insignificant though it
appeared, is worth noting, to show how careful one must be in
understanding and dealing with negro servants.  Quite
unaccountably to myself, the general of my Wanguana, Baraka,
after showing much discontent with his position as head of
Captain Grant's establishment, became so insolent, that it was
necessary to displace him, and leave him nothing to do but look
after the men.  This promoted Frij, who enjoyed his rise as much
as Baraka, if his profession was to be believed, enjoyed his
removal from that office.  Though he spoke in this manner, still
I knew that there was something rankling in his mind which
depressed his spirits as long as he remained with us, though what
it was I could not comprehend, nor did I fully understand it till
months afterwards.  It was ambition, which was fast making a
fiend of him; and had I known it, he would, and with great
advantage too, have been dismissed upon the spot.  The facts were
these: He was exceedingly clever, and he knew it.  His command
over men was surprising.  At Zanzibar he was the Consul's right-
hand man: he ranked above Bombay in the consular boat's crew, and
became a terror even to the Banyans who kept slaves.  He seemed,
in fact, in his own opinion, to have imbibed all the power of the
British Consul who had instructed him.  Such a man was an element
of discord in our peaceful caravan.  He was far too big-minded
for the sphere which he occupied; and my surprise now is that he
ever took service, knowing what he should, at the time of
enlistment, have expected, that no man would be degraded to make
room for him.  But this was evidently what he had expected,
though he dared not say it.  He was jealous of Bombay, because he
thought his position over the money department was superior to
his own over the men; and he had seen Bombay, on one occasion,
pay a tax in Uzaramo--a transaction which would give him
consequence with the native chiefs.  Of Sheikh Said he was
equally jealous, for a like reason; and his jealousy increased
the more that I found it necessary to censure the timidity of
this otherwise worthy little man.  Baraka thought, in his
conceit, that he could have done all things better, and gained
signal fame, had he been created chief.  Perhaps he thought he
had gained the first step towards this exalted rank, and hence
his appearing very happy for this time.  I could not see through
so deep a scheme and only hoped that he would shortly forget, in
the changes of the marching life, those beautiful wives he had
left behind him, which Bombay in his generosity tried to persuade
me was the cause of his mental distraction.

Our halt at the ford here was cut short by the increasing
sickness of the Hottentots, and the painful fact that Captain
Grant was seized with fever.[FN#6]  We had to change camp to the
little village of Kiruru, where, as rice was grown--an article
not to be procured again on this side of Unyamuezi--we stopped a
day to lay in supplies of this most valuable of all travelling
food.  Here I obtained the most consistent accounts of the river
system which, within five days' journey, trends through Uzegura;
and I concluded, from what I heard, that there is no doubt of the
Mukondokua and Wami rivers being one and the same stream.  My
informants were the natives of the settlement, and they all
concurred in saying that the Kingani above the junction is called
the Rufu, meaning the parent stream.  Beyond it, following under
the line of the hills, at one day's journey distant, there is a
smaller river called Msonge. At an equal distance beyond it,
another of the same size is known as Lungerengeri; and a fourth
river is the Wami, which mouths in the sea at Utondue, between
the ports of Whindi and Saadami.  In former years, the ivory-
merchants, ever seeking for an easy road for their trade, and
knowing they would have no hills to climb if they could only gain
a clear passage by this river from the interior plateau to the
sea, made friends with the native chiefs of Uzegura, and
succeeded in establishing it as a thoroughfare.  Avarice,
however, that fatal enemy to the negro chiefs, made them
overreach themselves by exorbitant demands of taxes.  Then
followed contests for the right of appropriating the taxes, and
the whole ended in the closing of the road, which both parties
were equally anxious to keep open for their mutual gain.  This
foolish disruption having at first only lasted for a while, the
road was again opened and again closed, for the merchants wanted
an easy passage, and the native chiefs desired cloths.  But it
was shut again; and now we heard of its being for a third time
opened, with what success the future only can determine--for
experience WILL not teach the negro, who thinks only for the
moment.  Had they only sense to see, and patience to wait, the
whole trade of the interior would inevitably pass through their
country instead of Uzaramo; and instead of being poor in cloths,
they would be rich and well dressed like their neighbours.  But
the curse of Noah sticks to these his grandchildren by Ham, and
no remedy that has yet been found will relieve them.  They
require a government like ours in India; and without it, the
slave trade will wipe them off the face of the earth.

Now leaving the open parks of pretty acacias, we followed up the
Mgazi branch of the Mgeta, traversed large tree-jungles, where
the tall palm is conspicuous, and drew up under the lumpy
Mkambaku, to find a residence for the day.  Here an Arab
merchant, Khamis, bound for Zanzibar, obliged us by agreeing for
a few dollars to convey our recent spoils in natural history to
the coast.

My plans for the present were to reach Zungomero as soon as
possible, as a few days' halt would be required there to fix the
longitude of the eastern flank of the East Coast Range by
astronomical observation; but on ordering the morning's march,
the porters--too well fed and lazy--thought our marching-rate
much too severe, and resolutely refused to move.  They ought to
have made ten miles a-day, but preferred doing five.  Argument
was useless, and I was reluctant to apply the stick, as the Arabs
would have done when they saw their porters trifling with their
pockets. Determining, however, not to be frustrated in this
puerile manner, I ordered the bugler to sound the march, and
started with the mules and coast-men, trusting to Sheikh and
Baraka to bring on the Wanyamuezi as soon as they could move
them.  The same day we crossed the Mgazi where we found several
Wakhutu spearing fish in the muddy hovers of its banks.

We slept under a tree, and this morning found a comfortable
residence under the eaves of a capacious hut.  The Wanyamuezi
porters next came in at their own time, and proved to us how
little worth are orders in a land where every man, in his own
opinion, is a lord, and no laws prevail.  Zungomero, bisected by
the Mgeta, lies on flat ground, in a very pretty amphitheatre of
hills, S. lat. 7§ 26' 53", and E. long. 37§ 36' 45".  It is
extremely fertile, and very populous, affording everything that
man can wish, even to the cocoa and papwa fruits; but the slave-
trade has almost depopulated it, and turned its once flourishing
gardens into jungles.  As I have already said, the people who
possess these lands are cowardly by nature, and that is the
reason why they are so much oppressed.  The Wasuahili, taking
advantage of their timidity, flock here in numbers to live upon
the fruits of their labours. The merchants on the coast, too,
though prohibited by their Sultan from interfering with the
natural course of trade, send their hungry slaves, as touters, to
entice all approaching caravans to trade with their particular
ports, authorising the touters to pay such premiums as may be
necessary for the purpose.  Where they came from we could not
ascertain; but during our residence, a large party of the
Wasuahili marched past, bound for the coast, with one hundred
head of cattle, fifty slaves in chains, and as many goats.  Halts
always end disastrously in Africa, giving men time for mischief;-
-and here was an example of it.  During the target-practice,
which was always instituted on such occasions to give confidence
to our men, the little pepper-box Rahan, my head valet,
challenged a comrade to a duel with carbines.  Being stopped by
those around him, he vented his wrath in terrible oaths, and
swung about his arms, until his gun accidentally went off, and
blew his middle finger off.

Baraka next, with a kind of natural influence of affinity when a
row is commenced, made himself so offensive to Bombay, as to send
him running to me so agitated with excitement that I thought him
drunk. He seized my hands, cried, and implored me to turn him
off.  What could this mean?  I could not divine; neither could he
explain, further than that he had come to a determination that I
must send either him or Baraka to the right-about; and his first
idea was that he, and not Baraka, should be the victim.  Baraka's
jealousy about his position had not struck me yet.  I called them
both together and asked what quarrel they had, but could not
extract the truth. Baraka protested that he had never given,
either by word or deed, the slightest cause of rupture; he only
desired the prosperity of the march, and that peace should reign
throughout the camp; but Bombay was suspicious of him, and
malignantly abused him, for what reason Baraka could not tell. 
When I spoke of this to Bombay, like a bird fascinated by the eye
of a viper, he shrank before the slippery tongue of his opponent,
and could only say, "No, Sahib--oh no, that is not it; you had
better turn me off, for his tongue is so long, and mine so short,
you never will believe me."  I tried to make them friends, hoping
it was merely a passing ill-wind which would soon blow over; but
before long the two disputants were tonguing it again, and I
distinctly heard Bombay ordering Baraka out of camp as he could
not keep from intermeddling, saying, which was true, he had
invited him to join the expedition, that his knowledge of
Hindustani might be useful to us; he was not wanted for any other
purpose, and unless he was satisfied with doing that alone, we
would get on much better without him.  To this provocation Baraka
mildly made the retort, "Pray don't put yourself in a passion,
nobody is hurting you, it is all in your own heart, which is full
of suspicions and jealousy without the slightest cause."

This complicated matters more than ever.  I knew Bombay to be a
generous, honest man, entitled by his former services to be in
the position he was now holding as fundi, or supervisor in the
camp. Baraka, who never would have joined the expedition
excepting through his invitation, was indebted to him for the
rank he now enjoyed-- a command over seventy men, a duty in which
he might have distinguished himself as a most useful accessory to
the camp. Again I called the two together, and begged them to act
in harmony like brothers, noticing that there was no cause for
entertaining jealousy on either side, as every order rested with
myself to reward for merit or to punish.  The relative position
in the camp was like that of the senior officers in India, Bombay
representing the Mulki lord, or Governor-General, and Baraka the
Jungi lord, or Commander- in-Chief.  To the influence of this
distinguished comparison they both gave way, acknowledging myself
their judge, and both protesting that they wished to serve in
peace and quietness for the benefit of the march.

Zungomero is a terminus or junction of two roads leading to the
interior--one, the northern, crossing over the Goma Pass, and
trenching on the Mukondokua river, and the other crossing over
the Mabruki Pass, and edging on the Ruaha river.  They both unite
again at Ugogi, the western terminus on the present great
Unyamuezi line.  On the former expedition I went by the northern
line and returned by the southern, finding both equally easy,
and, indeed, neither is worthy of special and permanent
preference.  In fact, every season makes a difference in the
supply of water and provisions; and with every year, owing to
incessant wars, or rather slave-hunts, the habitations of the
wretched inhabitants become constantly changed--generally
speaking, for the worse.  Our first and last object, therefore,
as might be supposed, from knowing these circumstances, was to
ascertain, before mounting the hill-range, which route would
afford us the best facilities for a speedy march now.  No one,
however, could or would advise us.  The whole country on ahead,
especially Ugogo, was oppressed by drought and famine. To avoid
this latter country, then, we selected the southern route, as by
doing so it was hoped we might follow the course of the Ruaha
river from Maroro to Usenga and Usanga, and thence strike across
to Unyanyembe, sweeping clear of Ugogo.

With this determination, after despatching a third set of
specimens, consisting of large game animals, birds, snakes,
insects, land and freshwater shells, and a few rock specimens, of
which one was fossiliferous, we turned southwards, penetrating
the forests which lie between the greater range and the little
outlying one.  At the foot of this is the Maji ya Wheta, a hot,
deep-seated spring of fresh water, which bubbles up through many
apertures in a large dome-shaped heap of soft lime--an
accumulation obviously thrown up by the force of the spring, as
the rocks on either side of it are of igneous character.  We
arrived at the deserted village of Kirengue. This was not an easy
go-ahead march, for the halt had disaffected both men and mules. 
Three of the former bolted, leaving their loads upon the ground;
and on the line of march, one of the mules, a full-conditioned
animal, gave up the ghost after an eighteen hours' sickness. 
What his disease was I never could ascertain; but as all the
remaining animals died afterwards much in the same manner, I may
state for once and for all, that these attacks commenced with
general swelling, at first on the face, then down the neck, along
the belly and down the legs.  It proved so obstinate that fire
had no effect upon it; and although we cut off the tails of some
to relieve them by bleeding, still they died.

In former days Kirengue was inhabited, and we reasonably hoped to
find some supplies for the jungly march before us.  But we had
calculated without our host, for the slave-hunters had driven
every vestige of humanity away; and now, as we were delayed by
our three loads behind, there was nothing left but to send back
and purchase more grain.  Such was one of the many days frittered
away in do-nothingness.

This day, all together again, we rose the first spurs of the
well-wooded Usagara hills, amongst which the familiar bamboo was
plentiful, and at night we bivouacked in the jungle.

Rising betimes in the morning, and starting with a good will, we
soon reached the first settlements of Mbuiga, from which could be
seen a curious blue mountain, standing up like a giant
overlooking all the rest of the hills.  The scenery here formed a
strong and very pleasing contrast to any we had seen since
leaving the coast. Emigrant Waziraha, who had been driven from
their homes across the Kingani river by the slave-hunters, had
taken possession of the place, and disposed their little conical-
hut villages on the heights of the hill-spurs in such a
picturesque manner, that one could not help hoping they would
here at least be allowed to rest in peace and quietness.  The
valleys, watered by little brooks, are far richer, and even
prettier, than the high lands above, being lined with fine trees
and evergreen shrubs; while the general state of prosperity was
such, that the people could afford, even at this late season of
the year, to turn their corn into malt to brew beer for sale; and
goats and fowls were plentiful in the market.

Passing by the old village of Mbuiga, which I occupied on my
former expedition, we entered some huts on the western flank of
the Mbuiga district; and here, finding a coast-man, a great
friend of the little sheikh's, willing to take back to Zanzibar
anything we might give him, a halt was made, and I drew up my
reports.  I then consigned to his charge three of the most sickly
of the Hottentots in a deplorable condition--one of the mules,
that they might ride by turns--and all the specimens that had
been collected.  With regret I also sent back the camera; because
I saw, had I allowed my companion to keep working it, the heat he
was subjected to in the little tent whilst preparing and fixing
his plates would very soon have killed him.  The number of
guinea-fowl seen here was most surprising.

A little lighter and much more comfortable for the good riddance
of those grumbling "Tots," we worked up to and soon breasted the
stiff ascent of the Mabruki Pass, which we surmounted without
much difficult.  This concluded the first range of these Usagara
hills; and once over, we dropped down to the elevated valley of
Makata, where we halted two days to shoot.  As a travelling Arab
informed me that the whole of the Maroro district had been laid
waste by the marauding Wahehe, I changed our plans again, and
directed our attention to a middle and entirely new line, which
in the end would lead us to Ugogi.  The first and only giraffe
killed upon the journey was here shot by Grant, with a little 40-
gauge Lancaster rifle, at 200 yards' distance.  Some smaller
animals were killed; but I wasted all my time in fruitlessly
stalking some wounded striped eland--magnificent animals, as
large as Delhi oxen--and some other animals, of which I wounded
three, about the size of hartebeest, and much their shape, only
cream-coloured, with a conspicuous black spot in the centre of
each flank.  The eland may probably be the animal first mentioned
by Livingstone, but the other animal is not known.

Though reluctant to leave a place where such rare animals were to
be found, the fear of remaining longer on the road induced us to
leave Kikobogo, and at a good stride we crossed the flat valley
of Makata, and ascended the higher lands beyond, where we no
sooner arrived than we met the last down trader from Unyamuezi,
well known to all my men as the great Mamba or Crocodile.  Mamba,
dressed in a dirty Arab gown, with coronet of lion's nails
decorating a thread-bare cutch cap, greeted us with all the
dignity of a savage potentate surrounded by his staff of half-
naked officials.  As usual, he had been the last to leave the
Unyamuezi, and so purchased all his stock of ivory at a cheap
rate, there being no competitors left to raise the value of that
commodity; but his journey had been a very trying one.  With a
party, at his own estimate, of two thousand souls-- we did not
see anything like that number--he had come from Ugogo to this, by
his own confession, living on the products of the jungle, and by
boiling down the skin aprons of his porters occasionally for a
soup.  Famines were raging throughout the land, and the Arabs
preceding him had so harried the country, that every village was
deserted.  On hearing our intention to march upon the direct
line, he frankly said he thought we should never get through for
my men could not travel as he had done, and therefore he advised
our deflecting northwards from New Mbumi to join the track
leading from Rumuma to Ugogi.  This was a sad disappointment;
but, rather than risk a failure, I resolved to follow his advice.

After reaching the elevated ground, we marched over rolling tops,
covered with small trees and a rich variety of pretty bulbs, and
reached the habitations of Muhanda, where we no sooner appeared
than the poor villagers, accustomed only to rough handling,
immediately dispersed in the jungles.  By dint of persuasion,
however, we induced them to sell us provisions, though at a
monstrous rate, such as no merchant could have afforded; and
having spent the night quietly, we proceeded on to the upper
courses of the M'yombo river, which trends its way northwards to
the Mukondokua river.  The scenery was most interesting, with
every variety of hill, roll, plateau, and ravine, wild and
prettily wooded; but we saw nothing of the people.  Like
frightened rats, as soon as they caught the sound of our
advancing march, they buried themselves in the jungles, carrying
off their grain with them.  Foraging parties, of necessity, were
sent out as soon as the camp was pitched, with cloth for
purchases, and strict orders not to use force; the upshot of
which was, that my people got nothing but a few arrows fired at
them by the lurking villagers, and I was abused for my
squeamishness.  Moreover, the villagers, emboldened by my lenity,
vauntingly declared they would attack the camp by night, as they
could only recognise in us such men as plunder their houses and
steal their children.  This caused a certain amount of alarm
among my men, which induced them to run up a stiff bush-fence
round the camp, and kept them talking all night.

This morning we marched on as usual, with one of the Hottentots
lashed on a donkey; for the wretched creature, after lying in the
sun asleep, became so sickly that he could not move or do
anything for himself, and nobody would do anything for him.  The
march was a long one, but under ordinary circumstances would have
been very interesting, for we passed an immense lagoon, where
hippopotami were snorting as if they invited an attack.  In the
larger tree-jungles the traces of elephants, buffaloes,
rhinoceros, and antelopes were very numerous; while a rich
variety of small birds, as often happened, made me wish I had
come on a shooting rather than on a long exploring expedition. 
Towards sunset we arrived at New Mbimi, a very pretty and fertile
place, lying at the foot of a cluster of steep hills, and pitched
camp for three days to lay in supplies for ten, as this was
reported to be the only place where we could buy corn until we
reached Ugogo, a span of 140 miles.  Mr Mbumi, the chief of the
place, a very affable negro, at once took us by the hand, and
said he would do anything we desired, for he had often been to
Zanzibar.  He knew that the English were the ruling power in that
land, and that they were opposed to slavery, the terrible effects
of which had led to his abandoning Old Mbumi, on the banks of the
Mukondokua river, and rising here.

The sick Hottentot died here, and we buried him with Christian
honours.  As his comrades said, he died because he had determined
to die,--an instance of that obstinate fatalism in their mulish
temperament which no kind words or threats can cure.  This
terrible catastrophe made me wish to send all the remaining
Hottentots back to Zanzibar; but as they all preferred serving
with me to returning to duty at the Cape, I selected two of the
MOST sickly, put them under Tabib, one of Rigby's old servants,
and told him to remain with them at Mbumi until such time as he
might find some party proceeding to the coasts; and, in the
meanwhile, for board and lodgings I have Mbumi beads and cloth. 
The prices of provisions here being a good specimen of what one
has to pay at this season of the year, I give a short list of
them:--sixteen rations corn, two yards cloth; three fowls, two
yards cloth; one goat, twenty yards cloth; one cow, forty yards
cloth,--the cloth being common American sheeting.  Before we left
Mbumi, a party of forty men and women of the Waquiva tribe,
pressed by famine, were driven there to purchase food.  The same
tribe had, however killed many of Mbumi's subjects not long
since, and therefore, in African revenge, the chief seized them
all, saying he would send them off for sale to Zanzibar market
unless they could give a legitimate reason for the cruelty they
had committed.  These Waquiva, I was given to understand,
occupied the steep hills surrounding this place. They were a
squalid-looking set, like the generality of the inhabitants of
this mountainous region.

This march led us over a high hill to the Mdunhwi river, another
tributary to the Mukondokua.  It is all clad in the upper regions
with the slender pole-trees which characterise these hills,
intermingled with bamboo; but the bottoms are characterised by a
fine growth of fig-trees of great variety along with high
grasses; whilst near the villages were found good gardens of
plantains, and numerous Palmyra trees.  The rainy season being
not far off, the villagers were busy in burning rubble and
breaking their ground. Within their reach everywhere is the
sarsaparilla vine, but growing as a weed, for they know nothing
of its value.

Rising up from the deep valley of Mdunhwi we had to cross another
high ridge before descending to the also deep valley of Chongue,
as picturesque a country as the middle heights of the Himalayas,
dotted on the ridges and spur-slopes by numerous small conical-
hut villages; but all so poor that we could not, had we wanted
it, have purchased provisions for a day's consumption.

Leaving this valley, we rose to the table of Manyovi, overhung
with much higher hills, looking, according to the accounts of our
Hottentots, as they eyed the fine herds of cattle grazing on the
slopes, so like the range in Kafraria, that they formed their
expectations accordingly, and appeared, for the first time since
leaving the coast, happy at the prospect before them, little
dreaming that such rich places were seldom to be met with.  The
Wanyamuezi porters even thought they had found a paradise, and
forthwith threw down their loads as the villagers came to offer
them grain for sale; so that, had I not had the Wanguana a little
under control, we should not have completed our distance that
day, and so reached Manyonge, which reminded me, by its ugliness,
of the sterile Somali land.  Proceeding through the semi-desert
rolling table-land--in one place occupied by men who build their
villages in large open squares of flat-topped mud huts, which,
when I have occasion to refer to them in future, I shall call by
their native name tembe--we could see on the right hand the
massive mountains overhanging the Mukondokua river, to the front
the western chain of these hills, and to the left the high crab-
claw shaped ridge, which, extending from the western chain,
circles round conspicuously above the swelling knolls which lie
between the two main rocky ridges.  Contorted green thorn-trees,
"elephant-foot" stumps, and aloes, seem to thrive best here, by
their very nature indicating what the country is, a poor stony
land.  Our camp was pitched by the river Rumuma, where, sheltered
from the winds, and enriched by alluvial soil, there ought to
have been no scarcity; but still the villagers had nothing to
sell.

On we went again to Marenga Mkhaili, the "Salt Water," to
breakfast, and camped in the crooked green thorns by night,
carrying water on for our supper.  This kind of travelling--
forced marches--hard as it may appear, was what we liked best,
for we felt that we were shortening the journey, and in doing so,
shortening the risks of failure by disease, by war, by famine,
and by mutiny.  We had here no grasping chiefs to detain us for
presents, nor had our men time to become irritable and truculent,
concoct devices for stopping the way, or fight amongst
themselves.

On again, and at last we arrived at the foot of the western
chain; but not all together.  Some porters, overcome by heat and
thirst, lay scattered along the road, while the corporal of the
Hottentots allowed his mule to stray from him, never dreaming the
animal would travel far from his comrades, and, in following
after him, was led such a long way into the bush, that my men
became alarmed for his safety, knowing as they did that the
"savages" were out living like monkeys on the calabash fruit, and
looking out for any windfalls, such as stragglers worth
plundering, that might come in their way. At first the Wanguana
attempted to track down the corporal; but finding he would not
answer their repeated shots, and fearful for their own safety,
they came into camp and reported the case. Losing no time, I
ordered twenty men, armed with carbines, to carry water for the
distressed porters, and bring the corporal back as soon as
possible.  They all marched off, as they always do on such
exploits, in high good-humour with themselves for the valour
which they intended to show; and in the evening came in, firing
their guns in the most reckless manner, beaming with delight; for
they had the corporal in tow, two men and two women captives, and
a spear as a trophy.  Then in high impatience, all in a breath,
they began a recital of the great day's work.  The corporal had
followed on the spoor of the mule, occasionally finding some of
his things that had been torn from the beast's back by the
thorns, and, picking up these one by one, had become so burdened
with the weight of them, that he could follow no farther.  In
this fix the twenty men came up with him, but not until they had
had a scrimmage with the "savages," had secured four, and taken
the spear which had been thrown at them. Of the mule's position
no one could give an opinion, save that they imagined, in
consequence of the thickness of the bush, he would soon become
irretrievably entangled in the thicket, where the savages would
find him, and bring him in as a ransom for the prisoners.

What with the diminution of our supplies, the famished state of
the country, and the difficulties which frowned upon us in
advance, together with unwillingness to give up so good a mule,
with all its gear and ammunition, I must say I felt doubtful as
to what had better be done, until the corporal, who felt
confident he would find the beast, begged so hard that I sent him
in command of another expedition of sixteen men, ordering him to
take one of the prisoners with him to proclaim to his brethren
that we would give up the rest if they returned us the mule.  The
corporal then led off his band to the spot where he last saw
traces of the animal, and tracked on till sundown; while Grant
and myself went out pot-hunting and brought home a bag consisting
of one striped eland, one saltiana antelope, four guinea-fowl,
four ringdoves, and one partridge--a welcome supply, considering
we were quite out of flesh.

Next day, as there were no signs of the trackers, I went again to
the place of the elands, wounded a fine male, but gave up the
chase, as I heard the unmistakable gun-firing return of the
party, and straightway proceeded to camp.  Sure enough, there
they were; they had tracked the animal back to Marenga Mkhali,
through jungle-- for he had not taken to the footpath.  Then
finding he had gone on, they returned quite tired and famished. 
To make the most of a bad job, I now sent Grant on to the Robeho
(or windy) Pass, on the top of the western chain, with the mules
and heavy baggage, and directions to proceed thence across the
brow of the hill the following morning, while I remained behind
with the tired men, promising to join him by breakfast-time.  I
next released the prisoners, much to their disgust, for they had
not known such good feeding before, and dreaded being turned
adrift again in the jungles to live on calabash seeds; and then,
after shooting six guinea-fowl, turned in for the night.

Betimes in the morning we were off, mounting the Robeho, a good
stiff ascent, covered with trees and large blocks of granite,
excepting only where cleared for villages; and on we went
rapidly, until at noon the advance party was reached, located in
a village overlooking the great interior plateau--a picture, as
it were, of the common type of African scenery.  Here, taking a
hasty meal, we resumed the march all together, descended the
great western chain, and, as night set in, camped in a ravine at
the foot of it, not far from the great junction-station Ugogi,
where terminate the hills of Usagara.




                           Chapter IV



Ugogo, and the Wilderness of Mgunda Mkhali

The Lie of the Country--Rhinoceros-Stalking--Scuffle of Villagers
over a Carcass--Chief "Short-Legs" and His Successors-- Buffalo-
Shooting--Getting Lost--A Troublesome Sultan--Desertions from the
Camp--Getting Plundered--Wilderness March--Diplomatic Relations
with the Local Powers--Manua Sera's Story--Christmas-- The Relief
from Kaze

This day's work led us from the hilly Usagara range into the more
level lands of the interior.  Making a double march of it, we
first stopped to breakfast at the quiet little settlement of
Inenge, where cattle were abundant, but grain so scarce that the
villagers were living on calabash seeds.  Proceeding thence
across fields delightfully checkered with fine calabash and fig
trees, we marched, carrying water through thorny jungles, until
dark, when we bivouacked for the night, only to rest and push on
again next morning, arriving at Marenga Mkhali (the saline water)
to breakfast. Here a good view of the Usagara hills is obtained. 
Carrying water with us, we next marched half-way to the first
settlement of Ugogo, and bivouacked again, to eat the last of our
store of Mbumi grain.

At length the greater famine lands had been spanned; but we were
not in lands of plenty--for the Wagogo we found, like their
neighbours Wasagara, eating the seed of the calabash, to save
their small stores of grain.

The East Coast Range having been passed, no more hills had to be
crossed, for the land we next entered on is a plateau of rolling
ground, sloping southward to the Ruaha river, which forms a great
drain running from west to east, carrying off all the rainwaters
that fall in its neighbourhood through the East Coast Range to
the sea.  To the northward can be seen some low hills, which are
occupied by Wahumba, a subtribe of the warlike Masai; and on the
west is the large forest-wilderness of Mgunda Mkhali.  Ugogo,
lying under the lee side of the Usagara hills, is comparatively
sterile. Small outcrops of granite here and there poke through
the surface, which, like the rest of the rolling land, being
covered with bush, principally acacias, have a pleasing
appearance after the rains have set in, but are too brown and
desert-looking during the rest of the year.  Large prairies of
grass also are exposed in many places, and the villagers have
laid much ground bare for agricultural purposes.

Altogether, Ugogo has a very wild aspect, well in keeping with
the natives who occupy it, who, more like the Wazaramo than the
Wasagara, carry arms, intended for use rather than show.  The
men, indeed, are never seen without their usual arms--the spear,
the shield, and the assage.  They live in flat-topped, square,
tembe villages, wherever springs of water are found, keep cattle
in plenty, and farm enough generally to supply not only their own
wants, but those of the thousands who annually pass in caravans.
They are extremely fond of ornaments, the most common of which is
an ugly tube of the gourd thrust through the lower lobe of the
ear. Their colour is a soft ruddy brown, with a slight infusion
of black, not unlike that of a rich plum.  Impulsive by nature,
and exceedingly avaricious, they pester travellers beyond all
conception, by thronging the road, jeering, quizzing, and
pointing at them; and in camp, by intrusively forcing their way
into the midst of the kit, and even into the stranger's tent. 
Caravans, in consequence, never enter their villages, but camp
outside, generally under the big "gouty-limbed" trees--encircling
their entire camp sometimes with a ring-fence of thorns to
prevent any sudden attack.

To resume the thread of the journey: we found, on arrival in
Ugogo, very little more food than in Usagara for the Wagogo were
mixing their small stores of grain with the monkey-bread seeds of
the gouty-limbed tree.  Water was so scarce in the wells at this
season that we had to buy it at the normal price of country beer;
and, as may be imagined where such distress in food was existing,
cows, goats, sheep, and fowls were also selling at high rates.

Our mules here gave us the slip again, and walked all the way
back to Marenga Mkhali, where they were found and brought back by
some Wagogo, who took four yards of merikani in advance, with a
promise of four more on return, for the job--their chief being
security for their fidelity.  This business detained us two days,
during which time I shot a new variety of florikan, peculiar in
having a light blue band stretching from the nose over the eye to
the occiput. Each day, while we resided here, cries were raised
by the villagers that the Wahumba were coming, and then all the
cattle out in the plains, both far and near, were driven into the
village for protection.

At last, on the 26th, as the mules were brought it, I paid a
hongo or tax of four barsati and four yards of chintz to the
chief, and departed, but not until one of my porters, a Mhehe,
obtained a fat dog for his dinner; he had set his heart on it,
