and would not move until he had killed it, and tied it on to his
load for the evening's repast.  Passing through the next
villages--a collection called Kifukuro--we had to pay another
small tax of two barsati and four yards of chintz to the chief. 
There we breakfasted, and pushed on, carrying water to a bivouac
in the jungles, as the famine precluded our taking the march more
easily.

Pushing on again, we cleared out of the woods, and arrived at the
eastern border of the largest clearance of Ugogo, Kanyenye.  Here
we were forced to halt a day, as the mules were done up, and
eight of the Wanyamuezi porters absconded, carrying with them the
best part of their loads.  There was also another inducement for
stopping here; for, after stacking the loads, as we usually did
on arriving in camp, against a large gouty-limbed tree, a hungry
Mgogo, on eyeing our guns, offered his services to show us some
bicornis rhinoceros, which, he said paid nightly visits to
certain bitter pools that lay in the nullah bottoms not far off. 
This exciting intelligence made me inquire if it was not possible
to find them at once; but, being assured that they lived very far
off, and that the best chance was the night, I gave way, and
settled on starting at ten, to arrive at the ground before the
full moon should rise.

I set forth with the guide and two of the sheikh's boys, each
carrying a single rifle, and ensconced myself in the nullah, to
hide until our expected visitors should arrive, and there
remained until midnight.  When the hitherto noisy villagers
turned into bed, the silvery moon shed her light on the desolate
scene, and the Mgogo guide, taking fright, bolted.  He had not,
however, gone long, when, looming above us, coming over the
horizon line, was the very animal we wanted.

In a fidgety manner the beast then descended, as if he expected
some danger in store--and he was not wrong; for, attaching a bit
of white paper to the fly-sight of my Blissett, I approached him,
crawling under cover of the banks until within eighty yards of
him, when, finding that the moon shone full on his flank, I
raised myself upright and planted a bullet behind his left
shoulder.  Thus died my first rhinoceros.

To make the most of the night, as I wanted meat for my men to
cook, as well as a stock to carry with them, or barter with the
villagers for grain, I now retired to my old position, and waited
again.

After two hours had elapsed, two more rhinoceros approached me in
the same stealthy, fidgety way as the first one.  They came even
closer than the first, but, the moon having passed beyond their
meridian, I could not obtain so clear a mark.  Still they were
big marks, and I determined on doing my best before they had time
to wind us; so stepping out, with the sheikh's boys behind me
carrying the second rifle to meet all emergencies, I planted a
ball in the larger one, and brought him round with a roar and
whooh-whooh, exactly to the best position I could wish for
receiving a second shot; but, alas! on turning sharply round for
the spare rifle, I had the mortification to see that both the
black boys had made off, and were scrambling like monkeys up a
tree.  At the same time the rhinoceros, fortunately for me, on
second consideration turned to the right-about, and shuffled
away, leaving, as is usually the case when conical bullets are
used, no traces of blood.

Thus ended the night's work.  We now went home by dawn to apprise
all the porters that we had flesh in store for them, when the two
boys who had so shamelessly deserted me, instead of hiding their
heads, described all the night's scenes with such capital mimicry
as to set the whole camp in a roar.  We had all now to hurry back
to the carcass before the Wagogo could find it; but though this
precaution was quickly taken, still, before the tough skin of the
beast could be cut through, the Wagogo began assembling like
vultures, and fighting with my men.  A more savage, filthy,
disgusting, but at the same time grotesque, scene than that which
followed cannot be conceived.  All fell to work armed with
swords, spears, knives, and hatchets--cutting and slashing,
thumping and bawling, fighting and tearing, tumbling and
wrestling up to their knees in filth and blood in the middle of
the carcass.  When a tempting morsel fell to the possession of
any one, a stronger neighbour would seize and bear off the prize
in triumph.  All right was now a matter or pure might, and lucky
it was that it did not end in a fight between our men and the
villagers.  These might be afterwards seen, one by one, covered
with blood, scampering home each with his spoil--a piece of
tripe, or liver, or lights, or whatever else it might have been
his fortune to get off with.

We were still in great want of men; but rather than stop a day,
as all delays only lead to more difficulties, I pushed on to
Magomba's palace with the assistance of some Wagogo carrying our
baggage, each taking one cloth as his hire.  The chief wazir at
once come out to meet me on the way, and in an apparently affable
manner, as an old friend, begged that I would live in the palace-
-a bait which I did not take, as I knew my friend by experience a
little too well.  he then, in the politest possible manner, told
me that a great dearth of food was oppressing the land--so much
so, that pretty cloths only would purchase grain.  I now wished
to settle my hongo, but the great chief could not hear of such
indecent haste.

The next day, too, the chief was too drunk to listen to any one,
and I must have patience.  I took out this time in the jungles
very profitably, killing a fine buck and doe antelope, of a
species unknown.  These animals are much about the same size and
shape as the common Indian antelope, and, like them, roam about
in large herds.  The only marked difference between the two is in
the shape of their horns, as may be seen by the woodcut; and in
their colour, in which, in both sexes, the Ugogo antelopes
resemble the picticandata gazelle of Tibet, except that the
former have dark markings on the face.

At last, after thousands of difficulties much like those I
encountered in Uzaramo, the hongo was settled by a payment of one
kisutu, one dubani, four yards bendera, four yards kiniki, and
three yards merikani.  The wazir then thought he would do some
business on his own account, and commenced work by presenting me
with a pot of ghee and flour, saying at the same time "empty
words did not show true love," and hoping that I would prove mine
by making some slight return.  To get rid of the animal I gave
him the full value of his present in cloth, which he no sooner
pocketed than he had the audacity to accuse Grant of sacrilege
for having shot a lizard on a holy stone, and demanded four
cloths to pay atonement for this offence against the "church." 
As yet, he said, the chief was not aware of the damage done, and
it was well he was not; for he would himself, if I only paid him
the four cloths, settle matters quietly, otherwise there would be
no knowing what demands might be made on my cloth.  It was
necessary to get up hot temper, else there was no knowing how far
he would go; so I returned him his presents, and told the sheikh,
instead of giving four, to fling six cloths in his face, and tell
him that the holy-stone story was merely a humbug, and I would
take care no more white men ever came to see him again.

Some Wanyamuezi porters, who had been left sick here by former
caravans, now wished to take service with me as far as Kaze; but
the Wagogo, hearing of their desire, frightened them off it.  A
report also at this time was brought to us, that a caravan had
just arrived at our last ground, having come up from Whindi,
direct by the line of the Wami river, in its upper course called
Mukondokua, without crossing a single hill all the way; I
therefore sent three men to see if they had any porters to spare,
as it was said they had; but the three men, although they left
their bows and arrows behind, never came back.

Another mule died to-day.  This was perplexing indeed, but to
stop longer was useless; so we pushed forward as best we could to
a pond at the western end of the district where we found a party
of Makua sportsmen who had just killed an elephant.  They had
lived in Ugogo one year and a half, and had killed in all
seventeen elephants; half the tusks of which, as well as some
portion of the flesh, they gave to Magomba for the privilege of
residing there.  There were many antelopes there, some of which
both Grant and I shot for the good of the pot, and he also killed
a crocute hyena.  From the pond we went on to the middle of a
large jungle, and bivouacked for the night in a shower of rain,
the second of the season.

During a fierce downpour of rain, the porters all quivering and
quaking with cold, we at length emerged from the jungle, and
entered the prettiest spot in Ugogo--the populous district of
Usekhe--where little hills and huge columns of granite crop out. 
Here we halted.

Next day came the hongo business, which was settled by paying one
dubani, one kitambi, one msutu, four yards merikani, and two
yards kiniki; but whilst we were doing it eight porters ran away,
and four fresh ones were engaged (Wanyamuezi) who had run away
from Kanyenye.

With one more march from this we reached the last district in
Ugogo, Khoko.  Here the whole of the inhabitants turned out to
oppose us, imagining we had come there to revenge the Arab,
Mohinna, because the Wagogo attacked him a year ago, plundered
his camp, and drove him back to Kaze, for having shot their old
chief "Short-legs." They, however, no sooner found out who we
were than they allowed us to pass on, and encamp in the outskirts
of the Mgunda Mkhali wilderness.  To this position in the bush I
strongly objected, on the plea that guns could be best used
against arrows in the open; but none would go out in the field,
maintaining that the Wagogo would fear to attack us so far from
their villages, as we now were, lest we might cut them off in
their retreat.

Hori Hori was now chief in Short-leg's stead, and affected to be
much pleased that we were English, and not Arabs.  He told us we
might, he thought, be able to recruit all the men that we were in
want of, as many Wanyanuezi who had been left there sick wished
to go to their homes; and I would only, in addition to their
wages, have to pay their "hotel bills" to the Wagogo.  This, of
course, I was ready to do, though I knew the Wanyamuezi had paid
for themselves, as is usual, by their work in the fields of their
hosts. Still, as I should be depriving these of hands, I could
scarcely expect to get off for less than the value of a slave for
each, and told Sheikh said to look out for some men at once,
whilst at the same time he laid in provisions of grain to last us
eight days in the wilderness, and settle the hongo.

For this triple business, I allowed three days, during which
time, always eager to shoot something, either for science or the
pot, I killed a bicornis rhinoceros, at a distance of five paces
only, with my small 40-gauge Lancaster, as the beast stood
quietly feeding in the bush; and I also shot a bitch fox of the
genus Octocyon lalandii, whose ill-omened cry often alarms the
natives by forewarning them of danger.  This was rather tame
sport; but next day I had better fun.

Starting in the early morning, accompanied by two of Sheikh
Said's boys, Suliman and Faraj, each carrying a rifle, while I
carried a shot-gun, we followed a footpath to the westward in the
wilderness of Mgunda Mkhali.  There, after walking a short while
in the bush, as I heard the grunt of a buffalo close on my left,
I took "Blissett" in hand, and walked to where I soon espied a
large herd quietly feeding.  They were quite unconscious of my
approach, so I took a shot at a cow, and wounded her; then, after
reloading, put a ball in a bull and staggered him also.  This
caused great confusion among them; but as none of the animals
knew where the shots came from, they simply shifted about in a
fidgety manner, allowing me to kill the first cow, and even fire
a fourth shot, which sickened the great bull, and induced him to
walk off, leaving the herd to their fate, who, considerably
puzzled, began moving off also.

I now called up the boys, and determined on following the herd
down before either skinning the dead cow or following the bull,
who I knew could not go far.  Their footprints being well defined
in the moist sandy soil, we soon found the herd again; but as
they now knew they were pursued, they kept moving on in short
runs at a time, when, occasionally gaining glimpses of their
large dark bodies as they forced through the bush, I repeated my
shots and struck a good number, some more and some less severely. 
This was very provoking; for all of them being stern shots were
not likely to kill, and the jungle was so thick I could not get a
front view of them. Presently, however, one with her hind leg
broken pulled up on a white-ant hill, and, tossing her horns,
came down with a charge the instant I showed myself close to her. 
One crack of the rifle rolled her over, and gave me free scope to
improve the bag, which was very soon done; for on following the
spoors, the traces of blood led us up to another one as lame as
the last.  He then got a second bullet in the flank, and, after
hobbling a little, evaded our sight and threw himself into a
bush, where we not sooner arrived than he plunged headlong at us
from his ambush, just, and only just, giving me time to present
my small 40-gauge Lancaster.

It was a most ridiculous scene.  Suliman by my side, with the
instinct of a monkey, made a violent spring and swung himself by
a bough immediately over the beast, whilst Faraj bolted away and
left me single-gunned to polish him off.  There was only one
course to pursue, for in one instant more he would have been into
me; so, quick as thought, I fired the gun, and, as luck would
have it, my bullet, after passing through the edge of one of his
horns, stuck in the spine of his neck, and rolled him over at my
feet as dead as a rabbit.  Now, having cut the beast's throat to
make him "hilal," according to Mussulman usage, and thinking we
had done enough if I could only return to the first wounded bull
and settle him too, we commenced retracing our steps, and by
accident came on Grant.  He was passing by from another quarter,
and became amused by the glowing description of my boys, who
never omitted to narrate their own cowardice as an excellent
tale.  He begged us to go on in our course, whilst he would go
back and send us some porters to carry home the game.

Now, tracking back again to the first point of attack, we
followed the blood of the first bull, till at length I found him
standing like a stuck pig in some bushes, looking as if he would
like to be put out of his miseries.  Taking compassion, I
levelled my Blisset; but, as bad luck would have it, a bough
intercepted the flight of the bullet, and it went "pinging" into
the air, whilst the big bull went off at a gallop.  To follow on
was no difficulty, the spoor was so good; and in ten minutes
more, as I opened on a small clearance, Blisset in hand, the
great beast, from the thicket on the opposite side, charged down
like a mad bull, full of ferocity--as ugly an antagonist as ever
I saw, for the front of his head was all shielded with horn.  A
small mound fortunately stood between us, and as he rounded it, I
jumped to one side and let fly at his flank, but without the
effect of stopping him; for, as quick as thought, the huge
monster was at my feet, battling with the impalpable smoke of my
gun, which fortunately hung so thick on the ground at the height
of his head that he could not see me, though I was so close that
I might, had I been possessed of a hatchet, have chopped off his
head.  This was a predicament which looked very ugly, for my boys
had both bolted, taking with them my guns; but suddenly the
beast, evidently regarding the smoke as a phantom which could not
be mastered, turned round in a bustle, to my intense relief, and
galloped off at full speed, as if scared by some terrible
apparition.

O what would I not then have given for a gun, the chance was such
a good one!  Still, angry though I was, I could not help laughing
as the dastardly boys came into the clearance full of their
mimicry, and joked over the scene they had witnessed in security,
whilst my life was in jeopardy because they were too frightened
to give me my gun.  But now came the worst part of the day; for,
though rain was falling, I had not the heart to relinquish my
game.  Tracking on through the bush, I thought every minute I
should come up with the brute; but his wounds ceased to bleed,
and in the confusion of the numerous tracks which scored all the
forest we lost our own.

Much disappointed at this, I now proposed to make for the track
we came by in the morning, and follow it down into camp; but this
luxury was not destined to be our lot that night, for the rain
had obliterated all our footprints of the morning, and we passed
the track, mistaking it for the run of wild beasts.  It struck me
we had done so; but say what I would, the boys thought they knew
better; and the consequence was that, after wandering for hours
no one knew where--for there was no sun to guide us--I pulled up,
and swore I would wait for the stars, else it might be our fate
to be lost in the wilderness, which I did not much relish.  We
were all at this time "hungry as hunters," and beginning to feel
very miserable from being wet through.  What little ammunition I
had left I fired off as signals, or made tinder of to get up a
fire, but the wood would not burn.  In this hapless condition the
black boys began murmuring, wishing to go on, pretending, though
both held opposite views, that each knew the way; for they
thought nothing could be worse than their present state of
discomfort.

Night with its gloom was then drawing on, heightened by thunder
and lightning, which set in all around us.  At times we thought
we heard musketry in camp, knowing that Grant would be sure to
fire signals for us; and doubtless we did so, but its sound and
the thunder so much resembled one another that we distrusted our
ears.  At any rate, the boys mistook the west for the east; and
as I thought they had done so, I stood firm to one spot, and
finally lay down with them to sleep upon the cold wet ground,
where we slept pretty well, being only disturbed occasionally by
some animals sniffing at our feet.  As the clouds broke towards
morning, my obstinate boys still swore that west was east, and
would hardly follow me when tracking down Venus; next up rose the
moon and then followed the sun, when, as good luck would have it,
we struck on the track, and walked straight into camp.

Here every one was in a great state of excitement: Grant had been
making the men fire volleys.  The little sheikh was warmly
congratulatory as he spoke of the numbers who had strayed away
and had been lost in that wilderness; whilst Bombay admitted he
thought we should turn up again if I did not listen to the advice
of the boys, which was his only fear.  Nothing as yet, I now
found, had been done to further our march.  The hongo, the sheikh
said, had to precede everything; yet that had not been settled,
because the chief deferred it the day of our arrival, on the plea
that it was the anniversary of Short-legs's death; and he also
said that till then all the Wagogo had been in mourning by
ceasing to wear all their brass bracelets and other ornaments,
and they now wished to solemnise the occasion by feasting and
renewing their finery. This being granted, the next day another
pretext for delay was found, by the Wahumba having made a raid on
their cattle, which necessitated the chief and all his men
turning out to drive them away; and to-day nothing could be
attended to, as a party of fugitive Wanyamuezi had arrived and
put them all in a fright. These Wanyamuezi, it then transpired,
were soldiers of Manua Sera, the "Tippler," who was at war with
the Arabs.  He had been defeated at Mguru, a district in
Unyamuezi, by the Arabs, and had sent these men to cut off the
caravan route, as the best way of retaliation that lay in his
power.

At last the tax having been settled by the payment of one dubani,
two barsati, one sahari, six yards merikani, and three yards
kiniki (not, however, until I had our tents struck, and
threatened to march away if the chief would not take it), I
proposed going on with the journey, for our provisions were
stored.  but when the loads were being lifted, I found ten more
men were missing; and as nothing now could be done but throw ten
loads away, which seemed to great a sacrifice to be made in a
hurry, I simply changed ground to show we were ready to march,
and sent my men about, either to try to induce the fugitive
Wanyamuezi to take service with me or else to buy donkeys, as the
chief said he had some to sell.

We had already been here too long.  A report was now spread that
a lion had killed one of the chief's cows; and the Wagogo,
suspecting that our being here was the cause of this ill luck,
threatened to attack us.  This no sooner got noised over the camp
than all my Wanyamuezi porters, who had friends in Ugogo, left to
live with them, and would not come back again even when the
"storm had blown over," because they did not like the incessant
rains that half deluged the camp.  The chief, too, said he would
not sell us his donkeys, lest we should give them back to
Mohinna, from whom they were taken during his fight here. 
Intrigues of all sorts I could see were brewing, possibly at the
instigation of the fugitive Wanyamuezi, who suspected we were
bound to side with the Arabs-- possibly from some other cause, I
could not tell what; so, to clear out of this pandemonium as soon
as possible I issued cloths to buy double rations, intending to
cross the wilderness by successive relays in double the ordinary
number of days.  I determined at the same time to send forward
two freed men to Kaze to ask Musa and the Arabs to send me out
some provisions and men to meet us half-way.

Matters grew worse and worse.  The sultan, now finding me unable
to move, sent a message to say if I would not give him some
better cloths to make his hongo more respectable, he would attack
my camp; and advised all the Wanyamuezi who regarded their lives
not to go near me if I resisted.  This was by no means pleasant;
for the porters showed their uneasiness by extracting their own
cloths from my bundles, under the pretext that they wished to
make some purchases of their own.  I ought, perhaps, to have
stopped this; but I thought the best plan was to show total
indifference; so, at the same time that they were allowed to take
their cloths, I refused to comply with the chief's request, and
begged them to have no fear so long as they saw I could hold my
own ground with my guns.

The Wanyamuezi, however, were panic-stricken, and half of them
bolted, with the kirangozi at their head, carrying off all the
double-ration cloths as well as their own.  At this time, the
sultan, having changed tactics, as he saw us all ready to stand
on the defensive, sent back his hongo; but, instead of using
threats, said he would oblige us with donkeys or anything else if
we would only give him a few more pretty cloths.  With this
cringing, perfidious appeal I refused to comply, until the
sheikh, still more cringing, implored me to give way else not a
single man would remain with me.  I then told him to settle with
the chief himself, and give me the account, which amounted to
three barsati, two sahari, and three yards merikani; but the
donkeys were never alluded to.

With half my men gone, I still ordered the march, though strongly
opposed to the advice of one of old Mamba's men, who was then
passing by on his way to the coast, in command of his master's
rear detachment.  He thought it impossible for us to pull through
the wilderness, with its jungle grasses and roots, depending for
food only on Grant's gun and my own; still we made half-way to
the Mdaburu nullah, taking some of Mamba's out to camp with us,
as he promised to take letters and specimens down to the coast
for us, provided I paid him some cloths as ready money down, and
promised some more to be paid at Zanzibar.  These letters
eventually reached home, but not the specimens.

The rains were so heavy that the whole country was now flooded,
but we pushed on to the nullah by relays, and pitched on its left
bank. In the confusion of the march, however, we lost many more
porters, who at the same time relieved us of their loads, by
slipping off stealthily into the bush.

The fifteenth was a forced halt, as the stream was so deep and so
violent we could not cross it.  To make the best of this very
unfortunate interruption, I now sent on two men to Kaze, with
letters to Musa and Sheikh Snay, both old friends on the former
expedition, begging them to send me sixty men, each carrying
thirty rations of grain, and some country tobacco.  The tobacco
was to gratify my men, who said of all things they most wanted to
cheer them was something to smoke.  At the same time I sent back
some other men to Khoko, with cloth to buy grain for present
consumption, as some of my porters were already reduced to living
on wild herbs and white ants.  I then sent all the remaining men,
under the directions of Bombay and Baraka, to fell a tall tree
with hatchets, on the banks of the nullah, with a view to
bridging it; but the tree dropped to the wrong side, and thwarted
the plan.  The rain ceased on the 17th, just as we put the rain-
gauge out, which was at once interpreted to be our Uganga, or
religious charm, and therefore the cause of its ceasing.  It was
the first fine day for a fortnight, so we were only too glad to
put all our things out to dry, and rejoiced to think of the
stream's subsiding.  My men who went back to Khoko for grain
having returned with next to nothing-- though, of course, they
had spent all the cloths--I sent back another batch with pretty
cloths, as it was confidently stated that grain was so scarce
there, nothing but the best fabrics would but it.  This also
proved a dead failure; but although animals were very scarce,
Grant relieved our anxiety by shooting a zebra and an antelope.

After five halts, we forded the stream, middle deep, and pushed
forwards again, doing short stages of four or five miles a-day,
in the greatest possible confusion; for, whilst Grant and I were
compelled to go out shooting all day for the pot, the sheikh and
Bombay went on with the first half of the property and then,
keeping guard over it sent the men back again to Baraka, who kept
rear-guard, to have the rest brought on.  Order there was none:
the men hated this "double work;" all the Wanyamuezi but three
deserted, with the connivance of the coast-men, carrying off
their loads with them, under a mutual understanding, as I found
out afterwards, that the coast-men were to go shares in the
plunder as soon as we reached Unyamuezi.  The next great obstacle
in this tug-and-pull wilderness-march presented itself on the
24th, when, after the first half of the property had crossed the
Mabunguru nullah, it rose in flood and cut off the rear half.  It
soon, however, subsided; and the next day we reached "the
Springs," where we killed a pig and two rhinoceros.  Not content,
however, with this fare--notwithstanding the whole camp had been
living liberally on zebra's and antelope's flesh every day
previously-- some of my coast-men bolted on to the little
settlement of Jiwa la Mkoa, contrary to orders, to purchase some
grain; and in doing so, increased our transport difficulties.

Pulling on in the same way again--when not actually engaged in
shooting, scolding and storming at the men, to keep them up to
the mark, and prevent them from shirking their work, which they
were for every trying to do--we arrived on the 28th at the
"Boss," a huge granite block, from the top of which the green
foliage of the forest-trees looked like an interminable cloud,
soft and waving, fit for fairies to dwell upon.  Here the
patience of my men fairly gave way, for the village of Jiwa la
Mkoa was only one long march distance from us; and they, in
consequence, smelt food on in advance much sweeter than the wild
game and wild grasses they had been living on; and many more of
them could not resist deserting us, though they might, had we all
pulled together, have gone more comfortably in, as soon as the
rear property arrived next day with Baraka.

All the men who deserted on the 25th, save Johur and Mutwana, now
came into camp, and told us they had heard from travellers that
those men who had been sent on for reliefs to Kaze were bringing
us a large detachment of slaves to help us on.  My men had
brought no food either for us or their friends, as the cloths
they took with them, "which were their own," were scarcely
sufficient to purchase a meal--famines being as bad where they
had been as in Ugogo.  To try and get all the men together again,
I now sent off a party loaded with cloths to see what they could
get for us; but they returned on the 30th grinning and joking,
with nothing but a small fragment of goat-flesh, telling lies by
the dozens.  Johur then came into camp, unconscious that Baraka
by my orders had, during his absence, been inspecting his kit,
where he found concealed seventy-three yards of cloth, which
could only have been my property, as Johur had brought no akaba
or reserve fund from the coast.

The theft having been proved to the satisfaction of every one, I
ordered Baraka to strip him of everything and give him three
dozen lashes; but after twenty-one had been given, the rest were
remitted on his promising to turn Queen's evidence, when it
transpired that Mutwana had done as much as himself.  Johur, it
turned out, was a murderer, having obtained his freedom by
killing his master.  He was otherwise a notoriously bad
character; so, wishing to make an example, as I knew all my men
were robbing me daily, though I could not detect them, I had him
turned out of camp.  Baraka was a splendid detective, and could
do everything well when he wished it, so I sent him off now with
cloths to see what he could to at Jiwa la Mkoa, and next day he
returned triumphantly driving in cows and goats.  Three
Wanyamuezi, also, who heard we were given to shooting wild
animals continually, came with him to offer their services as
porters.

As nearly all the men had now returned, Grant and I spent New
Year's Day with the first detachment at Jiwa la Mkoa, or Round
Rock-- a single tembe village occupied by a few Wakimbu settlers,
who, by their presence and domestic habits, made us feel as
though we were well out of the wood.  So indeed we found it; for
although this wilderness was formerly an entire forest of trees
and wild animals, numerous Wakimbu, who formerly occupied the
banks of the Ruaha to the southward, had been driven to migrate
here, wherever they could find springs of water, by the
boisterous naked pastorals the Warori.

At night three slaves belonging to Sheikh Salem bin Saif stole
into our camp, and said they had been sent by their master to
seek for porters at Kaze, as all the Wanyamuezi porters of four
large caravans had deserted in Ugogo, and they could not move.  I
was rather pleased by this news, and thought it served the
merchants right, knowing, as I well did, that the Wanyamuezi,
being naturally honest, had they not been defrauded by foreigners
on the down march to the coast, would have been honest still. 
Some provisions were now obtained by sending men out to distant
villages; but we still supplied the camp with our guns, killing
rhinoceros, wild boar, antelope, and zebras.  The last of our
property did not come up till the 5th, when another thief being
caught, got fifty lashes, under the superintendence of Baraka, to
show that punishment was only inflicted to prevent further crime.

The next day my men came from Kaze with letters from Sheikh Snay
and Musa.  They had been detained there some days after arrival,
as those merchants' slaves had gone to Utambara to settle some
quarrel there; but as soon as they returned, Musa ordered them to
go and assist us, giving them beads to find rations for
themselves on the way, as the whole country about Kaze had been
half-starved by famines, though he did send a little rice and
tobacco for me. The whole party left Kaze together; but on
arrival at Tura the slaves said they had not enough beads and
would return for some more, when they would follow my men.  This
bit of news was the worst that could have befallen us; my men
were broken-hearted enough before, and this drove the last spark
of spirit out of them. To make the best of a bad job, I now sent
Bombay with two other men off to Musa to see what he could do,
and ordered my other men to hire Wakimbu from village to village. 
On the 7th, a nervous excitement was produced in the camp by some
of my men running in and calling all to arm, as the fugitive
chief Manua Sera was coming, with thirty armed followers carrying
muskets.  Such was the case: and by the time my men were all
under arms, with their sword-bayonets fixed, drawn up by my tent
the veritable "Tippler" arrived; but, not liking the look of such
a formidable array as my men presented, he passed on a short way,
and then sent back a deputation to make known his desire of
calling on me, which was no sooner complied with than he came in
person, attended by a body-guard.  On my requesting him to draw
near and sit, his wooden stool was placed for him.  He began the
conversation by telling me he had heard of my distress from want
of porters, and then offered to assist me with some, provided I
would take him to Kaze, and mediate between him and the Arabs;
for, through their unjustifiable interference in his government
affairs, a war had ensued, which terminated with the Arabs
driving him from his possessions a vagabond.  Manua Sera, I must
say, was as fine a young man as ever I looked upon.  He was very
handsome, and looked as I now saw him the very picture of a
captain of the banditti of the romances.  I begged him to tell me
his tale, and, in compliance, he gave me the following
narrative:--

"Shortly after you left Kaze for England, my old father, the late
chief Fundi Kira, died, and by his desire I became lawful chief;
for, though the son of a slave girl, and not of Fundi Kira's
wife, such is the law of inheritance--a constitutional policy
established to prevent any chance of intrigues between the sons
born in legitimate wedlock.  Well, after assuming the title of
chief, I gave presents of ivory to all the Arabs with a liberal
hand, but most so to Musa, which caused great jealousy amongst
the other merchants. Then after this I established a property tax
on all merchandise that entered my country.  Fundi Kira had never
done so, but I did not think that any reason why I should not,
especially as the Arabs were the only people who lived in my
country exempt from taxation. This measure, however, exasperated
the Arabs, and induced them to send me hostile messages, to the
effect that, if I ever meddled with them, they would dethrone me,
and place Mkisiwa, another illegitimate son, on the throne in my
stead.  This," Manua Sera continued, "I could not stand; the
merchants were living on sufferance only in my country.  I told
them so, and defied them to interfere with my orders, for I was
not a 'woman,' to be treated with contempt; and this got up a
quarrel.  Mkisiwa, seizing at the opportunity of the prize held
out to him by the Arabs as his supporters, then commenced a
system of bribery.  Words led to blows; we had a long and tough
fight; I killed many of their number, and they killed mine. 
Eventually they drove me from my palace, and placed Mkisiwa there
as chief in my stead.  My faithful followers however, never
deserted me; so I went to Rubuga, and put up with old Maula
there.  The Arabs followed--drove me to Nguru, and tried to kill
Maula for having fostered me.  He, however, escaped them; but
they destroyed his country, and then followed me down to Nguru. 
There we fought for many months, until all provisions were
exhausted, when I defied them to catch me, and forced my way
through their ranks.  It is needless to say I have been a
wanderer since; and though I wish to make friends, they will not
allow it, but do all they can to hunt me to death.  Now, as you
were a friend of my father, I do hope you will patch up this war
for me, which you must think is unjust."

I told Manua Sera I felt very much for him, and I would do my
best if he would follow me to Kaze; but I knew that nothing could
ever be done unless he returned to the free-trade principles of
his father. He then said he had never taken a single tax from the
Arabs, and would gladly relinquish his intention to do so.  The
whole affair was commenced in too great a hurry; but whatever
happened he would gladly forgive all if I would use my influence
to reinstate him, for by no other means could he ever get his
crown back again. I then assured him that I would do what I could
to restore the ruined trade of his country, observing that, as
all the ivory that went out of his country, came to ours, and all
imports were productions of our country also, this war injured us
as well as himself.  Manua Sera seemed highly delighted, and said
he had a little business to transact in Ugogo at present, but he
would overtake me in a few days.  He then sent me one of my
runaway porters, whom he had caught in the woods making off with
a load of my beads.  We then separated; and Baraka, by my orders,
gave the thief fifty lashes for his double offence of theft and
desertion.

On the 9th, having bought two donkeys and engaged several men, we
left Jiwa la Mkoa, with half our traps, and marched to Garaeswi,
where, to my surprise, there were as many as twenty tembes-- a
recently-formed settlement of Wokimbu.  Here we halted a day for
the rear convoy, and then went on again by detachments to Zimbo,
where, to our intense delight, Bombay returned to us on the 13th,
triumphantly firing guns, with seventy slaves accompanying him,
and with letters from Snay and Musa, in which they said they
hoped, if I met with Manua Sera, that I would either put a bullet
through his head, or else bring him in a prisoner, that they
might do for him, for the scoundrel had destroyed all their trade
by cutting off caravans.  Their fights with him commenced by his
levying taxes in opposition to their treaties with his father,
Fundi Kira, and then preventing his subjects selling them grain.

Once more the whole caravan moved on; but as I had to pay each of
the seventy slaves sixteen yards of cloth, by order of their
masters, in the simple matter of expenditure it would have been
better had I thrown ten loads away at Ugogo, where my
difficulties first commenced.  On arrival at Mgongo Thembo--the
Elephant's Back-- called so in consequence of a large granitic
rock, which resembles the back of that animal, protruding through
the ground--we found a clearance in the forest, of two miles in
extent, under cultivation. Here the first man to meet me was the
fugitive chief of Rubuga, Maula.  This poor old man--one of the
honestest chiefs in the country--had been to the former
expedition a host and good friend. He now gave me a cow as a
present, and said he would give me ten more if I would assist him
in making friends with the Arabs, who had driven him out of his
country, and had destroyed all his belongings, even putting a
slave to reign in his stead, though he had committed no fault of
intentional injury towards them.  It was true Manua Sera, their
enemy, had taken refuge in his palace, but that was not his
fault; for, anticipating the difficulties that would arise, he
did his best to keep Manua Sera out of it, but Manua Sera being
too strong for him, forced his way in.  I need not say I tried to
console this unfortunate victim of circumstances as best I could,
inviting him to go with me to Kaze, and promising to protect him
with my life if he feared the Arabs; but the old man, being too
feeble to travel himself, said he would send his son with me.

Next day we pushed on a double march through the forest, and
reached a nullah.  As it crosses the track in a southerly
direction, this might either be the head of the Kululu mongo or
river, which, passing through  the district of Kiwele, drains
westward into the Malagarazi river, and thence into the
Tanganyika, or else the most westerly tributary to the Ruaha
river, draining eastward into the sea.  The plateau, however, is
apparently so flat here, that nothing b a minute survey, or
rather following the watercourse, could determine the matter. 
Then emerging from the wilderness, we came into the open
cultivated district of Tura, or "put down"--called so by the
natives because it was, only a few years ago, the first cleared
space in the wilderness, and served as a good halting-station,
after the normal ten day's march in the jungles, where we had now
been struggling more than a month.

The whole place, once so fertile, was now almost depopulated and
in a sad state of ruin, showing plainly the savage ravages of
war; for the Arabs and their slaves, when they take the field,
think more of plunder and slavery than the object they started
on--each man of the force looking out for himself.  The
incentives, too, are so great;--a young woman might be caught
(the greatest treasure of earth), or a boy or a girl, a cow or a
goat--all of the fortunes, of themselves too irresistible to be
overlooked when the future is doubtful.  Here Sheikh Said broke
down in health of a complaint which he formerly had suffered
from, and from which I at once saw he would never recover
sufficiently well to be ever effective again. It was a sad
misfortune, as the men had great confidence in him, being the
representative of their Zanzibar government: still it could not
be helped; for, as a sick man is, after all, the greatest
possible impediment to a march, it was better to be rid of him
than have the trouble of dragging him; so I made up my mind, as
soon as we reached Kaze, I would drop him there with the Arabs. 
He could not be moved on the 16th, so I marched across the plain
and put up in some villages on its western side.  Whilst waiting
for the sheikh's arrival, some villagers at night stole several
loads of beads, and ran off with them; but my men, finding the
theft out in time, hunted them down, and recovered all but one
load--for the thieves had thrown their loads down as soon as they
found they were hotly pursued.

Early this morning I called all the head men of the village
together, and demanded the beads to be restored to me; for, as I
was living with them, they were responsible, according to the
laws of the country.  They acknowledged the truth and force of my
demand, and said they would each give me a cow as an earnest,
until their chief, who was absent, arrived.  This, of course, was
objected to, as the chief, in his absence, must have deputed some
one to govern for him, and I expected him to settle at once, that
I might proceed with the march.  Then selecting five of my head
men to conduct the case, with five of their elders, it was
considered my losses were equivalent to thirty head of cattle. 
As I remitted the penalty to fifteen head, these were made over
to me, and we went on with the march--all feeling delighted with
the issue but the Hottentots, who, not liking the loss of the
second fifteen cows, said that in Kafirland, where the laws of
the country are the same as here, the whole would have been
taken, and, as it was, they thought I was depriving them of their
rights to beef.

By a double march, the sheikh riding in a hammock slung on a
pole, we now made Kuale, or "Partridge" nullah, which, crossing
the road to the northward, drains these lands to the Malagarazi
river, and thence into the Tanganyika lake.  Thence, having spent
the night in the jungle, we next morning pushed into the
cultivated district of Rubuga, and put up in some half-deserted
tembes, where the ravages of war were even more disgusting to
witness than at Tura. The chief, as I have said, was a slave,
placed there by the Arabs on the condition that he would allow
all traders and travellers to help themselves without payment as
long as they chose to reside there. In consequence of this wicked
arrangement, I found it impossible to keep my men from picking
and stealing.  They looked upon plunder as their fortune and
right, and my interference as unjustifiable.

By making another morning and evening march, we then reached the
western extremity of this cultivated opening; where, after
sleeping the night, we threaded through another forest to the
little clearance of Kigue, and in one more march through forest
arrived in the large and fertile district of Unyanyembe, the
centre of Unyamuezi--the Land of the Moon--within five miles of
Kaze which is the name of a well in the village of Tbora, now
constituted the great central slave and ivory merchants' depot. 
My losses up to this date (23d) were as follows:--One Hottentot
dead and five returned; one freeman sent back with the
Hottentots, and one flogged and turned off; twenty-five of Sultan
Majid's gardeners deserted; ninety-eight of the original
Wanyamuezi porters deserted; twelve mules and three donkeys dead. 
Besides which, more than half of my property had been stolen;
whilst the travelling expenses had been unprecedented, in
consequence of the severity of the famine throughout the whole
length of the march.




                           Chapter V



                           Unyamuezi

The Country and People of U-n-ya-muezi--Kaze, the Capital--Old
Musa --The Naked Wakidi--The N'yanza, and the Question of the
River Running in or out--The Contest between Mohinna and "Short-
legs"-- Famine--The Arabs and Local Wars--The Sultana of
Unyambewa--Ungurue "The Pig"--Pillage.

U-n-ya-muezi--Country of Moon--must have been one of the largest
kingdoms in Africa.  It is little inferior in size to England,
and of much the same shape, though now, instead of being united,
it is cut up into petty states.  In its northern extremities it
is known by the appellation U-sukuma--country north; and in the
southern, U-takama--country south.  There are no historical
traditions known to the people; neither was anything ever written
concerning their country, as far as we know, until the Hindus,
who traded with the east coast of Africa, opened commercial
dealings with its people in salves and ivory, possibly some time
prior to the birth of our Saviour, when, associated with their
name, Men of the Moon, sprang into existence the Mountains of the
Moon.  These Men of the Moon are hereditarily the greatest
traders in Africa, and are the only people who, for love of
barter and change, will leave their own country as porters and go
to the coast, and they do so with as much zest as our country-
folk go to a fair.  As far back as we can trace they have done
this, and they still do it as heretofore. The whole of their
country ranges from 3000 to 4000 feet above the sea-level--a high
plateau, studded with little outcropping hills of granite,
between which, in the valleys, there are numerous fertilising
springs of fresh water, and rich iron ore is found in sandstone. 
Generally industrious--much more so than most other negroes--they
cultivate extensively, make cloths of cotton in their own looms,
smelt iron and work it up very expertly, build tembes to live in
over a large portion of their country, but otherwise live in
grass huts, and keep flocks and herds of considerable extent.

The Wanyamuezi, however, are not a very well-favoured people in
physical appearance, and are much darker than either the Wazaramo
or the Wagogo, though many of their men are handsome and their
women pretty; neither are they well dressed or well armed, being
wanting in pluck and gallantry.  Their women, generally, are
better dressed than the men.  Cloths fastened round under the
arms are their national costume, along with a necklace of beads,
large brass or copper wire armlets, and a profusion of thin
circles, called sambo, made of the giraffe's tail-hairs bound
round by the thinnest iron or copper wire; whilst the men at home
wear loin-cloths, but in the field, or whilst travelling, simply
hang a goat-skin over their shoulders, exposing at least three-
fourths of their body in a rather indecorous manner.  In all
other respects they ornament themselves like the women, only,
instead of a long coil of wire wound up the arm, they content
themselves with having massive rings of copper or brass on the
wrist; and they carry for arms a spear and bow and arrows.  All
extract more or less their lower incisors, and cut a [upside-down
V shape] between their two upper incisors.  The whole tribe are
desperate smokers, and greatly given to drink.

On the 24th, we all, as many as were left of us, marched into the
merchant's depot, S. lat. 5§ 0' 52", and E. long. 33§ 1'
34",[FN#7] escorted by Musa, who advanced to meet us, and guided
us into his tembe, where he begged we would reside with him until
we could find men to carry our property on to Karague.  He added
that he would accompany us; for he was on the point of going
there when my first instalment of property arrived, but deferred
his intention out of respect to myself.  He had been detained at
Kaze ever since I last left it in consequence of the Arabs having
provoked a war with Manua Sera, to which he was adverse.  For a
long time also he had been a chained prisoner; as the Arabs,
jealous of the favour Manua Sera had shown to him in preference
to themselves, basely accused him of supplying Manua Sera with
gunpowder, and bound him hand and foot "like a slave."  It was
delightful to see old Musa's face again, and the supremely
hospitable, kind, and courteous manner in which he looked after
us, constantly bringing in all kind of small delicacies, and
seeing that nothing was wanting to make us happy. All the
property I had sent on in advance he had stored away; or rather,
I should say, as much as had reached him, for the road expenses
had eaten a great hole in it.

Once settled down into position, Sheikh Snay and the whole
conclave of Arab merchants came to call on me.  They said they
had an army of four hundred slaves armed with muskets ready to
take the field at once to hunt down Manua Sera, who was cutting
their caravan road to pieces, and had just seized, by their
latest reports, a whole convoy of their ammunition.  I begged
them strongly to listen to reason, and accept my advice as an old
soldier, not to carry on their guerilla warfare in such a
headlong hurry, else they would be led a dance by Manua Sera, as
we had been by Tantia Topee in India. I advised them to allow me
to mediate between them, after telling them what a favourable
interview I had had with Manua Sera and Maula, whose son was at
that moment concealed in Musa's tembe. My advice, however, was
not wanted.  Snay knew better than any one how to deal with
savages, and determined on setting out as soon as his army had
"eaten their beef-feast of war."

On my questioning him about the Nile, Snay still thought the
N'yanza was the source of the Jub river[FN#8] as he did in our
former journey, but gave way when I told him that vessels
frequented the Nile, as this also coincided with his knowledge of
navigators in vessels appearing on some waters to the northward
of Unyoro.  In a great hurry he then bade me good-bye; when, as
he thought it would be final, I gave him, in consideration of his
former good services to the last expedition, one of the gold
watches given me by the Indian Government.  I saw him no more,
though he and all the other Arabs sent me presents of cows,
goats, and rice, with a notice that they should have gone on
their war-oath before, only, hearing of my arrival, out of due
respect to my greatness they waited to welcome me in.  Further,
after doing for Manua Sera, they were determined to go on to
Ugogo to assist Salem bin Saif and the other merchants on, during
which, at the same time, they would fight all the Wagogo who
persisted in taking taxes and in harassing caravans.  At the
advice of Musa, I sent Maula's son off at night to tell