 the old
chief how sorry I was to find the Arabs so hot-headed I could not
even effect an arrangement with them.  It was a great pity; for
Manua Sera was so much liked by the Wanyamuezi, they would, had
they been able, have done anything to restore him.

Next day the non-belligerent Arabs left in charge of the station,
headed by my old friends Abdulla and Mohinna, came to pay their
respects again, recognising in me, as they said, a
"personification of their sultan," and therefore considering what
they were doing only due to my rank.  They regretted with myself
that Snay was so hot-headed; for they themselves thought a treaty
of peace would have been the best thing for them, for they were
more than half-ruined already, and saw no hope for the future. 
Then, turning to geography, I told Abdulla all I had written and
lectured in England concerning his stories about navigators on
the N'yanza, which I explained must be the Nile, and wished to
know if I should alter it in any way: but he said, "Do not; you
may depend it will all turn out right;" to which Musa added, all
the people in the north told him that when the N'yanza rose, the
stream rushed with such violence it tore up islands and floated
them away.

I was puzzled at this announcement, not then knowing that both
the lake and the Nile, as well as all ponds, were called N'yanza:
but we shall see afterwards that he was right; and it was in
consequence of this confusion in the treatment of distinctly
different geographical features under one common name by these
people, that in my former journey I could not determine where the
lake had ended and the Nile began.  Abdulla again--he had done so
on the former journey--spoke to me of a wonderful mountain to the
northward of Karague, so high and steep no one could ascend it. 
It was, he said, seldom visible, being up in the clouds, where
white matter, snow or hail, often fell.  Musa said this hill was
in Ruanda, a much larger country than Urundi; and further, both
men said, as they had said before, that the lands of Usoga and
Unyoro were islands, being surrounded by water; and a salt lake,
which was called N'yanza, though not the great Victoria N'yanza
lay on the other said of the Unyoro, from which direction
Rumanika, king of Karague, sometimes got beads forwarded to him
by Kamrasi, king of Unyoro, of a different sort from any brought
from Zanzibar.  Moreover, these beads were said to have been
plundered from white men by the Wakidi,--a stark-naked people who
live up in trees--have small stools fixed on behind, always ready
for sitting--wear their hair hanging down as far as the rump, all
covered with cowrie-shells--suspend beads from wire attached to
their ears and their lower lips--and wear strong iron collars and
bracelets.

This people, I was told, are so fierce in war that no other tribe
can stand against them, though they only fight with short spears.
When this discourse was ended, ever perplexed about the
Tanganyika being a still lake, I enquired of Mohinna and other
old friends what they thought about the Marungu river: did it run
into or out of the lake? and they all still adhered to its
running into the lake-- which, after all, in my mind, is the most
conclusive argument that it does run out of the lake, making it
one of a chain of lakes leading to the N'yanza, and through it by
the Zambezi into the sea; for all the Arabs on the former journey
said the Rusizi river ran out of the Tanganyika, as also the
Kitangule ran out of the N'yanza, and the Nile ran into it, even
though Snay said he thought the Jub river drained the N'yanza. 
All these statements were, when literally translated into
English, the reverse of what the speakers, using a peculiar Arab
idiom, meant to say; for all the statements made as to the flow
of rivers by the negroes--who apparently give the same meaning to
"out" and "in" as we do--contradicted the Arabs in their
descriptions of the direction of the flow of these rivers.

Mohinna now gave us a very graphic description of his fight with
Short-legs, the late chief of Khoko.  About a year ago, as he was
making his way down to the coast with his ivory merchandise, on
arrival at Khoko, and before his camp was fortified with a ring-
fence of thorns, some of his men went to drink at a well, where
they no sooner arrived than the natives began to bean them with
sticks, claiming the well as their property.  This commenced a
row, which brought out a large body of men, who demanded a
bullock at the point of their spears.  Mohinna hearing this, also
came to the well, and said he would not listen to their demand,
but would drink as he wished, for the water was the gift of God. 
Words then changed to blows.  All Mohinna's pagazis bolted, and
his merchandise fell into the hands of the Wagogo.  Had his camp
been fortified, he think he would have been too much for his
enemies; but, as it was, he retaliated by shooting Short-legs in
the head, and at once bolted back to Kaze with a few slaves as
followers, and his three wives.

The change that had taken place in Unyanyembe since I last left
it was quite surprising.  Instead of the Arabs appearing
merchants, as they did formerly, they looked more like great
farmers, with huge stalls of cattle attached to their houses;
whilst the native villages were all in ruins--so much so that, to
obtain corn for my men, I had to send out into the district
several days' journey off, and even then had to pay the most
severe famine prices for what I got.  The Wanyamuezi, I was
assured, were dying of starvation in all directions; for, in
addition to the war, the last rainy season had been so light, all
their crops had failed.

27th and 28th.--I now gave all my men presents for the severe
trials they had experienced in the wilderness, forgetting, as I
told them, the merciless manner in which they had plundered me;
but as I have a trifle more in proportion, to the three sole
remaining pagazis, because they had not finished their work, my
men were all discontented, and wished to throw back their
presents, saying I did not love them, although they were
"perminents," as much as the "temperaries."  They, however, gave
in, after some hours of futile arguments, on my making them
understand, through Baraka, that what they saw me give to the
pagazis would, if they reflected, only tend to prove to them that
I was not a bad master who forgot his obligations when he could
get no more out of his servants.

I then went into a long inquiry with Musa about our journey
northward to Karague; and as he said there were no men to be
found in or near Unyanyembe, for they were either all killed or
engaged in the war, it was settled he should send some of his
head men on to Rungua, where he had formerly resided, trading for
some years, and was a great favourite with the chief of the
place, by name Kiringuana.  He also settled that I might take out
of his establishment of slaves as many men as I could induce to
go with me, for he thought them more trouble than profit, hired
porters being more safe; moreover, he said the plan would be of
great advantage to him, as I offered to pay, both man and master,
each the same monthly stipend as I gave my present men.  This was
paying double, and all the heavier a burden, as the number I
should require to complete my establishment to one hundred armed
men would be sixty.  He, however, very generously advised me not
to take them, as they would give so much trouble; but finally
gave way when I told him I felt I could not advance beyond
Karague unless I was quite independent of the natives there--a
view in which he concurred.

29th and 30th.--Jafu, another Indian merchant here, and co-
partner of Musa, came in from a ten days' search after grain, and
described the whole country to be in the most dreadful state of
famine. Wanyamuezi were lying about dead from starvation in all
directions, and he did not think we should ever get through Usui,
as Suwarora, the chief, was so extortionate he would "tear us to
pieces"; but advised our waiting until the war was settled, when
all the Arabs would combine and go with us.  Musa even showed
fear, but arranged, at my suggestion, that he should send some
men to Rumanika, informing him of our intention to visit him, and
begging, at the same time, he would use his influence in
preventing our being detained in Usui.

I may here explain that the country Uzinza was once a large
kingdom, governed by a king named Ruma, of Wahuma blood.  At his
death, which took place in Dagara's time (the present Rumanika's
father), the kingdom was contested by his two sons, Rohinda and
Suwarora, but, at the intercession of Dagara, was divided--
Rohinda taking the eastern, called Ukhanga, and Suwarora the
western half of the country, called Usui.  This measure made Usui
feudatory to Karague, so that much of the produce of the
extortions committed in Usui went to Karague, and therefore they
were recognised, though the odium always rested on Suwarora, "the
savage extortioner," rather than on the mild-disposed king of
Karague, who kept up the most amicable relations with every one
who visited him.

Musa, I must say, was most loud in his praises of Rumanika; and
on the other hand, as Musa, eight years ago, had saved Rumanika's
throne for him against an insurrection got up by his younger
brother Rogero, Rumanika, always regarding Musa as his saviour,
never lost an opportunity to show his gratitude, and would have
done anything that Musa might have asked him.  Of this matter,
however, more in Karague.

31st.--To-day, Jafu, who had lost many ivories at Khoko when
Mohinna was attacked there, prepared 100 slaves, with Said bin
Osman, Mohinna's brother, with a view to follow down Snay, and,
combining forces, attack Hori Hori, hoping to recover their
losses; for it appeared to them the time had now come when their
only hope left in carrying their trade to a successful issue, lay
in force of arms. They would therefore not rest satisfied until
they had reduced Khoko and Usekhe both, by actual force, to
acknowledge their superiority, "feeding on them" until the
Ramazan, when they would return with all the merchants detained
in Ugogo, and, again combining their forces, they would fall on
Usui, to reduce that country also.

When these men had gone, a lunatic set the whole place in
commotion. He was a slave of Musa's, who had wounded some men
previously in his wild excesses, and had been tied up; but now,
breaking loose again, he swore he would not be satisfied until he
killed some "big man." His strength was so great no one could
confine him, though they hunted him into a hut, where, having
seized a gun and some arrows, he defied any one to put hands on
him.  Here, however, he was at last reduced to submission and a
better state of his senses by starvation: for I must add, the
African is much give to such mental fits of aberration at certain
periods: these are generally harmless, but sometimes not; but
they come and they go again without any visible cause.

1st.--Musa's men now started for Rungua, and promised to bring
all the porters we wanted by the first day of the next moon.  We
found that this would be early enough, for all the members of the
expedition, excepting myself, were suffering from the effects of
the wilderness life--some with fever, some with scurvy, and some
with ophthalmia--which made it desirable they should all have
rest. Little now was done besides counting out my property, and
making Sheikh Said, who became worse and worse, deliver his
charge of Cafila Bashi over to Bombay for good.  When it was
found so much had been stolen, especially of the best articles, I
was obliged to purchase many things from Musa, paying 400 per
cent, which he said was their value here, over the market price
of Zanzibar.  I also got him to have all my coils of brass and
copper wire made into bracelet, as is customary, to please the
northern people.

7th.--To-day information was brought here that whilst Manua Sera
was on his way from Ugogo to keep his appointment with me, Sheikh
Snay's army came on him at Tura, where he was ensconced in a
tembe. Hearing this, Snay, instead of attacking the village at
once, commenced negotiations with the chief of the place by
demanding him to set free his guest, otherwise they, the Arabs,
would storm the tembe.  The chief, unfortunately, did not comply
at once, but begged grace for one night, saying that if Manua
Sera was found there in the morning they might do as they liked. 
Of course Manua bolted; and the Arabs, seeing the Tura people all
under arms ready to defend themselves the next morning, set at
them in earnest, and shot, murdered, or plundered the whole of
the district.  Then, whilst Arabs were sending in their captures
of women, children, and cattle, Manua Sera made off to a district
called Dara, where he formed an alliance with its chief, Kifunja,
and boasted he would attack Kaze as soon as the travelling season
commenced, when the place would be weakened by the dispersion of
the Arabs on their ivory excursions.

The startling news set the place in a blaze, and brought all the
Arabs again to seek my advice for they condemned what Snay had
done in not listening to me before, and wished to know if I could
not now treat for them with Manua Sera, which they thought could
be easily managed, as Manua Sera himself was not only the first
to propose mediation, but was actually on his way here for the
purpose when Snay opposed him.  I said nothing could give me
greater pleasure than mediating for them, to put a stop to these
horrors, but it struck me the case had now gone too far.  Snay,
in opposition to my advice, was bent on fighting; he could not be
recalled and unless all the Arabs were of one mind, I ran the
risk of committing myself to a position I could not maintain.  To
this they replied that the majority were still at Kaze, all
wishing for peace at any price, and that whatever terms I might
wish to dictate they would agree to. Then I said, "What would you
do with Mkisiwa? you have made him chief, and cannot throw him
over."  "Oh, that," they said, "can be easily managed; for
formerly, when we confronted Manua Sera at Nguru, we offered to
give him as much territory as his father governed, though not
exactly in the same place; but he treated our message with
disdain, not knowing then what a fix he was in. Now, however, as
he has seen more, and wishes for peace himself, there can be no
difficulty."  I then ordered two of my men to go with two of
Musa's to acquaint Manua Sera with what we were about, and to
know his views on the subject; but these men returned to say
Manua Sera could not be found, for he was driven from "pillar to
post" by the different native chiefs, as, wherever he went, his
army ate up their stores, and brought nothing but calamities with
them. Thus died this second attempted treaty.  Musa then told me
it was well it turned out so; for Manua Sera would never believe
the Arabs, as they had broken faith so often before, even after
exchanging blood by cutting incision in one another's legs--the
most sacred bond or oath the natives know of.

As nothing more of importance was done, I set out with Grant to
have a week's shooting in the district, under the guidance of an
old friend, Fundi Sangoro, Musa's "head gamekeeper," who assured
me that the sable antelope and blanc boc, specimens of which I
had not yet seen, inhabited some low swampy place called N'yama,
or "Meat," not far distant, on the left bank of the Wale nullah. 
My companion unfortunately got fever here, and was prevented from
going out, and I did little better; for although I waded up to my
middle every day, and wounded several blanc boc, I only bagged
one, and should not have got even him, had it not happened that
some lions in the night pulled him down close to our camp, and
roared so violently that they told us the story.  The first thing
in the morning I wished to have at them; but they took the hint
of daybreak to make off, and left me only the half of the animal. 
I saw only one sable antelope.  We all went back to Kaze,
arriving there on the 24th.

25th to 13th.--Days rolled on, and nothing was done in
particular-- beyond increasing my stock of knowledge of distant
places and people, enlarging my zoological collection, and taking
long series of astronomical observations--until the 13th, when
the whole of Kaze was depressed by a sad scene of mourning and
tears.  Some slaves came in that night--having made their way
through the woods from Ugogo, avoiding the track to save
themselves from detection-- and gave information that Snay, Jafu,
and five other Arabs, had been killed, as well as a great number
of slaves.  The expedition, they said, had been defeated, and the
positions were so complicated nobody knew what to do.  At first
the Arabs achieved two brilliant successes, having succeeded in
killing Hori Hori of Khoko, when they recovered their ivory, made
slaves of all they could find, and took a vast number of cattle;
then attacking Usekhe they reduced that place to submission by
forcing a ransom out of its people.  At this period, however,
they heard that a whole caravan, carrying 5000 dollars' worth of
property, had been cut up by the people of Mzanza, a small
district ten miles north of Usekhe; so, instead of going on to
Kanyenye to relieve the caravans which were waiting there for
them, they foolishly divided their forces into three parts. Of
these they sent one to take their loot back to Kaze, another to
form a reserve force at Mdaburu, on the east flank of the
wilderness, and a third, headed by Snay and Jafu, to attack
Mzanza. At the first onset Snay and Jafu carried everything
before them, and became so excited over the amount of their loot
that they lost all feelings of care or precaution.

In this high exuberance of spirits, a sudden surprise turned
their momentary triumph into a total defeat; for some Wahumba,
having heard the cries of the Wagogo, joined in their cause, and
both together fell on the Arab force with such impetuosity that
the former victors were now scattered in all directions.  Those
who could run fast enough were saved--the rest were speared to
death by the natives.  Nobody knew how Jafu fell; but Snay, after
running a short distance, called one of his slaves, and begged
him to take his gun, saying, "I am too old to keep up with you;
keep this gun for my sake, for I will lie down here and take my
chance."  He never was seen again.  But this was not all their
misfortunes; for the slaves who brought in this information had
met the first detachment, sent with the Khoko loot, at Kigua,
where, they said, the detachment had been surprised by Manua
Sera, who, having fortified a village with four hundred men,
expecting this sort of thing, rushed out upon them, and cut them
all up.

The Arabs, after the first burst of their grief was over, came to
me again in a body, and begged me to assist them, for they were
utterly undone.  Manua Sera prevented their direct communication
with their detachment at Mdaburu, and that again was cut off from
their caravans at Kanyenye by the Mzanza people, and in fact all
the Wagogo; so they hoped at least I would not forsake them,
which they heard I was going to do, as Manua Sera had also
threatened to attack Kaze.  I then told them, finally that their
proposals were now beyond my power, for I had a duty to perform
as well as themselves, and in a day or two I should be off.

14th to 17th.--On the 14th thirty-nine porters were brought in
from Rungua by Musa's men, who said they had collected one
hundred and twenty, and brought them to within ten miles of this,
when some travellers frightened all but thirty-nine away, by
telling them, "Are you such fools as to venture into Kaze now?
all the Arabs have been killed, or were being cut up and pursued
by Manua Sera." This sad disappointment threw me on my "beam-
ends."  For some reason or other none of Musa's slaves would take
service, and the Arabs prevented theirs from leaving the place,
as it was already too short of hands.  To do the best under these
circumstances, I determined on going to Rungua with what kit
could be carried, leaving Bombay behind with Musa until such time
as I should arrive there, and, finding more men, could send them
back for the rest.  I then gave Musa the last of the gold watches
the Indian Government had given me;[FN#9] and, bidding Sheikh
Said take all our letters and specimens back to the coast as soon
as the road was found practicable, set out on the march
northwards with Grant and Baraka, and all the rest of my men who
were well enough to carry loads, as well as some of Musa's head
men, who knew where to get porters.

After passing Masange and Zimbili, we put up a night in the
village of Iviri, on the northern border of Unyanyembe, and found
several officers there, sent by Mkisiwa, to enforce a levy of
soldiers to take the field with the Arabs at Kaze against Manua
Sera; to effect which, they walked about ringing bells, and
bawling out that if a certain percentage of all the inhabitants
did not muster, the village chief would be seized, and their
plantations confiscated. My men all mutinied here for increase of
ration allowances.  To find themselves food with, I had given
them all one necklace of beads each per diem since leaving Kaze,
in lieu of cloth, which hitherto had been served out for that
purpose.  It was a very liberal allowance, because the Arabs
never gave more than one necklace to every three men, and that,
too, of inferior quality to what I served.  I brought them to at
last by starvation, and then we went on.  Dipping down into a
valley between two clusters of granitic hills, beautifully
clothed with trees and grass, studded here and there with rich
plantations, we entered the district of Usagari, and on the
second day forded the Gombe nullah again--in its upper course,
called Kuale.

Rising again up to the main level of the plantation, we walked
into the boma of the chief of Unyambewa, Singinya, whose wife was
my old friend the late sultana Ungugu's lady's-maid.  Immediately
on our entering her palace, she came forward to meet me with the
most affable air of a princess, begged I would always come to her
as I did then, and sought to make every one happy and
comfortable. Her old mistress, she said, died well stricken in
years; and, as she had succeeded her, the people of her country
invited Singinya to marry her, because feuds had arisen about the
rights of succession; and it was better a prince, whom they
thought best suited by birth and good qualities, should head
their warriors, and keep all in order.  At that moment Singinya
was out in the field fighting his enemies; and she was sure, when
he heard I was here, that he would be very sorry he had missed
seeing me.

We next went on to the district of Ukumbi, and put up in a
village there, on approaching which all the villagers turned out
to resist us, supposing we were an old enemy of theirs.  They
flew about brandishing their spears, and pulling their bows in
the most grotesque attitudes, alarming some of my porters so much
that they threw down their loads and bolted.  All the country is
richly cultivated, though Indian corn at that time was the only
grain ripe. The square, flat-topped tembes had now been left
behind, and instead the villagers lived in small collections of
grass huts, surrounded by palisades of tall poles.

Proceeding on we put up at the small settlement of Usenda, the
proprietor of which was a semi-negro Arab merchant called
Sangoro. He had a large collection of women here, but had himself
gone north with a view to trade in Karague.  Report, however,
assured us that he was then detained in Usui by Suwarora, its
chief, on the plea of requiring his force of musketeers to
prevent the Watuta from pillaging his country, for these Watuta
lived entirely on plunder of other people's cattle.

With one move, by alternately crossing strips of forest and
cultivation, studded here and there with small hills of granite,
we forded the Qaunde nullah--a tributary to the Gombe--and
entered the rich flat district of Mininga, where the gingerbread-
palm grows abundantly.  The greatest man we found here was a
broken-down ivory merchant called Sirboko, who gave us a good hut
to live in.  Next morning, I believe at the suggestion of my
Wanguana, with Baraka at their head, he induced me to stop there;
for he said Rungua had been very recently destroyed by the
Watuta, and this place could afford porters better than it.  To
all appearance this was the case, for this district was better
cultivated than any place I had seen. I also felt a certain
inclination to stop, as I was dragging on sick men, sorely
against my feelings; and I also thought I had better not go
farther away from my rear property; but, afraid of doing wrong in
not acting up to Musa's directions, I called up his head men who
were with me, and asked them what they thought of the matter, as
they had lately come from Rungua.  On their confirming Sirboki's
story, and advising my stopping, I acceded to their
recommendation, and immediately gave Musa's men orders to look
out for porters.

Hearing this, all my Wanguana danced with delight; and I, fearing
there was some treachery, called Musa's men again, saying I had
changed my mind, and wished to go on in the afternoon; but when
the time came, not one of our porters could be seen.  There was
now no help for it; so, taking it coolly, I gave Musa's men
presents, begged them to look sharp in getting the men up, and
trusted all would end well in the long-run.  Sirboko's attentions
were most warm and affecting.  He gave us cows, rice, and milk,
with the best place he had to live in, and looked after us as
constantly and tenderly as if he had been our father.  It seemed
quite unjust to harbour any suspicion against him.

He gave the following account of himself:--He used to trade in
ivory, on account of some Arabs at Zanzibar.  On crossing Usui,
he once had a fight with one of the chiefs of the country and
killed him; but he got through all right, because the natives,
after two or three of their number had been killed, dispersed,
and feared to come near his musket again.  He visited Uganda when
the late king Sunna was living, and even traded Usoga; but as he
was coming down from these northern countries he lost all his
property by a fire breaking out in a village he stopped in, which
drove him down here a ruined man.  As it happened, however, he
put up with the chief of this district, Ugali--Mr Paste--at a
time when the Watuta attacked the place and drove all the
inhabitants away.  The chief, too, was on the point of bolting,
when Sirboko prevented him by saying, "If you will only have
courage to stand by me, the Watuta shall not come near--at any
rate, if they do, let us both die together." The Watuta at that
time surrounded the district, crowning all the little hills
overlooking it; but fearing the Arabs' guns might be many, they
soon walked away, and left them in peace.  In return for this
magnanimity, and feeling a great security in firearms, Ugali then
built the large enclosure, with huts for Sirboko, we were now
living in.  Sirboko, afraid to return to the coast lest he should
be apprehended for debt, has resided here ever since, doing odd
jobs for other traders, increasing his family, and planting
extensively. His agricultural operations are confined chiefly to
rice, because the natives do not like it enough to be tempted to
steal it.

25th to 2d.--I now set to work, collecting, stuffing, and
drawing, until the 2d, when Musa's men came in with three hundred
men, whom I sent on to Kaze at once with my specimens and
letters, directing Musa and Bombay to come on and join us
immediately.  Whilst waiting for these men's return, one of
Sirboko's slaves, chained up by him, in the most piteous manner
cried out to me: "Hai Bana wangi, Bana wangi (Oh, my lord, my
lord), take pity on me!  When I was a free man I saw you at
Uvira, on the Tanganyika lake, when you were there; but since
then the Watuta, in a fight at Ujiji, speared me all over and
left me for dead, when I was seized by the people, sold to the
Arabs, and have been in chains ever since.  Oh, I saw, Bana
wangi, if you would only liberate me I would never run away, but
would serve you faithfully all my life."  This touching appeal
was too strong for my heart to withstand, so I called up Sirboko,
and told him, if he would liberate this one man to please me he
should be no loser; and the release was effected.  He was then
christened Farham (Joy), and was enrolled in my service with the
rest of my freed men.  I then inquired if it was true the Wabembe
were cannibals, and also circumcised.  In one of their slaves the
latter statement was easily confirmed.  I was assure that he was
not a cannibal; for the whole tribe of Wabembe, when they cannot
get human flesh otherwise, give a goat to their neighbours for a
sick or dying child, regarding such flesh as the best of all.  No
other cannibals, however, were known of; but the Masai, and their
cognates, the Wahumba, Wataturu, Wakasange, Wanyaramba, and even
the Wagogo and Wakimbu, circumcise.

On the 15th I was surprised to find Bombay come in with all my
rear property and a great quantity of Musa's, but with out the
old man. By a letter from Sheikh Said I then found that, since my
leaving Kaze, the Arabs had, along with Mkisiwa, invested the
position of Manua Sera at Kigue, and forced him to take flight
again. Afterwards the Arabs, returning to Kaze, found Musa
preparing to leave.  Angry at this attempt to desert them, they
persuaded him to give up his journey north for the present; so
that at the time Bombay left, Musa was engaged as public
auctioneer in selling the effects of Snay, Jafu, and others, but
privately said he would follow me on to Karague as soon as his
rice was cut.  Adding a little advice of his own, Sheikh Said
pressed me to go on with the journey as fast as possible, because
all the Arabs had accused me of conspiring with Manua Sera, and
would turn against me unless I soon got away.

2d to 30th.--Disgusted with Musa's vacillatory conduct, on the
22d I sent him a letter containing a bit of my mind.  I had given
him, as a present, sufficient cloth to pay for his porters, as
well as a watch and a good sum of money, and advised his coming
on at once, for the porters who had just brought in my rear
property would not take pay to go on to Karague; and so I was
detained again, waiting whilst his head man went to Rungua to
look for more.  Five days after this, a party of Sangoro's
arrived from Karague, saying they had been detained three months
in Usui by Suwarora, who had robbed them of an enormous quantity
of property, and oppressed them so that all their porters ran
away.  Now, slight as this little affair might appear, it was of
vital importance to me, as I found all my men shaking their heads
and predicting what might happen to us when we got there; so, as
a forlorn hope, I sent Baraka with another letter to Musa,
offering to pay as much money for fifty men carrying muskets as
would buy fifty slaves, and, in addition to that, I offered to
pay them what my men were receiving as servants. Next day (23d)
the chief Ugali came to pay his respects to us. He was a fine-
looking young man, about thirty years old, the husband of thirty
wives, but he had only three children.  Much surprised at the
various articles composing our kit, he remarked that our
"sleeping-clothes"--blankets--were much better than his royal
robes; but of all things that amused him most were our picture-
books, especially some birds drawn by Wolf.

Everything still seemed going against me; for on the following
day (24th) Musa's men came in from Rungua to say the Watuta were
"out." They had just seized fifty head of cattle from Rungua, and
the people were in such a state of alarm they dared not leave
their homes and families.  I knew not what to do, for there was
no hope left but in what Baraka might bring; and as that even
would be insufficient, I sent Musa's men into Kaze, to increase
the original number by thirty men more.

Patience, thank God, I had a good stock of, so I waited quietly
until the 30th, when I was fairly upset by the arrival of a
letter from Kaze, stating that Baraka had arrived, and had been
very insolent both to Musa and to Sheikh Said.  The bearer of the
letter was at once to go and search for porters at Rungua, but
not a word was said about the armed men I had ordered.  At the
same time reports from the other side came in, to the effect that
the Arabs at Kaze and Msene had bribed the Watuta to join them,
and overrun the whole country from Ugogo to Usui; and, in
consequence of this, all the natives on the line I should have to
take were in such dread of that terrible wandering race of
savages, who had laid waste in turn all the lands from N'yassa to
Usui on their west flank, that not a soul dared leave his home. 
I could now only suppose that this foolish and hasty
determination of the Arabs, who, quite unprepared to carry out
their wicked alliance to fight, still had set every one against
their own interests as well as mine, had not reached Musa, so I
made up my mind at once to return to Kaze, and settle all matters
I had in my heart with himself and the Arabs in person.

This settled, I next, in this terrible embarrassment, determined
on sending back the last of the Hottentots, as all four of them,
though still wishing to go on with me, distinctly said they had
not the power to continue the march, for they had never ceased
suffering from fever and jaundice, which had made them all yellow
as guineas, save one, who was too black to change colour.  It
felt to me as if I were selling my children, having once
undertaken to lead them through the journey; but if I did not
send them back then, I never could afterwards, and therefore I
allowed the more substantial feelings of humanity to overcome
these compunctions.

Next morning, then, after giving the Tots over in charge of some
men to escort them on to Kaze quietly, I set our myself with a
dozen men, and the following evening I put up with Musa, who told
me Baraka had just left without one man--all his slaves having
become afraid to go, since the news of the Arab alliance had
reached Kaze. Suwarora had ordered his subjects to run up a line
of bomas to protect his frontier, and had proclaimed his
intention to kill every coast-man who dared attempt to enter
Usui.  My heart was ready to sink as I turned into bed, and I was
driven to think of abandoning everybody who was not strong enough
to go on with me carrying a load.

3d to 13th.--Baraka, hearing I had arrived, then came back to me,
and confirmed Musa's words.  The Arabs, too, came flocking in to
beg, nay implore, me to help them out of their difficulties. Many
of them were absolutely ruined, they said; others had their
houses full of stores unemployed.  At Ugogo those who wished to
join them were unable to do so, for their porters, what few were
left, were all dying of starvation; and at that moment Manua Sera
was hovering about, shooting, both night and day, all the poor
villagers in the district, or driving them away.  Would to God,
they said, I would mediate for them with Manua Sera--they were
sure I would be successful--and then they would give me as many
armed men as I liked.  Their folly in all their actions, I said,
proved to me that anything I might attempt to do would be futile,
for their alliance with the Watuta, when they were not prepared
to act, at once damned them in my eyes as fools.  This they in
their terror acknowledged, but said it was not past remedy, if I
would join them, to counteract what had been done in that matter. 
Suffice it now to say, after a long conversation, arguing all the
pros and cons over, I settled I would write out all the articles
of a treaty of peace, by which they should be liable to have all
their property forfeited on the coast if they afterwards broke
faith; and I begged them to call the next day and sign it.

They were no sooner gone, however, than Musa assured me they had
killed old Maula of Rubuga in the most treacherous manner, as
follows:--Khamis, who is an Arab of most gentlemanly aspect, on
returning from Ugogo attended by slaves, having heard that Maula
was desirous of adjusting a peace, invited him with his son to do
so.  When old Maula came as desired, bringing his son with him,
and a suitable offering of ivory and cattle, the Arab induced
them both to kneel down and exchange blood with him, when, by a
previously concerted arrangement, Khamis had them shot down by
his slaves.  This disgusting story made me quite sorry, when next
day the Arabs arrived, expecting that I should attempt to help
them; but as the matter had gone so far, I asked them, in the
first place, how they could hope Manua Sera would have any faith
in them when they were so treacherous, or trust to my help, since
they had killed Maula, who was my protege?  They all replied in a
breath, "Oh, let the past be forgotten, and assist us now! for in
you alone we can look for a preserver."

At length an armistice was agreed to; but as no one dared go to
negotiated it but my men, I allowed them to take pay from the
Arabs, which was settled on the 4th by ten men taking four yards
of cloth each, with a promise of a feast on sweetmeats when they
returned. Ex Mrs Musa, who had been put aside by her husband
because she was too fat for her lord's taste, then gave me three
men of her private establishment, and abused Musa for being
wanting in "brains." She had repeatedly advised him to leave this
place and go with me, lest the Arabs, who were all in debt to
him, should put him to death; but he still hung on to recover his
remaining debts, a portion having been realised by the sale of
Snay's and Jafu's effects; for everything in the shape of
commodities had been sold at the enormous price of 500 per cent--
the male slaves even fetching 100 dollars per head, though the
females went for less. The Hottentots now arrived, with many more
of my men, who, seeing their old "flames," Snay's women, sold off
by auction, begged me to advance them money to purchase them
with, for they could not bear to see these women, who were their
own when they formerly stayed here, go off like cattle no one
knew where.  Compliance, of course, was impossible, as it would
have crowded the caravan with women. Indeed, to prevent my men
every thinking of matrimony on the march, as well as to incite
them on through the journey, I promised, as soon as we reached
Egypt, to give them all wives and gardens at Zanzibar, provided
they did not contract marriages on the road.

On the 6th, the deputation, headed by Baraka, returned
triumphantly into Kaze, leading in two of Manua Sera's ministers-
-one of them a man with one eye, whom I called Cyclops--and tow
others, ministers of a chief called Kitambi, or Little Blue
Cloth.  After going a day's journey, they said they came to where
Manua Sera was residing with Kitambi, and met with a most
cheerful and kind reception from both potentates, who, on hearing
of my proposition, warmly acceded to it, issued orders at once
that hostilities should cease, and, with one voice, said they
were convinced that, unless through my instrumentality, Manua
Sera would never regain his possessions. Kitambi was quite beside
himself, and wished my men to stop one night to enjoy his
hospitality.  Manua Sera, after reflecting seriously about the
treacherous murder of old Maula, hesitated, but gave way when it
had been explained away by my men, and said, "No; they shall go
at once, for my kingdom depends on the issue, and Bana Mzungu
(the White Lord) may get anxious if they do not return promptly." 
One thing, however, he insisted on, and that was, the only place
he would meet the Arabs in was Unyanyembe, as it would be beneath
his dignity to settle matters anywhere else. And further, he
specified that he wished all the transactions to take place in
Musa's house.

Next day, 7th, I assembled all the Arabs at Musa's "court," with
all my men and the two chiefs, four men attending, when Baraka,
"on his legs," told them all I proposed for the treaty of peace. 
The Arabs gave their assent to it; and Cyclops, for Manua Sera,
after giving a full narrative of the whole history of the war, in
such a rapid and eloquent manner as would have done justice to
our Prime Minister, said his chief was only embittered against
Snay, and now Snay was killed, he wished to make friends with
them.  To which the Arabs made a suitable answer, adding, that
all they found fault with was an insolent remark which, in his
wrath, Manua Sera had given utterance to, that their quarrel with
him was owing chiefly to a scurvy jest which he had passed on
them, and on the characteristic personal ceremony of initiation
to their Mussulman faith.  Now, however, as Manua Sera wished to
make friends, they would abide by anything that I might propose. 
Here the knotty question arose again, what territory they, the
Arabs, would give to Manua Sera? I thought he would not be
content unless he got the old place again; but as Cyclops said
no, that was not in his opinion absolutely necessary, as the
lands of Unyanyembe had once before been divided, the matter was
settled on the condition that another conference should be held
with Manua Sera himself on the subject.

I now (8th and 9th) sent these men all off again, inviting Manua
Sera to come over and settle matters at once, if he would,
otherwise I should go on with my journey, for I could not afford
to wait longer here.  Then, as soon as they left, I made Musa
order some of his men off to Rungua, requesting the chief of the
place to send porters to Mininga to remove all our baggage over
to his palace; at the same time I begged him not to fear the
Watuta's threat to attack him, as Musa would come as soon as the
treaty was concluded, in company with me, to build a boma
alongside his palace, as he did in former years, to be nearer his
trade with Karague.  I should have mentioned, by the way, that
Musa had now made up his mind not to go further than the borders
of Usui with me, lest I should be "torn to pieces," and he would
be "held responsible on the coast."  Musa's men, however, whom he
selected for this business, were then engaged making Mussulmans
of all the Arab slave boys, and said they would not go until they
had finished, although I offered to pay the "doctor's bill," or
allowance they expected to get.  The ceremony, at the same time
that it helps to extend their religion, as christening does ours,
also stamps the converts with a mark effective enough to prevent
desertion; because, after it has been performed, their own tribe
would not receive them again.  At last, when they did go, Musa,
who was suffering from a sharp illness, to prove to me that he
was bent on leaving Kaze the same time as myself, began eating
what he called his training pills--small dried buds of roses with
alternate bits of sugar-candy.  Ten of these buds, he said, eaten
dry, were sufficient for ordinary cases, and he gave a very
formidable description of the effect likely to follow the use of
the same number boiled in rice-water or milk.

Fearful stories of losses and distress came constantly in from
Ugogo by small bodies of men, who stole their way through the
jungles. To-day a tremendous commotion took place in Musa's tembe
amongst all the women, as one had been delivered of still-born
twins.  They went about in procession, painted and adorned in the
most grotesque fashion, bewailing and screeching, singing and
dancing, throwing their arms and legs about as if they were
drunk, until the evening set in, when they gathered a huge bundle
of bulrushes, and, covering it with a cloth, carried it up to the
door of the bereaved on their shoulders, as though it had been a
coffin.  Then setting it down on the ground, they planted some of
the rushes on either side of the entrance, and all kneeling
together, set to bewailing, shrieking, and howling incessantly
for hours together.

After this (10th to 12th), to my great relief, quite
unexpectedly, a man arrived from Usui conveying a present of some
ivories from a great mganga or magician, named Dr K'yengo, who
had sent them to Musa as a recollection from an old friend,
begging at the same time for some pretty cloths, as he said he
was then engaged as mtongi or caravan director, collecting
together all the native caravans desirous of making a grand march
to Uganda.  This seemed to me a heaven-born opportunity of making
friends with one who could help me so materially, and I begged
Musa to seal it by sending him something on my account, as I had
nothing by me; but Musa objected, thinking it better simply to
say I was coming, and if he, K'yengo, would assist me in Usui, I
would then give him some cloths as he wanted; otherwise, Musa
said, the man who had to convey it would in all probability make
away with it, and then do his best to prevent my seeing K'yengo. 
As soon as this was settled, against my wish and opinion, a
special messenger arrived from Suwarora, to inquire of Musa what
truth there was in the story of the Arabs having allied
themselves to the Watuta.  He had full faith in Musa, and hoped,
if the Arabs had no hostile intentions towards him, he, Musa,
would send him two of theirs; further, Suwarora wished Musa would
send him a cat.  A black cat was then given to the messenger for
Suwarora, and Musa sent an account of all that I had done towards
effecting a peace, saying that the Arabs had accepted my views,
and if he would have patience until I arrived in Usui, the four
men required would be sent with me.

In the evening my men returned again with Cyclops, who said, for
his master, that Manua Sera desired nothing more than peace, and
to make friends with the Arabs; but as nothing was settled about
deposing Mkisiwa, he could not come over here.  Could the Arabs,
was Manua Sera's rejoinder, suppose for a moment that he would
voluntarily divide his dominion with one whom he regarded as his
slave!  Death would be preferable; and although he would trust
his life in the Mzungu's hands if he called him again, he must
know it was his intention to hunt Mkisiwa down like a wild
animal, and would never rest satisfied until he was dead.  The
treaty thus broke down; for the same night Cyclops decamped like
a thief, after brandishing an arrow which Manua Sera had given
him to throw down as a gauntlet of defiance to fight Mkisiwa to
death.  After this the Arabs were too much ashamed of themselves
to come near me, though invited by letter, and Musa became so ill
he would not take my advice and ride in a hammock, the best
possible cure for his complaint; so, after being humbugged so
many times by his procrastinations, I gave Sheikh Said more
letters and specimens, with orders to take the Tots down to the
coast as soon as practicable, and started once more for the
north, expecting very shortly to hear of Musa's death, though he
promised to follow me the very next day or die in the attempt,
and he also said he would bring on the four men required by
Suwarora; for I was fully satisfied in my mind that he would have
marched with me then had he had the resolution to do so at all.

Before I had left the district I heard that Manua Sera had
collected a mixed force of Warori, Wagogo, and Wasakuma, and had
gone off to Kigue again, whilst the Arabs and Mkisiwa were
feeding their men on beef before setting out to fight him.  Manua
Sera, it was said, had vast resources.  His father, Fundi Kira,
was a very rich man, and had buried vast stores of property,
which no one knew of but Manua Sera, his heir.  The Wanyamuezi
all inwardly loved him for his great generosity, and all alike
thought him protected by a halo of charm-power so effective
against the arms of the Arabs that he could play with them just
as he liked.

On crossing Unyambewa (14th), when I a third time put up with my
old friend the sultana, her chief sent word to say he hoped I
would visit him at his fighting boma to eat a cow which he had in
store for me, as he could not go home and enjoy the society of
his wife whilst the war was going on; since, by so doing, it was
considered he "would lose strength."

On arriving at Mininga, I was rejoiced to see Grant greatly
recovered.  Three villagers had been attacked by two lions during
my absence.  Two of the people escaped, but the third was seized
as he was plunging into his hut, and was dragged off and devoured
by the animals.  A theft also had taken place, by which both
Grant and Sirboko lost property; and the thieves had been traced
over the borders of the next district.  No fear, however, was
entertained about the things being recovered, for Sirboko had
warned Ugali the chief, and he had promised to send his Waganga,
or magicians, out to track them down, unless the neighbouring
chief chose to give them up.  After waiting two days, as no men
came from Rungua, I begged Grant to push ahead on to Ukani, just
opposite Rungua, with all my coast-men, whilst I remained behind
for the arrival of Musa's men and porters to carry on the rest of
the kit--for I had now twenty-two in addition to men permanently
enlisted, who took service on the same rate of pay as my original
coast-men; though, as usual, when the order for marching was
issued, a great number were found to be either sick or
malingering.

Two days afterwards, Musa's men came in with porters, who would
not hire themselves for more than two marches, having been
forbidden to do so by their chief on account of the supposed
Watuta invasion; and for these two marches they required a
quarter of the whole customary hire to Karague.  Musa's traps,
too, I found, were not to be moved, so I saw at once Musa had not
kept faith with me, and there would be a fresh set of
difficulties; but as every step onwards was of the greatest
importance--for my men were consuming my stores at a fearful
pace--I paid down the beads they demanded, and next day joined
Grant at Mbisu, a village of Ukuni held by a small chief called
Mchimeka, who had just concluded a war of two years' standing
with the great chief Ukulima (the Digger), of Nunda (the Hump). 
During the whole of the two years' warfare the loss was only
three men on each side.  Meanwhile Musa's men bolted like thieves
one night, on a report coming that the chief of Unyambewa, after
concluding the war, whilst amusing himself with his wife, had
been wounded on the foot by an arrow that fell from her hand. The
injury had at once taken a mortal turn, and the chief sent for
his magicians, who said it was not the fault of the wife--
somebody else must have charmed the arrow to cause such a deadly
result. They then seized hold of the magic horn, primed for the
purpose, and allowed it to drag them to where the culprits dwelt. 
Four poor men, who were convicted in this way, were at once put
to death, and the chief from that moment began to recover.

After a great many perplexities, I succeeded in getting a
kirangozi, or leader, by name Ungurue (the Pig).  He had several
times taken caravans to Karague, and knew all the languages well,
but unfortunately he afterwards proved to be what his name
implied. That, however, I could not foresee, so, trusting to him
and good-luck, I commenced making fresh enlistments of porters;
but they came and went in the most tantalising manner,
notwithstanding I offered three times the hire that any merchant
could afford to give. Every day seemed to be worse and worse. 
Some of Musa's men came to get palm-toddy for him, as he was too
weak to stand, and was so cold nothing would warm him.  There
was, however, no message brought for myself; and as the
deputation did not come to me, I could only infer that I was
quite forgotten, of that Musa, after all, had only been
humbugging me.  I scarcely knew what to do.  Everybody advised me
to stop where I was until the harvest was over, as no porters
could be found on ahead, for Ukuni was the last of the fertile
lands on this side of Usui.

Stopping, however, seemed endless; not so my supplies, I
therefore tried advancing in detachments again, sending the free
men off under Grant to Ukulima's, whilst I waited behind keeping
ourselves divided in the hopes of inducing all hands to see the
advisability of exerting themselves for the gen