eral good--as my
men, whilst we were all together, showed they did not care how
long they were kept doing no more fatiguing work than chaffing
each other, and feeding at my expense.

In the meanwhile the villagers were very merry, brewing and
drinking their pombe (beer) by turns, one house after the other
providing the treat.  On these occasions the chief--who always
drank freely, and more than any other--heading the public
gatherings of men and women, saw the large earthen pots placed
all in a row, and the company taking long draughts from bowls
made of plaited straw, laughing as they drank, until, half-
screwed, they would begin bawling and shouting.  To increase the
merriment, one or two jackanapes, with zebras' manes tied over
their heads, would advance with long tubes like monster bassoons,
blowing with all their might, contorting their faces and bodies,
and going through the most obscene and ridiculous motions to
captivate their simple admirers. This, however, was only the
feast; the ball then began, for the pots were no sooner emptied
than five drums at once, of different sizes and tones, suspended
in a line from a long horizontal bar, were beaten with fury, and
all the men, women, and children, singing and clapping their
hands in time, danced for hours together.

A report reached me, by some of Sirboko's men, whom he had sent
to convey to us a small present of rice, that an Arab, who was
crossing Msalala to our northward, had been treacherously robbed
of all his arms and guns by a small district chief, whose only
excuse was that the Wanyamuezi had always traded very well by
themselves until the Arabs came into the country; but now, as
they were robbed of their property, on account of the
disturbances caused by these Arabs, they intended for the future
to take all they could get, and challenged the Arabs to do the
same.

My patience was beginning to suffer again, for I could not help
thinking that the chiefs of the place were preventing their
village men going with me in order that my presence here might
ward of the Watuta; so I called up the kirangozi, who had
thirteen "Watoto," as they are called, or children of his own,
wishing to go, and asked him if he knew why no other men could be
got.  As he could not tell me, saying some excused themselves on
the plea they were cutting their corn, and others that they
feared the Watuta, I resolved at once to move over to Nunda; and
if that place also failed to furnish men, I would go on to Usui
or Karague with what men I had, and send back for the rest of my
property; for though I could bear the idea of separating from
Grant, still the interests of old England were at stake, and
demanded it.

This resolve being strengthened by the kirangozi's assurance that
the row in Msalala had shaken the few men who had half dreaded to
go with me, I marched over to Hunda, and put up with Grant in
Ukulima's boma, when Grant informed me that the chief had
required four yards of cloth from him for having walked round a
dead lioness, as he had thus destroyed a charm that protected his
people against any more of these animals coming, although,
fortunately, the charm could be restored again by paying four
yards of cloth.  Ukulima, however, was a very kind and good man,
though he did stick the hands and heads of his victims on the
poles of his boma as a warning to others.  He kept five wives, of
whom the rest paid such respect to the elder one, it was quite
pleasing to see them.  A man of considerable age, he did
everything the state or his great establishment required himself. 
All the men of his district clapped their hands together as a
courteous salutation to him, and the women curtsied as well as
they do at our court--a proof that they respected him as a great
potentate--a homage rarely bestowed on the chiefs of other small
states.  Ukulima was also hospitable; for on one occasion, when
another chief came to visit him, he received his guest and
retainers with considerable ceremony, making all the men of the
village get up a dance; which they did, beating the drums and
firing off guns, like a lot of black devils let loose.

We were not the only travellers in misfortune here, for Masudi,
with several other Arabs, all formed in one large caravan, had
arrived at Mchimeka's, and could not advance for want of men. 
They told me it was the first time they had come on this line,
and they deeply regretted it, for they had lost 5000 dollar's
worth of beads by their porters running away with their loads,
and now they did not know how to proceed.  Indeed, they left the
coast and arrived at Kaze immediately in rear of us, and had,
like ourselves, found it as much as they could do even to reach
this, and now they were at a standstill for want of porters.

As all hopes of being able to get any more men were given up, I
called on Bombay and Baraka to make arrangements for my going
ahead with the best of my property as I had devised.  They both
shook their heads, and advised me to remain until the times
improved, when the Arabs, being freed from the pressure of war,
would come along and form with us a "sufari ku" or grand march,
as Ukulima and every one else had said we should be torn to
pieces in Usui if we tried to cross that district with so few
men.  I then told them again and again of the messages I had sent
on to Rumanika in Karague, and to Suwarora in Usui, and begged
them to listen to me, instancing as an example of what could be
done by perseverance the success of Columbus, who, opposed by his
sailors' misgivings, still when on and triumphed, creating for
himself immortal renown.

They gave way at last; so, after selecting all the best of my
property, I formed camp at Phunze, left Bombay with Grant behind,
as I thought Bombay the best and most honest man I had got, from
his having had so much experience, and then went ahead by myself,
with the Pig as my guide and interpreter, and Baraka as my
factotum. The Waguana then all mutinied for a cloth apiece,
saying they would not lift a load unless I gave it.  Of course a
severe contest followed; I said, as I had given them so much
before, they could not want it, and ought to be ashamed of
themselves.  They urged, however, they were doing double work,
and would not consent to carry loads as they had done at Mgunda
Mkhali again.

Arguments were useless, for, simply because they were tired of
going on, they WOULD not see that as they were receiving pay
every day, they therefore ought to work every day.  However, as
they yielded at last, by some few leaning to my side, I gave what
they asked for, and went to the next village, still inefficient
in men, as all the Pig's Watoto could not be collected together. 
This second move brought us into a small village, of which Ghiya,
a young man, was chief.

He was very civil to me, and offered to sell me a most charming
young woman, quite the belle of the country; but as he could not
bring me to terms, he looked over my picture-books with the
greatest delight, and afterwards went into a discourse on
geography with considerable perspicacity; seeming fully to
comprehend that if I got down the Nile it would afterwards result
in making the shores of the N'yanza like that of the coast at
Zanzibar, where the products of his country could be exchanged,
without much difficulty, for cloths, beads, and brass wire.  I
gave him a present; then a letter was brought to me from Sheikh
Said, announcing Musa's death, and the fact that Manua Sera was
still holding out at Kigue; in answer to which I desired the
sheikh to send me as many of Musa's slaves as would take service
with me, for they ought now, by the laws of the Koran, to be all
free.

On packing up to leave Ghiya's, all the men of the village shut
the bars of the entrance, wishing to extract some cloths from me,
as I had not given enough, they said, to their chief.  They soon,
however, saw that we, being inside their own fort, had the best
of it, and they gave way.  We then pushed on to Ungurue's,
another chief of the same district.  Here the men and women of
the place came crowding to see me, the fair sex all playfully
offering themselves for wives, and wishing to know which I
admired most. They were so importunate, after a time, that I was
not sorry to hear an attack was made on their cattle because a
man of the village would not pay his dowry-money to his father-
in-law, and this set everybody flying out to the scene of action.

After this, as Bombay brought up the last of my skulking men, I
bade him good-bye again, and made an afternoon-march on to
Takina, in the district of Msalala, which we no sooner approached
than all the inhabitants turned out and fired their arrows at us. 
They did no harm, however, excepting to create a slight alarm,
which some neighbouring villagers took advantage of to run of
with two of my cows. To be returned to them, but called in vain,
as the scoundrels said, "Findings are keepings, by the laws of
our country; and as we found your cows, so we will keep them." 
For my part I was glad they were gone, as the Wanguana never yet
kept anything I put under their charge; so, instead of allowing
them to make a fuss the next morning, I marched straight on for
M'ynoga's, the chief of the district, who was famed for his
infamy and great extortions, having pushed his exactions so far
as to close the road.

On nearing his palace, we heard war-drums beat in every
surrounding village, and the kirangozi would go no farther until
permission was obtained from M'yonga.  This did not take long, as
the chief said he was most desirous to see a white man, never
having been to the coast, though his father-in-law had, and had
told him that the Wazungu were even greater people than the
sultan reigning there. On our drawing near the palace, a small,
newly-constructed boma was shown for my residence; but as I did
not wish to stop there, knowing how anxious Grant would be to
have his relief, I would not enter it, but instead sent Baraka to
pay the hongo as quickly as possible, that we might move on
again; at the same time ordering him to describe the position
both Grant and myself were in, and explain that what I paid now
was to frank both of us, as the whole of the property was my own. 
Should he make any remarks about the two cows that were stolen, I
said he must know that I could not wait for them, as my brother
would die of suspense if we did not finish the journey and send
back for him quickly.  Off went Baraka with a party of men,
stopping hours, of course, and firing volleys of ammunition away. 
He did not return again until the evening, when the palace-drums
announced that the hongo had been settled for one barsati, one
lugoi, and six yards merikani.  Baraka approached me
triumphantly, saying how well he had managed the business. 
M'yonga did not wish to see me, because he did not know the coast
language. He was immensely pleased with the present I had given
him, and said he was much and very unjustly abused by the Arabs,
who never came this way, saying he was a bad man.  He should be
very glad to see Grant, and would take nothing from him; and,
though he did not see me in person, he would feel much affronted
if I did not stop the night there.  In the meanwhile he would
have the cows brought in, for he could not allow any one to leave
his country abused in any way.

My men had greatly amused him by firing their guns off and
showing him the use of their sword-bayonets.  I knew, as a matter
of course, that if I stopped any longer I should be teased for
more cloths, and gave orders to my men to march the same instant,
saying, if they did not--for I saw them hesitate--I would give
the cows to the villagers, since I knew that was the thing that
weighed on their minds.  This raised a mutiny.  No one would go
forward with the two cows behind; besides which, the day was far
spent, and there was nothing but jungle, they said, beyond.  The
kirangozi would not show the way, nor would any man lift a load. 
A great confusion ensued. I knew they were telling lies, and
would not enter the village, but shot the cows when they arrived,
for the villagers to eat, to show them I cared for nothing but
making headway, and remained out in the open all night.  Next
morning, sure enough, before we could get under way, M'yonga sent
his prime minister to say that the king's sisters and other
members of his family had been crying and tormenting him all
night for having let me off so cheaply--they had got nothing to
cover their nakedness, and I must pay something more. This
provoked fresh squabbles.  The drums had beaten and the tax was
settled; I could not pay more.  The kirangozi, however, said he
would not move a peg unless I gave something more, else he would
be seized on his way back.  His "children' all said the same; and
as I thought Grant would only be worsted if I did not keep
friends with the scoundrel, I gave four yards more merikani, and
then went on my way.

For the first few miles there were villagers, but after that a
long tract of jungle, inhabited chiefly by antelopes and
rhinoceros.  It was wilder in appearance than most parts of
Unyamuezi.  In this
jungle a tributary nullah to the Gombe, called Nurhungure, is the
boundary-line between the great Country of the Moon and the
kingdom of Uzinza.




                           Chapter VI



                             Uzinza

The Politics of Uzinza--The Wahuma--"The Pig's" Trick--First
Taste of Usui Taxation--Pillaged by Mfumbi--Pillaged by Makaka--
Pillaged by Lumeresi--Grant Stripped by M'Yonga--Stripped Again
by Ruhe-- Terrors and Defections in the Camp--Driven back to Kaze
with new Tribulations and Impediments.

Uzinza, which we now entered, is ruled by two Wahuma chieftains
of foreign blood, descended from the Abyssinian stock, of whom we
saw specimens scattered all over Unyamuezi, and who extended even
down south as far as Fipa.  Travellers see very little, however,
of these Wahuma, because, being pastorals, they roam about with
their flocks and build huts as far away as they can from
cultivation.  Most of the small district chiefs, too, are the
descendants of those who ruled in the same places before the
country was invaded, and with them travellers put up and have
their dealings.  The dress of the Wahuma is very simple, composed
chiefly of cow-hide tanned black-- a few magic ornaments and
charms, brass or copper bracelets, and immense number of sambo
for stockings, which looked very awkward on their long legs. 
They smear themselves with rancid butter instead of macassar, and
are, in consequence, very offensive to all but the negro, who
seems, rather than otherwise, to enjoy a good sharp nose tickler. 
For arms they carry both bow and spear; more generally the
latter.  The Wazinza in the southern parts are so much like the
Wanyamuezi, as not to require any especial notice; but in the
north, where the country is more hilly, they are much more
energetic and actively built.  All alike live in grass-hut
villages, fenced round by bomas in the south, but open in the
north.  Their country rises in high rolls, increasing in altitude
as it approaches the Mountains of the Moon, and is generally well
cultivated, being subjected to more of the periodical rains than
the regions we have left, though springs are not so abundant, I
believe, as they are in the Land of the Moon, where they ooze out
by the flanks of the little granitic hills.

After tracking through several miles of low bush-jungle, we came
to the sites of some old bomas that had been destroyed by the
Watuta not long since.  Farther on, as we wished to enter a
newly- constructed boma, the chief of which was Mafumbu Wantu (a
Mr Balls), we felt the effects of those ruthless marauders; for
the villagers, thinking us Watuta in disguise, would not let us
in; for those savages, they said, had once tricked them by
entering their village, pretending to be traders carrying ivory
and merchandise, whilst they were actually spies.  This was
fortunate for me, however, as Mr Balls, like M'yonga, was noted
for his extortions on travellers. We then went on and put up in
the first village of Bogue, where I wished to get porters and
return for Grant, as the place seemed to be populous.  Finding,
however, that I could not get a sufficient number for that
purpose, I directed those who wished for employment to go off at
once and take service with Grant.

I found many people assembled here from all parts of the
district, for the purpose of fighting M'yonga; but the chief
Ruhe, having heard of my arrival, called me to his palace, which,
he said, was on my way, that he might see me, for he never in all
his life had a white man for his guest, and was so glad to hear
of my arrival that he would give orders for the dispersing of his
forces.  I wished to push past him, as I might be subjected to
such calls every day; but Ungurue, in the most piggish manner--
for he was related to Ruhe --insisted that neither himself nor
any of his children would advance one step farther with me unless
I complied with their wish, which was a simple conformity with
the laws of their country, and therefore absolute.  At length
giving in, I entered Ruhe's boma, the poles of which were decked
with the skulls of his enemies stuck upon them.  Instead,
however, of seeing him myself, as he feared my evil eye, I
conducted the arrangements for the hongo through Baraka, in the
same way as I did at M'yonga's, directing that it should be
limited to the small sum of one barsati and four yards kiniki.

The drum was beaten, as the public intimation of the payment of
the hongo, and consequently of our release, and we went on to
Mihambo, on the west border of the eastern division of Uzinza,
which is called Ukhanga.  It overlooks the small district of
Sorombo, belonging to the great western division, known as Usui,
and is presided over by a Sorombo chief, named Makaka, whose
extortions had been so notorious that no Arabs now ever went near
him.  I did not wish to do so either, though his palace lay in
the direct route. It was therefore agreed we should skirt round
by the east of this district, and I even promised the Pig I would
give him ten necklaces a-day in addition to his wages, if he
would avoid all the chiefs, and march steadily ten miles every
day.  By doing so, we should have avoided the wandering Watuta,
whose depredations had laid waste nearly all of this country; but
the designing blackguard, in opposition to my wishes, to
accomplish some object of his own, chose to mislead us all, and
quietly took us straight into Sorombo to Kague, the boma of a
sub-chief, called Mfumbi, where we no sooner arrived than the
inhospitable brute forbade any one of his subjects to sell us
food until the hongo was paid, for he was not sure that we were
not allied with the Watuta to rob his country.  After receiving
what he called his dues--one barsati, two yards merikani, and two
yards kiniki--the drums beat, and all was settled with him; but I
was told the head chief Makaka, who lived ten miles to the west,
and so much out of my road, had sent expressly to invite me to
see him.  He said it was his right I should go to him as the
principal chief of the district.  Moreover he longed for a sight
of a white man; for though he had travelled all across Uganda and
Usoga into Masawa, or the Masai country, as well as to the coast,
where he had seen both Arabs and Indians, he had never yet seen
an Englishman.  If I would oblige him, he said he would give me
guides to Suwarora, who was his mkama or king.  Of course I knew
well what all this meant; and at the same time that I said I
could not comply, I promised to send him a present of friendship
by the hands of Baraka.

This caused a halt.  Makaka would not hear of such an
arrangement. A present, he said, was due to him of course, but of
more importance than the present was his wish to see me.  Baraka
and all the men begged I would give in, as they were sure he must
be a good man to send such a kind message.  I strove in vain, for
no one would lift a load unless I complied; so, perforce, I went
there, in company, however, with Mfumbi, who now pretended to be
great friends; but what was the result?  On entering the palace
we were shown into a cowyard without a tree in it, or any shade;
and no one was allowed to sell us food until a present of
friendship was paid, after which the hongo would be discussed.

The price of friendship was not settled that day, however, and my
men had to go supperless to bed.  Baraka offered him one common
cloth, and then another--all of which he rejected with such
impetuosity that Baraka said his head was all on a whirl.  Makaka
insisted he would have a deole, or nothing at all.  I protested I
had no deoles I could give him; for all the expensive cloths
which I had brought from the coast had been stolen in Mgunda
Mkhali.  I had three, however, concealed at the time--which I had
bought from Musa, at forty dollars each--intended for the kings
of Karague and Uganda.

Incessant badgering went on for hours and hours, until at last
Baraka, clean done with the incessant worry of this hot-headed
young chief, told him, most unfortunately, he would see again if
he could find a deole, as he had one of his own.  Baraka then
brought one to my tent, and told me of his having bought it for
eight dollars at the coast; and as I now saw I was let in for it,
I told him to give it.  It was given, but Makaka no sooner saw it
than he said he must have another one; for it was all nonsense
saying a white man had no rich cloths.  Whenever he met Arabs,
they all said they were poor men, who obtained all their
merchandise from the white men on credit, which they refunded
afterwards, by levying a heavy percentage on the sale of their
ivory.

I would not give way that night; but next day, after fearful
battling, the present of friendship was paid by Baraka's giving
first a dubuani, then one sahari, then one barsati, then one
kisutu, and then eight yards of merikani--all of which were
contested in the most sickening manner--when Baraka, fairly done
up, was relieved by Makaka's saying, "That will do for
friendship; if you had given the deole quietly, all this trouble
would have been saved; for I am not a bad man, as you will see." 
My men then had their first dinner here, after which the hongo
had to be paid.  This for the time was, however, more easily
settled; because Makaki at once said he would never be satisfied
until he had received, if I had really not got a deole, exactly
double in equivalents of all I had given him. This was a fearful
drain on my store; but the Pig, seeing my concern, merely laughed
at it, and said, "Oh, these savage chiefs are all alike here; you
will have one of these taxes to pay every stage to Uyofu, and
then the heavy work will begin; for all these men, although they
assume the dignity of chief to themselves, are mere officers, who
have to pay tribute to Suwarora, and he would be angry if they
were shortcoming."

The drums as yet had not beaten, for Makaka said he would not be
satisfied until we had exchanged presents, to prove that we were
the best of friends.  To do this last act properly, I was to get
ready whatever I wished to give him, whilst he would come and
visit me with a bullock; but I was to give him a royal salute, or
the drums would not beat.  I never felt so degraded as when I
complied, and gave orders to my men to fire a volley as he
approached my tent; but I ate the dirt with a good grace, and met
the young chief as if nothing had happened.  My men, however,
could not fire the salute fast enough for him; for he was one of
those excitable impulsive creatures who expect others to do
everything in as great a hurry as their minds wander.  The moment
the first volley was fired, he said, "Now, fire again, fire
again; be quick, be quick!  What's the use of those things?"
(meaning the guns).  "We could spear you all whilst you are
loading: be quick, be quick, I tell you."  But Baraka, to give
himself law, said: "No; I must ask Bana" (master) "first, as we
do everything by order; this is not fighting at all."

The men being ready, file-firing was ordered, and then the young
chief came into my tent.  I motioned him to take my chair, which,
after he sat down upon it, I was very sorry for, as he stained
the seat all black with the running colour of one of the new
barsati cloths he had got from me, which, to improve its
appearance, he had saturated with stinking butter, and had tied
round his loins. A fine-looking man of about thirty, he wore the
butt-end of a large sea-shell cut in a circle, and tied on his
forehead, for a coronet, and sundry small saltiana antelope
horns, stuffed with magic powder, to keep off the evil eye.  His
attendants all fawned on him, and snapped their fingers whenever
he sneezed.  After passing the first compliment, I gave him a
barsati, as my token of friendship, and asked him what he saw
when he went to the Masai country. He assured me "that there were
two lakes, and not one"; for, on going from Usoga to the Masai
country, he crossed over a broad strait, which connected the big
N'yanza with another one at its north-east corner.  Fearfully
impetuous, as soon as this answer was given, he said, "Now I have
replied to your questions, do you show me all the things you have
got, for I want to see everything, and be very good friends.  I
did not see you the first day, because you being a stranger, it
was necessary I should first look into the magic horn to see if
all was right and safe; and now I can assure you that, whilst I
saw I was safe, I also saw that your road would be prosperous.  I
am indeed delighted to see you, for neither my father, nor any of
my forefathers, ever were honoured with the company of a white
man in all their lives."

My guns, clothes, and everything were then inspected, and begged
for in the most importunate manner.  He asked for the picture-
books, examined the birds with intense delight--even trying to
insert under their feathers his long royal fingernails, which are
grown like a Chinaman's by these chiefs, to show they have a
privilege to live on meat.  Then turning to the animals, he
roared over each one in turn as he examined them, and called out
their names.  My bull's-eye lantern he coveted so much, I had to
pretend exceeding anger to stop his further importunities.  He
then began again begging for lucifers, which charmed him so
intensely I thought I should never get rid of him.  He would have
one box of them.  I swore I could not part with them.  He
continued to beg, and I to resist.  I offered a knife instead,
but this he would not have, because the lucifers would be so
valuable for his magical observances.  On went the storm, till at
last I drove him off with a pair of my slippers, which he had
stuck his dirty feet into without my leave.  I then refused to
take his bullock, because he had annoyed me.  On his part he was
resolved not to beat the drum; but he graciously said he would
think about it if I paid another lot of cloth equal to the second
deole I ought to have given him.

I began seriously to consider whether I should have this chief
shot, as a reward for his oppressive treachery, and a warning to
others; but the Pig said it was just what the Arabs were
subjected to in Ubena, and they found it best to pay down at
once, and do all they were ordered.  If I acted rightly, I would
take the bullock, and then give the cloth; whilst Baraka said,
"We will shoot him if you give the order, only remember Grant is
behind, and if you commence a row you will have to fight the
whole way, for every chief in the country will oppose you."

I then told the Pig and Baraka to settle at once.  They no sooner
did so than the drums beat, and Makaka, in the best humour
possible, came over to say I had permission to go when I liked,
but he hoped I would give him a gun and a box of lucifers.  This
was too provoking. The perpetual worry had given Baraka a fever,
and had made me feel quite sick; so I said, if he ever mentioned
a gun or lucifers again, I would fight the matter out with him,
for I had not come there to be bullied.  He then gave way, and
begged I would allow my men to fire a volley outside his boma, as
the Watuta were living behind a small line of granitic hills
flanking the west of his district, and he wished to show them
what a powerful force he had got with him.  This was permitted;
but his wisdom in showing off was turned into ridicule; for the
same evening the Watuta made and attack on his villages and
killed three of his subjects, but were deterred from committing
further damage by coming in contact with my men, who, as soon as
they saw the Watuta fighting, fired their muskets off in the air
and drove them away, they themselves at the same time bolting
into my camp, and as usual vaunting their prowess.

I then ordered a march for the next morning, and went out in the
fields to take my regular observations for latitude.  Whilst
engaged in this operation, Baraka, accompanied by Wadimoyo
(Heart's-stream), another of my freeman, approached me in great
consternation, whispering to themselves.  They said they had some
fearful news to communicate, which, when I heard it, they knew
would deter our progress: it was of such great moment and
magnitude, they thought they could not deliver it then.  I said,
"What nonsense! out with it at once.  Are we such chickens that
we cannot speak about matters like men? out with it at once."

Then Baraka said, "I have just heard from Makaka, that a man who
arrived from Usui only a few minutes ago has said Suwarora is so
angry with the Arabs that he has detained one caravan of theirs
in his country, and, separating the whole of their men, has
placed each of them in different bomas, with orders to his
village officers that, in case the Watuta came into his country,
without further ceremony they were to be all put to death."  I
said, "Oh, Baraka, how can you be such a fool?  Do you not see
through this humbug? Makaka only wishes to keep us here to
frighten away the Watuta; for Godsake be a man, and don't be
alarmed at such phantoms as these.  You always are nagging at me
that Bombay is the 'big' and you are the 'small' man.  Bombay
would never be frightened in this silly way.  Now, do you reflect
that I have selected you for this journey, as it would, if you
succeed with me in carrying out our object, stamp you for ever as
a man of great fame.  Pray, don't give way, but do your best to
encourage the men, and let us march in the morning."  On this, as
on other occasions of the same kind, I tried to impart
confidence, by explaining, in allusion to Petherick's expedition,
that I had arranged to meet white men coming up from the north. 
Baraka at last said, "All right--I am not afraid; I will do as
you desire."  But as the two were walking off, I heard Wadimoyo
say to Baraka, "Is he not afraid now? won't he go back?"--which,
if anything, alarmed me more than the first intelligence; for I
began to think that they, and not Makaka, had got up the story.

All night Makaka's men patrolled the village, drumming and
shouting to keep off the Watuta, and the next morning, instead of
a march, after striking my tent I found that the whole of my
porters, the Pig's children, were not to be found.  They had gone
off and hidden themselves, saying that they were not such fools
as to go any farther, as the Watuta were out, and would cut us up
on the road. This was sickening indeed.

I knew the porters had not gone far, so I told the Pig to bring
them to me, that we might talk the matter over; but say what I
would, they all swore they would not advance a step farther. 
Most of them were formerly men of Utambara.  The Watuta had
invaded their country and totally destroyed it, killing all their
wives and children, and despoiling everything they held dear to
them.  They did not wish to rob me, and would give up their hire,
but not one step more would they advance.  Makaka then came
forward and said, "Just stop here with me until this ill wind
blows over"; but Baraka, more in a fright at Makaka than at any
one else, said, No--he would do anything rather than that; for
Makaka's bullying had made him quite ill.  I then said to my men,
"If nothing else will suit you, the best plan I can think of is
to return to Mihambo in Bogue, and there form a depot, where,
having stored my property, I shall give the Pig a whole load, or
63 lb., of Mzizima beads if he will take Baraka in disguise on to
Suwarora, and ask him to send me eighty men, whilst I go back to
Unyanyembe to see what men I can get from the late Musa's
establishment, and then we might bring on Grant, and move in a
body together."  At first Baraka said, "Do you wish to have us
killed? Do you think if we went to Suwarora's you would ever see
us back again?  You would wait and wait for us, but we should
never return." To which I replied, "Oh, Baraka, do not think so! 
Bombay, if he were here, would go in a minute.  Suwarora by this
time knows I am coming, and you may depend on it he will be just
as anxious to have us in Usui as Makaka is to keep us here, and
he cannot hurt us, as Rumanika is over him, and also expects us." 
Baraka then, in the most doleful manner, said he would go if the
Pig would.  The Pig, however, did not like it either, but said
the matter was so important he would look into the magic horn all
night, and give his answer next morning as soon as we arrived at
Mihambo.

On arrival at Mihambo next day, all the porters brought their pay
to me, and said they would not go, for nothing would induce them
to advance a step farther.  I said nothing; but, with "my heart
in my shoes," I gave what I thought their due for coming so far,
and motioned them to be off; then calling on the Pig for his
decision, I tried to argue again, though I saw it was no use, for
there was not one of my own men who wished to go on.  They were
unanimous in saying Usui was a "fire," and I had no right to
sacrifice them. The Pig then finally refused, saying three loads
even would not tempt him, for all were opposed to it. Of what
value, he observed, would the beads be to him if his life was
lost?  This was crushing; the whole camp was unanimous in
opposing me.  I then made Baraka place all my kit in the middle
of the boma, which was a very strong one, keeping out only such
beads as I wished him to use for the men's rations daily, and
ordered him to select a few men who would return with me to Kaze;
when I said, if I could not get all the men I wanted, I would try
and induce some one, who would not fear, to go on to Usui;
failing which, I would even walk back to Zanzibar for men, as
nothing in the world would ever induce me to give up the journey.

This appeal did not move him; but, without a reply, he sullenly
commenced collecting some men to accompany me back to Kaze. At
first no one would go; they then mutinied for more beads,
announcing all sorts of grievances, which they said they were
always talking over to themselves, though I did not hear them.
The greatest, however, that they could get up was, that I always
paid the Wanyamuezi "temporaries" more than they got, though
"permanents."  "They were the flesh, and I was the knife"; I cut
and did with them just as I liked, and they could not stand it
any longer.  However, they had to stand it; and next day, when I
had brought them to reason, I gave over the charge of my tent and
property to Baraka, and commenced the return with a bad hitching
cough, caused by those cold easterly winds that blow over the
plateau during the six dry months of the years, and which are, I
suppose, the Harmattan peculiar to Africa.

Next day I joined Grant once more, and found he had collected a
few Sorombo men, hoping to follow after me.  I then told him all
my mishaps in Sorombo, as well as of the "blue-devil" frights
that had seized all my men.  I felt greatly alarmed about the
prospects of the expedition, scarcely knowing what I should do. 
I resolved at last, if everything else failed, to make up a raft
at the southern end of the N'yanza, and try to go up to the Nile
in that way. My cough daily grew worse.  I could not lie or sleep
on either side. Still my mind was so excited and anxious that,
after remaining one day here to enjoy Grant's society, I pushed
ahead again, taking Bombay with me, and had breakfast at
Mchimeka's.

There I found the Pig, who now said he wished he had taken my
offer of beads, for he had spoken with his chief, and saw that I
was right.  Baraka and the Wanguana were humbugs, and had they
not opposed his going, he would have gone then; even now, he
said, he wished I would take him again with Bombay.  Though half
inclined to accept his offer, which would have saved a long
trudge to Kaze, yet as he had tricked me so often, I felt there
would be no security unless I could get some coast interpreters,
who would not side with the chiefs against me as he had done. 
From this I went on to Sirboko's, and spent the next day with him
talking over my plans. The rafting up the lake he thought a good
scheme; but he did not think I should ever get through Usui until
all the Kaze merchants went north in a body, for it was no use
trying to force my men against their inclinations; and if I did
not take care how I handled them, he thought they would all
desert.

My cough still grew worse, and became so bad that, whilst
mounting a hill on entering Ungugu's the second day after, I blew
and grunted like a broken-winded horse, and it became so
distressing I had to halt a day.  In two more marches, however, I
reached Kaze, and put up with Musa's eldest son, Abdalla, on the
2nd July, who now was transformed from a drunken slovenly boy
into the appearance of a grand swell, squatting all day as his
old father used to do. The house, however, did not feel the same-
-no men respected him as they had done his father.  Sheikh Said
was his clerk and constant companion, and the Tots were well fed
on his goats--at my expense, however.  On hearing my fix, Abdalla
said I should have men; and, what's more, he would go with me as
his father had promised to do; but he had a large caravan
detained in Ugogo, and for that he must wait.

At that moment Manua Sera was in a boma at Kigue, in alliance
with the chief of that place; but there was no hope for him now,
as all the Arabs had allied themselves with the surrounding
chiefs, including Kitambi; and had invested his position by
forming a line, in concentric circles, four deep, cutting off his
supplies of water within it, so that they daily expected to hear
of his surrendering. The last news that had reached them brought
intelligence of one man killed and two Arabs wounded; whilst, on
the other side, Manua Sera had lost many men, and was put to such
straits that he had called out if it was the Arabs' determination
to kill him he would bolt again; to which the Arabs replied it
was all the same; if he ran up to the top of the highest mountain
or down into hell, they would follow after and put him to death.

3d.--After much bother and many disappointments, as I was assured
I could get no men to help me until after the war was over, and
the Arabs had been to Ugogo, and had brought up their property,
which was still lying there, I accepted two men as guides--one
named Bui, a very small creature, with very high pretensions, who
was given me by Abdalla--the other, a steady old traveller, named
Nasib (or Fortune), who was given me by Fundi Sangoro.  These two
slaves, both of whom knew all the chiefs and languages up to and
including Uganda, promised me faithfully they would go with
Bombay on to Usui, and bring back porters in sufficient number
for Grant and myself to go on together.  They laughed at the
stories I told them of the terror that had seized Baraka and all
the Wanguana, and told me, as old Musa had often done before,
that those men, especially Baraka, had from their first leaving
Kaze made up their minds they would not enter Usui, or go
anywhere very far north.

I placed those men on the same pay as Bombay, and then tried to
buy some beads from the Arabs, as I saw it was absolutely
necessary I should increase my fast-ebbing store if I ever hoped
to reach Gondokoro.  The attempt failed, as the Arabs would not
sell at a rate under 2000 per cent.; and I wrote a letter to
Colonel Rigby, ordering up fifty armed men laden with beads and
pretty cloths-- which would, I knew, cost me œ1000 at the least--
and left once more for the north on the 5th.

Marching slowly, as my men kept falling sick, I did not reach
Grant again until the 11th.  His health had greatly improved, and
he had been dancing with Ukulima, as may be seen by the
accompanying woodcut.  So, as I was obliged to wait for a short
time to get a native guide for Bui, Nasib and Bombay, who would
show them a jungle-path to Usui, we enjoyed our leisure hours in
shooting guinea-fowls for the pot.  A report then came to us that
Suwarora had heard with displeasure that I had been endeavouring
to see him, but was deterred because evil reports concerning him
had been spread.  This unexpected good news delighted me
exceedingly; confirmed my belief that Baraka, after all, was a
coward, and induced me to recommend Bombay to make his cowardice
more indisputable by going on and doing what he had feared to do.
To which Bombay replied, "Of course I will.  It is all folly
pulling up for every ill wind that blows, because, until one
actually SEES there is something in it, you never can tell
amongst these savages-- 'shaves' are so common in Africa. 
Besides, a man has but one life, and God is the director of
everything."  "Bravo!" said I, "we will get on as long as you
keep to that way of thinking."

At length a guide was obtained, and with him came some of those
men of the Pig's who returned before; for they had a great desire
to go with me, but had been deterred, they said, by Baraka and
the rest of my men.  Seeing all this, I changed my plans again,
intending, on arrival at Baraka's camp, to prevail on the whole
of the party to go with me direct, which I thought they could not
now refuse, since Suwarora had sent us an invitation.  Moreover,
I did not like the idea of remaining still whilst the three men
went forwards, as it would be losing time.

These separations from Grant were most annoying, but they could
not be helped; so, when all was settled here, I bade him adieu--
both of us saying we would do our best--and set out on my
journey, thinking what a terrible thing it was I could not
prevail on my men to view things as I did.  Neither my experience
with native chiefs, nor my money and guns, were of any use to me,
simply because my men were such incomprehensible fools, though
many of them who had travelled before ought to have known better.

More reports came to us about Suwarora, all of the most inviting
nature; but nothing else worth mentioning occurred until we
reached the border of Msalala, where an officer of M'yonga's, who
said he was a bigger man than his chief, demanded a tax, which I
refused, and the dispute ended in his snatching Nasib's gun out
of his hands. I thought little of this affair myself, beyond
regretting the delay which it might occasion, as M'yonga, I knew,
would not permit such usage, if I chose to go round by his palace
and make a complaint. Both Bui and Nasib, however, were so
greatly alarmed, that before I could say a word they got the gun
back again by paying four yards merikani.  We had continued
bickering again, for Bui had taken such fright at this kind of
rough handling, and the "push-ahead" manner in which I persisted
"riding over the lords of the soil," that I could hardly drag the
party along.

However, on the 18th, after breakfasting at Ruhe's, we walked
into Mihambo, and took all the camp by surprise.  I found the
Union Jack hoisted upon a flag-staff, high above all the trees,
in the boma. Baraka said he had done this to show the Watuta that
the place was occupied by men with guns--a necessary precaution,
as all the villages in the neighbourhood had, since my departure,
been visited and plundered by them.  Lumeresi, the chief of the
district, who lived ten miles to the eastward, had been
constantly pressing him to leave this post and come to his
palace, as he felt greatly affronted at our having shunned him
and put up with Ruhe.  He did not want property, he said, but he
could not bear that the strangers had lived with his mtoto, or
child, which Ruhe was, and yet would not live with him.  He
thought Baraka's determined obstinacy on this could only be
caused by the influence of the head man of the village, and
threatened that if Baraka did not come to visit him at once, he
would have the head man beheaded.  Then, shifting round a bit, he
thought of ordering his subjects to starve the visitors into
submission, and said he must have a hongo equal to Ruhe's.  To
all this Baraka replied, that he was merely a servant, and as he
had orders to stop where he was, he could not leave it until I
came; but to show there was no ill-feeling towards him, he sent
the chief a cloth.

These first explanations over, I entered my tent, in which Baraka
had been living, and there I found a lot of my brass wires on the
ground, lying scattered about.  I did not like the look of this,
so ordered Bombay to resume his position of factotum, and count
over the kit.  Whilst this was going on, a villager came to me
with a wire, and asked me to change it for a cloth.  I saw at
once what the game was; so I asked my friend where he got it, on
which he at once pointed to Baraka.  I then heard the men who
were standing round us say one to another in under-tones,
giggling with the fun of it, "Oh, what a shame of him!  Did you
hear what Bana said, and that fool's reply to it?  What a shame
of him to tell in that way." Without appearing to know, or rather
to hear, the by-play that was going on, I now said to Baraka,
"How is it this man has got one of my wires, for I told you not
to touch or unpack them during my absence?"  To which he coolly
replied, in face of such evidence, "It is not one of your wires;
I never gave away one of yours; there are lots more wires besides
yours in the country.  The man tells a falsehood; he had the wire
before, but now, seeing your cloth open, wants to exchange it." 
"If that is the case," I said, taking things easy, "how is it you
have opened my loads and scattered the wires about in the tent?" 
"Oh, that was to take care of them; for I thought, if they were
left outside all night with the rest of the property, some one
would steal them, and I should get the blame of it."

Further parley was useless; for, though both my wires and cloths
were short, still it was better not to kick up a row, when I had
so much to do to keep all my men in good temper for the journey.
Baraka then, wishing to beguile me, as he thought he could do,
into believing him a wonderful man for both pluck and honesty,
said he had had many battles to fight with the men since I had
been gone to Kaze, for there were two strong parties in the camp;
those who, during the late rebellion at Zanzibar, had belonged to
the Arabs that sided with Sultan Majid, and were royalists, and
those who, having belonged to the rebellious Arabs, were on the
opposite side.  The battle commenced, he stated, by the one side
abusing the other for their deeds during that rebellion, the
rebels in this sort of contest proving themselves the stronger. 
But he, heading the royalist party, soon reduced them to order,
though only for a short while, as from that point they turned
round to open mutiny for more rations; and some of the rebels
tried to kill him, which, he said, they would have done had he
not settled the matter by buying some cows for them.  It was on
this account he had been obliged to open my loads.  And now he
had told me the case, he hoped I would forgive him if he had done
wrong.  Now, the real facts of the case were these--though I did
not find them out at the time:-- Baraka had bought some slaves
with my effects, and he had had a fight with some of my men
because they tampered with his temporary wife--a princess he had
picked up in Phunze.  To obtain her hand he had given ten
necklaces of MY beads to her mother, and had agreed to the
condition that he should keep the girl during the journey; and
after it was over, and he took her home, he would, if his wife
pleased him, give her mother ten necklaces more.

Next day Baraka told me his heart shrank to the dimensions of a
very small berry when he saw whom I had brought with me
yesterday-- meaning Bombay, and the same porters whom he had
prevented going on with me before.  I said, "Pooh, nonsense; have
done with such excuses, and let us get away out of this as fast
as we can.  Now, like a good man, just use your influence with
the chief of the village, and try and get from him five or six
men to complete the number we want, and then we will work round
the east of Sorombo up to Usui, for Suwarora has invited us to
him."  This, however, was not so easy; for Lumeresi, having heard
of my arrival, sent his Wanyapara, or grey-beards, to beg I would
visit him.  He had never seen a white man in all his life,
neither had his father, nor any of his forefathers, although he
had often been down to the coast; I must come and see him, as I
had seen his mtoto Ruhe.  He did not want property; it was only
the pleasure of my company that he wanted, to enable him to tell
all his friends what a great man had lived in his house.

This was terrible: I saw at once that all my difficulties in
Sorombo would have to be gone through again if I went there, and
groaned when I thought what a trick the Pig had played me when I
first of all came to this place; for if I had gone on then, as I
wished, I should have slipped past Lumeresi without his knowing
it.

I had to get up a storm at the grey-beards, and said I could not
stand going out of my road to see any one now, for I had already
lost so much time by Makaka's trickery in Sorombo.  Bui then,
quaking with fright at my obstinacy, said, "You must--indeed you
must--give in and do with these savage chiefs as the Arabs when
they travel, for I will not be a party to riding rough-shod over
them." Still I stuck out, and the grey-beards departed to tell
their chief of it.  Next morning he sent them back to say he
would not be cheated out of his rights as the chief of the
district.  Still I would not give in, and the whole day kept
"jawing" without effect, for I could get no man to go with me
until the chief gave his sanction.  I then tried to send Bombay
off with Bui, Nasib, and their guide, by night; but though Bombay
was willing, the other two hung back on the old plea.  In this
state of perplexity, Bui begged I would allow him to go over to
Lumeresi and see what he could do with a present.  Bui really now
was my only stand-by, so I sent him off, and next had the
mortification to find that he had been humbugged by honeyed
words, as Baraka had been with Makaka, into believing that
Lumeresi was a good man, who really had no other desire at heart
than the love of seeing me.  His boma, he said, did not lie much
out of my line, and he did not wish a stitch of my cloth.  So far
from detaining me, he would give me as many men as I wanted; and,
as an earnest of his good intentions, he sent his copper hatchet,
the badge of office as chief of the district, as a guarantee for
me.

To wait there any longer after this, I knew, would be a mere
waste of time, so I ordered my men to pack up that moment, and we
all marched over at once to Lumeresi's, when we put up in his
boma. Lumeresi was not in then, but, on his arrival at night, he
beat all his drums to celebrate the event, and fired a musket, in
reply to which I fired three shots.  The same night, whilst
sitting out to make astronomical observations, I became deadly
cold--so much so, that the instant I had taken the star, to fix
my position, I turned into bed, but could not get up again; for
the cough that had stuck to me for a month then became so
violent, heightened by fever succeeding the cold fit, that before
the next morning I was so reduced that I could not stand.  For
the last month, too, I had not been able to sleep on either side,
as interior pressure, caused by doing so, provoked the cough; but
now I had, in addition, to be propped in position to get any
repose whatev