er.  The symptoms, altogether, were rather alarming,
for the heart felt inflamed and ready to burst, pricking and
twingeing with every breath, which was exceedingly aggravated by
constant coughing, when streams of phlegm and bile were ejected. 
The left arm felt half-paralysed, the left nostril was choked
with mucus, and on the centre of the left shoulder blade I felt a
pain as if some one was branding me with a hot iron.  All this
was constant; and, in addition, I repeatedly felt severe pains--
rather paroxysms of fearful twinges--in the spleen, liver, and
lungs; whilst during my sleep I had all sorts of absurd dreams:
for instance--I planned a march across Africa with Sir Roderick
Murchison; and I fancied some curious creatures, half-men and
half-monkeys, came into my camp to inform me that Petherick was
waiting in boats at the south-west corner of the N'yanza, etc.,
etc.

Though my mind was so weak and excited when I woke up from these
trances, I thought of nothing but the march, and how I could get
out of Lumeresi's hands.  He, with the most benign countenance,
came in to see me, the very first thing in the morning, as he
said, to inquire after my health; when, to please him as much as
I could, I had a guard of honour drawn up at the tent door to
fire a salute as he entered; then giving him my iron camp-chair
to sit upon, which tickled him much--for he was very corpulent,
and he thought its legs would break down with his weight--we had
a long talk, though it was as much as I could do to remember
anything, my brain was so excited and weak.  Kind as he looked
and spoke, he forgot all his promises about coveting my property,
and scarcely got over the first salutation before he began
begging for many things that he saw, and more especially for a
deole, in order that he might wear it on all great occasions, to
show his contemporaries what a magnanimous man his white visitor
was.  I soon lost my temper whilst striving to settle the hongo. 
Lumeresi would have a deole, and I would not admit that I had
one.

23d to 31st.--Next morning I was too weak to speak moderately,
and roared more like a madman than a rational being, as, breaking
his faith, he persisted in bullying me.  The day after, I took
pills and blistered my chest all over, still Lumeresi would not
let me alone, nor come to any kind of terms until the 25th, when
he said he would take a certain number of pretty common cloths
for his children if I would throw in a red blanket for himself. 
I jumped at this concession with the greatest eagerness, paid
down my cloths on the spot; and, thinking I was free at last,
ordered a hammock to be slung on a pole, that I might leave the
next day.  Next morning, however, on seeing me actually preparing
to start, Lumeresi found he could not let me go until I increased
the tax by three more cloths, as some of his family complained
that they had got nothing. After some badgering, I paid what he
asked for, and ordered the men to carry me out of the palace
before anything else was done, for I would not sleep another
night where I was.  Lumeresi then stood in my way, and said he
would never allow a man of his country to give me any assistance
until I was well, for he could not bear the idea of hearing it
said that, after taking so many cloths from me, he had allowed me
to die in the jungles--and dissuaded my men from obeying my
orders.

In vain I appealed to his mercy, declaring that the only chance
left me of saving my life would be from the change of air in the
hammock as I marched along.  He would not listen, professing
humanity, whilst he meant plunder; and I now found that he was
determined not to beat the drum until I had paid him some more,
which he was to think over and settle next day.  When the next
day came, he would not come near me, as he said I must possess a
deole, otherwise I would not venture on to Karague; for nobody
ever yet "saw" Rumanika without one.  This suspension of business
was worse than the rows; I felt very miserable, and became worse. 
At last, on my offering him anything that he might consider an
equivalent for the deole if he would but beat the drums of
satisfaction, he said I might consider myself his prisoner
instead of his guest if I persisted in my obstinacy in not giving
him Rumanika's deole; and then again peremptorily ordered all of
his subjects not to assist me in moving a load.  After this,
veering round for a moment on the generous tack, he offered me a
cow, which I declined.

1st to 4th.--Still I rejected the offered cow, until the 2nd,
when, finding him as dogged as ever, at the advice of my men I
accepted it, hoping thus to please him; but it was no use, for he
now said he must have two deoles, or he would never allow me to
leave his palace.  Every day matters got worse and worse. 
Mfumbi, the small chief of Sorombo, came over, in an Oily-Gammon
kind of manner, to say Makaka had sent him over to present his
compliments to me, and express his sorrow on hearing that I had
fallen sick here. He further informed me that the road was closed
between this and Usui, for he had just been fighting there, and
had killed the chief Gomba, burnt down all his villages, and
dispersed all the men in the jungle, where they now resided,
plundering every man who passed that way.  This gratuitous,
wicked, humbugging terrifier helped to cause another defeat.  It
was all nonsense, I knew, but both Bui and Nasib, taking fright,
begged for their discharges. In fearful alarm and anxiety, I
begged them to have patience and see the hongo settled first, for
there was no necessity, at any rate, for immediate hurry; I
wished them to go on ahead with Bombay, as in four days they
could reach Suwarora's.  But they said they could not hear of it-
-they would not go a step beyond this.  All the chiefs on ahead
would do the same as Lumeresi; the whole country was roused. I
had not even half enough cloths to satisfy the Wasui; and my
faithful followers would never consent to be witness to my being
"torn to pieces."

5th and 6th.--The whole day and half of the next went in
discussions.  At last, able for the first time to sit up a
little, I succeeded in prevailing on Bui to promise he would go
to Usui as soon as the hongo was settled, provided, as he said, I
took on myself all responsibilities of the result.  This cheered
me so greatly, I had my chair placed under a tree and smoked my
first pipe.  On seeing this, all my men struck up a dance, to the
sound of the drums, which they carried on throughout the whole
night, never ceasing until the evening of the next day.  These
protracted caperings were to be considered as their
congratulation for my improvement in health; for, until I got
into my chair, they always thought I was going to die.  They then
told me, with great mirth and good mimicry, of many absurd scenes
which, owing to the inflamed state of my brain, had taken place
during my interviews with Lumeresi.  Bombay at this time very
foolishly told Lumeresi, if he "really wanted a deole," he must
send to Grant for one. This set the chief raving.  He knew there
was one in my box, he said, and unless I gave it, the one with
Grant must be brought; for under no circumstances would he allow
of my proceeding northwards until that was given him.  Bui and
Nasib then gave me the slip, and slept that night in a
neighbouring boma without my knowledge.

7th to 9th.--As things had now gone so far, I gave Lumeresi the
deole I had stored away for Rumanika, telling him, at the same
time as he took it, that he was robbing Rumanika, and not myself;
but I hoped, now I had given it, he would beat the drums.  The
scoundrel only laughed as he wrapped my beautiful silk over his
great broad shoulders, and said, "Yes, this will complete our
present of friendship; now then for the hongo--I must have
exactly double of all you have given."  This Sorombo trick I
attributed to the instigation of Makaka, for these savages never
fail to take their revenge when they can.  I had doubled back
from his country, and now he was cutting me off in front.  I
expected as much when the oily blackguard Mfumbi came over from
his chief to ask after my health; so, judging from my experience
with Makaka, I told Lumeresi at once to tell me what he
considered his due, for this fearful haggling was killing me by
inches.  I had no more deoles, but would make that up in brass
wire.  He then fixed the hongo at fifteen masango or brass wire
bracelets, sixteen cloths of sorts, and a hundred necklaces of
samisami or red coral beads, which was to pay for Grant as well
as myself.  I paid it down on the spot; the drums beat the
"satisfaction," and I ordered the march with the greatest relief
of mind possible.

But Bui and Nasib were not to be found; they had bolted.  The
shock nearly killed me.  I had walked all the way to Kaze and
back again for these men, to show mine a good example--had given
them pay and treble rations, the same as Bombay and Baraka--and
yet they chose to desert.  I knew not what to do, for it appeared
to me that, do what I would, we would never succeed; and in my
weakness of body and mind I actually cried like a child over the
whole affair.  I would rather have died than have failed in my
journey, and yet failure seemed at this juncture inevitable.

8th.--As I had no interpreters, and could not go forward myself,
I made up my mind at once to send back all my men with Bombay, to
Grant; after joining whom, Bombay would go back to Kaze again for
other interpreters, and on his return would pick up Grant, and
bring him on here.  This sudden decision set all my men up in a
flame; they swore it was no use my trying to go on to Karague;
they would not go with me; they did not come here to be killed. 
If I chose to lose my life, it was no business of theirs, but
they would not be witness to it.  They all wanted their discharge
at once; they would not run away, but must have a letter of
satisfaction, and then they would go back to their homes at
Zanzibar.  But when they found they lost all their arguments and
could not move me, they said they would go back for Grant, but
when they had done that duty, then they would take their leave.

10th to 15th.--This business being at last settled, I wrote to
Grant on the subject, and sent all the men off who were not sick.
Thinking then how I could best cure the disease that was keeping
me down, as I found the blister of no use, I tried to stick a
packing needle, used as a seton, into my side; but finding it was
not sharp enough, in such weak hands a mine, to go through my
skin, I got Baraka to try; and he failing too, I then made him
fire me, for the coughing was so incessant I could get no sleep
at night.  I had now nothing whatever to think of but making
dodges for lying easy, and for relieving my pains, or else for
cooking strong broths to give me strength, for my legs were
reduced to the appearance of pipe-sticks, until the 15th, when
Baraka, in the same doleful manner as in Sorombo, came to me and
said he had something to communicate, which was so terrible, if I
heard it I should give up the march. Lumeresi was his authority,
but he would not tell it until Grant arrive.  I said to him, "Let
us wait till Grant arrives; we shall then have some one with us
who won't shrink from whispers"--meaning Bombay; and so I let the
matter drop for the time being.  But when Grant came, we had it
out of him, and found this terrible mystery all hung on
Lumeresi's prognostications that we never should get through Usui
with so little cloth.

16th to 19th.--At night, I had such a terrible air-catching fit,
and made such a noise whilst trying to fill my lungs, that it
alarmed all the camp, so much so that my men rushed into my tent
to see if I was dying.  Lumeresi, in the morning, then went on a
visiting excursion into the district, but no sooner left than the
chief of Isamiro, whose place lies close to the N'yanza, came
here to visit him (17th); but after waiting a day to make friends
with me, he departed (18th), as I heard afterwards, to tell his
great Mhuma chief, Rohinda, the ruler of Ukhanga, to which
district this state of Bogue belongs, what sort of presents I had
given to Lumeresi.  He was, in fact, a spy whom Rohinda had sent
to ascertain what exactions had been made from me, as he, being
the great chief, was entitled to the most of them himself.  On
Lumeresi's return, all the men of the village, as well as mine,
set up a dance, beating the drums all day and all night.

20th to 21st.--Next night they had to beat their drums for a very
different purpose, as the Watuta, after lifting all of Makaka's
cattle in Sorombo, came hovering about, and declared they would
never cease fighting until they had lifted all those that
Lumeresi harboured round his boma; for it so happened that
Lumeresi allowed a large party of Watosi, alias Wahuma, to keep
their cattle in large stalls all round his boma, and these the
Watuta had now set their hearts upon.  After a little reflection,
however, they thought better of it, as they were afraid to come
in at once on account of my guns.

Most gladdening news this day came in to cheer me.  A large mixed
caravan of Arabs and coast-men, arriving from Karague, announced
that both Rumanika and Suwarora were anxiously looking out for
us, wondering why we did not come.  So great, indeed, was
Suwarora's desire to see us, that he had sent four men to invite
us, and they would have been here now, only that one of them fell
sick on the way, and the rest had to stop for him.  I cannot say
what pleasure this gave me; my fortune, I thought, was made; and
so I told Baraka, and pretended he did not believe the news to be
true.  Without loss of time I wrote off to Grant, and got these
men to carry the letter.

Next day (22d) the Wasui from Suwarora arrived.  They were a very
gentle, nice-dispositioned-looking set of men--small, but well
knit together.  They advanced to my tent with much seeming grace;
then knelt at my feet, and began clapping their hands together,
saying, at the same time, "My great chief, my great chief, I hope
you are well; for Suwarora, having heard of your detention here,
has sent us over to assure you that all those reports that have
been circulated regarding his ill-treatment of caravans are
without foundation; he is sorry for what has happened to deter
your march, and hopes you will at once come to visit him."  I
then told them all that had happened--how Grant and myself were
situated--and begged them to assist me by going off to Grant's
camp to inspire all the men there with confidence, and bring my
rear property to me--saying, as they agreed to do so, "Here are
some cloths and some beads for your expenses, and when you return
I will give you more."  Baraka at once, seeing this, told me they
were not trustworthy, for at Mihambo an old man had come there
and tried to inveigle him in the same manner, but he kicked him
out of the camp, because he knew he was a touter, who wished
merely to allure him with sweet words to fleece him afterwards. 
I then wrote to Grant another letter to be delivered by these
men.

Lumeresi no sooner heard of the presents I had given them, than
he flew into a passion, called them imposters, abused them for
not speaking to him before they came to me, and said he would not
allow them to go.  High words then ensued.  I said the business
was mine, and not his; he had no right to interfere, and they
should go. Still Lumeresi was obstinate, and determined they
should not, for I was his guest; he would not allow any one to
defraud me.  It was a great insult to himself, if true, that
Suwarora should attempt to snatch me out of his house; and he
could not bear to see me take these strangers by the hand, when,
as we have seen, it took him so long to entice me to his den, and
he could not prevail over me until he actually sent his copper
hatchet.

When this breeze blew over, by Lumeresi's walking away, I told
the Wasui not to mind him, but to do just as I bid them.  They
said they had their orders to bring me, and if Lumeresi would not
allow them to go for Grant, they would stop where they were, for
they knew that if Suwarora found them delaying long, he would
send more men to look after them.  There was no peace yet,
however; for Lumeresi, finding them quietly settled down eating
with my men, ordered them out of his district, threatening force
if they did not comply at once. I tried my best for them, but the
Wasui, fearing to stop any longer, said they would take leave to
see Suwarora, and in eight days more they would come back again,
bringing something with them, the sight of which would make
Lumeresi quake.  Further words were now useless, so I gave them
more cloth to keep them up to the mark, and sent them off. 
Baraka, who seemed to think this generosity a bit of insanity,
grumbled that if I had cloths to throw away it would have been
better had I disposed of them to my own men.

Next day (26th), as I was still unwell, I sent four men to Grant
with inquiries how he was getting on, and a request for
medicines. The messengers took four days to bring back the
information that Bombay had not returned from Kaze, but that
Grant, having got assistance, hoped to break ground about the 5th
of next month. They brought me at the same time information that
the Watuta had invested Ruhe's, after clearing off all the cattle
in the surrounding villages, and had proclaimed their intention
of serving out Lumeresi next.  In consequence of this, Lumeresi
daily assembled his grey-beards and had councils of war in his
drum-house; but though his subjects sent to him constantly for
troops, he would not assist them.

Another caravan then arrived (31st) from Karague, in which I
found an old friend, of half Arab breed, called Saim, who whilst
I was residing with Sheikh Snay at Kaze on my former expedition,
taught me the way to make plantain-wine.  He, like the rest of
the porters in the caravan, wore a shirt of fig-tree bark called
mbugu.  As I shall have frequently to use this word in the course
of the Journal, I may here give an explanation of its meaning. 
The porter here mentioned told me that the people about the
equator all wore this kind of covering, and made it up of
numerous pieces of bark sewn together, which they stripped from
the trees after cutting once round the trunk above and below, and
then once more down the tree from the upper to the lower circular
cutting.  This operation did not kill the trees, because, if they
covered the wound, whilst it was fresh, well over with plaintain-
leaves, shoots grew down from above, and a new bark came all over
it.  The way they softened the bark, to make it like cloth, was
by immersion in water, and a good strong application of a mill-
headed mallet, which ribbed it like corduroy. [FN#10]  Saim told
me he had lived ten years in Uganda, had crossed the Nile, and
had traded eastward as far as the Masai country. He thought the
N'yanza was the sources of the Ruvuma river; as the river which
drained the N'yanza, after passing between Uganda and Usoga, went
through Unyoro, and then all round the Tanganyika lake into the
Indian Ocean, south of Zanzibar.  Kiganda, he also said, he knew
as well as his own tongue; and as I wanted an interpreter, he
would gladly take service with me.  This was just what I wanted--
a heaven-born stroke of luck.  I seized at his offer with
avidity, gave him a new suit of clothes, which made him look
quite a gentleman, and arranged to send him next day with a
letter to Grant.

1st and 2d.--A great hubbub and confusion now seized all the
place, for the Watuta were out, and had killed a woman of the
place who had formerly been seized by them in war, but had since
escaped and resided here.  To avenge this, Lumeresi headed his
host, and was accompanied by my men; but they succeeded in
nothing save in frightening off their enemies, and regaining
possession of the body of the dead woman.  Then another hubbub
arose, for it was discovered that three Wahuma women were missing
(2d); and, as they did not turn up again, Lumeresi suspected the
men of the caravan, which left with Saim, must have taken them
off as slaves.  He sent for the chief of the caravan, and had him
brought back to account for this business. Of course the man
swore he knew nothing about the matter, whilst Lumeresi swore he
should stop there a prisoner until the women were freed, as it
was not the first time his women had been stolen in this manner. 
About the same time a man of this place, who had been to Sorombo
to purchase cows, came in with a herd, and was at once seized by
Lumeresi; for, during his absence, one of Lumeresi's daughters
had been discovered to be with child, and she, on being asked who
was the cause of it, pointed out that man.  To compensate for
damage done to himself, as his daughter by this means had become
reduced to half her market-value, Lumeresi seized all the cattle
this man had brought with him.

3d to 10th.--When two days had elapsed, one of the three missing
Wahuma women was discovered in a village close by.  As she said
she had absconded because her husband had ill-treated her, she
was flogged, to teach her better conduct.  It was reported they
had been seen in M'yonga's establishment; and I was at the same
time informed that the husbands who were out in search of them
would return, as M'yonga was likely to demand a price for them if
they were claimed, in virtue of their being his rightful property
under the acknowledged law of buni, or findings-keepings.

For the next four days nothing but wars and rumours of wars could
be heard.  The Watuta were out in all directions plundering
cattle and burning villages, and the Wahuma of this place had
taken such fright, they made a stealthy march with all their
herds to a neighbouring chief, to whom it happened that one of
Lumeresi's grey-beards was on a visit.  They thus caught a
Tartar; for the grey-beard no sooner saw them than he went and
flogged them all back again, rebuking them on the way for their
ingratitude to their chief, who had taken them in when they
sought his shelter, and was now deserted by them on the first
alarm of war.

10th.--Wishing now to gain further intelligence of Grant, I
ordered some of my men to carry a letter to him; but they all
feared the Watuta meeting them on the way, and would not.  Just
then a report came in that one of Lumeresi's sons, who had gone
near the capital of Ukhanga to purchase cows, was seized by
Rohinda in consequence of the Isamiro chief telling him that
Lumeresi had taken untold wealth from me, and he was to be
detained there a prisoner until Lumeresi either disgorged, or
sent me on to be fleeced again.  Lumeresi, of course, was greatly
perplexed at this, and sought my advice, but could get nothing
out of me, for I laughed in my sleeve, and told him such was the
consequence of his having been too greedy.

11th to 15th.--Masudi with his caravan arrived from Mchimeka--
Ungurue "the Pig," who had led me astray, was, by the way, his
kirangozi or caravan-leader.  Masudi told us he had suffered most
severely from losses by his men running away, one after the
other, as soon as they received their pay.  He thought Grant
would soon join me, as, the harvest being all in, the men about
Rungua would naturally be anxious for service.  He had had
fearful work with M'yonga, having paid him a gun, some gunpowder,
and a great quantity of cloth; and he had to give the same to
Ruhe, with the addition of twenty brass wires, one load of
mzizima, and one load of red coral beads.  This was startling,
and induced me to send all the men I could prudently spare off to
Grant at once, cautioning him to avoid Ruhe's, as Lumeresi had
promised me he would not allow one other thing to be taken from
me.  Lumeresi by this time was improving, from lessons on the
policy of moderation which I had been teaching him; for when he
tried to squeeze as much more out of Masudi as Ruhe had taken, he
gave way, and let him off cheaply at my intercession. He had seen
enough to be persuaded that this unlimited taxation or plunder
system would turn out a losing game, such as Unyamyembe and Ugogo
were at that time suffering from.  Moreover, he was rather put to
shame by my saying, "Pray, who now is biggest--Ruhe or yourself?
for any one entering this country would suspect that he was, as
he levies the first tax, and gives people to understand that, by
their paying it, the whole district will be free to them; such at
any rate he told me, and so it appears he told Masudi.  If you
are the sultan, and will take my advice, I would strongly
recommend your teaching Ruhe a lesson, by taking from him what
the Arabs paid, and giving it back to Masudi.

At midnight (16th) I was startled in my sleep by the hurried
tramp of several men, who rushed in to say they were Grant's
porters-- Bogue men who had deserted him.  Grant, they said, in
incoherent, short, rapid, and excited sentences, was left by them
standing under a tree, with nothing but his gun in his hand.  All
the Wanguana had been either killed or driven away by M'yonga's
men, who all turned out and fell upon the caravan, shooting,
spearing, and plundering, until nothing was left.  The porters
then, seeing Grant all alone, unable to help him, bolted off to
inform me and Lumeresi, as the best thing they could do.  Though
disbelieving the story in all its minutiae, I felt that something
serious must have happened; so, without a moment's delay, I sent
off the last of my men strong enough to walk to succour Grant,
carrying with them a bag of beads. Baraka then stepped outside my
tent, and said in a loud voice, purposely for my edification,
"There, now, what is the use of thinking any more about going to
Karague?  I said all along it was impossible"; upon hearing which
I had him up before all the remaining men, and gave him a
lecture, saying, happen what would, I must die or go on with the
journey, for shame would not allow me to give way as Baraka was
doing.  Baraka replied, he was not afraid --he only meant to
imply that men could not act against impossibilities. 
"Impossibilities!" I said; "what is impossible? Could I not go on
as a servant with the first caravan, or buy up a whole caravan if
I liked?  What is impossible?  For Godsake don't try any more to
frighten my men, for you have nearly killed me already in doing
so."

Next day (17th) I received a letter from Grant, narrating the
whole of his catastrophes:--

   "In the Jungles, near M'yonga's,     16th Sept. 1861.

"My dear Speke,--The caravan was attacked, plundered, and the men
driven to the winds, while marching this morning into M'yonga's
country.

"Awaking at cock-crow, I roused the camp, all anxious to rejoin
you; and while the loads were being packed, my attention was
drawn to an angry discussion between the head men and seven or
eight armed fellows sent by Sultan M'yonga, to insist upon my
putting up for the day in his village.  They were summarily told
that as YOU had already made him a present, he need not expect a
visit from ME. Adhering, I doubt not, to their master's
instructions, they officiously constituted themselves our guides
till we chose to strike off their path, when, quickly heading our
party, they stopped the way, planted their spears, and DARED our
advance!

"This menace made us firmer in our determination, and we swept
past the spears.  After we had marched unmolested for some seven
miles, a loud yelping from the woods excited our attention, and a
sudden rush was made upon us by, say two hundred men, who came
down seemingly in great glee.  In an instant, at the caravan's
centre, they fastened upon the poor porters.  The struggle was
short; and with the threat of an arrow or spear at their breasts,
men were robbed of their cloths and ornaments, loads were yielded
and run away with before resistance could be organised; only
three men of a hundred stood by me, the others, whose only
thought was their lives, fled into the woods, where I went
shouting for them.  One man, little Rahan--rip as he is--stood
with cocked gun, defending his load, against five savages with
uplifted spears.  No one else could be seen.  Two or three were
reported killed; some were wounded. Beads, boxes, cloths, etc.,
lay strewed about the woods.  In fact, I felt wrecked.  My
attempt to go and demand redress from the sultan was resisted,
and, in utter despair, I seated myself among a mass of rascals
jeering round me, and insolent after the success of the day.
Several were dressed in the very cloths, etc., they had stolen
from my men.

"In the afternoon, about fifteen men and loads were brought me,
with a message from the sultan, that the attack had been a
mistake of his subjects--that one man had had a hand cut off for
it, and that all the property would be restored!

Yours sincerely,    J. W. Grant."

Now, judging from the message sent to Grant by M'yonga, it
appeared to me that his men had mistaken their chief's orders,
and had gone one step beyond his intentions.  It was obvious that
the chief merely intended to prevent Grant from passing through
or evading his district without paying a hongo, else he would not
have sent his men to invite him to his palace, doubtless with
instructions, if necessary, to use force.  This appears the more
evident from the fact of his subsequent contrition, and finding
it necessary to send excuses when the property was in his hands;
for these chiefs, grasping as they are, know they must conform to
some kind of system, to save themselves from a general war, or
the avoidance of their territories by all travellers in future. 
To assist Grant, I begged Lumeresi to send him some aid in men at
once; but he refused, on the plea that M'yonga was at war with
him, and would kill them if they went.  This was all the more
provoking, as Grant, in a letter next evening, told me he could
not get all his men together again, and wished to know what
should be done.  He had recovered all the property except six
loads of beads, eighty yards of American sheeting, and many minor
articles, besides what had been rifled more or less from every
load.  In the same letter he asked me to deliver up a Mhuma woman
to a man who came with the bearers of his missive, as she had
made love to Saim at Ukulima's, and had bolted with my men to
escape from her husband.

On inquiring into this matter, she told me her face had been her
misfortune, for the man who now claimed her stole her from her
parents at Ujiji, and forcibly made her his wife, but ever since
had ill-treated her, often thrashing her, and never giving her
proper food or clothing.  It was on this account she fell in love
with Saim; for he, taking compassion on her doleful stories, had
promised to keep her as long as he travelled with me, and in the
end to send her back to her parents at Ujiji.  She was a
beautiful woman, with gazelle eyes, oval face, high thin nose,
and fine lips, and would have made a good match for Saim, who had
a good deal of Arab blood in him, and was therefore, in my
opinion, much of the same mixed Shem-Hamitic breed.  But as I did
not want more women in my camp, I have her some beads, and sent
her off with the messenger who claimed her, much against my own
feelings.  I had proposed to Grant that, as Lumeresi's
territories extended to within eight miles of M'yonga's, he
should try to move over the Msalala border by relays, when I
would send some Bogue men to meet him; for though Lumeresi would
not risk sending his men into the clutches of M'yonga, he was
most anxious to have another white visitor.

20th and 21st.--I again urged Lumeresi to help on Grant, saying
it was incumbent on him to call M'yonga to account for
maltreating Grant's porters, who were his own subjects, else the
road would be shut up--he would lose all the hongos he laid on
caravans--and he would not be able to send his own ivory down to
the coast.  This appeal had its effect: he called on his men to
volunteer, and twelve porters came forward, who no sooner left,
than in came another letter from Grant, informing me that he had
collected almost enough men to march with, and that M'yonga had
returned on of the six missing loads, and promised to right him
in everything.

Next day, however, I had from Grant two very opposite accounts--
one, in the morning, full of exultation, in which he said he
hoped to reach Ruhe's this very day, as his complement of porters
was then completed; while by the other, which came in the
evening, I was shocked to hear that M'yonga, after returning all
the loads, much reduced by rifling, had demanded as a hongo two
guns, two boxed ammunition, forty brass wires, and 160 yards of
American sheeting, in default of which he, Grant, must lend
M'yonga ten Wanguana to build a boma on the west of his district,
to enable him to fight some Wasona who were invading his
territory, otherwise he would not allow Grant to move from his
palace.  Grant knew not what to do. He dared not part with the
guns, because he knew it was against my principle, and therefore
deferred the answer until he heard from me, although all his
already collected porters were getting fidgety, and two had
bolted.  In this fearful fix I sent Baraka off with strict orders
to bring Grant away at any price, except the threatened sacrifice
of men, guns, and ammunition, which I would not listen to, as one
more day's delay might end in further exactions; at the same
time, I cautioned him to save my property as far as he could, for
it was to him that M'yonga had formerly said that what I paid him
should do for all.

Some of M'yonga's men who had plundered Grant now "caught a
Tartar." After rifling his loads of a kilyndo, or bark box of
beads, they, it appeared, received orders from M'yonga to sell a
lot of female slaves, amongst whom were the two Wahuma women who
had absconded from this.  The men in charge, not knowing their
history, brought them for sale into this district, where they
were instantly recognised by some of Lumeresi's men, and brought
in to him. The case was not examined at once, Lumeresi happening
to be absent; so, to make good their time, the men in charge
brought their beads to me to be exchanged for something else, not
knowing that both camps were mine, and that they held my beads
and not Grant's. Of course I took them from them, but did not
give them a flogging, as I knew if I did so they would at once
retaliate upon Grant. The poor Wahuma women, as soon as Lumeresi
arrived, were put to death by their husbands, because, by
becoming slaves, they had broken the laws of their race.

22d to 24th.--At last I began to recover.  All this exciting
news, with the prospect of soon seeing Grant, did me a world of
good,-- so much so, that I began shooting small birds for
specimens-- watching the blacksmiths as they made tools, spears,
ad bracelets-- and doctoring some of the Wahuma women who came to
be treated for ophthalmia, in return for which they gave me milk. 
The milk, however, I could not boil excepting in secrecy, else
they would have stopped their donations on the plea that this
process would be an incantation or bewitchment, from which their
cattle would fall sick and dry up.  I now succeeded in getting
Lumeresi to send his Wanyapara to go and threaten M'yonga, that
if he did not release Grant at once, we would combine to force
him to do so.  They, however, left too late, for the hongo had
been settled, as I was informed by a letter from Grant next day,
brought to my by Bombay, who had just returned from Kaze after
six weeks' absence. He brought with him old Nasib and another
man, and told me both Bui and Nasib had hidden themselves in a
Boma close to Lumeresi's the day when my hongo was settled; but
they bolted the instant the drums beat, and my men fired guns to
celebrate the event, supposing that the noise was occasioned by
our fighting with Lumeresi.  These cowards then made straight for
Kaze, when Fundi Sangoro gave Nasib a flogging for deserting me,
and made him so ashamed of his conduct that he said he would
never do it again.  Bui also was flogged, but, admitting himself
to be a coward, was set to the "right-about." With him Bombay
also brought three new deoles, for which I had to pay 160
dollars, and news that the war with Manua Sera was not then over. 
He had effected his escape in the usual manner, and was leading
the Arabs another long march after him.

Expecting to meet Grant this morning (25th), I strolled as far as
my strength and wind would allow me towards Ruhe's; but I was
sold, for Ruhe had detained him for a hongo.  Lumeresi also
having heard of it, tried to interpose, according to a plan
arranged between us in case of such a thing happening, by sending
his officers to Ruhe, with an order not to check my "brother's"
march, as I had settled accounts for all.  Later in the day,
however, I heard from Grant that Ruhe would not let him go until
he had paid sixteen pretty cloths, six wires, one gun, one box of
ammunition, and one load of mzizima beads, coolly saying that I
had only given him a trifle, under the condition that, when the
big caravan arrived, Grant would make good the rest.  I
immediately read this letter to Lumeresi, and asked him how I
should answer it, as Grant refused to pay anything until I gave
the order.

To which Lumeresi replied, Ruhe, "my child," could not dare to
interfere with Grant after his officers arrived, and advised me
to wait until the evening.  At all events, if there were any
further impediments, he himself would go over there with a force
and release Grant.  In the evening another messenger arrived from
Grant, giving a list of his losses and expenses at M'yonga's.
They amounted to an equivalent of eight loads, and were as
follows: --100 yards cloth, and 4600 necklaces of beads (these
had been set aside as the wages paid to the porters, but being in
my custody, I had to make them good); 300 necklaces of beads
stolen from the loads; one brass wire stolen; one sword-bayonet
stolen; Grant's looking-glass stolen; one saw stolen; one box
ammunition stolen. Then paid in hongo, 160 yards cloth; 150
necklaces; one scarlet blanket, double; one case ammunition; ten
brass wires.  Lastly, there was one donkey beaten to death by the
savages.  This was the worst of all; for this poor brute carried
me on the former journey to the southern end of the N'yanza, and
in consequence was a great pet.

As nothing further transpired, and I was all in the dark (26th),
I wrote to Grant telling him of my interviews with Lumeresi, and
requesting him to pay nothing; but it was too late, for Grant, to
my inexpressible delight, was the next person I saw; he walked
into camp, and then he was a good laugh over all our misfortunes.
Poor Grant, he had indeed had a most troublesome time of it. The
scoundrel Ruhe, who only laughed at Lumeresi's orders, had
stopped his getting supplies of food for himself and his men;
told him it was lucky that he came direct to the palace, for full
preparations had been made for stopping him had he attempted to
avoid it; would not listen to any reference being made to avoid
myself; badgered and bullied over every article that he
extracted; and, finally, when he found compliance with his
extortionate requests was not readily granted, he beat the
wardrums to frighten the porters, and ordered the caravan out of
his palace, to where he said they would find his men ready to
fight it out with them. It happened that Grant had just given
Ruhe a gun when my note arrived, on which they made an agreement,
that it was to be restored, provided that, after the full
knowledge of all these transactions had reached us, it was both
Lumeresi's and my desire that it should be so.

I called Lumeresi (27th), and begged he would show whether he was
the chief or not, by requiring Ruhe to disgorge the property he
had taken from me.  His Wanyapara had been despised, and I had
been most unjustly treated.  Upon this the old chief hung down
his head, and said it touched his heart more than words could
tell to hear my complaint, for until I came that way no one had
come, and I had paid him handsomely.  He fully appreciated the
good service I had done to him and his country by opening a road
which all caravans for the future would follow if property dealt
with.  Having two heads in a country was a most dangerous thing,
but it could not be helped for the present, as his hands were too
completely occupied already. There were Rohinda, the Watuta, and
M'yonga, whom he must settle with before he could attend to Ruhe;
but when he was free, then Ruhe should know who was the chief. 
To bring the matter to a climax, Mrs. Lumeresi then said she
ought to have something, because Ruhe was her son, whilst
Lumeresi was only her second husband and consort, for Ruhe was
born to her by her former husband. She therefore was queen.

Difficulties now commenced again (28th).  All the Wanguana
struck, and said they would go no further.  I argued--they
argued; they wanted more pay--I would not give more.  Bombay, who
appeared the only one of my men anxious to go on with Grant and
myself, advised me to give in, else they would all run away, he
said. I still stuck out, saying that if they did go, they should
be seized on the coast and cast into jail for desertion.  I had
sent for fifty more men on the same terms as themselves, and
nothing in the world would make me alter what had been
established at the British Consulate.  There all their
engagements were written down in the office-book, and the Consul
was our judge.

29th to 4th.--This shut them up, but at night two of them
deserted; the Wanyamuezi porters also deserted, and I had to find
more. Whilst this was going on, I wrote letters and packed up my
specimens, and sent them back by my late valet, Rahan, who also
got orders to direct Sheikh Said to seize the two men who
deserted, and take them down chained to the coast when he went
there.  On the 4th, Lumeresi was again greatly perplexed by his
sovereign Rohinda calling on him for some cloths; he must have
thirty at least, else he would not give up Lumeresi's son. 
Further, he commanded in a bullying tone that all the Wahuma who
were with Lumeresi should be sent to him at once, adding, at the
same time, if his royal mandate was not complied with as soon as
he expected, he would at once send a force to seize Lumeresi, and
place another man in his stead to rule over the district.

Lumeresi, on hearing this, first consulted me, saying his chief
was displeased with him, accusing him of being too proud, in
having at once two such distinguished guests, and meant by these
acts only to humble him.  I replied, if that was the case, the
sooner he allowed us to go, the better it would be for him; and,
reminding him of his original promise to give me assistance on to
Usui, said he could do so now with a very good grace.

Quite approving himself of this suggestion, Lumeresi then gave me
one of his officers to be my guide--his name was Sangizo.  This
man no sooner received his orders than, proud of his office as
the guide of such a distinguished caravan, he set to work to find
us porters. Meanwhile my Wasui friends, who left on the 25th of
August, returned, bearing what might be called Suwarora's mace--a
long rod of brass bound up in stick charms, and called
Kaquenzingiriri, "the commander of all things."  This they said
was their chief's invitation to see us, and sent this
Kaquenzingiriri, to command us respect wherever we went.

5th.--Without seeing us again, Lumeresi, evidently ashamed of the
power held over him by this rod of Suwarora's, walked off in the
night, leaving word that he was on his way to Ruhe's, to get back
my gun and all the other things that had been taken from Grant.
The same night a large herd of cattle was stolen from the boma
without any one knowing it; so next morning, when the loss was
discovered, all the Wahuma set off on the spoor to track them
down; but with what effect I never knew.

As I had now men enough to remove half our property, I made a
start of it, leaving Grant to bring up the rest.  I believe I was
a most miserable spectre in appearance, puffing and blowing at
each step I took, with shoulder drooping, and left arm hanging
like a dead leg, which I was unable ever to swing.  Grant,
remarking this, told me then, although fro a friendly delicacy he
had abstained from saying so earlier, that my condition, when he
first saw me on rejoining, gave him a sickening shock.  Next day
(7th) he came up with the rest of the property, carried by men
who had taken service for that one march only.

Before us now lay a wilderness of five marches' duration, as the
few villages that once lined it had all been depopulated by the
Sorombo people and the Watuta.  We therefore had to lay in
rations for those days, and as no men could be found who would
take service to Karague, we filled up our complement with men at
exorbitant wages to carry our things on to Usui.  At this place,
to our intense joy, three of Sheikh Said's boys came to us with a
letter from Rigby; but, on opening it, our spirits at once fell
far below zero, for it only informed us that he had sent us all
kinds of nice things, and letters from home, which were packed up
in boxes, and despatched from the coast on the 30th October 1860.

The boys then told me that a merchant, nickname Msopora, had left
the boxes in Ugogo, in charge of some of those Arabs who were
detained there, whilst he went rapidly round by the south,
following up the Ruaha river to Usanga and Usenga, whence he
struck across to Kaze.  Sheikh Said, they said, sent his
particular respects to me; he had heard of Grant's disasters with
great alarm.  If he could be of service, he would readily come to
me; but he had dreamed three times that he saw me marching into
Cairo, which, as three times were lucky, he was sure would prove
good, and he begged I would still keep my nose well to the front,
and push boldly on.  Manua Sera was still in the field, and all
was uncertain.  Bombay then told me-- he had forgotten to do so
before--that when he was last at Kaze, Sheikh said told him he
was sure we would succeed if both he and myself pulled together,
although it was well known no one else of my party wished to go
northwards.

With at last a sufficiency of porters, we all set out together,
walking over a new style of country.  Instead of the constantly-
recurring outcrops of granite, as in Unyamuezi, with valleys
between, there were only two lines of little hills visible, one
right and one left of us, a good way off; whilst the ground over
which we were travelling, instead of being confined like a
valley, rose in long high swells of sandstone formation, covered
with small forest-trees, among which flowers like primroses, only
very much larger, and mostly of a pink colour, were frequently
met with. Indeed, we ought all to have been happy together, for
all my men were paid and rationed trebly--far better than they
would have been if they had been travelling with any one else;
but I had not paid all, as they thought, proportionably, and
therefore there were constant heartburnings, with strikes and
rows every day.  It was useless to tell them that they were all
paid according to their own agreements--that all short-service
men had a right to expect more in proportion to their work than
long-service ones; they called it all love and partiality, and in
their envy would think themselves ill-used.

At night the kirangozi would harangue the camp, cautioning all
hands to keep together on the line of march, as the Watuta were
constantly hovering about, and the men should not squabble and
fight with their master, else no more white men would come this
way again. On the 11th we were out of Bogue, in the district of
Ugomba, and next march brought us into Ugombe (12th), where we
crossed the Ukongo nullah, draining westwards to the Malagarai
river.  Here some of the porters, attempting to bolt, were
intercepted by my coast-men and had a fight of it, for they fired
arrows, and in return the coast-men cut their bows.  The whole
camp, of course, was in a blaze at this; their tribe was
insulted, and they would not stand it, until Bombay put down
their pride with a few strings of beads, as the best means of
restoring peace in the camp.

At this place we were visited by the chief of the district, Pongo
(Bush-boc), who had left his palace to see us and invite us his
way, for he feared we might give him the slip by going west into
Uyofu. He sent us a cow, and said he should like some return; for
Masudi, who had gone ahead, only gave him a trifle, professing to
be our vanguard, and telling him that as soon as we came with the
large caravan we would satisfy him to his heart's content.  We
wished for an interview, but he would not see us, as he was
engaged looking into his magic horn, with an endeavour to see
what sort of men we were, as none of our sort had ever come that
way before.

The old sort of thing occurred again.  I sent him one kitambi and
eight yards kiniki, explaining how fearfully I was reduced from
theft and desertions, and begging he would have mercy; but
instead of doing so he sent the things back in a huff, after a
whole day's delay, and said he required, besides, one sahari, one
kitambi, and eight yards kiniki.  In a moment I sent them over,
and begged he would beat the drums; but no, he thought he was
entitled to ten brass wires, in addition, and would accept them
at his palace the next day, as he could not think of allowing us
to leave his country until we had done him that honour, else all
the surrounding chiefs would call him inhospitable.

Too knowing now to be caught with such chaff, I told him, through
Bombay, if he would consider the ten brass wires final, I would
give them, and then go to his palace, not otherwise.  He acceded
to this, but no sooner got them, than he broke his faith, and
said he must either have more pretty cloths, or five more brass
wires, and then, without doubt, he would beat the drums.  A long
badgering bargain ensued, at which I made all my men be present
as witnesses, and we finally concluded the hongo with four more
brass wires.

The drums then no sooner beat the satisfaction, than the Wasui
mace-bearers, in the most feeling and good-mannered possible
manner, dropped down on their knees before me, and congratulated
me on the cessation of this tormenting business.  Feeling much
freer, we now went over and put up in Pong's palace, for we had
to halt there a day to collect more porters, as half my men had
just bolted.  This was by no means an easy job, for all my
American sheeting was out, and so was the kiniki.  Pongo then for
the first time showed himself, sneaking about with an escort,
hiding his head in a cloth lest our "evil eyes" might bewitch
him.  Still he did us a good turn; for on the 16th he persuaded
his men to take service with us at the enormous hire of ten
necklaces of beads per man for every day's march--nearly ten
times what an Arab pays.  Fowls were as plentiful here as
elsewhere, though the people only kept them to sell to
travellers, or else for cutting them open for diving purposes, by
inspection of their blood and bones.

From the frying pan we went into the fire in crossing from Ugombe
into the district of Wanga, where we beat up the chief,
N'yaruwamba, and at once went into the hongo business.  He
offered a cow to commence with, which I would not accept until
the tax was paid, and then I made my offering of two wires, one
kitambi, and one kisutu. Badgering then commenced: I must add two
wires, and six makete or necklaces of mzizima beads, the latter
being due to the chief for negotiating the tax.  When this
addition was paid, we should be freed by beat of drum.

I complied at once, by way of offering a special mark of respect
And friendship, and on the reliance that he would keep his word.
The scoundrel, however, no sooner got the articles, than he said
a man had just come there to inform hi that I gave Pongo ten
wires and ten cloths; he, therefore, could not be satisfied until
I added one more wire, when, without fail, he would beat the
drums.  It was given, after many angry words; but it was the old
story over again-- he would have one more wire and a cloth, or
else he would not allow us to proceed on the morrow.  My men,
this time really provoked, said they would fight it out;--a king
breaking his word in that wa