y! But in the end the demand had to
be paid; and at last, at 9 P.M., the drums beat the satisfaction.

From this we went on to the north end of Wanga, in front of which
was a wilderness, separating the possessions of Rohinda from
those of Suwarora.  We put up in a boma, but were not long
ensconced there when the villagers got up a pretext for a
quarrel, thinking they could plunder us of all our goods, and
began pitching into my men. We, however, proved more than a match
for them.  Our show of guns frightened them all out of the place;
my men then gave chase, firing off in the air, which sent them
flying over the fields, and left us to do there as we liked until
night, when a few of the villagers came back and took up their
abode with us quietly.  Next, after dark, the little village was
on the alert again.  The Watuta were out marching, and it was
rumoured that they were bound for M'yaruwamba's.  The porters who
were engaged at Pongo's now gave us the slip: we were
consequently detained here next day (19th), when, after engaging
a fresh set, we crossed the wilderness, and in Usui put up with
Suwarora's border officer of this post, N'yamanira.

Here we were again brought to a standstill.




                          Chapter VII



                              Usui

Taxation recommenced--A Great Doctor--Suwarora pillaging--The
Arabs --Conference with an Ambassador from Uganda--Disputes in
Camp-- Rivalry of Bombay and Baraka--Departure from the
Inhospitable Districts.

We were now in Usui, and so the mace-bearers, being on their own
ground forgot their manners, and peremptorily demanded their pay
before they would allow us to move one step farther.  At first I
tried to stave the matter off, promising great rewards if they
took us quickly on to Suwarora; but they would take no
alternative--their rights were four wires each.  I could not
afford such a sum, and tried to beat them down, but without
effect; for they said, they had it in their power to detain us
here a whole month, and they could get us bullied at every stage
by the officers of the stations. No threats of reporting them to
their chief had any effect, so, knowing that treachery in these
countries was a powerful enemy, I ordered them to be paid. 
N'yamanira, the Mkungu, then gave us a goat and two pots of
pombe, begging, at the same time, for four wires, which I paid,
hoping thus to get on in the morning.

I then made friends with him, and found he was a great doctor as
well as an officer.  In front of his hut he had his church or
uganga--a tree, in which was fixed a blaue boc's horn charged
with magic powder, and a zebra's hoof, suspended by a string over
a pot of water sunk in the earth below it.  His badges of office
he had tied on his head; the butt of a shell, representing the
officer's badge, being fixed on the forehead, whilst a small
sheep's horn, fixed jauntily over the temple, denoted that he was
a magician. Wishing to try my powers in magical arts, as I
laughed at his church, he begged me to produce an everlasting
spring of water by simply scratching the ground.  He, however,
drew short up, to the intense delight of my men, on my promising
that I would do so if he made one first.

At night, 22d, a steel scabbard and some cloths were extracted
from our camp, so I begged my friend the great doctor would show
us the use of his horn.  This was promised, but never performed. 
I then wished to leave, as the Wasui guides, on receiving their
pay, promised we should; but they deferred, on the plea that one
of them must see their chief first, and get him to frank us
through, else, they said, we should be torn to pieces.  I said I
thought the Kaquenzingiriri could do this; but they said, "No;
Suwarora must be told first of your arrival, to prepare him
properly for your coming; so stop here for three days with two of
us, whilst the third one goes to the palace and returns again;
for you know the chiefs of these countries do not feel safe until
they have a look at the uganga."

One of them then went away, but no sooner had left than a man
named Makinga arrived to invite us on, as he said, at his adopted
brother K'yengo's request.  Makinga then told us that Suwarora,
on first hearing that we were coming, became greatly afraid, and
said he would not let us set eyes on his country, as he was sure
we were king-dethroners; but, referring for opinion to Dr
K'yengo, his fears were overcome by the doctor assuring him that
he had seen hosts of our sort at Zanzibar; and he knew, moreover,
that some years ago we had been to Ujiji and to Ukerewe without
having done any harm in those places; and, further, since Musa
had sent word that I had done my best to subdue the war at
Unyanyembe, and had promised to do my best here, he, Suwarora,
had been anxiously watching our movements, and longed for our
arrival.  This looked famous, and it was agreed we should move
the next morning.  Just then a new light broke in on my defeat at
Sorombo, for with Makinga I recognised one of my former porters,
who I had supposed was a "child" of the Pig's.  This man now said
before all my men, Baraka included, that he wished to accept the
load of mzizima I had offered the Pig if he would go forward with
Baraka and tell Suwarora I wanted some porters to help me to
reach him.  He was not a "child" of the Pig's, but a "child" of
K'yengo's; and as Baraka would not allow him to accept the load
of mzizima, he went on to K'yengo by himself, and told all that
had happened.  It was now quite clear what motives induced
Suwarora to send out the three Wasui; but how I blessed Baraka
for this in my heart, though I said nothing about it to him, for
fear of his playing some more treacherous tricks.  Grant then
told me Baraka had been frightened at Mininga, by a blackguard
Mganga to whom he would not give a present, into the belief that
our journey would encounter some terrible mishap; for, when the
M'yonga catastrophe happened, he thought that a fulfillment of
the Mganga's prophecy.

I wished to move in the morning (23d), and had all hands ready,
but was told by Makinga he must be settled with first.  His dues
for the present were four brass wires, and as many more when we
reached the palace.  I could not stand this: we were literally,
as Musa said we should be, being "torn to pieces"; so I appealed
to the mace-bearers, protested that Makinga could have no claims
on me, as he was not a man of Usui, but a native of Utambara, and
brought on a row.  On the other hand, as he could not refute
this, Makinga swore the mace was all a pretence, and set a-
fighting with the Wasui and all the men in turn.

To put a stop to this, I ordered a halt, and called on the
district officer to assist us, on which he said he would escort
us on to Suwarora's if we would stop till next morning.  This was
agreed to; but in the night we were robbed of three goats, which
he said he could not allow to be passed over, lest Suwarora might
hear of it, and he would get into a scrape.  He pressed us
strongly to stop another day whilst he sought for them, but I
told him I would not, as his magic powder was weak, else he would
have found the scabbard we lost long before this.

At last we got under way, and, after winding through a long
forest, we emerged on the first of the populous parts of Usui, a
most convulsed-looking country, of well-rounded hills composed of
sandstone.  In all the parts not under cultivation they were
covered with brushwood.  Here the little grass-hut villages were
not fenced by a boma, but were hidden in large fields of
plantains.  Cattle were numerous, kept by the Wahuma, who could
not sell their milk to us because we ate fowls and a bean called
maharague.

Happily no one tried to pillage us here, so on we went to
Vikora's, another officer, living at N'yakasenye, under a
sandstone hill, faced with a dyke of white quartz, over which
leaped a small stream of water--a seventy-feet drop--which, it is
said, Suwarora sometimes paid homage to when the land was
oppressed by drought.  Vikora's father it was whom Sirboko of
Mininga shot.  Usually he was very severe with merchants in
consequence of that act; but he did not molest us, as the
messenger who went on to Suwarora returned here just as we
arrived, to say we must come on at once, as Suwarora was anxious
to see us, and had ordered his Wakungu not to molest us. Thieves
that night entered our ringfence of thorns, and stole a cloth
from off one of my men while he was sleeping.

We set down Suwarora, after this very polite message, "a regular
trump," and walked up the hill of N'yakasenye with considerable
mirth, singing his praises; but we no sooner planted ourselves on
the summit than we sang a very different tune.  We were ordered
to stop by a huge body of men, and to pay toll.

Suwarora, on second thoughts, had changed his mind, or else he
had been overruled by two of his officers--Kariwami, who lived
here, and Virembo, who lived two stages back, but were then with
their chief.  There was no help for it, so I ordered the camp to
be formed, and sent Nasib and the mace-bearers at once off to the
palace to express to his highness how insulted I felt as his
guest, being stopped in this manner, even when I had his
Kaquenzingiriri with me as his authority that I was invited there
as a guest.  I was not a merchant who carried merchandise, but a
prince like himself, come on a friendly mission to see him and
Rumanika.  I was waiting at night for the return of the
messengers, and sitting out with my sextant observing the stars,
to fix my position, when some daring thieves, in the dark bushes
close by, accosted two of the women of the camp, pretending a
desire to know what I was doing.  They were no sooner told by the
unsuspecting women, than they whipped off their cloths and ran
away with them, allowing their victims to pass me in a state of
absolute nudity.  I could stand this thieving no longer.  My
goats and other things had been taken away without causing me
much distress of mind, but now, after this shocking event, I
ordered my men to shoot at any thieves that came near them.

This night one was shot, without any mistake about it; for the
next morning we tracked him by his blood, and afterwards heard he
had died of his wound.  The Wasui elders, contrary to my
expectation, then came and congratulated us on our success.  They
thought us most wonderful men, and possessed of supernatural
powers; for the thief in question was a magician, who until now
was thought to be invulnerable.  Indeed, they said Arabs with
enormous caravans had often been plundered by these people; but
though they had so many more guns than ourselves, they never
succeeded in killing one.

Nasib then returned to inform us that the king had heard our
complaint, and was sorry for it, but said he could not interfere
with the rights of his officers.  He did not wish himself to take
anything from us, and hoped we would come on to him as soon as we
had satisfied his officers with the trifle they wanted.  Virembo
then sent us some pombe by his officers, and begged us to have
patience, for he was then fleecing Masudi at the encamping-ground
near the palace.  This place was alive with thieves.  During the
day they lured my men into their huts by inviting them to dinner;
but when they got them they stripped them stark-naked and let
them go again; whilst at night they stone our camp.  After this,
one more was shot dead and two others wounded.

I knew that Suwarora's message was all humbug, and that his
officers merely kept about one per cent. of what they took from
travellers, paying the balance into the royal coffers.  Thinking
I was now well in for a good fleecing myself, I sent Bombay off
to Masudi's camp, to tell Insangez, who was travelling with him
on a mission of his master's, old Musa's son, that I would reward
him handsomely if he would, on arrival at Karague, get Rumanika
to send us his mace here in the same way as Suwarora had done to
help us out of Bogue, as he knew Musa at one time said he would
go with us to Karague in person. When Bombay was gone, Virembo
then deputed Kariwami to take the hongo for both at once, mildly
requiring 40 wires, 80 cloths, and 400 necklaces of every kind of
bead we possessed.  This was, indeed, too much of a joke.  I
complained of all the losses I had suffered, and begged for
mercy; but all he said, after waiting the whole day, was, "Do not
stick at trifles; for, after settling with us, you will have to
give as much more to Vikora, who lives down below."

Next morning, as I said I could not by any means pay such an
exorbitant tax as was demanded, Kariwami begged me to make an
offer which I did by sending him four wires.  These, of course,
were rejected with scorn; so, in addition, I sent an old box.
That, too, was thrown back on me, as nothing short of 20 wires,
40 cloths, and 200 necklaces of all sorts of beads, would satisfy
him; and this I ought to be contented to pay, as he had been so
moderate because I was the king's guest, and had been so reduced
by robbery.  I now sent six wires more, and said this was the
last I could give--they were worth so many goats to me--and now
by giving them away, I should have to live on grain like a poor
man, though I was a prince in my own country, just like Suwarora. 
Surely Suwarora could not permit this if he knew it; and if they
would not suffice, I should have to stop here until called again
by Suwarora. The ruffian, on hearing this, allowed the wires to
lie in his hut, and said he was going away, but hoped, when he
returned, I should have, as I had got no cloths, 20 wires, and
1000 necklaces of extra length, strung and all ready for him.

Just then Bombay returned flushed with the excitement of a great
success.  He had been in Masudi's camp, and had delivered my
message to Insangez.  Asudi, he said, had been there a fortnight
unable to settle his hongo, for the great Mkama had not deigned
to see him, though the Arab had been daily to his palace
requesting an interview.  "Well," I said, "that is all very
interesting, but what next?--will the big king see us?"  "O no;
by the very best good fortune in the world, on going into the
palace I saw Suwarora, and spoke to him at once; but he was so
tremendously drunk, he could not understand me."  "What luck was
there in that?" I asked. On which Bombay said, "Oh, everybody in
the place congratulated me on my success in having obtained an
interview with that great monarch the very first day, when Arabs
had seldom that privilege under one full month of squatting; even
Masudi had not yet seen him."  To which Nasib also added, "Ah,
yes--indeed it is so-- a monstrous success; there is great
ceremony as well as business at these courts; you will better see
what I mean when you get to Uganda.  These Wahuma kings are not
like those you ever saw in Unyamuezi or anywhere else; they have
officers and soldiers like Said Majid, the Sultan at Zanzibar." 
"Well," said I to Bombay, "what was Suwarora like?"  "Oh, he is a
very fine man--just as tall, and in the face very like Grant; in
fact, if Grant were black you would not know the difference." 
"And were his officers drunk too?" "O yes, they were all drunk
together; men were bringing in pombe all day."  "And did you get
drunk?"  "O yes," said Bombay, grinning, and showing his whole
row of sharp-pointed teeth, "they WOULD make me drink; and then
they showed me the place they assigned for your camp when you
come over there.  It was not in the palace, but outside, without
a tree near it; anything but a nice-looking residence."  I then
sent Bombay to work at the hongo business; but, after haggling
till night with Kariwami, he was told he must bring fourteen
brass wires, two cloths, and five mukhnai of kanyera, or white
porcelain beads--which, reduced, amounted to three hundred
necklaces; else he said I might stop there for a month.

At last I settled this confounded hongo, by paying seven
additional wires in lieu of the cloth; and, delighted at the
termination of this tedious affair, I ordered a march.  Like
magic, however, Vikora turned up, and said we must wait until he
was settled with. His rank was the same as the others, and one
bead less than I had given them he would not take.  I fought all
the day out, but the next morning, as he deputed his officers to
take nine wires, these were given, and then we went on with the
journey.

Tripping along over the hill, we descended to a deep miry
watercourse, full of bulrushes, then over another hill, from the
heights of which we saw Suwarora's palace, lying down in the
Uthungu valley, behind which again rose another hill of
sandstone, faced on the top with a dyke of white quartz.  The
scene was very striking, for the palace enclosures, of great
extent, were well laid out to give effect.  Three circles of milk
bush, one within the other, formed the boma, or ring-fence.  The
chief's hut (I do not think him worthy of the name of king, since
the kingdom is divided in two) was three times as large as any of
the others, and stood by itself at the farther end; whilst the
smaller huts, containing his officers and domestics, were
arranged in little groups within a circle, at certain distances
apart from one another, sufficient to allow of their stalling
their cattle at night.

On descending into the Uthungu valley, Grant, who was preceding
the men, found Makinga opposed to the progress of the caravan
until his dues were paid.  He was a stranger like ourselves, and
was consequently treated with scorn, until he tried to maintain
what he called his right, by pulling the loads off my men's
shoulders, whereupon Grant cowed him into submission, and all
went on again-- not to the palace, as we had supposed, but, by
the direction of the mace-bearers, to the huts of Suwarora's
commander-in-chief, two miles from the palace; and here we found
Masudi's camp also. We had no sooner formed camp for ourselves
and arranged all our loads, than the eternal Vikora, whom I
thought we had settled with before we started, made a claim for
some more wire, cloth, and beads, as he had not received as much
as Kariwani and Virembo. Of course I would not listen to this, as
I had paid what his men asked for, and that was enough for me. 
Just then Masudi, with the other Arabs who were travelling with
him, came over to pay us a visit, and inquire what we thought of
the Usui taxes.  He had just concluded his hongo to Suwarora by
paying 80 wires, 120 yards of cloth, and 130 lb. of beads, whilst
he had also paid to every officer from 20 to 40 wires, as well as
cloths and beads. On hearing of my transactions, he gave it as
his opinion that I had got off surprisingly well.

Next morning, (1st) Masudi and his party started for Karague.
They had been more than a year between this and Kaze, trying all
the time to get along.  Provisions here were abundant--hawked
about by the people, who wore a very neat skin kilt strapped
round the waist, but otherwise were decorated like the
Wanyamuezi.  It was difficult to say who were of true breed here,
for the intercourse of the natives with the Wahuma and the
Wanyamuezi produced a great variety of facial features amongst
the people.  Nowhere did I ever see so many men and women with
hazel eyes as at this place.

In the evening, an Uganda man, by name N'yamgundu, came to pay
his respects to us.  He was dressed in a large skin wrapper, made
up of a number of very small antelope skins: it was as soft as
kid, and just as well sewn as our gloves.  To our surprise the
manners of the man were quite in keeping with his becoming dress. 
I was enchanted with his appearance, and so were my men, though
no one could speak to him but Nasib, who told us he knew him
before.  He was the brother of the dowager queen of Uganda, and,
along with a proper body of officers, he had been sent by Mtesa,
the present king of Uganda, to demand the daughter of Suwarora,
as reports had reached his king that she was surprisingly
beautiful.  They had been here more than a year, during which
time this beautiful virgin had died; and now Suwarora, fearful of
the great king's wrath, consequent on his procrastinations, was
endeavouring to make amends for it, by sending, instead of his
daughter, a suitable tribute in wires. I thought it not wonderful
that we should be fleeced.

Next day (2d) Sirhid paid us a visit, and said he was the first
man in the state.  He certainly was a nice-looking young man,
with a good deal of the Wahuma blood in him.  Flashily dressed in
coloured cloths and a turban, he sat down in one of our chairs as
if he had been accustomed to such a seat all his life, and spoke
with great suavity.  I explained our difficulties as those of
great men in misfortune; and, after listening to our tale, he
said he would tell Suwarora of the way we had been plundered, and
impress upon him to deal lightly with us.  I said I had brought
with me a few articles of European manufacture for Suwarora,
which I hoped would be accepted if I presented them, for they
were such things as only great men like his chief every
possessed.  One was a five-barrelled pistol, another a large
block-in box, and so fourth; but after looking at them, and
seeing the pistol fired, he said; "No; you must not shew these
things at first, or the Mkama might get frightened, thinking them
magic.  I might lose my head for presuming to offer them, and
then there is no knowing what might happen afterwards." "Then can
I not see him at once and pay my respects, for I have come a
great way to obtain that pleasure?"  "No," said Sirhid, "I will
see him first; for he is not a man like myself, but requires to
be well assured before he sees anybody."  "Then why did he invite
me here!"  "He heard that Makaka, and afterwards Lumeresi, had
stopped your progress; and as he wished to see what you were
like, he ordered me to send some men to you, which, as you know,
I did twice.  He wishes to see you, but does not like doing
things in a hurry.  Superstition, you know, preys on these men's
minds who have not seen the world like you and myself."  Sirhid
then said he would ask Suwarora to grant us an interview as soon
as possible; then, whilst leaving, he begged for the iron chair
he had sat upon; but hearing we did not know how to sit on the
ground, and therefore could not spare it, he withdrew without any
more words about it.

Virembo then said (3d) he must have some more wire and beads, as
his proxy Kariwami had been satisfied with too little.  I drove
him off in a huff, but he soon came back again with half the
hongo I had paid to Kariwami, and said he must have some cloths
or he would not have anything.  As fortune decreed it, just then
Sirhid dropped in, and stopped him importunity for the time by
saying that if we had possessed cloths his men must have known
it, for they had been travelling with us.  No sooner, however,
did Virembo turn tail than the Sirhid gave us a broad hint that
he usually received a trifle from the Arabs before he made an
attempt at arranging the hongo with Suwarora.  Any trifle would
do but he preferred cloth.

This was rather perplexing.  Sirhid knew very well that I had a
small reserve of pretty cloths, though all the common ones had
been expended; so, to keep in good terms with him who was to be
our intercessor, I said I would give him the last I had got if he
would not tell Suwarora or any one else what I had done.  Of
course he was quite ready to undertake the condition, so I gave
him two pretty cloths, and he in return gave me two goats.  But
when this little business had been transacted, to my surprise he
said: "I have orders from Suwarora to be absent five days to
doctor a sick relation of his, for there is no man in the country
so skilled in medicines as myself; but whilst I am gone I will
leave Karambule, my brother, to officiate in my stead about
taking your hongo; but the work will not commence until to-
morrow, for I must see Suwarora on the subject myself first."

Irungu, a very fine-looking man of Uganda, now called on me and
begged for beads.  He said his king had heard of our approach,
and was most anxious to see us.  Hearing this I begged him to
wait here until my hongo was paid, that we might travel on to
Uganda together.  He said, No, he could not wait, for he had been
detained here a whole year already; but, if I liked, he would
leave some of his children behind with me, as their presence
would intimidate Suwarora, and incite him to let us off quickly.

I then begged him to convey a Colt's six-chamber revolving rifle
to his king, Mtesa, as an earnest that I was a prince most
desirous of seeing him.  No one, I said, but myself could tell
what dangers and difficulties I had encountered to come thus far
for the purpose, and all was owing to his great fame, as the king
of kings, having reached me even as far off as Zanzibar.  The
ambassador would not take the rifle, lest his master, who had
never seen such a wonderful weapon before, should think he had
brought him a malign charm, and he would be in danger of losing
his head.  I then tried to prevail on him to take a knife and
some other pretty things, but he feared them all; so, as a last
chance--for I wished to send some token, by way of card or
letter, for announcing my approach and securing the road--I gave
him a red six-penny pocket-handkerchief, which he accepted; and
he then told me he was surprised I had come all this way round to
Uganda, when the road by the Masai country was so much shorter. 
He told me how, shortly after the late king of Uganda, Sunna,
died, and before Mtesa had been selected by the officers of the
country to be their king, an Arab caravan came across the Masai
as far as Usoga, and begged for permission to enter Uganda; but
as the country was disturbed by the elections, the officers of
the state advised the Arabs to wait, or come again when the king
was elected.  I told him I had heard of this before, but also
heard that those Arabs had met with great disasters, owing to the
turbulence of the Masai.  To which he replied: "That is true;
there were great difficulties in those times, but now the Masai
country was in better order; and as Mtesa was most anxious to
open that line, he would give me as many men as I liked if I
wished to go home that way."

This was pleasant information, but not quite new, for the Arabs
had told me Mtesa was so anxious to open that route, he had
frequently offered to aid them in it himself.  Still it was most
gratifying to myself as I had written to the Geographical
Society, on leaving Bogue, that if I found Petherick in Uganda,
or on the northern end of the N'yanza, so that the Nile question
was settled, I would endeavour to reach Zanzibar via the Masai
country.  In former days, I knew, the kings of Uganda were in the
habit of sending men to Karague when they heard that Arabs wished
to visit them--even as many as two hundred at a time--to carry
their kit; so I now begged Irungu to tell Mtesa that I should
want at least sixty men; and then, on his promising that he would
be my commissioner, I gave him the beads he had begged for
himself.

4th to 6th.--Karambule now told us to string our beads on the
fibre of the Mwale tree, which was sold here by the Wasui, as he
intended to live in the palace for a couple of days, arranging
with Suwarora what tax we should have to pay, after which he
would come and take it from us; but we must mind and be ready,
for whatever Suwarora said, it must be done instantly.  There was
no such thing as haggling with him; you must pay and be off at
once, failing which you might be detained a whole month before
there would be an opportunity to speak on the subject again. 
Beads were then served out to all my men to be strung, a certain
quantity to every kambi or mess, and our work was progressing;
but next day we heard that Karambule was sick or feigning to be
so, and therefore had never gone to the palace at all.  On the
6th, provoked at last by the shameful manner in which we were
treated, I send word to him to say, if he did not go at once I
would go myself, and force my way in with my guns, for I could
not submit to being treated like a slave, stuck out here in the
jungle with nothing to do but shoot for specimens, or make
collections of rocks, etc.  This brought on another row; for he
said both Virembo and Vikora had returned their hongos, and until
their tongues were quieted he could not speak to Suwarora.

To expedite matters (7th), as our daily consumption in camp was a
tax of itself, I gave these tormenting creatures one wire, one
pretty cloth, and five hundred necklaces of white beads, which
were no sooner accepted than Karambule, in the same way as Sirhid
had done, said it would be greatly to my advantage if I gave him
something worth having before he saw the Mkama.  Only too glad to
being work I gave him a red blanket, called joho, and five
strings of mzizima beads, which were equal to fifty of the common
white.

8th and 9th.--All this time nothing but confusion reigned in
camp, khambi fighting against khambi.  Both men and women got
drunk, whilst from outside we were tormented by the Wasui, both
men and women pertinaciously pressing into our hut, watching us
eat, and begging in the most shameless manner.  They did not know
the word bakhshish, or present; but, as bad as the Egyptians,
they held our their hands, patted their bellies, and said
Kaniwani (my friend) until we were sick of the sound of that
word.  Still it was impossible to dislike these simple creatures
altogether, they were such perfect children.  If we threw water
at them to drive them away, they came back again, thinking it
fun.

Ten days now had elapsed since we came here, still nothing was
done (10th), as Karambule said, because Suwarora had been so
fully occupied collecting an army to punish an officer who had
refused to pay his taxes, had ignored his authority, and had set
himself us as king of the district he was appointed to
superintend.  After this, at midnight, Karambule, in an excited
manner, said he had seen Suwarora, and it then was appointed
that, not he, but Virembo should take the royal hongo, as well as
the Wahinda, or princes' shares, the next morning--after which we
might go as fast as we liked, for Suwarora was so full occupied
with his army he could not see us this time.  Before, however,
the hongo could be paid, I must give the Sirhid and himself
twenty brass wires, three joho, three barsati, twenty strings of
mzizima, and one thousand strings of white beads.  They were
given.

A fearful row now broke out between Bombay and Baraka (11th).
Many of my men had by this time been married, notwithstanding my
prohibition.  Baraka, for instance, had with him the daughter of
Ungurue, chief of Phunze; Wadimoyo, a woman called Manamaka;
Sangizo, his wife and sister; but Bombay had not got one, and
mourned for a girl he had set his eyes on, unfortunately for
himself letting Baraka into his confidence.  This set Baraka on
the qui vive to catch Bombay tripping; for Baraka knew he could
not get her without paying a good price for her, and therefore
watched his opportunity to lay a complaint against him of
purloining my property, by which scheme he would, he thought, get
Bombay's place as storekeeper himself.  In a sly manner Bombay
employed some of my other men to take five wires, a red blanket,
and 500 strings of beads, to his would-be father-in-law, which,
by a previously-concocted arrangement, was to be her dowry price.
These men did as they were bid; but the father-in-law returned
things, saying he must have one more wire.  That being also
supplied, the scoundrel wanted more, and made so much fuss about
it, that Baraka became conversant with all that was going on, and
told me of it.

This set the whole camp in a flame, for Bombay and Baraka were
both very drunk, as well as most of the other men, so that it was
with great difficulty I could get hold of the rights of their
stories. Bombay acknowledged he had tried to get the girl, for
they had been sentimentalising together for several days, and
both alike wished to be married.  Baraka, he said, was allowed to
keep a wife, and his position, demanded that he should have one
also; but the wires were his own property, and not mine, for he
was given them by the chiefs as a perquisite when I paid their
hongo through him.  He thought it most unjust and unfair of
Baraka to call him to account in that way, but he was not
surprised at it, as Baraka, from the beginning of the journey to
the present moment, had always been backbiting him, to try and
usurp his position.  Baraka, at this, somewhat taken aback, said
there were no such things as perquisites on a journey like this;
for whatever could be saved from the chiefs was for the common
good of all, and all alike ought to share in it--repeating words
I had often expressed.  Then Bombay retorted trembling and
foaming in his liquor: "I know I shall get the worst of it, for
whilst Baraka's tongue is a yard long, mine is only an inch; but
I would not have spent any wires of master's to purchase slaves
with (alluding to what Baraka had done at Mihambo); nor would I,
for any purpose of making myself richer; but when it comes to a
wife, that's a different thing."

In my heart I liked Bombay all the more for this confession, but
thought it necessary to extol Baraka for his quickness in finding
him out, which drove Bombay nearly wild.  He wished me to degrade
him, if I thought him dishonest; threw himself on the ground, and
kissed my feet.  I might thrash him, turn him into a porter, or
do anything else that I liked with him, as long as I did not
bring a charge of dishonesty against him.  He could not explain
himself with Baraka's long tongue opposed to him, but there were
many deficiencies in my wires before he took overcharge at Bogue,
which he must leave for settlement till the journey was over, and
then, the whole question having been sifted at Zanzibar, we would
see who was the most honest.  I then counted all the wires over,
at Bombay's request, and found them complete in numbers, without
those he had set aside from the dowry money.  Still there was a
doubt, for the wires might have been cut by him without
detection, as from the commencement they were of different
lengths.  However, I tried to make them friends, claimed all the
wires myself, and cautioned every man in the camp again, that
they were all losers when anything was misappropriated; for I
brought this property to pay our way with and whatever balance
was over at the end of the journey I would divide amongst the
whole of them.

12th and 13th.--When more sober, Bombay again came to crave a
thousand pardons for what he had done, threw himself down at my
feet, then at Grant's, kissed our toes, swore I was his Ma Pap
(father and mother); he had no father or mother to teach him
better; he owed all his prosperity to me; men must err sometimes;
oh, if I would only forgive him,--and so forth.  Then being
assured that I knew he never would have done as he had if a
woman's attractions had not led him astray, he went to his work
again like a man, and consoled himself by taking Sangizo's sister
to wife on credit instead of the old love, promising to pay the
needful out of his pay, and to return her to her brother when the
journey was over.

In the evening Virembo and Karambule came to receive the hongo
for their chief, demanding 60 wires, 160 yards merikani, 300
strings of mzizima, and 5000 strings of white beads; but they
allowed themselves to be beaten down to 50 wires, 20 pretty
cloths, 100 strings mzizima, and 4000 kutuamnazi, or cocoa-nut-
leaf coloured beads, my white being all done.  It was too late,
however, to count all the things out, so they came the next day
and took them. They then said we might go as soon as we had
settled with the Wahinda or Wanawami (the king's children), for
Suwarora could not see us this time, as he was so engaged with
his army; but he hoped to see us and pay us more respect when we
returned from Uganda, little thinking that I had sworn in my mind
never to see him, or return that way again.  I said to those men,
I thought he was ashamed to see us, as he had robbed us so after
inviting us into the country, else he was too superstitious, for
he ought at least to have given us a place in his palace.  They
both rebutted the insinuation; and, to change the subject,
commenced levying the remaining dues to the princes, which ended
by my giving thirty-four wires and six pretty cloths in a lump.

Early in the morning we were on foot again, only too thankful to
have got off so cheaply.  Then men were appointed as guides and
protectors, to look after us as far as the border.  What an
honour! We had come into the country drawn there by a combination
of pride and avarice and now we were leaving it in hot haste
under the guidance of an escort of officers, who were in reality
appointed to watch us as dangerous wizards and objects of terror. 
It was all the same to us, as we now only thought of the prospect
of relief before us, and laughed at what we had gone through.

Rising out of the Uthungu valley, we walked over rolling ground,
drained in the dips by miry rush rivulets.  The population was
thinly scattered in small groups of grass huts, where the scrub
jungle had been cleared away.  On the road we passed cairns, to
which every passer-by contributed a stone.  Of the origin of the
cairns I could not gain any information, though it struck me as
curious I should find them in the first country we had entered
governed by the Wahuma, as I formerly saw the same thing in the
Somali country, which doubtless, in earlier days, was governed by
a branch of the Abyssinians.  Arrived at our camping, we were
immediately pounced upon by a deputation of officers, who said
they had been sent by Semamba, the officer of this district.  He
lived ten miles from the road; but hearing of our approach, he
had sent these men to take his dues.  At first I objected to pay,
lest he should afterwards treat me as Virembo had done; but I
gave way in the end, and paid nine wires, two chintz and two
bindera cloths, as the guides said they would stand my security
against any further molestation.

Rattling on again as merry as larks, over the same red sandstone
formation, we entered a fine forest, and trended on through it as
a stiff pace until we arrived at the head of a deep valley called
Lohuati, which was so beautiful we instinctively pulled up to
admire it.  Deep down its well-wooded side below us was a stream,
of most inviting aspect for a trout-fisher, flowing towards the
N'yanza. Just beyond it the valley was clothed with fine trees
and luxuriant vegetation of all descriptions, amongst which was
conspicuous the pretty pandana palm, and rich gardens of
plantains; whilst thistles of extraordinary size and wild indigo
were the more common weeds. The land beyond that again rolled
back in high undulations, over which, in the far distance, we
could see a line of cones, red and bare on their tops, guttered
down with white streaks, looking for all the world like recent
volcanoes; and in the far background, rising higher than all,
were the rich grassy hills of Karague and Kishakka.

On resuming our march, a bird, called khongota, flew across our
path; seeing which, old Nasib, beaming with joy, in his
superstitious belief cried out with delight, "Ah, look at that
good omen!--now our journey will be sure to be prosperous." 
After fording the stream, we sat down to rest, and were visited
by all the inhabitants, who were more naked than any people we
had yet seen. All the maidens, even at the age of puberty, did
not hesitate to stand boldly in front of us--for evil thoughts
were not in their minds.  From this we rose over a stony hill to
the settlement of Vihembe, which, being the last on the Usui
frontier, induced me to give our guides three wires each, and
four yards of bindera, which Nasib said was their proper fee. 
Here Bombay's would-be, but disappointed, father-in-law sent
after us to say that he required a hongo; Suwarora had never
given his sanction to our quitting his country; his hongo even
was not settled.  He wished, moreover, particularly to see us;
and if we did not return in a friendly manner, an army would
arrest our march immediately.




                          Chapter VIII



                            Karague

Relief from Protectors and Pillagers--The Scenery and Geology--
Meeting with the Friendly King Rumanika--His Hospitalities and
Attention--His Services to the Expedition--Philosophical and
Theological Inquiries--The Royal Family of Karague--The M-Fumbiro
Mountain--Navigation of "The Little Windermere"--The New-Moon
Levee --Rhinoceros and Hippopotamus Hunting--Measurement of a
Fattened Queen--Political Polygamy--Christmas--Rumours of
Petherick's Expedition--Arrangements to meet it--March to Uganda.

This was a day of relief and happiness.  A load was removed from
us in seeing the Wasui "protectors" depart, with the truly
cheering information that we now had nothing but wild animals to
contend with before reaching Karague.  This land is "neutral," by
which is meant that it is untenanted by human beings; and we
might now hope to bid adieu for a time to the scourging system of
taxation to which we had been subjected.

Gradually descending from the spur which separates the Lohugati
valley from the bed of the Lueru lo Urigi, or Lake of Urigi, the
track led us first through a meadow of much pleasing beauty, and
then through a passage between the "saddle-back" domes we had
seen from the heights above Lohugati, where a new geological
formation especially attracted my notice.  From the green slopes
of the hills, set up at a slant, as if the central line of
pressure on the dome top had weighed on the inside plates,
protruded soft slabs of argillaceous sandstone, whose laminae
presented a beef-sandwich appearance, puce or purple alternating
with creamy-white. Quartz and other igneous rocks were also
scattered about, lying like superficial accumulations in the dips
at the foot of the hills, and red sandstone conglomerates clearly
indicated the presence of iron. The soil itself looked rich and
red, not unlike our own fine country of Devon.

On arriving in camp we pitched under some trees, and at once were
greeted by an officer sent by Rumanika to help us out of Usui. 
This was Kachuchu, an old friend of Nasib's, who no sooner saw
him than, beaming with delight, he said to us, "Now, was I not
right when I told you the birds flying about on Lohugati hill
were a good omen? Look here what this man says: Rumanika has
ordered him to bring you on to his palace at once, and wherever
you stop a day, the village officers are instructed to supply you
with food at the king's expenses, for there are no taxes gathered
from strangers in the kingdom of Karague.  Presents may be
exchanged, but the name of tax is ignored."  Grant here shot a
rhinoceros, which came well into play to mix with the day's flour
we had carried on from Vihembe.

Deluded yesterday by the sight of the broad waters of the Lueru
lo Urigi, espied in the distance from the top of a hill, into the
belief that we were in view of the N'yanza itself, we walked
triumphantly along, thinking how well the Arabs at Kaze had
described this to be a creek of the great lake; but on arrival in
camp we heard from the village officer that we had been
misinformed, and that it was a detached lake, but connected with
the Victoria N'yanza by a passage in the hills and the Kitangule
river. Formerly, he said, the Urigi valley was covered with
water, extending up to Uhha, when all the low lands we had
crossed from Usui had to be ferried, and the saddle-back hills
were a mere chain of islands in the water.  But the country had
dried up, and the lake of Urigi became a small swamp.  He further
informed us, that even in the late king Dagara's time it was a
large sheet of water; but the instant he ceased to exist, the
lake shrank to what we now saw.

Our day's march had been novel and very amusing.  The hilly
country surrounding us, together with the valley, brought back to
recollection many happy days I had once spent with the Tartars in
the Thibetian valley of the Indus--only this was more
picturesque; for though both countries are wild, and very thinly
inhabited, this was greened over with grass, and dotted here and
there on the higher slopes with thick bush of acacias, the haunts
of rhinoceros, both white and black; whilst in the flat of the
valley, herds of hartebeests and fine cattle roamed about like
the kiyang and tame yak of Thibet.  Then, to enhance all these
pleasure, so different from our former experiences, we were
treated like guests by the chief of the place, who, obeying the
orders of his king, Rumanika, brought me presents, as soon as we
arrived, of sheep, fowls, and sweet potatoes, and was very
thankful for a few yards of red blanketing as a return, without
begging for more.

The farther we went in this country the better we liked it, as
the people were all kept in good order; and the village chiefs
were so civil, that we could do as we liked.  After following
down the left side of the valley and entering the village, the
customary presents and returns were made.  Wishing then to obtain
a better view of the country, I strolled over the nearest hills,
and found the less exposed slopes well covered with trees.  Small
antelopes occasionally sprang up from the grass.  I shot a
florikan for the pot; and as I had never before seen white
rhinoceros, killed one now; though, as no one would eat him, I
felt sorry rather than otherwise for what I had done.  When I
returned in the evening, small boys brought me sparrows for sale;
and then I remembered the stories I had heard from Musa Mzuri--
that in the whole of Karague the small birds were so numerous,
the people, to save themselves from starvation were obliged to
grow a bitter corn which the birds disliked; and so I found it. 
At night, whilst observing for latitude, I was struck by surprise
to see a long noisy procession pass by where I sat, led by some
men who carried on their shoulders a woman covered up in a
blackened skin.  On inquiry, however, I heard she was being taken
to the hut of her espoused, where, "bundling fashion," she would
be put in bed; but it was only with virgins they took so much
trouble.

A strange but characteristic story now reached my ears.  Masudi,
the merchant who took up Insangez, had been trying his best to
deter Rumanika from allowing us to enter his country, by saying
we were addicted to sorcery; and had it not been for Insangez's
remonstrances, who said we were sent up by Musa, our fate would
have been doubtful.  Rumanika, it appeared, as I always had
heard, considered old Musa his saviour, for having eight years
before quelled a rebellion, when his younger brother, Rogero,
aspired to the throne; whilst Musa's honour and honesty were
quite unimpeachable.  But more of this hereafter.

Khonze, the next place, lying in the bending concave of this
swamp lake, and facing Hangiro, was commanded by a fine elderly
man called Muzegi, who was chief officer during Dagara's time. 
He told me with the greatest possible gravity, that he remembered
well the time when a boat could have gone from this to Vigura; as
also when fish and crocodiles came up from the Kitangule; but the
old king no sooner died than the waters dried up; which showed as
plainly as words could tell, that the king had designed it, to
make men remember him with sorrow in all future ages.  Our
presents after this having been exchanged, the good old man, at
my desire, explained the position of all the surrounding
countries, in his own peculiar manner, by laying a long stick on
the ground pointing due north and south, to which he attached
shorter ones pointing to the centre of each distant country.  He
thus assisted me in the protractions of the map, to the countries
which lie east and west of the route.

Shortly after starting this morning, we were summoned by the last
officer on the Urigi to take breakfast with him, as he could not
allow us to pass by without paying his respects to the king's
guests.  He was a man of most affable manners, and loth we should
part company without one night's entertainment at least; but as
it was a matter of necessity, he gave us provisions to eat on the
way, adding, at the same time, he was sorry he could not give
more, as a famine was then oppressing the land.  We parted with
reiterated compliments on both sides; and shortly after, diving
into the old bed of the Urigi, were constantly amused with the
variety of game which met our view.  On several occasions the
rhinoceros were so numerous and impudent as to contest the right
of the road with us, and the greatest sport was occasioned by our
bold Wanguana going at them in parties of threes and fours, when,
taking good care of themselves at considerable distances, they
fired their carbines all together, and whilst the rhinoceros ran
one way, they ran the other. Whilst we were pitching our tents
after sunset by some pools on the plain, Dr K'yengo arrived with
the hongo of brass and copper wires sent by Suwarora for the
great king Mtesa, in lieu of his daughter who died; so next
morning we all marched together on to Uthenga.

Rising out of the bed of the Urigi, we passed over a low spur of
beef-sandwich clay sandstones, and descended into the close, rich
valley of Uthenga, bound in by steep hills hanging over us more
than a thousand feet high, as prettily clothed as the mountains
of Scotland; whilst in the valley there were not only magnificent
trees of extraordinary height, but also a surprising amount of
the richest cultivation, amongst which the banana may be said to
prevail. Notwithstanding this apparent richness in the land, the
Wanyambo, living in their small squalid huts, seem poor.  The
tobacco they smoke is imported from the coffee-growing country of
Uhaiya.  After arrival in the village, who should we see but the
Uganda officer, Irungu!  The scoundrel, instead of going on to
Uganda, as he had promised to do, conveying my present to Mtesa,
had stopped here plundering the Wanyambo, and getting drunk on
their pombe, called, in their language, marwa--a delicious kind
of wine made from the banana.  He, or course, begged for more
beads; but, not able to trick me again, set his drummers and
fifers at work, in hopes that he would get over our feelings in
that way.

Henceforth, as we marched, Irungu's drummers and fifers kept us
alive on the way.  This we heard was a privilege that Uganda
Wakungu enjoyed both at home and abroad, although in all other
countries the sound of the drum is considered a notice of war,
unless where it happens to accompany a dance or festival. 
Leaving the valley of Uthenga, we rose over the spur of
N'yamwara, where we found we had attained the delightful altitude
of 5000 odd feet.  Oh, how we enjoyed it! every one feeling so
happy at the prospect of meeting so soon the good king Rumanika. 
Tripping down the greensward, we now worked our way to the Rozoka
valley, and pitched our tents in the village.

Kachuchu here told us he had orders to precede us, and prepare
Rumanika for our coming, as his king wished to know what place we
would prefer to live at--the Arab depot at kufro, on the direct
line to Uganda, in his palace with himself, or outside his
enclosures. Such politeness rather took us aback; so, giving our
friend a coil of copper wire to keep him in good spirits, I said
all our pleasure rested in seeing the king; whatever honours he
liked to confer on us we should take with good grace, but one
thing he must understand, we came not to trade, but to see him
and great kings and therefore the Arabs had no relations with us. 
This little point settled, off started Kachuchu in his usual
merry manner, whilst I took a look at the hills, to see their
geological formation, and found them much as before, based on
streaky clay sandstones, with the slight addition of pure blue
shales, and above sections of quartzose sandstone lying in flags,
as well as other metamorphic and igneous rocks scattered about.

Moving on the next morning over hill and dale, we came to the
junction of two roads, where Irungu, with his drummers, fifers
and amazon followers, took one way to Kufro, followed by the men
carrying Suwarora's hongo, and we led off on the other, dire