cted
to the palace.  The hill-tops in many places were breasted with
dykes of pure white quartz, just as we had seen in Usui, only
that here their direction tended more to the north.  It was most
curious to contemplate, seeing that the chief substance of the
hills was a pure blue, or otherwise streaky clay sandstone, which
must have been formed when the land was low, but has now been
elevated, making these hills the axis of the centre of the
continent, and therefore probably the oldest of all.

When within a few miles of the palace we were ordered to stop and
wait for Kachuchu's return; but no sooner put up in a plaintain
grove, where pombe was brewing, and our men were all taking a
suck at it, than the worthy arrived to call us on the same
instant, as the king was most anxious to see us.  The love of
good beer of course made our men all too tired to march again; so
I sent off Bombay with Nasib to make our excuses, and in the
evening found them returning with a huge pot of pombe and some
royal tobacco, which Rumanika sent with a notice that he intended
it exclusively for our own use, for though there was abundance
for my men, there was nothing so good as what came from the
palace; the royal tobacco was as sweet and strong as honey-dew,
and the beer so strong it required a strong man to drink it.

After breakfast next morning, we crossed the hill-spur called
Waeranhanje, the grassy tops of which were 5500 feet above the
sea. Descending a little, we came suddenly in view of what
appeared to us a rich clump of trees, in S. lat. 1§ 42' 42", and
E. long.  31§ 1' 49"; and, 500 feet below it, we saw a beautiful
sheet of water lying snugly within the folds of the hills.  We
were not altogether unprepared for it, as Musa of old had
described it, and Bombay, on his return yesterday, told us he had
seen a great pond.  The clump, indeed, was the palace enclosure. 
As to the lake, for want of a native name, I christened it the
Little Winderemere, because Grant thought it so like our own
English lake of that name.  It was one of many others which, like
that of Urigi, drains the moisture of the overhanging hills, and
gets drained into the Victoria N'yanza through the Kitangule
river.

To do royal honours to the king of this charming land, I ordered
my men to put down their loads and fire a volley.  This was no
sooner done than, as we went to the palace gate, we received an
invitation to come in at once, for the king wished to see us
before attending to anything else.  Now, leaving our traps
outside, both Grant and myself, attended by Bombay and a few of
the seniors of my Wanguana, entered the vestibule, and, walking
through extensive enclosures studded with huts of kingly
dimensions, were escorted to a pent-roofed baraza, which the
Arabs had built as a sort of government office where the king
might conduct his state affairs.

Here, as we entered, we saw sitting cross-legged on the ground
Rumanika the king, and his brother Nnanaji, both of them men of
noble appearance and size.  The king was plainly dressed in an
Arab's black choga, and wore, for ornament, dress-stockings of
rich-coloured beads, and neatly-worked wristlets of copper.
Nnanaji, being a doctor of very high pretensions, in addition to
a check cloth wrapped round him, was covered with charms.  At
their sides lay huge pipes of black clay.  In their rear,
squatting quiet as mice, were all the king's sons, some six or
seven lads, who wore leather middle-coverings, and little dream-
charms tied under their chins.  The first greetings of the king,
delivered in good Kisuahili, were warm and affecting, and in an
instant we both felt and saw we were in the company of men who
were as unlike as they could be to the common order of the
natives of the surrounding districts.  They had fine oval faces,
large eyes, and high noses, denoting the best blood of Abyssinia. 
Having shaken hands in true English style, which is the peculiar
custom of the men of this country, the ever-smiling Rumanika
begged us to be seated on the ground opposite to him, and at once
wished to know what we thought of Karague, for it had struck him
his mountains were the finest in the world; and the lake, too,
did we not admire it?  Then laughing, he inquired--for he knew
all the story--what we thought of Suwarora, and the reception we
had met with in Usui.  When this was explained to him, I showed
him that it was for the interest of his own kingdom to keep a
check on Suwarora, whose exorbitant taxations prevented the Arabs
from coming to see him and bringing things from all parts of the
world.  He made inquiries for the purpose of knowing how we found
our way all over the world; for on the former expedition a letter
had come to him for Musa, who no sooner read it than he said I
had called him and he must leave, as I was bound for Ujiji.

This of course led to a long story, describing the world, the
proportions of land and water, and the power of ships, which
conveyed even elephants and rhinoceros--in fact, all the animals
in the world--to fill our menageries at home,--etc., etc.; as
well as the strange announcement that we lived to the northward,
and had only come this way because his friend Musa had assured me
without doubt that he would give us the road on through Uganda. 
Time flew like magic, the king's mind was so quick and enquiring;
but as the day was wasting away, he generously gave us our option
to choose a place for our residence in or out of his palace, and
allowed us time to select one.  We found the view overlooking the
lake to be so charming, that we preferred camping outside, and
set our men at once to work cutting sticks and long grass to
erect themselves sheds.

One of the young princes--for the king ordered them all to be
constantly in attendance on us--happening to see me sit on an
iron chair, rushed back to his father and told him about it. 
This set all the royals in the palace in a state of high wonder,
and ended by my getting a summons to show off the white man
sitting on his throne; for of course I could only be, as all of
them called me, a king of great dignity, to indulge in such
state.  Rather reluctantly I did as I was bid, and allowed myself
once more to be dragged into court.  Rumanika, as gentle as ever,
then burst into a fresh fit of merriment, and after making sundry
enlightened remarks of enquire, which of course were responded to
with the greatest satisfaction, finished off by saying, with a
very expressive shake of the head, "Oh, these Wazungu, these
Wazungu! they know and do everything."

I then put in a word for myself.  Since we had entered Karague we
never could get one drop of milk either for love or for money,
and I wished to know what motive the Wahuma had for withholding
it. We had heard they held superstitious dreads; that any one who
ate the flesh of pigs, fish, or fowls, or the bean called
Maharague, if he tasted the products of their cows, would destroy
their cattle --and I hoped he did not labour under any such
absurd delusions. To which he replied, It was only the poor who
thought so; and as he now saw we were in want, he would set apart
one of his cows expressly for our use.  On bidding adieu, the
usual formalities of handshaking were gone through; and on
entering camp, I found the good thoughtful king had sent us some
more of his excellent beer.

The Wanguana were now all in the highest of good-honour; for time
after time goats and fowls were brought into camp by the officers
of the king, who had received orders from all parts of the
country to bring in supplies for his guests; and this kind of
treatment went on for a month, though it did not diminish my
daily expenditures of beads, as grain and plantains were not
enough thought of.  The cold winds, however, made the coast-men
all shiver, and suspect, in their ignorance, we must be drawing
close to England, the only cold place they had heard of.

16th.--Hearing it would be considered indecent haste to present
my tributary offering at once, I paid my morning's visit, only
taking my revolving-pistol, as I knew Rumanika had expressed a
strong wish to see it.  The impression it made was surprising--he
had never seen such a thing in his life; so, in return for his
great generosity, as well as to show I placed no value on
property, not being a merchant, I begged him to accept it.  We
then adjourned to his private hut, which rather surprised me by
the neatness with which it was kept.  The roof was supported by
numerous clean poles, to which he had fastened a large assortment
of spears--brass-headed with iron handles, and iron-headed with
wooden ones--of excellent workmanship. A large standing-screen,
of fine straw-plait work, in elegant devices, partitioned off one
part of the room; and on the opposite side, as mere ornaments,
were placed a number of brass grapnels and small models of cows,
made in iron for his amusement by the Arabs at Kufro.  A little
later in the day, as soon as we had done breakfast, both Rumanika
and Nnanaji came over to pay us a visit; for they thought, as we
could find our way all over the world, so we should not find much
difficulty in prescribing some magic charms to kill his brother,
Rogero, who lived on a hill overlooking the Kitangule. Seating
them both on our chairs, which amused them intensely, I asked
Rumanika, although I had heard before the whole facts of the
case, what motives now induced him to wish the committal of such
a terrible act, and brought out the whole story afresh.

Before their old father Dagara died, he had unwittingly said to
the mother of Rogero, although he was the youngest born, what a
fine king he would make; and the mother, in consequence, tutored
her son to expect the command of the country, although the law of
the land in the royal family is the primogeniture system,
extending, however, only to those sons who are born after the
accession of the king to the throne.

As soon, therefore, as Dagara died, leaving the three sons
alluded to, all by different mothers, a contest took place with
the brothers, which, as Nnanaji held by Rumanika, ended in the
two elder driving Rogero away.  It happened, however, that half
the men of the country, either from fear or love, attached
themselves to Rogero. Feeling his power, he raised an army and
attempted to fight for the crown, which it is generally admitted
would have succeeded, had not Musa, with unparalleled
magnanimity, employed all the ivory merchandise at his command to
engage the services of all the Arabs' slaves residing at Kufro,
to bring muskets against him.  Rogero was thus frightened away;
but he went away swearing that he would carry out his intentions
at some future date, when the Arabs had withdrawn from the
country.

Magic charms, of course, we had none; but the king would not
believe it, and, to wheedle some out of us, said they would not
kill their brother even if they caught him--for fratricide was
considered an unnatural crime in their country--but they would
merely gouge out his eyes and set him at large again; for without
the power of sight he could do them no harm.

I then recommended, as the best advice I could give him for the
time being, to take some strong measures against Suwarora and the
system of taxation carried on in Usui.  These would have the
effect of bringing men with superior knowledge into the country--
for it was only through the power of knowledge that good
government could be obtained.  Suwarora at present stopped eight-
tenths of the ivory-merchants who might be inclined to trade here
from coming into the country, by the foolish system of excessive
taxation he had established.  Next I told him, if he would give
me one or two of his children, I would have them instructed in
England; for I admired his race, and believed them to have sprung
from our old friends the Abyssinians, whose king, Sahela
Selassie, had received rich presents from our Queen.  They were
Christians like ourselves, and had the Wahuma not lost their
knowledge of God they would be so also. A long theological and
historical discussion ensued, which so pleased the king, that he
said he would be delighted if I would take two of his sons to
England, that they might bring him a knowledge of everything. 
Then turning again to the old point, his utter amazement that we
should spend so much property in travelling, he wished to know
what we did it for; when men had such means they would surely sit
down and enjoy it.  "Oh no," was the reply; "we have had our fill
of the luxuries of life; eating, drinking, or sleeping have no
charms for us now; we are above trade, therefore require no
profits, and seek for enjoyment the run of the world. To observe
and admire the beauties of creation are worth much more than
beads to us.  But what led us this way we have told you before;
it was to see your majesty in particular, and the great kings of
Africa--and at the same time to open another road to the north,
whereby the best manufactures or Europe would find their way to
Karague, and you would get so many more guests."  In the highest
good-humour the king said, "As you have come to see me and see
sights, I will order some boats and show you over the lake, with
musicians to play before you, or anything else that you like."
Then, after looking over our pictures with intensest delight, and
admiring our beds, boxes, and outfit in general, he left for the
day.

In the afternoon, as I had heard from Musa that the wives of the
king and princes were fattened to such an extent that they could
not stand upright, I paid my respects to Wazezeru, the king's
eldest brother--who, having been born before his father ascended
the throne, did not come in the line of succession--with the hope
of being able to see for myself the truth of the story.  There
was no mistake about it.  On entering the hut I found the old man
and his chief wife sitting side by side on a bench of earth
strewed over with grass, and partitioned like stalls for sleeping
apartments, whilst in front of them were placed numerous wooden
pots of milk, and hanging from the poles that supported the
beehive-shaped hut, a large collection of bows six feet in
length, whilst below them were tied an even larger collection of
spears, intermixed with a goodly assortment of heavy-headed
assages.  I was struck with no small surprise at the way he
received me, as well as with the extraordinary dimensions, yet
pleasing beauty, of the immoderately fat fair one his wife.  She
could not rise; and so large were her arms that, between the
joints, the flesh hung down like large, loose-stuffed puddings. 
Then in came their children, all models of the Abyssinian type of
beauty, and as polite in their manners as thorough-bred
gentlemen.  They had heard of my picture-books from the king, and
all wished to see them; which they no sooner did, to their
infinite delight, especially when they recognised any of the
animals, then the subject was turned by my inquiring what they
did with so many milk-pots.  This was easily explained by
Wazezeru himself, who, pointing to his wife, said, "This is all
the product of those pots: from early youth upwards we keep those
pots to their mouths, as it is the fashion at court to have very
fat wives."

27th.--Ever anxious to push on with the journey, as I felt every
day's delay only tended to diminish my means--that is, my beads
and copper wire--I instructed Bombay to take the under-mentioned
articles to Rumanika as a small sample of the products of my
country;[FN#11] to say I felt quite ashamed of their being so few
and so poor, but I hoped he would forgive my shortcomings, as he
knew I had been so often robbed on the way to him; and I trusted,
in recollection of Musa, he would give me leave to go on to
Uganda, for every day's delay was consuming my supplies. 
Nnanaji, however, it was said, should get something; so, in
addition to the king's present, I apportioned one out for him,
and Bombay took both up to the palace.[FN#12]  Everybody, I was
pleased to hear, was surprised with both the quantity and quality
of what I had been able to find for them; for, after the
plundering in Ugogo, the immense consumption caused by such long
delays on the road, the fearful prices I had had to pay for my
porters' wages, the enormous taxes I had been forced to give both
in Msalala and Uzinza, besides the constant thievings in camp,
all of which was made public by the constantly-recurring tales of
my men, nobody thought I had got anything left.

Rumanika, above all, was as delighted as if he had come in for a
fortune, and sent to say the Raglan coat was a marvel, and the
scarlet broadcloth the finest thing he had ever seen.  Nobody but
Musa had ever given him such beautiful beads before, and none
ever gave with such free liberality.  Whatever I wanted I should
have in return for it, as it was evident to him I had really done
him a great honour in visiting him.  Neither his father nor any
of his forefathers had had such a great favour shown them.  He
was alarmed, he confessed, when he heard we were coming to visit
him, thinking we might prove some fearful monsters that were not
quite human, but now he was delighted beyond all measure with
what he saw of us. A messenger should be sent at once to the king
of Uganda to inform him of our intention to visit him, with his
own favourable report of us.  This was necessary according to the
etiquette of the country. Without such a recommendation our
progress would be stopped by the people, whilst with one word
from him all would go straight; for was he not the gatekeeper,
enjoying the full confidence of Uganda? A month, however, must
elapse, as the distance to the palace of Uganda was great; but,
in the meantime, he would give me leave to go about in his
country to do and see what I liked, Nnanaji and his sons
escorting me everywhere.  Moreover, when the time came for my
going on to Uganda, if I had not enough presents to give the
king, he would fill up the complement from his own stores, and
either go with me himself, or send Nnanaji to conduct me as far
as the boundary of Uganda, in order that Rogero might not molest
us on the way.  In the evening, Masudi, with Sangoro and several
other merchants, came up from Kufro to pay us a visit of respect.

28th and 29th.--A gentle hint having come to us that the king's
brother, Wazezeru, expected a trifle in virtue of his rank, I
sent him a blanket and seventy-five blue egg-beads.  These were
accepted with the usual good grace of these people.  The king
then, ever attentive to our position as guests, sent his royal
musicians to give us a tune.  The men composing the band were a
mixture of Waganda and Wanyambo, who played on reed instruments
made telescope fashion, marking time by hand-drums.  At first
they marched up and down, playing tunes exactly like the
regimental bands of the Turks, and then commenced dancing a
species of "hornpipe," blowing furiously all the while.  When
dismissed with some beads, Nnanaji dropped in and invited me to
accompany him out shooting on the slopes of the hills overlooking
the lake.  He had in attendance all the king's sons, as well as a
large number of beaters, with three or four dogs.  Tripping down
the greensward of the hills together, these tall, athletic
princes every now and then stopped to see who could shoot
furthest, and I must say I never witnessed better feats in my
life.  With powerful six-feet-long bows they pulled their arrows'
heads up to the wood, and made wonderful shots in the distance. 
They then placed me in position, and arranging the field, drove
the covers like men well accustomed to sport--indeed, it struck
me they indulged too much in that pleasure, for we saw nothing
but two or three montana and some diminutive antelopes, about the
size of mouse deer, and so exceedingly shy that not one was
bagged.

Returning home to the tents as the evening sky was illumined with
the red glare of the sun, my attention was attracted by observing
in the distance some bold sky-scraping cones situated in the
country Ruanda, which at once brought back to recollection the
ill-defined story I had heard from the Arabs of a wonderful hill
always covered with clouds, on which snow or hail was constantly
falling.  This was a valuable discovery, for I found these hills
to be the great turn-point of the Central African watershed. 
Without loss of time I set to work, and, gathering all the
travellers I could in the country, protracted, from their
descriptions, all the distance topographical features set down in
the map, as far north as 3§ of north latitude, as far east as
36§, and as far west as 26§ of east longitude; only afterwards
slightly corrected, as I was better able to connect and clear up
some trifling but doubtful points.

Indeed, I was not only surprised at the amount of information
about distant places I was enabled to get here from these men,
but also at the correctness of their vast and varied knowledge,
as I afterwards tested it by observation and the statements of
others.  I rely so far on the geographical information I thus
received, that I would advise no one to doubt the accuracy of
these protractions until he has been on the spot to test them by
actual inspection.  About the size only of the minor lakes do I
feel doubtful, more especially the Little Luta Nzige, which on
the former journey I heard was a salt lake, because salt was
found on its shores and in one of its islands.  Now, without
going into any lengthy details, and giving Rumanika due credit
for everything--for had he not ordered his men to give me every
information that lay in their power, they would not have done so-
-I will merely say for the present that, whilst they conceived
the Victoria N'yanza would take a whole month for a canoe to
cross it, they thought the Little Luta Nzige might be crossed in
a week.  The Mfumbiro cones in Ruanda, which I believe reach
10,000 feet, are said to be the highest of the "Mountains of the
Moon." At their base are both salt and copper mines, as well as
hot springs.  There are also hot springs in Mpororo, and one in
Karague near where Rogero lived.

30th.--The important business of announcing our approach to
Uganda was completed by Rumanika appointing Kachuchu to go to
king Mtesa as quickly as possible, to say we were coming to visit
him.  He was told that we were very great men, who only travelled
to see great kings and great countries; and, as such, Rumanika
trusted we should be received with courteous respect, and allowed
to roam all over the country wherever we liked, he holding
himself responsible for our actions for the time being.  In the
end, however, we were to be restored to him, as he considered
himself our father, and therefore must see that no accident
befell us.

To put the royal message in proper shape, I was now requested to
send some trifle by way of a letter or visiting card; but, on
taking out a Colt's revolving rifle for the purpose, Rumanika
advised me not to send it, as Mtesa might take fright, and,
considering it a charm of evil quality, reject us as bad
magicians, and close his gates on us.  Three bits of cotton cloth
were then selected as the best thing for the purpose; and,
relying implicitly on the advice of Rumanika, who declared his
only object was to further our views, I arranged accordingly, and
off went Kachuchu.

To keep my friend in good-humour, and show him how well the
English can appreciate a kindness, I presented him with a hammer,
a sailor's knife, a Rodger's three-bladed penknife, a gilt
letter-slip with paper and envelopes, some gilt pens, an ivory
holder, and a variety of other small articles.  Of each of these
he asked the use, and then in high glee put it into the big
block-tin box, in which he kept his other curiosities, and which
I think he felt more proud of than any other possession.  After
this, on adjourning to his baraza, Ungurue the Pig, who had
floored my march in Sorombo, and Makinga, our persecutor in Usui,
came in to report that the Watuta had been fighting in Usui, and
taken six bomas, upon which Rumanika asked me what I thought of
it, and if I knew where the Watuta came from. I said I was not
surprised to hear Usui had attracted the Watuta's cupidity, for
every one knew of the plundering propensities of the inhabitants,
and as they became rich by their robberies, they must in turn
expect to be robbed.  Where the Watuta came from, nobody could
tell; they were dressed something like the Zulu Kaffirs of the
South, but appeared to be now gradually migrating from the
regions of N'yazza.  To this Dr K'yengo, who was now living with
Rumanika as his head magician, added that, whilst he was living
in Utambara, the Watuta invested his boma six months; and
finally, when all their cows and stores were exhausted, they
killed all the inhabitants but himself, and he only escaped by
the power of the charms which he carried about him.  These were
so powerful, that although he lay on the ground, and the Watuta
struck at him with their spears, not one could penetrate his
body.

In the evening after this, as the king wished to see all my
scientific instruments, we walked down to the camp; and as he did
not beg for anything, I gave him some gold and mother-of-pearl
shirt studs to swell up his trinket-box.  The same evening I made
up my mind, if possible, to purchase a stock of beads from the
Arabs, and sent Baraka off to Kufro, to see what kind of a
bargain he could make with them; for, whilst I trembled to think
what those "blood-suckers" would have the impudence to demand
when they found me at their mercy, I felt that the beads must be
bought, or the expedition would certainly come to grief.

1st and 2d.--Two days after this the merchants came in a body to
see me, and said their worst beads would stand me 80 dollars per
frasala, as they would realise that value in ivory on arrival at
the coast.  Of course no business was done, for the thing was
preposterous by all calculation, being close on 2500 per cent.
above Zanzibar valuation.  I was "game" to give 50 dollars, but
as they would not take this, I thought of dealing with Rumanika
instead. I then gave Nnanaji, who had been constantly throwing
out hints that I ought to give him a gun as he was a great
sportsman, a lappet of beadwork to keep his tongue quiet, and he
in return sent me a bullock and sundry pots of pombe, which, in
addition to the daily allowance sent by Rumanika, made all my
people drunk, and so affected Baraka that one of the women--also
drunk--having given him some sharp abuse, he beat her in so
violent a manner that the whole drunken camp set upon him, and
turned the place into a pandemonium. A row amongst the negroes
means a general rising of arms, legs, and voices; all are in a
state of the greatest excitement; and each individual thinks he
is doing the best to mend matters, but is actually doing his best
to create confusion.

By dint of perseverance, I now succeeded in having Baraka
separated from the crowd and dragged before me for justice.  I
found that the woman, who fully understood the jealous hatred
which existed in Baraka's heart against Bombay, flirted with both
of them; and, pretending to show a preference for Bombay, set
Baraka against her, when from high words they came to blows, and
set the place in a blaze.  It was useless to remonstrate--Baraka
insisted he would beat the woman if she abused him, no matter
whether I thought it cowardly or not; he did not come with me
expecting to be bullied in this way--the whole fault lay with
Bombay--I did not do him justice-- when he proved Bombay a thief
at Usui, I did not turn him off, but now, instead, I showed the
preference to Bombay by always taking him when I went to
Rumanika.  It was useless to argue with such a passionate man, so
I told him to go away and cool himself before morning.

When he was gone, Bombay said there was not one man in the camp,
besides his own set, who wished to go on to Egypt--for they had
constant arguments amongst themselves about it; and whilst Bombay
always said he would follow me wherever I led, Baraka and those
who held by him abused him and his set for having tricked them
away from Zanzibar, under the false hopes that the road was quite
safe. Bombay said his arguments were, that Bana knew better than
anybody else what he was about, and he would follow him, trusting
to luck, as God was the disposer of all things, and men could die
but once. Whilst Baraka's arguments all rested the other way;--
that no one could tell what was ahead of him--Bana had sold
himself to luck and the devil--but though he did not care for his
own safety, he ought not to sacrifice the lives of others--Bombay
and his lot were fools for their pains in trusting to him.

3d.--At daybreak Rumanika sent us word he was off to Moga-
Namarinzi, a spur of a hill beyond "the Little Windermere,"
overlooking the Ingezi Kagera, or river which separates Kishakka
from Karague, to show me how the Kiangule river was fed by small
lakes and marshes, in accordance with my expressed wish to have a
better comprehension of the drainage system of the Mountains of
the Moon. He hoped we would follow him, not by the land route he
intended to take, but in canoes which he had ordered at the ferry
below. Starting off shortly afterwards, I made for the lake, and
found the canoes all ready, but so small that, besides two
paddlers, only two men could sit down in each.  After pushing
through the tall reeds with which the end of the lake is covered,
we emerged in the clear open, and skirted the further side of the
water until a small strait was gained, which led us into another
lake, drained at the northern end with a vast swampy plain,
covered entirely with tall rushes, excepting only in a few places
where bald patches expose the surface of the water, or where the
main streams of the Ingezi and Luchoro valleys cut a clear drain
for themselves.

The whole scenery was most beautiful.  Green and fresh, the
slopes of the hills were covered with grass, with small clumps of
soft cloudy-looking acacias growing at a few feet only above the
water, and above them, facing over the hills, fine detached
trees, and here and there the gigantic medicinal aloe.  Arrived
near the end of the Moga-Namirinzi hill in the second lake, the
paddlers splashed into shore, where a large concourse of people,
headed by Nnanaji, were drawn up to receive me.  I landed with
all the dignity of a prince, when the royal band struck up a
march, and we all moved on to Rumanika's frontier palace, talking
away in a very complimentary manner, not unlike the very polite
and flowery fashion of educated Orientals.

Rumanika we found sitting dressed in a wrapper made of an nzoe
antelope's skin, smiling blandly as we approached him.  In the
warmest manner possible he pressed me to sit by his side, asked
how I had enjoyed myself, what I thought of his country, and if I
did not feel hungry; when a pic-nic dinner was spread, and we all
set to at cooked plantains and pombe, ending with a pipe of his
best tobacco.  Bit by bit Rumanika became more interested in
geography, and seemed highly ambitious of gaining a world-wide
reputation through the medium of my pen.  At his invitation we
now crossed over the spur to the Ingezi Kagera side, when, to
surprise me, the canoes I had come up the lake in appeared before
us.  They had gone out of the lake at its northern end, paddled
into, and then up the Kagera to where we stood, showing, by
actual navigation, the connection of these highland lakes with
the rivers which drain the various spurs of the Mountains of the
Moon.  The Kagera was deep and dark, of itself a very fine
stream, and, considering it was only one-- and that, too, a minor
one--of the various affluents which drain the mountain valleys
into the Victoria N'yanza through the medium of the Kitangule
river, I saw at once there must be water sufficient to make the
Kitangule a very powerful tributary to the lake.

On leaving this interesting place, with the widespread
information of all the surrounding countries I had gained, my
mind was so impressed with the topographical features of all this
part of Africa, that in my heart I resolved I would make Rumanika
as happy as he had made me, and asked K'yengo his doctor, of all
things I possessed what the king would like best.  To my surprise
I then learnt that Rumanika had set his heart on the revolving
rifle I had brought for Mtesa--the one, in fact, which he had
prevented my sending on to Uganda in the hands of Kachuchu, and
he would have begged me for it before had his high-minded
dignity, and the principle he had established of never begging
for anything, not interfered.  I then said he should certainly
have it; for as strongly as I had withheld from giving anything
to those begging scoundrels who wished to rob me of all I
possessed in the lower countries, so strongly now did I feel
inclined to be generous with this exceptional man Rumanika.  We
then had another pic-nic together, and whilst I went home to join
Grant, Rumanika spent the night doing homage and sacrificing a
bullock at the tomb of his father Dagara.

Instead of paddling all down the lake again, I walked over the
hill, and, on crossing at its northern end, whished to shoot
ducks; but the superstitious boatmen put a stop to my intended
amusement by imploring me not to do so, lest the spirit of the
lake should be roused to dry up the waters.

4th.--Rumanika returned in the morning, walking up the hill,
followed by a long train of his officers, and a party of men
carrying on their shoulders his state carriage, which consisted
of a large open basket laid on the top of two very long poles.
After entering his palace, I immediately called on him to thank
him for the great treat he had given me, and presented him, as an
earnest of what I thought, with the Colt's revolving rifle and a
fair allowance of ammunition.  His delight knew no bounds on
becoming the proprietor of such an extraordinary weapon, and
induced him to dwell on his advantages over his brother Rogero,
whose antipathy to him was ever preying on his mind.  He urged me
again to devise some plan for overcoming him; and, becoming more
and more confidential, favoured me with the following narrative,
by way of evidence how the spirits were inclined to show all the
world that he was the rightful successor to the throne:--When
Dagara died, and he, Nnanaji, and Rogero, were the only three
sons left in line of succession to the crown, a small mystic drum
of diminutive size was placed before them by the officers of
state.  It was only feather weight in reality, but, being loaded
with charms, became so heavy to those who were not entitled to
the crown, that no one could lift it but the one person whom the
spirits were inclined towards as the rightful successor.  Now, of
all the three brothers, he, Rumanika, alone could raise it from
the ground; and whilst his brothers laboured hard, in vain
attempting to move it, he with his little finger held it up
without any exertion.

This little disclosure in the history of Karague led us on to
further particulars of Dagara's death and burial, when it
transpired that the old king's body, after the fashion of his
predecessors, was sewn up in a cow-skin, and placed in a boat
floating on the lake, where it remained for three days, until
decomposition set in and maggots were engendered, of which three
were taken into the palace and given in charge to the heir-elect;
but instead of remaining as they were, one worm was transformed
into a lion, another into a leopard, and the third into a stick. 
After this the body of the king was taken up and deposited on the
hill Moga-Namirinzi, where, instead of putting him underground,
the people erected a hut over him, and, thrusting in five maidens
and fifty cows, enclosed the doorway in such a manner that the
whole of them subsequently died from starvation.

This, as may naturally be supposed, led into further genealogical
disclosures of a similar nature, and I was told by Rumanika that
his grandfather was a most wonderful man; indeed, Karague was
blessed with more supernatural agencies than any other country. 
Rohinda the Sixth, who was his grandfather, numbered so many
years that people thought he would never die; and he even became
so concerned himself about it, reflecting that his son Dagara
would never enjoy the benefit of his position as successor to the
crown of Karague, that he took some magic powders and charmed
away his life. His remains were then taken to Moga-Namirinzi, in
the same manner as were those of Dagara; but, as an improvement
on the maggot story, a young lion emerged from the heart of the
corpse and kept guard over the hill, from whom other lions came
into existence, until the whole place has become infested by
them, and has since made Karague a power and dread to all other
nations; for these lions became subject to the will of Dagara,
who, when attacked by the countries to the northward, instead of
assembling an army of men, assembled his lion force, and so swept
all before him.

Another test was then advanced at the instigation of K'yengo, who
thought Rumanika not quite impressive enough of his right to the
throne; and this was, that each heir in succession, even after
the drum dodge, was required to sit on the ground in a certain
place of the country, where, if he had courage to plant himself,
the land would gradually rise up, telescope fashion, until it
reached the skies, when, if the aspirant was considered by the
spirits the proper person to inherit Karague, he would gradually
be lowered again without any harm happening; but, otherwise, the
elastic hill would suddenly collapse, and he would be dashed to
pieces.  Now, Rumanika, by his own confession, had gone through
this ordeal with marked success; so I asked him if he found the
atmosphere cold when so far up aloft, and as he said he did so,
laughing at the quaintness of the question, I told him I saw he
had learnt a good practical lesson on the structure of the
universe, which I wished he would explain to me.  In a state of
perplexity, K'yengo and the rest, on seeing me laughing, thought
something was wrong; so, turning about, they thought again, and
said, "No, it must have been hot, because the higher one ascended
the nearer he got to the sun."

This led on to one argument after another, on geology, geography,
and all the natural sciences, and ended by Rumanika showing me an
iron much the shape and size of a carrot.  This he said was found
by one of his villagers whilst tilling the ground, buried some
way down below the surface; but dig as he would, he could not
remove it, and therefore called some men to his help.  Still the
whole of them united could not lift the iron, which induced them,
considering there must be some magic in it, to inform the king. 
"Now," says Rumanika, "I no sooner went there and saw the iron,
and brought it here as you see it.  What can such a sign mean?" 
"Of course that you are the rightful king," said his flatterers. 
"Then," said Rumanika, in exuberant spirits, "during Dagara's
time, as the king was sitting with many other men outside his
hut, a fearful storm of thunder and lightning arose, and a
thunderbolt struck the ground in the midst of them, which
dispersed all the men but Dagara, who calmly took up the
thunderbolt and places it in the palace. I, however, no sooner
came into possession, and Rogero began to contend with me, than
the thunderbolt vanished.  How would you account for this?"  The
flatterers said, "It is as clear as possible; God gave the
thunderbolt to Dagaro as a sign he was pleased with him and his
rule; but when he found two brothers contending, he withdrew it
to show their conduct was wicked."

5th.-- Rumanika in the morning sent me a young male nzoe (water-
boc)[FN#13] which his canoe-men had caught in the high rushes at
the head of the lake, by the king's order, to please me; for I
had heard this peculiar animal described in such strange ways at
Kaze, both by Musa and the Arabs, I was desirous of having a look
at one. It proved to be closely allied to a water-boc found by
Livingstone on the Ngami Lake; but, instead of being striped, was
very faintly spotted, and so long were its toes, it could hardly
walk on the dry ground; whilst its coat, also well adapted to the
moist element it lived in, was long, and of such excellent
quality that the natives prize it for wearing almost more than
any other of the antelope tribe.  The only food it would eat were
the tops of the tall papyrus rushes; but though it ate and drank
freely, and lay down very quietly, it always charged with
ferocity any person who went near it.

In the afternoon Rumanika invited both Grant and myself to
witness his New Moon Levee, a ceremony which takes place every
month with a view of ascertaining how many of his subjects are
loyal. On entering his palace enclosure, the first thing we saw
was a blaue boc's horn stuffed full of magic powder, with very
imposing effect, by K'yengo, and stuck in the ground, with its
mouth pointing in the direction of Rogero.  In the second court,
we found thirty-five drums ranged on the ground, with as many
drummers standing behind them, and a knot of young princes and
officers of high dignity waiting to escort us into the third
enclosure, where, in his principal hut, we found Rumanika
squatting on the ground, half-concealed by the portal, but
showing his smiling face to welcome us in.  His head was got up
with a tiara of beads, from the centre of which, directly over
the forehead, stood a plume of red feathers, and encircling the
lower face with a fine large white beard set in a stock or band
of beads.  We were beckoned to squat alongside Nnanaji, the
master of ceremonies, and a large group of high officials outside
the porch.  Then the thirty-five drums all struck up together in
very good harmony; and when their deafening noise was over, a
smaller band of hand-drums and reed instruments was ordered in to
amuse us.

This second performance over, from want of breath only, district
officers, one by one, came advancing on tip-toe, then pausing,
contorting and quivering their bodies, advancing again with a
springing gait and outspread arms, which they moved as if they
wished to force them out of their joints, in all of which actions
they held drum-sticks or twigs in their hands, swore with a
maniacal voice an oath of their loyalty and devotion to their
king, backed by the expression of a hope that he would cut off
their heads if they ever turned from his enemies, and then,
kneeling before him, they held out their sticks that he might
touch them.  With a constant reiteration of these scenes--the
saluting at one time, the music at another--interrupted only once
by a number of girls dancing something like a good rough Highland
fling whilst the little band played, the day's ceremonies ended.

6th and 7th.--During the next two days, as my men had all worn
out their clothes, I gave them each thirty necklaces of beads to
purchase a suit of the bark cloth called mbugu, already
described. Finding the flour of the country too bitter to eat by
itself, we sweetened it with ripe plantains, and made a good cake
of it. The king now, finding me disinclined to fight his brother
Rogero, either with guns or magic horns, asked me to give him a
"doctor" or charm to create longevity and to promote the increase
of his family, as his was not large enough to maintain the
dignity of so great a man as himself.  I gave him a blister, and,
changing the subject, told him the history of the creation of
man.  After listening to it attentively, he asked what thing in
creation I considered the greatest of all things in the world;
for whilst a man at most could only live one hundred years, a
tree lived many; but the earth ought to be biggest, for it never
died.

I then told him again I wished one of his sons would accompany me
to England, that he might learn the history of Moses, wherein he
would find that men had souls which live for ever, but that the
earth would come to an end in the fullness of time.  This
conversation, diversified by numerous shrewd remarks on the part
of Rumanika, led to his asking how I could account for the
decline of countries, instancing the dismemberment of the Wahuma
in Kittara, and remarking that formerly Karague included Urundi,
Ruanda, and Kishakka, which collectively were known as the
kingdom of Meru, governed by one man. Christian principles, I
said, made us what we are, and feeling a sympathy for him made me
desirous of taking one of his children to learn in the same
school with us, who, on returning to him, could impart what he
knew, and, extending the same by course of instruction, would
doubtless end by elevating his country to a higher position than
it ever knew before,--etc., etc.  The policy and government of
the vast possessions of Great Britain were then duly discussed,
and Rumanika acknowledged that the pen was superior to that of
the sword, and the electric telegraph and steam engine the most
wonderful powers he had ever heard of.

Before breaking up, Rumanika wished to give me any number of
ivories I might like to mention, even three or four hundred, as a
lasting remembrance that I had done him the honour of visiting
Karague in his lifetime, for though Dagara had given to coloured
merchants, he would be the first who had given to a white man. 
Of course this royal offer was declined with politeness; he must
understand that it was not the custom of big men in my country to
accept presents of value when we made visits of pleasure.  I had
enjoyed my residence in Karague, his intellectual conversations
and his kind hospitality, all of which I should record in my
books to hand down to posterity; but if he would give me a cow's
horn, I would keep it as a trophy of the happy days I had spent
in his country.  He gave me one, measuring 3 feet 5 inches in
length, and 18 3/4 inches in circumference at the base.  He then
offered me a large sheet, made up of a patchwork of very small
N'yera antelope skins, most exquisitely cured and sewn.  This I
rejected, as he told me it had been given to himself, explaining
that we prided ourselves on never parting with the gifts of a
friend; and this speech tickled his fancy so much, that he said
he never would part with anything I gave him.

8th and 9th.--The 8th went off much in the usual way, by my
calling on the king, when I gave him a pack of playing-cards,
which he put into his curiosity-box.  He explained to me, at my
request, what sort of things he would like any future visitors to
bring him-- a piece of gold and silver embroidery; but, before
anything else, I found he would like to have toys--such as Yankee
clocks with the face in a man's stomach, to wind up behind, his
eyes rolling with every beat of the pendulum; or a china-cow
milk-pot, a jack-in-the- box, models of men, carriages, and
horses--all animals in fact, and railways in particular.

On the 9th I went out shooting, as Rumanika, with his usual
politeness, on hearing my desire to kill some rhinoceros, ordered
his sons to conduct the filed for me.  Off we started by sunrise
to the bottom of the hills overlooking the head of the Little
Windermere lake.  On arrival at the scene of action--a thicket or
acacia shrubs--all the men in the neighbourhood were assembled to
beat.  Taking post myself, by direction, in the most likely place
to catch a sight of the animals, the day's work began by the
beaters driving the covers in my direction.  In a very short
time, a fine male was discovered making towards me, but not
exactly knowing where he should bolt to.  While he was in this
perplexity, I stole along between the bushes, and caught sight of
him standing as if anchored by the side of a tree and gave him a
broadsider with Blissett, which, too much for his constitution to
stand, sent him off trotting, till exhausted by bleeding he lay
down to die, and allowed me to give him a settler.

In a minute or two afterwards, the good young princes, attracted
by the sound of the gun, came to see what was done.  Their
surprise knew no bounds; they could scarcely believe what they
saw; and then, on recovering, with the spirit of true gentlemen,
they seized both my hands, congratulating me on the magnitude of
my success, and pointed out, as an example of it, a bystander who
showed fearful scars, both on his abdomen and at the blade of his
shoulder, who they declared had been run through by one of these
animals.  It was, therefore, wonderful to them, they observed,
with what calmness I went up to such formidable beasts.

Just at this time a distant cry was heard that another rhinoceros
was concealed in a thicket, and off we set to pursue her. 
Arriving at the place mentioned, I settled at once I would enter
with only two spare men carrying guns, for the acacia thorns were
so thick that the only tracks into the thicket were runs made by
these animals.  Leading myself, bending down to steal in, I
tracked up a run till half-way through cover, when suddenly
before me, like a pig from a hole, a large female, with her young
one behind her, came straight down whoof-whoofing upon me.  In
this awkward fix I forced myself to one side, though pricked all
over with thorns in doing so, and gave her one on the head which
knocked her out of my path, and induced her for safety to make
for the open, where I followed her down and gave her another. 
She then took to the hills and crossed over a spur, when,
following after her, in another dense thicket, near the head of a
glen, I came upon three, who no sooner sighted me, than all in
line they charged down my way.  Fortunately at the time my gun-
bearers were with me; so, jumping to one side, I struck them all
three in turn.  One of them dropped dead a little way on; but the
others only pulled up when they arrived at the bottom.  To please
myself now I had done quite enough; but as the princes would have
it, I went on with the chase.  As one of the two, I could see,
had one of his fore-legs broken, I went at the sounder one, and
gave him another shot, which simply induced him to walk over the
lower end of the hill.  Then turning to the last one, which could
not escape, I asked the Wanyambo to polish him off with their
spears and arrows, that I might see their mode of sport.  As we
moved up to the animal, he kept charging with such impetuous
fury, they could not go into him; so I gave him a second ball,
which brought him to anchor.  In this helpless state the men set
at him in earnest, and a more barbarous finale I never did
witness.  Every man sent his spear, assage, or arrow, into his
sides, until, completely exhausted, he sank like a porcupine
covered with quills.  The day's sport was now ended, so I went
home to breakfast, leaving instructions that the heads should be
cut off and sent to the king as a trophy of what the white man
could do.

10th and 11th.--The next day, when I called on Rumanika, the
spoils were brought into court, and in utter astonishment he
said, "Well, this must have been done with something more potent
than powder, for neither the Arabs nor Nnanaji, although they
talk of their shooting powers, could have accomplished such a
great feat as this. It is no wonder the English are the greatest
men in the world."

Neither the Wanyambo nor the Wahuma would eat the rhinoceros, so
I was not sorry to find all the Wanyamuezi porters of the Arabs
at Kufro, on hearing of the sport, come over and carry away all
the flesh.  They passed by our camp half borne down with their
burdens of sliced flesh, suspended from poles which they carried
on their shoulders; but the following day I was disgusted by
hearing that their masters had forbidden their eating "the
carrion," as the throats of the animals had not been cut; and,
moreover, had thrashed them soundly because they complained they
were half starved, which was perfectly true, by the poor food
that they got as their pay.

12th.--On visiting Rumanika again, and going through my
geographical lessons, he told me, in confirmation of Musa's old
stories, that in Ruanda there existed pigmies who lived in trees,
but occasionally came down at night, and, listening at the hut
doors of the men, would wait until they heard the name of one of
its inmates, when they would call him out, and, firing an arrow
into his heart, disappear again in the same way as they came. 
But, more fo