rmidable even than these little men, there were
monsters who could not converse with me, and never showed
themselves unless they saw women pass by; then, in voluptuous
excitement, they squeezed them to death.  Many other similar
stories were then told, when I, wishing to go, was asked if I
could kill hippopotami.  Having answered that I could, the king
graciously said he would order some canoes for me the next
morning; and as I declined because Grant could not accompany me,
as a terrible disease had broken out in his leg, he ordered a
pig-shooting party.  Agreeably with this, the next day I went out
with his sons, numerously attended; but although we beat the
covers all day, the rain was so frequent that the pigs would not
bolt.

14th.--After a long and amusing conversation with Rumanika in the
morning, I called on one of his sisters-in-law, married to an
elder brother who was born before Dagara ascended the throne. 
She was another of those wonders of obesity, unable to stand
excepting on all fours.  I was desirous to obtain a good view of
her, and actually to measure her, and induced her to give me
facilities for doing so, by offering in return to show her a bit
of my naked legs and arms.  The bait took as I wished it, and
after getting her to sidle and wriggle into the middle of the
hut, I did as I promised, and then took her dimensions as noted
below.[FN#14]  All of these are exact except the height, and I
believe I could have obtained this more accurately if I could
have her laid on the floor. Not knowing what difficulties I
should have to contend with in such a piece of engineering, I
tried to get her height by raising her up. This, after infinite
exertions on the part of us both, was accomplished, when she sank
down again, fainting, for her blood had rushed to her head. 
Meanwhile, the daughter, a lass of sixteen, sat stark-naked
before us, sucking at a milk-pot, on which the father kept her at
work by holding a rod in his hand, for as fattening is the first
duty of fashionable female life, it must be duly enforced by the
rod if necessary.  I got up a bit of flirtation with missy, and
induced her to rise and shake hands with me. Her features were
lovely, but her body was as round as a ball.

In the evening we had another row with my head men--Baraka having
accused Bombay of trying to kill him with magic.  Bombay, who was
so incessantly bullied by Baraka's officious attempts to form
party cliques opposed to the interests of the journey, and get
him turned out of the camp, indiscreetly went to one of K'yengo's
men, and asked him if he knew of any medicine that would affect
the hearts of the Wanguana so as to incline them towards him; and
on the sub-doctor saying Yes, Bombay gave him some beads, and
bought the medicine required, which, put into a pot of pombe, was
placed by Baraka's side.  Baraka in the meanwhile got wind of the
matter through K'yengo, who, misunderstanding the true facts of
the case, said it was a charm to deprive Baraka of his life.  A
court of inquiry having been convened, with all the parties
concerned in attendance, K'yengo's mistake was discovered, and
Bombay was lectured for his folly, as he had a thousand times
before abjured his belief in such magical follies; moreover, to
punish him for the future, I took Baraka, whenever I could, with
me to visit the king, which, little as it may appear to others,
was of the greatest consequence to the hostile parties.

15th and 16th.--When I next called on Rumanika I gave him a
Vautier's binocular and prismatic compass; on which he politely
remarked he was afraid he was robbing me of everything. More
compliments went round, and then he asked if it was true we could
open a man's skull, look at his brains, and close it up again;
also if it was true we sailed all round the world into regions
where there was no difference between night and day, and how,
when he ploughed the seas in such enormous vessels as would carry
at once 20,000 men, we could explain to the sailors what they
ought to do; for, although he had heard of these things, no one
was able to explain them to him.

After all the explanations were given, he promised me a boat-hunt
after the nzoe in the morning; but when the time came, as
difficulties were raised, I asked him to allow us to anticipate
the arrival of Kachuchu, and march on to Kitangule.  He answered,
with his usual courtesy, That he would be very glad to oblige us
in any way that we liked; but he feared that, as the Waganda were
such superstitious people, some difficulties would arise, and he
must decline to comply with our request.  "You must not," he
added, "expect ever to find again a reasonable man like myself." 
I then gave him a book on "Kafir laws," which he said he would
keep for my sake, with all the rest of the presents, which he was
determined never to give away, though it was usual for him to
send novelties of this sort to Mtesa, king of Uganda, and
Kamrasi, king of Unyoro, as a friendly recognition of their
superior positions in the world of great monarchies.

17th.--Rumanika next introduced me to an old woman who came from
the island of Gasi, situated in the little Luta Nzige.  Both her
upper and lower incisors had been extracted, and her upper lip
perforated by a number of small holes, extending in an arch from
one corner to the other.  This interesting but ugly old lady
narrated the circumstances by which she had been enslaved, and
then sent by Kamrasi as a curiosity to Rumanika, who had ever
since kept her as a servant in his palace.  A man from Ruanda
then told us of the Wilyanwantu (men-eaters), who disdained all
food but human flesh; and Rumanika confirmed the statement. 
Though I felt very sceptical about it, I could not help thinking
it a curious coincidence that the position they were said to
occupy agreed with Petherick's Nyam Nyams (men-eaters).

Of far more interest were the results of a conversation which I
had with another of Kamrasi's servants, a man of Amara, as it
threw some light upon certain statements made by Mr Leon of the
people of Amara being Christians.  He said they bore single holes
in the centres both of their upper and lower lips, as well as in
the lobes of both of their ears, in which they wear small brass
rings.  They live near the N'yanza--where it is connected by a
strait with a salt lake, and drained by a river to the northward-
-in comfortable houses, built like the tembes of Unyamuezi.  When
killing a cow, they kneel down in an attitude of prayer, with
both hands together, held palm upwards, and utter Zu, a word the
meaning of which he did not know. I questioned him to try if the
word had any trace of a Christian meaning--for instance, a
corruption of Jesu--but without success. Circumcision is not
known amongst them, neither have they any knowledge of God or a
soul.  A tribe called Wakuavi, who are white, and described as
not unlike myself, often came over the water and made raids on
their cattle, using the double-edged sime as their chief weapon
of war.  These attacks were as often resented, and sometimes led
the Wamara in pursuit a long way into their enemy's country,
where, at a place called Kisiguisi, they found men robed in red
cloths.  Beads were imported, he thought, both from the east and
from Ukidi.  Associated with the countries Masau or Masai, and
Usamburu, which he knew, there was a large mountain, the exact
position of which he could not describe.

I took down many words of his language, and found they
corresponded with the North African dialects, as spoken by the
people of Kidi, Gani, and Madi.  The southerners, speaking of
these, would call them Wakidi, Wagani, and Wamadi, but among
themselves the syllable was is not prefixed, as in the southern
dialects, to signify people. Rumanika, who appeared immensely
delighted as he assisted me in putting the questions I wanted,
and saw me note them down in my book, was more confirmed than
ever in the truth of my stories that I came from the north, and
thought as the beads came to Amara, so should I be able to open
the road and bring him more visitors. This he knew was his only
chance of ever seeing me more, for I swore I would never go back
through Usui, so greatly did I feel the indignities imposed on me
by Suwarora.

18th.--To keep the king in good-humour, I now took a table-knife,
spoon, and fork to the palace, which, after their several uses
were explained, were consigned to his curiosity-box.  Still
Rumanika could not understand how it was I spent so much and
travelled so far, or how it happened such a great country as ours
could be ruled by a woman.  He asked the Queen's name, how many
children she had, and the mode of succession; then, when fully
satisfied, led the way to show me what his father Dagara had done
when wishing to know of what the centre of the earth was
composed.  At the back of the palace a deep ditch was cut,
several yards long, the end of which was carried by a
subterranean passage into the palace, where it was ended off with
a cavern led into by a very small aperture.  It then appeared
that Dagara, having failed, in his own opinion, to arrive any
nearer to the object in view, gave the excavating up as a bad
job, and turned the cave into a mysterious abode, where it was
confidently asserted he spent many days without eating or
drinking, and turned sometimes into a young man, and then an old
one, alternately, as the humour seized him.

19th to 22d.--On the 19th I went fishing, but without success,
for they said the fish would not take in the lake; and on the
following day, as Grant's recovery seemed hopeless, for a long
time at least, I went with all the young princes to se what I
could do with the hippopotami in the lake, said to inhabit the
small island of Conty.  The part was an exceedingly merry one. 
We went off to the island in several canoes, and at once found an
immense number of crocodiles basking in the sun, but not a single
hippopotamus was in sight.  The princes then, thinking me "green"
at this kind of sport, said the place was enchanted, but I need
not fear, for they would bring them out to my feet by simply
calling out certain names, and this was no sooner done than four
old and one young one came immediately in font of us.  It seemed
quite a sin to touch them, they looked all so innocent; but as
the king wanted to try me again, I gave one a ball on the head
which sent him under, never again to be seen, for on the 22nd, by
which time I supposed he ought to have risen inflated with gases,
the king sent out his men to look out for him; but they returned
to say, that whilst all the rest were in the old place, that one,
in particular, could not be found.

On this K'yengo, who happened to be present whilst our interview
lasted, explained that the demons of the deep were annoyed with
me for intruding on their preserves, without having the courtesy
to commemorate the event by the sacrifice of a goat or a cow. 
Rumanika then, at my suggestions, gave Nnanaji the revolving
pistol I first gave him, but not without a sharp rebuke for his
having had the audacity to beg a gun of me in consideration of
his being a sportsman.  We then went into a discourse on
astrology, when the intelligent Rumanika asked me if the same sun
we saw one day appeared again, or whether fresh suns came every
day, and whether or not the moon made different faces, to laugh
at us mortals on earth.

23d and 24th.--This day was spent by the king introducing me to
his five fat wives, to show with what esteem he was held by all
the different kings of the countries surrounding.  From Mpororo--
which, by the by, is a republic--he was wedded to Kaogez, the
daughter of Kahaya, who is the greatest chief in the country;
from Unyoro he received Kauyangi, Kamrasi's daughter; from Nkole,
Kambiri, the late Kasiyonga's daughter; from Utumbi, Kirangu, the
late Kiteimbua's daughter; and lastly, the daughter of
Chiuarungi, his head cook.

After presenting Rumanika with an india-rubber band--which, as
usual, amused him immensely--for the honour he had done me in
showing me his wives, a party of Waziwa, who had brought some
ivory from Kidi, came to pay their respects to him.  On being
questioned by me, they said that they once saw some men like my
Wanguana there; they had come from the north to trade, but,
though they carried firearms, they were all killed by the people
of Kidi.  This was famous; it corroborated what I knew, but could
not convince others of,--that traders could find their way up to
Kidi by the Nile. It in a manner explained also how it was that
Kamrasi, some years before, had obtained some pink beads, of a
variety the Zanzibar merchants had never thought of bringing into
the country. Bombay was now quite convinced, and we all became
transported with joy, until Rumanika, reflecting on the sad state
of Grant's leg, turned that joy into grief by saying that the
rules of Uganda are so strict, that no one who is sick could
enter the country.  "To show," he said, "how absurd they are,
your donkey would not be permitted because he has no trousers;
and you even will have to put on a gown, as your unmentionables
will be considered indecorous."  I now asked Rumanika if he would
assist me in replenishing my fast-ebbing store of beads, by
selling tusks to the Arabs at Kufro, when for every 35lb. weight
I would give him 50 dollars by orders on Zanzibar, and would
insure him from being cheated, by sending a letter of advice to
our Consul residing there.  At first he demurred, on the high-
toned principle that he could not have any commercial dealings
with myself; but, at the instigation of Bombay and Baraka, who
viewed it in its true character, as tending merely to assist my
journey in the best manner he could, without any sacrifice to
dignity, he eventually yielded, and, to prove his earnestness,
sent me a large tusk, with a notice that his ivory was not kept
in the palace, but with his officers, and as soon as they could
collect it, so soon I should get it.

Rumanika, on hearing that it was our custom to celebrate the
birth of our Saviour with a good feast of beef, sent us an ox. I
immediately paid him a visit to offer the compliments of the
season, and at the same time regretted, much to his amusement,
that he, as one of the old stock of Abyssinians, who are the
oldest Christians on record, should have forgotten this rite; but
I hoped the time would come when, by making it known that his
tribe had lapsed into a state of heathenism, white teachers would
be induced to set it all to rights again.  At this time some
Wahaiya traders (who had been invited at my request by Rumanika)
arrived.  Like the Waziwa, they had traded with Kidi, and they
not only confirmed what the Waziwa had said, but added that, when
trading in those distant parts, they heard of Wanguana coming in
vessels to trade to the north of Unyoro; but the natives there
were so savage, they only fought with these foreign traders.  A
man of Ruanda now informed us that the cowrie-shells, so
plentiful in that country, come there from the other or western
side, but he could not tell whence they were originally obtained. 
Rumanika then told me Suwarora had been so frightened by the
Watuta, and their boastful threats to demolish Usui bit by bit,
reserving him only as a tit-bit for the end, that he wanted a
plot of ground in Karague to preserve his property in.

26th, 27th, and 28th.--Some other travellers from the north again
informed us that they had heard of Wanguana who attempted to
trade in Gani and Chopi, but were killed by the natives.  I now
assured Rumanika that in two or three years he would have a
greater trade with Egypt than he ever could have with Zanzibar;
for when I opened the road, all those men he heard of would swarm
up here to visit him.  He, however, only laughed at my folly in
proposing to go to a place of which all I heard was merely that
every stranger who went there was killed.  He began to show a
disinclination to allow my going there, and though from the most
friendly intention, this view was alarming, for one word from him
could have ruined my projects. As it was, I feared my followers
might take fright and refuse to advance with me.  I thought it
good policy to talk of there being many roads leading through
Africa, so that Rumanika might see he had not got, as he thought,
the sole key to the interior.  I told him again of certain views
I once held of coming to see him from the north up the Nile, and
from the east through the Masai.  He observed that, "To open
either of those routes, you would require at least two hundred
guns."  He would, however, do something when we returned from
Uganda; for as Mtesa followed his advice in everything, so did
Kamrasi, for both held the highest opinion of him.

The conversation then turning on London, and the way men and
carriages moved up the streets like strings of ants on their
migrations, Rumanika said the villages in Ruanda were of enormous
extent, and the people great sportsmen, for they turned out in
multitudes, with small dogs on whose necks were tied bells, and
blowing horns themselves, to hunt leopards.  They were, however,
highly superstitious, and would not allow any strangers to enter
their country; for some years ago, when Arabs went there, a great
drought and famine set in, which they attributed to evil
influences brought by them, and, turning them out of their
country, said they would never admit any of their like amongst
them again.  I said, in return, I thought his Wanyambo just as
superstitious, for I observed, whilst walking one day, that they
had placed a gourd on the path, and on inquiry found they had
done so to gain the sympathy of all passers-by to their crop
close at hand, which was blighted, imagining that the voice of
the sympathiser heard by the spirits would induce them to relent,
and restore a healthy tone to the crop.

During this time an interesting case was brought before us for
judgment.  Two men having married one woman, laid claim to her
child, which, as it was a male one, belonged to the father. 
Baraka was appointed the umpire, and immediately comparing the
infant's face with those of its claimants, gave a decision which
all approved of but the loser.  It was pronounced amidst peals of
laughter from my men; for whenever any little excitement is going
forward, the Wanguana all rush to the scene of action to give
their opinions, and joke over it afterwards.

29th and 30th.--On telling Rumanika this story next morning, he
said, "Many funny things happen in Karague"; and related some
domestic incidents, concluding with the moral that "Marriage in
Karague was a mere matter of money."  Cows, sheep, and slaves
have to be given to the father for the value of his daughter; but
if she finds she has made a mistake, she can return the dowry-
money, and gain her release.  The Wahuma, although they keep
slaves and marry with pure negroes, do not allow their daughters
to taint their blood by marrying out of their clan.  In warfare
it is the rule that the Wahinda, or princes, head their own
soldiers, and set them the example of courage, when, after firing
a few arrows, they throw their bows away, and close at once with
their spears and assages. Life is never taken in Karague, either
for murder or cowardice, as they value so much their Wahuma
breed; but, for all offences, fines of cows are exacted according
to the extent of the crime.

31st.--Ever proud of his history since I had traced his descent
from Abyssinia and King David, whose hair was as straight as my
own, Rumanika dwelt on my theological disclosures with the
greatest delight, and wished to know what difference existed
between the Arabs and ourselves; to which Baraka replied, as the
best means of making him understand, that whilst the Arabs had
only one Book, we had two; to which I added, Yes, that is true in
a sense; but the real merits lie in the fact that we have got the
better BOOK, as may be inferred from the obvious fact that we are
more prosperous, and their superiors in all things, as I would
prove to him if he would allow me to take one of his sons home to
learn that BOOK; for then he would find his tribe, after a while,
better off than the Arabs are.  Much delighted, he said he would
be very glad to give me two boys for that purpose.

Then, changing the subject, I pressed Rumanika, as he said he had
no idea of a God or future state, to tell me what advantage he
expected from sacrificing a cow yearly at his father's grave.  He
laughingly replied he did not know, but he hoped he might be
favoured with better crops if he did so.  He also place pombe and
grain, he said, for the same reason, before a large stone on the
hillside, although it could not eat, or make any use of it; but
the coast-men were of the same belief as himself, and so were all
the natives.  No one in Africa, as far as he knew, doubted the
power of magic and spells; and if a fox barked when he was
leading an army to battle, he would retire at once, knowing that
this prognosticated evil.  There were many other animals, and
lucky and unlucky birds, which all believed in.

I then told him it was fortunate he had no disbelievers like us
to contend with in battle, for we, instead of trusting to luck
and such omens, put our faith only in skill and pluck, which
Baraka elucidated from his military experience in the wars in
British India.  Lastly, I explained to him how England formerly
was as unenlightened as Africa, and believing in the same sort of
superstitions, and the inhabitants were all as naked as his skin-
wearing Wanyambo; but now, since they had grown wiser, and saw
through such impostures, they were the greatest men in the world.
He said, for the future he would disregard what the Arabs said,
and trust to my doctrines, for without doubt he had never seen
such a wise man as myself; and the Arabs themselves confirmed
this when they told him that all their beads and cloths came from
the land of the Wazungu, or white men.

1st, 2d, and 3d.--The new year was ushered in by the most
exciting intelligence, which drove us half wild with delight, for
we fully believed Mr Petherick was indeed on his road up the
Nile, endeavouring to meet us.  It was this:--An officer of
Rumanika's, who had been sent four years before on a mission to
Kamrasi, had just then returned with a party of Kamrasi's who
brought ivory for sale to the Arabs at Kufro, along with a
vaunting commission to inform Rumanika that Kamrasi had foreign
visitors as well as himself.  They had not actually come into
Unyoro, but were in his dependency, the country of Gani, coming
up the Nile in vessels. They had been attacked by the Gani
people, and driven back with considerable loss both of men and
property, although they were in sailing vessels, and fired guns
which even broke down the trees on the banks.  Some of their
property had been brought to him, and he in return had ordered
his subjects not to molest them, but allow them to come on to
him.  Rumanika enjoyed this news as much as myself, especially
when I told him of Petherick's promise to meet us, just as these
men said he was trying to do; and more especially so, when I told
him that if he would assist me in trying to communicate with
Petherick, the latter would either come here himself, or send one
of his men, conveying a suitable present, whilst I was away in
Uganda; and then in the end we would all go off to Kamrasi's
together.

4th.--Entering warmly into the spirit of this important
intelligence, Rumanika inquired into its truth; and, finding no
reason to doubt it, said he would send some men back with
Kamrasi's men, if I could have patience until they were ready to
go. There would be no danger, as Kamrasi was his brother-in-law,
and would do all that he told him.

I now proposed to send Baraka, who, ashamed to cry off, said he
would go with Rumanika's officers if I allowed him a companion of
his own choosing, who would take care of him if he got sick on
the way, otherwise he should be afraid they would leave him to
die, like a dog, in the jungles.  We consoled him by assenting to
the companion he wished, and making Rumanika responsible that no
harm should come to him from any of the risks which his
imagination conjured up.  Rumanika then gave him and Uledi, his
selected companion, some sheets of mbugu, in order that they
might disguise themselves as his officers whilst crossing the
territories of the king of Uganda.  On inquiring as to the reason
of this, it transpired that, to reach Unyoro, the party would
have to cross a portion of Uddu, which the late king Sunna, on
annexing that country to Uganda, had divided, not in halves, but
by alternate bands running transversely from Nkole to the
Victoria N'yanza.

5th and 6th.--To keep Rumanika up to the mark, I introduced to
him Saidi, one of my men, who was formerly a slave, captured in
Walamo, on the borders of Abyssinia, to show him, by his
similarity to the Wahuma, how it was I had come to the conclusion
that he was of the same race.  Saidi told him his tribe kept
cattle with the same stupendous horns as those of the Wahuma; and
also that, in the same manner, they all mixed blood and milk for
their dinners, which, to his mind, confirmed my statement.  At
night, as there was a partial eclipse of the moon, all the
Wanguana marched up and down from Rumanika's to Nnanaji's huts,
singing and beating our tin cooking-pots to frighten off the
spirit of the sun from consuming entirely the chief object of
reverence, the moon.

7th.--Our spirits were now further raised by the arrival of a
semi-Hindu-Suahili, named Juma, who had just returned from a
visit to the king of Uganda, bringing back with him a large
present of ivory and slaves; for he said he had heard from the
king of our intention to visit him, and that he had despatched
officers to call us immediately.  This intelligence delighted
Rumanika as much as it did us, and he no sooner heard it than he
said, with ecstasies, "I will open Africa, since the white men
desire it; for did not Dagara command us to show deference to
strangers?"  Then, turning to me, he added, "My only regret is,
you will not take something as a return for the great expenses
you have been put to in coming to visit me."  The expense was
admitted, for I had now been obliged to purchase from the Arabs
upwards of œ400 worth of beads, to keep such a store in reserve
for my return from Uganda as would enable me to push on to
Gondokoro.  I thought this necessary, as every report that
arrived from Unyamuezi only told us of further disasters with the
merchants in that country.  Sheikh Said was there even then, with
my poor Hottentots, unable to convey my post to the coast.

8th to 10th.--At last we heard the familiar sound of the Uganda
drum.  Maula, a royal officer, with a large escort of smartly-
dressed men, women, and boys, leading their dogs and playing
their reeds, announced to our straining ears the welcome
intelligence that their king had sent them to call us. 
N'yamgundu, who had seen us in Usui, had marched on to inform the
king of our advance and desire to see him; and he, intensely
delighted at the prospect of having white men for his guests,
desired no time should be lost in our coming on.  Maula told us
that his officers had orders to supply us with everything we
wanted whilst passing through his country, and that there would
be nothing to pay.

One thing only now embarrassed me--Grant was worse, without hope
of recovery for at least one or two months.  This large body of
Waganda could not be kept waiting.  To get on as fast as possible
was the only chance of ever bringing the journey to a successful
issue; so, unable to help myself, with great remorse at another
separation, on the following day I consigned my companion, with
several Wanguana, to the care of my friend Rumanika.  I then
separated ten loads of beads and thirty copper wires for my
expenses in Uganda; wrote a letter to Petherick, which I gave to
Baraka; and gave him and his companion beads to last as money for
six months, and also a present both for Kamrasi and the Gani
chief.  To Nsangez I gave charge of my collections in natural
history, and the reports of my progress, addressed to the
Geographical Society, which he was to convey to Sheikh Said at
Kaze, for conveyance as far as Zanzibar.

This business concluded in camp, I started my men and went to the
palace to bid adieu to Rumanika, who appointed Rozaro, one of his
officers, to accompany me wherever I went in Uganda, and to bring
me back safely again.  At Rumanika's request I then gave Mtesa's
pages some ammunition to hurry on with to the great king of
Uganda, as his majesty had ordered them to bring him, as quickly
as possible, some strengthening powder, and also some powder for
his gun.  Then, finally, to Maula, also under Rumanika's
instructions, I gave two copper wires and five bundles of beads;
and, when all was completed, set out on the march, perfectly sure
in my mind that before very long I should settle the great Nile
problem for ever; and, with this consciousness, only hoping that
Grant would be able to join me before I should have to return
again, for it was never supposed for a moment that it was
possible I ever could go north from Uganda. Rumanika was the most
resolute in this belief, as the kings of Uganda, ever since that
country was detached from Unyoro, had been making constant raids,
seizing cattle and slaves from the surrounding communities.




                           Chapter IX



                     History of the Wahuma

The Abyssinians and Gallas--Theory of Conquest of Inferior by
Superior Races--The Wahuma and the Kingdom of Kittara--Legendary
History of the Kingdom of Uganda--Its Constitution, and the
Ceremonials of the Court.

The reader has now had my experience of several of the minor
states, and has presently to be introduced to Uganda, the most
powerful state in the ancient but now divided great kingdom of
Kittara. I shall have to record a residence of considerable
duration at the court there; and, before entering on it, I
propose to state my theory of the ethnology of that part of
Africa inhabited by the people collectively styled Wahuma--
otherwise Gallas or Abyssinians. My theory is founded on the
traditions of the several nations, as checked by my own
observations of what I saw when passing through them.  It appears
impossible to believe, judging from the physical appearance of
the Wahuma, that they can be of any other race than the semi-
Shem-Hamitic of Ethiopia.  The traditions of the imperial
government of Abyssinia go as far back as the scriptural age of
King David, from whom the late reigning king of Abyssinia, Sahela
Selassie, traced his descent.

Most people appear to regard the Abyssinians as a different race
from the Gallas, but, I believe, without foundation.  Both alike
are Christians of the greatest antiquity.  It is true that,
whilst the aboriginal Abyssinians in Abyssinia proper are more
commonly agriculturists, the Gallas are chiefly a pastoral
people; but I conceive that the two may have had the same
relations with each other which I found the Wahuma kings and
Wahuma herdsmen holding with the agricultural Wazinza in Uzinza,
the Wanyambo in Karague, the Waganda in Uganda, and the Wanyoro
in Unyoro.

In these countries the government is in the hands of foreigners,
who had invaded and taken possession of them, leaving the
agricultural aborigines to till the ground, whilst the junior
members of the usurping clans herded cattle--just as in
Abyssinia, or wherever the Abyssinians or Gallas have shown
themselves. There a pastoral clan from the Asiatic side took the
government of Abyssinia from its people and have ruled over them
ever since, changing, by intermarriage with the Africans, the
texture of their hair and colour to a certain extent, but still
maintaining a high stamp of Asiatic feature, of which a market
characteristic is a bridged instead of bridgeless nose.

It may be presumed that there once existed a foreign but compact
government in Abyssinia, which, becoming great and powerful, sent
out armies on all sides of it, especially to the south, south-
east, and west, slave-hunting and devastating wherever they went,
and in process of time becoming too great for one ruler to
control. Junior members of the royal family then, pushing their
fortunes, dismembered themselves from the parent stock, created
separate governments, and, for reasons which cannot be traced,
changed their names.  In this manner we may suppose that the
Gallas separated from the Abyssinians, and located themselves to
the south of their native land.

Other Abyssinians, or possibly Gallas--it matters not which they
were or what we call them--likewise detaching themselves, fought
in the Somali country, subjugated that land, were defeated to a
certain extent by the Arabs from the opposite continent, and
tried their hands south as far as the Jub river, where they also
left many of their numbers behind.  Again they attacked Omwita
(the present Mombas), were repulsed, were lost sight of in the
interior of the continent, and, crossing the Nile close to its
source, discovered the rich pasture-lands of Unyoro, and founded
the great kingdom of Kittara, where they lost their religion,
forgot their language, extracted their lower incisors like the
natives, changed their national name to Wahuma, and no longer
remembered the names of Hubshi or Galla--though even the present
reigning kings retain a singular traditional account of their
having once been half white and half black, with hair on the
white side straight, and on the black side frizzly.  It was a
curious indication of the prevailing idea still entertained by
them of their foreign extraction, that it was surmised in Unyoro
that the approach of us white men into their country from both
sides at once, augured an intention on our part to take back the
country from them.  Believing, as they do, that Africa formerly
belonged to Europeans, from whom it was taken by negroes with
whom they had allied themselves, the Wahuma make themselves a
small residue of the original European stock driven from the
land-- an idea which seems natural enough when we consider that
the Wahuma are, in numbers, quite insignificant compared with the
natives.

Again, the princes of Unyoro are called Wawitu, and point to the
north when asked where their country Uwitu is situated,
doubtfully saying, when questioned about its distance, "How can
we tell circumstances which took place in our forefathers' times?
we only think it is somewhere near your country."  Although,
however, this very interesting people, the Wahuma, delight in
supposing themselves to be of European origin, they are forced to
confess, on closer examination, that although they came in the
first instance from the doubtful north, they came latterly from
the east, as part of a powerful Wahuma tribe, beyond Kidi, who
excel in arms, and are so fierce no Kidi people, terrible in war
as these too are described to be, can stand against them.  This
points, if our maps are true, to the Gallas--for all pastorals in
these people's minds are Wahuma; and if we could only reconcile
ourselves to the belief that the Wawitu derived their name from
Omwita, the last place they attacked on the east coast of Africa,
then all would be clear: for it must be noticed the Wakama, or
kings, when asked to what race they owe their origin, invariably
reply, in the first place, from princes--giving, for instance,
the titles Wawitu in Unyoro, and Wahinda in Karague-- which is
most likely caused by their never having been asked such a close
question before, whilst the idiom of the language generally
induces them to call themselves after the name applied to their
country.

So much for ethnological conjecture.  Let us now deal with the
Wahuma since they crossed the Nile and founded the kingdom of
Kittara, a large tract of land bounded by the Victoria N'yanza
and Kitangule Kagera or River on the south, the Nile on the east,
the Little Luta-Nzige Lake[FN#15] on the north, and the kingdoms
of Utubi and Nkole on the west.

The general name Kittara is gradually becoming extinct, and is
seldom applied to any but the western portions; whilst the north-
eastern, in which the capital is situated, is called Unyoro, and
the other, Uddu apart from Uganda, as we shall presently see.

Nobody has been able to inform us how many generations old the
Wahuma government of Unyoro is.  The last three kings are
Chiawambi, N'yawongo, and the present king Kamrasi.  In very
early times dissensions amongst the royal family, probably
contending for the crown, such as we presume must have occurred
in Abyssinia, separated the parent stock, and drove the weaker to
find refuge in Nkole, where a second and independent government
of Wahuma was established.  Since then, twenty generations ago,
it is said the Wahuma government of Karague was established in
the same manner.  The conspirator Rohinda fled from Kittara to
Karague with a large party of Wahuma; sought the protection of
Nono, who, a Myambo, was king over the Wanyambo of that country;
ingratiated himself and his followers with the Wanyambo; and,
finally, designing a crown for himself, gave a feast,
treacherously killed King Nono in his cups, and set himself on
the throne, the first mkama or king who ruled in Karague. 
Rohinda was succeeded by Ntare, then Rohinda II., then Ntare II.,
which order only changed with the eleventh reign, when Rusatira
ascended the throne, and was succeeded by Mehinga, then Kalimera,
then Ntare VII., then Rohinda VI., then Dagara, and now Rumanika. 
During this time the Wahuma were well south of the equator, and
still destined to spread.  Brothers again contended for the crown
of their father, and the weaker took refuge in Uzinza, where the
fourth Wahuma government was created, and so remained under one
king until the last generation, when King Ruma died, and his two
sons, Rohinda, the eldest, and Suwarora, contended for the crown,
but divided the country between them, Rohinda taking the eastern
half, and Suwarora the western, at the instigation of the late
King Dagara of Karague.

This is the most southerly kingdom of the Wahuma, though not the
farthest spread of its people, for we find the Watusi, who are
emigrants from Karague of the same stock, overlooking the
Tanganyika Lake from the hills of Uhha, and tending their cattle
all over Unyamuezi under the protection of the native negro
chiefs; and we also hear that the Wapoka of Fipa, south of the
Rukwa Lake are the same.  How or when their name became changed
from Wahuma to Watusi no one is able to explain; but, again
deducing the past from the present, we cannot help suspecting
that, in the same way as this change has taken place, the name
Galla may have been changed from Hubshi, and Wahuma from Gallas. 
But though in these southern regions the name of the clan has
been changed, the princes still retain the title of Wahinda as in
Karague, instead of Wawitu as in Unyoro, and are considered of
such noble breed that many of the pure negro chiefs delight in
saying, I am a Mhinda, or prince, to the confusion of travellers,
which confusion is increased by the Wahuma habits of conforming
to the regulations of the different countries they adopt.  For
instance, the Wahuma of Uganda and Karague, though so close to
Unyoro, do not extract their lower incisors; and though the
Wanyoro only use the spear in war, the Wahuma in Karague are the
most expert archers in Africa.  We are thus left only the one
very distinguishing mark, the physical appearance of this
remarkable race, partaking even more of the phlegmatic nature of
the Shemitic father than the nervous boisterous temperament of
the Hamitic mother, as a certain clue to their Shem-Hamitic
origin.

It remains to speak of the separation of Uddu from Unyoro, the
present kingdom of Uganda--which, to say the least of it, is
extremely interesting, inasmuch as the government there is as
different from the other surrounding countries as those of Europe
are compared to Asia.

In the earliest times the Wahuma of Unyoro regarded all their
lands bordering on the Victoria Lake as their garden, owing to
its exceeding fertility, and imposed the epithet of Wiru, or
slaves, upon its people, because they had to supply the imperial
government with food and clothing.  Coffee was conveyed to the
capital by the Wiru, also mbugu (bark-cloaks), from an
inexhaustible fig-tree; in short, the lands of the Wiru were
famous for their rich productions.

Now Wiru in the northern dialect changes to Waddu in the
southern; hence Uddu, the land of the slaves, which remained in
one connected line from the Nile to the Kitangule Kagera until
eight generations back, when, according to tradition, a sportsman
from Unyoro, by name Uganda, came with a pack of dogs, a woman, a
spear, and a shield, hunting on the left bank of Katonga valley,
not far from the lake. He was but a poor man, though so
successful in hunting that vast numbers of the Wiru flocked to
him for flesh, and became so fond of him as to invite him to be
their king, saying, "Of what avail to us is our present king,
living so far away that when we sent him a cow as a tributary
offering, that cow on the journey gave a calf, and the calf
became a cow and gave another calf, and so on, and yet the
present has not reached its destination?"

At first Uganda hesitated, on the plea that they had a king
already, but on being farther pressed consented; when the people
hearing his name said, "Well, let it be so; and for the future
let this country between the Nile and Katonga be called Uganda,
and let your name be Kimera, the first king of Uganda."

The same night Kimera stood upon a stone with a spear in his
hand, and a woman and dog sitting by his side; and to this day
people assert that his footprints and the mark left by his spear-
end, as well as the seats of the woman and dog, are visible.  The
report of these circumstances soon reached the great king of
Unyoro, who, in his magnificence, merely said, "The poor creature
must be starving; allow him to feed there if he likes."  The
kings who have succeeded Kimera are: 1. Mahanda; 2. Katereza; 3.
Chabago; 4. Simakokiro; 5. Kamanya; 6. Sunna; 7. Mtesa, not yet
crowned.

These kings have all carried on the same system of government as
that commenced by Kimera, and proved themselves a perfect terror
to Unyoro, as we shall see in the sequel.  Kimera, suddenly risen
to eminence, grew proud and headstrong--formed a strong clan
around him, whom he appointed to be his Wakunga, or officers--
rewarded well, punished severely, and soon became magnificent. 
Nothing short of the grandest palace, a throne to sit upon, the
largest harem, the smartest officers, the best dressed people,
even a menagerie for pleasure--in fact, only the best of
everything--would content him. Fleets of boats, not canoes, were
built for war, and armies formed, that the glory of the king
might never decrease.  In short, the system of government,
according to barbarous ideas was perfect. Highways were cut from
one extremity of the country to the other, and all rivers
bridged.  No house could be built without its necessary
appendages for cleanliness; no person, however poor, could expose
his person; and to disobey these laws was death.

After the death of Kimera, the prosperity of Uganda never
decreased, but rather improved.  The clan of officers formed by
him were as proud of their emancipation from slavery, as the king
they had created was of his dominion over them.  They buried
Kimera with state honours, giving charge of the body to the late
king's most favourite consort, whose duty it was to dry the
corpse by placing it on a board resting on the mouth of an
earthen open pot heated by fire from below.  When this drying
process was completed, at the expiration of three months, the
lower jaw was cut out and neatly worked over with beads; the
umbilical cord, which had been preserved from birth, was also
worked with beads.  These were kept apart, but the body was
consigned to a tomb, and guarded ever after by this officer and a
certain number of the king's next most favourite women, all of
whom planted gardens for their maintenance, and were restricted
from seeing the succeeding king.

By his large establishment of wives, Kimera left a number of
princes or Warangira, and as many princesses.  From the Warangira
the Wakunga now chose as their king the one whom they thought
best suited for the government of the country--not of too high
rank by the mother's side, lest their selection in his pride
should kill them all, but one of low birth.  The rest were placed
with wives in a suite of huts, under charge of a keeper, to
prevent any chance of intrigues and dissensions.  They were to
enjoy life until the prince-elect should arrive at the age of
discretion and be crowned, when all but two of the princes would
be burnt to death, the two being reserved in case of accident as
long as the king wanted brother companions, when one would be
banished to Unyoro, and the other pensioned with suitable
possessions in Uganda.  The mother of the king by this measure
became queen-dowager, or N'yamasore. She halved with her son all
the wives of the deceased king not stationed at his grave, taking
second choice; kept up a palace only little inferior to her son's
with large estates, guided the prince-elect in the government of
the country, and remained until the end of his minority the
virtual ruler of the land; at any rate, no radical political
changes could take place without her sanction. The princesses
became the wives of the king; no one else could marry them.

Both mother and son had their Ktikiros or commander-in-chief,
also titled Kamraviona, as well as other officers of high rank.
Amongst them in due order of gradation are the Ilmas, a woman who
had the good fortune to have cut the umbilical cord at the king's
birth; the Sawaganzi, queen's sister and king's barber; Kaggao,
Polino, Sakibobo, Kitunzi, and others, governors of provinces;
Jumab, admiral of the fleet; Kasugu, guardian of the king's
sister; Mkuenda, factor; Kunsa and Usungu, first and second class
executioners; Mgemma, commissioner in charge of tombs; Seruti,
brewer; Mfumbiro, cook; numerous pages to run messages and look
after the women, and minor Wakungu in hundreds.  One Mkungu is
always over the palace, in command of the Wanagalali, or guards
which are changed monthly; another is ever in attendance as
seizer of refractory persons.  There are also in the palace
almost constantly the Wanangalavi, or drummers; Nsase, pea-gourd
rattlers; Milele, flute-players; Mukonderi, clarionet-players;
also players on wooden harmonicons and lap-harps, to which the
players sing accompaniments; and, lastly, men who whistle on
their fingers--for music is half the amusement of these courts. 
Everybody in Uganda is expected to keep spears, shields and dogs,
the Uganda arms and cognisance; whilst the Wakungu are entitled
to drums.  There is also a Neptune Mgussa, or spirit, who lives
in the depths of the N'yanza, communicates through the medium of
his temporal Mkungu, and guides to a certain extent the naval
destiny of the king.

It is the duty of all officers, generally speaking, to attend at
court as constantly as possible; should they fail, they forfeit
their lands, wives, and all belongings.  These will be seized and
given to others more worthy of them; as it is presumed that
either insolence or disaffection can be the only motive which
would induce any person to absent himself for any length of time
from the pleasure of seeing his sovereign.  Tidiness in dress is
imperatively necessary, and for any neglect of this rule the head
may be the forfeit.  The punishment for such offences, however,
may be commuted by fines of cattle, goats, fowls, or brass wire. 
All acts of the king are counted benefits, for which he must be
thanked; and so every deed done to his subjects is a gift
received by them, though it should assume the shape of flogging
or fine; for are not these, which make better men of them, as
necessary as anything?  The thanks are rendered by gravelling on
the ground, floundering about and whining after the manner of
happy dogs, after which they rise up suddenly, take up sticks--
spears are not allowed to be carried in court--make as if
charging the king, jabbering as fast as tongues can rattle, and
so they swear fidelity for all their lives.

This is the greater salutation; the lesser one is performed
kneeling in an attitude of prayer, continually throwing open the
hands, and repeating sundry words.  Among them the word
"n'yanzig" is the most frequent and conspicuous; and hence these
gesticulations receive the general designation n'yanzig--a term
which will be frequently met with, and which I have found it
necessary to use like an English verb.  In consequence of these
salutations, there is more ceremony in court than business,
though the king, ever having an eye to his treasury, continually
finds some trifling fault, condemns the head of the culprit,
takes his liquidation-present, if he has anything to pay, and
thus keeps up his revenue.

No one dare stand before the king whilst he is either standing
still or sitting, but must approach him with downcast eyes and
bended knees, and kneel or sit when arrived.  To touch the king's
throne or clothes, even by accident, or to look upon his women is
certain death.  When sitting in court holding a levee, the king
invariably has in attendance several women, Wabandwa, evil-eye
averters or sorcerers.  They talk in feigned voices raised to a
shrillness almost amounting to a scream.  They wear dried lizards
on their heads, small goat-skin aprons trimmed with little bells,
diminutive shields and spears set off with cock-hackles--their
functions in attendance being to administer cups of marwa
(plantain wine). To complete the picture of the court, one must
imagine a crowd of pages to run royal messages; they dare not
walk for such deficiency in zeal to their master might cost their
life.  A further feature of the court consists in the national
symbols already referred to-- a dog, two spears, and shield.

With the company squatting in large half-circle or three sides of
a square many deep before him, in the hollow of which are
drummers and other musicians, the king, sitting on his throne in
high dignity, issues his orders for the day much to the following
effect:-- "Cattle, women, and children are short in Uganda; an
army must be formed of one to two thousand strong, to plunder
Unyoro.  The Wasoga have been insulting his subjects, and must be
reduced to subjection: for this emergency another army must be
formed, of equal strength, to act by land in conjunction with the
fleet.  The Wahaiya have paid no tribute to his greatness lately
and must be taxed."  For all these matters the commander-in-chief
tells off the divisional officers, who are approved by the king,
and the matter is ended in court.  The divisional officers then
find subordinate officers, who find men, and the army proceeds
with its march.  Should any fail with their mission,
reinforcements are sent, and the runaways, called women, are
drilled with a red-hot iron until they are men no longer, and die
for their cowardice.,  All heroism, however, ensures promotion. 
The king receives his army of officers with great ceremony,
listens to their exploits, and gives as rewards, women, cattle,
and command over men--the greatest elements of wealth in Uganda--
with a liberal hand.

As to the minor business transacted in court, culprits are
brought in bound by officers, and reported.  At once the sentence
is given, perhaps awarding the most torturous, lingering death--
probably without trial or investigation, and, for all the king
knows, at the instigation of some one influenced by wicked spite. 
If the accused endeavour to plead his defence, his voice is at
once drowned, and the miserable victim dragged off in the
roughest manner possible by those officers who love their king,
and delight in promptly carrying out his orders.  Young virgins,
the daughters of Wakungu, stark naked, and smeared with grease,
but holding, for decency's sake, a small square of mbugu at the
upper corners in both hands before them, are presented by their
fathers in propitiation for some offence, and to fill the harem. 
Seizing-office