rs receive orders to hunt down Wakungu who have
committed some indiscretions, and to confiscate their lands,
wives, children, and property.  An officer observed to salute
informally is ordered for execution, when everybody near him
rises in an instant, the drums beat, drowning his cries, and the
victim of carelessness is dragged off, bound by cords, by a dozen
men at once.  Another man, perhaps, exposes an inch of naked leg
whilst squatting, or has his mbugu tied contrary to regulations,
and is condemned to the same fate.

Fines of cows, goats, and fowls are brought in and presented;
they are smoothed down by the offender's hands, and then applied
to his face, to show there is no evil spirit lurking in the gift;
then thanks are proferred for the leniency of the king in letting
the presenter off so cheaply, and the pardoned man retires, full
of smiles, to the ranks of the squatters.  Thousands of cattle,
and strings of women and children, sometimes the result of a
victorious plundering hunt, or else the accumulated seizures from
refractory Wakungu, are brought in; for there is no more common
or acceptable offering to appease the king's wrath towards any
refractory or blundering officer than a present of a few young
beauties, who may perhaps be afterwards given as the reward of
good service to other officers.

Stick-charms, being pieces of wood of all shapes, supposed to
have supernatural virtues, and coloured earths, endowed with
similar qualities, are produced by the royal magicians.  The
master of the hunt exposes his spoils--such as antelopes, cats,
porcupines, curious rats, etc., all caught in nets, and placed in
baskets-- zebra, lion, and buffalo skins being added.  The
fishermen bring their spoils; also the gardeners.  The cutlers
show knives and forks made of iron inlaid with brass and copper;
the furriers, most beautifully-sewn patchwork of antelopes'
skins; the habit-maker, sheets of mbugu barkcloth; the
blacksmith, spears; the maker of shields, his productions;--and
so forth; but nothing is ever given without rubbing it down, then
rubbing the face, and going through a long form of salutation for
the gracious favour the king has shown in accepting it.

When tired of business, the king rises, spear in hand, and,
leading his dog, walked off without word or comment leaving his
company, like dogs, to take care of themselves.

Strict as the discipline of the exterior court is, that of the
interior is not less severe.  The pages all wear turbans of cord
made from aloe fibres.  Should a wife commit any trifling
indiscretion, either by word or deed, she is condemned to
execution on the spot, bound by the pages and dragged out. 
Notwithstanding the stringent laws for the preservation of
decorum by all male attendants, stark-naked full-grown women are
the valets.

On the first appearance of the new moon every month, the king
shuts himself up, contemplating and arranging his magic horns--
the horns of wild animals stuffed with charm-powder--for two or
three days. These may be counted his Sundays or church festivals,
which he dedicates to devotion.  On other days he takes his
women, some hundreds, to bathe or sport in ponds; or, when tired
of that, takes long walks, his women running after him, when all
the musicians fall in, take precedence of the party, followed by
the Wakungu and pages, with the king in the centre of the
procession, separating the male company from the fair sex.  On
these excursions no common man dare look upon the royal
procession.  Should anybody by chance happen to be seen, he is at
once hunted down by the pages, robbed of everything he possessed,
and may count himself very lucky if nothing worse happens. 
Pilgrimages are not uncommon, and sometimes the king spends a
fortnight yachting; but whatever he does, or wherever he goes,
the same ceremonies prevail--his musicians, Wakungu, pages, and
the wives take part in all.

But the greatest of all ceremonies takes place at the time of the
coronation.  The prince-elect then first seeks favour from the
kings of all the surrounding countries, demanding in his might
and power one of each of their daughters in marriage, or else
recognition in some other way, when the Ilmas makes a pilgrimage
to the deceased king's tomb, to observe, by the growth an other
signs of certain trees, and plants, what destiny awaits the king. 
According to the prognostics, they report that he will either
have to live a life of peace, or after coronation take the field
at the head of an army to fight either east, west, or both ways,
when usually the first march is on Kittara, and the second on
Usoga.  The Mgussa's voice is also heard, but in what manner I do
not know, as all communication on state matters is forbidden in
Uganda.  These preliminaries being arranged, the actual
coronation takes place, when the king ceases to hold any farther
communion with his mother.  The brothers are burnt to death, and
the king, we shall suppose, takes the field at the head of his
army.

It is as the result of these expeditions that one-half Usogo and
the remaining half of Uddu have been annexed to Uganda.




                           Chapter X



                       Karague and Uganda

Escape from Protectors--Cross the Kitangule, the First Affluent
of the Nile--Enter Uddu--Uganda--A Rich Country--Driving away the
Devil--A Conflict in the Camp--A Pretending Prince--Three Pages
with a Diplomatic Message from the King of Uganda--Crime in
Uganda.

Crossing back over the Weranhanje spur, I put up with the Arabs
at Kufro.  Here, for the first time in this part of the world, I
found good English peas growing.  Next day (11th), crossing over
a succession of forks, supporters to the main spur, we encamped
at Luandalo.  Here we were overtaken by Rozaro, who had remained
behind, as I now found, to collect a large number of Wanyambo,
whom he called his children, to share with him the gratuitous
living these creatures always look out for on a march of this
nature.

After working round the end of the great spur whilst following
down the crest of a fork, we found Karague separated by a deep
valley from the hilly country of Uhaiya, famous for its ivory and
coffee productions.  On entering the rich plantain gardens of
Kisaho, I was informed we must halt there a day for Maula to join
us, as he had been detained by Rumanika, who, wishing to give him
a present, had summoned Rozaro's sister to his palace for that
purpose.  She was married to another, and had two children by
him, but that did not signify, as it was found in time her
husband had committed a fault, on account of which it was thought
necessary to confiscate all his property.

At this place all the people were in a constant state of
inebriety, drinking pombe all day and all night.  I shot a
montana antelope, and sent its head and skin back to Grant,
accompanied with my daily report to Rumanika.

Maula having joined me, we marched down to near the end of the
fork overlooking the plain of Kitangule--the Waganada drums
beating, and whistles playing all the way we went along.

We next descended from the Mountains of the Moon, and spanned a
long alluvial plain to the settlement of the so-long-heard-of
Kitangule, where Rumanika keeps his thousands and thousands of
cows.  In former days the dense green forests peculiar to the
tropics, which grow in swampy places about this plain, were said
to have been stocked by vast herds of elephants; but, since the
ivory trade had increased, these animals had all been driven off
to the hills of Kisiwa and Uhaiya, or into Uddu beyond the river,
and all the way down to the N'yanza.

To-day we reached the Kitangule Kagera, or river, which, as I
ascertained in the year 1858, falls into the Victoria N'yanza on
the west side.  Most unfortunately, as we led off to cross it,
rain began to pour, so that everybody and everything was thrown
into confusion.  I could not get a sketch of it, though Grant was
more fortunate afterwards; neither could I measure or fathom it;
and it was only after a long contest with the superstitious
boatmen that they allowed me to cross in their canoe with my
shoes on, as they thought the vessel would either upset, or else
the river would dry up, in consequence of their Neptune taking
offence at me.  Once over, I looked down on the noble stream with
considerable pride. About eight yards broad, it was sunk down a
considerable depth below the surface of the land, like a huge
canal, and is so deep, it could not be poled by the canoemen;
while it runs at a velocity of from three to four knots an hour.

I say I viewed it with pride, because I had formed my judgment of
its being fed from high-seated springs in the Mountains of the
Moon solely on scientific geographical reasonings; and, from the
bulk of the stream, I also believed those mountains must obtain
an altitude of 8000 feet[FN#16] or more, just as we find they do
in Ruanda. I thought then to myself, as I did at Rumanika's, when
I first viewed the Mfumbiro cones, and gathered all my distant
geographical information there, that these highly saturated
Mountains of the Moon give birth to the Congo as well as to the
Nile, and also to the Shire branch of the Zambeze.

I came, at the same time, to the conclusion that all our previous
information concerning the hydrography of these regions, as well
as the Mountains of the Moon, originated with the ancient Hindus,
who told it to the priests of the Nile; and that all those busy
Egyptian geographers, who disseminated their knowledge with a
view to be famous for their long-sightedness, in solving the
deep-seated mystery with enshrouded the source of their holy
river, were so many hypothetical humbugs.  Reasoning thus, the
Hindu traders alone, in those days, I believed, had a firm basis
to stand upon, from their intercourse with the Abyssinians--
through whom they must have heard of the country of Amara, which
they applied to the N'yanza-- and with the Wanyamuezi or men of
the Moon, from whom they heard of the Tanganyika and Karague
mountains.  I was all the more impressed with this belief, by
knowing that the two church missionaries, Rebmann and Erhardt,
without the smallest knowledge of the Hindus' map, constructed a
map of their own, deduced from the Zanzibar traders, something on
the same scale, by blending the Victoria N'yanza, Tanganyida, and
N'yazza into one; whilst to their triuned lake they gave the name
Moon, because the men of the Moon happened to live in front of
the central lake.  And later still, Mr Leon, another missionary,
heard of the N'yanza and the country Amara, near which he heard
the Nile made its escape.

Going on with the march we next came to Ndongo, a perfect garden
of plantains.  The whole country was rich--most surprisingly so.
The same streaky argillaceous sandstones prevailed as in Karague.
There was nothing, in fact, that would not have grown here, if it
liked moisture and a temperate heat.  It was a perfect paradise
for negroes: as fast as they sowed they were sure of a crop
without much trouble; though, I must say, they kept their huts
and their gardens in excellent order.

As Maula would stop here, I had to halt also.  The whole country
along the banks of the river, and near some impenetrable forests,
was alive with antelopes, principally hartebeests, but I would
not fire at them until it was time to return, as the villagers
led me to expect buffaloes.  The consequence was, as no buffaloes
were to be found, I got no sport, though I wounded a hartebeest,
and followed him almost into camp, when I gave up the chase to
some negroes, and amused myself by writing to Rumanika, to say if
Grant did not reach me by a certain date, I would try to navigate
the N'yanza, and return to him in boats up the Kitangule river.

We crossed over a low spur of hill extending from the mountainous
kingdom of Nkole, on our left, towards the N'yanza.  Here I was
shown by Nasib a village called Ngandu, which was the farthest
trading depot of the Zanzibar ivory-merchants.  It was
established by Musa Mzuri, by the permission of Rumanika; for, as
I shall have presently to mention, Sunna, after annexing this
part of Uddu to Uganda, gave Rumanika certain bands of territory
in it as a means of security against the possibility of its being
wrested out of his hands again by the future kings of Unyoro. 
Following on Musa's wake, many Arabs also came here to trade; but
they were so oppressive to the Waganda that they were recalled by
Rumanika, and obliged to locate themselves at Kufro.  To the
right, at the end of the spur, stretching as far as the eye could
reach towards the N'yanza, was a rich, well-wooded, swampy plain,
containing large open patches of water, which not many years
since, I was assured, were navigable for miles, but now, like the
Urigi lake, were gradually drying up.  indeed, it appeared to me
as if the N'yanza must have once washed the foot of these hills,
but had since shrunk away from its original margin.

On arrival at Ngambezi, I was immensely struck with the neatness
and good arrangement of the place, as well as its excessive
beauty and richness.  No part of Bengal or Zanzibar could excel
it in either respect; and my men, with one voice, exclaimed, "Ah,
what people these Waganda are!" and passed other remarks, which
may be abridged as follows:--"They build their huts and keep
their gardens just as well as we do at Unguja, with screens and
enclosures for privacy, a clearance in front of their
establishments, and a baraza or reception-hut facing the
buildings.  Then, too, what a beautiful prospect it has!--rich
marshy plains studded with mounds, on each of which grow the
umbrella cactus, or some other evergreen tree; and beyond, again,
another hill-spur such as the one we have crossed over."  One of
king Mtesa's uncles, who had not been burnt to death by the order
of the late king Sunna on his ascension to the throne, was the
proprietor of this place, but unfortunately he was from home. 
However, his substitute gave me his baraza to live in, and
brought many presents of goats, fowls, sweet potatoes, yams,
plantains, sugarcane, and Indian corn, and apologised in the end
for deficiency in hospitality.  I, of course, gave him beads in
return.

Continuing over the same kind of ground in the next succeeding
spurs of the streaky red-clay sandstone hills, we put up at the
residence of Isamgevi, a Mkungu or district officer of
Rumanika's.  His residence was as well kept as Mtesa's uncle's;
but instead of a baraza fronting his house, he had a small
enclosure, with three small huts in it, kept apart for devotional
purposes, or to propitiate the evil spirits--in short, according
to the notions of the place, a church.  This officer gave me a
cow and some plantains, and I in return gave him a wire and some
beads.  Many mendicant women, called by some Wichwezi, by others
Mabandwa, all wearing the most fantastic dresses of mbugu,
covered with beads, shells, and sticks, danced before us, singing
a comic song, the chorus of which was a long shrill rolling Coo-
roo-coo-roo, coo-roo-coo-roo, delivered as they came to a
standstill.  Their true functions were just as obscure as the
religion of the negroes generally; some called them devil-
drivers, other evil-eye averters; but, whatever it was for, they
imposed a tax on the people, whose minds being governed by a
necessity for making some self-sacrifice to propitiate something,
they could not tell what, for their welfare in the world, they
always gave them a trifle in the same way as the East Indians do
their fakirs.

After crossing another low swampy flat, we reached a much larger
group, or rather ramification, of hill-spurs pointing to the
N'yanza, called Kisuere, and commanded by M'yombo, Rumanika's
frontier officer.  Immediately behind this, to the northward,
commenced the kingdom of Unyoro; and here it was, they said,
Baraka would branch off my line on his way to Kamrasi.  Maula's
home was one march distant from this, so the scoundrel now left
me to enjoy himself there, giving as his pretext for doing so,
that Mtesa required him, as soon as I arrived here, to send on a
messenger that order might be taken for my proper protection on
the line of march; for the Waganda were a turbulent set of
people, who could only be kept in order by the executioner; and
doubtless many, as was customary on such occasions, would be
beheaded, as soon as Mtesa heard of my coming, to put the rest in
a fright.  I knew this was all humbug, of course, and I told him
so; but it was of no use, and I was compelled to halt.

On the 23d another officer, named Maribu, came to me and said,
Mtesa, having heard that Grant was left sick behind at Karague,
had given him orders to go there and fetch him, whether sick or
well, for Mtesa was most anxious to see white men.  Hearing this
I at once wrote to Grant, begging him to come on if he could do
so, and to bring with him all the best of my property, or as much
as he could of it, as I now saw there was more cunning humbug
than honesty in what Rumanika had told me about the impossibility
of our going north from Uganda, as well as in his saying sick men
could not go into Uganda, and donkeys without trousers would not
be admitted there, because they were considered indecent.  If he
was not well enough to move, I advised him to wait there until I
reached Mtesa's, when I would either go up the lake and Kitangule
to fetch him away, or would make the king send boats for him,
which I more expressly wished, as it would tend to give us a much
better knowledge of the lake.

Maula now came again, after receiving repeated and angry
messages, and I forced him to make a move.  He led me straight up
to his home, a very nice place, in which he gave me a very large,
clean, and comfortable hut--had no end of plantains brought for
me and my men--and said, "Now you have really entered the kingdom
of Uganda, for the future you must buy no more food.  At every
place that you stop for the day, the officer in charge will bring
you plantains, otherwise your men can help themselves in the
gardens, for such are the laws of the land when a king's guest
travels in it. Any one found selling anything to either yourself
or your men would be punished."  Accordingly, I stopped the daily
issue of beads; but no sooner had I done so, than all my men
declared they could not eat plantains.  It was all very well,
they said, for the Waganda to do so, because they were used to
it, but it did not satisfy their hunger.

Maula, all smirks and smiles, on seeing me order the things out
for the march, begged I would have patience, and wait till the
messenger returned from the king; it would not take more than ten
days at the most.  Much annoyed at this nonsense, I ordered my
tent to be pitched.  I refused all Maula's plantains, and gave my
men beads to buy grain with; and, finding it necessary to get up
some indignation, said I would not stand being chained like a
dog; if he would not go on ahead, I should go without him.  Maula
then said he would go to a friend's and come back again.  I said,
if he did not, I should go off; and so the conversation ended.

26th.--Drumming, singing, screaming, yelling, and dancing had
been going on these last two days and two nights to drive the
Phepo or devil out of a village.  The whole of the ceremonies
were most ludicrous.  An old man and woman, smeared with white
mud, and holding pots of pombe in their laps, sat in front of a
hut, whilst other people kept constantly bringing them baskets
full of plantain-squash, and more pots of pombe.  In the
courtyard fronting them, were hundreds of men and women dressed
in smart mbugus-- the males wearing for turbans, strings of
abrus-seeds wound round their heads, with polished boars' tusks
stuck in in a jaunty manner. These were the people who, drunk as
fifers, were keeping up such a continual row to frighten the
devil away.  In the midst of this assembly I now found Kachuchu,
Rumanika's representative, who went on ahead from Karague palace
to tell Mtesa that I wished to see him. With him, he said, were
two other Wakungu of Mtesa's, who had orders to bring on my party
and Dr K'yengo's.  Mtesa, he said, was so mad to see us, that the
instant he arrived at the palace and told him we wished to visit
him, the king caused "fifty big men and four hundred small ones"
to be executed, because, he said, his subjects were so bumptious
they would not allow any visitors to come near him, else he would
have had white men before.

27th.--N'yamgundu, my old friend at Usui, then came to me, and
said he was the first man to tell Mtesa of our arrival in Usui,
and wish to visit him.  The handkerchief I had given Irungu at
Usui to present as a letter to Mtesa he had snatched away from
him, and given, himself, to his king, who no sooner received it
than he bound it round his head, and said, in ecstasies of
delight, "Oh, the Mzungu, the Mzungu! he does indeed want to see
me."  Then giving him four cows as a return letter to take to me,
he said, "Hurry off as quickly as possible and bring him here." 
"The cows," said N'yamgundu, "have gone on to Kisuere by another
route, but I will bring them here; and then, as Maula is taking
you, I will go and fetch Grant."  I then told him not to be in
such a hurry.  I had turned off Maula for treating me like a dog,
and I would not be escorted by him again.  He replied that his
orders would not be fully accomplished as long as any part of my
establishment was behind; so he would, if I wished it, leave part
of his "children" to guide me on to Mtesa's, whilst he went to
fetch Grant. An officer, I assured him, had just gone on to fetch
Grant, so he need not trouble his head on that score; at any
rate, he might reverse his plan, and send his children for Grant,
whilst he went on with me, by which means he would fully
accomplish his mission. Long arguments ensued, and I at length
turned the tables by asking who was the greatest--myself or my
children; when he said, "As I see you are the greatest, I will do
as you wish; and after fetching the cows from Kisuere, we will
march to-morrow at sunrise."

The sun rose, but N'yamgundu did not appear.  I was greatly
annoyed lest Maula should come and try to drive him away.  I
waited, restraining my impatience until noon, when, as I could
stand it no longer, I ordered Bombay to strike my tent, and
commence the march. A scene followed, which brought out my
commander-in-chief's temper in a rather surprising shape.  "How
can we go in?" said Bombay. "Strike the tent," said I.  "Who will
guide us?" said Bombay. "Strike the tent," I said again.  "But
Rumanika's men have all gone away, and there is no one to show us
the way."  "Never mind; obey my orders, and strike the tent." 
Then, as Bombay would not do it, I commenced myself, assisted by
some of my other men, and pulled it down over his head, all the
women who were assembled under it, and all the property.  On
this, Bombay flew into a passion, abusing the men who were
helping me, as there were fires and powder-boxes under the tent. 
I of course had to fly into a passion and abuse Bombay. He, in a
still greater rage, said he would pitch into the men, for the
whole place would be blown up.  "That is no reason why you should
abuse my men," I said, "who are better than you by obeying my
orders.  If I choose to blow up my property, that is my look-out;
and if you don't do your duty, I will blow you up also."  Foaming
and roaring with rage, Bombay said he would not stand being thus
insulted.  I then gave him a dig on the head with my fist. He
squared up, and pouted like an enraged chameleon, looking
savagely at me.  I gave him another dig, which sent him
staggering. He squared again: I gave him another; till at last,
as the claret was flowing, he sulked off, and said he would not
serve me any more. I then gave Nasib orders to take Bombay's
post, and commence the march; but the good old man made Bombay
give in, and off we went, amidst crowds of Waganda, who had
collected to witness with comedy, and were all digging at one
another's heads, showing off in pantomime the strange ways of the
white man.  N'yamgundu then jointed us, and begged us to halt
only one more day, as some of his women were still at Kisuere;
but Bombay, showing his nozzle rather flatter than usual, said,
"No; I got this on account of your lies. I won't tell Bana any
more of your excuses for stopping; you may tell him yourself if
you like."  N'yamgundu, however, did not think this advisable,
and so we went on as we were doing.  It was the first and last
time I had ever occasion to lose my dignity by striking a blow
with my own hands; but I could not help it on this occasion
without losing command and respect; for although I often had
occasion to award 100 and even 150 lashes to my men for stealing,
I could not, for the sake of due subordination, allow any
inferior officer to strike Bombay, and therefore had to do the
work myself.

Skirting the hills on the left, with a large low plain to the
right we soon came on one of those numerous rush-drains that
appear to me to be the last waters left of the old bed of the
N'yanza.  This one in particular was rather large, being 150
yards wide.  It was sunk where I crossed it, like a canal, 14
feet below the plain; and what with mire and water combined, so
deep, I was obliged to take off my trousers whilst fording it. 
Once across, we sought for and put up in a village beneath a
small hill, from the top of which I saw the Victoria N'yanza for
the first time on this march.  N'yamgundu delighted me much:
treating me as king, he always fell down on his knees to address
me, and made all his "children" look after my comfort in camp.

We marched on again over the same kind of ground, alternately
crossing rush-drains of minor importance, though provokingly
frequent, and rich gardens, from which, as we passed, all the
inhabitants bolted at the sound of our drums, knowing well that
they would be seized and punished if found gazing at the king's
visitors. Even on our arrival at Ukara not one soul was visible. 
The huts of the villagers were shown to myself and my men without
any ceremony. The Wanyambo escort stole what they liked out of
them, and I got into no end of troubles trying to stop the
practice; for they said the Waganda served them the same way when
they went to Karague, and they had a right to retaliate now.  To
obviate this distressing sort of plundering, I still served out
beads to my men, and so kept them in hand a little; but they were
fearfully unruly, and did not like my interference with what by
the laws of the country they considered their right.

Here I had to stop a day for some of N'yamgundu's women, who, in
my hurry at leaving Maula's, were left behind.  A letter from
Grant was now brought to me by a very nice-looking young man, who
had the skin of a leopard-cat (F. Serval) tied round his neck--a
badge which royal personages only were entitled to wear. 
N'yamgundu seeing this, as he knew the young man was not entitled
to wear it, immediately ordered his "children" to wrench it from
him. Two ruffianly fellows then seized him by his hands, and
twisted his arms round and round until I thought they would come
out of their sockets.  Without uttering a sound the young man
resisted, until N'yamgundu told them to be quiet, for he would
hold a court on the subject, and see if the young man could
defend himself. The ruffians then sat on the ground, but still
holding on to him; whilst N'yamgundu took up a long stick, and
breaking it into sundry bits of equal length, placed one by one
in front of him, each of which was supposed to represent one
number in line of succession to his forefathers.  By this it was
proved he did not branch in any way from the royal stock. 
N'yamgundu then turning to the company, said, What would he do
now to expiate his folly?  If the matter was taken before Mtesa
he would lose his head; was it not better he should pay one
hundred cows  All agreeing to this, the young man said he would
do so, and quietly allowed the skin to be untied and taken off by
the ruffians.

Next day, after crossing more of those abominable rush-drains,
whilst in sight of the Victoria N'yanza, we ascended the most
beautiful hills, covered with verdure of all descriptions. At
Meruka, where I put up, there resided some grandees, the chief of
whom was the king's aunt.  She sent me a goat, a hen, a basket of
eggs, and some plantains, in return for which I sent her a wire
and some beads.  I felt inclined to stop here a month, everything
was so very pleasant.  The temperature was perfect.  The roads,
as indeed they were everywhere, were as broad as our coach-roads,
cut through the long grasses, straight over the hills and down
through the woods in the dells--a strange contrast to the
wretched tracks in all the adjacent countries.  The huts were
kept so clean and so neat, not a fault could be found with them--
the gardens the same.  Wherever I strolled I saw nothing but
richness, and what ought to be wealth. The whole land was a
picture of quiescent beauty, with a boundless sea in the
background.  Looking over the hills, it struck the fancy at once
that at one period the whole land must have been at a uniform
level with their present tops, but that by the constant
denudation it was subjected to by frequent rains, it had been cut
down and sloped into those beautiful hills and dales which now so
much pleased the eye; for there were none of those quartz dykes I
had seen protruding through the same kink of aqueous formations
in Usui and Karague; nor were there any other sorts of volcanic
disturbance to distort the calm quiet aspect of the scene.

From this, the country being all hill and dale, with miry rush-
drains in the bottoms, I walked, carrying my shoes and stockings
in my hands, nearly all the way.  Rozaro's "children" became more
and more troublesome, stealing everything they could lay their
hands upon out of the village huts we passed on the way. On
arrival at Sangua, I found many of them had been seized by some
men who, bolder than the rest, had overtaken them whilst gutting
their huts, and made them prisoners, demanding of me two slaves
and one load of beads for their restitution.  I sent my men back
to see what had happened, and ordered them to bring all the men
on to me, that I might see fair play.  They, however, took the
law into their own hands, drove off the Waganda villagers by
firing their muskets, and relieved the thieves.  A complaint was
then laid against Nyamgundu by the chief officer of the village,
and I was requested to halt.  That I would not do, leaving the
matter in the hands of the governor-general, Mr Pokino, whom I
heard we should find at the next station, Masaka.

On arrival there at the government establishment--a large
collection of grass huts, separated one from the other within
large enclosures, which overspread the whole top of a low hill--I
was requested to withdraw and put up in some huts a short
distance off, and wait until his excellency, who was from home,
could come and see me; which the next day he did, coming in state
with a large number of officers, who brought with them a cow,
sundry pots of pombe, enormous sticks of sugar-cane, and a large
bundle of country coffee. This grows in great profusion all over
this land in large bushy trees, the berries sticking on the
branches like clusters of hollyberries.

I was then introduced, and told that his excellency was the
appointed governor of all the land lying between the Katonga and
the Kitangule rivers.  After the first formalities were over, the
complaint about the officers at Sangua was preferred for
decision, on which Pokino at once gave it against the villagers,
as they had no right, by the laws of the land, to lay hands on a
king's guest. Just then Maula arrived, and began to abuse
N'yamgundu.  Of course I would not stand this; and, after telling
all the facts of the case, I begged Pokino to send Maula away out
of my camp.  Pokino said he could not do this, as it was by the
king's order he was appointed; but he put Maula in the
background, laughing at the way he had "let the bird fly out of
his hands," and settled that N'yamgundu should be my guide.  I
then gave him a wire, and he gave me three large sheets of mbugu,
which he said I should require, as there were so many water-
courses to cross on the road I was going.  A second day's halt
was necessitated by many of my men catching fever, probably owing
to the constant crossing of those abominable rush-drains.  There
was no want of food here, for I never saw such a profusion of
plantains anywhere.  They were literally lying in heaps on the
ground, though the people were brewing pombe all day, and cooking
them for dinner every evening.

After crossing many more hills and miry bottoms, constantly
coming in view of the lake, we reached Ugonzi, and after another
march of the same description, came to Kituntu, the last
officer's residence in Uddu.  Formerly it was the property of a
Beluch named Eseau, who came to this country with merchandise,
trading on account of Said Said, late Sultan of Zanzibar; but
having lost it all on his way here, paying mahongo, or taxes, and
so forth he feared returning, and instead made great friends with
the late king Sunna, who took an especial fancy to him because he
had a very large beard, and raised him to the rank of Mkungu.  A
few years ago, however, Eseau died, and left all his family and
property to a slave named Uledi, who now, in consequence, is the
border officer.

I became now quite puzzled whilst thinking which was the finest
spot I had seen in Uddu, so many were exceedingly beautiful; but
I think I gave the preference to this, both for its own immediate
neighbourhood and the long range of view it afforded of Uganda
proper, the lake, and the large island, or group of islands,
called Sese where the king of Uganda keeps one of his fleets of
boats.

Some little boys came here who had all their hair shaved off
excepting two round tufts on either side of the head.  They were
the king's pages; and, producing three sticks, said they had
brought them to me from their king, who wanted three charms or
medicines. Then placing one stick on the ground before me, they
said, "This one is a head which, being affected by dreams of a
deceased relative, requires relief"; the second symbolised the
king's desire for the accomplishment of a phenomenon to which the
old phalic worship was devoted; "and this third one," they said,
"is a sign that the king wants a charm to keep all his subjects
in awe of him."  I then promised I would do what I could when I
reached the palace, but feared to do anything in the distance.  I
wished to go on with the march, but was dissuaded by N'yamgundu,
who said he had received orders to find me some cows here, as his
king was most anxious I should be well fed.  Next day, however,
we descended into the Katonga valley, where, instead of finding a
magnificent broad sheet of water, as I had been led to expect by
the Arabs' account of it, I found I had to wade through a
succession of rush-drains divided one from the other by islands. 
It took me two hours, with my clothes tucked up under my arms, to
get through them all; and many of them were so matted with weeds,
that my feet sank down as though I trod in a bog.

The Waganda all said that at certain times in the year no one
could ford these drains, as they all flooded; but, strangely
enough, they were always lowest when most rain fell in Uganda. 
No one, however, could account for this singular fact.  No one
knew of a lake to supply the waters, nor where they came from. 
That they flowed into the lake there was no doubt--as I could see
by the trickling waters in some few places--and they lay exactly
on the equator.  Rising out of the valley, I found all the
country just as hilly as before, but many of the rush-drains
going to northward; and in the dells were such magnificent trees,
they quite took me by surprise.  Clean-trunked, they towered up
just as so many great pillars, and then spread out their high
branches like a canopy over us.  I thought of the blue gums of
Australia, and believed these would beat them.  At the village of
Mbule we were gracefully received by the local officer, who
brought a small present, and assured me that the king was in a
nervous state of excitement, always asking after me.  Whilst
speaking he trembled, and he was so restless he could never sit
still.

Up and down we went on again through this wonderful country,
surprisingly rich in grass, cultivation, and trees.  Watercourses
were as frequent as ever, though not quite so troublesome to the
traveller, as they were more frequently bridged with poles or
palm-tree trunks.

This, the next place we arrived at, was N'yamgundu's own
residence, where I stopped a day to try and shoot buffaloes. 
Maula here had the coolness to tell me he must inspect all the
things I had brought for presentation to the king, as he said it
was the custom; after which he would hurry on and inform his
majesty.  Of course I refused, saying it was uncourteous to both
the king and myself. Still he persisted, until, finding it
hopeless, he spitefully told N'yamgundu to keep me here at least
two days.  N'yamgundu, however, very prudently told him he should
obey his orders, which were to take me on as fast as he could.  I
then gave N'yamgundu wires and beads for himself and all his
family round, which made Maula slink further away from me than
ever.

The buffaloes were very numerous in the tall grasses that lined
the sides and bottoms of the hills; but although I saw some, I
could not get a shot, for the grasses being double the height of
myself, afforded them means of dashing out of view as soon as
seen, and the rustling noise made whilst I followed them kept
them on the alert. At night a hyena came into my hut, and carried
off one of my goats that was tied to a log between two of my
sleeping men.

During the next march, after passing some of the most
beautifully- wooded dells, in which lay small rush-lakes on the
right of the road, draining, as I fancied, into the Victoria
Lake, I met with a party of the king's gamekeepers, staking their
nets all along the side of a hill, hoping to catch antelopes by
driving the covers with dogs and men.  Farther on, also, I came
on a party driving one hundred cows, as a present from Mtesa to
Rumanika, which the officers in charge said was their king's
return for the favour Rumanika had done him in sending me on to
him.  It was in this way that great kings sent "letters" to one
another.

Next day, after going a short distance, we came on the Mwarango
river, a broad rush-drain of three hundred yards' span, two-
thirds of which was bridged over.  Until now I did not feel sure
where the various rush-drains I had been crossing since leaving
the Katonga valley all went to, but here my mind was made up, for
I found a large volume of water going to the northwards.  I took
off my clothes at the end of the bridge and jumped into the
stream, which I found was twelve yards or so broad, and deeper
than my height. I was delighted beyond measure at this very
surprising fact, that I was indeed on the northern slopes of the
continent, and had, to all appearance, found one of the branches
of the Nile's exit from the N'yanza.  I drew Bombay's attention
to the current; and, collecting all the men of the country,
inquired of them where the river sprang from.  Some of them said,
in the hills to the southward; but most of them said, from the
lake.  I argued the point with them; for I felt quite sure so
large a body of flowing water could not be collected together in
any place but the lake.  They then all agreed to this view, and
further assured me it went to Kamrasi's palace in Unyoro, where
it joined the N'yanza, meaning the Nile.

Pushing on again we arrived at N'yama Goma, where I found Irungu-
- the great ambassador I had first met in Usui, with all his
"children"--my enemy Makinga, and Suwarora's deputation with
wire,-- altogether, a collection of one hundred souls.  They had
been here a month waiting for leave to approach the king's
palace.  Not a villager was to be seen for miles round; not a
plantain remained on the trees, nor was there even a sweet potato
to be found in the ground.  The whole of the provisions of this
beautiful place had been devoured by the king's guests, simply
because he had been too proud to see them in a hurry.  This was
alarming, for I feared I should be served the same trick,
especially as all the people said this kind of treatment was a
mere matter of custom which those great kings demanded as a
respect due to their dignity; and Bombay added, with laughter,
they make all manner of fuss to entice one to come when in the
distance, but when they have got you in their power they become
haughty about it, and think only of how they can best impose on
your mind the great consequence which they affect before their
own people.

Here I was also brought to a standstill, for N'yamgundu said I
must wait for leave to approach the palace.  He wished to have a
look at the presents I had brought for Mtesa.  I declined to
gratify it, taking my stand on my dignity; there was no occasion
for any distrust on such a trifling matter as that, for I was not
a merchant who sought for gain, but had come, at great expense,
to see the king of this region.  I begged, however, he would go
as fast as possible to announce my arrival, explain my motive for
coming here, and ask for an early interview, as I had left my
brother Grant behind at Karague, and found my position, for want
of a friend to talk to, almost intolerable.  It was not the
custom of my country for great men to consort with servants, and
until I saw him, and made friends, I should not be happy.  I had
a great deal to tell him about, as he was the father of the Nile,
which river drained the N'yanza down to my country to the
northward.  With this message N'yamgundu hurried off as fast as
possible.

Next day (15th) I gave each of my men a fez cap, and a piece of
red blanket to make up military jackets.  I then instructed them
how to form a guard of honour when I went to the palace, and
taught Bombay the way Nazirs was presented at courts in India. 
Altogether we made a good show.  When this was concluded I went
with Nasib up a hill, from which we could see the lake on one
side, and on the other a large range of huts said to belong to
the king's uncle, the second of the late king Sunna's brothers,
who was not burnt to death when he ascended the throne.

I then (16th) very much wished to go and see the escape of the
Mwerango river, as I still felt a little sceptical as to its
origin, whether or not it came off those smaller lakes I had seen
on the road the day before I crossed the river; but no one would
listen to my project.  They all said I must have the king's
sanction first, else people, from not knowing my object, would
accuse me of practising witchcraft, and would tell their king so. 
They still all maintained that the river did come out of the
lake, and said, if I liked to ask the king's leave to visit the
spot, then they would go and show it me.  I gave way, thinking it
prudent to do so, but resolved in my mind I would get Grant to
see it in boats on his voyage from Karague.  There were not
guinea-fowls to be found here, nor a fowl, in any of the huts, so
I requested Rozaro to hurry off to Mtesa, and ask him to send me
something to eat.  He simply laughed at my request, and said I
did not know what I was doing. It would be as much as his life
was worth to go one yard in advance of this until the king's
leave was obtained.  I said, rather than be starved to death in
this ignominious manner, I would return to Karague; to which he
replied, laughing, "Whose leave have you got to do that?  Do you
suppose you can do as you like in this country?"

Next day (17th), in the evening, N'yamgundu returned full of
smirks and smiles, dropped on his knees at my feet, and, in
company with his "children," set to n'yanzigging, according to
the form of that state ceremonial already described.[FN#17]  In
his excitement he was hardly able to say all he had to
communicate.  Bit by bit, however, I learned that he first went
to the palace, and, finding the king had gone off yachting to the
Murchison Creek, he followed him there.  The king for a long
while would not believe his tale that I had come, but, being
assured, he danced with delight, and swore he would not taste
food until he had seen me.  "Oh," he said, over and over again
and again, according to my informer, "can this be true?  Can the
white man have come all this way to see me?  What a strong man he
must be too, to come so quickly!  Here are seven cows, four of
them milch ones, as you say he likes milk, which you will give
him; and there are three for yourself for having brought him so
quickly.  Now, hurry off as fast as you can, and tell him I am
more delighted at the prospect of seeing him than he can be to
see me.  There is no place here fit for his reception.  I was on
a pilgrimage which would have kept me here seven days longer but
as I am so impatient to see him, I will go off to my palace at
once, and will send word for him to advance as soon as I arrive
there."

About noon the succeeding day, some pages ran in to say we were
to come along without a moment's delay, as their king had ordered
it. He would not taste food until he saw me, so that everybody
might know what great respect he felt for me.  In the meanwhile,
however, he wished for some gunpowder.  I packed the pages off as
fast as I could with some, and tried myself to follow, but my men
were all either sick or out foraging, and therefore we could not
get under way until the evening.  After going a certain distance,
we came on a rush-drain, of much greater breadth even than the
Mwerango, called the Moga (or river) Myanza, which was so deep I
had to take off my trousers and tuck my clothes under my arms. 
It flowed into the Mwerango, but with scarcely any current at
all.  This rush-drain, all the natives assured me, rose in the
hills to the southward-- not in the lake, as the Mwerango did--
and it was never bridged over like that river, because it was
always fordable.  This account seemed to me reasonable; for
though so much broader in its bed than the Mwerango, it had no
central, deep-flowing current.




                           Chapter XI



                         Palace, Uganda

Preparations for the Reception at the Court of Mtesa, King of
Uganda--The Ceremonial--African Diplomacy and Dignity--Feats with
the Rifle--Cruelty, and Wastefulness of Life--The Pages--The
Queen- Dowager of Uganda--Her Court Reception--I negotiate for a
Palace-- Conversations with the King and Queen--The Queen's grand
Entertainment--Royal Dissipation.

To-day the king sent his pages to announce his intention of
holding a levee in my honour.  I prepared for my first
presentation at court, attired in my best, though in it I cut a
poor figure in comparison with the display of the dressy Waganda. 
They wore neat bark cloaks resembling the best yellow corduroy
cloth, crimp and well set, as if stiffened with starch, and over
that, as upper-cloaks, a patchwork of small antelope skins, which
I observed were sewn together as well as any English glovers
could have pieced them; whilst their head-dresses, generally,
were abrus turbans, set off with highly-polished boar-tusks,
stick-charms, seeds, beads, or shells; and on their necks, arms,
and ankles they wore other charms of wood, or small horns stuffed
with magic powder, and fastened on by strings generally covered
with snake-skin. N'yamgundu and Maula demanded, as their official
privilege, a first peep; and this being refused, they tried to
persuade me that the articles comprising the present required to
be covered with chintz, for it was considered indecorous to offer
anything to his majesty in a naked state.  This little
interruption over, the articles enumerated below[FN#18] were
conveyed to the palace in solemn procession thus:--With
N'yamgundu, Maula, the pages, and myself on the flanks, the
Union-Jack carried by the kirangozi guide led the way, followed
by twelve men as a guard of honour, dressed in red flannel
cloaks, and carrying their arms sloped, with fixed bayonets;
whilst in their rear were the rest of my men, each carrying some
article as a present.

On the march towards the palace, the admiring courtiers, wonder-
struck at such an unusual display, exclaimed, in raptures of
astonishment, some with both hands at their mouths, and others
clasping their heads with their hands, "Irungi! irungi!" which
may be translated "Beautiful! beautiful!"  I thought myself
everything was going on as well as could be wished; but before
entering the royal enclosures, I found, to my disagreeable
surprise, that the men with Suwarora's hongo or offering, which
consisted of more than a hundred coils of wire, were ordered to
lead the procession, and take precedence of me.  There was
something specially aggravating in this precedence; for it will
be remembered that these very brass wires which they saw, I had
myself intended for Mtesa, that they were taken from me by
Suwarora as far back as Usui, and it would never do, without
remonstrance, to have them boastfully paraded before my eyes in
this fashion.  My protests, however, had no effect upon the
escorting Wakungu.  Resolving to make them catch it, I walked
along as if ruminating in anger up the broad high road into a
cleared square, which divides Mtesa's domain on the south from
his Kamraviona's, or commander-in-chief, on the north, and then
turned into the court.  The palace or entrance quite surprised me
by its extraordinary dimensions, and the neatness with which it
was kept. The whole brow and sides of the hill on which we stood
were covered with gigantic grass huts, thatched as neatly as so
many heads dressed by a London barber, and fenced all round with
the tall yellow reeds of the common Uganda tiger-grass; whilst
within the enclosure, the lines of huts were joined together, or
partitioned off into courts, with walls of the same grass.  It is
here most of Mtesa's three or four hundred women are kept, the
rest being quartered chiefly with his mother, known by the title
of N'yamasore, or queen-dowager.  They stood in little groups at
the doors, looking at us, and evidently passing their own
remarks, and enjoying their own jokes, on the triumphal
procession.  At each gate as we passed, officers on duty opened
and shut it for us, jingling the big bells which are hung upon
them, as they sometimes are at shop-doors, to prevent silent,
stealthy entrance.

The first court passed, I was even more surprised to find the
unusual ceremonies that awaited me.  There courtiers of high
dignity stepped forward to greet me, dressed in the most
scrupulously neat fashions.  Men, women, bulls, dogs, and goats,
were led about by strings; cocks and hens were carried in men's
arms; and little pages, with rope-turbans, rushed about,
conveying messages, as if their lives depended on their
swiftness, every one holding his skin-cloak tightly round him
lest his naked legs might by accident be shown.

This, then, was the ante-reception court; and I might have taken
possession of the hut, in which musicians were playing and
singing on large nine-stringed harps, like the Nubian tambira,
accompanied by harmonicons.  By the chief officers in waiting,
however, who thought fit to treat us like Arab merchants, I was
requested to sit on the ground outside in the sun with my
servants.  Now, I had made up my mind never to sit upon the
ground as the natives and Arabs are obliged to do, nor to make my
obeisance in any other manner than is customary in England,
though the Arabs had told me that from fear they had always
complied with the manners of the court.  I felt that if I did not
stand up for my social position at once, I should be treated with
contempt during the remainder of my visit, and thus lose the
vantage-ground I had assumed of appearing rather as a prince than
a trader, for the purpose of better gaining the confidence of the
king.  To avert over-hastiness, however--for my servants began to
be alarmed as I demurred against doing as I was bid--I allowed
five minutes to the court to give me a proper reception, saying,
if