 it were not conceded I would then walk away.

Nothing, however, was done.  My own men, knowing me, feared for
me, as they did not know what a "savage" king would do in case I
carried out my threat; whilst the Waganda, lost in amazement at
what seemed little less than blasphemy, stood still as posts. 
The affair ended by my walking straight away home, giving Bombay
orders to leave the present on the ground, and to follow me.

Although the king is said to be unapproachable, excepting when he
chooses to attend court--a ceremony which rarely happens--
intelligence of my hot wrath and hasty departure reached him in
an instant.  He first, it seems, thought of leaving his toilet-
room to follow me, but, finding I was walking fast, and had gone
far, changed his mind, and sent Wakungu running after me. Poor
creatures! they caught me up, fell upon their knees, and implored
I would return at once, for the king had not tasted food, and
would not until he saw me.  I felt grieved at their touching
appeals; but, as I did not understand all they said, I simply
replied by patting my heart and shaking my head, walking if
anything all the faster.

On my arrival at my hut, Bombay and others came in, wet through
with perspiration, saying the king had heard of all my
grievances. Suwarora's hongo was turned out of court, and, if I
desired it, I might bring my own chair with me, for he was very
anxious to show me great respect--although such a seat was
exclusively the attribute of the king, no one else in Uganda
daring to sit on an artificial seat.

My point was gained, so I cooled myself with coffee and a pipe,
and returned rejoicing in my victory, especially over Suwarora.
After returning to the second tier of huts from which I had
retired, everybody appeared to be in a hurried, confused state of
excitement, not knowing what to make out of so unprecedented an
exhibition of temper.  In the most polite manner, the officers in
waiting begged me to be seated on my iron stool, which I had
brought with me, whilst others hurried in to announce my arrival. 
But for a few minutes only I was kept in suspense, when a band of
music, the musicians wearing on their backs long-haired goat-
skins, passed me, dancing as they went along, like bears in a
fair, and playing on reed instruments worked over with pretty
beads in various patters, from which depended leopard-cat skins--
the time being regulated by the beating of long hand-drums.

The mighty king was now reported to be sitting on his throne in
the statehut of the third tier.  I advanced, hat in hand, with my
guard of honour following, formed in "open ranks," who in their
turn were followed by the bearers carrying the present.  I did
not walk straight up to him as if to shake hands, but went
outside the ranks of a three-sided square of squatting Wakungu,
all inhabited in skins, mostly cow-skins; some few of whom had,
in addition, leopard-cat skins girt round the waist, the sign of
royal blood. Here I was desired to halt and sit in the glaring
sun; so I donned my hat, mounted my umbrella, a phenomenon which
set them all a-wondering and laughing, ordered the guard to close
ranks, and sat gazing at the novel spectacle!  A more theatrical
sight I never saw. The king, a good-looking, well-figured, tall
young man of twenty-five, was sitting on a red blanket spread
upon a square platform of royal grass, encased in tiger-grass
reeds, scrupulously well dressed in a new mbugu.  The hair of his
head was cut short, excepting on the top, where it was combed up
into a high ridge, running from stem to stern like a cockscomb. 
On his neck was a very neat ornament--a large ring, of
beautifully-worked small beads, forming elegant patterns by their
various colours.  On one arm was another bead ornament, prettily
devised; and on the other a wooden charm, tied by a string
covered with snakeskin.  On every finger and every toe, he had
alternate brass and copper rings; and above the ankles, halfway
up to the calf, a stocking of very pretty beads. Everything was
light, neat, and elegant in its way; not a fault could be found
with the taste of his "getting up."  For a handkerchief he held a
well-folded piece of bark, and a piece of gold-embroidered silk,
which he constantly employed to hide his large mouth when
laughing, or to wipe it after a drink of plantain-wine, of which
he took constant and copious draughts from neat little gourd-
cups, administered by his ladies-in-waiting, who were at once his
sisters and wives.  A white dog, spear, shield, and woman--the
Uganda cognisance--were by his side, as also a knot of staff
officers, with whom he kept up a brisk conversation on one side;
and on the other was a band of Wichezi, or lady-sorcerers, such
as I have already described.

I was now asked to draw nearer within the hollow square of
squatters, where leopard-skins were strewed upon the ground, and
a large copper kettledrum, surmounted with brass bells on arching
wires, along with two other smaller drums covered with cowrie-
shells, and beads of colour worked into patterns, were placed.  I
now longed to open conversation, but knew not the language, and
no one near me dared speak, or even lift his head from fear of
being accused of eyeing the women; so the king and myself sat
staring at one another for full an hour--I mute, but he pointing
and remarking with those around him on the novelty of my guard
and general appearance, and even requiring to see my hat lifted,
the umbrella shut and opened, and the guards face about and show
off their red cloaks--for such wonders had never been seen in
Uganda.

Then, finding the day waning, he sent Maula on an embassy to ask
me if I had seen him; and on receiving my reply, "Yes, for full
one hour," I was glad to find him rise, spear in hand, lead his
dog, and walk unceremoniously away through the enclosure into the
fourth tier of huts; for this being a pure levee day, no business
was transacted.  The king's gait in retiring was intended to be
very majestic, but did not succeed in conveying to me that
impression. It was the traditional walk of his race, founded on
the step of the lion; but the outward sweep of the legs, intended
to represent the stride of the noble beast, appeared to me only
to realise a very ludicrous kind of waddle, which made me ask
Bombay if anything serious was the matter with the royal person.

I had now to wait for some time, almost as an act of humanity;
for I was told the state secret, that the king had retired to
break his fast and eat for the first time since hearing of my
arrival; but the repast was no sooner over than he prepared for
the second act, to show off his splendour, and I was invited in,
with all my men, to the exclusion of all his own officers save my
two guides. Entering as before, I found him standing on a red
blanket, leaning against the right portal of the hut, talking and
laughing, handkerchief in hand, to a hundred or more of his
admiring wives, who, all squatting on the ground outside, in two
groups, were dressed in mew mbugus.  My men dared not advance
upright, nor look upon the women, but, stooping, with lowered
heads and averted eyes, came cringing after me.  Unconscious
myself, I gave loud and impatient orders to my guard, rebuking
them for moving like frightened geese, and, with hat in hand,
stood gazing on the fair sex till directed to sit and cap.

Mtesa then inquired what messages were brought from Rumanika; to
which Maula, delighted with the favour of speaking to royalty,
replied by saying, Rumanika had gained intelligence of Englishmen
coming up the Nile to Gani and Kidi.  The king acknowledged the
truthfulness of their story, saying he had heard the same
himself; and both Wakungu, as is the custom in Uganda, thanked
their lord in a very enthusiastic manner, kneeling on the ground-
-for no one can stand in the presence of his majesty--in an
attitude of prayer, and throwing out their hands as they repeated
the words N'yanzig, N'yanzig, ai N'yanzig Mkahma wangi, etc.,
etc., for a considerable time; when, thinking they had done
enough of this, and heated with the exertion, they threw
themselves flat upon their stomachs, and, floundering about like
fish on land, repeated the same words over again and again, and
rose doing the same, with their faces covered with earth; for
majesty in Uganda is never satisfied till subjects have grovelled
before it like the most abject worms. This conversation over,
after gazing at me, and chatting with his women for a
considerable time, the second scene ended.  The third scene was
more easily arranged, for the day was fast declining. He simply
moved his train of women to another hut, where, after seating
himself upon his throne, with his women around him, he invited me
to approach the nearest limits of propriety, and to sit as
before.  Again he asked me if I had seen him--evidently desirous
of indulging in his regal pride; so I made the most of the
opportunity thus afforded me of opening a conversation by telling
him of those grand reports I had formerly heard about him, which
induced me to come all his way to see him, and the trouble it had
cost me to reach the object of my desire; at the same time taking
a gold ring from off my finger, and presenting it to him, I said,
"This is a small token of friendship; if you will inspect it, it
is made after the fashion of a dog-collar, and, being the king of
metals, gold, is in every respect appropriate to your illustrious
race."

He said, in return, "If friendship is your desire, what would you
say if I showed you a road by which you might reach your home in
one month?"  Now everything had to be told to Bombay, then to
Nasib, my Kiganda interpreter, and then to either Maula or
N'yamgundu, before it was delivered to the king, for it was
considered indecorous to transmit any message to his majesty
excepting through the medium of one of his officers.  Hence I
could not get an answer put in; for as all Waganda are rapid and
impetuous in their conversation, the king, probably forgetting he
had put a question, hastily changed the conversation and said,
"What guns have you got? Let me see the one you shoot with."  I
wished still to answer the first question first, as I knew he
referred to the direct line to Zanzibar across the Masai, and was
anxious, without delay, to open the subject of Petherick and
Grant; but no one dared to deliver my statement.  Much
disappointed, I then said, "I had brought the best shooting-gun
in the world--Whitworth's rifle--which I begged he would accept,
with a few other trifles; and, with his permission, I would lay
them upon a carpet at his feet, as is the custom of my country
when visiting sultans."  He assented, sent all his women away,
and had an mbugu spread for the purpose, on which Bombay, obeying
my order, first spread a red blanket, and then opened each
article one after the other, when Nasib, according to the usage
already mentioned, smoothed them down with his dirty hands, or
rubbed them against his sooty face, and handed them to the king
to show there was no poison or witchcraft in them.  Mtesa
appeared quite confused with the various wonders as he handled
them, made silly remarks, and pondered over them like a perfect
child, until it was quite dark.  Torches were then lit, and guns,
pistols, powder, boxes, tools, beads--the whole collection, in
short--were tossed together topsy-turvy, bundled into mbugus, and
carried away by the pages.  Mtesa now said, "It is late, and time
to break up; what provisions would you wish to have?"  I said, "A
little of everything, but no one thing constantly."  "And would
you like to see me to-morrow?"  "Yes, every day."  "Then you
can't to-morrow, for I have business; but the next day come if
you like.  You can now go away, and here are six pots of
plantain-wine for you; my men will search for food to-morrow."

21st.--In the morning, whilst it rained, some pages drove in
twenty cows and ten goats, with a polite metaphorical message
from their king, to the effect that I had pleased him much, and
he hoped I would accept these few "chickens" until he could send
more, --when both Maula and N'yamgundu, charmed with their
success in having brought a welcome guest to Uganda, never ceased
showering eulogiums on me for my fortune in having gained the
countenance of their king.  The rain falling was considered at
court a good omen, and everybody declared the king mad with
delight.  Wishing to have a talk with him about Petherick and
Grant, I at once started off the Wakungu to thank him for the
present, and to beg pardon for my apparent rudeness of yesterday,
at the same time requesting I might have an early interview with
his majesty, as I had much of importance to communicate; but the
solemn court formalities which these African kings affect as much
as Oriental emperors, precluded my message from reaching the
king.  I heard, however, that he had spent the day receiving
Suwarora's hongo of wire, and that the officer who brought them
was made to sit in an empty court, whilst the king sat behind a
screen, never deigning to show his majestic person.  I was told,
too, that he opened conversation by demanding to know how it
happened that Suwarora became possessed of the wires, for they
were made by the white men to be given to himself, and Suwarora
must therefore have robbed me of them; and it was by such
practices he, Mtesa, never could see any visitors. The officer's
reply was, Suwarora would not show the white men any respect,
because they were wizards would did not sleep in houses at night,
but flew up to the tops of hills, and practised sorcery of every
abominable kind.  The king to this retorted, in a truly African
fashion, "That's a lie; I can see no harm in this white man; and
if he had been a bad man, Rumanika would not have sent him on to
me."  At night, when in bed, the king sent his pages to say, if I
desired his friendship I would lend him one musket to make up six
with what I had given him, for he intended visiting his relations
the following morning.  I sent three, feeling that nothing would
be lost by being "open-handed."

22d.--To-day the king went the round of his relations, showing
the beautiful things given him by the white man--a clear proof
that he was much favoured by the "spirits," for neither his
father nor any of his forefathers had been so recognised and
distinguished by any "sign" as a rightful inheritor to the Uganda
throne: an anti-Christian interpretation of omens, as rife in
these dark regions now as it was in the time of King
Nebuchadnezzar. At midnight the three muskets were returned, and
I was so pleased with the young king's promptitude and honesty, I
begged he would accept them.

23d.--At noon Mtesa sent his pages to invite me to his palace. I
went, with my guard of honour and my stool, but found I had to
sit waiting in an ante-hut three hours with his commander-in-
chief and other high officers before he was ready to see me. 
During this time Wasoga minstrels, playing on tambira, and
accompanied by boys playing on a harmonicon, kept us amused; and
a small page, with a large bundle of grass, came to me and said,
"The king hopes you won't be offended if required to sit on it
before him; for no person in Uganda, however high in office, is
ever allowed to sit upon anything raised above the ground, nor
can anybody but himself sit upon such grass as this; it is all
that his throne is made of. The first day he only allowed you to
sit on your stool to appease your wrath."

On consenting to do in "Rome as the Romans do," when my position
was so handsomely acknowledged, I was called in, and found the
court sitting much as it was on the first day's interview, only
that the number of squatting Wakungu was much diminished; and the
king, instead of wearing his ten brass and copper rings, had my
gold one on his third finger.  This day, however, was cut out for
business, as, in addition to the assemblage of officers, there
were women, cows, goats, fowls, confiscations, baskets of fish,
baskets of small antelopes, porcupines, and curious rats caught
by his gamekeepers, bundles of mbugu, etc., etc., made by his
linen-drapers, coloured earths and sticks by his magician, all
ready for presentation; but, as rain fell, the court broke up,
and I had nothing for it but to walk about under my umbrella,
indulging in angry reflections against the haughty king for not
inviting me into his hut.

When the rain had ceased, and we were again called in, he was
found sitting in state as before, but this time with the head of
a black bull placed before him, one horn of which, knocked off,
was placed alongside, whilst four living cows walked about the
court.

I was now requested to shoot the four cows as quickly as
possible; but having no bullets for my gun, I borrowed the
revolving pistol I had given him, and shot all four in a second
of time; but as the last one, only wounded, turned sharply upon
me, I gave him the fifth and settled him.  Great applause
followed this wonderful feat, and the cows were given to my men. 
The king now loaded one of the carbines I had given him with his
own hands, and giving it full-cock to a page, told him to go out
and shoot a man in the outer court; which was no sooner
accomplished than the little urchin returned to announce his
success, with a look of glee such as one would see in the face of
a boy who had robbed a bird's nest, caught a trout, or done any
other boyish trick.  The king said to him, "And did you do it
well?"  "Oh, yes, capitally."  He spoke the truth, no doubt, for
he dared not have trifled with the king; but the affair created
hardly any interest.  I never heard, and there appeared no
curiosity to know, what individual human being the urchin had
deprived of life.

The Wakungu were not dismissed, and I asked to draw near, when
the king showed me a book I had given to Rumanika, and begged for
the inspiring medicine which he had before applied for through
the mystic stick.  The day was now gone, so torches were lit, and
we were ordered to go, though as yet I had not been able to speak
one word I wished to impart about Petherick and Grant; for my
interpreters were so afraid of the king they dared not open their
mouths until they were spoken to.  The king was now rising to go,
when, in great fear and anxiety that the day would be lost, I
said, in Kisuahili, "I wish you would send a letter by post to
Grant, and also send a boat up the Kitangule, as far as
Rumanika's palace, for him, for he is totally unable to walk."  I
thus attracted his notice, though he did not understand one word
I uttered.  The result was, that he waited for the
interpretation, and replied that a post would be no use, for no
one would be responsible for the safe delivery of the message; he
would send N'yamgundu to fetch him, but he thought Rumanika would
not consent to his sending boats up the Kitangule as far as the
Little Windermere; and then, turning round with true Mganda
impetuosity, he walked away without taking a word from me in
exchange.

24th.--Early this morning the pages came to say Mtesa desired I
would send him three of my Wanguaga to shoot cows before him. 
This was just what I wanted.  It had struck me that personal
conferences with me so roused the excitable king, that there was
no bringing plain matters of business home to him; so, detaching
seven men with Bombay, I told him, before shooting, to be sure
and elicit the matter I wanted--which was, to excite the king's
cupidity by telling him I had a boat full of stores with two
white men at Gani, whom I wished to call to me if he would
furnish some guides to accompany my men; and further, as Grant
could not walk, I wished boats sent for him, at least as far as
the ferry on the Kitangule, to which place Rumanika, at any rate,
would slip him down in canoes.  At once, on arriving, Mtesa
admitted the men, and ordered them to shoot at some cows; but
Bombay, obeying my orders to first have his talk out, said, No--
before he could shoot he must obey master and deliver his
message; which no sooner was told than the king, in a hurry,
excited by the prospects of sport, impatiently said, "Very good;
I will send men either by water or overland through Kidi,[FN#19]
just as your master likes; only some of his men had better go
with mine: but now shoot cows, shoot cows; for I want to see how
the Waguana shoot." They shot seven, and all were given to them
when they were dismissed.  In the evening the pages came to ask
me if I would like to shoot kites in the palace with their king;
but I declined shooting anything less than elephants, rhinoceros,
or buffaloes; and even for these I would not go out unless the
king went with me; --a dodge I conceived would tend more than any
other to bring us together, and so break through those ceremonial
restraints of the court, which at present were stopping all pans
of progression.

25th.--The king invited me to shoot with him--really buffaloes--
close to the palace; but as the pages had been sent off in a
hurry, without being fully instructed, I declined, on the plea
that I had always been gulled and kept waiting or treated with
incivility, for hours before I obtained an interview; and as I
did not wish to have any more ruptures in the palace, I proposed
Bombay should go to make proper arrangements for my reception on
the morrow--as anyhow, at present I felt indisposed.  The pages
dreaded their master's wrath, departed for a while, and then sent
another lad to tell me he was sorry to hear I felt unwell, but he
hoped I would come if only for a minute, bringing my medicines
with me, for he himself felt pain.  That this second message was
a forged one I had no doubt, for the boys had not been long
enough gone; still, I packed up my medicines and went, leaving
the onus, should any accident happen, upon the mischievous story-
bearers.

As I anticipated, on arrival at the palace I found the king was
not ready to receive me, and the pages desired me to sit with the
officers in waiting until he might appear.  I found it necessary
to fly at once into a rage, called the pages a set of deceiving
young blackguards, turned upon my heel, and walked straight back
through the courts, intending to leave the palace.  Everybody was
alarmed; information of my retreat at once reached the king, and
he sent his Wakungu to prevent my egress.  These officers passed
me, as I was walking hurriedly along under my umbrella, in the
last court, and shut the entrance-gate in front of me.  This was
too much, so I stamped, and, pointing my finger, swore in every
language I knew, that if they did not open the gate again, as
they had shut it at once, and that, too, before my face, I would
never leave the spot I stood upon alive.  Terror-stricken, the
Wakungu fell on their knees before me, doing as they were bid;
and, to please them, I returned at once, and went up to the king,
who, now sitting on his throne, asked the officers how they had
managed to entice me back; to which they all replied in a breath,
n'yanzigging heartily, "Oh, we were so afraid--he was so
terrible! but he turned at once as soon as we opened the gate." 
"How? what gate? tell us all about it."  And when the whole story
was fully narrated, the matter was thought a good joke.  After
pausing a little, I asked the king what ailed him, for I was
sorry to hear he had been sick; but instead of replying, he shook
his head, as much as to say, I had put a very uncouth question to
his majesty--and ordered some men to shoot cows.

Instead of admiring this childish pastime, which in Uganda is
considered royal sport, I rather looked disdainful, until,
apparently disappointed at my indifference, he asked what the box
I had brought contained.  On being told it was the medicine he
desired, he asked me to draw near, and sent his courtiers away.
When only the interpreters and one confidential officer were
left, besides myself, he wished to know if I could apply the
medicine without its touching the afflicted part.  To give him
confidence in my surgical skill, I moved my finger, and asked him
if he knew what gave it action; and on his replying in the
negative, I have him an anatomical lecture, which so pleased him,
he at once consented to be operated on, and I applied a blister
accordingly.  The whole operation was rather ridiculous; for the
blister, after being applied, had to be rubbed in turn on the
hands and faces of both Bombay and Nasib, to show there was no
evil spirit in the "doctor." Now, thought I to myself, is the
right time for business; for I had the king all to myself, then
considered a most fortunate occurrence in Uganda, where every man
courts the favour of a word with his king, and adores him as a
deity, and he in turn makes himself as distance as he can, to
give greater effect to his exalted position. The matter, however,
was merely deferred: for I no sooner told him my plans for
communicating quickly with Petherick and Grant, than, after
saying he desired their coming even more than myself, he promised
to arrange everything on the morrow.

26th.--In the morning, as agreed, I called on the king, and found
the blister had drawn nicely; so I let off the water, which
Bombay called the malady, and so delighted the king amazingly.  A
basket of fruit, like Indian loquots, was then ordered in, and we
ate them together, holding a discussion about Grant and
Petherick, which ended by the king promising to send an officer
by water to Kitangule, and another with two of my men, via Usoga
and Kidi, to Gani; but as it was necessary my men should go in
disguise, I asked the king to send me four mbugu and two spears;
when, with the liberality of a great king, he sent me twenty
sheets of the former, four spears, and a load of sun-dried fish
strung on a stick in shape of a shield.

27th.--At last something was done.  One Uganda officer and one
Kidi guide were sent to my hut by the king, as agreed upon
yesterday, when I detached Mabruki and Bilal from my men, gave
them letters and maps addressed to Petherick; and giving the
officers a load of Mtende to pay their hotel bills on the way, I
gave them, at the same time, strict orders to keep by the Nile;
then, having dismissed them, I called on the king to make
arrangements for Grant, and to complain that my residence in
Uganda was anything but cheerful, as my hut was a mile from the
palace, in an unhealthy place, where he kept his Arab visitors. 
It did not become my dignity to live in houses appropriated to
persons in the rank of servants, which I considered the ivory
merchants to be; and as I had come only to see him and the high
officers of Uganda, not seeking for ivory or slaves, I begged he
would change my place of residence to the west end, when I also
trusted his officers would not be ashamed to visit me, as
appeared to be the case at present.  Silence being the provoking
resort of the king, when he did not know exactly what to say, he
made no answer to my appeal, but instead, he began a discourse on
geography, and then desired me to call upon his mother,
N'yamasore, at her palace Masorisori, vulgarly called Soli Soli,
for she also required medicine; and, moreover, I was cautioned
that for the future the Uganda court etiquette required I should
attend on the king two days in succession, and every third day on
his mother the queen-dowager, as such were their respective
rights.

Till now, owing to the strict laws of the country, I had not been
able to call upon anybody but the king himself.  I had not been
able to send presents or bribes to any one, nor had any one,
except the cockaded pages, by the king's order, visited me;
neither was anybody permitted to sell me provisions, so that my
men had to feed themselves by taking anything they chose from
certain gardens pointed out by the king's officers, or by seizing
pombe or plantains which they might find Waganda carrying towards
the palace. This non-interventive order was part of the royal
policy, in order that the king might have the full fleecing of
his visitors.

To call upon the queen-mother respectfully, as it was the opening
visit, I too, besides the medicine-chest, a present of eight
brass and copper wire, thirty blue-egg beads, one bundle of
diminutive beads, and sixteen cubits of chintz, a small guard,
and my throne of royal grass.  The palace to be visited lay half
a mile beyond the king's, but the highroad to it was forbidden
me, as it is considered uncourteous to pass the king's gate
without going in.  So after winding through back-gardens, the
slums of Bandowaroga, I struck upon the highroad close to her
majesty's, where everything looked like the royal palace on a
miniature scale.  A large cleared space divided the queen's
residence from her Kamraviona's.  The outer enclosures and courts
were fenced with tiger-grass; and the huts, though neither so
numerous nor so large, were constructed after the same fashion as
the king's.  Guards also kept the doors, on which large bells
were hung to give alarm, and officers in waiting watched the
throne-rooms.  All the huts were full of women, save those kept
as waiting-rooms; where drums and harmonicons were played for
amusement.  On first entering, I was required to sit in a
waiting-hut till my arrival was announced; but that did not take
long, as the queen was prepared to receive me; and being of a
more affable disposition than her son, she held rather a levee of
amusement than a stiff court of show.  I entered the throne-hut
as the gate of that court was thrown open, with my hat off, but
umbrella held over my head, and walked straight towards her till
ordered to sit upon my bundle of grass.

Her majesty--fat, fair, and forty-five--was sitting, plainly
garbed in mbugu, upon a carpet spread upon the ground within a
curtain of mbugu, her elbow resting on a pillow of the same bark
material; the only ornaments on her person being an abrus
necklace, and a piece of mbugu tied round her head, whilst a
folding looking-glass, much the worse for wear, stood open by her
side.  An iron rod like a spit, with a cup on the top, charged
with magic powder, and other magic wands, were placed before the
entrance; and within the room, four Mabandwa sorceresses or
devil-drivers, fantastically dressed, as before described, and a
mass of other women, formed the company. For a short while we sat
at a distance, exchanging inquiring glances at one another, when
the women were dismissed, and a band of music, with a court full
of Wakungu, was ordered in to change the scene. I also got orders
to draw near and sit fronting her within the hut. Pombe, the best
in Uganda, was then drunk by the queen, and handed to me and to
all the high officers about her, when she smoked her pipe, and
bade me smoke mine.  The musicians, dressed in long-haired Usoga
goat-skins, were now ordered to strike up, which they did, with
their bodies swaying or dancing like bears in a fair. Different
drums were then beat, and I was asked if I could distinguish
their different tones.

The queen, full of mirth, now suddenly rose, leaving me sitting,
whilst she went to another hut, changed her mbugu for a deole,
and came back again for us to admire her, which was no sooner
done to her heart's content, than a second time, by her order,
the court was cleared, and, when only three or four confidential
Wakungu were left, she took up a small faggot of well-trimmed
sticks, and, selecting three, told me she had three complains. 
"This stick," she says, "represents my stomach, which gives me
much uneasiness; this second stick my liver, which causes
shooting pains all over my body; and this third one my heart, for
I get constant dreams at night about Sunna, my late husband, and
they are not pleasant." The dreams and sleeplessness I told her
was a common widow's complaint, and could only be cured by her
majesty making up her mind to marry a second time; but before I
could advise for the bodily complaints, it would be necessary for
me to see her tongue, feel her pulse, and perhaps, also, her
sides.  Hearing this, the Wakungu said, "Oh, that can never be
allowed without the sanction of the king"; but the queen, rising
in her seat, expressed her scorn at the idea to taking advice
from a mere stripling, and submitted herself for examination.

I then took out two pills, the powder of which was tasted by the
Wakungu to prove that there was no devilry in "the doctor," and
gave orders for them to be eaten at night, restricting her pombe
and food until I saw her again.  My game was now advancing, for I
found through her I should get the key to an influence that might
bear on the king, and was much pleased to hear her express
herself delighted with me for everything I had done except
stopping her grog, which, naturally enough in this great pombe-
drinking country, she said would be a very trying abstinence.

The doctoring over, her majesty expressed herself ready to
inspect the honorarium I had brought for her, and the articles
were no sooner presented by Bombay and Nasib, with the usual
formalities of stroking to insure their purity, than she, boiling
with pleasure, showed them all to her officers, who declared,
with a voice of most exquisite triumph, that she was indeed the
most favoured of queens. Then, in excellent good taste, after
saying that nobody had ever given her such treasures, she gave
me, in return, a beautifully- worked pombe sucking-pipe, which
was acknowledged by every one to be the greatest honour she could
pay me.

Not satisfied with this, she made me select, though against my
desire, a number of sambo, called here gundu, rings of giraffe
hair wound round with thin iron or copper wire, and worn as
anklets; and crowned with all sundry pots of pombe, a cow, and a
bundle of dried fish, of the description given in the woodcut,
called by my men Samaki Kambari.  This business over, she begged
me to show her my picture-books, and was so amused with them that
she ordered her sorceresses and all the other women in again to
inspect them with her.  Then began a warm and complimentary
conversation, which ended by an inspection of my rings and al the
contents of my pockets, as well as of my watch, which she called
Lubari--a term equivalent to a place of worship, the object of
worship itself, or the iron horn or magic pan.   Still she said I
had not yet satisfied her; I must return again two days hence,
for she like me much-- excessively--she could not say how much;
but now the day was gone, I might go.  With this queer kind of
adieu she rose and walked away, leaving me with my servants to
carry the royal present home.

28th.--My whole thoughts were now occupied in devising some
scheme to obtain a hut in the palace, not only the better to
maintain my dignity, and so gain superior influence in the court,
but also that I might have a better insight into the manners and
customs of these strange people.  I was not sorry to find the
king attempting to draw me to court, daily to sit in attendance
on him as his officers were obliged to do all day long, in order
that he might always have a full court or escort whenever by
chance he might emerge from his palace, for it gave me an opening
for asserting my proper position.

Instead, therefore, of going at the call of his pages this
morning I sent Bombay with some men to say that although I was
desirous of seeing him daily, I could not so expose myself to the
sun.  In all other countries I received, as my right, a palace to
live in when I called on the king of my country, and unless he
gave one now I should feel slighted; moreover, I should like a
hut in the same enclosure as himself, when I could sit and
converse with him constantly, and teach him the use of the things
I had given him. By Bombay's account, the king was much struck
with the force of my humble request, and replied that he should
like to have Bana, meaning myself, ever by his side, but his huts
were all full of women, and therefore it could not be managed;
if, however, Bana would but have patience for a while, a hut
should be built for him in the environs, which would be a mark of
distinction he had never paid to any visitor before.  Then
changing the subject by inspecting my men, he fell so much in
love with their little red "fez" caps, that he sent off his pages
to beg me for a specimen, and, on finding them sent by the boys,
he remarked, with warm approbation, how generous I was in
supplying his wishes, and then, turning to Bombay, wished to know
what sort of return-presents would please me best. Bombay,
already primed, instantly said, "Oh, Bana, being a great man in
his own country, and not thirsting for gain in ivory or slaves,
would only accept such things as a spear, shield, or drum, which
he could take to his own country as a specimen of the
manufactures of Uganda, and a pleasing recollection of his visit
to the king."

"Ah," says Mtesa, "if that is all he wants, then indeed will I
satisfy him, for I will give him the two spears with which I took
all this country, and, when engaged in so doing, pierced three
men with one stab.

"But, for the present, is it true what I have heard, that Bana
would like to go out with me shooting?"  "Oh yes, he is a most
wonderful sportsman--shoots elephants and buffaloes, and birds on
the wing. He would like to go out on a shooting excursion and
teach you the way."

Then turning the subject, in the highest good-humour the king
made centurions of N'yamgundu and Maula, my two Wakungu, for
their good service, he said, in bringing him such a valuable
guest.  This delighted them so much that as soon as they could
they came back to my camp, threw themselves at my feet, and
n'yanzigging incessantly, narrated their fortunes, and begged, as
a great man, I would lend them some cows to present to the king
as an acknowledgement for the favour he had shown them.  The
cows, I then told them, had come from the king, and could not go
back again, for it was not the habit of white men to part with
their presents; but as I felt their promotion redounded on
myself, and was certainly the highest compliment their king could
have paid me, I would give them each a wire to make their salaam
good.

This was enough; both officers got drunk, and, beating their
drums, serenaded the camp until the evening set in, when, to my
utter surprise, an elderly Mganda woman was brought into camp
with the commander-in-chief's metaphorical compliments, hoping I
would accept her "to carry my water"; with this trifling
addition, that in case I did not think her pretty enough, he
hoped I would not hesitate to select which I liked from ten
others, of "all colours," Wahuma included, who, for that purpose,
were then waiting in his palace.

Unprepared for this social addition in my camp, I must now
confess I felt in a fix, knowing full well that nothing so
offends as rejecting an offer at once, so I kept her for the time
being, intending in the morning to send her back with a string of
blue beads on her neck; but during the night she relieved me of
my anxieties by running away, which Bombay said was no wonder,
for she had obviously been seized as part of some confiscated
estate, and without doubt knew where to find some of her friends.

To-day, for the first time since I have been here, I received a
quantity of plantains.  This was in consequence of my complaining
that the king's orders to my men to feed themselves at others'
expense was virtually making them a pack of thieves.

1st.--I received a letter from Grant, dated 10th February,
reporting Baraka's departure for Unyoro on the 30th January,
escorted by Kamrasi's men on their return, and a large party of
Rumanika's bearing presents as a letter from their king; whilst
Grant himself hoped to leave Karague before the end of the month. 
I then sent Bombay to see the queen, to ask after her health, beg
for a hut in the palace enclosures, and say I should have gone
myself, only I feared her gate might be shut, and I cannot go
backwards and forwards so far in the sun without a horse or an
elephant to ride upon.  She begged I would come next morning.  A
wonderful report came that the king put two tops of powder into
his Whitworth rifle to shoot a cow, and the bullet not only
passed through the cow, but through the court fence, then through
the centre of a woman, and, after passing the outer fence, flew
whizzing along no one knew where.

2d.--Calling on the queen early, she admitted me at once,
scolding me severely for not having come or sent my men to see
her after she had taken the pills.  She said they did her no
good, and prevailed on me to give her another prescription.  Then
sending her servant for a bag full of drinking-gourds, she made
me select six of the best, and begged for my watch.  That, of
course, I could not part with; but I took the opportunity of
telling her I did not like my residence; it was not only far away
from everybody, but it was unworthy of my dignity.  I came to
Uganda to see the king and queen, because the Arabs said they
were always treated with great respect; but now I could perceive
those Arabs did not know what true respect means.  Being poor
men, they thought much of a cow or goat given gratis, and were
content to live in any hovels.  Such, I must inform her, was not
my case.  I could neither sit in the sun nor live in a poor man's
hut.  When I rose to leave for breakfast, she requested me to
stop, but I declined, and walked away.  I saw, however, there was
something wrong; for Maula, always ordered to be in attendance
when anybody visits, was retained by her order to answer why I
would not stay with her longer.  If I wanted food or pombe, there
was plenty of it in her palace, and her cooks were the cleverest
in the world; she hoped I would return to see her in the morning.

3d.--Our cross purposes seemed to increase; for, while I could
not get a satisfactory interview, the king sent for N'yamgundu to
ascertain why I had given him good guns and many pretty things
which he did not know the use of, and yet I would not visit him
to explain their several uses.  N'yamgundu told him I lived too
far off, and wanted a palace.  After this I walked off to see
N'yamasore, taking my blankets, a pillow, and some cooking-pots
to make a day of it, and try to win the affections of the queen
with sixteen cubits bindera, three pints peke, and three pints
mtende beads, which, as Waganda are all fond of figurative
language, I called a trifle for her servants.

I was shown in at once, and found her majesty sitting on an
Indian carpet, dressed in a red linen wrapper with a gold border,
and a box, in shape of a lady's work-box, prettily coloured in
divers patters with minute beads, by her side.  Her councillors
were in attendance; and in the yard a band of music, with many
minor Wakungu squatting in a semicircle, completed her levee. 
Maula on my behalf opened conversation, in allusion to her
yesterday's question, by saying I had applied to Mtesa for a
palace, that I might be near enough both their majesties to pay
them constant visits. She replied, in a good hearty manner, that
indeed was a very proper request, which showed my good sense, and
ought to have been complied with at once; but Mtesa was only a
Kijana or stripling, and as she influenced all the government of
the country, she would have it carried into effect.  Compliments
were now passed, my presents given and approved of; and the
queen, thinking I must be hungry, for she wanted to eat herself,
requested me to refresh myself in another hut.  I complied,
spread my bedding, and ordered in my breakfast; but as the hut
was full of men, I suspended a Scotch plain, and quite eclipsed
her mbugu curtain.

Reports of this magnificence at once flew to the queen, who sent
to know how many more blankets I had in my possession, and
whether, if she asked for one, she would get it.  She also
desired to see my spoons, fork, and pipe--an English meerschaum,
mounted with silver; so, after breakfast, I returned to see her,
showed her the spoons and forks, and smoked my pipe, but told her
I had no blankets left but what formed my bed.  She appeared very
happy and very well, did not say another word about the blankets,
but ordered a pipe for herself, and sat chatting, laughing, and
smoking in concert with me.

I told her I had visited all the four quarters of the globe, and
had seen all colours of people, but wondered where she got her
pipe from, for it was much after the Rumish (Turkish) fashion,
with a long stick.  Greatly tickled at the flattery, she said,
"We hear men like yourself come to Amara from the other side, and
drive cattle away."  "The Gallas, or Abyssinians, who are tall
and fair, like Rumanika," I said, "might do so, for they live not
far off on the other side of Amara, but we never fight for such
paltry objects. If cows fall into our hands when fighting, we
allow our soldiers to eat them, while we take the government of
the country into our hands."  She then said, "We hear you don't
like the Unyamuezi route, we will open the Ukori one for you." 
"Thank your majesty," said I, in a figurative kind of speech to
please Waganda ears; and turning the advantage of the project on
her side, "You have indeed hit the right nail on the head.  I do
not like the Unyamuezi route, as you may imagine when I tell you
I have lost so much property there by mere robbery of the people
and their kings.  The Waganda do not see me in a true light; but
if they have patience for a year or two, until the Ukori road is
open, and trade between our respective countries shall commence,
they will then see the fruits of my advent; so much so, that
every Mganda will say the first Uganda year dates from the
arrival of the first Mzundu (white) visitor.  As one coffee-seed
sown brings forth fruit in plenty, so my coming here may be
considered."  All appreciated this speech, saying, "The white
man, he even speaks beautifully! beautifully! beautifully!
beautifully!" and, putting their hands to their mouths, they
looked askance at me, nodding their admiring approval.

The queen and her ministers then plunged into pombe and became
uproarious, laughing with all their might and main.  Small bugu
cups were not enough to keep up the excitement of the time, so a
large wooden trough was placed before the queen and filled with
liquor. If any was spilt, the Wakungu instantly fought over it,
dabbing their noses on the ground, or grabbing it with their
hands, that not one atom of the queen's favour might be lost; for
everything must be adored that comes from royalty, whether by
design or accident. The queen put her head to the trough and
drank like a pig from it, and was followed by her ministers.  The
band, by order, then struck up a tune called the Milele, playing
on a dozen reeds, ornamented with beads and cow-tips, and five
drums, of various tones and sizes, keeping time.  The musicians
dancing with zest, were led by four bandmasters, also dancing,
but with their backs turned to the company to show off their
long, shaggy, goat-skin jackets, sometimes upright, at other
times bending and on their heels, like the hornpipe-dancers or
western countries.

It was a merry scene, but soon became tiresome; when Bombay, by
way of flattery, and wishing to see what the queen's wardrobe
embraced, told her, Any woman, however ugly, would assume a
goodly appearance if prettily dressed; upon which her gracious
majesty immediately rose, retired to her toilet-hut, and soon
returned attired in a common check cloth, and abrus tiara, a bead
necklace, and with a folding looking-glass, when she sat, as
before, and was handed a blown-glass cup of pombe, with a cork
floating on the liquor, and a napkin mbugu covering the top, by a
naked virgin.  For her kind condescension in assuming plain
raiment, everybody, of course, n'yanzigged.  Next she ordered her
slave girls to bring a large number of sambo (anklets), and
begged me to select the best, for she liked me much.  In vain I
tried to refuse them: she had given more than enough for a
keepsake before, and I was not hungry for property; still I had
to choose some, or I would give offence. She then gave me a
basket of tobacco, and a nest of hen eggs for her "son's"
breakfast.  When this was over, the Mukonderi, another dancing-
tune, with instruments something like clarionets, was ordered;
but it had scarcely been struck up, before a drenching rain, with
strong wind, set in and spoilt the music, though not the playing-
-for none dared stop without an order; and the queen, instead of
taking pity, laughed most boisterously over the exercise of her
savage power as the unfortunate musicians were nearly beaten down
by the violence of the weather.

When the rain ceased, her majesty retired a second time to her
toilet-hut, and changed her dress for a puce-coloured wrapper,
when I, ashamed of having robbed her of so many sambo, asked her
if she would allow me to present her with a little English "wool"
to hang up instead of her mbugu curtain on cold days like this.
Of course she could not decline, and a large double scarlet
blanket was placed before her.  "Oh, wonder of wonders!"
exclaimed all the spectators, holding their mouths in both hands
at a time--such a "pattern" had never been seen here before.  It
stretched across the hut, was higher than the men could reach--
indeed it was a perfect marvel; and the man must be a good one
who brought such a treasure as this to Uddu.  "And why not say
Uganda?" I asked.  "Because all this country is called Uddu. 
Uganda is personified by Mtesa; and no one can say he has seen
Uganda until he has been presented to the king."

As I had them all in a good humour now, I complained I did not
see enough of the Waganda--and as every one dressed so remarkably
well, I could not discern the big men from the small; could she
not issue some order by which they might call on me, as they did
not dare do so without instruction, and then I, in turn, would
call on them? Hearing this, she introduced me to her prime
minister, chancellor of exchequer, women-keepers, hangmen, and
cooks, as the first nobles in the land, that I might recognise
them again if I met them on the road.  All n'yanzigged for this
great condescension, and said they were delighted with their
guest; then producing a strip of common joho to compare it with
my blanket, they asked if I could recognise it.  Of course, said
I, it is made in my country, of the same material, only of
coarser quality, and everything of the same sort is made in
Uzungu.  Then, indeed, said the whole company, in one voice, we
do like you, and your cloth too--but you most.  I modestly bowed
my head, and said their friendship was my chief desire.

This speech also created great hilarity; the queen and
councillors all became uproarious.  The queen began to sing, and
the councillors to join in chorus; then all sang and all drank,
and drank and sang, till, in their heated excitement, they turned
the palace into a pandemonium; still there was not noise enough,
so the band and drums were called again, and tomfool--for Uganda,
like the old European monarchies, always keeps a jester--was made
to sing in the gruff, hoarse, unnatural voice which he ever
affects to maintain his character, and furnished with pombe when
his throat was dry.

Now all of a sudden, as if a devil had taken possession of the
company, the prime minister with all the courtiers jumped upon
their legs, seized their sticks, for nobody can carry a spear
when visiting, swore the queen had lost her heart to me, and
running into the yard, returned, charging and jabbering at the
queen; retreated and returned again, as if they were going to put
an end to her for the guilt of loving me, but really to show
their devotion and true love to her.  The queen professed to take
this ceremony with calm indifference, but her face showed that
she enjoyed it.  I was not getting very tired of sitting on my
low stool, and begged for leave to depart, but N'yamasore would
not hear of it; she loved me a great deal too much to let me go
away at this time of day, and forthwith ordered in more pombe. 
The same roystering scene was repeated; cups were too small, so
the trough was employed; and the queen graced it by drinking,
pig-fashion, first, and then handing it round to the company.

Now, hoping to produce gravity and then to slip away, I asked if
my medicines had given her any relief, that I might give her more
to strengthen he