r.  She said she could not answer that question
just yet; for though the medicine had moved her copiously, as yet
she had seen no snake depart from her.  I told her I would give
her some strengthening medicine in the morning: for the present,
however, I would take my leave, as the day was far gone, and the
distance home very great; but though I dragged my body away, my
heart would still remain here, for I loved her much.

This announcement took all by surprise; they looked at me and
then at her, and looked again and laughed, whilst I rose, waved
my hat, and said, "Kua heri, Bibi" (good-bye, madam).  On
reaching home I found Maribu, a Mkungu, with a gang of men sent
by Mtesa to fetch Grant from Kitangule by water.  He would not
take any of my men with him to fetch the kit from Karague, as
Mtesa, he said, had given him orders to find all the means of
transport; so I gave him a letter to Grant, and told him to look
sharp, else Grant would have passed the Kitangule before he
arrived there.  "Never mind," says Maribu, "I shall walk to the
mouth of the Katonga, boat it to Sese island, where Mtesa keeps
all his large vessels, and I shall be at Kitangule in a very
short time."

4th.--I sent Bombay off to administer quinine to the queen; but
the king's pages, who watched him making for her gateway, hurried
up to him, and turned him back by force.  He pleaded earnestly
that I would flog him if he disobeyed my orders, but they would
take all the responsibility--the king had ordered it; and then
they, forging a lie, bade him run back as fast as he could,
saying I wanted to see the king, but could not till his return. 
In this way poor Bombay returned to me half-drowned in
perspiration.  Just then another page hurried in with orders to
bring me to the palace at once, for I had not been there these
four days; and while I was preparing to express the proper amount
of indignation at this unceremonious message, the last impudent
page began rolling like a pig upon my mbugued or carpeted floor,
till I stormed and swore I would turn him out unless he chose to
behave more respectfully before my majesty, for I was no peddling
merchant, as he had been accustomed to see, and would not stand
it; moreover, I would not leave my hut at the summons of the king
or anybody else, until I chose to do so.

This expression of becoming wrath brought every one to a sense of
his duty; and I then told them all I was excessively angry with
Mtesa for turning back my messenger; nobody had ever dared do
such a thing before, and I would never forgive the king until my
medicines had been given to the queen.  As for my going to the
palace, it was out of the question, as I had been repeatedly
before told the king, unless it pleased him to give me a fitting
residence near himself. In order now that full weight should be
given to my expressions, I sent Bombay with the quinine to the
king, in company with the boys, to give an account of all that
had happened; and further, to say I felt exceedingly distressed I
could not go to see him constantly--that I was ashamed of my
domicile--the sun was hot to walk in; and when I went to the
palace, his officers in waiting always kept me waiting like a
servant--a matter hurtful to my honour and dignity.  It now
rested with himself to remove these obstacles. Everybody
concerned in this matter left for the palace but Maula, who said
he must stop in camp to look after Bana.  Bombay no sooner
arrived in the palace, and saw the king upon his throne, than
Mtesa asked him why he came?  "By the instructions of Bana," was
his reply--"for Bana cannot walk in the sun; no white man of the
sultan's breed can do so."

Hearing this, the king rose in a huff, without deigning to reply,
and busied himself in another court.  Bombay, still sitting,
waited for hours till quite tired, when he sent a boy in to say
he had not delivered half my message; he had brought medicine for
the queen, and as yet he had no reply for Bana.  Either with
haughty indifference, or else with injured pride at his not being
able to command me at his pleasure, the king sent word, if
medicine is brought for the queen, then let it be taken to her;
and so Bombay walked off to the queen's palace.  Arrived there,
he sent in to say he had brought medicine, and waited without a
reply till nightfall, when, tired of his charge, he gave the
quinine into N'yamgundu's hands for delivery, and returned h
home.  Soon after, however, N'yamgundu also returned to say the
queen would not take the dose to-day, but hoped I would
administer it personally in the morning.

Whilst all this vexations business had been going on in court--
evidently dictated by extreme jealousy because I showed, as they
all thought, a preference for the queen--Maula, more than tipsy,
brought a Mkungu of some standing at court before me, contrary to
all law-- for as yet no Mganda, save the king's pages, had ever
dared enter even the precincts of my camp.  With a scowling,
determined, hang-dog-looking countenance, he walked impudently
into my hut, and taking down the pombe-suckers the queen had
given me, showed them with many queer gesticulations, intended to
insinuate there was something between the queen and me.  Among
his jokes were, that I must never drink pombe excepting with
these sticks; if I wanted any when I leave Uganda, to show my
friends, she would give me twenty more sticks of that sort if I
liked them; and, turning from verbal to practical jocularity, the
dirty fellow took my common sucker out of the pot, inserted one
of the queen's, and sucked at it himself, when I snatched and
threw it away.

Maula's friend, who, I imagined, was a spy, then asked me whom I
liked most--the mother or the son; but, without waiting to hear
me, Maula hastily said, "The mother, the mother of course! he
does not care for Mtesa, and won't go to see him."  The friend
coaxingly responded, "Oh no; he likes Mtesa, and will go and see
him too; won't you?"  I declined, however, to answer from fear of
mistake, as both interpreters were away.  Still the two went on
talking to themselves, Maula swearing that I loved the mother
most, whilst the friend said, No, he loves the son, and asking me
with anxious looks, till they found I was not to be caught by
chaff, and then, both tired, walked away--the friend advising me,
next time I went to court, to put on an Arab's gown, as trousers
are indecent in the estimation of every Mganda.

5th.--Alarmed at having got involved in something that looked
like court intrigues, I called up N'yamgundu; told him all that
happened yesterday, both at the two courts and with Maula at
home; and begged him to apply to the king for a meeting of five
elders, that a proper understanding might be arrived at; but
instead of doing as I desired, he got into a terrible fright,
calling Maula, and told me if I pressed the matter in this way
men would lose their lives. Meanwhile the cunning blackguard
Maula begged for pardon; said I quite misunderstood his meaning;
all he had said was that I was very fortunate, being in such
favour at court, for the king and queen both equally loved me.

N'yamgundu now got orders to go to Karague overland for Dr
K'yengo; but, dreading to tell me of it, as I had been so kind to
him, he forged a falsehood, said he had leave to visit his home
for six days, and begged for a wire to sacrifice to his church. 
I gave him what he wanted, and away he went.  I then heard his
servants had received orders to go overland for Grant and
K'yengo; so I wrote another note to Grant, telling him to come
sharp, and bring all the property by boat that he could carry,
leaving what he could not behind in charge of Rumanika.

At noon, the plaguy little imps of pages hurried in to order the
attendance of all my men fully armed before the king, as he
wished to seize some refractory officer.  I declined this abuse
of my arms, and said I should first go and speak to the king on
the subject myself, ordering the men on no account to go on such
an errand; and saying this, I proceeded towards the palace,
leaving instructions for those men who were not ready to follow. 
As the court messengers, however, objected to our going in
detachments, I told Bombay to wait for the rest, and hurry on to
overtake me. Whilst lingering on the way, every minute expecting
to see my men, the Wazinza, who had also received orders to seize
the same officer, passed me, going to the place of attack, and,
at the same time, I heard my men firing in a direction exactly
opposite to the palace. I now saw I had been duped, and returned
to my hut to see the issue. The boys had deceived us all. 
Bombay, tricked on the plea of their taking him by a short cut to
the palace, suddenly found himself with all the men opposite the
fenced gardens that had to be taken-- the establishment of the
recusant officer,--and the boys, knowing how eager all blacks are
to loot, said, "Now, then, at the houses; seize all you can,
sparing nothing--men, women, or children, mbugus or cowries, all
alike--for it is the order of the king;" and in an instant my men
surrounded the place, fired their guns, and rushed upon the
inmates.  One was speared forcing his way through the fence, but
the rest were taken and brought triumphantly into my camp.  It
formed a strange sight in the establishment of an English
gentleman, to see my men flushed with the excitement of their
spoils, staggering under loads of mbugu, or leading children,
mothers, goats, and dogs off in triumph to their respective huts.
Bombay alone, of all my men, obeyed my orders, touching nothing;
and when remonstrated with for having lead the men, he said he
could not help it--the boys had deceived him in the same way as
they had tricked me.

It was now necessary that I should take some critical step in
African diplomacy; so, after ordering all the seizures to be
given up to Maula on behalf of the king, and threatening to
discharge any of my men who dared retain one item of the
property, I shut the door of my hut to do penance for two days,
giving orders that nobody but my cook Ilmas, not even Bombay,
should come near me; for the king had caused my men to sin--had
disgraced their red cloth--and had inflicted on me a greater
insult than I could bear.  I was ashamed to show my face.  Just
as the door was closed, other pages from the king brought the
Whitworth rifle to be cleaned, and demanded an admittance; but no
one dared approach me, and they went on their way again.

6th.--I still continued to do penance.  Bombay, by my orders,
issued from within, prepared for a visit to the king, to tell him
all that had happened yesterday, and also to ascertain if the
orders for sending my men on a plundering mission had really
emanated from himself, when the bothering pages came again,
bringing a gun and knife to be mended.  My door was found shut,
so they went to Bombay, asked him to do it, and told him the king
desired to know if I would go shooting with him in the morning. 
The reply was, "No; Bana is praying to-day that Mtesa's sins
might be forgiven him for having committed such an injury to him,
sending his soldiers on a mission that did not become them, and
without his sanction too.  He is very angry about it, and wished
to know if it was done by the king's orders."  The boys said,
"Nothing can be done without the king's orders."  After further
discussion, Bombay intimated that I wished the king to send me a
party of five elderly officers to counsel with, and set all
disagreeables to rights, or I would not go to the palace again;
but the boys said there were no elderly gentlemen at court, only
boys such as themselves.  Bombay now wished to go with them
before the king, to explain matters to him, and to give him all
the red cloths of my men, which I took from them, because they
defiled their uniform when plundering women and children; but the
boys said the king was unapproachable just them, being engaged
shooting cows before his women.  He then wished the boys to carry
the cloth; but they declined, saying it was contrary to orders
for anybody to handle cloth, and they could not do it.




                          Chapter XII



                   Palace, Uganda--Continued

Continued Diplomatic Difficulties--Negro Chaffing--The King in a
New Costume--Adjutant and Heron Shooting at Court--My Residence
Changed --Scenes at Court--The Kamraviona, or Commander-in-Chief-
-Quarrels-- Confidential Communications with the King--Court
Executions and Executioners--Another Day with the Queen.

7th.--The farce continued, and how to manage these haughty
capricious blacks puzzled my brains considerably; but I felt that
if I did not stand up now, no one would ever be treated better
hereafter.  I sent Nasib to the queen, to explain why I had not
been to see her.  I desired to do so, because I admired her
wisdom; but before I went I must first see the king, to provide
against any insult being offered to me, such as befell Bombay
when I sent him with medicine.  Having despatched him, I repaired
again to the palace.  In the antechamber I found a number of
Wakungu, as usual, lounging about on the ground, smoking,
chatting, and drinking pombe, whilst Wasoga amused them singing
and playing on lap-harps, and little boys kept time on the
harmonicon.

These Wakungu are naturally patient attendants, being well
trained to the duty; but their very lives depend upon their
presenting themselves at court a certain number of months every
year, no matter from what distant part of the country they have
to come.  If they failed, their estates would be confiscated, and
their lives taken unless they could escape.  I found a messenger
who consented to tell the king of my desire to see him.  He
returned to say that the king was sleeping--a palpable falsehood. 
In a huff, I walked home to breakfast, leaving my attendants,
Maula and Uledi, behind to make explanations.  They saw the king,
who simply asked, "Where is Bana?" And on being told that I came,
but went off again, he said, as I was informed, "That is a lie,
for had he come here to see me he would not have returned"; then
rising, he walked away and left the men to follow me.

I continued ruminating on these absurd entanglements, and the
best way of dealing with them, when lo! to perplex me still more,
in ran a bevy of the royal pages to ask for mtende beads--a whole
sack of them; for the king wished to go with his women on a
pilgrimage to the N'yanza.  Thinking myself very lucky to buy the
king's ear so cheaply, I sent Maula as before, adding that I
considered my luck very bad, as nobody here knew my position in
society, else they would not treat me as they did.  My proper
sphere was the palace, and unless I got a hut there, I wished to
leave the country. My first desire had always been to see the
king; and if he went to the N'yanza, I trusted he would allow me
to go there also.  The boys replied, "How can you go with his
women?  No one ever is permitted to see them."  "Well," said I,
"if I cannot go to the N'yanza with him" (thinking only of the
great lake, whereas they probably meant a pond in the palace
enclosures, where Mtesa constantly frolics with his women), "I
wish to go to Usoga and Amara, as far as the Masai; for I have no
companions here but crows and vultures." They promised to take
the message, but its delivery was quite another thing; for no one
can speak at this court till he is spoken to, and a word put in
out of season is a life lost.

On Maula's return, I was told the king would not believe so
generous a man as Bana could have sent him so few beads; he
believed most of my store must have been stolen on the road, and
would ask me about that to-morrow.  He intimated that for the
future I must fire a gun at the waiting-hut whenever I entered
the palace, so that he might hear of my arrival, for he had been
up that morning, and would have been glad to see me, only the
boys, from fear of entering his cabinet, had forged a lie, and
deprived him of any interview with me, which he had long wished
to get.  This ready cordiality was as perplexing as all the rest. 
Could it be possible, I thought, I had been fighting with a
phantom all this while, and yet the king had not been able to
perceive it?  At all events, now, as the key to his door had been
given, I would make good use of it and watch the result. 
Meanwhile Nasib returned from the queen-dowager's palace without
having seen her majesty, though he had waited there patiently the
whole day long, for she was engaged in festivities, incessantly
drumming and playing, in consequence of the birth of twins
(Mabassa), which had just taken place in her palace; but he was
advised to return on the morrow.

8th.--After breakfast I walked to the palace, thinking I had
gained all I wanted; entered, and fired guns, expecting an
instant admittance; but, as usual, I was required to sit and
wait; the king was expected immediately.  All the Wagungu talked
in whispers, and nothing was heard but the never-ceasing harps
and harmonicons. In a little while I felt tired of the monotony,
and wished to hang up a curtain, that I might lie down in privacy
and sleep till the king was ready; but the officers in waiting
forbade this, as contrary to law, and left me the only
alternative of walking up and down the court to kill time,
spreading my umbrella against the powerful rays of the sun.  A
very little of that made me fidgety and impetuous, which the
Waganda noticed, and, from fear of the consequences, they began
to close the gate to prevent my walking away.  I flew out on
them, told Bombay to notice the disrespect, and shamed them into
opening it again.  The king immediately, on hearing of this, sent
me pombe to keep me quiet; but as I would not touch it, saying I
was sick at heart, another page rushed out to say the king was
ready to receive me; and, opening a side gate leading into a
small open court without a hut in it, there, to be sure, was his
majesty, sitting on an Arab's donkey run, propped against one
page, and encompassed by four others.

On confronting him, he motioned me to sit, which I did upon my
bundle of grass, and, finding it warm, asked leave to open my
umbrella.  He was much struck at the facility with which I could
make shade, but wondered still more at my requiring it.  I
explained to him that my skin was white because I lived in a
colder country than his, and therefore was much more sensitive to
the heat of the sun than his black skin; adding, at the same
time, if it gave no offence, I would prefer sitting in the shade
of the court fence. He had no objection, and opened conversation
by asking who it was that gave me such offence in taking my guard
from me to seize his Wakungu.  The boy who had provoked me was
then dragged in, tied by his neck and hands, when the king asked
him by whose orders he had acted in such a manner, knowing that I
objected to it, and wished to speak to him on the subject first. 
The poor boy, in a dreadful fright, said he had acted under the
instructions of the Kamraviona: there was no harm done, for
Bana's men were not hurt.  "Well, then," said the king, "if they
were not injured, and you only did as you were ordered, no fault
rests with you; but begone out of my sight, for I cannot bear to
see you, and the Kamraviona shall be taught a lesson not to
meddle with my guests again until I give him authority to do so."

I now hoped, as I had got the king all by himself, and apparently
in a good humour with me, that I might give him a wholesome
lesson on the manners and customs of the English nation, to show
how much I felt the slights I had received since my residence in
Uganda; but he never lost his dignity and fussiness as an Uganda
king.  My words must pass through his Mkungu, as well as my
interpreter's, before they reached him; and, as he had no
patience, everything was lost till he suddenly asked Maula,
pretending not to know, where my hut was; why everybody said I
lived so far away; and when told, he said, "Oh! that is very far,
he must come nearer."  Still I could not say a word, his
fussiness and self-importance overcoming his inquisitiveness.

Rain now fell, and the king retired by one gate, whilst I was
shown out of another, until the shower was over.  As soon as the
sky was clear again, we returned to the little court, and this
time became more confidential, as he asked many questions about
England-- such as, Whether the Queen knew anything about
medicines? Whether she kept a number of women as he did? and what
her palace was like? --which gave me an opportunity of saying I
would like to see his ships, for I heard they were very numerous-
-and also his menagerie, said to be full of wonderful animals. 
He said the vessels were far off, but he would send for them; and
although he once kept a large number of animals, he killed them
all in practising with his guns. The Whitworth rifle was then
brought in for me to take to pieces and teach him the use of; and
then the chronometer.  He then inquired if I would like to go
shooting?  I said, "Yes, if he would accompany me--not
otherwise."  "Hippopotami?"  "Yes; there is great fun in that,
for they knock the boats over when they charge from below." "Can
you swim?"  "Yes."  "So can I.  And would you like to shoot
buffalo?"  "Yes, if you will go."  "At night, then, I will send
my keepers to look out for them.  Here is a leopard-car, with
white behind its ears, and a Ndezi porcupine of the short-quilled
kind, which my people eat with great relish; and if you are fond
of animals, I will give you any number of specimens, for my
keepers net and bring in live animals of every kind daily; for
the present, you can take this basket of porcupines home for your
dinner." My men n'yanzigged--the king walked away, giving orders
for another officer to follow up the first who went to Ukori, and
bring Petherick quickly--and I went home.

This was to be a day of varied success.  When I arrived at my hut
I found a messenger sent by the queen, with a present of a goat,
called "fowls for Bana, my son," and a load of plantains, called
potatoes, waiting for me; so I gave the bearer fundo of mtende
beads, and told again the reasons why I had not been able to call
upon the queen, but I hoped to do so shortly, as the king had
promised me a house near at hand.  I doubt, however, whether one
word of my message ever reached her.  That she wanted me at her
palace was evident by the present, though she was either too
proud or too cautious to say so.

At night I overheard a chat between Sangizo, a Myamuezi, and
Ntalo, a freed man of Zanzibar, very characteristic of their way
of chaffing.  Sangizo opened the battle by saying, "Ntalo, who
are you?"  N. "A Mguana" (freed man). S. "A Mguana, indeed! then
where is your mother?"  N. "She died at Anguja."  S. "Your mother
died at Anguja! then where is your father?"  N. "He died at
Anguja likewise."  S. "Well, that is strange; and where are your
brothers and sister?"  N. "They all died at Anguja."  S. (then
changing the word Anguja for Anguza, says to Ntalo) "I think you
said your mother and father both died at Anguza, did you not?" 
N. "Yes, at Anguza." S. "Then you had two mothers and two
fathers--one set died at Anguja, and the other set at Anguza; you
are a humbug; I don't believe you; you are no Mguana, but a slave
who has been snatched from his family, and does not know where
any of his family are. Ah! ah! ah!"  And all the men of the camp
laugh together at the wretched Ntalo's defeat; but Ntalo won't be
done, so retorts by saying, "Sangizo, you may laugh at me because
I am an orphan, but what are you? you are a savage--a Mshezi; you
come from the Mashenzi, and you wear skins, not cloths, as men
do; so hold your impudent tongue";--and the camp pealed with
merry boisterous laughter again.

9th.--Early in the morning, and whilst I was in bed, the king
sent his pages to request me to visit his royal mother, with some
specific for the itch, with which her majesty was then afflicted.
I said I could not go so far in the sun; I would wait till I
received the promised palace near her.  In the meanwhile I
prepared to call on him.  I observed, in fact, that I was an
object of jealousy between the two courts, and that, if I acted
skilfully and decidedly, I might become master of the situation,
and secure my darling object of a passage northwards.  The boys
returned, bringing a pistol to be cleaned, and a message to say
it was no use my thinking of calling on the king--that I must go
to the queen immediately, for she was very ill.  So far the queen
won the day, but I did not obtain my new residence, which I
considered the first step to accomplishing the greater object; I
therefore put the iron farther in the fire by saying I was no
man's slave, and I should not go until I got a house in the
palace--Bombay could teach the boys the way to clean the pistol. 
The perk monkeys, however, turned up their noses at such menial
service, and Uledi was instructed in their stead.

10th.--To surprise the queen, and try another dodge, I called on
her with all my dining things and bedding, to make a day of it,
and sleep the night.  She admitted me at once, when I gave her
quinine, on the proviso that I should stop there all day and
night to repeat the dose, and tell her the reason why I did not
come before.  She affected great anger at Mtesa having interfered
with my servants when coming to see her--sympathised with me on
the distance I had to travel--ordered a hut to be cleared for me
ere night--told me to eat my breakfast in the next court--and,
rising abruptly, walked away.  At noon we heard the king
approaching with his drums and rattle-traps, but I still waited
on till 5 p.m., when, on summons, I repaired to the throne-hut. 
Here I heard, in an adjoining court, the boisterous, explosive
laughs of both mother and son--royal shouts loud enough to be
heard a mile off, and inform the community that their sovereigns
were pleased to indulge in hilarity. Immediately afterwards, the
gate between us being thrown open, the king, like a very child,
stood before us, dressed for the first time, in public, in what
Europeans would call clothes.  For a cap he wore a Muscat alfia,
on his neck a silk Arab turban, fastened with a ring.  Then for a
coat he had an Indian kizbow, and for trousers a yellow woollen
doti; whilst in his hand, in imitation of myself, he kept running
his ramrod backwards and forwards through his fingers.  As I
advanced and doffed my hat, the king, smiling, entered the court,
followed by a budding damsel dressed in red bindera, who carried
the chair I had presented to him, and two new spears.

He now took his seat for the first time upon the chair, for I had
told him, at my last interview, that all kings were expected to
bring out some new fashion, or else the world would never make
progress; and I was directed to sit before him on my grass
throne. Talking, though I longed to enter into conversation, was
out of the question; for no one dared speak for me, and I could
not talk myself; so we sat and grinned, till in a few minutes the
queen, full of smirks and smiles, joined us, and sat on a mbugu. 
I offered the medicine-chest as a seat, but she dared not take
it; in fact, by the constitution of Uganda, no one, however high
in rank, not even his mother, can sit before the king.  After
sundry jokes, whilst we were all bursting with laughter at the
theatrical phenomenon, the Wakungu who were present, some twenty
in number, threw themselves in line upon their bellies, and
wriggling like fish, n'yanzigged, n'goned, and demaned, and
uttered other wonderful words of rejoining--as, for instance,
"Hai Minange!  Hai Mkama wangi!"  (O my chief!  O my king!)--
whilst they continued floundering, kicking about their legs,
rubbing their faces, and patting their hands upon the ground, as
if the king had performed some act of extraordinary munificence
by showing himself to them in that strange and new position--a
thing quite enough to date a new Uganda era from.

The king, without deigning to look upon his grovelling subjects,
said, "Now, mother, take your medicine"; for he had been called
solemnly to witness the medical treatment she was undergoing at
my hands.  When she had swallowed her quinine with a wry face,
two very black virgins appeared on the stage holding up the
double red blanket I had given the queen; for nothing, however
trifling, can be kept secret from the king.  The whole court was
in raptures. The king signified his approval by holding his
mouth, putting his head on one side, and looking askance at it. 
The queen looked at me, then at the blanket and her son in turn;
whilst my men hung down their heads, fearful lest they should be
accused of looking at the ladies of the court; and the Wakungu
n'yanzigged again, as if they could not contain the gratification
they felt at the favour shown them.  Nobody had ever brought such
wonderful things to Uganda before, and all loved Bana.

Till now I had expected to vent my wrath on both together for all
past grievances, but this childish, merry, homely scene--the
mother holding up her pride, her son, before the state officers--
melted my heart at once.  I laughed as well as they did, and said
it pleased me excessively to see them both so happy together.  It
was well the king had broken through the old-fashioned laws of
Uganda, by sitting on an iron chair, and adopting European
dresses; for now he was opening a road to cement his own
dominions with my country. I should know what things to send that
would please him.  The king listened, but without replying; and
said, at the conclusion, "It is late, now let us move"; and
walked away, preserving famously the lion's gait.  The mother
also vanished, and I was led away to a hut outside, prepared for
my night's residence.  It was a small, newly-built hut, just
large enough for my bed, with a corner for one servant; so I
turned all my men away, save one--ate my dinner, and hoped to
have a quiet cool night of it, when suddenly Maula flounced in
with all his boys, lighting a fire, and they spread their mbugus
for the night.  In vain I pleaded I could not stand the
suffocation of so many men, especially of Waganda, who eat raw
plantains; and unless they turned out, I should do so, to benefit
by the pure air.  Maula said he had the queen's orders to sleep
with Bana, and sleep there he would; so rather than kick him out,
which I felt inclined to do, I smoked my pipe and drank pombe all
night, turning the people out and myself in, in the morning, to
prepare for a small house-fight with the queen.

11th.--Early in the morning, as I expected, she demanded my
immediate attendance; and so the little diplomatic affair I had
anticipated came on.  I began the affair by intimating that I am
in bed, and have not breakfasted.  So at 10 a.m. another
messenger arrives, to say her majesty is much surprised at my not
coming. What can such conduct mean, when she arranged everything
so nicely for me after my own desire, that she might drink her
medicine properly?  Still I am not up; but nobody will let me
rest for fear of the queen; so, to while away the time, I order
Bombay to call upon her, give the quinine, and tell her all that
has happened; at which she flies into a towering rage, says she
will never touch medicine administered by any other hands but
mine, and will not believe in one word Bombay says, either about
Maula or the hut; for Maula, whose duty necessarily obliged him
to take my servants before her majesty, had primed her with a lot
of falsehoods on the subject; and she had a fondness for Maula,
because he was a clever humbug and exceeding rogue--and sent
Bombay back to fetch me, for nobody had ever dared disobey her
mandates before.

It had now turned noon, and being ready for the visit, I went to
see the queen.  Determined to have her turn, she kept me waiting
for a long time before she would show herself; and at last, when
she came, she flounced up to her curtain, lay down in a huff, and
vented her wrath, holding her head very high, and wishing to know
how I could expect officers, with large establishments, to be
turned out of their homes merely to give me room for one night; I
ought to have been content with my fare; it was no fault of
Maula's.  I tried to explain through Nasib, but she called Nasib
a liar, and listened to Maula who told the lies; then asked for
her medicine; drank it, saying it was a small dose; and walked
off in ill humour as she had come.  I now made up my mind to sit
till 3 p.m., hoping to see the queen again, whilst talking with
some Kidi officers, who, contrary to the general law of the
country, indulged me with some discourses on geography, from
which I gathered, though their stories were rather confused, that
beyond the Asua river, in the Galla country, there was another
lake which was navigated by the inhabitants in very large
vessels; and somewhere in the same neighbourhood there was an
exceedingly high mountain covered with yellow dust, which the
natives collected, etc., etc.

Time was drawing on, and as the queen would not appear of her own
accord, I sent to request a friendly conversation with her before
I left, endeavouring, as well as I could, to persuade her that
the want of cordiality between us was owing to the mistakes of
interpreters, who had not conveyed to her my profound sentiments
of devotion.  This brought her gracious corpulence out all smirks
and smiles, preceded by a basket of potatoes for "Bana, my son."
I began conversation with a  speech of courtesy, explaining how I
had left my brother Grant and my great friend Rumanika at Karague
--hastening, in compliance with the invitation of the king, to
visit him and herself, with the full hope of making friends in
Uganda; but now I had come, I was greatly disappointed; for I
neither saw half enough of their majesties, nor did any of their
officers ever call upon me to converse and pass away the dreary
hours.  All seemed highly pleased, and complimented my speech;
while the queen, turning to her officers, said, "If that is the
case, I will send these men to you"; whereupon the officers,
highly delighted at the prospect of coming to see me, and its
consequence a present, n'yanzigged until I thought their hands
would drop off.  Then her majesty to my thorough annoyance, and
before I had finished half I had to say, rose from her seat, and,
showing her broad stern to the company, walked straight away. 
The officers then drew near me, and begged I would sleep there
another night; but as they had nothing better to offer than the
hut of last night, I declined and went my way, begging them to
call and make friends with me.

12th.--Immediately after breakfast the king sent his pages in a
great hurry to say he was waiting on the hill for me, and begged
I would bring all my guns immediately.  I prepared, thinking,
naturally enough, that some buffaloes had been marked down; for
the boys, as usual, were perfectly ignorant of his designs.  To
my surprise, however, when I mounted the hill half-way to the
palace, I found the king standing, dressed in a rich filagreed
waistcoat, trimmed with gold embroidery, tweedling the loading-
rod in his fingers, and an alfia cap on his head, whilst his
pages held his chair and guns, and a number of officers, with
dogs and goats for offerings, squatted before him.

When I arrived, hat in hand, he smiled, examined my firearms, and
proceeded for sport, leading the way to a high tree, on which
some adjutant birds were nesting, and numerous vultures resting.
This was the sport; Bana must shoot a nundo (adjutant) for the
king's gratification.  I begged him to take a shot himself, as I
really could not demean myself by firing at birds sitting on a
tree; but it was all of no use--no one could shoot as I could,
and they must be shot.  I proposed frightening them out with
stones, but no stone could reach so high; so, to cut the matter
short, I killed an adjutant on the nest, and, as the vultures
flew away, brought one down on the wing, which fell in a garden
enclosure.

The Waganda were for a minute all spell-bound with astonishment,
when the king jumped frantically in the air, clapping his hands
above his head, and singing out, "Woh, woh, woh! what wonders!
Oh, Bana, Bana! what miracles he performs!"--and all the Wakungu
followed in chorus.  "Now load, Bana--load, and let us see you do
it," cried the excited king; but before I was half loaded, he
said, "Come along, come along, and let us see the bird."  Then
directing the officers which way to go--for, by the etiquette of
the court of Uganda, every one must precede the king--he sent
them through a court where his women, afraid of the gun, had been
concealed. Here the rush onward was stopped by newly made fences,
but the king roared to the officers to knock them down. This was
no sooner said than done, by the attendants in a body shoving on
and trampling them under, as an elephant would crush small trees
to keep his course. So pushing, floundering through plaintain and
shrub, pell-mell one upon the other, that the king's pace might
not be checked, or any one come in for a royal kick or blow, they
came upon the prostrate bird.  "Woh, woh, woh!" cried the king
again, "there he is, sure enough; come here, women--come and look
what wonders!"  And all the women, in the highest excitement,
"woh-wohed" as loud as any of the men.  But that was not enough. 
"Come along, Bana," said the king, "we must have some more
sport;" and, saying this he directed the way towards the queen's
palace, the attendants leading, followed by the pages, then the
king, next myself--for I never would walk before him--and finally
the women, some forty or fifty, who constantly attended him.

To make the most of the king's good-humour, while I wanted to
screen myself from the blazing sun, I asked him if he would like
to enjoy the pleasures of an umbrella; and before he had time to
answer, held mine over him as we walked side by side.  The
Wakungu were astonished, and the women prattled in great delight;
whilst the king, hardly able to control himself, sidled and spoke
to his flatterers as if he were doubly created monarch of all he
surveyed. He then, growing more familiar, said, "Now, Bana, do
tell me-- did you not shoot that bird with something more than
common ammunition?  I am sure you did, now; there was magic in
it." And all I said to the contrary would not convince him.  "But
we will see again."  "At buffaloes?" I said.  "No, the buffaloes
are too far off now; we will wait to go after then until I have
given you a hut close by."  Presently, as some herons were flying
overhead, he said, "Now, shoot, shoot!" and I brought a couple
down right and left. He stared, and everybody stared, believing
me to be a magician, when the king said he would like to have
pictures of the birds drawn and hung up in the palace; "but let
us go and shoot some more, for it is truly wonderful."  Similar
results followed, for the herons were continually whirling round,
as they had their nests upon a neighbouring tree; and then the
king ordered his pages to carry all the birds, save the vulture--
which, for some reason, they did not touch--and show them to the
queen.

He then gave the order to move on, and we all repaired to the
palace.  Arrived at the usual throne-room, he took his seat,
dismissed the party of wives who had been following him, as well
as the Wakungu, received pombe from his female evil-eye averters,
and ordered me, with my men, to sit in the sun facing him, till I
complained of the heat, and was allowed to sit by his side. 
Kites, crows, and sparrows were flying about in all directions,
and as they came within shot, nothing would satisfy the excited
boy-king but I must shoot them, and his pages take them to the
queen, till my ammunition was totally expended.  He then wanted
me to send for more shot; and as I told him he must wait for more
until my brothers come, he contented himself with taking two or
three sample grains and ordering his iron-smiths to make some
like them.

Cows were now driven in for me to kill two with one bullet; but
as the off one jumped away when the gun fired, the bullet passed
through the near one, then through all the courts and fences, and
away no one knew where.  The king was delighted, and said he must
keep the rifle to look at for the night.  I now asked permission
to speak with him on some important matters, when he sent his
women away and listened.  I said I felt anxious about the road on
which Mabruki was travelling, to which I added that I had ordered
him to tell Petherick to come here or else to send property to
the value of one thousand dollars; and I felt anxious because
some of the queen's officers felt doubtful about Waganda being
able to penetrate Kidi.  He said I need not concern myself on
that score; he was much more anxious for the white men to come
here than even I was, and he would not send my men into any
danger; but it was highly improper for any of his people to speak
about such subjects.  Then, assembling the women again, he asked
me to load Whitworth for him, when he shot the remaining cow,
holding the rifle in both hands close to his thigh.  The feat, of
course, brought forth great and uproarious congratulations from
his women.  The day thus ended, and I was dismissed.

13th.--Mabriki and Bilal come into camp: they returned last
night; but the Waganda escort, afraid of my obtaining information
of them before the king received it, kept them concealed.  They
had been defeated in Usoga, two marches each of Kira, at the
residence of Nagozigombi, Mtesa's border officer, who gave them
two bullocks, but advised their returning at once to inform the
king that the independent Wasoga had been fighting with his
dependent Wasoga subjects for some time, and the battle would not
be over for two months or more, unless he sent an army to their
assistance.

I now sent Bombay to the king to request an interview, as I had
much of importance to tell him; but the could not be seen, as he
was deep in the interior of the palace enjoying the society of
his wives. The Kamraviona, however, was found there waiting, as
usual, on the mere chance of his majesty taking it into his head
to come out. He asked Bombay if it was true the woman he gave me
ran away; and when Bombay told him, he said, "Oh, he should have
chained her for two or three days, until she became accustomed to
her residence; for women often take fright and run away in that
way, believing strangers to be cannibals."  But Bombay replied,
"She was not good enough for Bana; he let her go off like a dog;
he wants a young and beautiful Mhuma, or none at all."  "Ah,
well, then, if he is so particular, he must wait a bit, for we
have none on hand.  What I gave him is the sort of creature we
give all our guests."  A Msoga was sent by the king to take the
dead adjutant of yesterday out of the nest--for all Wasoga are
expert climbers, which is not the case with the Waganda; but the
man was attacked half-way up the tree by a swarm of bees, and
driven down again.

14th.--After all the vexatious haggling for a house, I gained my
object to-day by a judicious piece of bribery which I had
intended to accomplish whenever I could.  I now succeeded in
sending--for I could not, under the jealous eyes in Uganda, get
it done earlier-- a present of fifteen pints mixed beads, twenty
blue eggs, and five copper bracelets, to the commander-in-chief,
as a mark of friendship.  At the same time I hinted that I should
like him to use his influence in obtaining for me a near and
respectable residence, where I hoped he, as well as all the
Waganda nobility, would call upon me; for my life in Uganda was
utterly miserable, being shut up like a hermit by myself every
day.  The result was, that a number of huts in a large plantain
garden were at once assigned to me, on the face of a hill,
immediately overlooking and close to the main road. It was
considered the "West End."  It had never before been occupied by
any visitors excepting Wahinda ambassadors; and being near, and
in full view of the palace, was pleasant and advantageous, as I
could both hear the constant music, and see the throngs of people
ever wending their way to and from the royal abodes.  I lost no
time in moving all my property, turning out the original
occupants--in selecting the best hut for myself, giving the rest
to my three officers--and ordering my men to build barracks for
themselves, in street form, from my hut to the main road.  There
was one thing only left to be done; the sanitary orders of Uganda
required every man to build himself a house of parliament, such
being the neat and cleanly nature of the Waganda--a pattern to
all other negro tribes.

15th.--As nobody could obtain an interview with the king
yesterday, I went to the palace to-day, and fired three shots--a
signal which was at once answered from within by a double
discharge of a gun I had just lent him on his returning my rifle. 
In a little while, as soon as he had time to dress, the king,
walking like a lion, sallied forth, leading his white dog, and
beckoned me to follow him to the state hut, the court of which
was filled with squatting men as usual, well dressed, and keeping
perfect order.  He planted himself on his throne, and begged me
to sit by his side.  Then took place the usual scene of a court
levee, as described in Chapter X., with the specialty, in this
instance, that the son of the chief executioner--one of the
highest officers of state--was led off for execution, for some
omission or informality in his n'yanzigs, or salutes.

At this levee sundry Wakungu of rank complained that the Wanyambo
plundered their houses at night, and rough-handled their women,
without any respect for their greatness, and, when caught, said
they were Bana's men.  Bombay, who was present, heard the
complaint, and declared these were Suwarora's men, who made use
of the proximity of my camp to cover their own transgressions. 
Then Suwarora's deputation, who were also present, cringed
forward, n'yanzigging like Waganda, and denied the accusation,
when the king gave all warning that he would find out the truth
by placing guards on the look-out at night.

Till this time the king had not heard one word about the defeat
of the party sent for Petherick.  His kingdom might have been
lost, and he would have been no wiser; when the officer who led
Mabruki came forward and told him all that had happened, stating,
in addition to what I heard before, that they took eighty men
with them, and went into battle three times successfully. 
Dismissing business, however, the king turned to me, and said he
never saw anything so wonderful as my shooting in his life; he
was sure it was done by magic, as my gun never missed, and he
wished I would instruct him in the art.  When I denied there was
any art in shooting, further than holding the gun straight, he
shook his head, and getting me to load his revolving pistol for
him, he fired all five barrels into two cows before the
multitude.  He then thought of adjutant-shooting with ball, left
the court sitting, desired me to follow him, and leading the way,
went into the interior of the palace, where only a few select
officers were permitted to follow us.  The birds were wild, and
as nothing was done, I instructed him in the way to fire from his
shoulder, placing the gun in position. He was shy at first, and
all the people laughed at my handling royalty like a schoolboy;
but he soon took to it very good-naturedly, when I gave him my
silk necktie and gold crest-ring, explaining their value, which
he could not comprehend, and telling him we gentlemen prided
ourselves on never wearing brass or copper.

He now begged hard for shot; but I told him again his only chance
of getting any lay in opening the road onwards; it was on this
account, I said, I had come to see him to-day.  He answered, "I
am going to send an army to Usoga to force the way from where
your men were turned back."  But this, I said, would not do for
me, as I saw his people travelled like geese, not knowing the
direction of Gani, or where they were going to when sent.  I
proposed that if he would call all his travelling men of
experience together, I would explain matters to them by a map I
had brought; for I should never be content till I saw Petherick.

The map was then produced.  He seemed to comprehend it
immediately, and assembled the desired Wakungu; but, to my
mortification, he kept all the conversation to himself, Waganda
fashion; spoke a lot of nonsense; and then asked his men what
they thought had better be done.  The sages replied, "Oh, make
friends, and do the matter gently."  But the king proudly raised
his head, laughed them to scorn, and said, "Make friends with men
who have crossed their spears with us already!  Nonsense! they
would only laugh at us; the Uganda spear alone shall do it." 
Hearing this bravado, the Kamraviona, the pages, and the elders,
all rose to a man, with their sticks, and came charging at their
king, swearing they would carry out his wished with their lives. 
The meeting now broke up in the usual unsatisfactory, unfinished
manner, by the king rising and walking away, whilst I returned
with the Kamraviona, who begged for ten more blue eggs in
addition to my present to make a full necklace, and told my men
to call upon him in the morning, when he would give me anything I
wished to eat.  Bombay was then ordered to describe what sort of
food I lived on usually; when, Mganda fashion, he broke a stick
into ten bits, each representing a differing article, and said,
"Bana eat mixed food always"; and explained that stick No. 1
represented beef; No. 2, mutton; No. 3, fowl; No. 4, eggs; No. 5,
fish; No. 6, potatoes; No. 7, plantains; No. 8, pombe; No. 9,
butter; No. 10, flour.

16th.--To-day the king was amusing himself among his women again,
and not to be seen.  I sent Bombay with ten blue eggs as a
present for the Kamraviona, intimating my desire to call upon
him.  He sent me a goat and ten fowls' eggs, saying he was not
visible to strangers on business to-day.  I inferred that he
required the king's permission to receive me.  This double
failure was a more serious affair then a mere slight; for my cows
were eaten up, and my men clamouring incessantly for food; and
though they might by orders help themselves "ku n'yangania"--by
seizing--from the Waganda, it hurt my feelings so much to witness
this, that I tried from the first to dispense with it, telling
the king I had always flogged my men for stealing, and now he
turned them into a pack of thieves. I urged that he should either
allow me to purchase rations, or else feed them from the palace
as Rumanika did; but he always turned a deaf ear, or said that
what Sunna his father had introduced it ill became him to
subvert; and unless my men helped themselves they would die of
starvation.

On the present emergency I resolved to call upon the queen. On
reaching the palace, I sent an officer in to announce my arrival,
and sat waiting for the reply fully half an hour, smoking my
pipe, and listening to her in the adjoining court, where music
was playing, and her voice occasionally rent the air with merry
boisterous laughing.

The messenger returned to say no one could approach her sanctuary
or disturb her pleasure at this hour; I must wait and bide my
time, as the Uganda officers do.  Whew!  Here was another
diplomatic crisis, which had to be dealt with in the usual way. 
"I bide my time!" I said, rising in a towering passion, and
thrashing the air with my ramrod walking-stick, before all the
visiting Wakungu, "when the queen has assured me her door would
always be open to me! I shall leave this court at once, and I
solemnly swear I shall never set foot in it again, unless some
apology be made for treating me like a dog."  Then, returning
home, I tied up all the presents her majesty had given me in a
bundle, and calling Maula and my men together, told them to take
them where they came from; for it ill became me to keep tokens of
friendship when no friendship existed between us.  I came to make
friends with the queen, not to trade or take things from her--and
so forth.  The blackguard Maula, laughing, said, "Bana does not
know what he is doing; it is a heinous offence in Uganda sending
presents back; nobody for their lives dare do so to the queen;
her wrath 