would know no bounds.  She will say, "I took a few
trifles from Bana as specimens of his country, but they shall all
go back, and the things the king has received shall go back also,
for we are all of one family'; and then won't Bana be very sorry? 
Moreover, Wakungu will be killed by dozens, and lamentations will
reign throughout the court to propitiate the devils who brought
such disasters on them."  Bombay, also in a fright, said, "Pray
don't do so; you don't know these savages as we do; there is no
knowing what will happen; it may defeat our journey altogether.
Further, we have had no food these four days, because row
succeeds row.  If we steal, you flog us; and if we ask the
Waganda for food, they beat us.  We don't know what to do."  I
was imperative, however, and said, "Maula must take back these
things in the morning, or stand the consequences."  In fact, I
found that, like the organ-grinders in London, to get myself
moved on I must make myself troublesome.

17th.--The queen's presents were taken back by Maula and Nasib,
whilst I went to see the Kamraviona.  Even this gentleman kept me
waiting for some time to show his own importance, and then
admitted me into one of his interior courts, where I found him
sitting on the ground with several elders; whilst Wasoga
minstrels played on their lap-harps, and sang songs in praise of
their king, and the noble stranger who wore fine clothes and
eclipsed all previous visitors. At first, on my approach, the
haughty young chief, very handsome, and twenty years of age, did
not raise his head; then he begged me to be seated, and even
enquired after my health, in a listless, condescending kind of
manner, as if the exertion of talking was too much for his
constitution or his rank; but he soon gave up this nonsense as I
began to talk, inquired, amongst other things, why I did not see
the Waganda at my house, when I said I should so much like to
make acquaintance with them, and begged to be introduced to the
company who were present.

I was now enabled to enlarge the list of topics on which it is
prohibited to the Waganda to speak or act under pain of death. No
one even dare ever talk about the royal pedigree of the countries
that have been conquered, or even of any neighbouring countries;
no one dare visit the king's guests, or be visited by them,
without leave, else the king, fearing sharers in his plunder,
would say, What are you plucking our goose for?  Neither can any
one cast his eye for a moment on the women of the palace, whether
out walking or at home, lest he should be accused of amorous
intentions.  Beads and brass wire, exchanged for ivory or slaves,
are the only articles of foreign manufacture any Mganda can hold
in his possession. Should anything else be seen in his house--for
instance, cloth-- his property would be confiscated and his life
taken.

I was now introduced to the company present, of whom one Mgema,
an elderly gentleman of great dignity, had the honour to carry
Sunna the late king; Mpungu, who cooked for Sunna, also ranks
high in court; then Usungu and Kunza, executioners, rank very
high, enjoying the greatest confidence with the king; and,
finally, Jumba and Natigo, who traced their pedigree to the age
of the first Uganda king.  As I took down a note of their several
names, each seemed delighted at finding his name written down by
me; and Kunza, the executioner, begged as a great favour that I
would plead to the king to spare his son's life, who, as I have
mentioned, was ordered out to execution on the last levee day. 
At first I thought it necessary, for the sake of maintaining my
dignity, to raise objections, and said it would ill become one of
my rank to make any request that might possibly be rejected; but
as the Kamraviona assured me there would be no chance of failure,
and everybody else agreed with him, I said it would give me
intense satisfaction to serve him; and the old man squeezed my
hand as if overpowered with joy.

This meeting, as might be imagined, was a very dull one, because
the company, being tongue-tied as regards everything of external
interest, occupied themselves solely on matters of home business,
or indulged their busy tongues, Waganda fashion, in gross
flattery of their "illustrious visitor."  In imitation of the
king, the Kamraviona now went from one hut to another, requesting
us to follow that we might see all his greatness, and then took
me alone into a separate court, to show me his women, some five-
and-twenty of the ugliest in Uganda.  This, he added, was a mark
of respect he had never conferred on any person before; but,
fearing lest I should misunderstand his meaning and covet any of
them, he said, "Mind they are only to be looked at."

As we retired to the other visitors, the Kamraviona, in return
for some courteous remarks of mine, said all the Waganda were
immensely pleased with my having come to visit them; and as he
heard my country is governed by a woman, what would I say if he
made the Waganda dethrone her, and create me king instead? 
Without specially replying, I showed him a map, marking off the
comparative sizes of British and Waganda possessions, and shut
him up.  The great Kamraviona, or commander-in-chief, with all
his wives, has no children, and was eager to know if my skill
could avail to remove this cloud in his fortunes.  He generously
gave me a goat and eggs, telling my men they might help
themselves to plantains from any gardens they liked beyond
certain limits, provided they did not enter houses or take
anything else.  He then said he was tired and walked away without
another word.

On returning home I found Nasib and Maula waiting for me, with
all the articles that had been returned to the queen very neatly
tied together.  They had seen her majesty, who, on receiving my
message, pretended excessive anger with her doorkeeper for not
announcing my arrival yesterday--flogged him severely--inspected
all the things returned--folded them up again very neatly with
her own hands-- said she felt much hurt at the mistake which had
arisen, and hoped I would forgive and forget it, as her doors
would always be open to me.

I now had a laugh at my friends Maula and Bombay for their
misgivings of yesterday, telling them I knew more of human nature
than they did; but they shook their heads, and said it was all
very well Bana having done it, but if Arabs or any other person
had tried the same trick, it would have been another affair. 
"Just so," said I; "but then, don't you see, I know my value
here, which makes all the difference you speak of."

18th.--Whilst walking towards the palace to pay the king a
friendly visit, I met two of my men speared on the head, and
streaming with blood; they had been trying to help themselves to
plantains carried on the heads of Waganda; but the latter proving
too strong, my people seized a boy and woman from their party as
witnesses, according to Uganda law, and ran away with them, tied
hand and neck together.  With this addition to my attendance I
first called in at the Kamraviona's for justice; but as he was
too proud to appear at once, I went on to the king's fired three
shots as usual, and obtained admittance at once, when I found him
standing in a yard dressed in cloth, with his iron chair behind
him, and my double-gun loaded with half charges of powder and a
few grains of iron shot, looking eagerly about for kites to fly
over.  His quick eye, however, readily detected my wounded men
and prisoners, as also some Wazinza prisoners led in by Waganda
police, who had been taken in the act of entering Waganda houses
and assailing their women. Thus my men were cleared of a false
stigma; and the king, whilst praising them, ordered all the
Wazinza to leave his dominions on the morrow.

The other case was easily settled by my wounded men receiving
orders to keep their prisoners till claimed, when, should any
people come forward, they would be punished, otherwise their loss
in human stock would be enough.  The Wanguana had done quite
right to seize on the highway, else they would have starved; such
was the old law, and such is the present one.  It was no use our
applying for a change of system.  At this stage of the business,
the birds he was watching having appeared, the king, in a great
state of excitement, said, "Shoot that kite," and then "Shoot
that other"; but the charges were too light; and the birds flew
away, kicking with their claws as if merely stung a little.

Whilst this was going on, the Kamraviona, taking advantage of my
having opened the door with the gun, walked in to make his
salutations.  A blacksmith produced two very handsome spears, and
a fisherman a basket of fish, from which two fish were taken out
and given to me.  The king then sat on his iron chair, and I on a
wooden box which I had contrived to stuff with the royal grass he
gave me, and so made a complete miniature imitation of his
throne.  The folly in now allowing me to sit upon my portable
iron stool, as an ingenious device for carrying out my
determination to sit before him like an Englishman.  I wished to
be communicative, and, giving him a purse of money, told him the
use and value of the several coins; but he paid little regard to
them, and soon put them down. The small-talk of Uganda had much
more attractions to his mind than the wonders of the outer world,
and he kept it up with his Kamraviona until rain fell and
dispersed the company.

19th.--As the queen, to avoid future difficulties, desired my
officers to acquaint her beforehand whenever I wished to call
upon her, I sent Nasib early to say I would call in the
afternoon; but he had to wait till the evening before he could
deliver the message, though she had been drumming and playing all
the day.  She then complained against my men for robbing her
gardeners on the highway, wished to know why I didn't call upon
her oftener, appointed the following morning for an interview,
and begged I would bring her some liver medicines, as she
suffered from constant twinges in her right side, sealing her
"letter" with a present of a nest of eggs and one fowl.

Whilst Nasib was away, I went to the Kamraviona to treat him as I
had the king.  He appeared a little more affable to-day, yet
still delighted in nothing but what was frivolous.  My beard, for
instance, engrossed the major part of the conversation; all the
Waganda would come out in future with hairy faces; but when I
told them that, to produce such a growth, they must wash their
faces with milk, and allow a cat to lick it off, they turned up
their noses in utter contempt.

20th.--I became dead tired of living all alone, with nothing else
to occupy my time save making these notes every day in my office
letter-book, as my store of stationery was left at Karague.  I
had no chance of seeing any visitors, save the tiresome pages,
who asked me to give or to do something for the king every day;
and my prospect was cheerless, as I had been flatly refused a
visit to Usoga until Grant should come.  For want of better
amusement, I made a page of Lugoi, a sharp little lad, son of the
late Beluch, but adopted by Uledi, and treated him as a son,
which he declared he wished to be, for he liked me better than
Uledi as a father. He said he disliked Uganda, where people's
lives are taken like those of fowls; and wished to live at the
coast, the only place he ever heard of, where all the Wanguana
come from--great swells in Lugoi's estimation.  Now, with Lugoi
dressed in a new white pillow-case, with holes trimmed with black
tape for his head and arms to go through, a dagger tied with red
bindera round his waist, and a square of red blanket rolled on
his shoulder as a napkin, for my gun to rest on, or in place of a
goat-skin run when he wished to sit down, I walked off to inquire
how the Kamraviona was, and took my pictures with me.

Lugoi's dress, however, absorbed all their thoughts, and he was
made to take it off and put it on again as often as any fresh
visitor came to call.  Hardly a word was said about anything
else; even the pictures, which generally are in such demand,
attracted but little notice.  I asked the Kamraviona to allow me
to draw his pet dog; when the king's sister Miengo came in and
sat down, laughing and joking with me immoderately.

At first there was a demur about my drawing the dog--whether from
fear of bewitching the animal or not, I cannot say; but instead
of producing the pet--a beautifully-formed cream-coloured dog--a
common black one was brought in, which I tied in front of Miengo,
and then drew both woman and dog together.  After this unlawful
act was discovered, of drawing the king's sister without his
consent, the whole company roared with laughter, and pretended
nervous excitement lest I should book them likewise.  One of my
men, Sangoro, did not return to camp last night from foraging;
and as my men suspect the Waganda must have murdered him, I told
the Kamraviona, requesting him to find out; but he coolly said,
"Look for him yourselves two days more, for Wanguana often make
friends with our people, and so slip away from their masters; but
as they are also often murdered, provided you cannot find him in
that time, we will have the Mganga out."

21st.--Last night I was turned out of my bed by a terrible hue
and cry from the quarter allotted to Rozaro and his Wanyambo
companions; for the Waganda had threatened to demolish my men,
one by one, for seizing their pombe and plaintains, though done
according to the orders of the king; and now, finding the
Wanyambo nearest to the road, they set on them by moonlight, with
spear and club, maltreating them severely, till, with
reinforcements, the Wanyambo gained the ascendancy, seized two
spears and one shield as a trophy, and drove their enemies off. 
In the morning, I sent the Wakungu off with the trophies to the
king, again complaining that he had turned my men into a pack of
highwaymen, and, as I foresaw, had thus created enmity between
the Waganda and them, much to my annoyance. I therefore begged he
would institute some means to prevent any further occurrence of
such scenes, otherwise I would use firearms in self-defence.

Whilst these men were on this mission, I went on a like errand to
the queen, taking my page Lugoi with the liver medicine.  The
first object of remark was Lugoi, as indeed it was everywhere;
for, as I walked along, crowds ran after the little phenomenon. 
Then came the liver questions; and, finally what I wanted--her
complaint against my men for robbing on the road, as it gave me
the opportunity of telling her the king was doing what I had been
trying to undo with my stick ever since I left the coast; and I
begged she would use influence to correct these disagreeables. 
She told me for the future to send my men to her palace for food,
and rob no more; in the meanwhile, here were some plantains for
them.  She then rose and walked away, leaving me extremely
disappointed that I could not make some more tangible arrangement
with her--such as, if my men came and found the gate shut, what
were they to do then? there were forty-five of them; how much
would she allow; etc. etc.  But this was a true specimen of the
method of transacting business among the royal family of Uganda. 
They gave orders without knowing how they are to be carried out,
and treat all practical arrangements as trifling details not
worth attending to.

After this unsatisfactory interview, I repaired to the king's,
knowing the power of my gun to obtain an interview, whilst
doubting the ability of the Wakungu to gain an audience for me. 
Such was the case.  These men had been sitting all day without
seeing the king, and three shots opened his gate immediately to
me.  He was sitting on the iron chair in the shade of the court,
attended by some eighty women, tweedling the loading rod in his
fingers; but as my rod appeared a better one than his, they were
exchanged.  I then gave him a tortoise-shell comb to comb his
hair straight with, as he invariably remarked on the beautiful
manner in which I dressed my hair, making my uncap to show it to
his women, and afterwards asked my men to bring on the affair of
last night.  They feared, they said, to speak on such subjects
whilst the women were present. I begged for a private audience;
still they would not speak until encouraged and urged beyond all
patience.  I said, in Kisuahili, "Kbakka" (king), "my men are
afraid to tell you what I want to say"; when Maula, taking
advantage of my having engaged his attention, though the king did
not understand one word I said, said of himself, by way of
currying favour, "I saw a wonderful gun in Rumankika's hands,
with six barrells; not a short one like your fiver" (meaning the
revolving pistol) "but a long one, as long as my arm." "Indeed,"
says the king, "we must have that."  A page was then sent for by
Maula, who, giving him a bit of stick representing the gun
required, told him to fetch it immediately.

The king then said to me, "What is powder made of?"  I began with
sulphur (kibriti), intending to explain everything; but the word
kibriti was enough for him, and a second stick was sent for
kibriti, the bearer being told to hurry for his life and fetch
it.  The king now ordered some high officers who were in waiting
to approach. They come, almost crouching to their knees, with
eyes averted from the women, and n'yanzigged for the favour of
being called, till they streamed with perspiration.  Four young
women, virgins, the daughters of these high officers, nicely
dressed, were shown in as brides, and ordered to sit with the
other women.  A gamekeeper brought in baskets small antelopes,
called mpeo--with straight horns resembling those of the
saltiana, but with coats like the hog-deer of India--intended for
the royal kitchen.  Elderly gentlemen led in goats as commutation
for offences, and went through the ceremonies due for the favour
of being relieved of so much property.  Ten cows were then driven
in, plundered from Unyoro, and outside, the voices of the brave
army who captured them were heard n'yanzigging vehemently. 
Lastly, some beautifully made shields were presented, and,
because extolled, n'yanzigged over; when the king rose abruptly
and walked straight away, leaving my fools of men no better off
for food, no reparation for their broken heads, than if I had
never gone there.

22d.--I called on the queen to inquire after her health, and to
know how my men were to be fed; but, without giving me time to
speak, she flew at me again about my men plundering.  The old
story was repeated; I had forty-five hungry men, who must have
food, and unless either she or the king would make some proper
provision for them, I could not help it.  Again she promised to
feed them, but she objected to them bearing swords, "for of what
use are swords? If the Waganda don't like the Wanguana, can
swords prevail in our country?"  And, saying this, she walked
away.  I thought to myself that she must have directed the attack
upon my camp last night and is angry at the Wanguana swords
driving her men away.  At 3 p.m. I visited the king, to have a
private chat, and state my grievances; but the three shots fired
brought him out to levee, when animals and sundry other things
were presented; and appointments of Wakungu were made for the
late gallant services of some of the men in plundering Unyoro.

The old executioner, Kunza, being present, I asked the king to
pardon his son.  Surprised, at first Mtesa said, "Can it be
possible Bana has asked for this?"  And when assured, in great
glee he ordered the lad's release, amidst shouts of laughter from
everybody but the agitated father, who n'yanzigged, cried, and
fell at my feet, making a host of powerful signs as a token of
his gratitude; for his heart was too full of emotion to give
utterance to his feelings.  The king them, in high good-humour,
said, "You have called on me many times without broaching the
subject of Usoga, and perhaps you may fancy we are not exerting
ourselves in the matter; but my army is only now returning from
war" (meaning plundering in Unyoro), "and I am collecting another
one, which will open Usoga effectually."  Before I could say
anything, the king started up in his usual manner, inviting a
select few to follow him to another court, when my medicine-chest
was inspected, and I was asked to operate for fistula on one of
the royal executioners.  I had no opportunity of incurring this
responsibility; for while professing to prepare for the
operation, the king went off it a fling.

When I got home I found Sangoro, whom we thought lost or
murdered, quietly ensconced in camp.  He had been foraging by
himself a long way from camp, in a neighbourhood where many of
the king's women are kept; and it being forbidden ground, he was
taken up by the keepers, placed in the stocks, and fed, until to-
day, when he extricated his legs by means of his sword, and ran
away.  My ever-grumbling men mobbed me again, clamouring for
food, saying, as they eyed my goats, I lived at ease and
overlooked their wants.  In vain I told them they had fared more
abundantly than I had since we entered Uganda; whilst I spared my
goats to have a little flesh of their cows as rapidly as
possible, selling the skins for pombe, which I seldom tasted;
they robbed me as long as I had cloth or beads, and now they had
all become as fat as hogs by lifting food off the Waganda lands.
As I could not quiet them, I directed that, early next morning,
Maula should go to the king and Nasib to the queen, while I
proposed going to Kamraviona's to work them all three about this
affair of food.

23d.--According to the plan of last night, I called early on the
Kamraviona.  He promised me assistance, but with an air which
seemed to say, What are the sufferings of other men to me?  So I
went home to breakfast, doubting if anything ever would be done. 
As Kaggo, however, the second officer of importance, had
expressed a wish to see me, I sent Bombay to him for food, and
waited the upshot. Presently the king sent to say he wished to
see me with my compass; for the blackguard Maula had told him I
possessed a wonderful instrument, by looking at which I could
find my way all over the world.  I went as requested, and found
the king sitting outside the palace on my chair dressed in
cloths, with my silk neckerchief and crest-ring, playing his
flute in concert with his brothers, some thirty-odd young men and
boys, one half of them manacled, the other half free, with an
officer watching over them to see that they committed no
intrigues.

We then both sat side by side in the shade of the courtwalls,
conversed and had music by turns; for the king had invited his
brothers here to please me, the first step towards winning the
coveted compass.  My hair must now be shown and admired, then my
shoes taken off and inspected, and my trousers tucked up to show
that I am white all over.  Just at this time Bombay, who had been
in great request, came before us laden with plantains.  This was
most opportune; for the king asked what he had been about, and
then the true state of the case as regards my difficulties in
obtaining food were, I fancy, for the first time, made known to
him.  In a great fit of indignation he said, "I once killed a
hundred Wakungu in a single day, and now, if they won't feed my
guests, I will kill a hundred more; for I know the physic for
bumptiousness."  Then, sending his brothers away, he asked me to
follow him into the back part of the palace, as he loved me so
much he must show me everything.  We walked along under the
umbrella, first looking down one street of huts, then up another,
and, finally, passing the sleeping-chamber, stopped at one
adjoining it.  "That hut," said the king, "is the one I sleep in;
no one of my wives dare venture within it unless I call her."  He
let me feel immediately that for the distinction conferred on me
in showing me this sacred hut a return was expected.  Could I
after that refuse him such a mere trifle as a compass?  I told
him he might as well put my eyes out and ask me to walk home, as
take away that little instrument, which could be of no use to
him, as he could not read or understand it.  But this only
excited his cupidity; he watched it twirling round and pointing
to the north, and looked and begged again, until, tired of his
importunities, I told him I must wait until the Usoga road was
open before I could part with it, and then the compass would be
nothing to what I would give him.  Hearing this, "That is all on
my shoulders; as sure as I live it shall be done; for that
country has no king, and I have long been desirous of taking it." 
I declined, however, to give him the instrument on the security
of his promise, and he went to breakfast.

I walked off to Usungu to see what I could do for him in his
misery. I found that he had a complication of evils entirely
beyond my healing power, and among them inveterate forms of the
diseases which are generally associated with civilisation and its
social evils. I could do nothing to cure him, but promised to do
whatever was in my power to alleviate his sufferings.

24th.--Before breakfast I called on poor Usungu, prescribing hot
coffee to be drunk with milk every morning, which astonished him
not a little, as the negroes only use coffee for chewing.  He
gave my men pombe and plantains.  On my return I met a page sent
to invite me to the palace.  I found the king sitting with a
number of women. He was dressed in European clothes, part of them
being a pair of trousers he begged for yesterday, that he might
appear like Bana. This was his first appearance in trousers, and
his whole attire, contrasting strangely with his native
habiliments, was in his opinion very becoming, though to me a
little ridiculous; for the legs of the trousers, as well as the
sleeves of the waistcoat, were much too short, so that his black
feet and hands stuck out at the extremities as an organ-player's
monkey's do, whilst the cockscomb on his head prevented a fez
cap, which was part of his special costume for the occasion, from
sitting properly. This display over, the women were sent away,
and I saw shown into a court, where a large number of plantains
were placed in a line upon the ground for my men to take away,
and we were promised the same treat every day.  From this we
proceeded to another court, where we sat in the shade together,
when the women returned again, but were all dumb, because my
interpreters dared not for their lives say anything, even on my
account, to the king's women.  Getting tired, I took out my
sketch-book and drew Lubuga, the pet, which amused the king
immensely as he recognised her cockscomb.

Then twenty naked virgins, the daughters of Wakungu, all smeared
and shining with grease, each holding a small square of mbugu for
a fig-leaf, marched in a line before us, as a fresh addition to
the harem, whilst the happy fathers floundered n'yanzigging on
the ground, delighted to find their darlings appreciated by the
king. Seeing this done in such a quiet mild way before all my
men, who dared not lift their heads to see it, made me burst into
a roar of laughter, and the king, catching the infection from me,
laughed as well: but the laughing did not end there--for the
pages, for once giving way to nature, kept bursting--my men
chuckled in sudden gusts--while even the women, holding their
mouths for fear of detection, responded--and we all laughed
together.  Then a sedate old dame rose from the squatting mass,
ordered the virgins to right-about, and marched them off, showing
their still more naked reverses.  I now obtained permission for
the Wakungu to call upon me, and fancied I only required my
interpreters to speak out like men when I had anything to say, to
make my residence in Uganda both amusing and instructive; but
though the king, carried off by the prevailing good-humour of the
scene we had both witnessed, supported me, I found that he had
counter-ordered what he had said as soon as I had gone, and, in
fact, no Mkungu ever dared come near me.

25th.--To-day I visited Usungu again, and found him better.  He
gave pombe and plantains for my people, but would not talk to me,
though I told him he had permission to call on me.

I have now been for some time within the court precincts, and
have consequently had an opportunity of witnessing court customs. 
Among these, nearly every day since I have changed my residence,
incredible as it may appear to be, I have seen one, two, or three
of the wretched palace women led away to execution, tied by the
hand, and dragged along by one of the body-guard, crying out, as
she went to premature death, "Hai Minange!" (O my lord!)
"Kbakka!" (My king!) "Hai N'yawo!" (My mother!) at the top of her
voice, in the utmost despair and lamentation; and yet there was
not a soul who dared lift hand to save any of them, though many
might be heard privately commenting on their beauty.

26th.--To-day, to amuse the king, I drew a picture of himself
holding a levee, and proceeded to visit him.  On the way I found
the highroad thronged with cattle captured in Unyoro; and on
arrival at the ante-chamber, amongst the officers in waiting,
Masimbi (Mr Cowries or Shells), the queen's uncle, and Congow, a
young general, who once led an army into Unyoro, past Kamrasi's
palace. They said they had obtained leave for me to visit them,
and were eagerly looking out for the happy event.  At once, on
firing, I was admitted to the king's favourite place, which, now
that the king had a movable chair to sit upon, was the shade of
the court screen. We had a chat; the picture was shown to the
women; the king would like to have some more, and gave me leave
to draw in the palace any time I liked.  At the same time he
asked for my paint-box, merely to look at it.  Though I
repeatedly dunned him for it, I could never get it back from him
until I was preparing to leave Uganda.

27th.--After breakfast I started on a visit to Congow; but
finding he had gone to the king as usual, called at Masimbi's and
he being absent also, I took advantage of my proximity to the
queen's palace to call on her majesty.  For hours I was kept
waiting; firstly, because she was at breakfast; secondly, because
she was "putting on medicine"; and, thirdly, because the sun was
too powerful for her complexion; when I became tired of her
nonsense, and said, "If she does not wish to see me, she had
better say so at once, else I shall walk away; for the last time
I came I saw her but for a minute, when she rudely turned her
back upon me, and left me sitting by myself." I was told not to
be in a hurry--she would see me in the evening. This promise
might probably be fulfilled six blessed hours from the time when
it was made; but I thought to myself, every place in Uganda is
alike when there is no company at home, and so I resolved to sit
the time out, like Patience on a monument, hoping something funny
might turn up after all.

At last her majesty stumps out, squats behind my red blanket,
which is converted into a permanent screen, and says hastily, or
rather testily, "Can't Bana perceive the angry state of the
weather?--clouds flying about, and the wind blowing half a gale?
Whenever that is the case, I cannot venture out."  Taking her lie
without an answer, I said, I had now been fifty days or so doing
nothing in Uganda--not one single visitor of my own rank ever
came near me, and I could not associated with people far below
her condition and mine--in fact, all I had to amuse me at home
now was watching a hen lay her eggs upon my spare bed.  Her
majesty became genial, as she had been before, and promised to
provide me with suitable society.  I then told her I had desired
my officers several times to ask the king how marriages were
conducted in this country, as they appeared so different from
ours, but they always said they dared not put such a question to
him, and now I hoped she would explain it to me.  To tell her I
could not get anything from the king, I knew would be the surest
way of eliciting what I wanted from her, because of the jealousy
between the two courts; and in this instance it was fully proved,
for she brightened up at once, and, when I got her to understand
something of what I meant by a marriage ceremony, in high good
humour entered on a long explanation, to the following effect:--

There are no such things as marriages in Uganda; there are no
ceremonies attached to it.  If any Mkungu possessed of a pretty
daughter committed an offence, he might give her to the king as a
peace-offering; if any neighbouring king had a pretty daughter,
and the king of Uganda wanted her, she might be demanded as a
fitting tribute.  The Wakungu in Uganda are supplied with women
by the king, according to their merits, from seizures in battle
abroad, or seizures from refractory officers at home.  The women
are not regarded as property according to the Wanyamuezi
practice, though many exchange their daughters; and some women,
for misdemeanours, are sold into slavery; whilst others are
flogged, or are degraded to do all the menial services of the
house.

The Wakungu then changed the subject by asking, if I married a
black woman, would there be any offspring, and what would be
their colour? The company now became jovial, when the queen
improved it by making a significant gesture, and with roars of
laughter asking me if I would like to be her son-in-law, for she
had some beautiful daughters, either of the Wahuma, or Waganda
breed. Rather staggered at first by this awful proposal, I
consulted Bombay what I should do with one if I got her.  He,
looking more to number one than my convenience, said, "By all
means accept the offer, for if YOU don't like her, WE should, and
it would be a good means of getting her out of this land of
death, for all black people love Zanzibar." The rest need not be
told; as a matter of course I had to appear very much gratified,
and as the bowl went round, all became uproarious.  I must wait a
day or two, however, that a proper selection might be made; and
when the marriage came off, I was to chain the fair one two or
three days, until she became used to me, else, from mere fright,
she might run away.

To keep up the spirits of the queen, though her frequent potions
of pombe had wellnigh done enough, I admired her neck-ring,
composed of copper wire, with a running inlaid twist of iron, and
asked her why she wore such a wreath of vine-leaves, as I had
often seen on some of the Wakungu.  On this she produced a number
of rings similar to the one she wore, and taking off her own,
placed it round my neck. Then, pointing to her wreath, she said,
"This is the badge of a kidnapper's office--whoever wears it,
catches little children." I inferred that its possession, as an
insignia of royalty, conferred on the bearer the power of
seizure, as the great seal in this country confers power on
public officers.

The queen's dinner was now announced; and, desiring me to remain
where I was for a short time, she went to it.  She sent me
several dishes (plantain-leaves), with well-cooked beef and
mutton, and a variety of vegetables, from her table, as well as a
number of round moist napkins, made in the shape of wafers, from
the freshly-drawn plantain fibres, to wash the hands and face
with.  There was no doubt now about her culinary accomplishments. 
I told her so when she returned, and that I enjoyed her parties
all the more because they ended with a dinner.  "More pombe, more
pombe," cried the queen, full of mirth and glee, helping
everybody round in turn, and shouting and laughing at their
Kiganda witticisms--making, though I knew not a word said, an
amusing scene to behold--till the sun sank; and her majesty
remarking it, turned to her court and said, "If I get up, will
Bana also rise, and not accuse me of deserting him?"  With this
speech a general rising took place, and, watching the queen's
retiring, I stood with my hat in hand, whilst all the Wakungu
fell upon their knees, and then all separated.

28th.--I went to the palace, and found, as usual, a large levee
waiting the king's pleasure to appear; amongst whom were the
Kamraviona, Masimbi, and the king's sister Miengo.  I fired my
gun, and admitted at once, but none of the others could follow me
save Miengo.  The king, sitting on the chair with his women by
his side, ordered twelve cloths, the presents of former Arab
visitors, to be brought before him; and all of these I was
desired to turn into European garments, like my own coats,
trousers, and waistcoats. It was no use saying I had no tailors--
the thing must be done somehow; for he admired my costume
exceedingly, and wished to imitate it now he had cloth enough for
ever to dispense with the mbugu.

As I had often begged the king to induce his men, who are all
wonderfully clever artisans, to imitate the chair and other
things I gave him, I now told him if he would order some of his
sempsters, who are far cleverer with the needle than my men, to
my camp, I would cut up some old clothes, and so teach them how
to work. This was agreed to, and five cows were offered as a
reward; but as his men never came, mine had to do the job.

Maula then engaged the king's attention for fully an hour,
relating what wonderful things Bana kept in his house, if his
majesty would only deign to see them; and for this humbug got
rewarded by a present of three women.  Just at this juncture an
adjutant flew overhead, and, by way of fun, I presented my gun,
when the excited king, like a boy from school, jumped up,
forgetting his company, and cried, "Come, Bana, and shoot the
nundo; I know where he has gone--follow me."  And away we went,
first through one court, then through another, till we found the
nundo perched on a tree, looking like a sedate old gentleman with
a bald head, and very sharp, long nose.  Politeness lost the
bird; for whilst I wished the king to shoot, he wished me to do
so, from fear of missing it himself.  He did not care about
vultures--he could practise at them at any time; but he wanted a
nundo above all things.  The bird, however, took the hint, and
flew away.




                          Chapter XIII



                   Palace, Uganda--Continued

A Visit to a Distinguished Statesman--A Visit from the King--
Royal Sport--The Queen's Present of Wives--The Court Beauties and
their Reverses--Judicial Procedure in Uganda--Buffalo-Hunting--A
Musical Party--My Medical Practice--A Royal Excursion on the
N'yanza-- The Canoes of Uganda--A Regatta--Rifle Practice--
Domestic Difficulties--Interference of a Magician--The King's
Brothers.

29th.--According to appointment I went early this morning to
visit Congow.  He kept me some time waiting in his outer hut, and
then called me in to where I found him sitting with his women--a
large group, by no means pretty.  His huts are numerous, the
gardens and courts all very neat and well kept.  He was much
delighted with my coming, produced pombe, and asked me what I
thought of his women, stripping them to the waist.  He assured me
that he had thus paid me such a compliment as nobody else had
ever obtained, since the Waganda are very jealous of one another-
-so much so, that any one would be killed if found starring upon
a woman even in the highways. I asked him what use he had for so
many women?  To which he replied, "None whatever; the king gives
them to us to keep up our rank, sometimes as many as one hundred
together, and we either turn them into wives, or make servants of
them, as we please."  Just then I heard that Mkuenda, the queen's
woman-keeper, was outside waiting for me, but dared not come in,
because Congow's women were all out; so I asked leave to go home
to breakfast, much to the surprise of Congow, who thought I was
his guest for the whole day.  It is considered very indecorous in
Uganda to call upon two persons in one day, though even the king
or the queen should be one of them.  Then, as there was no help
for it--Congow could not detain me when hungry--he showed me a
little boy, the only child he had, and said, with much fatherly
pride, "Both the king and queen have called on me to see this
fine little fellow"; and we parted to meet again some other day. 
Outside his gate I found Mkuenda, who said the queen had sent him
to invite "her son" to bring her some stomach medicine in the
morning, and come to have a chat with her.  With Mkuenda I walked
home; but he was so awed by the splendour of my hut, with its few
blankets and bit of chintz, that he would not even sit upon a
cow-skin, but asked if any Waganda dared venture in there.  He
was either too dazzled or too timid to answer any questions, and
in a few minutes walked away again.

After this, I had scarcely swallowed by breakfast before I
received a summons from the king to meet him out shooting, with
all the Wanguana armed, and my guns; and going towards the
palace, found him with a large staff, pages and officers as well
as women, in a plantain garden, looking eagerly out for birds,
whilst his band was playing.  In addition to his English dress,
he wore a turban, and pretended that the glare of the sun was
distressing his eyes--for, in fact, he wanted me to give him a
wideawake like my own.  Then, as if a sudden freak had seized
him, though I knew it was on account of Maula's having excited
his curiosity, he said, "Where does Bana live? lead away." 
Bounding and scrambling, the Wakungu, the women and all, went
pell-mell through everything towards my hut.  If the Kamraviona
or any of the boys could not move fast enough, on account of the
crops on the fields, they were piked in the back till half
knocked over; but, instead of minding, they trotted on,
n'yanzigging as if honoured by a kingly poke, though treated like
so many dogs.

Arrived at the hut, the king took off his turban as I took off my
hat, and seated himself on my stool; whilst the Kamraviona, with
much difficulty, was induced to sit upon a cowskin, and the women
at first were ordered to squat outside.  Everything that struck
the eye was much admired and begged for, though nothing so much
as my wideawake and mosquito-curtains; then, as the women were
allowed to have a peep in and see Bana in his den, I gave them
two sacks of beads, to make the visit profitable, the only
alternative left me from being forced into inhospitality, for no
one would drink from my cup.  Moreover, a present was demanded by
the laws of the country.

The king, excitedly impatient, now led the way again, shooting
hurry-scurry through my men's lines, which were much commented on
as being different from Waganda hutting, on to the tall tree with
the adjutant's nest.  One young bird was still living in it. 
There was no shot, so bullets must be fired; and the cunning
king, wishing to show off, desired me to fire simultaneously with
himself.  We fired, but my bullet struck the bough the nest was
resting on; we fired again, and the bullet passed through the
nest without touching the bird.  I then asked the king to allow
me to try his Whitworth, to which a little bit of stick, as a
charm to secure a correct aim, had been tied below the trigger-
guard.  This time I broke the bird's leg, and knocked him half
out of the nest; so, running up to the king, I pointed to the
charm, saying, That has done it--hoping to laugh him out of the
folly; but he took my joke in earnest, and he turned to his men,
commenting on the potency of the charm.  Whilst thus engaged, I
took another rifle and brought the bird down altogether.  "Woh,
woh, woh!" shouted the king; "Bana, Mzungu, Mzungu!" he repeated,
leaping and clapping his hands, as he ran full speed to the
prostrate bird, whilst the drums beat, and the Wakungu followed
him: "Now, is not this a wonder? but we must go and shoot
another."  "Where?" I said; "we may walk a long way without
finding, if we have nothing but our eyes to see with.  Just send
for your telescope, and then I will show you how to look for
birds." Surprised at this announcement, the king sent his pages
flying for the instrument, and when it came I instructed him how
to use it; when he could see with it, and understand its powers,
his astonishment knew no bounds; and, turning to his Wakungu, he
said, laughing, "Now I do see the use of this thing I have been
shutting up in the palace.  On that distant tree I can see three
vultures.  To its right there is a hut, with a woman sitting
inside the portal, and many goats are feeding all about the
palace, just as large and distinct as if I was close by them."

The day was now far spent, and all proceeded towards the palace.
On the way a mistletoe was pointed out as a rain-producing tree,
probably because, on a former occasion, I had advised the king to
grow groves of coffee-trees about his palace to improve its
appearance, and supply the court with wholesome food--at the same
time informing him that trees increase the falls of rain in a
country, though very high ones would be dangerous, because they
attract lightning.  Next the guns must be fired off; and, as it
would be a pity to waste lead, the king, amidst thunders of
applause, shot five cows, presenting his gun from the shoulder.

So ended the day's work in the field, but not at home; for I had
hardly arrived there before the pages hurried in to beg for
powder and shot, then caps, then cloth, and, everything else
failing, a load of beads.  Such are the persecutions of this
negro land-- the host every day must beg something in the most
shameless manner from his guest, on the mere chance of gaining
something gratis, though I generally gave the king some trifle
when he least expected it, and made an excuse that he must wait
for the arrival of fresh stores from Gani when he asked.

30th.--To fulfil my engagement with the queen, I walked off to
her palace with stomach medicine, thinking we were now such warm
friends, all pride and distant ceremonies would be dispensed
with; but, on the contrary, I was kept waiting for hours till I
sent in word to say, if she did not want medicine, I wished to go
home, for I was tired of Uganda and everything belonging to it. 
This message brought her to her gate, where she stood laughing
till the Wahuma girls she had promised me, one of twelve and the
other a little older, were brought in and made to squat in front
of us. The elder, who was in the prime of youth and beauty, very
large of limb, dark in colour, cried considerably; whilst the
younger one, though very fair, had a snubby nose and everted
lips, and laughed as if she thought the change in her destiny
very good fun.  I had now to make my selection, and took the
smaller one, promising her to Bombay as soon as we arrived on the
coast, where, he said, she would be considered a Hubshi or
Abyssinian.  But when the queen saw what I had done, she gave me
the other as well, saying the little one was too young to go
alone, and, if separated, she would take fright and run away. 
Then with a gracious bow I walked of with my two fine specimens
of natural history, though I would rather have had princes, that
I might have taken them home to be instructed in England; but the
queen, as soon as we had cleared the palace, sent word to say she
must have another parting look at her son with his wives.  Still
laughing, she said, "That will do; you look beautiful; now go
away home"; and off we trotted, the elder sobbing bitterly, the
younger laughing.

As soon as we reached home, my first inquiry was concerning their
histories, of which they appeared to know but very little. The
elder, whom I named Meri (plantains), was obtained by Sunna, the
late king, as a wife, from Nkole; and though she was a mere
Kahala, or girl, when the old king died, he was so attached to
her he gave her twenty cows, in order that she might fatten up on
milk after her native fashion; but on Sunna's death, when the
establishment of women was divided, Meri fell to N'yamasore's
(the queen's) lot.  The lesser one, who still retains the name of
Kahala, said she was seized in Unyoro by the Waganda, who took
her to N'yamasore, but what became of her father and mother she
could not say.

It was now dinner-time, and as the usual sweet potatoes and
goat's flesh were put upon my box-table, I asked them to dine
with me, and we became great friends, for they were assured they
would finally get good houses and gardens at Zanzibar; but
nothing would induce either of them to touch food that had been
cooked with butter.  A dish of plantains and goat-flesh was then
prepared; but though Kahala wished to eat it, Meri rejected the
goat's flesh, and would not allow Kahala to taste it either; and
thus began a series of domestic difficulties.  On inquiring how I
could best deal with my difficult charge, I was told the Wahuma
pride was so great, and their tempers so strong, they were more
difficult to break in than a phunda, or donkey, though when once
tamed, they became the best of wives.

31st.--I wished to call upon the queen and thank her for her
charming present, but my hungry men drove me to the king's palace
in search of food.  The gun firing brought Mtesa out, prepared
for a shooting trip, with his Wakungu leading, the pages carrying
his rifle and ammunition, and a train of women behind.  The first
thing seen outside the palace gate was a herd of cows, from which
four were selected and shot at fifty paces by the king, firing
from his shoulder, amidst thunders of applause and hand-shakings
of the elders.  I never saw them dare touch the king's hand
before. Then Mtesa, turning kindly to me, said, "Pray take a
shot"; but I waived the offer off, saying he could kill better
himself. Ambitious of a cut above cows, the king tried his hand
at some herons perched on a tree, and, after five or six
attempts, hit one in the eye.  Hardly able to believe in his own
skill, he stood petrified at first, and then ran madly to the
fallen bird, crying, "Woh, woh, woh! can this be?--is it true? 
Woh, woh!"  He jumped in the air, and all his men and women
shouted in concert with him. Then he rushes at me, takes both my
hands--shakes, shakes--woh, woh!--then runs to his women, then to
his men; shakes them all, woh-wohing, but yet not shaking or
wohing half enough for his satisfaction, for he is mad with joy
at his own exploit.

The bird is then sent immediately to his mother, whilst he
retires to his palace, woh-wohing, and taking "ten to the dozen"
all the way and boasting of his prowess.  "Now, Bana, tell me--do
you not think, if two such shots as you and I were opposed to an
elephant, would he have any chance before us?  I know I can
shoot--I am certain of it now.  You have often asked me to go
hippopotamus-shooting with you, but I staved it off until I
learnt the way to shoot.  Now, however, I can shoot--and that
remarkably well too, I flatter myself.  I will have at them, and
both of us will go on the lake together." The palace was now
reached; musicians were ordered to play before the king, and
Wakungu appointments were made to celebrate the feats of the day. 
Then the royal cutler brought in dinner-knives made of iron,
inlaid with squares of copper and brass, and goats and vegetables
were presented as usual, when by torchlight we were dismissed, my
men taking with them as many plantains as they could carry.

1st.--I stayed at home all this day, because the king and queen
had set it apart for looking at and arranging their horns--
mapembe, or fetishes, as the learned call such things--to see
that there are no imperfections in the Uganga.  This was
something like an inquiry into the ecclesiastical condition of
the country, while, at the same time, it was a religious
ceremony, and, as such, was appropriate to the first day after
the new moon appears.  This being the third moon by account, in
pursuance of ancient customs, all the people about court,
including the king, shaved their heads--the king, however,
retaining his cockscomb, the pages their double cockades, and the
other officers their single cockades on the back of the head, or
either side, according to the official rank of each.  My men were
occupied making trousers for the king all day; whilst the pages,
and those sent to learn the art of tailoring, instead of doing
their duty, kept continually begging for something to present the
king.

2d.--The queen now taking a sporting fit into her head, sent for
me early in the morning, with all my men, armed, to shoot