 a
crested crane in her palace; but though we were there as
required, we were kept waiting till late in the afternoon, when,
instead of talking about shooting, as her Wakungu had forbidden
her doing it, she asked after her two daughters--whether they had
run away, or if they liked their new abode?  I replied I was
sorry circumstances did not permit my coming to thank her sooner,
for I felt grateful beyond measure to her for having charmed my
house with such beautiful society.  I did not follow her advice
to chain either of them with iron, for I found cords of love, the
only instrument white men know the use of, quite strong enough. 
Fascinated with this speech, she said she would give me another
of a middle age between the two, expecting, as I thought, that
she would thus induce me to visit her more frequently than I did
her son; but, though I thanked her, it frightened me from
visiting her for ages after.

She then said, with glowing pride, casting a sneer on the king's
hospitality, "In the days of yore, Sunna, whenever visitors came
to see him, immediately presented them with women, and, secondly,
with food; for he was very particular in looking after his
guests' welfare, which is not exactly what you find the case now,
I presume."  The rest of the business of the day consisted in
applications for medicine and medical treatment, which it was
difficult satisfactorily to meet.

3d.--To-day Katumba, the king's head page, was sent to me with
deoles to be made into trousers and waistcoats, and a large
sixty-dollar silk I had given him to cover the chair with.  The
king likes rich colours, and I was solemnly informed that he will
never wear anything but clothes like Bana.

4th.--By invitation I went to the palace at noon, with guns, and
found the king holding a levee, the first since the new moon,
with all heads shaved in the manner I have mentioned.  Soon
rising, he showed the way through the palace to a pond, which is
described as his bathing N'yanza, his women attending, and pages
leading the way with his guns.  From this we passed on to a
jungle lying between the palace hill and another situated at the
northern end of the lake, where wild buffaloes frequently lie
concealed in the huge papyrus rushes of a miry drain; but as none
could be seen at that moment, we returned again to the palace. 
He showed me large mounds of earth, in the shape of cocked hats,
which are private observatories, from which the surrounding
country can be seen. By the side of these observatories are huts,
smaller than the ordinary ones used for residing in, where the
king, after the exertion of "looking out," takes his repose. 
Here he ordered fruit to be brought--the Matunguru, a crimson pod
filled with acid seeds, which has only been observed growing by
the rivers or waters of Uganda--and Kasori, a sort of liquorice-
root.  He then commenced eating with us, and begging again,
unsuccessfully, for my compass. I tried again to make him see the
absurdity of tying a charm on Whitworth's rifle, but without the
least effect.  In fact he mistook all my answers for admiration,
and asked me, in the simplest manner possible, if I would like to
possess a charm; and even when I said "No, I should be afraid of
provoking Lubari's" (God's) "anger if I did so," he only wondered
at my obstinacy, so thoroughly was he wedded to his belief.  He
then called for his wideawake, and walked with us into another
quarter of his palace, when he entered a dressing-hut, followed
by a number of full-grown, stark-naked women, his valets; at the
same time ordering a large body of women to sit on one side the
entrance, whilst I, with Bombay, were directed to sit on the
other, waiting till he was ready to hold another levee. From
this, we repaired to the great throne-hut, where all his Wakungu
at once formed court, and business was commenced.  Amongst other
things, an officer, by name Mbogo, or the Buffalo, who had been
sent on a wild-goose chase to look after Mr Petherick, described
a journey he had made, following down the morning sun. After he
had passed the limits of plantain-eating men, he came upon men
who lived upon meat alone, who never wore mbugus, but either
cloth or skins, and instead of the spear they used the double-
edged sime.  He called the people Wasewe, and their chief Kisawa;
but the company pronounced them to be Masawa (Masai).

After this, about eighty men were marched into the court, with
their faces blackened, and strips of plantain-bark tied on their
heads, each holding up a stick in his hand in place of a spear,
under the regulation that no person is permitted to carry weapons
of any sort in the palace.  They were led by an officer, who,
standing like a captain before his company, ordered them to jump
and praise the king, acting the part of fugleman himself. Then
said the king, turning to me, "Did I not tell you I had sent many
men to fight? These are some of my army returned; the rest are
coming, and will eventually, when all are collected, go in a body
to fight in Usoga." Goats and other peace-offerings were then
presented; and, finally a large body of officers came in with an
old man, with his two ears shorn off for having been too handsome
in his youth, and a young woman who, after four days' search, had
been discovered in his house.  They were brought for judgment
before the king.

Nothing was listened to but the plaintiff's statement, who said
he had lost the woman four days, and, after considerable search,
had found her concealed by the old man, who was indeed old enough
to be her grandfather.  From all appearances one would have said
the wretched girl had run away from the plaintiff's house in
consequence of ill treatment, and had harboured herself on this
decrepid old man without asking his leave; but their voices in
defence were never heard, for the king instantly sentenced both
to death, to prevent the occurrence of such impropriety again;
and, to make the example more severe, decreed that their lives
should not be taken at once, but, being fed to preserve life as
long as possible, they were to be dismembered bit by bit, as
rations for the vultures, every day, until life was extinct.  The
dismayed criminals, struggling to be heard, in utter despair,
were dragged away boisterously in the most barbarous manner, to
the drowning music of the milele and drums.

The king, in total unconcern about the tragedy he had thus
enacted, immediately on their departure said, "Now, then, for
shooting, Bana; let us look at your gun."  It happened to be
loaded, but fortunately only with powder, to fire my announcement
at the palace; for he instantly placed caps on the nipples, and
let off one barrel by accident, the contents of which stuck in
the thatch.  This created a momentary alarm, for it was supposed
the thatch had taken fire; but it was no sooner suppressed than
the childish king, still sitting on his throne, to astonish his
officers still more, levelled the gun from his shoulder, fired
the contents of the second barrel into the faces of his squatting
Wakungu, and then laughed at his own trick.  In the meanwhile
cows were driven in, which the king ordered his Wakungu to shoot
with carbines; and as they missed them, he showed them the way to
shoot with the Whitworth, never missing. The company now broke
up, but I still clung to the king, begging him to allow me to
purchase food with beads, as I wanted it, for my establishment
was always more or less in a starving state; but he only said,
"Let us know what you want and you shall always have it"; which,
in Uganda, I knew from experience only meant, Don't bother me any
more, but give me your spare money, and help yourself from my
spacious gardens--Uganda is before you.

5th--To-day the king went on a visit with his mother, and
therefore neither of them could be seen by visitors.  I took a
stroll towards the N'yanza, passing through the plantain-groves
occupied by the king's women, where my man Sangoro had been twice
taken up by the Mgemma and put in the stocks.  The plantain
gardens were beautifully kept by numerous women, who all ran away
from fright at seeing me, save one who, taken by surprise, threw
herself flat on the ground, rolled herself up in her mbugu, and,
kicking with her naked heels, roared murder and help, until I
poked her up, and reproached her for her folly.  This little
incident made my fairies bolder, and, sidling up to me one by
one, they sat in a knot with me upon the ground; then clasping
their heads with their hands, they woh-wohed in admiration of the
white man; they never in all their lives saw anything so
wonderful; his wife and children must be like him; what would not
Sunna have given for such a treat?--but it was destined to
Mtesa's lot.  What is the interpretation of this sign, if it does
not point to the favour in which Mtesa is upheld by the spirits? 
I wished to go, but no: "Stop a little more," they said, all in a
breath, or rather out of breath in their excitement; "remove the
hat and show the hair; take off the shoes and tuck up the
trousers; what on earth is kept in the pockets?  Oh, wonder of
wonders!--and the iron!"  As I put the watch close to the ear of
one of them, "Tick, tick, ticks--woh, woh, woh"--everybody must
hear it; and then the works had to be seen.  "Oh, fearful!" said
one, "hide your faces: it is the Lubari.  Shut it up, Bana, shut
it up; we have seen enough; but you will come again and bring us
beads."  So ended the day's work.

6th.--To-day I sent Bombay to the palace for food.  Though rain
fell in torrents, he found the king holding a levee, giving
appointments, plantations, and women, according to merit, to his
officers.  As one officer, to whom only one woman was given,
asked for more, the king called him an ingrate, and ordered him
to be cut to pieces on the spot; and the sentence was, as Bombay
told me, carried into effect-- not with knives, for they are
prohibited, but with strips of sharp-edged grass, after the
executioners had first dislocated his neck by a blow delivered
behind the head, with a sharp, heavy-headed club.

No food, however, was given to my men, though the king,
anticipating Bombay's coming, sent me one load of tobacco, one of
butter, and one of coffee.  My residence in Uganda became much
more merry now, for all the women of the camp came daily to call
on my two little girls; during which time they smoked my tobacco,
chewed my coffee, drank my pombe, and used to amuse me with queer
stories of their native land. Rozaro's sister also came, and
proposed to marry me, for Maula, she said, was a brutal man; he
killed one of his women because he did not like her, and now he
had clipped one of this poor creature's ears off for trying to
run away from him; and when abused for his brutality, he only
replied, "It was no fault of his, as the king set the example in
the country."

In the evening I took a walk with Kahala, dressed in a red scarf,
and in company with Lugoi, to show my children off in the gardens
to my fair friends of yesterday.  Everybody was surprised.  The
Mgemma begged us to sit with him and drink pombe, which he
generously supplied to our heart's content; wondered at the
beauty of Kahala, wished I would give him a wife like her, and
lamented that the king would not allow his to wear such pretty
clothes.  We passed on a little farther, and were invited to sit
with another man, Lukanikka, to drink pombe and chew coffee--
which we did as before, meeting with the same remarks; for all
Waganda, instructed by the court, know the art of flattery better
than any people in the world, even including the French.

7th.--In the morning, whilst it rained hard, the king sent to say
that he had started buffalo-shooting, and expected me to join
him. After walking a mile beyond the palace, we found him in a
plantain garden, dressed in imitation of myself, wideawake and
all, the perfect picture of a snob.  He sent me a pot of pombe,
which I sent home to the women, and walked off for the shooting-
ground, two miles further on, the band playing in the front,
followed by some hundred Wakungu--then the pages, then the king,
next myself, and finally the women--the best in front, the worst
bringing up the rear, with the king's spears and shield, as also
pots of pombe, a luxury the king never moves without.  It was
easy to see there would be no sport, still more useless of offer
any remarks, therefore all did as they were bid.  The broad road,
like all in Uganda, went straight over hill and dale, the heights
covered with high grass or plantain groves, and the valleys with
dense masses of magnificent forest-trees surrounding swamps
covered with tall rushes half bridged.  Proceeding on, as we came
to the first water, I commenced flirtations with Mtesa's women,
much to the surprise of the king and every one.  The bridge was
broken, as a matter of course; and the logs which composed it,
lying concealed beneath the water, were toed successively by the
leading men, that those who followed should not be tripped up by
them.  This favour the king did for me, and I in return for the
women behind; they had never been favoured in their lives with
such gallantry, and therefore could not refrain from laughing,
which attracted the king's notice and set everybody in a giggle;
for till now no mortal man had ever dared communicate with his
women.

Shortly after this we left the highway, and, turning westwards,
passed through a dense jungle towards the eastern shores of the
Murchison Creek, cut by runnels and rivulets, where on one
occasion I offered, by dumb signs to carry the fair ones pick-a-
back over, and after crossing a second myself by a floating log,
offered my hand.  The leading wife first fears to take it, then
grows bold and accepts it; when the prime beauty, Lubuga,
following in her wake, and anxious to feel, I fancy, what the
white man is like, with an imploring face holds out both her
hands in such a captivating manner, that though I feared to draw
attention by waiting any longer, I could not resist compliance. 
The king noticed it; but instead of upbraiding me, passed it off
as a joke, and running up to the Kamraviona, gave him a poke in
the ribs, and whispered what he had seen, as if it had been a
secret.  "Woh, woh!" says the Kamraviona, "what wonders will
happen next?"

We were now on the buffalo ground; but nothing could be seen save
some old footprints of buffaloes, and a pitfall made for catching
them.  By this time the king was tired; and as he saw me
searching for a log to sit upon, he made one of his pages kneel
upon all fours and sat upon his back, acting the monkey in aping
myself; for otherwise he would have sat on a mbugu, in his
customary manner, spread on the ground.  We returned, pushing
along, up one way, then another, without a word, in thorough
confusion, for the king delights in boyish tricks, which he has
learned to play successfully.  Leaving the road and plunging into
thickets of tall grass, the band and Wakungu must run for their
lives, to maintain the order of march, by heading him at some
distant point of exit from the jungle; whilst the Kamraviona,
leading the pages and my men, must push head first, like a herd
of buffaloes, through the sharp-cutting grass, at a sufficient
rate to prevent the royal walk from being impeded; and the poor
women, ready to sink with exhaustion, can only be kept in their
places by fear of losing their lives.

We had been out the whole day; still he did not tire of these
tricks, and played them incessantly till near sundown, when we
entered the palace.  Then the women and Wakungu separating from
us, we--that is, the king, the Kamraviona, pages, and myself--sat
down to a warm feast of sweet potatoes and plantains, ending with
pombe and fruit, whilst moist circular napkins, made in the shape
of magnificent wafers out of plantain fibre, acted at once both
the part of water and towel.  This over, as the guns had to be
emptied, and it was thought sinful to waste the bullets, four
cows were ordered in and shot by the king.  Thus ended the day,
my men receiving one of the cows.

8th.--As Mtesa was tired with his yesterday's work, and would not
see anybody, I took Lugoi and Kahala, with a bundle of beads, to
give a return to the Mgemma for his late treat of pombe. His
household men and women were immensely delighted with us, but
more so, they said, for the honour of the visit.  They gave us
more pombe, and introduced us to one of N'yamasore's numerous
sisters, who was equally charmed with myself and my children. The
Mgemma did not know how he could treat us properly, he said, for
he was only a poor man; but he would order some fowls, that I
might carry them away.  When I refused this offer, because we
came to see him, and not to rob him, he thought it the most
beautiful language, and said he would bring them to the house
himself. I added, I hoped he would do so in company with his
wife, which he promised, though he never dared fulfil the
promise; and, on our leaving, set all his servants to escort us
beyond the premises. In the evening, as the king's musicians
passed the camp, I ordered them in to play the milele, and give
my men and children a treat of dancing.  The performers received
a bundle of beads and went away happy.

9th.--I called on Congow, but found him absent, waiting on the
king, as usual; and the king sent for my big rifle to shoot birds
with.

10th.--In consequence of my having explained to the king the
effect of the process of distilling, and the way of doing it, he
sent a number of earthen pots and bugus of pombe that I might
produce some spirits for him; but as the pots sent were not made
after the proper fashion, I called at the palace and waited all
day in the hope of seeing him.  No one, however, dared enter his
cabinet, where he had been practising "Uganga" all day, and so
the pombe turned sour and useless.  Such are the ways of Uganda
all over.

11th.--The king was out shooting; and as nothing else could be
done, I invited Uledi's pretty wife Guriku to eat a mutton
breakfast, and teach my child Meri not to be so proud.  In this
we were successful; but whether her head had been turned, as
Bombay thought, or what else, we know not; but she would neither
walk, nor talk, nor do anything but lie at full length all day
long, smoking and lounging in thorough indolence.

12th.--I distilled some fresh pombe for the king; and taking it
to him in the afternoon, fired guns to announce arrival.  He was
not visible, while fearful shrieks were heard from within, and
presently a beautiful woman, one of the king's sisters, with
cockscomb erect, was dragged out to execution, bewailing and
calling on her king, the Kamraviona, and Mzungu, by turns, to
save her life.  Would to God I could have done it! but I did not
know her crime, if crime she had committed, and therefore had to
hold my tongue, whilst the Kamraviona, and other Wakungu present,
looked on with utter unconcern, not daring to make the slightest
remark.  It happened that Irungu was present in the ante-chamber
at this time; and as Maula came with my party, they had a fight
in respect to their merits for having brought welcome guests to
their king.  Mtesa, it was argued, had given N'yamgundu more
women and men than he did to Maula, because he was the first to
bring intelligence of our coming, as well as that of K'yengo, and
Suworora's hongo to his king; whilst, finally, he superseded
Maula by taking me out of his charge, and had done a further good
service by sending men on to Karague to fetch both Grant and
K'yengo.

Maula, although he had received the second reward, had literally
done nothing, whilst Irungu had been years absent at Usui, and
finally had brought a valuable hongo, yet he got less than Maula. 
This, Irungu said, was an injustice he would not stand;
N'yamgundu fairly earned his reward, but Maula must have been
tricking to get more than himself.  He would get a suitable
offering of wire, and lay his complaint in court the first
opportunity. "Pooh, pooh! nonsense!" says Maula, laughing; "I
will give him more wires than you, and then let us see who will
win the king's ear." Upon this the two great children began
collecting wire and quarrelling until the sun went down, and I
went home.  I did not return to a quiet dinner, as I had hoped,
but to meet the summons of the king.  Thinking it policy to obey,
I found him waiting my coming in the palace.  He made apologies
for not answering my gun, and tasted some spirits resembling
toddy, which I had succeeded in distilling.  He imbibed it with
great surprise; it was wonderful tipple; he must have some more;
and, for the purpose of brewing better, would send the barrel of
an old Brown Bess musket, as well as more pombe and wood in the
morning.

13th.--As nothing was done all day, I took the usual promenade in
the Seraglio Park, and was accosted by a very pretty little
woman, Kariana, wife of Dumba, who, very neatly dressed, was
returning from a visit.  At first she came trotting after me,
then timidly paused, then advanced, and, as I approached, stood
spellbound at my remarkable appearance.  At last recovering
herself, she woh-wohed with all the coquetry of a Mganda woman,
and a flirtation followed; she must see my hair, my watch, the
contents of my pockets-- everything; but that was not enough.  I
waved adieu, but still she followed.  I offered my arm, showing
her how to take it in European fashion, and we walked along to
the surprise of everybody, as if we had been in Hyde Park rather
than in Central Africa, flirting and coquetting all the way.  I
was surprised that no one came to prevent her forwardness; but
not till I almost reached home did any one appear; and then, with
great scolding, she was ordered to return-- not, however, without
her begging I would call in and see her on some future occasion,
when she would like to give me some pombe.

14th.--As conflicting reports came about Grant, the king very
courteously, at my request, forwarded letters to him.  I passed
the day in distilling pombe, and the evening in calling on Mrs
Dumba, with Meri, Kahala, Lugoi, and a troop of Wanyamuezi women. 
She was very agreeable; but as her husband was attending the
palace, could not give pombe, and instead gave my female escort
sundry baskets of plaintains and potatoes, signifying a dinner,
and walked half-way home, flirting with me as before.

15th--I called on the king with all the spirits I had made, as
well as the saccharine residue.  We found him holding a levee,
and receiving his offerings of a batch of girls, cows, goats, and
other things of an ordinary nature.  One of the goats presented
gave me an opportunity of hearing one of the strangest stories I
had yet heard in this strange country: it was a fine for
attempted regicide, which happened yesterday, when a boy, finding
the king alone, which is very unusual, walked up to him and
threatened to kill him, because, he said, he took the lives of
men unjustly.  The king explained by description and pantomime
how the affair passed. When the youth attacked him he had in his
hand the revolving pistol I had given him, and showed us, holding
the pistol to his cheek, how he had presented the muzzle to the
boy, which, though it was unloaded, so frightened him that he ran
away.  All the courtiers n'yanzigged vigorously for the
condescension of the king in telling the story.  There must have
been some special reason why, in a court where trifling breaches
of etiquette were punished with a cruel death, so grave a crime
should have been so leniently dealt with; but I could not get at
the bottom of the affair.  The culprit, a good-looking young
fellow of sixteen or seventeen, who brought in the goat, made his
n'yanzigs, stroked the goat and his own face with his hands,
n'yanzigged again with prostrations, and retired.

After this scene, officers announced the startling fact that two
white men had been seen at Kamrasi's, one with a beard like
myself, the other smooth-faced.  I jumped at this news, and said,
"Of course, they are there; do let me send a letter to them." I
believed it to be Petherick and a companion whom I knew he was to
bring with him.  The king, however, damped my ardour by saying
the information was not perfect, and we must wait until certain
Wakungu, whom he sent to search in Unyoro, returned.

16th.--The regions about the palace were all in a state of
commotion to-day, men and women running for their lives in all
directions, followed by Wakungu and their retainers.  The cause
of all this commotion was a royal order to seize sundry
refractory Wakungu, with their property, wives, concubines--if
such a distinction can be made in this country--and families all
together.  At the palace Mtesa had a musical party, playing the
flute occasionally himself. After this he called me aside, and
said, "Now, Bana, I wish you would instruct me, as you have often
proposed doing, for I wish to learn everything, though I have
little opportunity for doing so." Not knowing what was uppermost
in his mind, I begged him to put whatever questions he liked, and
he should be answered seriatim-- hoping to find him inquisitive
on foreign matters; but nothing was more foreign to his mind:
none of his countrymen ever seemed to think beyond the sphere of
Uganda.

The whole conversation turned on medicines, or the cause and
effects of diseases.  Cholera, for instance, very much affected
the land at certain seasons, creating much mortality, and
vanishing again as mysteriously as it came.  What brought this
scourge? and what would cure it?  Supposing a man had a headache,
what should he take for it? or a leg ache, or a stomach-ache, or
itch; in fact, going the rounds of every disease he knew, until,
exhausting the ordinary complaints, he went into particulars in
which he was personally much interested; but I was unfortunately
unable to prescribe medicines which produce the physical
phenomenon next to his heart.

17th.--I called upon the king by appointment, and found a large
court, where the Wakungu caught yesterday, and sentenced to
execution, received their reprieve on paying fines of cattle and
young damsels--their daughters.  A variety of charms, amongst
which were some bits of stick strung on leather and covered with
serpent-skin, were presented and approved of.  Kaggao, a large
district officer, considered the second in rank here, received
permission for me to call upon him with my medicines.  I pressed
the king again to send men with mine to Kamrasi's to call
Petherick. At first he objected that they would be killed, but
finally he yielded, and appointed Budja, his Unyoro ambassador,
for the service.  Then, breaking up the court, he retired with a
select party of Wakungu, headed by the Kamraviona, and opened a
conversation on the subject which is ever uppermost with the king
and his courtiers.

18th.--To-day I visited Kaggao with my medicine-chest.  He had a
local disease, which he said came to him by magic, though a
different cause was sufficiently obvious, and wanted medicine
such as I gave Mkuenda, who reported that I gave him a most
wonderful draught.  Unfortunately I had nothing suitable to give
my new patient, but cautioned him to have a care lest contagion
should run throughout his immense establishment, and explained
the whole of the circumstances to him.  Still he was not
satisfied; he would give me slaves, cows, or ivory, if I would
only cure him.  He was a very great man, as I could see, with
numerous houses, numerous wives, and plenty of everything, so
that it was ill-becoming of him to be without his usual habits. 
Rejecting his munificent offers, I gave him a cooling dose of
calomel and jalap, which he drank like pombe, and pronounced
beautiful--holding up his hands, and repeating the words
"Beautiful, beautiful! they are all beautiful together! There is
Bana beautiful! his box is beautiful! and his medicine
beautiful!"--and, saying this, led us in to see his women, who at
my request were grouped in war apparel--viz., a dirk fastened to
the waist by many strings of coloured beads.  There were from
fifty to sixty women present, all very lady-like, but none of
them pretty. Kaggao then informed me the king had told all his
Wakungu he would keep me as his guest four months longer to see
if Petherick came; and should he not by that time, he would give
me an estate, stocked with men, women, and cattle, in perpetuity,
so that, if I ever wished to leave Uganda, I should always have
something to come back to; so I might now know what my fate was
to be.  Before leaving, Kaggao presented us with two cows and ten
baskets of potatoes.

19th.--I sent a return present of two wires and twelve fundo of
beads of sorts to Kaggao, and heard that the king had gone to
show himself off to his mother dressed Bana fashion.  In the
evening Katunzi, N'yamasore's brother, just returned from the
Unyoro plunder, called on me whilst I was at dinner.  Not knowing
who he was, and surprised at such audacity in Uganda, for he was
the first officer who ever ventured to come near me in this
manner, I offered him a knife and fork, and a share in the
repast, which rather abashed him; for, taking it as a rebuff, he
apologised immediately for the liberty he had taken, contrary to
the etiquette of Uganda society, in coming to a house when the
master was at dinner; and he would have left again had I not
pressed him to remain.  Katunzi then told me the whole army had
returned from Unyoro, with immense numbers of cows, women, and
children, but not men, for those who did not run away were killed
fighting.  He offered me a present of a woman, and pressed me to
call on him.

20th.--Still I found that the king would not send his Wakungu for
the Unyoro expedition, so I called on him about it.  Fortunately
he asked me to speak a sentence in English, that he might hear
how it sounds; and this gave me an opportunity of saying, if he
had kept his promise by sending Budja to me, I should have
despatched letters to Petherick.  This was no sooner interpreted
than he said, if I would send my men to him with letters in the
morning he would forward them on, accompanied with an army.  On
my asking if the army was intended to fight, he replied, in
short, "First to feel the way."  On hearing this, I strongly
advised him, if he wished the road to be kept permanently open,
to try conciliation with Kamrasi, and send him some trifling
present.

Now were brought in some thirty-odd women for punishment and
execution, which the king, who of late had been trying to learn
Kisuahili, in order that we might be able to converse together,
asked me, in that language, if I would like to have some of these
women; and if so, how many?  On my replying "One," he begged me
to have my choice, and a very pretty one was selected.  God only
knows what became of the rest; but the one I selected, on
reaching home, I gave to Ilmas, my valet, for a wife.  He and all
the other household servants were much delighted with this
charming acquisition; but the poor girl, from the time she had
been selected, had flattered herself she was to be Bana's wife,
and became immensely indignant at the supposed transfer, though
from the first I had intended her for Ilmas, not only to favour
him for his past good services, but as an example to my other
men, as I had promised to give them all, provided they behaved
well upon the journey, a "free-man's garden," with one wife each
and a purse of money, to begin a new life upon, as soon as they
reached Zanzibar. The temper of Meri and Kahala was shown in a
very forcible manner: they wanted this maid as an addition to my
family, called her into the hut and chatted till midnight,
instructing her not to wed with Ilmas; and then, instead of
turning into bed as usual, they all three slept upon the ground. 
My patience could stand this phase of henpecking no longer, so I
called in Manamaka, the head Myamuezi woman, whom I had selected
for their governess, and directed her to assist Ilmas, and put
them to bed "bundling."

21st.--In the morning, before I had time to write letters, the
king invited me to join him at some new tank he was making
between his palace and the residence of his brothers.  I found
him sitting with his brothers, all playing in concert on flutes. 
I asked him, in Kisuahili, if he knew where Grant was?  On
replying in the negative, I proposed sending a letter, which he
approved of; and Budja was again ordered to go with an army for
Petherick.

22d.--Mabruki and Bilal, with Budja, started to meet Petherick,
and three more men, with another letter to Grant.  I called on
the king, who appointed the 24th instant for an excursion of
three days' hippopotamus-shooting on the N'yanza.

23d.--To-day occurred a brilliant instance of the capricious
restlessness and self-willedness of this despotic king.  At noon,
pages hurried in to say that he had started for the N'yanza, and
wished me to follow him without delay.  N'yanza, as I have
mentioned, merely means a piece of water, whether a pond, river,
or lake; and as no one knew which N'yanza he meant, or what
project was on foot, I started off in a hurry, leaving everything
behind, and walked rapidly through gardens, over hills, and
across rushy swamps, down the west flank of the Murchison Creek,
till 3 p.m., when I found the king dressed in red, with his
Wakungu in front and women behind, travelling along in the
confused manner of a pack of hounds, occasionally firing his
rifle that I might know his whereabouts.  He had just, it seems,
mingled a little business with pleasure; for noticing, as he
passed, a woman tied by the hands to be punished for some
offence, the nature of which I did not learn, he took the
executioner's duty on himself, fired at her, and killed her
outright.

On this occasion, to test all his followers, and prove their
readiness to serve him, he had started on a sudden freak for the
three days' excursion on the lake one day before the appointed
time, expecting everybody to fall into place by magic, without
the smallest regard to each one's property, feelings, or comfort.
The home must be forsaken without a last adieu, the dinner
untasted, and no provision made for the coming night, in order
that his impetuous majesty should not suffer one moment's
disappointment. The result was natural; many who would have come
were nowhere to be found; my guns, bed, bedding, and note-books,
as well as cooking utensils, were all left behind, and, though
sent for, did not arrive till the following day.

On arriving at the mooring station, not one boat was to be found,
nor did any arrive until after dark, when, on the beating of
drums and firing of guns, some fifty large ones appeared.  They
were all painted with red clay, and averaged from ten to thirty
paddles, with long prows standing out like the neck of a syphon
or swan, decorated on the head with the horns of the Nsunnu
(lencotis) antelope, between which was stuck upright a tuft of
feathers exactly like a grenadier's plume.  These arrived to
convey us across the mouth of a deep rushy swamp to the royal
yachting establishment, the Cowes of Uganda, distant five hours'
travelling from the palace.  We reached the Cowes by torchlight
at 9 p.m., when the king had a picnic dinner with me, turned in
with his women in great comfort, and sent me off to a dreary hut,
where I had to sleep upon a grass-strew floor. I was surprised we
had to walk so far, when, by appearance, we might have boated it
from the head of the creek all the way down; but, on inquiry, was
informed of the swampy nature of the ground at the head of the
creek precluded any approach to the clear water there, and hence
the long overland journey, which, though fatiguing to the
unfortunate women, who had to trot the whole way behind Mtesa's
four-mile-an-hour strides, was very amusing.  The whole of the
scenery--hill, dale, and lake--was extremely beautiful. The
Wanguana in my escort compared the view to their own beautiful
Poani (coast); but in my opinion it far surpassed anything I ever
saw, either from the sea or upon the coast of Zanzibar.

The king rose betimes in the morning and called me, unwashed and
very uncomfortable, to picnic with him, during the collection of
the boats.  The breakfast, eaten in the open court, consisted of
sundry baskets of roast-beef and plantain-squash, folded in
plantain-leaves.  He sometimes ate with a copper knife and
picker, not forked--but more usually like a dog, with both hands. 
The bits too tough for his mastication he would take from his
mouth and give as a treat to the pages, who n'yanzigged, and
swallowed them with much seeming relish.  Whatever remained over
was then divided by the boys, and the baskets taken to the cooks. 
Pombe served as tea, coffee, and beer for the king; but his
guests might think themselves very lucky if they ever got a drop
of it.

Now for the lake.  Everybody in a hurry falls into his place the
best way he can--Wakungu leading, and women behind.  They rattle
along, through plantains and shrubs, under large trees, seven,
eight, and nine feet in diameter, till the beautiful waters are
reached--a picture of the Rio scenery, barring that of the higher
mountains in the background of that lovely place, which are here
represented by the most beautiful little hills.  A band of
fifteen drums of all sizes, called the Mazaguzo, playing with the
regularity of a lot of factory engines at work, announced the
king's arrival, and brought all the boats to the shore--but not
as in England, where Jack, with all the consequence of a lord at
home, invites the ladies to be seated, and enjoys the sight of so
many pretty faces. Here every poor fellow, with his apprehensions
written in his face, leaps over the gunwale into the water--
ducking his head for fear of being accused of gazing on the fair
sex, which is death--and bides patiently his time.  They were
dressed in plantain leaves, looking like grotesque Neptunes.  The
king, in his red coat and wideawake, conducted the arrangements,
ordering all to their proper places-- the women, in certain
boats, the Wakungu and Wanguana in others, whilst I sat in the
same boat with him at his feet, three women holding mbugus of
pombe behind.  The king's Kisuahali now came into play, and he
was prompt in carrying out the directions he got from myself to
approach the hippopotami.  But the waters were too large and the
animals too shy, so we toiled all the day without any effect,
going only once ashore to picnic; not for the women to eat-- for
they, poor things, got nothing--but the king, myself, the pages,
and the principal Wakungu.  As a wind-up to the day's amusement,
the king led the band of drums, changed the men according to
their powers, put them into concert pitch, and readily detected
every slight irregularity, showing himself a thorough musician.

This day requires no remark, everything done being the
counterpart of yesterday, excepting that the king, growing bolder
with me in consequence of our talking together, became more
playful and familiar--amusing himself, for instance, sometimes by
catching hold of my beard as the rolling of the boat unsteadied
him.

We started early in the usual manner; but after working up and
down the creek, inspecting the inlets for hippopotami, and tiring
from want of sport, the king changed his tactics, and, paddling
and steering himself with a pair of new white paddles, finally
directing the boats to an island occupied by the Mgussa, or
Neptune of the N'yanza, not in person--for Mgussa is a spirit--
but by his familiar or deputy, the great medium who communicates
the secrets of the deep to the king of Uganda.  In another sense,
he might be said to be the presiding priest of the source of the
mighty Nile, and as such was, of course, an interesting person
for me to meet.  The first operation on shore was picnicking,
when many large bugus of pombe were brought for the king; next,
the whole party took a walk, winking through the trees, and
picking fruit, enjoying themselves amazingly, till, by some
unlucky chance, one of the royal wives, a most charming creature,
and truly one of the best of the lot, plucked a fruit and offered
it to the king, thinking, doubtless, to please him greatly; but
he, like a madman, flew into a towering passion, said it was the
first time a woman ever had the impudence to offer him anything,
and ordered the pages to seize, bind, and lead her off to
execution.

These words were no sooner uttered by the king than the whole
bevy of pages slipped their cord turbans from their heads, and
rushed, like a pack of cupid beagles upon the fairy queen, who,
indignant at the little urchins daring to touch her majesty,
remonstrated with the king, and tried to beat them off like
flies, but was soon captured, overcome, and dragged away, crying,
in the names of the Kamraviona and Mzungu (myself), for help and
protection; whilst Lubuga, the pet sister, and all the other
women, clasped the king by his legs, and, kneeling, implored
forgiveness for their sister. The more they craved for mercy, the
more brutal he became, till at last he took a heavy stick and
began to belabour the poor victim on the head.

Hitherto I had been extremely careful not to interfere with any
of the king's acts of arbitrary cruelty, knowing that such
interference, at an early stage, would produce more harm than
good. This last act of barbarism, however, was too much for my
English blood to stand; and as I heard my name, Mzungu,
imploringly pronounced, I rushed at the king, and, staying his
uplifted arm, demanded from him the woman's life.  Of course I
ran imminent risk of losing my own in thus thwarting the
capricious tyrant; but his caprice proved the friend of both. 
The novelty of interference even made him smile, and the woman
was instantly released.

Proceeding on through the trees of this beautiful island, we next
turned into the hut of the Mgussa's familiar, which at the
farther end was decorated with many mystic symbols amongst others
a paddle, the badge of his high office--and for some time we sat
chatting, when pombe was brought, and the spiritual medium
arrived.  He was dressed Wichwezi fashion, with a little white
goat-skin apron, adorned with numerous charms, and used a paddle
for a mace or walking stick.  He was not an old man, though he
affected to be so-- walking very slowly and deliberately,
coughing asthmatically, glimmering with his eyes, and mumbling
like a witch.  With much affected difficulty he sat at the end of
the hut beside the symbols alluded to, and continued his coughing
full half an hour, when his wife came in in the same manner,
without saying a word, and assumed the same affected style.  The
king jokingly looked at me and laughed, and then at these strange
creatures, by turn, as much as to say, What do you think of them?
but no voice was heard save that of the old wife, who croaked
like a frog for water, and, when some was brought, croaked again
because it was not the purest of the lake's produce--had the
first cup changed, wetted her lips with the second, and hobbled
away in the same manner as she came.

At this juncture the Mgussa's familiar motioned the Kamraviona
and several officers to draw around him, when, in a very low
tone, he gave them all the orders of the deep, and walked away. 
His revelations seemed unpropitious, for we immediately repaired
to our boats and returned to our quarters.  Here we no sooner
arrived than a host of Wakungu, lately returned from the Unyoro
war, came to pay their respects to the king: they had returned
six days or more, but etiquette had forbidden their approaching
majesty sooner. Their successes had been great, their losses,
nil, for not one man had lost his life fighting.  To these men
the king narrated all the adventures of the day; dwelling more
particularly on my defending his wife's life, whom he had
destined for execution.  This was highly approved of by all; and
they unanimously said Bana knew what he was about, because he
dispenses justice like a king in his own country.

Early in the morning a great hue and cry was made because the
Wanguana had been seen bathing in the N'yanza naked, without the
slightest regard to decency.  We went boating as usual all day
long, sometimes after hippopotami, at others racing up and down
the lake, the king and Wakungu paddling and steering by turns,
the only break to this fatigue being when we went ashore to
picnic, or the king took a turn at the drums.  During the evening
some of the principal Wakungu were collected to listen to an
intellectual discourse on the peculiarities of the different
women in the royal establishment, and the king in good-honour
described the benefits he had derived from this pleasant tour on
the water.

Whilst I was preparing my Massey's log to show the use of it to
the king, he went off boating without me; and as the few
remaining boats would not take me off because they had received
no orders to do so, I fired guns, but, getting no reply, went
into the country hoping to find game; but, disappointed in that
also, I spent the first half of the day with a hospitable old
lady, who treated us to the last drop of pombe in her house--for
the king's servants had robbed her of nearly everything--smoked
her pipe with me, and chatted incessantly on the honour paid her
by the white king's visit, as well as of the horrors of Uganda
punishment, when my servants told her I saved the life of one
queen.  Returning homewards, the afternoon was spent at a
hospitable officer's, who would not allow us to depart until my
men were all fuddled with pombe, and the evening setting in
warned us to wend our way.  On arrival at camp, the king, quite
shocked with himself for having deserted me, asked me if I did
not hear his guns fire.  He had sent twenty officers to scour the
country, looking for me everywhere.  He had been on the lake the
whole day himself, and was now amusing his officers with a little
archery practice, even using the bow himself, and making them
shoot by turns.  A lucky shot brought forth immense applause, all
jumping and n'yanzigging with delight, whether it was done by
their own bows or the king's.

A shield was the mark, stuck up at only thirty paces; still they
were such bad shots that they hardly ever hit it.  Now tired of
this slow sport, and to show his superior prowess, the king
ordered sixteen shields to be placed before him, one in front of
the other, and with one shot from Whitworth pierced the whole of
them, the bullet passing through the bosses of nearly every one. 
"Ah!" says the king, strutting about with gigantic strides, and
brandishing the rifle over his head before all his men, "what is
the use of spears and bows?  I shall never fight with anything
but guns in the future."  These Wakungu, having only just then
returned from plundering Unyoro, had never before seen their king
in a chair, or anybody sitting, as I was, by his side; and it
being foreign to their notions, as well as, perhaps, unpleasant
to their feelings, to find a stranger sitting higher than
themselves, they complained against this outrage to custom, and
induced the king to order my dethronement.  The result was, as my
iron stool was objectionable, I stood for a moment to see that I
thoroughly understood their meaning; and then showing them my
back, walked straightway home to make a grass throne, and dodge
them that way.

There was nothing for dinner last night, nothing again this
morning, yet no one would go in to report this fact, as rain was
falling, and the king was shut up with his women.  Presently the
thought struck me that the rifle, which was always infallible in
gaining me admittance at the palace, might be of the same service
now. I therefore shot a dove close to the royal abode, and, as I
expected, roused the king at once, who sent his pages to know
what the firing was about.  When told the truth--that I had been
trying to shoot a dish of doves for breakfast, as I could get
neither meat nor drink from his kitchen--the head boy, rather
guessing than understanding what was told him, distorted my
message, and said to the king, as I could not obtain a regular
supply of food from his house, I did not wish to accept anything
further at his hands, but intended foraging for the future in the
jungles.  The king, as might be imagined, did not believe the
boy's story, and sent other pages to ascertain the truth of the
case, bidding them listen well, and beware of what they were
about.  This second lot of boys conveyed the story rightly, when
the king sent me a cow.  As I afterwards heard, he cut off the
ears of the unfortunate little mischief-maker for not making a
proper use of those organs; and then, as the lad was the son of
one of his own officers he was sent home to have the sores
healed.  After breakfast the king called me to go boating, when I
used my grass throne, to the annoyance of the attendants.  This
induced the king to say before them, laughing, "Bana, you see, is
not to be done; he is accustomed to sit before kings, and sit he
will."  Then by way of a change, he ordered all the drums to
embark and play upon the waters; whilst he and his attendants
paddled and steered by turns, first up the creek, and then down
nearly to the broad waters of the lake.

There was a passage this way, it was said, leading up to Usoga,
but very circuitous, on account of reefs or shoals, and on the
way the Kitiri island was passed; but no other Kitiri was known
to the Waganda, though boats went sometimes coasting down the
western side of the lake to Ukerewe.  The largest island on the
lake is the Sese,[FN#20] off the mouth of the Katonga river,
where another of the high priests of the Neptune of the N'yanza
resides.  The king's largest vessels are kept there, and it is
famous for its supply of mbugu barks.  We next went on shore to
picnic, when a young hippopotamus, speared by harpoon, one pig,
and a pongo or bush-boc, were presented to the king.  I now
advised boat-racing, which was duly ordered, and afforded much
amusement as the whole fifty boats formed in line, and paddle
furiously to the beat of drum to the goal which I indicated.

The day was done.  In great glee the king, ever much attached to
the blackguard Maula, in consequence of his amusing stories,
appointed him to the office of seizer, or chief kidnapper of
Wakungu; observing that, after the return of so many officers
from war, much business in that line would naturally have to be
done, and there was none so trustworthy now at court to carry out
the king's orders.  All now went to the camp; but what was my
astonishment on reaching the hut to find every servant gone,
along with the pots, pans, meat, everything; and all in
consequence of the king's having taken the drums on board, which,
being unusual, was regarded as one of his delusive tricks, and a
sign of immediate departure.  He had told no one he was going to
the N'yanza, and now it was thought he would return in the same
way.  I fired for my supper, but fired in vain.  Boys came out,
by the king's order to inquire what I wanted, but left again
without doing anything further.

At my request the king sent off boats to inquire after the one
that left, or was supposed to have left, for Grant on the 3d of
March, and he then ordered the return home, much to my delight;
for, beautiful as the N'yanza was, the want of consideration for
other people's comfort, the tiring, incessant boating, all day
long and every day, in the sun, as well as the king's hurry-
scurry about everything he undertook to do, without the smallest
forethought, preparation, or warning, made me dream of my
children, and look forward with pleasure to rejoining them. 
Strange as it may appear to Englishmen, I had a sort of paternal
love for those little blackamoors as if they had been my
offspring; and I enjoyed the simple stories that their sable
visitors told me every day they came over to smoke their pipes,
which they did with the utmost familiarity, helping themselves
from my stores just as they liked.

Without any breakfast, we returned by the same route by which we
had come, at four miles an hour, till half the way was cleared,
when the king said, laughing, "Bana, are you hungry?"--a
ridiculous question after twenty-four hours of starvation, which
he knew full well-- and led the way into a plantain-grove, where
the first hut that was found was turned in