side out for the king's
accommodation, and picnic was prepared.  As, however, he ordered
my portion to be given outside with the pages', and allowed
neither pombe or water, I gave him the slip, and walked hurriedly
home, where I found Kahala smirking, and apparently glad to see
us, but Meri shamming ill in bed, whilst Manamaka, the governess,
was full of smiles and conversation.  She declared Meri had
neither tasted food or slept since my departure, but had been
retching all the time.  Dreadfully concerned at the doleful story
I immediately thought of giving relief with medicines, but
neither pulse, tongue, nor anything else indicated the slightest
disorder; and to add to these troubles, Ilmas's woman had tried
during my absence to hang herself, because she would not serve as
servant but wished to be my wife; and Bombay's wife, after taking
a doze of quinine, was delivered of a still-born child.

1st.--I visited the king, at his request, with the medicine-
chest. He had caught a cold.  He showed me several of his women
grievously affected with boils, and expected me to cure them at
once.  I then went home, and found twenty men who had passed
Grant, coming on a stretcher from Karague, without any of the
rear property.  Meri, still persistent, rejected strengthening
medicines, but said, in a confidential manner, if I would give
her a goat to sacrifice to the Uganga she would recover in no
time.  There was something in her manner when she said this that
I did not like--it looked suspicious; and I contented myself by
saying, "No, I am a wiser doctor than any in these lands; if
anybody could cure you, that person is myself: and further, if I
gave you a goat to sacrifice, God would be angry with both of us
for our superstitious credulity; you must therefore say no more
about it."

2d.--The whole country around the palace was in a state of
commotion to-day, from Maula and his children hunting down those
officers who had returned from the war, yet had not paid their
respects to the king at the N'yanza, because they thought they
would not be justified in calling on him so quickly after their
arrival. Maula's house, in consequence of this, was full of beef
and pombe; whilst, in his courtyard, men, women, and children,
with feet in stocks, very like the old parish stocks in England,
waited his pleasure, to see what demands he would make upon them
as the price of their release.  After anxiously watching, I found
out that Meri was angry with me for not allowing Ilmas's woman to
live in my house; and, to conquer my resolution against it--
although I ordered it with a view to please Ilmas, for he was
desperately in love with her--she made herself sick by putting
her finger down her throat. I scolded her for her obstinacy.  She
said she was ill--it was not feigned; and if I would give her a
goat to sacrifice she would be well at once; for she had looked
into the magic horn already, and discovered that if I have her a
goat for that purpose it would prove that I loved her, and her
health would be restored to her at once.  Hallo!  Here was a
transformation from the paternal position into that of a
henpecked husband!  Somebody, I smelt at once, had been tampering
with my household whilst I was away.  I commenced investigations,
and after a while found out that Rozaro's sister had brought a
magician belonging to her family into the hut during my absence,
who had put Meri up to this trick of extorting a goat from me, in
order that he might benefit by it himself, for the magician eats
the sacrifice, and keeps the skin.

I immediately ordered him to be seized and bound to the flag-
staff, whilst Maula, Uledi, Rozaro, and Bombay were summoned to
witness the process of investigation.  Rozaro flew into a
passion, and tried to release the magician as soon as he saw him,
affecting intense indignation that I should take the law into my
own hands when one of Rumanika's subjects was accused; but only
lost his dignity still more on being told he had acknowledged his
inability to control his men so often when they had misbehaved,
that I scorned to ask his assistance any longer.  He took huff at
this, and, as he could not help himself, walked away, leaving us
to do as we liked.  The charge was fully proved.  The impudent
magician, without leave, and contrary to all the usages of the
country, had entered and set my house against itself during my
absence, and had schemed to rob me of a goat.  I therefore
sentenced him to fifty lashes--twenty-five for the injury he had
inflicted on my by working up a rebellion in my house, and the
remaining twenty-five for attempting larceny-- saying, as he had
wanted my goat and its skin, so now in return I wanted his skin. 
These words were no sooner pronounced than the wretched Meri
cried out against it, saying all the fault was hers: "Let the
stick skin my back, but spare my doctor; it would kill me to see
him touched."

This appeal let me see that there was something in the whole
matter too deep and intricate to be remedied by my skill.  I
therefore dismissed her on the spot, and gave her, as a sister
and free woman, to Uledi and his pretty Mhmula wife, giving
Bombay orders to carry the sentences into execution.  After
walking about till after dark, on returning to the empty house, I
had some misgivings as to the apparent cruelty of abandoning one
so helpless to the uncertainties of this wicked world.  Ilmas's
woman also ran away, doubtless at the instigation of Rozaro's
sister, for she had been denied any further access to the house
as being at the bottom of all this mischief.

3d.--I was haunted all night by my fancied cruelty, and in the
morning sent its victim, after Uganda fashion, some symbolical
presents, including a goat, in token of esteem; a black blanket,
as a sign of mourning; a bundle of gundu anklets; and a packet of
tobacco, in proof of my forgiveness.




                          Chapter XIV



                   Palace, Uganda--Continued

Reception of a Victorious Army at Court--Royal Sport--A Review of
the Troops--Negotiations for the Opening of the Road along the
Nile --Grant's Return--Pillagings--Court Marriages--The King's
Brothers-- Divinations and Sacrifices--The Road granted at last--
The Preparations for continuing the Expedition--The Departure.

I now received a letter from Grant to say he was coming by boat
from Kitangule, and at once went to the palace to give the
welcome news to the king.  The road to the palace I found
thronged with people; and in the square outside the entrance
there squatted a multitude of attendants, headed by the king,
sitting on a cloth, dressed in his national costume, with two
spears and a shield by his side.  On his right hand the pages sat
waiting for orders, while on his left there was a small squatting
cluster of women, headed by Wichwezis, or attendant sorceresses,
offering pombe.  In front of the king, in form of a hollow
square, many ranks deep, sat the victorious officers, lately
returned from the war, variously dressed; the nobles
distinguished by their leopard-cat skins and dirks, the commoners
by coloured mbugu and cow or antelope skin cloaks; but all their
faces and arms were painted red, black, or smoke-colour.  Within
the square of men, immediately fronting the king, the war-arms of
Uganda were arranged in three ranks; the great war-drum, covered
with a leopard-skin, and standing on a large carpeting of them,
was placed in advance; behind this, propped or hung on a rack of
iron, were a variety of the implements of war in common use,
offensive and defensive, as spears--of which two were of copper,
the rest iron--and shields of wood and leather; whilst in the
last row or lot were arranged systematically, with great taste
and powerful effect, the supernatural arms, the god of Uganda,
consisting of charms of various descriptions and in great
numbers. Outside the square again, in a line with the king, were
the household arms, a very handsome copper kettledrum, of French
manufacture, surmounted on the outer edge with pretty little
brass bells depending from swan-neck-shaped copper wire, two new
spears, a painted leather shield, and magic wands of various
devices, deposited on a carpet of leopard-skins--the whole scene
giving the effect of true barbarous royalty in its uttermost
magnificence.

Approaching, as usual, to take my seat beside the king, some
slight sensation was perceptible, and I was directed to sit
beyond the women.  The whole ceremonies of this grand assemblage
were now obvious.  Each regimental commandant in turn narrated
the whole services of his party, distinguishing those subs who
executed his orders well and successfully from those who either
deserted before the enemy or feared to follow up their success. 
The king listened attentively, making, let us suppose, very
shrewd remarks concerning them; when to the worthy he awarded
pombe, helped with gourd-cups from large earthen jars, which has
n'yanzigged for vehemently; and to the unworthy execution.  When
the fatal sentence was pronounced, a terrible bustle ensued, the
convict wrestling and defying, whilst the other men seized,
pulled and tore the struggling wretch from the crowd, bound him
hands and head together, and led or rather tumbled him away.

After a while, and when all business was over, the king begged me
to follow him into the palace.  He asked again for stimulants--a
matter ever uppermost in his mind--and would not be convinced
that such things can do him no possible good, but would in the
end be deleterious.  Grant's letter was then read to him before
his women, and I asked for the dismissal of all the Wanyambo, for
they had not only destroyed my peace and home, but were always
getting me into disrepute by plundering the Waganda in the
highways.  No answer was given to this; and on walking home, I
found one of the king's women at my hut, imploring protection
against the Wanyambo, who had robbed and bruised her so often,
she could not stand such abuse any longer.

4th.--I sent Maula, early in the morning, with the plundered
woman, and desired him to request that the Wanyambo might be
dismissed. He returned, saying he delivered my message, but no
reply was given. I then searched for the king, and found him at
his brothers' suite of huts playing the flute before them.  On
taking my seat, he proudly pointed to two vultures which he had
shot with bullet, saying to his brothers, "There, do you see
these birds?  Bana shoots with shot, but I kill with bullets." 
To try him, I then asked for leave to go to Usoga, as Grant was
so far off; but he said, "No, wait until he comes, and you shall
both go together then; you fancy he is far off, but I know
better.  One of my men saw him coming along carried on a
stretcher."  I said, "No; that must be a mistake, for he told me
by letter he would come by water."

Heavy rain now set in, and we got under cover; but the brothers
never moved, some even sitting in the streaming gutter, and
n'yanzigging whenever noticed.  The eldest brother offered me his
cup of pombe, thinking I would not drink it; but when he saw its
contents vanishing fast, he cried "lekerow!" (hold fast!) and as
I pretended not to understand him, continuing to drink, he rudely
snatched the cup from my lips.  Alternate concerts with the
brothers, and conversation about hunting, in consequence of a
bump caused by a fall with steeple-chasing, which as discovered
on my forehead, ended this day's entertainment.

5th.--As all the Wanguana went foraging, I was compelled to stop
at home.  The king, however, sent an officer for Grant, because I
would not believe in his statement yesterday that he was coming
by land; and I also sent a lot of men with a litter to help him
on, and bring me an answer.

6th.--I went to the palace at the king's command.  He kept us
waiting an hour, and then passing out by a side gate, beckoned us
to follow.  He was dressed in European clothes, with his guns and
tin box of clothes leading the way.  His first question was,
"Well, Bana, where are your guns? for I have called you to go
shooting." "The pages never said anything about shooting, and
therefore the guns were left behind."  Totally unconcerned, the
king walked on to his brothers, headed by a band and attendants,
who were much lauded for being ready at a moment's notice.  A
grand flute concert was then played, one of the younger brothers
keeping time with a long hand-drum; then the band played; and
dancing and duets and singing followed.  After the usual
presentations, fines, and n'yanziggings, I asked for leave to go
and meet Grant by water, but was hastily told that two boats had
been sent for him when we returned from the N'yanza, and that two
runners, just returned from Karague, said he was on the way not
far off.  The child-king then changed his dress for another suit
of clothes for his brothers to admire, and I retired, much
annoyed, as he would neither give pombe for myself, nor plantains
for my men: and I was further annoyed on my arrival at home, to
find the Wanguana mobbing my hut and clamouring for food, and
calling for an order to plunder if I did not give them beads,
which, as the stock had run short, I could only do by their
returning to Karague for the beads stored there; and, even if
they were obtained, it was questionable if the king would revoke
his order prohibiting the sale of provisions to us.

7th.--To-day I called at the queen's, but had to wait five hours
in company with some attendants, to whom she sent pombe
occasionally; but after waiting for her nearly all day, they were
dismissed, because excess of business prevented her seeing them,
though I was desired to remain.  I asked these attendants to sell
me food for beads, but they declared they could not without
obtaining permission.  In the evening the queen stumped out of
her chambers and walked to the other end of her palace, where the
head or queen of the Wichwezi women lived, to whom everybody paid
the profoundest respect.  On the way I joined her, she saying, in
a state of high anger, "You won't call on me, now I have given
you such a charming damsel: you have quite forgotten us in your
love of home." Of course Meri's misdemeanour had to be explained,
when she said, "As that is the case, I will give you another; but
you must take Meri out of the country, else she will bring
trouble on us; for, you know, I never gave girls who lived in the
palace to any one in my life before, because they would tell
domestic affairs not proper for common people to know."  I then
said my reason for not seeing her before was, that the four times
I had sent messengers to make an appointment for the following
day, they had been repulsed from her doors.   This she would not
believe, but called me a story-teller in very coarse language,
until the men who had been sent were pointed out to her, and they
corroborated me.

The Wichwezi queen met her majesty with her head held very high,
and instead of permitting me to sit on my box of grass, threw out
a bundle of grass for that purpose.  All conversation was kept
between the two queens; but her Wichwezi majesty had a platter of
clay-stone brought, which she ate with great relish, making a
noise of satisfaction like a happy guinea-pig.  She threw me a
bit, which to the surprise of everybody, I caught and threw it
into my mouth, thinking it was some confection; but the harsh
taste soon made me spit it out again, to the amusement of the
company.  On returning home I found the king had requested me to
call on him as soon as possible with the medicine-chest.

8th.--Without a morsel to eat for dinner last night, or anything
this morning, we proceeded early to the palace, in great
expectation that the medicines in request would bring us
something; but after waiting all day till 4 p.m., as the king did
not appear, leaving Bombay behind, I walked away to shoot a
guinea-fowl within earshot of the palace.  The scheme was
successful, for the report of the gun which killed the bird
reached the king's ear, and induced him to say that if Bana was
present he would be glad to see him.  This gave Bombay an
opportunity of telling all the facts of the case; which were no
sooner heard than the king gave his starving guests a number of
plantains, and vanished at once, taking my page Lugoi with him,
to instruct him in Kisuahili (Zanzibar language).

9th.--As the fruit of last night's scheme, the king sent us four
goats and two cows.  In great good-humour I now called on him,
and found him walking about the palace environs with a carbine,
looking eagerly for sport, whilst his pages dragged about five
half-dead vultures tied in a bundle by their legs to a string.
"These birds," said he, tossing his head proudly, "were all shot
flying, with iron slugs, as the boys will tell you.  I like the
carbine very well, but you must give me a double smooth gun."
This I promised to give when Grant arrived, for his good-nature
in sending so many officers to fetch him.

We next tried for guinea-fowl, as I tell him they are the game
the English delight in; but the day was far spent, and none could
be found.  A boy then in attendance was pointed out, as having
seen Grant in Uddu ten days ago.  If the statement were true, he
must have crossed the Katonga.  But though told with great
apparent circumspection, I did not credit it, because my men sent
on the 15th ultimo for a letter to ascertain his whereabouts had
not returned, and they certainly would have done so had he been
so near.  To make sure, the king then proposed sending the boy
again with some of my men; but this I objected to as useless,
considering the boy had spoken falsely.  Hearing this, the king
looked at the boy and then at the women in turn, to ascertain
what they thought of my opinion, whereupon the boy cried.  Late
in the evening the sly little girl Kahala changed her cloth
wrapper for a mbugu, and slipped quietly away.  I did not suspect
her intention, because of late she had appeared much more than
ordinary happy, behaving to me in every respect like a dutiful
child to a parent.  A search was made, and guns fired, in the
hopes of frightening her back again, but without effect.

10th.--I had promised that this morning I would teach the king
the art of guinea-fowl shooting, and when I reached the palace at
6 a.m., I found him already on the ground.  He listened to the
tale of the missing girl, and sent orders for her apprehension at
once; then proceeding with the gun, fired eight shots
successively at guinea-birds sitting on trees, but missed them
all.  After this, as the birds were scared away, and both iron
shot and bullets were expended, he took us to his dressing-hut,
went inside himself, attended by full-grown naked women, and
ordered a breakfast of pork, beef, fish, and plantains to be
served me outside on the left of the entrance; whilst a large
batch of his women sat on the right side, silently coquetting,
and amusing themselves by mimicking the white man eating.  Poor
little Lugoi joined in the repast, and said he longed to return
to my hut, for he was half starved here, and no one took any
notice of him; but he was destined to be a royal page, for the
king would not part with him.  A cold fit then seized me, and as
I asked for leave to go, the king gave orders for one of his
wives to be flogged.  The reason for this act of brutality I did
not discover; but the moment the order was issued, the victim
begged the pages to do it quickly, that the king's wrath might be
appeased; and in an instant I saw a dozen boys tear their cord-
turbans from their heads pull her roughly into the middle of the
court, and belabour her with sticks, whilst she lay floundering
about, screeching to me for protection.  All I did was to turn my
head away and walk rapidly out of sight, thinking it better not
to interfere again with the discipline of the palace; indeed, I
thought it not improbable that the king did these things
sometimes merely that his guests might see his savage power.  On
reaching home I found Kahala standing like a culprit before my
door.  She would not admit, what I suspected, that Meri had
induced her to run away; but said she was very happy in my house
until yester-evening, when Rozaro's sister told her she was very
stupid living with the Mzungu all alone, and told her to run
away; which she did, taking the direction of N'yamasore's, until
some officers finding her, and noticing beads on her neck, and
her hair cut, according to the common court fashion, in slopes
from a point in the forehead to the breadth of her ears,
suspected her to be one of the king's women, and kept her in
confinement all night, till Mtesa's men came this morning and
brought her back again.  As a punishment, I ordered her to live
with Bombay; but my house was so dull again from want of some one
to eat dinner with me, that I remitted the punishment, to her
great delight.

11th.--To-day I received letters from Grant, dated 22d., 25th,
28th April and 2d May.  They were brought by my three men, with
Karague pease, flour, and ammunition.  He was at Maula's house,
which proved the king's boy to be correct; for the convoy, afraid
of encountering the voyage on the lake, had deceived my companion
and brought him on by land, like true negroes.

12th.--I sent the three men who had returned from Grant to lay a
complaint against the convoy, who had tricked him out of a
pleasant voyage, and myself out of the long-wished-for survey of
the lake. They carried at the same time a present of a canister
of shot from me to the king.  Delighted with this unexpected
prize, he immediately shot fifteen birds flying, and ordered the
men to acquaint me with his prowess.

13th.--To-day the king sent me four cows and a load of butter as
a return-present for the shot, and allowed one of his officers,
at my solicitation, to go with ten of my men to help Grant on. 
He also sent a message that he had just shot thirteen birds
flying.

14th.--Mabuki and Bilal returned with Budja and his ten children
from Unyoro, attended by a deputation of four men sent by
Kamrasi, who were headed by Kidgwiga.  Mtesa, it now transpired,
had followed my advice of making friendship with Kamrasi by
sending two brass wires as a hongo instead of an army, and
Kamrasi in return, sent him two elephant-tusks.  Kidgwiga said
Petherick's party was not in Unyoro--they had never reached
there, but were lying at anchor off Gani.  Two white men only had
been seen--one, they said, a hairy man, the other smooth-faced;
they were as anxiously inquiring after us as we were after them:
they sat on chairs, dressed like myself, and had guns and
everything precisely like those in my hut.  On one occasion they
sent up a necklace of beads to Kamrasi, and he, in return, gave
them a number of women and tusks.  If I wished to go that way,
Kamrasi would forward me on to their position in boats; for the
land route, leading through Kidi, was a jungle of ten days,
tenanted by a savage set of people, who hunt everybody, and seize
everything they see.

This tract is sometimes, however, traversed by the Wanyoro and
Gani people, who are traders in cows and tippet monkey-skins,
stealthily travelling at night; but they seldom attempt it from
fear of being murdered.  Baraka and Uledi, sent from Karague on
the 30th January, had been at Kamrasi's palace upwards of a
month, applying for the road to Gani, and as they could not get
that, wished to come with Mabruki to me; but this Kamrasi also
refused, on the plea that, as they had come from Karague, so they
must return there.  Kamrasi had heard of my shooting with Mtesa,
as also of the attempt made by Mabruki and Uledi to reach Gani
via Usoga.  He had received my present of beads from Baraka, and,
in addition, took Uledi's sword, saying, "If you do not wish to
part with it, you must remain a prisoner in my country all your
life, for you have not paid your footing."  Mabruki then told me
he was kept waiting at a village, one hour's walk from Kamrasi's
palace, five days before they were allowed to approach his
majesty; but when they were seen, and the presents exchanged,
they were ordered to pack off the following morning, as Kamrasi
said the Waganda were a set of plundering blackguards.

This information, to say the least of it, was very embarrassing--
a mixture of good and bad.  Petherick, I now felt certain, was on
the look-out for us; but his men had reached Kamrasi's, and
returned again before Baraka's arrival.  Baraka was not allowed
to go on to him and acquaint him of our proximity, and the
Waganda were so much disliked in Unyoro, that there seemed no
hopes of our ever being able to communicate by letter.  To add to
my embarrassments, Grant had not been able to survey the lake
from Kitangule, nor had Usoga and the eastern side of the lake
been seen.

15th.--I was still laid up with the cold fit of the 10th, which
turned into a low kind of fever.  I sent Bombay to the king to
tell him the news, and ask him what he thought of doing next.  He
replied that he would push for Gani direct; and sent back a pot
of pombe for the sick man.

16th.--The king to-day inquired after my health, and, strange to
say, did not accompany his message with a begging request.

17th.--My respite, however, was not long.  At the earliest
possible hour in the morning the king sent begging for things one
hundred times refused, supposing, apparently, that I had some
little reserve store which I wished to conceal from him.

18th and 19th.--I sent Bombay to the palace to beg for pombe, as
it was the only thing I had an appetite for, but the king would
see no person but myself.  He had broken his rifle washing-rod,
and this must be mended, the pages who brought it saying that no
one dared take it back to him until it was repaired.  A guinea-
fowl was sent after dark for me to see, as a proof that the king
was a sportsman complete.

20th.--The king going out shooting borrowed my powder-horn. The
Wanguana mobbed the hut and bullied me for food, merely because
they did not like the trouble of helping themselves from the
king's garden, though they knew I had purchased their privilege
to do so at the price of a gold chronometer and the best guns
England could produce.

21st.--I now, for the first time, saw the way in which the king
collected his army together.  The highroads were all thronged
with Waganda warriors, painted in divers colours, with plantain-
leaf bands round their heads, scanty goat-skin fastened to their
loins, and spears and shield in their hands, singing the tambure
or march, ending with a repetition of the word Mkavia, or
Monarch. They surpassed in number, according to Bombay, the
troops and ragamuffins enlisted by Sultain Majid when Sayyid
Sweni threatened to attack Zanzibar; in fact, he never saw such a
large army collected anywhere.

Bombay, on going to the palace, hoping to obtain plantains for
the men, found the king holding a levee, for the purpose of
despatching this said army somewhere, but where no one would
pronounce. The king, then, observing my men who had gone to
Unyoro together with Kamrasi's, questioned them on their mission;
and when told that no white men were there, he waxed wrathful,
and said it was a falsehood, for his men had seen them, and could
not be mistaken. Kamrasi, he said, must have hidden them
somewhere, fearful of the number of guns which now surrounded
him; and, for the same reason, he told lies, yes, lies--but no
man living shall dare tell himself lies; and now, as he could not
obtain his object by fair means, he would use arms and force it
out.  Then, turning to Bombay, he said, "What does your master
think of this business?" upon which Bombay replied, according to
his instructions, "Bana wishes nothing done until Grant arrives,
when all will go together."  On this the king turned his back and
walked away.

22d.--Kitunzi called on me early, because he heard I was sick. I
asked him why the Waganda objected to my sitting on a chair; but,
to avoid the inconvenience of answering a troublesome question,
without replying, he walked off, saying he heard a noise in the
neighbourhood of the palace which must be caused by the king
ordering some persons to be seized, and his presence was so
necessary he could not wait another moment.  My men went for
plantains to the palace and for pombe on my behalf; but the king,
instead of giving them anything, took two fez caps off their
heads, keeping them to himself, and ordered them to tell Bana all
his beer was done.

23d.--Kidgwiga called on me to say Kamrasi so very much wanted
the white men at Gani to visit him, he had sent a hongo of thirty
tusks to the chief of that country in hopes that it would insure
their coming to see him.  He also felt sure if I went there his
king would treat me with the greatest respect.  This afforded an
opportunity for putting in a word of reconciliation.  I said that
it was at my request that Mtesa sent Kamrasi a present; and so
now, if Kamrasi made friends with the Waganda, there would be no
difficulty about the matter.

24th.--The army still thronged the highways, some going, others
coming, like a swarm of ants, the whole day long.  Kidgwiga paid
another visit, and I went to the palace without my gun, wishing
the king to fancy all my powder was done, as he had nearly
consumed all my store; but the consequence was that, after
waiting the whole day, I never saw him at all.  In the evening
pages informed me that Grant had arrived at N'yama Goma, one
march distant.

25th.--I prepared twenty men, with a quarter of mutton for Grant
to help him on the way, but they could not go without a native
officer, lest they should be seized, and no officer would lead
the way. The king came shooting close to my hut and ordered me
out.  I found him marching Rozaro about in custody with four
other Wanyambo, who, detected plundering by Kitunzi, had set upon
and beaten him severely.  The king, pointing them out to me,
said, he did not like the system of plundering, and wished to
know if it was the practice in Karague.  Of course I took the
opportunity to renew my protest against the plundering system;
but the king, changing the subject, told me the Wazungu were at
Gani inquiring after us, and wishing to come here.  To this I
proposed fetching them myself in boats, but he objected, saying
he would send men first, for they were not farther off to the
northward than the place he sent boats to, to bring Grant.  He
said he did not like Unyoro, because Kamrasi hides himself like a
Neptune in the Nile, whenever his men go on a visit there, and
instead of treating his guests with respect, he keeps them beyond
the river.  For this reason he had himself determined on adopting
the passage by Kidi.

I was anxious, of course, to go on with the subject thus
unexpectedly opened, but, as ill-luck would have it, an adjutant
was espied sitting on a tree, when a terrible fuss and excitement
ensued.  The women were ordered one way and the attendants
another, whilst I had to load the gun on the best way I could
with the last charge and a half left in the king's pouch.  Ten
grains were all he would have allowed himself, reserving the
residue, without reflecting that a large bird required much shot;
and he was shocked to find me lavishly use the whole, and still
say it was not enough.

The bird was then at a great height, so that the first shot
merely tickled him, and drove him to another tree.  "Woh! woh!"
cried the king, "I am sure he is hit; look there, look there;"
and away he rushed after the bird; down with one fence, then with
another, in the utmost confusion, everybody trying to keep his
proper place, till at last the tree to which the bird had flown
was reached, and then, with the last charge of shot, the king
killed his first nundo. The bird, however, did not fall, but lay
like a spread eagle in the upper branches.  Wasoga were called to
climb the tree and pull it down; whilst the king, in ecstasies of
joy and excitement, rushed up and down the potato-field like a
mad bull, jumping and plunging, waving and brandishing the gun
above his head; whilst the drums beat, the attendants all woh-
wohed, and the women, joining with their lord, rushed about
lullalooing and dancing like insane creatures.  Then began
congratulations and hand-shakings, and, finally, the inspection
of the bird, which, by this time, the Wasoga had thrown down. 
Oh! oh! what a wonder!  Its wings outspread reached further than
the height of a man; we must go and show it to the brothers. 
Even that was not enough--we must show it to the mother; and away
we all rattled as fast as our legs could carry us.

Arrived at the queen's palace, out of respect to his mother, the
king changed his European clothes for a white kid-skin wrapper,
and then walked in to see her, leaving us waiting outside.  By
this time Colonel Congow, in his full-dress uniform, had arrived
in the square outside, with his regiment drawn up in review
order. The king, hearing the announcement, at once came out with
spears and shield, preceded by the bird, and took post, standing
armed, by the entrance, encircled by his staff, all squatting,
when the adjutant was placed in the middle of the company. 
Before us was a large open square, with the huts of the queen's
Kamraviona or commander-in- chief beyond.  The battalion,
consisting of what might be termed three companies, each
containing 200 men, being drawn up on the left extremity of the
parade-ground, received orders to march past in single file from
the right of companies, at a long trot, and re-form again at the
other end of the square.

Nothing conceivable could be more wild or fantastic than the
sight which ensued--the men all nearly naked, with goat or cat
skins depending from their girdles, and smeared with war colours
according to the taste of each individual; one-half of the body
red or black, the other blue, not in regular order--as, for
instance, one stocking would be red, the other black, whilst the
breeches above would be the opposite colours, and so with the
sleeves and waistcoat.  Every man carried the same arms--two
spears and one shield--held as if approaching an enemy, and they
thus moved in three lines of single rank and file, at fifteen to
twenty paces asunder, with the same high action and elongated
step, the ground leg only being bent, to give their strides the
greater force. After the men had all started, the captains of
companies followed, even more fantastically dressed; and last of
all came the great Colonel Congow, a perfect Robinson Crusoe,
with his long white-haired goat-skins, a fiddle-shaped leather
shield, tufted with white hair at all six extremities, bands of
long hair tied below the knees, and a magnificent helmet, covered
with rich beads of every colour, in excellent taste, surmounted
with a plume of crimson feathers, from the centre of which rose a
bent stem, tufted with goat-hair.  Next they charged in companies
to and fro; and, finally, the senior officers came charging at
their king, making violent professions of faith and honesty, for
which they were applauded. The parade then broke up, and all went
home.

26th.--One of king Mtesa's officers now consenting to go to
N'yama Goma with some of my men, I sent Grant a quarter of goat. 
The reply brought to me was, that he was very thankful for it;
that he cooked it and ate it on the spot; and begged I would see
the king, to get him released from that starving place.  Rozaro
was given over to the custody of Kitunzi for punishment.  At the
same time, the queen, having heard of the outrages committed
against her brother and women, commanded that neither my men nor
any of Rozaro's should get any more food at the palace; for as we
all came to Uganda in one body, so all alike were, by her logic,
answerable for the offence. I called at the palace for
explanation but could not obtain admittance because I would not
fire the gun.

27th.--The king sent to say he wanted medicine to propitiate
lightning.  I called and described the effects of a lightning-
rod, and tried to enter into the Unyoro business, wishing to go
there at once myself.  He objected, because he had not seen
Grant, but appointed an officer to go through Unyoro on to Gani,
and begged I would also send men with letters.  Our talk was
agreeably interrupted by guns in the distance announcing Grant's
arrival, and I took my leave to welcome my friend.  How we
enjoyed ourselves after so much anxiety and want of one another's
company, I need not describe.  For my part, I was only too
rejoiced to see Grant could limp about a bit, and was able to
laugh over the picturesque and amusing account he gave me of his
own rough travels.

28th.--The king in the morning sent Budja, his ambassador, with
Kamrasi's Kidgwiga, over to me for my men and letters, to go to
Kamrasi's again and ask for the road to Gani.  I wished to speak
to the king first, but they said they had no orders to stop for
that, and walked straight away.  I sent the king a present of a
double-barrelled gun and ammunition, and received in answer a
request that both Grant and myself would attend a levee, which he
was to hold in state, accompanied by his bodyguard, as when I was
first presented to him.  In the afternoon we proceeded to court
accordingly, but found it scantily attended; and after the first
sitting, which was speedily over, retired to another court, and
saw the women.  Of this dumb show the king soon got tired; he
therefore called for his iron chair, and entered into
conversation, at first about the ever-engrossing subject of
stimulants, till we changed it by asking him how he liked the
gun?  He pronounced it a famous weapon, which he would use
intensely.  We then began to talk in a general way about Suwarora
and Rumanika, as well as the road through Unyamuezi, which we
hoped would soon cease to exist, and be superseded by one through
Unyoro.

It will be kept in view that the hanging about at this court, and
all the perplexing and irritating negotiations here described,
had always one end in view--that of reaching the Nile where it
pours out of the N'yanza, as I was long certain that it did. 
Without the consent and even the aid of this capricious barbarian
I was now talking to, such a project was hopeless.  I naturally
seized every opportunity for putting in a word in the direction
of my great object, and here seemed to be an opportunity.  We now
ventured on a plump application for boats that we might feel our
way to Gani by water, supposing the lake and river to be
navigable all the way; and begged Kitunzi might be appointed to
accompany us, in order that whatever was done might be done all
with good effect in opening up a new line of commerce, by which
articles of European manufacture might find a permanent route to
Uganda.  It was "no go," however. The appeal, though listened to,
and commented on, showing that it was well understood, got no
direct reply.  It was not my policy to make our object appear too
important to ourselves, so I had to appear tolerably indifferent,
and took the opportunity to ask for my paint-box, which he had
borrowed for a day and had kept in his possession for months.  I
got no answer to that request either, but was immediately dunned
for the compass, which had been promised on Grant's arrival. 
Now, with a promise that the compass would be sent him in the
morning, he said he would see what pombe his women could spare
us; and, bidding good evening, walked away.

29th.--I sent Bombay with the compass, much to the delight of the
king, who no sooner saw it than he jumped and woh-wohed with
intense excitement at the treasure he had gained, said it was the
greatest present Bana had ever given him, for it was the thing by
which he found out all the roads and countries--it was, in fact,
half his knowledge; and the parting with it showed plainly that
Bana entertained an everlasting friendship for him.  The king
then called Maula, and said, "Maula, indeed you have spoken the
truth; there is nothing like this instrument," etc., etc.,
repeating what he had already told Bombay.  In the evening, the
king, accompanied by all his brothers, with iron chair and box,
came to visit us, and inspected all Grant's recently brought
pictures of the natives, with great acclamation.  We did not give
him anything this time, but, instead, dunned him for the paint-
box, and afterwards took a walk to my observatory hill, where I
acted as guide.  On the summit of this hill the king instructed
his brothers on the extent of his dominions; and as I asked where
Lubari or God resides, he pointed to the skies.

30th.--The king at last sent the paint-box, with some birds of
his own shooting, which he wished painted.  He also wanted
himself drawn, and all Grant's pictures copied.  Then, to wind up
these mild requests, a demand was made for more powder, and that
all our guns be sent to the palace for inspection.

31st.--I drew a large white and black hornbill and a green pigeon
sent by himself; but he was not satisfied; he sent more birds,
and wanted to see my shoes.  The pages who came with the second
message, however, proving impertinent, got a book flung at their
heads, and a warning to be off, as I intended to see the king
myself, and ask for food to keep my ever-complaining Wanguana
quiet. Proceeding to the palace, as I found Mtesa had gone out
shooting, I called on the Kamraviona, complained that my camp was
starving, and as I had nothing left to give the king said I
wished to leave the country.  Ashamed of its being supposed that
his king would not give me any food because I had no more
presents to give him, the Kamraviona, from his own stores, gave
me a goat and pombe, and said he would speak to the king on the
subject.

1st.--I drew for the king a picture of a guinea-fowl which he
shot in the early morning, and proceeded on a visit with Grant to
the queen's, accompanied only by seven men, as the rest preferred
foraging for themselves, to the chance of picking up a few
plantains at her majesty's.  After an hour's waiting, the queen
received us with smiles, and gave pombe and plantains to her new
visitor, stating pointedly she had none for me.  There was deep
Uganda policy in this: it was for the purpose of treating Grant
as a separate, independent person, and so obtaining a fresh hongo
or tax.  Laughing at the trick, I thanked her for the beer,
taking it personally on my household, and told her when my
property arrived from Karague, she should have a few more things
as I promised her; but the men sent had neither brought my
brother in a vessel, as they were ordered, not did they bring my
property from Karague.

Still the queen was not content: she certainly expected something
from Grant, if it was ever so little, for she was entitled to it,
and would not listen to our being one house.  Turning the
subject, to put in a word for my great object, I asked her to use
her influence in opening the road to Gani, as, after all, that
was the best way to get new things into Uganda.  Cunning as a
fox, the queen agreed to this project, provided Grant remained
behind, for she had not seen enough of him yet, and she would
speak to her son about the matter in the morning.

This was really the first gleam of hope, and I set to putting our
future operations into a shape that might lead to practical
results without alarming our capricious host.  I thought that
whilst I could be employed in inspecting the river, and in
feeling the route by water to Gani, Grant could return to Karague
by water, bringing up our rear traps, and, in navigating the
lake, obtain the information he had been frustrated in getting by
the machinations of his attendant Maribu.  It was agreed to, and
all seemed well; for there was much left to be done in Uganda and
Usoga, if we could only make sure of communicating once with
Petherick.  Before going home we had some more polite
conversation, during which the queen played with a toy in the
shape of a cocoa du mer, studded all over with cowries: this was
a sort of doll, or symbol of a baby and her dandling it was held
to indicate that she would ever remain a widow.  In the evening
the king returned all our rifles and guns, with a request for one
of them; as also for the iron chair he sat upon when calling on
us, an iron bedstead, and the Union Jack, for he did not honour
us with a visit for nothing; and the head page was sent to
witness the transfer of the goods, and see there was no humbug
about it.  It was absolutely necessary to get into a rage, and
tell the head page we did not come to Uganda to be swindled in
that manner, and he might tell the king I would not part with one
of them.

2d.--K'yengo, who came with Grant, now tried to obtain an
interview with the king, but could not get admission.  I had some
further trouble about the disposal of the child Meri, who said
she never before had lived in a poor man's house since she was
born. I thought to content her by offering to marry her to one of
Rumanika's sons, a prince of her own breed, but she would not
listen to the proposal.

3d.--For days past, streams of men have been carrying faggots of
firewood, clean-cut timber, into the palaces of the king, queen,
and the Kamraviona; and to-day, on calling on the king, I found
him engaged having these faggots removed by Colonel Mkavia's
regiment from one court into another, this being his way of
ascertaining their quantity, instead of counting them.  About
1600 men were engaged on this service, when the king, standing on
a carpet in front of the middle hut of the first court, with two
spears in his hand and his dog by his side, surrounded by his
brothers and a large staff of officers, gave orders for the
regiment to run to and fro in column, that he might see them
well; then turning to his staff, ordered them to run up and down
the regiment, and see what they thought of it.  This ridiculous
order set them all flying, and soon they returned, charging at
the king with their sticks, dancing and jabbering that their
numbers were many, he was the greatest king on earth, and their
lives and services were his for ever.  The regiment now received
orders to put down their faggots, and, taking up their own sticks
in imitation of spears, followed the antics of their officers in
charging and vociferating.  Next, Mkavia presented five hairy
Usoga goats, n'yanzigging and performing the other appropriate
ceremonies.  On asking the king if he had any knowledge of the
extent of his army, he merely said, "How can I, when these you
see are a portion of them just ordered here to carry wood?"

The regiment was now dismissed; but the officers were invited to
follow the king into another court, when he complimented them on
assembling so many men; they, instead of leaving well alone,
foolishly replied they were sorry they were not more numerous, as
some of the men lived so far away they shirked the summons;
Maula, then, ever forward in mischief, put a cap on it by saying,
if he could only impress upon the Waganda to listen to his
orders, there would never be a deficiency.  Upon which the king
said, "If they fail to obey you, they disobey me; for I have
appointed you as my orderly, and thereby you personify the orders
of the king." Up jumped Maula in a moment as soon as these words
were uttered, charging with his stick, then floundering and
n'yanzigging as if he had been signally rewarded.  I expected
some piece of cruel mischief to come of all this, but the king,
in his usual capricious way, suddenly rising, walked off to a
third court, followed only by a select few.

Here, turning to me, he said, "Bana, I love you, because you have
come so far to see me, and have taught me so many things since
you have been here."  Rising, with my hand to my heart, and
gracefully bowing at this strange announcement--for at that
moment I was full of hunger and wrath--I intimated I was much
flattered at hearing it, but as my house was in a state of
starvation, I trusted he would consider it.  "What!" said he, "do
you want goats?"  "Yes, very much."  The pages then received
orders to furnish me with ten that moment, as the king's farmyard
was empty, and he would reimburse them as soon as more
confiscations took place.  But this, I said, was not enough; the
Wanguana wanted plantains, for they had received none these
fifteen days.  "What!" said the king, turning to his pages again,
"have you given these men no plantains, as I ordered? Go and
fetch them this moment, and pombe too, for Bana."

The subject then turned on the plan I had formed of going to Gani
by water, and of sending Grant to Karague by the lake; but the
king's mind was fully occupied with the compass I had given him.
He required me to explain its use, and then broke up the meeting.

4th.--Viarungi, an officer sent by Rumanika to escort Grant to
Uganda, as well as to apply to king Mtesa for a force to fight
his brother Rogero, called on me with Rozaro, and said he had
received instructions from his king to apply to me for forty cows
and two slave-boys, because the Arabs who pass through his
country to Uganda always make him a present of that sort after
receiving them from Mtesa.  After telling him we English never
give the presents they have received away to any one, and never
make slaves, but free them, I laid a complaint against Rozaro for
having brought much trouble and disgrace upon my camp, as well as
much trouble on myself, and begged that he might be removed from
my camp.  Rozaro then attempted to excuse himself, but without
success, and said he had already detached his residence from my
camp, and taken up a separate residence with Viarungi, his
superior officer.

I called on the king in the afternoon, and found the pages had
already issued plantains for my men and pombe for myself.  The
king addressed me with great cordiality, and asked if I wished to
go to Gani.  I answered him with all promptitude,--Yes, at once,
with some of his officers competent to judge of the value of all
I point out to them for future purposes in keeping the road
permanently open. His provoking capriciousness, however, again
broke in, and he put me off till his messengers should return
from Unyoro.  I told him his men had gone in vain, for Budja left
without my letter or my men; and further, that the river route is
the only one that will ever be of advantage to Uganda, and the
sooner it was opened up the better. I entreated him to listen to
my advice, and send some of my men to Kamrasi direct, to acquaint
him with my intention to go down the river in boats to him; but I
could get no answer to this. Bombay then asked for cows for the
Wanguana, getting laughed at for his audacity, and the king broke
up the court and walked away.

5th.--I started on a visit to the queen, but half-way met Congow,
who informed me he had just escorted her majesty from his house,
where she was visiting, to her palace.  By way of a joke and
feeler, I took it in my head to try, by taking a harmless rise
out of Congow, whether the Nile is understood by the natives to
be navigable near its exit from the N'yanza.  I told him he had
been appointed by the king to escort us down the river to Gani. 
He took the affair very seriously, delivering himself to the
following purport: "Well, then, my days are numbered; for if I
refuse compliance I shall lose my head; and if I attempt to pass
Kamrasi's, which is on the river, I shall lose my life; for I am
a marked man there, having once led an army past his palace and
back again. It would be no use calling it a peaceful mission, as
you propose; for the Wanyoro distrust the Waganda to such an
extent, they would fly to arms at once."

Proceeding to the queen's palace, we met Murondo, who had once
travelled to the Masai frontier.  He said it would take a month
to go in boats from Kira, the most easterly district in Uganda,
to Masai, where there is another N'yanza, joined by a strait to
the big N'yanza, which king Mtesa's boats frequent for salt; but
the same distance could be accomplished in four days overland,
and three days afterwards by boat.  The queen, after keeping us
all day waiting, sent three bunches of plantains and a pot of
pombe, with a message that she was too tired to receive visitors,
and hoped we would call another day.

6th.--I met Pokino, the governor-general of Uddu, in the
morning's walk, who came here at the same time as Grant to visit
the king, and was invited into his house to d