rink pombe.  His
badge of office is an iron hatchet, inlaid with copper and
handled with ivory. He wished to give us a cow, but put it off
for another day, and was surprised we dared venture into his
premises without permission from the king.  After this, we called
at the palace, just as the king was returning from a walk with
his brothers.  He saw us, and sent for Bana.  We entered, and
presented him with some pictures, which he greatly admired,
looked at close and far, showed to the brothers, and inspected
again.  Pokino at this time came in with a number of well-made
shields, and presented them grovelling and n'yanzigging; but
though the governor of an important province, who had not been
seen by the king for years, he was taken no more notice of than
any common Mkungu.  A plan of the lake and Nile, which I brought
with me to explain our projects for reaching Karague and Gani,
engaged the king's attention for a while; but still he would not
agree to let anything be done until the messenger returned from
Unyoro.  Finding him inflexible, I proposed sending a letter,
arranging that his men should be under the guidance of my men
after they pass Unyoro on the way to Gani; and this was acceded
to, provided I should write a letter to Petherick by the morrow. 
I then tried to teach the king the use of the compass.  To make a
stand for it, I turned a drum on its head, when all the courtiers
flew at me as if to prevent an outrage, and the king laughed.  I
found that, as the instrument was supposed to be a magic charm of
very wonderful powers, my meddling with it and treating it as an
ordinary movable was considered a kind of sacrilege.

7th.--I wrote a letter to Petherick, but the promised Wakungu
never came for it.  As K'yengo was ordered to attend court with
Rumanika's hongo, consisting of a few wires, small beads, and a
cloth I gave him, as well as a trifle from Nnanji, I sent Bombay,
in place of going myself, to remind the king of his promises for
the Wakungu to Gani, as well as for boats to Karague, but a grunt
was the only reply which my messenger said he obtained.

8th.--Calling at the palace, I found the king issuing for a walk,
and joined him, when he suddenly turned round in the rudest
manner, re-entered his palace, and left me to go home without
speaking a word.  The capricious creature then reissued, and,
finding me gone, inquired after me, presuming I ought to have
waited for him.

9th.--During the night, when sleeping profoundly, some person
stealthily entered my hut and ran off with a box of bullets
towards the palace, but on the way dropped his burden.  Maula, on
the way home, happening to see it, and knowing it to be mine,
brought it back again.  I stayed at home, not feeling well.

10th.--K'yengo paid his hongo in wire to the king, and received a
return of six cows.  Still at home, an invalid, I received a
visit from Meri, who seemed to have quite recovered herself. 
Speaking of her present quarters, she said she loved Uledi's wife
very much, thinking birds of a feather ought to live together. 
She helped herself to a quarter of mutton, and said she would
come again.

11th.--To-day Viarungi, finding Rozaro's men had stolen thirty
cows, twelve slaves, and a load of mbugu from the Waganda, laid
hands on them himself for Rumanika, instead of giving them to
King Mtesa. Such are the daily incidents among our neighbours.

12th.--At night a box of ammunition and a bag of shot, which were
placed out as a reserve present for the king, to be given on our
departure, were stolen, obviously by the king's boys, and most
likely by the king's orders; for he is the only person who could
have made any use of them, and his boys alone know the way into
the hut; besides which, the previous box of bullets was found on
the direct road to the palace, while it was well known that no
one dared to touch an article of European manufacture without the
consent of the king.

13th.--I sent a message to the king about the theft, requiring
him, if an honest man, to set his detectives to work, and ferret
it out; his boys, at the same time, to show our suspicions, were
peremptorily forbidden ever to enter the hut again.  Twice the
king sent down a hasty message to say he was collecting all his
men to make a search, and, if they do not succeed, the Mganga
would be sent; but nothing was done.  The Kamraviona was sharply
rebuked by the king for allowing K'yengo to visit him before
permission was given, and thus defrauding the royal exchequer of
many pretty things, which were brought for majesty alone.  At
night the rascally boys returned again to plunder, but Kahala,
more wakeful than myself, heard them trying to untie the door-
handle, and frightened them away in endeavouring to awaken me.

14th and 15th.--Grant, doing duty for me, tried a day's penance
at the palace, but though he sat all day in the ante-chamber, and
musicians were ordered into the presence, nobody called for him.
K'yengo was sent with all his men on a Wakungu-seizing
expedition, --a good job for him, as it was his perquisite to
receive the major part of the plunder himself.

16th.--I sent Kahala out of the house, giving her finally over to
Bombay as a wife, because she preferred playing with dirty little
children to behaving like a young lady, and had caught the itch.
This was much against her wish, and the child vowed she would not
leave me until force compelled her; but I had really no other way
of dealing with the remnant of the awkward burden which the
queen's generosity had thrown on me.  K'yengo went to the palace
with fifty prisoners; but as the king had taken his women to the
small pond, where he has recently placed a tub canoe for purposes
of amusement, they did no business.

17th.--I took a first convalescent walk.  The king, who was out
shooting all day, begged for powder in the evening.  Uledi
returned from his expedition against a recusant officer at
Kituntu, bringing with him a spoil of ten women.  It appeared
that the officer himself had bolted from his landed possessions,
and as they belonged to "the church," or were in some way or
other sacred from civil execution, they could not be touched, so
that Uledi lost an estate which the king had promised him.  We
heard that Ilmas, wife of Majanja, who, as I already mentioned,
had achieved an illustrious position by services at the birth of
the king, had been sent to visit the late king Sunna's tomb,
whence, after observing certain trees which were planted, and
divining by mystic arts what the future state of Uganda required,
she would return at a specific time, to order the king at the
time of his coronation either to take the field with an army, to
make a pilgrimage, or to live a life of ease at home; whichever
of these courses the influence of the ordeal at the grave might
prompt her to order, must be complied with by the king.

18th.--I called at the palace with Grant, taking with us some
pictures of soldiers, horses, elephants, etc.  We found the guard
fighting over their beef and plantain dinner.  Bombay remarked
that this daily feeding on beef would be the lot of the Wanguana
if they had no religious scruples about the throat-cutting of
animals for food.  This, I told him, was all their own fault, for
they have really no religion or opinions of their own; and had
they been brought up in England instead of Africa, it would have
been all the other way with them as a matter of course; but
Bombay replied, "We could no more throw off the Mussulman faith
than you could yours."  A man with a maniacal voice sang and
whistled by turns. Katumba, the officer of the guards, saw our
pictures, and being a favourite, acquainted the king, which
gained us an admittance.

We found his majesty sitting on the ground, within a hut, behind
a portal, encompassed by his women, and took our seats outside.
At first all was silence, till one told the king we had some
wonderful pictures to show him; in an instant he grew lively,
crying out, "Oh, let us see them!" and they were shown, Bombay
explaining. Three of the king's wives then came in, and offered
him their two virgin sisters, n'yanzigging incessantly, and
beseeching their acceptance, as by that means they themselves
would become doubly related to him.  Nothing, however, seemed to
be done to promote the union, until one old lady, sitting by the
king's side, who was evidently learned in the etiquette and
traditions of the court, said, "Wait and see if he embraces,
otherwise you may know he is not pleased."  At this announcement
the girls received a hint to pass on, and the king commenced
bestowing on them a series of huggings, first sitting on the lap
of one, whom he clasped to his bosom, crossing his neck with hers
to the right, then to the left, and, having finished with her,
took post in the second one's lap, then on that of the third,
performing on each of them the same evolutions. He then retired
to his original position, and the marriage ceremony was supposed
to be concluded, and the settlements adjusted, when all went on
as before.

The pictures were again looked at, and again admired, when we
asked for a private interview on business, and drew the king
outside. I then begged he would allow me, whilst his men were
absent at Unyoro, to go to the Masai country, and see the Salt
Lake at the north-east corner of the N'yanza, and to lend me some
of his boats for Grant to fetch powder and beads from Karague. 
This important arrangement being conceded by the king more
promptly than we expected, a cow, plantains, and pombe were
requested; but the cow only was given, though our men were said
to be feeding on grass. Taking the king, as it appeared, in a
good humour, to show him the abuses arising from the system of
allowing his guests to help themselves by force upon the
highways, I reported the late seizures made of thirty cows and
twelve slaves by the Wanyambo; but, though surprised to hear the
news, he merely remarked that there were indeed a great number of
visitors in Uganda.  During this one day we heard the sad voice
of no less than four women, dragged from the palace to the
slaughter-house.

19th.--To follow up our success in the marching question and keep
the king to his promise, I called at his palace, but found he had
gone out shooting.  To push my object further, I then marched off
to the queen's to bid her good-bye, as if we were certain to
leave the next day; but as no one would dare to approach her
cabinet to apprise her of our arrival, we returned home tired and
annoyed.

20th.--The king sent for us at noon; but when we reached the
palace we found he had started on a shooting tour; so, to make
the best of our time, we called again upon the queen for the same
purpose as yesterday, as also to get my books of birds and
animals, which, taken merely to look at for a day or so, had been
kept for months. After hours of waiting, her majesty appeared
standing in an open gateway; beckoned us to advance, and offered
pombe; then, as two or three drops of rain fell, she said she
could not stand the violence of the weather, and forthwith
retired without one word being obtained.  An officer, however,
venturing in for the books, at length I got them.

21st.--To-day I went to the palace, but found no one; the king
was out shooting again.

22d.--We resolved to-day to try on a new political influence at
the court.  Grant had taken to the court of Karague a jumping-
jack, to amuse the young princes; but it had a higher destiny,
for it so fascinated the king Rumanika himself that he would not
part with it --unless, indeed, Grant would make him a big one out
of a tree which was handed to him for the purpose.  We resolved
to try the influence of such a toy on king Mtesa, and brought
with us, in addition, a mask and some pictures.  But although the
king took a visiting card, the gate was never opened to us. 
Finding this, and the day closing, we deposited the mask and
pictures on a throne, and walked away.  We found that we had thus
committed a serious breach of state etiquette; for the guard, as
soon as they saw what we had done, seized the Wanguana for our
offences in defiling the royal seat, and would have bound them,
had they not offered to return the articles to us.

23d.--Early in the morning, hearing the royal procession marching
off on a shooting excursion, we sent Bombay running after it with
the mask and pictures, to aquaint the king with our desire to see
him, and explain that we had been four days successively foiled
in attempts to find him in his palace, our object being an eager
wish to come to some speedy understanding about the appointed
journeys to the Salt Lake and Karague.  The toys produced the
desired effect; for the king stopped and played with them, making
Bombay and the pages don the masks by turns.  He appointed the
morrow for an interview, at the same time excusing himself for
not having seen us yesterday on the plea of illness.  In the
evening Kahala absconded with another little girl of the camp in
an opposite direction from the one she took last time; but as
both of them wandered about not knowing where to go to, and as
they omitted to take off all their finery, they were soon
recognised as in some way connected with my party, taken up, and
brought into camp, where they were well laughed at for their
folly, and laughed in turn at the absurdity of their futile
venture.

24th.--Hoping to keep the king to his promise, I went to the
palace early, but found he had already gone to see his brothers,
so followed him down, and found him engaged playing on a
harmonicon with them.  Surprised at my intrusion, he first asked
how I managed to find him out; then went on playing for a while;
but suddenly stopping to talk with me, he gave me an opportunity
of telling him I wished to send Grant off to Karague, and start
myself for Usoga and the Salt Lake in the morning.  "What! going
away?" said the king, as if he had never heard a word about it
before; and then, after talking the whole subject over again,
especially dwelling on the quantity of powder I had in store at
Karague, he promised to send the necessary officers for escorting
us on our respective journeys in the morning.

The brothers' wives then wished to see me, and came before us,
when I had to take off my hat and shoes as usual, my ready
compliance inducing the princes to pass various compliments of my
person and disposition. The brothers then showed me a stool made
of wood after the fashion of our sketching-stool, and a gun-cover
of leather, made by themselves, of as good workmanship as is to
be found in India.  The king then rose, followed by his brothers,
and we all walked off to the pond.  The effect of stimulants was
mooted, as well as other physiological phenomena, when a second
move took us to the palace by torchlight, and the king showed a
number of new huts just finished and beautifully made.  Finally,
he settled down to a musical concert, in which he took the lead
himself.  At eight o'clock, being tired and hungry, I reminded
the king of his promises, and he appointed the morning to call on
him for the Wakungu, and took leave.

25th.--Makinga, hearing of the intended march through Usoga, was
pleased to say he would like to join my camp and spend his time
in buying slaves and ivory there.  I went to the palace for the
promised escort, but was no sooner announced by the pages than
the king walked off into the interior of his harem, and left me
no alternative but to try my luck with the Kamraviona, who,
equally proud with his master, would not answer my call,--and so
another day was lost.

26th.--This morning we had the assuring intelligence from Kaddu
that he had received orders to hold himself in readiness for a
voyage to Karague in twenty boats with Grant, but the date of
departure was not fixed.  The passage was expected to be rough,
as the water off the mouth of the Kitangule Kagera (river) always
runs high, so that no boats can go there except at night, when
the winds of day subside, and are replaced by the calms of night. 
I called at the palace, but saw nothing of the king, though the
court was full of officials; and there were no less than 150
women, besides girls, goats, and various other things, seizures
from refractory state officers, who, it was said, had been too
proud to present themselves at court for a period exceeding
propriety.

All these creatures, I was assured, would afterwards be given
away as return-presents for the hongos or presents received from
the king's visitors.  No wonder the tribes of Africa are mixed
breeds. Amongst the officers in waiting was my friend Budja, the
ambassador that had been sent to Unyoro with Kidgwiga, Kamrasi's
deputy. He had returned three days before, but had not yet seen
the king. As might have been expected, he said he had been
anything but welcomed in Unyoro.  Kamrasi, after keeping him
half-starved and in suspense eight days, sent a message--for he
would not see him--that he did not desire any communication with
blackguard Waganda thieves, and therefore advised him, if he
valued his life, to return by the road by which he came as
speedily as possible.  Turning to Congow, I playfully told him
that, as the road through Unyoro was closed, he would have to go
with me through Usoga and Kidi; but the gallant colonel merely
shuddered, and said that would be a terrible undertaking.

27th.--The king would not show, for some reason or other, and we
still feared to fire guns lest he should think our store of
powder inexhaustible, and so keep us here until he had extorted
the last of it.  I found that the Waganda have the same absurd
notion here as the Wanyambo have in Karague, of Kamrasi's
supernatural power in being able to divide the waters of the Nile
in the same manner as Moses did the Red Sea.

28th.--The king sent a messenger-boy to inform us that he had
just heard from Unyoro that the white men were still at Gani
inquiring after us; but nothing was said of Budja's defeat.  I
sent Bombay immediately off to tell him we had changed our plans,
and now simply required a large escort to accompany us through
Usoga and Kidi to Gani, as further delay in communicating with
Petherick might frustrate all chance of opening the Nile trade
with Uganda. He answered that he would assemble all his officers
in the morning to consult with them on the subject, when he hoped
we would attend, as he wished to further our views.  A herd of
cows, about eighty in number, were driven in from Unyoro, showing
that the silly king was actually robbing Kamrasi at the same time
that he was trying to treat with him.  K'yengo informed us that
the king, considering the surprising events which had lately
occurred at his court, being very anxious to pry into the future,
had resolved to take a very strong measure for accomplishing that
end.  This was the sacrifice of a child by cooking, as described
in the introduction--a ceremony which it fell to K'yengo to carry
out.

29th.--To have two strings to my bow, and press our departure as
hotly as possible, I sent first Frij off with Nasib to the queen,
conveying, as a parting present, a block-tin brush-box, a watch
without a key, two sixpenny pocket-handkerchiefs, and a white
towel, with an intimation that we were going, as the king had
expressed his desire of sending us to Gani.  Her majesty accepted
the present, finding fault with the watch for not ticking like
the king's, and would not believe her son Mtesa had been so hasty
in giving us leave to depart, as she had not been consulted on
the subject yet. Setting off to attend the king at his appointed
time, I found the Kamraviona already there, with a large court
attendance, patiently awaiting his majesty's advent.  As we were
all waiting on, I took a rise out of the Kamraviona by telling
him I wanted a thousand men to march with me through Kidi to
Gani.  Surprised at the extent of my requisition, he wished to
know if my purpose was fighting.  I made him a present of the
great principle that power commands respect, and it was to
prevent any chance of fighting that we required so formidable an
escort.  His reply was that he would tell the king; and he
immediately rose and walked away home.

K'yengo and the representatives of Usui and Karague now arrived
by order of the king to bid farewell, and received the slaves and
cattle lately captured.  As I was very hungry, I set off home to
breakfast.  Just as I had gone, the provoking king inquired after
me, and so brought me back again, though I never saw him the
whole day.  K'yengo, however, was very communicative.  He said he
was present when Sunna, with all the forces he could muster,
tried to take the very countries I now proposed to travel
through; but, though in person exciting his army to victory, he
could make nothing of it.  He advised my returning to Karague,
when Rumanika would give me an escort through Nkole to Unyoro;
but finding that did not suit my views, as I swore I would never
retrace one step, he proposed my going by boat to Unyoro,
following down the Nile.

This, of course, was exactly what I wanted; but how could king
Mtesa, after the rebuff he had received from Kamrasi be induced
to consent to it?  My intention, I said, was to try the king on
the Usoga and Kidi route first, then on the Masai route to
Zanzibar, affecting perfect indifference about Kamrasi; and all
those failing--which, of course, they would--I would ask for
Unyoro as a last and only resource.  Still I could not see the
king to open my heart to him, and therefore felt quite
nonplussed.  "Oh," says K'yengo, "the reason why you do not see
him is merely because he is Ashamed to show his face, having made
so many fair promises to you which he knows he can never carry
out: bide your time, and all will be well."  At 4 p.m., as no
hope of seeing the king was left, all retired.

30th.--Unexpectedly, and for reasons only known to himself, the
king sent us a cow and load of butter, which had been asked for
many days ago.  The new moon seen last night kept the king
engaged at home, paying his devotions with his magic horns or
fetishes in the manner already described.  The spirit of this
religion--if such it can be called--is not so much adoration of a
Being supreme and beneficent, as a tax to certain malignant
furies--a propitiation, in fact, to prevent them bringing evil on
the land, and to insure a fruitful harvest.  It was rather
ominous that hail fell with violence, and lightning burnt down
one of the palace huts, while the king was in the midst of his
propitiatory devotions.

1st.--As Bombay was ordered to the palace to instruct the king in
the art of casting bullets, I primed him well to plead for the
road, and he reported to me the results, thus: First, he asked
one thousand men to go through Kidi.  This the king said was
impracticable, as the Waganda had tried it so often before
without success.  Then, as that could not be managed, what would
the king devise himself?  Bana only proposed the Usoga and Kidi
route, because he thought it would be to the advantage of Uganda. 
"Oh," says the king, cunningly, "if Bana merely wishes to see
Usoga, he can do so, and I will send a suitable escort, but no
more." To this Bombay replied, "Bana never could return; he would
sooner do anything than return--even penetrate the Masai to
Zanzibar, or go through Unyoro"; to which the king, ashamed of
his impotence, hung down his head and walked away.

In the meanwhile, and whilst this was going on at the king's
palace, I went with Grant, by appointment, to see the queen.  As
usual, she kept us waiting some time, then appeared sitting by an
open gate, and invited us, together with many Wakungu and
Wasumbua to approach.  Very lavish with stale sour pombe, she
gave us all some, saving the Wasumbua, whom she addressed very
angrily, asking what they wanted, as they have been months in the
country.  These poor creatures, in a desponding mood, defended
themselves by saying, which was quite true, that they had left
their homes in Sorombo to visit her, and to trade.  They had,
since their arrival in the country, been daily in attendance at
her palace, but never had the good fortune to see her excepting
on such lucky occasions as brought the Wazungu (white men) here,
when she opened her gates to them, but otherwise kept them shut. 
The queen retorted, "And what have you brought me, pray? where is
it?  Until I touch it you will neither see me nor obtain
permission to trade.  Uganda is no place for idle vagabonds."  We
then asked for a private interview, when, a few drops of rain
falling, the queen walked away, and we had orders to wait a
little.  During this time two boys were birched by the queen's
orders, and an officer was sent out to inquire why the watch he
had given her did not go.  This was easily explained. It had no
key; and, never losing sight of the main object, we took
advantage of the opportunity to add, that if she did not approve
of it, we could easily exchange it for another on arrival at
Gani, provided she would send an officer with us.

The queen, squatting within her hut, now ordered both Grant and
myself to sit outside and receive a present of five eggs and one
cock each, saying coaxingly, "These are for my children." Then
taking out the presents, she learned the way of wearing her watch
with a tape guard round her neck, reposing the instrument in her
bare bosom, and of opening and shutting it, which so pleased her,
that she declared it quite satisfactory.  The key was quite a
minor consideration, for she could show it to her attendants just
as well without one.  The towel and handkerchiefs were also very
beautiful, but what use could they be put to?  "Oh, your majesty,
to wipe the mouth after drinking pombe."  "Of course," is the
reply --"excellent; I won't use a mbugu napkin any more, but have
one of these placed on my cup when it is brought to drink, and
wipe my mouth with it afterwards.  But what does Bana want?" 
"The road to Gani," says Bombay for me.  "The king won't see him
when he goes to The palace, so now he comes here, trusting your
superior influence and good-nature will be more practicable." 
"Oh!" says her majesty, "Bana does not know the facts of the
case.  My son has tried all the roads without success, and now he
is ashamed to meet Bana face to face."  "Then what is to be done,
your majesty?"  "Bana must go back to Karague and wait for a
year, until my son is crowned, when he will make friends with the
surrounding chiefs, and the roads will be opened."  "But Bana
says he will not retrace one step; he would sooner lose his
life."  "Oh, that's nonsense! he must not be headstrong; but
before anything more can be said, I will send a message to my
son, and Bana can then go with Kaddu, K'yengo, and Viarungi, and
tell all they have to say to Mtesa to-morrow, and the following
day return to me, when everything will be concluded." We all now
left but Kaddu and some of the queen's officers, who waited for
the message to her son about us.  To judge from Kaddu, it must
have been very different from what she led us to expect, as, on
joining us, he said there was not the smallest chance of our
getting the road we required, for the queen was so decided about
it no further argument would be listened to.

2d.--Three goats were stolen, and suspicion falling on the king's
cooks, who are expert foragers, we sent to the Kamraviona, and
asked him to order out the Mganga; but his only reply was, that
he often loses goats in the same way.  He sent us one of his own
for present purposes, and gave thirty baskets of potatoes to my
men.  As the king held a court, and broke it up before 8 a.m.,
and no one would go there for fear of his not appearing again, I
waited, till the evening for Bombay, Kaddu, K'yengo, and
Viarungi, when, finding them drunk, I went by myself, fired a
gun, and was admitted to where the king was hunting guinea-fowl. 
On seeing me, he took me affectionately by the hand, and, as we
walked along together, he asked me what I wanted, showed me the
house which was burnt down, and promised to settle the road
question in the morning.

3d.--With Kaddu, K'yengo, and Viarungi all in attendance, we went
to the palace, where there was a large assemblage prepared for a
levee, and fired a gun, which brought the king out in state.  The
Sakibobo, or provincial governor, arrived with a body of soldiers
armed with sticks, made a speech, and danced at the head of his
men, all pointing sticks upwards, and singing fidelity to their
king.

The king then turned to me, and said, "I have come out to listen
to your request of last night.  What is it you do want?"  I said,
"To open the country to the north, that an uninterrupted line of
commerce might exist between England and this country by means of
the Nile.  I might go round by Nkole" (K'yengo looked daggers at
me); "but that is out of the way, and not suitable to the
purpose." The queen's deputation was now ordered to draw near,
and questioned in a whisper.  As K'yengo was supposed to know all
about me, and spoke fluently both in Kiganda and Kisuahili, he
had to speak first; but K'yengo, to everybody's surprise, said,
"One white man wishes to go to Kamrasi's, whilst the other wishes
to return through Unyamuezi."  This announcement made the king
reflect; for he had been privately primed by his mother's
attendants, that we both wished to go to Gani, and therefore
shrewdly inquired if Rumanika knew we wished to visit Kamrasi,
and whether he was aware we should attempt the passage north from
Uganda.  "Oh yes! of course Bana wrote to Bana Mdogo" (the little
master) "as soon as he arrived in Uganda and told him and
Rumanika all about it."  "Wrote! what does that mean?" and I was
called upon to explain.  Mtesa, then seeing a flaw in K'yengo's
statements, called him a story-teller; ordered him and his party
away, and bade me draw near.

The moment of triumph had come at last, and suddenly the road was
granted!  The king presently let us see the motive by which he
had been influenced.  He said he did not like having to send to
Rumanika for everything: he wanted his visitors to come to him
direct; moreover, Rumanika had sent him a message to the effect
that we were not to be shown anything out of Uganda, and when we
had done with it, were to be returned to him.  Rumanika, indeed!
who cared about Rumanika?  Was not Mtesa the king of the country,
to do as he liked? and we all laughed.  Then the king, swelling
with pride, asked me whom I liked best--Rumanika or himself,--an
awkward question, which I disposed of by saying I liked Rumanika
very much because he spoke well, and was very communicative; but
I also liked Mtesa, because his habits were much like my own--
fond of shooting and roaming about; whilst he had learned so many
things from my teaching, I must ever feel a yearning towards him.

With much satisfaction I felt that my business was now done; for
Budja was appointed to escort us to Unyoro, and Jumba to prepare
us boats, that we might go all the way to Kamrasi's by water.
Viarungi made a petition, on Rumanika's behalf, for an army of
Waganda to go to Karague, and fight the refractory brother,
Rogero; but this was refused, on the plea that the whole army was
out fighting at the present moment.  The court then broke up and
we went home.

To keep the king up to the mark, and seal our passage, in the
evening I took a Lancaster rifle, with ammunition, and the iron
chair he formerly asked for, as a parting present, to the palace,
but did not find him, as he had gone out shooting with his
brothers.

4th.--Grant and I now called together on the king to present the
rifle, chair, and ammunition, as we could not thank him in words
sufficiently for the favour he had done us in granting the road
through Unyoro.  I said the parting gift was not half as much as
I should like to have been able to give; but we hoped, on
reaching Gani, to send Petherick up to him with everything that
he could desire.  We regretted we had no more powder or shot, as
what was intended, and actually placed out expressly to be
presented on this occasion, was stolen.  The king looked hard at
his head page, who was once sent to get these very things now
given, and then turning the subject adroitly, asked me how many
cows and women I would like, holding his hand up with spread
fingers, and desiring me to count by hundreds; but the reply was,
Five cows and goats would be enough, for we wished to travel
lightly in boats, starting from the Murchison Creek.  Women were
declined on such grounds as would seem rational to him.  But if
the king would clothe my naked men with one mbugu (bark cloth)
each, and give a small tusk each to nine Wanyamuezi porters, who
desired to return to their home, the obligation would be great.

Everything was granted without the slightest hesitation; and then
the king, turning to me, said, "Well, Bana, so you really wish to
go?"  "Yes, for I have not seen my home for four years and
upwards" --reckoning five months to the year, Uganda fashion. 
"And you can give no stimulants?"  "No."  "Then you will send me
some from Gani-- brandy if you like; it makes people sleep sound,
and gives them strength."  Next we went to the queen to bid her
farewell, but did not see her.

On returning home I found half my men in a state of mutiny. They
had been on their own account to beg for the women and cows which
had been refused, saying, If Bana does not want them we do, for
we have been starved here ever since we came, and when we go for
food get broken heads; we will not serve with Bana any longer;
but as he goes north, we will return to Karague and Unyanyembe.
Bombay, however, told them they never had fed so well in all
their lives as they had in Uganda, counting from fifty to sixty
cows killed, and pombe and plantains every day, whenever they
took the trouble to forage; and for their broken heads they
invariably received a compensation in women; so that Bana had
reason to regret every day spent in asking for food for them at
the palace--a favour which none but his men received, but which
they had not, as they might have done, turned to good effect by
changing the system of plundering for food in Uganda.

5th.--By the king's order we attended at the palace early.  The
gun obtained us all a speedy admittance, when the king opened
conversation by saying, "Well, Bana, so you really are going?"
"Yes; I have enjoyed your hospitality for a long time, and now
wish to return to my home."  "What provision do you want?"  I
said, Five cows and five goats, as we shan't be long in Uganda;
and it is not the custom of our country, when we go visiting, to
carry anything away with us.  The king then said, "Well, I wish
to give you much, but you won't have it"; when Budja spoke out,
saying, "Bana does not know the country he had to travel through;
there is nothing but jungle and famine on the way, and he must
have cows"; on which the king ordered us sixty cows, fourteen
goats, ten loads of butter, a load of coffee and tobacco, one
hundred sheets of mbugu, as clothes for my men, at a suggestion
of Bombay's, as all my cloth had been expended even before I left
Karague.

This magnificent order created a pause, which K'yengo took
advantage of by producing a little bundle of peculiarly-shaped
sticks and a lump of earth--all of which have their own
particular magical powers, as K'yengo described to the king's
satisfaction. After this, Viarungi pleaded the cause of my
mutinous followers, till I shook my finger angrily at him before
the king, rebuked him for intermeddling in other people's
affairs, and told my own story, which gained the sympathy of the
king, and induced him to say, "Supposing they desert Bana, what
road do they expect to get?" Maula was now appointed to go with
Rozaro to Karague for the powder and other things promised
yesterday, whilst Viarungi and all his party, though exceedingly
anxious to get away, had orders to remain here prisoners as a
surety for the things arriving.  Further, Kaddu and two other
Wakungu received orders to go to Usui with two tusks of ivory to
purchase gunpowder, caps, and flints, failing which they would
proceed to Unyanyembe, and even to Zanzibar, for the king must
not be disappointed, and failure would cost them their lives.

Not another word was said, and away the two parties went, with no
more arrangement than a set of geese--Maula without a letter, and
Kaddu without any provision for the way, as if all the world
belonged to Mtesa, and he could help himself from any man's
garden that he liked, no matter where he was.  In the evening my
men made a humble petition for their discharge, even if I did not
pay them, producing a hundred reasons for wishing to leave me,
but none which would stand a moment's argument: the fact was,
they were afraid of the road to Unyoro, thinking I had not
sufficient ammunition.

6th.--I visited the king, and asked leave for boats to go at
once; but the fleet admiral put a veto on this by making out that
dangerous shallows exist between the Murchison Creek and the Kira
district station, so that the boats of one place never visit the
other; and further, if we went to Kira, we should find
impracticable cataracts to the Urondogani boat-station; our
better plan would therefore be, to deposit our property at the
Urondogani station, and walk by land up the river, if a sight of
the falls at the mouth of the lake was of such material
consequence to us.

Of course this man carried everything his own way, for there was
nobody able to contradict him, and we could not afford time to
visit Usoga first, lest by the delay we might lose an opportunity
of communicating with Petherick.  Grant now took a portrait of
Mtesa by royal permission, the king sitting as quietly as his
impatient nature would permit.  Then at home the Wanyamuezi
porters received their tusks of ivory, weighing from 16 to 50 lb.
each, and took a note besides on Rumanika each for twenty fundo
of beads, barring one Bogue man, who, having lent a cloth to the
expedition some months previously, thought it would not be paid
him, and therefore seized a sword as security; the consequence
was, his tusk was seized until the sword was returned, and he was
dismissed minus his beads, for having so misconducted himself. 
The impudent fellow then said, "It will be well for Bana if he
succeeds in getting the road through Unyoro; for, should he fail,
I will stand in his path at Bogue." Kitunzi offered an ivory for
beads, and when told we were not merchants, and advised to try
K'yengo, he said he dared not even approach K'yengo's camp lest
people should tell the king of it, and accuse him of seeking for
magical powers against his sovereign. Old Nasib begged for his
discharge.  It was granted, and he took a $50 letter on the
coast, and a letter of emancipation for himself and family,
besides an order, written in Kisuahili, for ten fundo of beads on
Rumanika, which made him very happy.

In the evening we called again at the palace with pictures of the
things the king required from Rumanika, and a letter informing
Rumanika what we wished done with them, in order that there might
be no mistake, requesting the king to forward them after Mula.
Just then Kaddu's men returned to say they wanted provisions for
the way, as the Wazinza, hearing of their mission, asked them if
they knew what they were about, going to a strange country
without any means of paying their way.  But the king instead of
listening to reason, impetuously said, "If you do not pack off at
once, and bring me the things I want, every man of you shall lose
his head; and as for the Wazinza, for interfering with my orders,
they shall be kept here prisoners until you return."

On the way home, one of the king's favourite women overtook us,
walking, with her hands clasped at the back of her head, to
execution, crying, "N'uawo!" in the most pitiful manner.  A man
was preceding her, but did not touch her; for she loved to obey
the orders of her king voluntarily, and in consequence of
previous attachment, was permitted, as a mark of distinction, to
walk free. Wondrous world! it was not ten minutes since we parted
from the king, yet he had found time to transact this bloody
piece of business.

7th.--Early in the morning the king bade us come to him to say
farewell.  Wishing to leave behind a favourable impression, I
instantly complied.  On the breast of my coat I suspended the
necklace the queen had given me, as well as his knife, and my
medals.  I talked with him in as friendly and flattering a manner
as I could, dwelling on his shooting, the pleasant cruising on
the lake, and our sundry picnics, as well as the grand prospect
there was now of opening the country to trade, by which his guns,
the best in the world, would be fed with powder--and other small
matters of a like nature,--to which he replied with great feeling
and good taste. We then all rose with an English bow, placing the
hand on the heart whilst saying adieu; and there was a complete
uniformity in the ceremonial, for whatever I did, Mtesa, in an
instant, mimicked with the instinct of a monkey.

We had, however, scarcely quitted the palace gate before the king
issued himself, with his attendants and his brothers leading, and
women bringing up the rear; here K'yengo and all the Wazinza
joined in the procession with ourselves, they kneeling and
clapping their hands after the fashion of their own country. 
Budja just then made me feel very anxious, by pointing out the
position of Urondogani, as I thought, too far north.  I called
the king's attention to it, and in a moment he said he would
speak to Budja in such a manner that would leave no doubts in my
mind, for he liked me much, and desired to please me in all
things.  As the procession now drew to our camp, and Mtesa
expressed a wish to have a final look at my men, I ordered them
to turn out with their arms and n'yanzig for the many favours
they had received.  Mtesa, much pleased, complimented them on
their goodly appearance, remarking that with such a force I would
have no difficulty in reaching Gani, and exhorted them to follow
me through fire and water; then exchanging adieus again he walked
ahead in gigantic strides up the hill, the pretty favourite of
his harem, Lubuga--beckoning and waving with her little hands,
and crying, "Bana! Bana!"--trotting after him conspicuous amongst
the rest, though all showed a little feeling at the severance. 
We saw them no more.




                           Chapter XV



            March Down the Northern Slopes of Africa

Kari--Tragic Incident there--Renewals of Troubles--Quarrels with
the Natives--Reach the Nile--Description of the Scene there--
Sport-- Church Estate--Ascend the River to the Junction with the
Lake--Ripon Falls--General Account of the Source of the Nile--
Descend again to Urondogani--The Truculent Sakibobo.

7th to 11th.--With Budja appointed as the general director, a
lieutenant of the Sakibobo's to furnish us with sixty cows in his
division at the first halting-place, and Kasoro (Mr Cat), a
lieutenant of Jumba's, to provide the boats at Urondogani, we
started at 1 p.m., on the journey northwards.  The Wanguana still
grumbled, swearing they would carry no loads, as they got no
rations, and threatening to shoot us if we pressed them,
forgetting that their food had been paid for to the king in
rifles, chronometers, and other articles, costing about 2000
dollars, and, what was more to the point, that all the ammunition
was in our hands.  A judicious threat of the stick, however, put
things right, and on we marched five successive days to Kari--as
the place was afterwards named, in consequence of the tragedy
mentioned below-- the whole distance accomplished being thirty
miles from the capital, through a fine hilly country, with
jungles and rich cultivation alternating.  The second march,
after crossing the Katawana river with its many branches flowing
north-east into the huge rush-drain of Luajerri, carried us
beyond the influence of the higher hills, and away from the huge
grasses which characterise the southern boundary of Uganda
bordering on the lake.

Each day's march to Kari was directed much in the same manner.
After a certain number of hours' travelling, Budja appointed some
village of residence for the night, avoiding those which belonged
to the queen, lest any rows should take place in them, which
would create disagreeable consequences with the king, and
preferring those the heads of which had been lately seized by the
orders of the king. Nevertheless, wherever we went, all the
villagers forsook their homes, and left their houses, property,
and gardens an easy prey to the thieving propensities of the
escort.  To put a stop to this vile practice was now beyond my
power; the king allowed it, and his men were the first in every
house, taking goats, fowls, skins, mbugus, cowries, beads, drums,
spears, tobacco, pombe,--in short, everything they could lay
their hands on--in the most ruthless manner.  It was a perfect
marauding campaign for them all, and all alike were soon laden
with as much as they could carry.

A halt of some days had become necessary at Kari to collect the
cows given by the king; and, as it is one of the most extensive
pasture- grounds, I strolled with my rifle (11th) to see what new
animals could be found; but no sooner did I wound a zebra than
messengers came running after me to say Kari, one of my men, had
been murdered by the villagers three miles off; and such was the
fact.  He, with others of my men, had been induced to go
plundering, with a few boys of the Waganda escort, to a certain
village of potters, as pots were required by Budja for making
plantain-wine, the first thing ever thought of when a camp is
formed.  On nearing the place, however, the women of the village,
who were the only people visible, instead of running away, as our
braves expected, commenced hullalooing, and brought out their
husbands.  Flight was now the only thought of our men, and all
would have escaped had Kari not been slow and his musket empty. 
The potters overtook him, and, as he pointed his gun, which they
considered a magic-horn, they speared him to death, and then fled
at once.  Our survivors were not long in bringing the news into
camp, when a party went out, and in the evening brought in the
man's corpse and everything belonging to him, for nothing had
been taken.

12th.--To enable me at my leisure to trace up the Nile to its
exit from the lake, and then go on with the journey as quickly as
possible, I wished the cattle to be collected and taken by Budja
and some of my men with the heavy baggage overland to Kamrasi's.
Another reason for doing so was, that I thought it advisable
Kamrasi should be forewarned that we were coming by the water
route, lest we should be suspected and stopped as spies by his
officers on the river, or regarded as enemies, which would
provoke a fight.  Budja, however, objected to move until a report
of Kari's murder had been forwarded to the king, lest the people,
getting bumptious, should try the same trick again; and Kasoro
said he would not go up the river, as he had received no orders
to do so.

In this fix I ordered a march back to the palace, mentioning the
king's last words, and should have gone, had not Budja ordered
Kasoro to go with me.  A page then arrived from the king to ask
after Bana's health, carrying the Whitworth rifle as his master's
card, and begging for a heavy double-barrelled gun to be sent him
from Gani.  I called this lad to witness the agreement I had made
with Budja, and told him, if Kasoro satisfied me, I would return
by him, in addition to the heavy gun, a Massey's patent log.  I
had taken it for the navigation of the lake, and it was now of no
further use to me, but, being an instrument of complicated
structure, it would be a valuable addition to the king's museum
of magic charms.  I added I should like the king to send me the
robes of honour and spears he had once promised me, in order that
I might, on reaching England, be able to show my countrymen a
specimen of the manufactures of his country.  The men who were
with Kari were now sent to the palace, under accusation of having
led him into ambush, and a complaint was made against the
villagers, which we waited the reply to.  As Budja forbade it, no
men would follow me out shooting, saying the villagers were out
surrounding our camp, and threatening destruction on any one who
dared show his face; for this was not the highroad to Uganda, and
therefore no one had a right to turn them out of their houses and
pillage their gardens.

13th.--Budja lost two cows given to his party last night, and
seeing ours securely tied by their legs to trees, asked by what
spells we had secured them; and would not believe our assurance
that the ropes that bound them were all the medicines we knew of. 
One of the Queen's sisters, hearing of Kari's murder, came on a
visit to condole with us, bringing a pot of pombe, for which she
received some beads.  On being asked how many sisters the queen
had, for we could not help suspecting some imposition, she
replied she was the only one, till assured ten other ladies had
presented themselves as the queen's sisters before, when she
changed her tone, and said, "That is true, I am not the only one;
but if I had told you the truth I might have lost my head."  This
was a significant expression of the danger to telling court
secrets.

I suspected that there must be a considerable quantity of game in
this district, as stake-nets and other traps were found in all
the huts, as well as numbers of small antelope hoofs spitted on
pipe-sticks--an ornament which is counted the special badge of
the sportsman in this part of Africa.  Despite, therefore, of the
warnings of Budja, I strolled again with my rifle, and saw
pallah, small plovers, and green antelopes with straight horns,
called mpeo, the skin of which makes a favourite apron for the
Mabandwa.

14th.--I met to-day a Mhuma cowherd in my strolls with the rifle,
and asked him if he knew where the game lay.  The unmannerly
creature, standing among a thousand of the sleekest cattle,
gruffishly replied, "What can I know of any other animals than
cows?" and went on with his work, as if nothing in the world
could interest him but his cattle-tending.  I shot a doe,
leucotis, called here nsunnu, the first one seen upon the
journey.

15th.--In the morning, when our men went for water to the
springs, some Waganda in ambush threw a spear at them, and this
time caught a Tartar, for the "horns," as they called their guns,
were loaded, and two of them received shot-wounds.  In the
evening, whilst we were returning from shooting, a party of
Waganda, also lying in the bush, called out to know what we were
about; saying, "Is it not enough that you have turned us out of
our homes and plantations, leaving us to live like animals in the
wilderness?" and when told we were only searching for sport,
would not believe that our motive was any other than hostility to
themselves.

At night one of Budja's men returned from the palace, to say the
king was highly pleased with the measures adopted by his Wakungu,
in prosecution of Kari's affair.  He hoped now as we had cows to
eat, there would be no necessity for wandering for food, but all
would keep together "in one garden."  At present no notice would
be taken of the murderers, as all the culprits would have fled
far away in their fright to escape chastisement.  But when a
little time had elapsed, and all would appear to have been
forgotten, officers would be sent and the miscreants apprehended,
for it was impossible to suppose anybody could be ignorant of the
white men being the guests of the king, considering they had
lived at the palace for so long. The king took this opportunity
again to remind me that he wanted a heavy solid double gun, such
as would last him all his life; and intimated that in a few days
the arms and robes of honour were to be sent.

16th.--Most of the cows for ourselves and the guides--for the
king gave them also a present, ten each--were driven into camp. 
We also got 50 lb. of butter, the remainder to be picked up on
the way. I strolled with the gun, and shot two zebras, to be sent
to the king, as, by the constitution of Uganda, he alone can keep
their royal skins.

17th.--We had to halt again, as the guides had lost most of their
cows, so I strolled