 with my rifle and shot a ndjezza doe, the
first I had ever seen.  It is a brown animal, a little smaller
than leucotis, and frequents much the same kind of ground.

18th.--We had still to wait another day for Budja's cows, when,
as it appeared all-important to communicate quickly with
Petherick, and as Grant's leg was considered too weak for
travelling fast, we took counsel together, and altered our plans. 
I arranged that Grant should go to Kamrasi's direct with the
property, cattle, and women, taking my letters and a map for
immediate despatch to Petherick at Gani, whilst I should go up
the river to its source or exit from the lake, and come down
again navigating as far as practicable.

At night the Waganda startled us by setting fire to the huts our
men were sleeping in, but providentially did more damage to
themselves than to us, for one sword only was buried in the fire,
whilst their own huts, intended to be vacated in the morning,
were burnt to the ground.  To fortify ourselves against another
invasion, we cut down all their plaintains to make a boma or
fence.

We started all together on our respective journeys; but, after
the third mile, Grant turned west, to join the highroad to
Kamrasi's, whilst I went east for Urondogani, crossing the
Luajerri, a huge rush-drain three miles broad, fordable nearly to
the right bank, where we had to ferry in boats, and the cows to
be swum over with men holding on to their tails.  It was larger
than the Katonga, and more tedious to cross, for it took no less
than four hours mosquitoes in myriads biting our bare backs and
legs all the while. The Luajerri is said to rise in the lake and
fall into the Nile, due south of our crossing-point.  On the
right bank wild buffalo are described to be as numerous as cows,
but we did not see any, though the country is covered with a most
inviting jungle for sport, which intermediate lays of fine
grazing grass.  Such is the nature of the country all the way to
Urondogani, except in some favoured spots, kept as tidily as in
any part of Uganda, where plantains grow in the utmost
luxuriance.  From want of guides, and misguided by the exclusive
ill-natured Wahuma who were here in great numbers tending their
king's cattle, we lost our way continually, so that we did not
reach the boat-station until the morning of the 21st.

Here at last I stood on the brink of the Nile; most beautiful was
the scene, nothing could surpass it!  It was the very perfection
of the kind of effect aimed at in a highly kept park; with a
magnificent stream from 600 to 700 yards wide, dotted with islets
and rocks, the former occupied by fishermen's huts, the latter by
sterns and crocodiles basking in the sun,--flowing between the
fine high grassy banks, with rich trees and plantains in the
background, where herds of the nsunnu and hartebeest could be
seen grazing, while the hippopotami were snorting in the water,
and florikan and guinea-fowl rising at our feet.  Unfortunately,
the chief district officer, Mlondo, was from home, but we took
possession of his huts-- clean, extensive, and tidily kept--
facing the river, and felt as if a residence here would do one
good.  Delays and subterfuges, however, soon came to damp our
spirits.  The acting officer was sent for, and asked for the
boats; they were all scattered, and could not be collected for a
day or two; but, even if they were at hand, no boat ever went up
or down the river.  The chief was away and would be sent for, as
the king often changed his orders, and, after all, might not mean
what had been said.  The district belonged to the Sakibobo, and
no representative of his had come here. These excuses, of course,
would not satisfy us.  The boats must be collected, seven, if
there are not ten, for we must try them, and come to some
understanding about them, before we march up stream, when, if the
officer values his life, he will let us have them, and
acknowledge Karoso as the king's representative, otherwise a
complaint will be sent to the palace, for we won't stand
trifling.

We were now confronting Usoga, a country which may be said to be
the very counterpart of Uganda in its richness and beauty.  Here
the people use such huge iron-headed spears with short handles,
that, on seeing one to-day, my people remarked that they were
better fitted for digging potatoes than piercing men.  Elephants,
as we had seen by their devastations during the last two marches,
were very numerous in this neighbourhood.  Till lately, a party
from Unyoro, ivory-hunting, had driven them away.  Lions were
also described as very numerous and destructive to human life. 
Antelopes were common in the jungle, and the hippopotami, though
frequenters of the plantain-garden and constantly heard, were
seldom seen on land in consequence of their unsteady habits.

The king's page again came, begging I would not forget the gun
and stimulants, and bringing with him the things I asked for--
two spears, one shield, one dirk, two leopard-cat skins, and two
sheets of small antelope skins.  I told my men they ought to
shave their heads and bathe in the holy river, the cradle of
Moses-- the waters of which, sweetened with sugar, men carry all
the way from Egypt to Mecca, and sell to the pilgrims.  But
Bombay, who is a philosopher of the Epicurean school, said, "We
don't look on those things in the same fanciful manner that you
do; we are contented with all the common-places of life, and look
for nothing beyond the present.  If things don't go well, it is
God's will; and if they do go well, that is His will also."

22d.--The acting chief brought a present of one cow, one goat,
and pombe, with a mob of his courtiers to pay his respects. He
promised that the seven boats, which are all the station he could
muster, would be ready next day, and in the meanwhile a number of
men would conduct me to the shooting-ground.  He asked to be
shown the books of birds and animals, and no sooner saw some
specimens of Wolf's handiwork, than, in utter surprise, he
exclaimed, "I know how these are done; a bird was caught and
stamped upon the paper," using action to his words, and showing
what he meant, while all his followers n'yanzigged for the favour
of the exhibition.

In the evening I strolled in the antelope parks, enjoying the
scenery and sport excessively.  A noble buck nsunnu, standing by
himself, was the first thing seen on this side, though a herd of
hertebeests were grazing on the Usoga banks.  One bullet rolled
my fine friend over, but the rabble looking on no sooner saw the
hit than they rushed upon him and drove him off, for he was only
wounded.  A chase ensued, and he was tracked by his blood when a
pongo (bush box) was started and divided the party.  It also
brought me to another single buck nsunnu, which was floored at
once, and left to be carried home by some of my men in company
with Waganda, whilst I went on, shot a third nsunnu buck, and
tracked him by his blood till dark, for the bullet had pierced
his lungs and passed out on the other side.  Failing to find him
on the way home, I shot, besides florikan and guinea-chicks, a
wonderful goatsucker, remarkable for the exceeding length of some
of its feathers floating out far beyond the rest in both
wings.[FN#21]  Returning home, I found the men who had charge of
the dead buck all in a state of excitement; they no sooner
removed his carcass, than two lions came out of the jungle and
lapped his blood.  All the Waganda ran away at once; but my
braves feared my answer more than the lions, and came off safely
with the buck on their shoulders.

23d.--Three boats arrived, like those used on the Murchison
Creek, and when I demanded the rest, as well as a decisive answer
about going to Kamrasi's, the acting Mkungu said he was afraid
accidents might happen, and he would not take me.  Nothing would
frighten this pig-headed creature into compliance, though I told
him I had arranged with the king to make the Nile the channel of
communication with England.  I therefore applied to him for
guides to conduct me up the river, and ordered Bombay and Kasoro
to obtain fresh orders from the king, as all future Wazungu,
coming to Uganda to visit or trade, would prefer the passage by
the river.  I shot another buck in the evening, as the Waganda
love their skins, and also a load of guinea-fowl--three, four,
and five at a shot--as Kasoro and his boys prefer them to
anything.

24th.--The acting officer absconded, but another man came in his
place, and offered to take us on the way up the river to-morrow,
humbugging Kasoro into the belief that his road to the palace
would branch off from the first state, though in reality it was
here. The Mkungu's women brought pombe, and spent the day gazing
at us, till, in the evening, when I took up my rifle, one ran
after Bana to see him shoot, and followed like a man; but the
only sport she got was on an ant-hill, where she fixed herself
some time, popping into her mouth and devouring the white ants as
fast as they emanated from their cells--for, disdaining does, I
missed the only pongo buck I got a shot at in my anxiety to show
the fair one what she came for.

Reports came to-day of new cruelties at the palace.  Kasoro
improved on their off-hand manslaughter by saying that two
Kamravionas and two Sakibobos, as well as all the old Wakungu of
Sunna's time, had been executed by the orders of king Mtesa.  He
told us, moreover, that if Mtesa ever has a dream that his father
directs him to kill anybody as being dangerous to his person, the
order is religiously kept.  I wished to send a message to Mtesa
by an officer who is starting at once to pay his respects at
court; but although he received it, and promised to deliver it,
Kasoro laughed at me for expecting that one word of it would ever
reach the king; for, however, appropriate or important the matter
might be, it was more than anybody dare do to tell the king, as
it would be an infringement of the rule that no one is to speak
to him unless in answer to a question.  My second buck of the
first day was brought in by the natives, but they would not allow
it to approach the hut until it had been skinned; and I found
their reason to be a superstition that otherwise no others would
ever be killed by the inmates of that establishment.

I marched up the left bank of the Nile at a considerable distance
from the water, to the Isamba rapids, passing through rich jungle
and plantain-gardens.  Nango, an old friend, and district officer
of the place, first refreshed us with a dish of plantain-squash
and dried fish, with pombe.  He told us he is often threatened by
elephants, but he sedulously keeps them off with charms; for if
they ever tasted a plantain they would never leave the garden
until they had cleared it out.  He then took us to see the
nearest falls of the Nile--extremely beautiful, but very
confined.  The water ran deep between its banks, which were
covered with fine grass, soft cloudy acacias, and festoons of
lilac convolvuli; whilst here and there, where the land had
slipped above the rapids, bared places of red earth could be
seen, like that of Devonshire; there, too, the waters, impeded by
a natural dam, looked like a huge mill-pond, sullen and dark, in
which two crocodiles, laving about, were looking out for prey. 
From the high banks we looked down upon a line of sloping wooded
islets lying across the stream, which divide its waters, and, by
interrupting them, cause at once both dam and rapids.  The whole
was more fairy-like, wild, and romantic than-- I must confess
that my thoughts took that shape--anything I ever saw outside of
a theatre.  It was exactly the sort of place, in fact, where,
bridged across from one side-slip to the other, on a moonlight
night, brigands would assemble to enact some dreadful tragedy. 
Even the Wanguana seemed spellbound at the novel beauty of the
sight, and no one thought of moving till hunger warned us night
was setting in, and we had better look out for lodgings.

Start again, and after drinking pombe with Nango, when we heard
that three Wakungu had been seized at Kari, in consequence of the
murder, the march was commenced, but soon after stopped by the
mischievous machinations of our guide, who pretended it was too
late in the day to cross the jungles on ahead, either by the road
to the source or the palace, and therefore would not move till
the morning; then, leaving us, on the pretext of business, he
vanished, and was never seen again.  A small black fly, with
thick shoulders and bullet-head, infests the place, and torments
the naked arms and legs of the people with its sharp stings to an
extent that must render life miserable to them.

After a long struggling march, plodding through huge grasses and
jungle, we reached a district which I cannot otherwise describe
than by calling it a "Church Estate."  It is dedicated in some
mysterious manner to Lubari (Almighty), and although the king
appeared to have authority over some of the inhabitants of it,
yet others had apparently a sacred character, exempting them from
the civil power, and he had no right to dispose of the land
itself.  In this territory there are small villages only at every
fifth mile, for there is no road, and the lands run high again,
whilst, from want of a guide, we often lost the track.  It now
transpired that Budja, when he told at the palace that there was
no road down the banks of the Nile, did so in consequence of his
fear that if he sent my whole party here they would rob these
church lands, and so bring him into a scrape with the wizards or
ecclesiastical authorities. Had my party not been under control,
we could not have put up here; but on my being answerable that no
thefts should take place, the people kindly consented to provide
us with board and lodgings, and we found them very obliging.  One
elderly man, half-witted-- they said the king had driven his
senses from him by seizing his house and family--came at once on
hearing of our arrival, laughing and singing in a loose jaunty
maniacal manner, carrying odd sticks, shells, and a bundle of
mbugu rags, which he deposited before me, dancing and singing
again, then retreating and bringing some more, with a few
plantains from a garden, when I was to eat, as kings lived upon
flesh, and "poor Tom" wanted some, for he lived with lions and
elephants in a hovel beyond the gardens, and his belly was empty. 
He was precisely a black specimen of the English parish idiot.

At last, with a good push for it, crossing hills and threading
huge grasses, as well as extensive village plantations lately
devastated by elephants--they had eaten all that was eatable, and
what would not serve for food they had destroyed with their
trunks, not one plantain or one hut being left entire--we arrived
at the extreme end of the journey, the farthest point ever
visited by the expedition on the same parallel of latitude as
king Mtesa's palace, and just forty miles east of it.

We were well rewarded; for the "stones," as the Waganda call the
falls, was by far the most interesting sight I had seen in
Africa. Everybody ran to see them at once, though the march had
been long and fatiguing, and even my sketch-block was called into
play. Though beautiful, the scene was not exactly what I
expected; for the broad surface of the lake was shut out from
view by a spur of hill, and the falls, about 12 feet deep, and
400 to 500 feet broad, were broken by rocks.  Still it was a
sight that attracted one to it for hours--the roar of the waters,
the thousands of passenger-fish, leaping at the falls with all
their might; the Wasoga and Waganda fisherman coming out in boats
and taking post on all the rocks with rod and hook, hippopotami
and crocodiles lying sleepily on the water, the ferry at work
above the falls, and cattle driven down to drink at the margin of
the lake,--made, in all, with the pretty nature of the country--
small hills, grassy-topped, with trees in the folds, and gardens
on the lower slopes--as interesting a picture as one could wish
to see.

The expedition had now performed its functions.  I saw that old
father Nile without any doubt rises in the Victoria N'yanza, and,
as I had foretold, that lake is the great source of the holy
river which cradled the first expounder of our religious belief.
I mourned, however, when I thought how much I had lost by the
delays in the journey having deprived me of the pleasure of going
to look at the north-east corner of the N'yanza to see what
connection there was, by the strait so often spoken of, with it
and the other lake where the Waganda went to get their salt, and
from which another river flowed to the north, making "Usoga an
island."  But I felt I ought to be content with what I had been
spared to accomplish; for I had seen full half of the lake, and
had information given me of the other half, by means of which I
knew all about the lake, as far, at least, as the chief objects
of geographical importance were concerned.

Let us now sum up the whole and see what it is worth. 
Comparative information assured me that there was as much water
on the eastern side of the lake as there is on the western--if
anything, rather more.  The most remote waters, or top head of
the Nile, is the southern end of the lake, situated close on the
third degree of south latitude, which gives to the Nile the
surprising length, in direct measurement, rolling over thirty-
four degrees of latitude, of above 2300 miles, or more than one-
eleventh of the circumference of our globe.  Now from this
southern point, round by the west, to where the great Nile stream
issues, there is only one feeder of any importance, and that is
the Kitangule river; whilst from the southernmost point, round by
the east, to the strait, there are no rivers at all of any
importance; for the travelled Arabs one and all aver, that from
the west of the snow-clad Kilimandjaro to the lake where it is
cut by the second degree, and also the first degree of south
latitude, there are salt lakes and salt plains, and the country
is hilly, not unlike Unyamuezi; but they said there were no great
rivers, and the country was so scantily watered, having only
occasional runnels and rivulets, that they always had to make
long marches in order to find water when they went on their
trading journeys: and further, those Arabs who crossed the strait
when they reached Usoga, as mentioned before, during the late
interregnum, crossed no river either.

There remains to be disposed of the "salt lake," which I believe
is not a salt, but a fresh-water lake; and my reasons are, as
before stated, that the natives call all lakes salt, if they find
salt beds or salt islands in such places.  Dr Krapf, when he
obtained a sight of the Kenia mountain, heard from the natives
there that there was a salt lake to its northward, and he also
heard that a river ran from Kenia towards the Nile.  If his
information was true on this latter point, then, without doubt,
there must exist some connection between his river and the salt
lake I have heard of, and this in all probability would also
establish a connection between my salt lake and his salt lake
which he heard was called Baringo.[FN#22] In no view that can be
taken of it, however, does this unsettled matter touch the
established fact that the head of the Nile is in 3§ south
latitude, where in the year 1858, I discovered the head of the
Victoria N'yanza to be.

I now christened the "stones" Ripon Falls, after the nobleman who
presided over the Royal Geographical Society when my expedition
was got up; and the arm of water from which the Nile issued,
Napoleon Channel, in token of respect to the French Geographical
Society, for the honour they had done me, just before leaving
England, in presenting me with their gold medal for the discovery
of the Victoria N'yanza.  One thing seemed at first perplexing--
the volume of water in the Kitangule looked as large as that of
the Nile; but then the one was a slow river and the other swift,
and on this account I could form no adequate judgment of their
relative values.

Not satisfied with my first sketch of the falls, I could not
resist sketching them again; and then, as the cloudy state of the
weather prevented my observing for latitude, and the officer of
the place said a magnificent view of the lake could be obtained
from the hill alluded to as intercepting the view from the falls,
we proposed going there; but Kasoro, who had been indulged with
nsunnu antelope skins, and with guinea-fowl for dinner, resisted
this, on the plea that I never should be satisfied.  There were
orders given only to see the "stones," and if he took me to one
hill I should wish to see another and another, and so on.  It
made me laugh, for that had been my nature all my life; but,
vexed at heart, and wishing to trick the young tyrant, I asked
for boats to shoot hippopotami, in the hope of reaching the hills
to picnic; but boating had never been ordered, and he would not
listen to it.  "Then bring fish," I said, that I might draw them:
no, that was not ordered.  "Then go you to the palace, and leave
me to go to Urondogani to-morrow, after I have taken a latitude;"
but the wilful creature would not go until he saw me under way. 
And as nobody would do anything for me without Kasoro's orders, I
amused the people by firing at the ferry-boat upon the Usoga
side, which they defied me to hit, the distance being 500 yards;
but nevertheless a bullet went through her, and was afterwards
brought by the Wasoga nicely folded up in a piece of mbugu. 
Bombay then shot a sleeping crocodile with his carbine, whilst I
spent the day out watching the falls.

This day also I spent watching the fish flying at the falls, and
felt as if I only wanted a wife and family, garden and yacht,
rifle and rod, to make me happy here for life, so charming was
the place.  What a place, I thought to myself, this would be for
missionaries!  They never could fear starvation, the land is so
rich; and, if farming were introduced by them, they might have
hundreds of pupils.  I need say no more.

In addition to the rod-and-line fishing, a number of men, armed
with long heavy poles with two iron spikes, tied prong-fashion to
one end, rushed to a place over a break in the falls, which tired
fish seemed to use as a baiting-room, dashed in their forks,
holding on by the shaft, and sent men down to disengaged the
pined fish and relieve their spears.  The shot they made in this
manner is a blind one--only on the chance of fish being there--
and therefore always doubtful in its result.

Church Estate again.  As the clouds and Kasoro's wilfulness were
still against me, and the weather did not give hopes of a change,
I sacrificed the taking of the latitude to gain time.  I sent
Bombay with Kasoro to the palace, asking for the Sakibobo himself
to be sent with an order for five boats, five cows, and five
goats, and also for a general order to go where I like, and do
what I like, and have fish supplied me; "for, though I know the
king likes me, his officers do not;" and then on separating I
retraced my steps to the Church Estate.

1st.--To-day, after marching an hour, as there was now no need
for hurrying, and a fine pongo buck, the Ngubbi of Uganda,
offered a tempting shot, I proposed to shoot it for the men, and
breakfast in a neighbouring village.  This being agreed to, the
animal was despatched, and we no sooner entered the village than
we heard that nsamma, a magnificent description of antelope,
abound in the long grasses close by, and that a rogue elephant
frequents the plantains every night.  This tempting news created
a halt.  In the evening I killed a nsamma doe, an animal very
much like the Kobus Ellipsiprymnus, but without the lunated mark
over the rump; and at night, about 1 a.m., turned out to shoot an
elephant, which we distinctly heard feasting on plantains; but
rain was falling, and the night so dark, he was left till the
morning.

2d.--I followed up the elephant some way, till a pongo offering
an irresistible shot I sent a bullet through him, but he was lost
after hours' tracking in the interminable large grasses.  An
enormous snake, with fearful mouth and fangs, was speared by the
men.  In the evening I wounded a buck nsamma, which, after
tracking till dark, was left to stiffen ere the following
morning; and just after this on the way home, we heard the rogue
elephant crunching the branches not far off from the track; but
as no one would dare follow me against the monster at this late
hour, he was reluctantly left to do more injury to the gardens.

3d.--After a warm search in the morning we found the nsamma buck
lying in some water; the men tried to spear him, but he stood at
bay, and took another bullet.  This was all we wanted, affording
one good specimen; so, after breakfast, we marched to Kirindi,
where the villagers, hearing of the sport we had had, and excited
with the hopes of getting flesh, begged us to halt a day.

4th.--Not crediting the stories told by the people about the
sport here, we packed to leave, but were no sooner ready than
several men ran hastily in to say some fine bucks were waiting to
be shot close by.  This was too powerful a temptation to be
withstood, so, shouldering the rifle, and followed by half the
village, if not more, women included, we went to the place, but,
instead of finding a buck--for the men had stretched a point to
keep me at their village--we found a herd of does, and shot one
at the people's urgent request.

We reached this in one stretch, and put up in our old quarters,
where the women of Mlondo provided pombe, plantains, and
potatoes, as before, with occasional fish, and we lived very
happily till the 10th, shooting buck, guinea-fowl, and florikan,
when, Bombay and Kasoro arriving, my work began again.  These two
worthies reached the palace, after crossing twelve considerable
streams, of which one was the Luajerri, rising in the lake.  The
evening of the next day after leaving me at Kira, they obtained
an interview with the king immediately; for the thought flashed
across his mind that Bombay had come to report our death, the
Waganda having been too much for the party.  He was speedily
undeceived by the announcement that nothing was the matter,
excepting the inability to procure boats, because the officers at
Urondogani denied all authority but the Sakibobo's, and no one
would show Bana anything, however trifling, without an express
order for it.

Irate at this announcement, the king ordered the Sakibobo, who
happened to be present, to be seized and bound at once, and said
warmly, "Pray, who is the king, that the Sakibobo's orders should
be preferred to mine?" and then turning to the Sakibobo himself,
asked what he would pay to be released?  The Sakibobo, alive to
his danger, replied at once, and without the slightest
hesitation, Eighty cows, eighty goats, eighty slaves, eighty
mbugu, eighty butter, eighty coffee, eighty tobacco, eighty
jowari, and eighty of all the produce of Uganda.  He was then
released.  Bombay said Bana wished the Sakibobo to come to
Urondogani, and gave him a start with five boats, five cows, and
five goats; to which the king replied, "Bana shall have all he
wants, nothing shall be denied him, not even fish; but it is not
necessary to send the Sakibobo, as boys carry all my orders to
kings as well as subjects.  Kasoro will return again with you,
fully instructed in everything, and, moreover, both he and Budja
will follow Bana to Gani."  Four days, however, my men were kept
at the palace ere the king gave them the cattle and leave to join
me, accompanied with one more officer, who had orders to find the
boats at once, see us off, and report the circumstance at court. 
Just as at the last interview, the king had four women, lately
seized and condemned to execution, squatting in his court. He
wished to send them to Bana, and when Bombay demurred, saying he
had no authority to take women in that way, the king gave him
one, and asked him if he would like to see some sport, as he
would have the remaining women cut to pieces before him.  Bombay,
by his own account, behaved with great propriety, saying Bana
never wished to see sport of that cruel kind, and it would ill
become him to see sights which his master had not.  Viarungi sent
me some tobacco, with kind regards, and said he and the Wazina
had just obtained leave to return to their homes, K'yengo alone,
of all the guests, remaining behind as a hostage until Mtesa's
powder-seeking Wakungu returned.  Finally, the little boy Lugoi
had been sent to his home. Such was the tenor of Bombay's report.

11th.--The officer sent to procure boats, impudently saying there
were none, was put in the stocks by Kasoro, whilst other men went
to Kirindi for sailors, and down the stream for boats.  On
hearing the king's order that I was to be supplied with fish, the
fishermen ran away, and pombe was no longer brewed for fear of
Kasoro.

12th.--To-day we slaughtered and cooked two cows for the journey-
- the remaining three and one goat having been lost in the
Luajerri-- and gave the women of the place beads in return for
their hospitality.  They are nearly all Wanyoro, having been
captured in that country by king Mtesa and given to Mlondo.  They
said their teeth were extracted, four to six lower incisors, when
they were young, because no Myoro would allow a person to drink
from his cup unless he conformed to that custom.  The same law
exists in Usoga.




                          Chapter XVI



                         Bahr El Abiad

First Voyage on the Nile--The Starting--Description of the River
and the Country--Meet a Hostile Vessel--A Naval Engagement--
Difficulties and Dangers--Judicial Procedure--Messages from the
King of Uganda-- His Efforts to get us back--Desertion--The
Wanyoro Troops--Kamrasi-- Elephant-Stalking--Diabolical
Possessions.

In five boats of five planks each, tied together and caulked with
mbugu rags, I started with twelve Wanguana, Kasoro and his page-
followers, and a small crew, to reach Kamrasi's palace in Unyoro-
-goats, dogs, and kit, besides grain and dried meat, filling up
the complement--but how many days it would take nobody knew.
Paddles propelled these vessels, but the lazy crew were slow in
the use of them, indulging sometimes in racing spurts, then
composedly resting on their paddles whilst the gentle current
drifted us along. The river, very unlike what it was from the
Ripon Falls downward, bore at once the character of river and
lake--clear in the centre, but fringed in most places with tall
rush, above which the green banks sloped back like park lands. 
It was all very pretty and very interesting, and would have
continued so, had not Kasoro disgraced the Union Jack, turning it
to piratical purposes in less than one hour.

A party of Wanyoro, in twelve or fifteen canoes, made of single
tree trunks, had come up the river to trade with the Wasoga, and
having stored their vessels with mbugu, dried fish, plantains
cooked and raw, pombe, and other things, were taking their last
meal on shore before they returned to their homes.  Kasoro seeing
this, and bent on a boyish spree, quite forgetting we were bound
for the very ports they were bound for, ordered our sailors to
drive in amongst them, landed himself, and sent the Wanyoro
flying before I knew what game was up, and then set to pillaging
and feasting on the property of those very men whom it was our
interest to propitiate, as we expected them shortly to be our
hosts.

The ground we were on belonged to king Mtesa, being a dependency
of Uganda, and it struck me as singular that Wanyoro should be
found here; but I no sooner discovered the truth than I made our
boatmen disgorge everything they had taken, called back the
Wanyoro to take care of their things, and extracted a promise
from Kasoro that he would not practise such wicked tricks again,
otherwise we could not travel together.  Getting to boat again,
after a very little paddling we pulled in to shore, on the Uganda
side, to stop for the night, and thus allowed the injured Wanyoro
to go down the river before us.  I was much annoyed by this
interruption, but no argument would prevail on Kasoro to go on. 
This was the last village on the Uganda frontier, and before we
could go any farther on boats it would be necessary to ask leave
of Kamrasi's frontier officer, N'yamyonjo, to enter Unyoro.  The
Wanguana demanded ammunition in the most imperious manner, whilst
I, in the same tone, refused to issue any lest a row should take
place and they then would desert, alluding to their dastardly
desertion in Msalala, when Grant was attacked.  If a fight should
take place, I said they must flock to me at once, and ammunition,
which was always ready, would be served out to them.  They
laughed at this, and asked, Who would stop with me when the fight
began?  This was making a jest of what I was most afraid of--that
they would all run away.

I held a levee to decide on the best manner of proceeding. The
Waganda wanted us to stop for the day and feel the way gently,
arguing that etiquette demands it.  Then, trying to terrify me,
they said, N'yamyonjo had a hundred boats, and would drive us
back to a certainty if we tried to force past them, if he were
not first spoken with, as the Waganda had often tried the passage
and been repulsed.  On the other hand, I argued that Grant must
have arrived long ago at Kamrasi's, and removed all these
difficulties for us; but, I said, if they would send men, let
Bombay start at once by land, and we will follow in boats, after
giving him time to say we are coming.  This point gained after a
hot debate, Bombay started at 10 a.m., and we not till 5 p.m., it
being but one hour's journey by water.  The frontier line was
soon crossed; and then both sides of the river, Usoga as well as
Unyoro, belong to Kamrasi.

I flattered myself all my walking this journey was over, and
there was nothing left but to float quietly down the Nile, for
Kidgwiga had promised boats, on Kamrasi's account, from Unyoro to
Gani, where Petherick's vessels were said to be stationed; but
this hope shared the fate of so many others in Africa.  In a
little while an enormous canoe, full of well-dressed and well-
armed men, was seen approaching us.  We worked on, and found they
turned, as if afraid. Our men paddled faster, they did the same,
the pages keeping time playfully by beat of drum, until at last
it became an exciting chase, won by the Wanyoro by their superior
numbers.  The sun was now setting as we approached N'yamyongo's. 
On a rock by the river stood a number of armed men, jumping,
jabbering, and thrusting with their spears, just as the Waganda
do.  I thought, indeed, they were Waganda doing this to welcome
us; but a glance at Kasoro's glassy eyes told me such was not the
case, but, on the contrary, their language and gestures were
threats, defying us to land.

The bank of the river, as we advanced, then rose higher, and was
crowned with huts and plantations, before which stood groups and
lines of men, all fully armed.  Further, at this juncture, the
canoe we had chased turned broadside on us, and joined in the
threatening demonstrations of the people on shore.  I could not
believe them to be serious--thought they had mistaken us--and
stood up in the boat to show myself, hat in hand.  I said I was
an Englishman going to Kamrasi's, and did all I could, but
without creating the slightest impression.  They had heard a drum
beat, they said, and that was a signal of war, so war it should
be; and Kamrasi's drums rattled up both sides the river,
preparing everybody to arm.  This was serious. Further, a second
canoe full of armed men issued out from the rushes behind us, as
if with a view to cut off our retreat, and the one in front
advanced upon us, hemming us in.  To retreat together seemed our
only chance, but it was getting dark, and my boats were badly
manned.  I gave the order to close together and retire, offering
ammunition as an incentive, and all came to me but one boat,
which seemed so paralysed with fright, it kept spinning round and
round like a crippled duck.

The Wanyoro, as they saw us retreating, were now heard to say,
"They are women, they are running, let us at them;" whilst I kept
roaring to my men, "Keep together--come for powder;" and myself
loaded with small shot, which even made Kasoro laugh and inquire
if it was intended for the Wanyoro.  "Yes, to shoot them like
guinea-fowl;" and he laughed again.  But confound my men! they
would not keep together, and retreat with me.  One of those
served with ammunition went as hard as he could go up stream to
be out of harm's way, and another preferred hugging the dark
shade of the rushes to keeping the clear open, which I desired
for the benefit of our guns. It was not getting painfully dark,
and the Wanyoro were stealing on us, as we could hear, though
nothing could be seen.  Presently the shade-seeking boat was
attacked, spears were thrown, fortunately into the river instead
of into our men, and grappling-hooks were used to link the boats
together.  My men cried, "Help, Bana! they are killing us;"
whilst I roared to my crew, "Go in, go in, and the victory will
be ours;" but not a soul would--they were spell-bound to the
place; we might have been cut up in detail, it was all the same
to those cowardly Waganda, whose only action consisted in crying,
"N'yawo! n'yawo!"--mother, mother, help us!

Three shots from the hooked boat now finished the action. The
Wanyoro had caught a Tartar.  Two of their men fell--one killed,
one wounded.  They were heard saying their opponents were not
Waganda, it were better to leave them alone; and retreated,
leaving us, totally uninjured, a clear passage up the river.  But
where was Bombay all this while!  He did not return till after
us, and then, in considerable excitement, he told his tale.  He
reached N'yamyongo's village before noon, asked for the officer,
but was desired to wait in a hut until the chief should arrive,
as he had gone out on business; the villagers inquired, however,
why we had robbed the Wanyoro yesterday, for they had laid a
complaint against us.  Bombay replied it was no fault of Bana's,
he did everything he could to prevent it, and returned all that
the boatmen took.

These men then departed, and did not return until evening, when
they asked Bombay, impudently, why he was sitting there, as he
had received no invitation to spend the night; and unless he
walked off soon they would set fire to his hut.  Bombay, without
the smallest intention of moving, said he had orders to see
N'yamyonjo, and until he did so he would not budge.  "Well," said
the people, "you have got your warning, now look our for
yourselves;" and Bombay, with his Waganda escort, was left again. 
Drums then began to beat, and men to hurry to and fro with spears
and shields, until at last our guns were heard, and, guessing the
cause, Bombay with his Waganda escort rushed out of the hut into
the jungle, and, without daring to venture on the beaten track,
through thorns and thicket worked his way back to me, lame, and
scratched all over with thorns.

Crowds of Waganda, all armed as if for war, came to congratulate
us in the morning, jumping, jabbering, and shaking their spears
at us, denoting a victory gained--for we had shot Wanyoro and no
harm had befallen us.  "But the road," I cried, "has that been
gained?  I am not going to show my back.  We must go again, for
there is some mistake; Grant is with Kamrasi, and N'yamyongo
cannot stop us. If you won't go in boats, let us go by land to
N'yamyongo's, and the boats will follow after."  Not a soul,
however, would stir. N'yamyongo was described as an independent
chief, who listened to Kamrasi only when he liked.  He did not
like strange eyes to see his secret lodges on the N'yanza; and if
he did not wish us to go down the river, Kamrasi's orders would
go for nothing.  His men had now been shot; to go within his
reach would be certain death.  Argument was useless, boating
slow, to send messages worse; so I gave in, turned my back on the
Nile, and the following day (16th) came on the Luajerri.

Here, to my intense surprise, I heard that Grant's camp was not
far off, on its return from Kamrasi's.  I could not, rather would
not, believe it, suspicious as it now appeared after my reverse.
The men, however, were positive, and advised my going to king
Mtesa's--a ridiculous proposition, at once rejected; for I had
yet to receive Kamrasi's answer to our Queen, about opening a
trade with England.  I must ascertain why he despised Englishmen
without speaking with them, and I could not believe Kamrasi would
prove less avaricious than either Rumanika or Mtesa, especially
as Rumanika had made himself responsible for our actions.  We
slept that night near Kari, the Waganda eating two goats which
had been drowned in the Luajerri; and the messenger-page, having
been a third time to the palace and back again, called to ask
after our welfare, on behalf of his king, and remind us about the
gun and brandy promised.

17th and 18th.--The two following days were spent wandering about
without guides, trying to keep the track Grant had taken after
leaving us, crossing at first a line of small hills, then
traversing grass and jungle, like the dak of India.  Plantain-
gardens were frequently met, and the people seemed very
hospitably inclined, though they complained sadly of the pages
rudely rushing into every hut, seizing everything they could lay
their hands on, and even eating the food which they had just
prepared for their own dinners, saying, in a mournful manner, "If
it were not out of respect for you we should fight those little
rascals, for it is not the king's guest nor his men who do us
injury, but the king's own servants, without leave or licence." 
I observed that special bomas or fences were erected to protect
these villages against the incursions of lions. Buffaloes were
about, but the villagers cautioned us not to shoot them, holding
them as sacred animals; and, to judge from the appearance of the
country, wild animals should abound, were it not for the fact
that every Mganda seems by instinct to be a sportsman.

At last, after numerous and various reports about Grant, we heard
his drums last night, but we arrived this morning just in time to
be too late.  He was on his march back to the capital of Uganda,
as the people had told us, and passed through N'yakinyama just
before I reached it.  What had really happened I knew not, and
was puzzled to think.  To insist on a treaty, demanding an
answer, to the Queen, seemed the only chance left; so I wrote to
Grant to let me know all about it, and waited the result.  He
very obligingly came himself, said he left Unyoro after stopping
there an age asking for the road without effect, and left by the
orders of Kamrasi, thinking obedience the better policy to obtain
our ends.  Two great objections had been raised against us; one
was that we were reported to be cannibals, and the other that our
advancing by two roads at once was suspicious, the more
especially so as the Waganda were his enemies; had we come from
Rumanika direct, there would have been no objection to us.

When all was duly considered, it appeared evident to me that the
great king of Unyoro, "the father of all the kings," was merely a
nervous, fidgety creature, half afraid of us because we were
attempting his country by the unusual mode of taking two routes
at once, but wholly so of the Waganda, who had never ceased
plundering his country for years.  As it appeared that he would
have accepted us had we come by the friendly route of Kisuere, a
further parley was absolutely necessary, and the more especially
so, as now we were all together and in Uganda, which, in
consequence, must relieve him from the fear of our harbouring
evil designs against him.  No one present, however, could be
prevailed on to go to him in the capacity of ambassador, as the
frontier officer had warned the Wageni or guests that, if they
ever attempted to cross the border again, he was bound in duty,
agreeably to the orders of his king, to expel them by force;
therefore, should the Wageni attempt it after this warning, their
first appearance would be considered a casus belli; and so the
matter rested for the day.

To make the best of a bad bargain, and as N'yakinyama was "eaten
up," we repaired to Grant's camp to consult with Budja; but Budja
was found firm and inflexible against sending men up to Unyoro.
His pride had been injured by the rebuffs we had sustained. He
would wait here three or four days as I proposed, to see what
fortune sent us, if I would not be convinced that Kamrasi wished
to reject us, and he would communicate with his king in the
meantime, but nothing more.  Here was altogether a staggerer: I
would stop for three or four days, but if Kamrasi would not have
us by that time, what was to be done?  Would it be prudent to try
Kisuere now Baraka had been refused the Gani route? or would it
not be better still for me to sell Kamrasi altogether, by
offering Mtesa five hundred loads of ammunition, cloth and beads,
if he would give us a thousand Waganda as a force to pass through
the Masai to Zanzibar, this property to be sent back by the
escort from the coast?  Kamrasi would no doubt catch it if we
took this course, but it was expensive.

Thus were we ruminating, when lo, to our delight, as if they had
been listening to us, up came Kidgwiga, my old friend, who, at
Mtesa'a place, had said Kamrasi would be very glad to see me, and
Vittagura, Kamrasi's commander-in-chief, to say their king was
very anxious to see us, and the Waganda might come or not as they
liked.  Until now, the deputation said, Kamrasi had doubted
Budja's word about our friendly intentions, but since he saw us
withdrawing from his country, those doubts were removed.  The
N'yamswenge, they said--meaning, I thought, Petherick--was still
at Gani; no English or others on the Nile ever expressed a wish
to enter Unyoro, otherwise they might have done so; and Baraka
had left for Karague, carrying off an ivory as a present from
Kamrasi.

21st.--I ordered the march to Unyoro; Budja, however, kept
brooding over the message sent to the Waganda, to the effect that
they might come or not as they liked, and considering us with
himself to have all been treated "like dogs," begged me to give
him my opinion as to what course he had better pursue; for he
must, in the first instance, report the whole circumstances to
the king, and could not march at once.  This was a blight on our
prospects, and appeared very vexatious, in the event of Budja
waiting for an answer, which, considering Mtesa had ordered his
Wakungu to accompany us all the way to Gani, might stop our march
altogether.

I therefore argued that Kamrasi's treatment of us was easily
accounted for: he heard of us coming by two routes from an
enemy's country, and was naturally suspicious of us; that had now
been changed by our withdrawing, and he invited us to him. 
Without doubt, his commander-in-chief was never very far away,
and followed on our heels.  Such precaution was only natural and
reasonable on Kamrasi's part, and what had been done need not
alarm any one. "If you do your duty properly, you will take us at
once into Unyoro, make your charge over to these men, and return
or not as you like; for in doing so you will have fulfilled both
Mtesa's, and Kamrasi's orders at once."  "Very good," says Budja,
"let it be so; for there is great wisdom in your words: but I
must first send to my king, for the Waganda villagers have struck
two of your men with weapons" (this had happened just before my
arrival here), "and this is a most heinous offence in Uganda,
which cannot be overlooked.  Had it been done with a common
stick, it could have been overlooked; but the use of weapons is
an offence, and both parties must go before the king." This, of
course, was objected to on the plea that it was my own affair.  I
was king of the Wanguana, and might choose to dispense with the
attendance.  The matter was compromised, however, on the
condition that Budja should march across the border to-morrow,
and wait for the return of these men and for further orders on
the Unyoro side.

The bait took.  Budja lost sight of the necessity there was for
his going to Gani to bring back a gun, ammunition, and some
medicine-- that is to say, brandy--for his king; and sent his men
off with mine to tell Mtesa all our adventures--our double
repulse, the intention to wait on the Unyoro side for further
orders, and the account of some Waganda having wounded my men.  I
added my excuses for Kamrasi, and laid a complaint against
Mtesa's officers for having defrauded us out of ten cows, five
goats, six butter, and sixty mbugu.  It was not that we required
these things, but I knew that the king had ordered them to be
given to us, and I thought it right we should show that his
officers, if they professed to obey his orders, had peculated. 
After these men had started, some friends of the villager who had
been apprehended on the charge of assailing my men, came and
offered Budja five cows to overlook the charge; and Budja, though
he could not overlook it when I pleaded for the man, asked me to
recall my men.  Discovering that the culprit was a queen's man,
and that the affair would cause bad blood at court should the
king order the man's life to be taken, I tried to do so, but
things had gone too far.

Again the expedition marched on in the right direction.  We
reached the last village on the Uganda frontier, and there spent
the night. Here Grant shot a nsunnu buck.  The Wanguana mutinied
for ammunition, and would not lift a load until they got it,
saying, "Unyoro is a dangerous country," though they had been
there before without any more than they now had in pouch.  The
fact was, my men, in consequence of the late issues on the river,
happened to have more than Grant's men, and every man must have
alike. The ringleader, unfortunately for himself, had lately
fired at a dead lion, to astonish the Unyoro, and his chum had
fired a salute, which was contrary to orders; for ammunition was
at a low ebb, and I had done everything in my power to nurse it. 
Therefore, as a warning to the others, the guns of these two were
confiscated, and a caution given that any gun in future let off,
either by design or accident, would be taken.

To-day I felt very thankful to get across the much-vexed
boundary-line, and enter Unyoro, guided by Kamrasi's deputation
of officers, and so shake off the apprehensions which had teased
us for so many days.  This first march was a picture of all the
country to its capital: an interminable forest of small trees,
bush, and tall grass, with scanty villages, low huts, and dirty-
looking people clad in skins; the plantain, sweet potato,
sesamum, and ulezi (millet) forming the chief edibles, besides
goats and fowls; whilst the cows, which are reported to be
numerous, being kept, as everywhere else where pasture-lands are
good, by the wandering, unsociable Wahuma are seldom seen.  No
hills, except a few scattered cones, disturb the level surface of
the land, and no pretty views ever cheer the eye.  Uganda is now
entirely left behind; we shall not see its like again; for the
further one leaves the equator, and the rain-attracting
influences of the Mountains of the Moon, vegetation decreases
proportionately with the distance.

Fortunately the frontier-village could not feed so large a party
as ours, and therefore we were compelled to move farther on, to
our great delight, through the same style of forest acacia,
cactus, and tall grass, to Kidgwiga's gardens, where we no sooner
arrived than Mtesa's messenger-page, with a party of fifty
Waganda, dropped in, in the most unexpected manner, to inquire
after "his royal master's friend, Bana."  The king had heard of
the fight upon the river, and thought the Wanguana must be very
good shots. He still trusted we would not forget the gun and
ammunition, but, above all, the load of stimulants, for he
desired that above all things on earth.  This was the fourth
message to remind us of these important matters which we had
received since leaving his gracious presence, and each time
brought by the same page.  While the purpose of the boy's coming
with so many men was not distinctly known, the whole village and
camp were 