in a state of great agitation, Budja fearing lest the
king had some fault to find with his work, and the Wanyoro
deeming it a menace of war, whilst I was afraid they might take
fright and stop our progress.

But all went well in the end; Massey's log, which I have
mentioned as a present I intended for Mtesa, was packed up, and
the page departed with it.  Some of Rumanika's men, who came into
Unyoro with Baraka, with four of K'yengo's, were sent to call us
by Kamrasi. Through Rumanika's men it transpired that he had
stood security for our actions, else, with the many evil reports
of our being cannibals and such-like, which had preceded our
coming here, we never should have gained admittance to the
country.  The Wanyoro, who are as squalid-looking as the
Wanyamuezi, and almost as badly dressed, now came about us to
hawk ivory ornaments, brass and copper twisted wristlets,
tobacco, and salt, which they exchanged for cowries, with which
they purchase cows from the Waganda.  As in Uganda, all the
villagers forsook their huts as soon as they heard the Wageni
(guests) were coming; and no one paid the least attention to the
traveller, save the few head-men attached to the escort, or some
professional traders.

25th to 28th.--I had no sooner ordered the march than Vittagura
counter-ordered it, and held a levee to ascertain, as he said, if
the Waganda were to go back; for though Kamrasi wished to see us,
he did not want the Waganda.  It was Kamrasi's orders that Budja
should tell this to his "child the Mkavia," meaning Mtesa; for
when the Waganda came the first time to see him, three of his
family died; and when they came the second time, three more died;
and as this rate of mortality was quite unusual in his family
circle, he could only attribute it to foul magic.  The presence
of people who brought such results was of course by no means
desirable. This neat message elicited with a declaration of the
necessity of Budja's going to Gani with us, and a response from
the commander-in-chief, probably to terrify the Waganda, that
although Gani was only nine days' journey distant from Kamrasi's
palace, the Gani people were such barbarians, they would call a
straight-haired man a magician, and any person who tied his mbugu
in a knot upon his shoulder, or had a full set of teeth as the
Waganda have, would be surely killed by them.  Finally, we must
wait two days, to see if Kamrasi would see us or not.  Such was
Unyoro diplomacy.

An announcement of a different kind immediately followed.  The
king had heard that I gave a cow to Vittagura and Kidgwiga when
they first came to me in Uganda, and wished the Wanyamuezi to
ascertain if this was true.  Of course, I said they were my
guests in Uganda, and if they had been wise they would have eaten
their cow on the spot; what was that to Kamrasi?  It was a pity
he did not treat us as well who have come into his country at his
own invitation, instead of keeping us starving in this gloomy
wilderness, without a drop of pombe to cheer the day;--why could
not he let us go on? He wanted first to hear if the big Mzungu,
meaning myself, had really come yet.  All fudge!

Three days were spent in simply waiting for return messages on
both sides, and more might have been lost in the same way, only
we amused Vittagura and gave him confidence by showing our
pictures, looking-glass, scissors, knives, etc., when he promised
a march in the morning, leaving a man behind to bring on the
Wanguana sent to Mtesa's, it being the only alternative which
would please Budja; for he said there was no security for life in
Unyoro, where every Mkungu calls himself the biggest man, and no
true hospitality is to be found.

The next two days took us through Chagamoyo to Kiratosi, by the
aid of the compass; for the route Kamrasi's men took differed
from the one which Budja knew, and he declared the Wanyoro were
leading us into a trap, and would not be convinced we were going
on all right till I pulled out the compass and confirmed the
Wanyoro.  We were anything but welcomed at Kiratosi, the people
asking by what bad luck we had come there to eat up their crops;
but in a little while they flocked to our doors and admired our
traps, remarking that they believed each iron box contained a
couple of white dwarfs, which we carry on our shoulders, sitting
straddle-legs, back to back, and they fly off to eat people
whenever they get the order.  One of these visitors happened to
be the sister of one of my men, named Baruti, who no sooner
recognised her brother, than, without saying a word, she clasped
her head with her hands, and ran off, crying, to tell her husband
what she had seen.  A spy of Kamrasi dropped the report that the
Wanguana were returning from Mtesa's, and hurried on to tell the
king.

31st.--Some Waganda hurrying in, confirmed the report of last
night, and said the Wanguana, footsore, had been left at the
Uganda frontier, expecting us to return, as Mtesa, at the same
time that he approved highly of my having sent men back to inform
him of Kamrasi's conduct, begged we would instantly return, even
if found within one march of Kamrasi's, for he had much of
importance to tell his friend Bana.  The message continued to
this effect: I need be under no apprehensions about the road to
the coast, for he would give me as many men as I liked; and,
fearing I might be short of powder, he had sent some with the
Wanguana.  Both Wanguana were by the king given women for their
services, and an old tin cartridge-box represented Mtesa's card,
it being an article of European manufacture, which, if found in
the possession of any Mganda, would be certain death to him. 
Finally, all the houses and plantains where my men were wounded
had been confiscated.

When this message was fully delivered, Budja said we must return
without a day's delay.  I, on the contrary, called up Kidgwiga. I
did not like my men having been kept prisoners in Uganda, and
pronounced in public that I would not return.  It would be an
insult to Kamrasi my doing so, for I was now in his "house" at
his own invitation.  I wished Bombay would go with him (Kidgwiga)
at once to his king, to say I had hoped, when I sent Budja with
Mabruki, in the first instance, conveying a friendly present from
Mtesa, which was done at my instigation, and I found Kamrasi
acknowledged it by a return-present, that there would be no more
fighting between them.  I said I had left England to visit these
countries for the purpose of opening up a trade, and I had no
orders to fight my way except with the force of friendship.  That
Rumanika had accepted my views Kamrasi must be fully aware by
Baraka's having visited him; and that Mtesa did the same must
also be evident, else he would never have ordered his men to
accompany me to Gani; and I now fondly trusted that these Waganda
would be allowed to go with me, when, by the influence of trade,
all animosity would cease, and friendly relations be restored
between the two countries.

This speech was hardly pronounced when Kajunju, a fine athletic
man, dropped suddenly in, nodded a friendly recognition to Budja,
and wished to know what the Waganda meant by taking us back, for
the king had heard of their intention last night; and when told
by Budja his story, and by Kidgwiga mine, he vanished like a
shadow.  Budja, now turning to me, said, "If you won't go back, I
shall; for the orders of Mtesa must always be obeyed, else lives
will be lost; and I shall tell him that you, since leaving his
country, and getting your road, have quite forgotten him."  "If
you give such a message as that," I said, "you will tell a
falsehood.  Mtesa has no right to order me out of another man's
house, to be an enemy with one whose friendship I desire.  I am
not only in honour bound to speak with Kamrasi, but I am also
bound to carry out the orders of my country just as much as you
are yours; moreover, I have invited Petherick to come to
Kamrasi's by a letter from Karague, and it would be ill-becoming
in me to desert him in the hands of an enemy, as he would then
certainly find Kamrasi to be if I went back now." Budja then
tried the coaxing dodge, saying, "There is much reason in your
words, but I am sorry you do not listen to the king, for he loves
you as a brother.  Did you not go about like two brothers--
walking, talking, shooting, and even eating together?  It was the
remark of all the Waganda, and the king will be so vexed when he
finds you have thrown him over.  I did not tell you before, but
the king says, 'How can I answer Rumanika if Kamrasi injures
Bana? Had I known Kamrasi was such a savage, I would not have let
Bana go there; and I should now have sent a forge to take him
away, only that some accident might arise from it by Kamrasi's
taking fright; the road even to Gani shall be got by force if
necessary.'" Then, finding me still persistent, Budja turned
again and threatened us with the king's power, saying, "If you
choose to disobey, we will see whether you ever get the road to
Gani or not; for Kamrasi is at war on all sides with his
brothers, and Mtesa will ally himself with them at any moment
that he wishes, and where will you be then?"

Saying this, Budja walked off, muttering that our being here
would much embarrass Mtesa's actions; whilst my Wanguana, who had
been attentively listening, like timid hares, made up their minds
to leave me, and tried, through Bombay, to obtain a final
interview with me, saying they knew Mtesa's power, and
disobedience to him would only end in taking away all chance of
escape.  In reply, I said I would not listen to them, as I had
seen enough of them to know it was no use speaking to a pack of
unreasonable cowards, having tried it so often before; but I sent
a message requesting them, if they did desert me at last, to
leave my guns; and, further, added an intimation that, as soon as
they reached the coast, they would be put into prison for three
years.  The scoundrels insolently said "tuende setu" (let's be
off), rushed to the Waganda drums, and beat the march.

1st.--Early in the morning, as Budja drummed the home march, I
called him up, gave him a glass rain-gauge as a letter for Mtesa,
and instructed him to say I would send a man to Mtesa as soon as
I had seen Kamrasi about opening the road; that I trusted he
would take all the guns from the deserters and keep them for me,
but the men themselves I wished transported to an island on the
N'yanza, for I could never allow such scoundrels again to enter
my camp. It was the effect of desertions like these that
prevented any white men visiting these countries.  This said, the
Waganda all left us, taking with them twenty-eight Wanguana,
armed with twenty-two carbines.  Amongst them was the wretched
governess, Manamaka, who had always thought me a wonderful
magician, because I possessed, in her belief, an extraordinary
power in inclining all the black kings' hearts to me, and induced
them to give the roads no one before of my colour had ever
attempted to use.

With a following reduced to twenty men, armed with fourteen
carbines, I now wished to start for Kamrasi's, but had not even
sufficient force to lift the loads.  A little while elapsed, and
a party of fifty Wanyoro rushed wildly into camp, with their
spears uplifted, and looked for the Waganda, but found them gone.
The athletic Kajunju, it transpired, had returned to Kamrasi's,
told him our story, and received orders to snatch us away from
the Waganda by force, for the great Mkamma, or king, was most
anxious to see his white visitors; such men had never entered
Unyoro before, and neither his father nor his father's fathers
had ever been treated with such a visitation; therefore he had
sent on these fifty men to fall by surprise on the Waganda, and
secure us.  But again, in a little while, about 10 a.m., Kajunju,
in the same wild manner, at the head of 150 warriors, with the
soldier's badge--a piece of mbugu or plantain-leaf tied round
their heads, and a leather sheath on their spear-heads, tufted
with cow's-tail--rushed in exultingly, having found, to their
delight, that there was no one left to fight with, and that they
had gained an easy victory.  They were certainly a wild set of
ragamuffins--as different as possible from the smart, well-
dressed, quick-of-speech Waganda as could be, and anything but
prepossessing to our eyes.  However, they had done their work,
and I offered them a cow, wishing to have it shot before them;
but the chief men, probably wishing the whole animal to
themselves, took it alive, saying the men were all the king's
servants, and therefore could not touch a morsel.

Kamrasi expected us to advance next day, when some men would go
on ahead to announce our arrival, and bring a letter which was
brought with beads by Gani before Baraka's arrival here.  It was
shown to Baraka in the hope that we would come by the Karague
route, but not to Mabruki, because he came from Uganda.  Kidgwiga
informed us that Kamrasi never retaliated on Mtesa when he lifted
Unyoro cows, though the Waganda keep their cattle on the border--
which simply meant that he had not the power of doing so.  The
twenty remaining Wanguana, conversing over the sudden scheme of
the deserters, proposed, on one side, sending for them, as, had
they seen the Wanyoro arrive, they would have changed their
minds; but the other side said, "What! those brutes who said we
should all die here if we stayed, and yet dared not face the
danger with us, should we now give them a helping hand?  Never! 
We told them we would share our fate with Bana, and share it we
will, for God rules everything: every man must die when his time
comes."

We marched for the first time without music, as the drum is never
allowed to be beaten in Unyoro except when the necessities of war
demand it, or for a dance.  Wanyamuezi and Wanyoro, in addition
to our own twenty men, carried the luggage, though no one carried
more than the smallest article he could find.  It was a pattern
Unyoro march, of only two hours' duration.  On arrival at the end
we heard that elephants had been seen close by.  Grant and I then
prepared our guns, and found a herd of about a hundred feeding on
a plain of long grass, dotted here and there by small mounds
crowned with shrub.  The animals appeared to be all females, much
smaller than the Indian breed; yet though ten were fired at, none
were killed, and only one made an attempt to charge.  I was with
the little twin Manua at the time, when, stealing along under
cover of the high grass, I got close to the batch and fired at
the larges, which sent her round roaring.  The whole of them
then, greatly alarmed, packed together and began sniffing the air
with their uplifted trunks, till, ascertaining by the smell of
the powder that their enemy was in front of them, they rolled up
their trunks and came close to the spot where I was lying under a
mound.  My scent then striking across them, they pulled up short,
lifted their heads high, and looked down sideways on us.  This
was a bad job.  I could not get a proper front shot at the boss
of any of them, and if I had waited an instant we should both
have been picked up or trodden to death; so I let fly at their
temples, and instead of killing, sent the whole of them rushing
away at a much faster pace than they came.  After this I gave up,
because I never could separate the ones I had wounded from the
rest, and thought it cruel to go on damaging more.  Thinking over
it afterwards, I came to the conclusion I ought to have put in
more powder; for I had, owing to their inferior size to the
Indian ones, rather despised them, and fired at them with the
same charge and in the same manner as I always did at rhinoceros.
Though puzzled at the strange sound of the rifle, the elephants
seldom ran far, packed in herd, and began to graze again.  Frij,
who was always ready at spinning a yarn, told us with much
gravity that two of my men, Uledi and Wadi Hamadi, deserters,
were possessed of devils (Phepo) at Zanzibar.  Uledi, not wishing
to be plagued by his Satanic majesty's angels on the march,
sacrificed a cow and fed the poor, according to the great Phepo's
orders, and had been exempted from it; but Wadi Hamadi, who
preferred taking his chance, had been visited several times: once
at Usui, when he was told the journey would be prosperous, only
the devil wanted one man's life, and one man would fall sick;
which proved true, for Hassani was murdered, and Grant fell sick
in Karague.  The second time Wadi Hamadi saw the devil in
Karague, and was told one man's life would be required in Uganda,
and such also was the case by Kari's murder; and a third time, in
Unyoro, he was possessed, when it was said that the journey would
be prosperous but protracted.

3d.--Though we stormed every day at being so shamefully neglected
and kept in the jungles, we could not get on, nor find out the
truth of our position.  I asked if Kamrasi was afraid of us, and
looking into his magic horn; and was answered, "No; he is very
anxious to see you, or he would not have sent six of his highest
officers to look after you, and prevent the unruly peasantry from
molesting you."  "Then by whose orders are we kept here?"  "By
Kamrasi's." "Why does Kamrasi keep us here?"  "He thinks you are
not so near, and men have gone to tell him."  "How did we come
here from the last ground?"  "By Kamrasi's orders; for nothing
can be done excepting by his orders."  "Then he must know we are
here?"  "He may not have seen the men we sent to him; for unless
he shows in public no one can see him."  The whole affair gave us
such an opinion of Kamrasi as induced us to think it would have
served him right had we joined Mtesa and given him a thrashing. 
This, I said, was put in our power by an alliance with his
refractory brothers; but Kidgwiga only laughed and said,
"Nonsense! Kamrasi is the chief of all the countries round here--
Usoga, Kidi, Chopi, Gani, Ulega, everywhere; he has only to hold
up his hand and thousands would come to his assistance." 
Kwibeya, the officer of the place, presented us with five fowls
on the part of the king, and some baskets of potatoes.

4th.--We halted again, it was said, in order that Kwibeya might
give us all the king had desired him to present.  I sent Bombay
off with a message to Kamrasi explaining everything, and begging
for an early interview, as I had much of importance to
communicate, and wished, of all things, to see the letter he had
from Gani, as it must have come from our dear friends at home. 
Seven goats, flour, and plantains, were now brought to us; and as
Kidgwiga begged for the flour without success, he flew into a fit
of high indignation because these things were given and received
without his having first been consulted.  He was the big man and
appointed go-between, and no one could dispute it.  This was
rather startling news to us, for Vittagura said he was commander-
in-chief; Kajunju thought himself biggest, so did Kwibeya, and
even Dr K'yengo's men justified Budja's speech.

5th and 6th.--Still another halt, with all sorts of excuses. 
Frij, it appeared, dreamt last night that the king of Uganda came
to fight us for not complying with his orders, and that all my
men ran away except Uledi and himself.  This, according to the
interpretation of the coast, would turn out the reverse,
otherwise his head must be wrong, and, according to local
science, should be set right again by actual cautery of the
temples; and as Grant dreamt a letter came from Gani which I
opened and ran away with, he thought it would turn out no letter
at all, and therefore Kamrasi had been humbugging us. We heard
that Bombay had shot a cow before Kamrasi and would not be
allowed to return until he had eaten it.

At last we made a move, but only of two hours' duration, through
the usual forest, in which elephants walked about as if it were
their park.  We hoped at starting to reach the palace, but found
we must stop here until the king should send for us.  We were
informed that doubtless he was looking into his Uganga, or magic
horn, to discover what he had to expect from us; and he seemed as
yet to have found no ground for being afraid of us.  Moreover, it
is his custom to keep visitors waiting on him in this way, for is
he not the king of kings, the king of Kittara, which includes all
the countries surrounding Unyoro?




                          Chapter XVII



                             Unyoro

Invitation to the Palace at last--Journey to it--Bombay's Visit
to King Kamrasi--Our Reputation as Cannibals--Reception at Court-
- Acting the Physician again--Royal Mendicancy.

We halted again, but in the evening one of Dr K'yengo's men came
to invite us to the palace.  He explained that Kamrasi was in a
great rage because we only received seven goats instead of
thirty, the number he had ordered Kwibeya to give us, besides
pombe and plantains without limitation.  I complained that Bombay
had been shown more respect than myself, obtaining an immediate
admittance to the king's presence.  To this he gave two ready
answers--that every distinction shown my subordinate was a
distinction to myself, and that we must not expect court
etiquette from savages.

9th.--We set off for the palace.  This last march differed but
little from the others.  Putting Dr K'yengo's men in front, and
going on despite all entreaties to stop, we passed the last bit
of jungle, sighted the Kidi hills, and, in a sea of swampy grass,
at last we stood in front of and overlooked the great king's
palace, situated N. lat. 1§ 37' 43", and E. long. 32§ 19' 49", on
a low tongue of land between the Kafu and Nile rivers.  It was a
dumpy, large hut, surrounded by a host of smaller ones, and the
worst royal residence we had seen since leaving Uzinza.  Here
Kajunju, coming from behind, overtook us, and breathless with
running, in the most excited manner, abused Dr K'yengo's men for
leading us on, and ordered us to stop until he saw the king, and
ascertained the place his majesty wished us to reside in. 
Recollecting Mtesa's words that Kamrasi placed his guest on the
N'yanza, I declined going to any place but the palace, which I
maintained was my right, and waited for the issue, when Kajunju
returned with pombe, and showed us to a small, dirty set of huts
beyond the Kafu river--the trunk of the Mwerango and N'yanza
branches which we crossed in Uganda-- and trusted this would do
for the present, as better quarters in the palace would be looked
for on the morrow.  This was a bad beginning, and caused a few of
the usual anathemas in which our countrymen give vent to their
irritation.

Two loads of flowers, neatly packed in long strips of rushpith,
were sent for us "to consume at once," as more would be given on
the morrow.  To keep us amused, Kidgwiga informed us that Kamrasi
and Mtesa--in fact, all the Wahuma--came originally from a stock
of the same tribe dwelling beyond Kidi.  All bury their dead in
the same way, under ground; but the kings are toasted first for
months till they are like sun-dried meat, when the lower jaw is
cut out and preserved, covered with beads.  The royal tombs are
put under the charge of special officers, who occupy huts erected
over them. The umbilical cords are preserved from birth, and, at
death, those of men are placed within the door-frame, whilst
those of women are buried without--this last act corresponding,
according to Bombay, with the custom of the Wahiyow.  On the
death of any of the great officers of state, the finger-bones and
hair are also preserved; or if they have died shaven, as
sometimes occurs, a bit of their mbugu dress will be preserved in
place of the hair. Their families guard their tombs.

The story we heard at Karague, about dogs with horns in Unyoro,
was confirmed by Kidgwiga, who positively assured us that he once
saw one in the possession of an official person, but it died. The
horn then was stuffed with magic powder, and, whenever an army
was ordered for war, it was placed on the war-track for the
soldiers to step over, in the same way as a child is sacrificed
to insure victory in Unyomuezi.  Of the Karague story, according
to which all the Kidi people sleep in trees, Kidgwiga gave me a
modified version. He said the bachelors alone do son, whilst the
married folk dwell in houses.  As most of these stories have some
foundation in fact, we presumed that the people of Kidi sometimes
mount a tree to sleep at night when travelling through their
forests, where lions are plentiful--but not otherwise.

10th.--I sent Kidgwiga with my compliments to the king, and a
request that his majesty would change my residence, which was so
filthy that I found it necessary to pitch a tent, and also that
he would favour me with an interview after breakfast.  The return
was a present of twenty cows, ten cocks, two bales of flour, and
two pots of pombe, to be equally divided between Grant and
myself, as Kamrasi recognised in us two distinct camps, because
we approached his country by two different routes--a smart method
for expecting two presents from us, which did not succeed, as I
thanked for all, Grant being "my son" on this occasion.  The king
also sent his excuses, and begged pardon for what happened to us
on entering his country, saying it could not have taken place had
we come from Rumanika direct.  His fear of the Waganda gave rise
to it, and he trusted we would forget and forgive.  To-morrow our
residence should be changed, and an interview follow, for he
desired being friends with us just as much as we did with him.

At last Bombay came back.  He reported that he had not been
allowed to leave the palace earlier, though he pleaded hard that
I expected his return; and the only excuse he could extract from
the king was, that we were coming in charge of many Wakungu, and
he had found it necessary to retard our approach in consequence
of the famine at Chaguzi.  His palace proper was not here, but
three marches westward: he had come here and pitched a camp to
watch his brothers, who were at war with him.  Bombay, doing his
best to escape, or to hurry my march, replied that he was very
anxious on our account, because the Waganda wished to snatch us
away.

It was no doubt this hint that brought the messenger to our
relief yesterday; and otherwise we might have been kept in the
jungle longer.  When told by Bombay of our treatment on the Nile,
the king first said he did not think we wished to see him, else
we would have come direct from Rumanika; but when asked if
Baraka's coming with Rumanika's officers was not sufficient to
satisfy him on this point, he hung down his head, and evaded the
question, saying he had been the making of Mtesa of Uganda; but
he had turned out a bad fellow, and now robbed him right and
left.[FN#23]  The Gani letter, supposed to be from Petherick, was
now asked for, and a suggestion made about opening a trade with
Gani, but all with the provoking result we had been so well
accustomed to.  No letter like that referred to had ever been
received, so that Frij's interpretation about Grant's letter-
dream was right; and if we wished to go to Gani, the king would
send men travelling by night, for his brothers at war with him
lay upon the road.  As to the Uganda question, and my desiring
him to make friends with Mtesa, in hopes that the influence of
trade would prevent any plundering in future, he merely tossed
his head.  He often said he did not know what to think about his
guests, now he had got them; to which Bombay, in rather
successful imitation of what he had heard me say on like
occasions, replied, "If you do not like them after you have seen
them, cut their heads off, for they are all in your hands."

11th.--With great apparent politeness Kamrasi sent in the morning
to inquire how we had slept.  He had "heard our cry"--an
expression of regal condescension--and begged we would not be
alarmed, for next morning he would see us, and after the meeting
change our residence, when, should we not approve of wading to
his palace, he would bridge all the swamps leading up to it; but
for the present he wanted two rounds of ball-cartridge--one to
fire before his women, and the other before his officers and a
large number of Kidi men who were there on a visit.  To please
this childish king, Bombay was sent with two other of my men, and
no sooner arrived than a cow was placed before them to be shot. 
Bombay, however, thinking easy compliance would only lead to
continued demands on our short store of powder, said he had no
order to shoot cows, and declined. A strong debated ensued, which
Bombay, by his own account, turned to advantage, by saying, "What
use is there in shooting cows? we have lots of meat; what we want
is flour to eat with it."  To which the great king retorted, "If
you have not got flour, that is not my fault, for I ordered your
master to come slowly, and to bring provisions along with him."

Then getting impatient, as all his visitors wanted sport, he
ordered the cow out again, and insisted on my men shooting at it,
saying at the same time to his Kidi visitors, boastfully, "Now I
will show you what devils these Wanguana are: with firearms they
can kill a cow with one bullet; and as they are going to Gani, I
advise you not to meddle with them."  The Kidi visitors said,
"Nonsense; we don't believe in their power, but we will see." 
Irate at his defeat, Bombay gave orders to the men to fire over
the cow, and told Kamrasi why he had done so--Bana would be angry
with him.  "Well," said the king of kings, "if that is true, go
back to your master, tell him you have disappointed me before
these men, and obtain permission to shoot the cow in the morning;
after which, should you succeed, your master can come after
breakfast to see me--but for the present, take him this pot of
pombe."

12th.--To back Bombay in what he had said, I gave him two more
cartridges to shoot the cow with, and orders as well to keep
Kamrasi to his word about the oft-promised interview and change
of residence.  He gave me the following account on his return: --
Upwards of a thousand spectators were present when he killed the
cow, putting both bullets into her, and all in a voice, as soon
as they saw the effect of the shot, shouted in amazement; the
Kidi visitors, all terror-stricken, crying out, as they clasped
their breasts, "Oh, great king, do allow us to return to our
country, for you have indeed got a new specimen of man with you,
and we are greatly afraid!"--a lot of humbug and affectation to
flatter the king, which pleased him greatly.  It was not
sufficient, however, to make him forget his regal pride; for
though Bombay pleaded hard for our going to see him, and for a
change of residence, the immovable king, to maintain the imperial
state he had assumed as "king of kings," only said, "What
difference does it make whether your master sees me to-day or to-
morrow?  If he wants to communicate about the road to Gani, his
property at Karague, or the guns at Uganda, he can do so as well
through the medium of my officers as with me direct, and I will
send men whenever he wishes to do so. Perhaps you don't know, but
I expect men from Gani every day, who took a present of slaves,
ivory and monkey-skins to the foreigners residing there, who, in
the first instance sent me a necklace of beads [showing them] by
some men who wore clothes. They said white men were coming from
Karague, and requested the beads might be shown them should they
do so.  They left this two moons before Baraka arrived here, and
I told them the white men would not come here, as I heard they
had gone to Uganda."

Bombay then, finding the king very communicative, went at him for
his inhospitality towards us, his turning us back from his
country twice, and now, after inviting us, treating us as
Suwarora did. On this he gave, by Bombay's account, the following
curious reason for his conduct:--"You don't understand the
matter.  At the time the white men were living in Uganda, many of
the people who had seen them there came and described them as
such monsters, they ate up mountains and drank the N'yanza dry;
and although they fed on both beef and mutton, they were not
satisfied until they got a dish of the 'tender parts' of human
beings three times a-day.  Now, I was extremely anxious to see
men of such wonderful natures.  I could have stood their
mountain-eating and N'yanzi-drinking capacities, but on no
consideration would I submit to sacrifice my subjects to their
appetites, and for this reason I first sent to turn them back;
but afterwards, on hearing from Dr K'yengo's men that, although
the white men had travelled all through their country, and
brought all the pretty and wonderful things of the world there,
they had never heard such monstrous imputations cast upon them, I
sent a second time to call them on: these are the facts of the
case.  Now, with regard to your accusation of my treating them
badly, it is all their own fault.  I ordered them to advance
slowly and pick up food by the way, as there is a famine here;
but they, instead, hurried on against my wishes.  That they want
to see and give me presents you have told me repeatedly--so do I
them; for I want them to teach me the way to shoot, and when that
is accomplished, I will take them to an island near Kidi, where
there are some men [his refractory brothers] whom I wish to
frighten away with guns; but still there is no hurry,--they can
come when I choose to call them, and not before."  Bombay to this
said, "I cannot deliver such a message to Bana; I have told so
many falsehoods about your saying you will have an interview to-
morrow, I shall only catch a flogging"; and forthwith departed.

13th.--More disgusted with Kamrasi than ever, I called Kidgwiga
up, and told him I was led to expect from Rumanika that I should
find his king a good and reasonable man, which I believed,
considering it was said by an unprejudiced person.  Mtesa, on the
contrary, told me Kamrasi treated all his guests with disrespect,
sending them to the farther side of the N'yanzi.  I now found his
enemy more truthful than his friend, and wished him to be told
so.  "For the future, I should never," I said, "mention his name
again, but wait until his fear of me had vanished; for he quite
forgot his true dignity as a host and king in his surprise and
fear, merely because we were in a hurry and desired to see him." 
He was reported to-day, by the way, to be drunk.

As nothing could be done yesterday, in consequence of the king
being in his cups, the Wakungu conveyed my message to-day, but
with the usual effect, till a diplomatic idea struck me, and I
sent another messenger to say, if our residence was not changed
at once, both Grant and myself had made up our minds to cut off
our hair and blacken our faces, so that the king of all kings
should have no more cause to fear us.  Ignoring his claims to
imperial rank, I maintained that his reason for ill-treating us
must be fear, --it could be nothing else.  This message acted
like magic; for he fully believed we would do as we said, and
disappoint him altogether of the strange sight of us as pure
white men.  The reply was, Kamrasi would not have us disfigured
in this way for all the world; men were appointed to convey our
traps to the west end at once; and Kidgwiga, Vittagura, and
Kajunju rushed over to give us the news in all hast lest we
should execute our threat, and they were glad to find us with our
faces unchanged.  I now gave one cow to the head of Dr K'yengo's
party, and one to the head of Rumanika's men, because I saw it
was through their instrumentality we gained admittance in the
country; and we changed residence to the west end of Chaguzi, and
found there comfortable huts close to the Kafu, which ran
immediately between us and the palace.

Still our position in Unyoro was not a pleasant one.  In a long
field of grass, as high as the neck, and half under water, so
that no walks could be taken, we had nothing to see but Kamrasi's
miserable huts and a few distant conical hills, of which one
Udongo, we conceive, represents the Padongo of Brun-Bollet,
placed by him in 1§ south latitude, and 35§ east longitude.  We
were scarcely inside our new dwelling when Kamrasi sent a cheer
of two pots pombe, five fowls, and two bunches of plantains,
hoping we were now satisfied with his favour; but he damped the
whole in a moment again, by asking for a many-bladed knife which
his officers had seen in Grant's possession.  I took what he
sent, from fear of giving offence, but replied that I was
surprised the great king should wish to see my property before
seeing myself, and although I attached no more value to my
property than he did to his, I could not demean myself by sending
him trifles in that way.  However, should he, after hearing my
sentiments, still persist in asking for the knife to be sent by
the hands of a black man, I would pack it up with all the things
I had brought for him, and send them by a black man, judging that
he liked black men more than white.

Dr K'yengo's men then informed us they had been twice sent with
an army of Wanyoro to attack the king's brothers, on a river-
island north of this about three days' journey, but each time it
ended in nothing.  You fancy yourself, they said, in a
magnificent army, but the enemy no sooner turn out than the
cowardly Wanyoro fly, and sacrifice their ally as soon as not
into the hands of the opponents.  They said Kamrasi would not
expect us to attack them with our guns.  Rionga was the head of
the rebels; there were formerly five, but now only two of the
brothers remained.

15th.--Kamrasi, after inquiring after our health, and how we had
slept, through a large deputation of head men, alluded to the
knife question of yesterday, thinking it very strange that after
giving me such nice food I should deny him the gratification of
simply looking at a knife; he did not intend to keep it if it was
not brought for him, but merely to look at and return it.  To my
reply of yesterday I added, I had been led, before entering
Unyoro, to regard Kamrasi as the king of all kings--the greatest
king that ever was, and one worthy to be my father; but now, as
he expected me to amuse him with toys, he had lowered himself in
my estimation to the position of being my child.  To this the
sages said, "Bana speaks beautifully, feelingly, and moderately. 
Of course he is displeased at seeing his property preferred
before himself; all the right is on his side: we will now return
and see what can be done--though none but white men in their
greatest dare send such messages to our king."

Dr K'yengo's men were now attacked by Kidgwiga for having taken a
cow from me yesterday, and told they should not eat it, because
both they and myself were the king's guests, and it ill became
one to eat that which was given as a dinner for the other. 
Fortunately, foreseeing this kind of policy, as Kamrasi had been
watching our actions, I invariably gave in presents those cows
which came with us from Uganda, and therefore defied any one to
meddle with them. This elicited the true facts of the case.  Dr
K'yengo's men had been sent out to our camp to observe if anybody
received presents from us, as Kamrasi feared his subjects would
have the fleecing of us before his turn came; and these men had
reported the two cows given by me as mentioned above.  Kamrasi no
sooner heard of this than he took the cows and kept them himself. 
In their justification, Dr K'yengo's men said that had they not
been in the country before us, Kamrasi would not have had such
guests at all; for when he asked them if the Waganda reports
about our cannibalism and other monstrosities were true, their
head man denied it all, offered to stand security for our
actions, and told the king if he found us cannibals he might make
a Mohammedan of him, and sealed the statement with his oath by
throwing down his shield and bow and walking over them.   To this
Kamrasi was said to have replied, "I will accept your statements,
but you must remain with me until they come."

Kajunju came with orders to say Kamrasi would seize anybody found
staring at us.  I requested a definite answer would be given as
regards Kamrasi's seeing us.  Dr K'yengo's men then said they
were kept a week waiting before they could obtain an interview,
whilst Kajunju excused his king by saying, "At present the court
is full of Kidi, Chopi, Gani, and other visitors, who he does not
wish should see you, as some may be enemies in disguise.  They
are all now taking presents of cows from Kamrasi, and going to
their homes, and, as soon as they are disposed of, your turn will
come."

16th.--We kept quiet all day, to see what effect that would have
upon the king.  Kidgwiga told us that, when he was a lad, Kamrasi
sent him with a large party of Wanyoro to visit a king who lived
close to a high mountain, two months' journey distant, to the
east or south-east of this, and beg for a magic horn, as that
king's doctor was peculiarly famed for his skill as a magician. 
The party carried with them 600 majembe (iron spades), two of
which expended daily paid for their board and lodgings on the
way.  The horn applied for was sent by a special messenger to
Kamrasi, who, in return, sent one of his horns; from which date,
the two kings, whenever one of them wishes to communicate with
the other, sends, on the messenger's neck, the horn that had been
given him, which both serves for credentials and security, as no
one dare touch a Mbakka with one of these horns upon his neck.

A common source of conversation among our men now was the
desertion of their comrades, all fancying how bitterly they would
repent it when they heard how we had succeeded, eating beef every
day; and Uledi now, in a joking manner, abused Mektub for having
urged him to desert.  He would not leave Bana, and if he had not
stopped, Mektub would have gone, for they both served one master
at Zanzibar, and therefore were like brothers; whilst Mektub,
laughing over the matter as if it were a good joke, said, "I
packed up my things to go, it is true; but I reflected if I got
back to the coast Said Majid would only make a slave of me
again."  M'yinzuggi, the head of Rumanika's party, gave me to-day
a tippet monkey-skin in return for the cow I had given him on the
14th.  These men, taking their natures from their king Rumanika,
are by far the most gentle, polite, and attentive of any black
men we have travelled amongst.

17th.--Tired and out of patience with our prison--a river of
crocodiles on one side, and swamps in every other direction,
while we could not go out shooting without a specific order from
the king--I sent Kidgwiga and Kajunju to inform Kamrasi that we
could bear this life no longer.  As he did not wish to see white
men, our residing here could be of no earthly use.  I hoped he
would accept our present from Bombay, and give us leave to depart
for Gani.  The Wakungu, who thought, as well as ourselves, that
we were in nothing better than a prison, hurried off with the
message, and soon returned with a message from their king that he
was busily engaged decorating his palace to give us a triumphant
reception; for he was anxious to pay us more respect than anybody
who had ever visited him before.  We should have seen him
yesterday, only that it rained; and, as a precaution against our
meeting being broken up, a shed was being built.  He could not
hear of our leaving the country without seeing him.

18th.--At last we were summoned to attend the king's levee; but
the suspicious creature wished his officers to inspect the things
we had brought for him before we went there.  Here was another
hitch. I could not submit to such disrespectful suspicions, but
if he wished Bombay to convey my present to him, I saw no harm in
the proposition.  The king waived the point, and we all started,
carrying as a present the things enumerated in the note.[FN#24]
The Union Jack led the way.  At the ferry three shots were fired,
when, stepping into two large canoes, we all went across the Kafu
together, and found, to our surprise, a small hut built for the
reception, low down on the opposite bank, where no strange eyes
could see us.

Within this, sitting on a low wooden stool placed upon a double
matting of skins--cows' below and leopards' above--on an elevated
platform of grass, was the great king Kamrasi, looking,
enshrouded in his mbugu dress, for all the world like a pope in
state--calm and actionless.  One bracelet of fine-twisted brass
wire adorned his left wrist, and his hair, half an inch long, was
worked up into small peppercorn-like knobs by rubbing the hand
circularly over the crown of the head.  His eyes were long, face
narrow, and nose prominent, after the true fashion of his breed;
and though a finely-made man, considerably above six feet high,
he was not so large as Rumanika.  A cow-skin, stretched out and
fastened to the roof, acted as a canopy to prevent dust falling,
and a curtain of mbugu concealed the lower parts of the hut, in
front of which, on both sides of the king, sat about a dozen head
men.

This was all.  We entered and took seats on our own iron stools,
whilst Bombay placed all the presents upon the ground before the
throne.  As no greetings were exchanged, and all at first
remained as silent as death, I commenced, after asking about his
health, by saying I had journeyed six long years (by the African
computation of five months in the year) for the pleasure of this
meeting, coming by Karague instead of by the Nile, because the
"Wanya Beri" (Bari people at Gondokoro) had defeated the projects
of all former attempts made by white men to reach Unyoro.  The
purpose of my coming was to ascertain whether his majesty would
like to trade with our country, exchanging ivory for articles of
European manufacture; as, should he do so, merchants would come
here in the same way as they went from Zanzibar to Karague. 
Rumanika and Mtesa were both anxious for trade, and I felt sorry
he would not listen to my advice and make friend with Mtesa; for
unless the influence of trade was brought in to check the Waganda
from pillaging the country, nothing would do so.

Kamrasi, in a very quiet, mild manner, instead of answering the
questions, told us of the absurd stories which he had heard from
the Waganda, said he did not believe them, else his rivers,
deprived of their fountains, would have run dry; and he thought,
if we did eat hills and the tender parts of mankind, we should
have had enough to satisfy our appetites before we reached
Unyoro.  Now, however, he was glad to see that, although our hair
was straight and our faces white, we still possessed hands and
feel like other men.

The present was then opened, and everything in turn placed upon
the red blanket.  The goggles created some mirth; so did the
scissors, as Bombay, to show their use, clipped his beard, and
the lucifers were considered a wonder; but the king scarcely
moved or uttered any remarks till all was over, when, at the
instigation of the courtiers, my chronometer was asked for and
shown.  This wonderful instrument, said the officers (mistaking
it for my compass), was the magic horn by which the white men
found their way everywhere. Kamrasi said he must have it, for,
besides it, the gun was the only thing new to him.  The
chronometer, however, I said, was the only one left, and could
not possibly be parted with; though, if Kamrasi liked to send men
to Gani, a new one could be obtained for him.

Then, changing the subject, much to my relief, Kamrasi asked
Bombay, "Who governs England?"  "A woman."  "Has she any
children?"  "Yes," said Bombay, with ready impudence; "these are
two of them" (pointing to Grant and myself).  That settled,
Kamrasi wished to know if we had any specked cows, or cows of any
peculiar colour, and would we like to change four large cows for
four small ones, as he coveted some of ours.  This was a
staggerer.  We had totally failed, then, in conveying to this
stupid king the impression that we were not mere traders, ready
to bargain with him.  We would present him with cows if we had
such as he wanted, but we could not bargain. The meeting then
broke up in the same chilling manner as it began, and we returned
as we came, but no sooner reached home than four pots of pombe
were sent us, with a hope that we had arrived all safely.  The
present gave great satisfaction.  The Wanguana accused Frij of
having "unclean hands," because the beef had not lasted so long
as it should do--it being a notable fact in Mussulman creed, that
unless the man's hands are pure who cuts the throat of an animal,
its flesh will not last fresh half the ordinary time.

19th.--As the presents given yesterday occupied the king's mind
too much for other business, I now sent to offer him one-third of
the guns left in Uganda, provided he would send some messengers
with one of my men to ask Mtesa for them, and also the same
proportion of the sixty loads of property left in charge of
Rumanika at Karague, if he would send the requisite number of
porters for its removal.  But of all things, I said, I most
wished to send a letter to Petherick at Gani, to apprise him of
our whereabouts, for he must have been four years waiting our
arrival there, and by the same opportunity I would get a watch
for the king.  He sent us to-day two pots of pombe, one sack of
salt, and what might be called a screw of butter, with an
assurance that the half of everything that came to his house--
and everything was brought from great distances in boats--he
would give me; but for the present the only thing he was in need
of was some medicine or stimulants.  Further, I need be under no
apprehension if I did not find men at once to go on the three
respective journeys; it should be all done in good time, for he
loved me much, and desired to show us so much respect that his
name should be celebrated for it in songs of praise until he was
bowed down by years, and even after death it should be
remembered.

I ascertained then that the salt, which was very white and pure,
came from an island on the Little Luta Nzige, about sixty miles
west from the Chaguzi palace, where the lake is said to be forty
or fifty miles wide.  It is the same piece of water we heard of
in Karague as the Little Luta Nzige, beyond Utumbi; and the same
story of Unyoro being an island circumscribed by it and the
Victoria N'yanza connected by the Nile, is related here, showing
that both the Karague and Unyoro people, as indeed all negroes
and Arabs, have the common defect in their language, of using the
same word for a peninsula and an island.  The Waijasi--of whom we
saw a specimen in the shape of an old woman, with her upper lip
edged with a row of small holes, at Karague--occupy a large
island on this lake named Gasi, and sometimes come to visit
Kamrasi.  Ugungu, a dependency of Kamrasi's, occupies this side,
the lake, and on the opposite side is Ulegga; beyond which, in
about 2§ N. lat. And 28§ E. long., is the country of Namachi; and
further west still about 2§, the Wilyanwantu, or cannibals, who,
according to the report both here and at Karague, "bury cows but
eat men."  These distant people pay their homage to Kamrasi,
though they have six degrees of longitude to travel over.  They
are, I believe, a portion of the N'yam N'yams--another name for
cannibal--whose country Petherick said he entered in 1857-58. 
Among the other wild legends about this people, it was said that
the Wilyanwantu, in making brotherhood, exchanged their blood by
drinking at one another's veins; and, in lieu of butter with
their porridge, they smear it with the fat of fried human flesh.

20th.--I had intended for to-day an expedition to the lake; but
Kamrasi, harbouring a wicked design that we should help in an
attack on his brothers, said there was plenty of time to think of
that; we would only find that all the waters united go to Gani,
and he wished us to be his guests for three or four months at
least. Fifty Gani men had just arrived to inform him that Rionga
had lately sent ten slaves and ten ivory tusks to Petherick's
post, to purchase a gun; but the answer was, that a thousand
times as much would not purchase a weapon that might be used
against us; for our arrival with Kamrasi had been heard of, and
nothing would be done to jeopardise our road.

To talk over this matter, the king invited us to meet him.  We
went as before, 