minus the flag and firing, and met a similar
reception. The Gani news was talked over, and we proposed sending
Bombay with a letter at once.  I could get no answer; so, to pass
the time, we wished to know from the king's own lips if he had
prevented Baraka from going to Gani, as he had carried orders
from Rumanika as well as from myself to visit Kamrasi, to give
him fifty egg-beads, seventy necklaces of mtende, and seventy
necklaces of kutuamnazi beads, and then to pass on to Gani and
give its chief fifty egg-beads and forty necklaces of kutuamnazi. 
Kamrasi replied, "I did not allow him to go, because I heard you
had gone to Uganda"; and Dr K'yengo's men happening to be
present, added, "Baraka used up all the beads save forty which he
gave to Kamrasi, living upon goats all the way; and when he left,
took back a tusk of ivory."

This little controversy was amusing, but did not suit Kamrasi,
who had his eye on a certain valuable possession of mine.  He
made his approach towards it by degrees, beginning with a truly
royal speech thus: "I am the king of all these countries, even
including Uganda and Kidi--though the Kidi people are such
savages they obey no man's orders--and you are great men also,
sitting on chairs before kings; it therefore ill becomes us to
talk of such trifles as beads, especially as I know if you ever
return this way I shall get more from you."  "Begging your
majesty's pardon," I said, "the mention of beads only fell in the
way of our talk like stones in a walk; our motive being to get at
the truth of what Baraka did and said here, as his conduct in
returning after receiving strict orders from Rumanika and
ourselves to open the road, is a perfect enigma to us.  We could
not have entered Unyoro at all excepting through Uganda, and we
could not have put foot in Uganda without visiting its king." 
Without deigning to answer, Kamrasi, in the metaphorical language
of a black man, said, "It would be unbecoming of me to keep
secrets from you, and therefore I will tell you at once; I am
sadly afflicted with a disorder which you alone can cure."  "What
is it, your majesty?  I can see nothing in your face; it may
perhaps require a private inspection."  "My heart," he said, "is
troubled, because you will not give me your magic horn-- the
thing, I mean, in your pocket, which you pulled out one day when
Budja and Vittagura were discussing the way; and you no sooner
looked at it than you said, 'That is the way to the palace.'"

So! the sly fellow has been angling for the chronometer all this
time, and I can get nothing out of him until he has got it--the
road to the lake, the road to Gani, everything seemed risked on
his getting my watch--a chronometer worth œ50, which would be
spoilt in his hands in one day.  To undeceive him, and tell him
it was the compass which I looked at and not the watch, I knew
would only end with my losing that instrument as well; so I told
him it was not my guide, but a time-keeper, made for the purpose
of knowing what time to eat my dinner by.  It was the only
chronometer I had with me; and I begged he would have patience
until Bombay returned from Gani with another, when he should have
the option to taking this or the new one.  "No; I must have the
one in your pocket; pull it out and show it."  This was done, and
I placed it on the ground, saying, "The instrument is yours, but
I must keep it until another one comes."  "No; I must have it
now, and will send it you three times every day to look at."

The watch went, gold chain and all, without any blessings
following it; and the horrid king asked if I could make up
another magic horn, for he hoped he had deprived us of the power
of travelling, and plumed himself on the notion that the glory of
opening the road would devolve upon himself.  When I told him
that to purchase another would cost five hundred cows, the whole
party were more confirmed than ever as to its magical powers; for
who in his sense would give five hundred cows for the mere
gratification of seeing at what time his dinner should be eaten? 
Thus ended the second meeting.  Kamrasi now said the Gani men
would feast on beef to-morrow, and the next day be ready to start
with my men for Petherick's camp.  He then accompanies us to the
boats, spear in hand, and saw us cross the water.  Long tail-
hairs of the giraffe surrounded his neck, on which little balls
and other ornaments of minute beads, after the Uganda fashion,
were worked.  In the evening four pots of pombe and a pack of
flour were brought, together with the chronometer, which was sent
to be wound up--damaged of course-- the seconds-hand had been
dislodged.

21st.--I heard from Kidgwiga that some of those Gani men now
ordered to go with Bombay had actually been visiting here when
the latter shot his first cow at the palace, but had gone to
their homes to give information of us, and had returned again. 
Eager to get on with my journey, and see European faces again, I
besought the king to let us depart, as our work was all finished
here, since he had assured us he would like to trade with
England.  The N'yanswenge-- meaning Petherick's party--who have
hitherto been afraid to come here, would do so now, when they had
seen us pass safely down, and could receive my guns and property
left to come from Uganda and Karague, which we ourselves could
not wait for.  Kamrasi, thinking me angry for his having taken
the watch so rudely out of my pocket, took fright at the message,
sent some of his attendants quickly back to me, requesting me to
keep the instrument until another arrived, and begged I would
never say I wished to leave his house again.

22d.--Kamrasi sent to say Bombay was not to start to-day, but to-
morrow, so we put the screw on again, and said we must go at
once; if he would give us guides to Gani, we would return him his
twenty cows and seven goats with pleasure.  I let him understand
we suspected he was keeping us here to fight his brothers, and
told him he must at once know we would never lift hand against
them.  It was contrary to the laws of our land.  "I have got no
orders to enter into black men's quarrels, and my mother" (the
Queen), "whom I see every night in my sleep calling me home,
would be very angry if she heard of it.  Rumanika once asked me
to fight his brothers Rogero and M'yongo, but my only reply to
all had been the same--I have no orders to fight with, only to
make friends of, the great kings of Africa."

The game seemed now to be won.  At once Kamrasi ordered Bombay to
prepare for the journey.  Five Wanyoro, five Chopi men, and five
Gani men, were to escort him.  There was no objection to his
carrying arms.  The moment he returned, which ought to be in
little more than a fortnight, we would all go together.  An
earnest request was at the same time made that I would not bully
him in the mean time with any more applications to depart.  So
Bombay and Mabruki, carrying there muskets, and a map and letter
for Petherick, departed.

23d and 24th.--Kamrasi, presuming he had gained favour in our
eyes, sent, begging to know how we had slept, and said he would
like us to inform him what part of his journey Bombay had this
morning reached --a fact which he had no doubt must be divinable
through the medium of our books.  The reply was, that Bombay's
luck was so good we had no doubt regarding his success; but now
he had gone, and our days here were numbered, we should like to
see the palace, his fat wives and children, as well as the
Wanyoro's dances, and all the gaiety of the place.  We did not
think our reception-hut by the river sufficiently dignified, and
our residence here was altogether like that of prisoners--seeing
no one, knowing no one.  In answer to this, Kamrasi sent one pot
of pombe and five fowls, begging we would not be alarmed; we
should see everything in good time, if we would but have
patience, for he considered us very great men, as he was a great
man himself, and we had come at his invitation.  He must request,
in the mean time, that we would send no more messages by his
officers, as such messages are never conveyed properly. At
present there was a great deal of business in the palace.

We asked for some butter, but could get none, as all the milk in
the palace was consumed by the wives and children, drinking all
day long, to make themselves immovably fat.

25th.--In the morning, the commander-in-chief wished us to cast a
horoscope, and see where Bombay was, and if he were getting on
well. That being negatived, he told us to put our hut in order,
as Kamrasi was coming to see us.  Accordingly we made everything
as smart as possible, hanging the room round with maps, horns,
and skins of animals, and places a large box covered with a red
blanket, as a throne for the king to set upon.  As he advanced,
my men, forming a guard of honour fired three shots immediately
on his setting foot upon our side the river; whilst Frij, with
his boatswain's whistle, piped the 'Rogue's March,' to prepare us
for his majesty's approach.  We saluted him, hat in hand, and,
leading the way, showed him in.  He was pleased to be
complimentary, remarking, what Waseja (fine men) we were, and
took his seat. We sat on smaller boxes, to appear humble, whilst
his escort of black "swells" filled the doorway, squatting on the
ground, so as to stop the light and interfere with our
decorations.

After the first salutations, the king remarked the head of a
nsamma buck, and handled it; then noticed my mosquito-curtains
hanging over the bed, and begged for them.  He was told they
could not be given until Bombay returned, as the mosquitoes would
eat us up. "But there were two," said the escort, "for we have
seen one in the other hut."  That was true; but were there not
two white men? However, if the king wanted gauze, here was a
smart gauze veil-- and the veil vanished at once.  The iron camp-
bed was next inspected, and admired; then the sextant, which was
coveted and begged for, but without success, much to the
astonishment of the king, as his attendants had led him to expect
he would get anything he asked for.  Then the thermometers were
wanted and refused; also table-knives, spoons, forks, and even
cooking-pots, for we had no others, and could not part with them. 
The books of birds and animals had next to be seen, and being
admired were coveted, the king offering one of the books I first
gave him in exchange for one of these.  In fact, he wanted to
fleece us of everything; so, to shut him up, I said I would not
part with one bird for one hundred tusks of ivory; they were all
the collections I had made in Africa, and if I parted with them
my journey would go for nothing; but if he wanted a few drawings
of birds I would do some for him-- at present I wished to speak
to him.  "Well, what is it? we are all attention."  "I wish to
know positively if you would like English traders to come here
regularly, as the Arabs do to trade at Karague? and if so, would
you give me a pembe (magic horn) as a warrant, that everybody may
know Kamrasi, king of Unyoro, desires it?"

Kamrasi replied, "I like your proposition very much; you shall
have the horn you ask for, either large or small, just as you
please; and after you have gone, should we hear any English are
at Gani wishing to come here, as my brothers are in the way we
will advance with spears whilst they approach with guns, and
between us both, my brothers must fly--for I myself will head the
expedition. But now you have had your say I will have mine if you
will listen." "All right, your majesty; what is it?"  "I am
constantly stricken with fever and pains, for which I know no
remedy but cautery; my children die young; my family is not large
enough to uphold my dignity and station in life; in fact, I am
infirm and want stimulants, and I wish you to prescribe for me,
which considering you have found your way to this, where nobody
came before, must be easy to you."  Two pills and a draught for
the morning were given as a preliminary measure, argument being
of no avail; and to our delight the king said it was time to go.

We jumped off our seats to show him the way, hoping our
persecutions were over; but still he sat, and sat, until at
length, finding we did not take the hint to give him a parting
present, he said, "I never visited any big man's house without
taking home some trifle to show my wife and children."  "Indeed,
great king! then you did not come to visit us, but to beg, eh? 
You shall have nothing, positively nothing; for we will not have
it said the king did not come to see us, but to beg."  Kamrasi's
face changed colour; he angrily said, "Irokh togend" (let us rise
and go), and forthwith walked straight out of the hut.  Frij
piped, but no guns fired; and as he asked the reason why he was
told it would be offensive to say we were glad he was going.  The
king was evidently not pleased for no pombe came to-day.




                         Chapter XVIII



                       Unyoro--Continued

The Ceremonies of the New Moon--Kamrasi's Rule and Discipline--
An Embassy from Uganda, and its Results--The Rebellious Brothers-
- An African Sorcerer and his Incantations--The Kamraviona of
Unyoro-- Burial Customs--Ethiopian Legends--Complicated Diplomacy
for our Detention--Proposal to send Princes to England--We get
away.

26th.--We found that the palace was shut up in consequence of the
new moon, seen for the first time last evening; and incessant
drumming was the order of the day.  Still, private interviews
might be granted, and I sent to inquire after the state of the
king's health. The reply was, that the medicine had not taken,
and the king was very angry because nothing was given him when he
took the trouble to call on us.  He never called at a big man's
house and left it mwiko (empty-handed) before; if there was
nothing else to dispose of, could Bana not have given him a bag
of beads?

To save us from this kind of incessant annoyance, I now thought
it would be our best policy to mount the high horse and bully
him. Accordingly, we tied up a bag of the commonest mixed beads,
added the king's chronometer, and sent them to Kamrasi with a
violent message that we were thoroughly disgusted with all that
had happened; the beads were for the poor beggar who came to our
house yesterday, not to see us, but to beg; and as we did not
desire the acquaintance of beggars, we had made up our minds
never to call again, nor receive any more bread or wine from the
king.

This appeared to be a hit.  Kamrasi, evidently taken aback, said,
if he thought he should have offended us by begging, he would not
have begged.  He was not a poor man, for he had many cows, but he
was a beggar, of course, when beads were in the question; and,
having unwittingly offended, as he desired our friendship, he
trusted his offence would be forgiven.  On opening the
chronometer, he again wrenched back the seconds-hand, and sent it
for repair, together with two pots of pombe as a peace-offering. 
Frij, who accompanied the deputation, overheard the counsellors
tell their king that the Waganda were on their way back to Unyoro
to snatch us away; on hearing which the king asked his men if
they would ever permit it; and, handling his spear as if for
battle, said at the same time he would lose his own head before
they should touch his guests.  Then, turning to Frij, he said,
"What would you do if they came?--go back with them?"  To which
Frij said, "No, never, when Gani is so near; they might cut our
heads off, but that is all they could do." The watch being by
this time repaired, it gave me the opportunity of sending
Kidgwiga back to the palace to say we trusted Kamrasi would allow
Budja to come here, if only with one woman to carry his pombe,
else Mtesa would take offence, form an alliance with Rionga, and
surround the place with warriors, for it was not becoming in
great kings to treat civil messengers like dogs.

The reply to this was, that Kamrasi was very much pleased with my
fatherly wisdom and advice, and would act up to it, allowing
Budja only to approach with one woman; we need, however, be under
no apprehensions, for Kamrasi's power was infinite; the Gani road
should be opened even at the spear's point; he had been beating
the big drum in honour of us the whole day; he would not allow
any beggars to come and see us, for he wanted us all to himself,
and for this reason had ordered a fence to be built all round our
house; but he had got no present from Grant yet, though all he
wanted was his mosquito-curtains, whilst he wished my picture-
books to show his women, and be returned.  We sent a picture of
Mtesa as a gift, the two books to look at and an acknowledgement
that the mosquito-curtains were his, only he must have patience
until Bombay arrived; but his proposition about the fence we
rejected with scorn. The king had been raising an army to fight
Rionga--the true reason, we suspect, for the beating of the
drums.

27th and 28th.--There was drumming and music all day and night,
and the army was being increased to a thousand men, but we poor
prisoners could see nothing of it.  Frij was therefore sent to
inspect the armament and brings us all the news.  Some of
N'yamyonjo's men, seeing mine armed with carbines, became very
inquisitive about them, and asked if they were the instruments
which shot at their men on the Nile--one in the arm, who died;
the other on the top of the shoulder, who was recovering.  The
drums were kept in private rooms, to which a select few only were
admitted.  Kamrasi conducts all business himself, awarding
punishments and seeing them carried out.  The most severe
instrument of chastisement is a knob-stick, sharpened at the
back, like that used in Uganda, for breaking a man's neck before
he is thrown into the N'yanza; but this severity is seldom
resorted to, Kamrasi being of a mild disposition compared with
Mtesa, whom he invariably alludes to when ordering men to be
flogged, telling them that were they in Uganda, their heads would
suffer instead of their backs.  In the day's work at the palace,
army collecting, ten officers were bound because they failed to
bring a sufficient number of fighting men, but were afterwards
released on their promising to bring more.

Nothing could be more filthy than the state of the palace and all
the lanes leading up to it: it was well, perhaps, that we were
never expected to go there, for without stilts and respirators it
would have been impracticable, such is the dirty nature of the
people. The king's cows, even, are kept in the palace enclosure,
the calves actually entering the hut, where, like a farmer,
Kamrasi walks amongst them up to his ankles in filth, and,
inspecting them, issues his orders concerning them.  What has to
be selected for his guests he singles out himself.

Dr K'yengo's men, who had been sent three times into action
against the refractory brothers, asked leave to return to
Karague; but the king, who did not fear for their lives when his
work was to be done, would not give them leave, lest accident
should befall them on the way.  We found no prejudice against
eating butter amongst these Wahuma, for they not only sold us
some, but mixed it with porridge and ate it themselves.

29th.--The king has appointed a special officer to keep our table
supplied with sweet potatoes, and sent us a pot of pombe, with
his excuses for not seeing us, as business was so pressing, and
would continue to be so until the army marched.  Budja and Kasoro
were again reported to be near with a force of fifty Waganda,
prepared to snatch us away; and the king, fearing the
consequences, had sent to inform Budja, that if he dared attempt
to approach, he would slip us off in boats to Gani, and then
fight it out with the Waganda; for his guests, since they had
been handed over to him, had been treated with every possible
respect.

To keep Kamrasi to his promise, as we particularly wished to hear
the Uganda news, Frij was sent to inform him on my behalf that
Mtesa only wished to make friends with all the great kings
surrounding his country before his coronation took place, when
his brothers would be burnt, and he would cease to take advice
from his mother.  To treat his messengers disrespectfully could
do no good, and might provoke a war, when we should see my
deserters joined with the Waganda really coming in force against
us; whereas, if we saw Budja, we could satisfy him, and Mtesa
too, and obviate any such calamity.  The reply was, that Kamrasi
would arrange for our having a meeting with Budja alone if we
wished it; he did not fear my deserters siding with king Mtesa,
but he detested the Waganda, and could not bear to see them in
his country.

30th.--At breakfast-time we heard that my old friend Kasoro had
come to our camp without permission, to the surprise of
everybody, attended by all his boys, leaving Budja and his
children, on account of sickness, at the camp assigned to the
Waganda, five miles off. Kasoro wished to speak to us, and we
invited him into the hut; but the interview could not be
permitted until Kamrasi's wishes on the subject had been
ascertained.  In a little while the Kamraviona, having seen
Kamrasi, said we might converse with one another whilst his
officers were present listening, and sent a cow as a present for
the Waganda.  Kasoro with his children now came before us in
their usual merry manner and, after saluting, told us how the
deserters, on reaching Uganda, begged for leave to proceed to
Karague; but Mtesa, who would only allow two of them to approach
him, abused them, saying, "Did I not command you to take Bana to
Gani at all risks?  If there was no road by land, you were to go
by water; or, if that failed, to go under-ground, or in the air
above, and if he died, you were to die with him: what, then, do
you mean by deserting him and flying here?  You shall not move a
yard from this until I receive a messenger from him to hear what
he has got to say on the matter."  Mtesa would not take their
arms, even at the desire of Budja, on my behalf; for as no
messenger on my behalf came to him, he would not believe what
Budja said, and feared to touch any of our property.  The chief
item of court news was, that Mtesa had shot a buffalo which was
attacking him behind the palace, and made his Wakungu carry the
animal bodily, whilst life was in it, into his court.  The
ammunition I wrote for to Rumanika had been brought by Maula.

As Kasoro still remained silent with regard to Mtesa's message, I
told him we shot two of N'yamyonjo's men on our retreat up the
Nile, and that Kamrasi turned us back because some miscreant
Waganda had forged lies and told him we were terrible monsters,
who ate hills and human flesh, and drank up all the water of the
lake.  He laughed, but still was silent; so I said, "What message
have you brought from Mtesa?"  To which, in a timid, modest kind
of manner, he said, "Bana knows--what more need I say?  Has he
forgotten Mtesa, who loves him so?"  I said, "No, indeed, I have
not forgotten Mtesa; and, moreover, as I expected you back again,
I have sent Bombay to bring the stimulants and all the things I
promised Mtesa from Gani; in two or three days he will return." 
"No," said Kasoro, "that is not it; we must go to Gani with you;
for Mtesa says he loves you so much he will never allow you to
part from his hand until his servants have seen you safely at
your homes."

I replied, "If Mtesa wishes you to see my vessels and all the
wonders they contain, as far as I am concerned you may do so, and
I shall be only too happy to show you a little English
hospitality; but the road is in Kamrasi's hands, and his wishes
must now be heard." The commander-in-chief, now content with all
he had heard, went to Kamrasi to receive his orders, whilst I
gave Kasoro a feast of porridge and salt, with pombe to wash it
down, and a cow to take home with him; for the poor creatures
said they were all starving as the Wanyoro would not allow them
to take a single plantain from the field until Kamrasi's
permission had been given.

Kamrasi's reply now arrived; it was to the following effect:--
"Tell my children, the Waganda, they were never turned out of
Unyoro by my orders: if they wish to go to Gani, they can do so;
but, first of all, they must return to Mtesa, and ask him to
deliver up all of Bana's men."  I answered, "No; if any one of
those scoundrels who has deserted me ever dares show his face to
me again, I will shoot him like a dog.  Moreover, I want Mtesa to
take their guns from them, and, without taking life, to transport
them all to an island on the N'yanza, where they can spend their
days in growing plantains; for it is such men who prevent our
travelling in the country and visiting kings."  Kasoro on this
said, "Mtesa will do so in a minute if you send a servant to him,
but he won't if we only say you wish it."

The commander-in-chief then added, as to Kasoro's wish to
accompany me, "If Mtesa will send another time one of his people
whose life he wishes sacrificed on the journey, or tells, Here is
a man whom I wish you to send to Gani at all hazards, and without
responsibility for his life on our part, we will be very glad to
send him; but as we are at war with the Gani people continually,
there will be no security for a Mganda's life there."  To this I
added, "Now, Kasoro, you see how it is; Kamrasi does not wish you
to do to Gani, so if you take my advice you will return to Mtesa. 
Give this tin cartridge-box, which first came from him, back to
him again, to show him you have seen me, and say, This is Bana's
letter; he wishes you to transport the deserters and seize their
guns.  The guns,  of course, I shall want again at some other
time, when I will send one of my English children to visit him;
for now Kamrasi has opened his country to us, and given us leave
to come and purchase ivory, I never shall be very far away." I
gave them three pills for Budja, blistered two of the pages, and
started the whole merrily off, Kasoro asking me to send Mtesa
some pretty things from England such as he never saw.

1st.--Kamrasi sent his commander-in-chief to inquire after my
health, and to say Budja had left in fear and trembling lest
Mtesa should cut all their heads off for failing in the mission;
but he had sent Kidgwiga's brother with a pot of pombe to escort
the Waganda beyond his frontier, and cheer them on the way; for
the tin cartridge-box, he thought, would save their lives by
satisfying Mtesa they had seen me.  The commander-in-chief then
told me Kamrasi did not wish them to accompany me through Kidi
for the Kidi people don't like the Waganda, and, discovering
their nationality by the fullness of their teeth, would bring
trouble on us whilst trying to kill them.  I said I thanked
Kamrasi for his having treated the Waganda with such marked
respect, in allowing them to see me, and sending them back with
an escort; but I thought it would have been better if he had
spoken the truth plainly out, for then I could have told them I
feared to have them in company with me.  In return for my
civilities, the king then send one of his chopi officers to see
me, who went four stages with Bombay, and he also sent some rich
beads which he wished me to look at.  They were nicely kept in a
neat though very large casing of rush pith, and were those sent
as a letter from Gani, to inform him that we were expected to
come via Karague.  After this, to keep us in good-humour, Kamrasi
sent to inform us that some Gani men, twenty-five in number, had
just arrived, and had given him a lion-skin, several tippet
monkey-skins, and some giraffe hair, as well as a stick of copper
or brass wire.  Bombay was met by them on the confines of Gani.

2d.--The king sent me a pot of pombe to-day, inquiring after my
health, and saying he would like to take the medicine I gave him
if I would send Frij over to administer it, but he would be
ashamed to swallow pills before me.  Hitherto he had not been
able to take the medicine from press of business in collecting an
army to fight his brothers; but as his troops would all leave for
war to-day, he expected to have leisure.

In plying the Kamraviona to try if we could get rid of the
annoying restraints which made our residence here a sort of
imprisonment, I discovered that the whole affair was not one of
blunder or accident, but that we actually were prisoners thus be
design. It appeared that Kamrasi's brothers, when they heard we
were coming into Unyoro, murmured, and said to the king, "Why are
you bringing such guests amongst us, who will practise all kinds
of diabolical sorcery, and bring evil on us?"  To which Kamrasi
replied, "I have invited them to come, and they shall come; and
if they bring evil with them, let that all fall on my shoulders,
for you shall not see them."  He then built a palaver-house on
the banks of the Kafu to receive us in privately; and when we
were to go to Gani, it was his intention to slip us off privately
down the Kafu.  The brothers were so thoroughly frightened, that
when Kamrasi opened his chronometer before them to show them the
works in motion, they turned their heads away.  The large block-
tin box I gave Kamrasi, as part of his hongo, was, I heard,
called Mzungu, or the white man, by him.

In the evening the beads recently brought from Gani were sent for
my inspection, with an intimation that Kamrasi highly approved of
them, and would like me to give him a few like them.  Some of
Kamrasi's spies, whom he had sent to the refractory allies of
Rionga his brother, returned bringing a spear and some grass from
the thatch of the hut of a Chopi chief.  The removal of the grass
was a piece of state policy.  It was stolen by Kamrasi's orders,
in order that he might spread a charm on the Chopi people, and
gain such an influence over them that their spears could not
prevail against the Wanyoro; but it was thought we might possess
some still superior magic powder, as we had come from such a long
distance, and Kamrasi would prefer to have ours.   These Chopi
people were leagued with the brothers, and thus kept the highroad
to Gani, though the other half of Chopi remained loyal; and
though Kamrasi continually sent armies against the refractory
half which aided his brothers, they never retaliated by attacking
this place.

We found, by the way, that certain drumming and harmonious
accompaniments which we had been accustomed to hear all day and
night were to continue for four moons, in celebration of twins
born to Kamrasi since we came here.

3d.--Kamrasi's political department was active again to-day. Some
Gani officials arrived to inform him that there were two white
men in the vessel spoken of as at Gani; a second vessel was
coming in there, and several others were on their way.  A
carnelian was shown me which the Gani people gave to Kamrasi many
years ago. Kamrasi expressed a wish that I would exchange magic
powders with him.  He had a very large variety, and would load a
horn for me with all those I desired most.  He wanted also
medicines for longevity and perpetual strength.  Those I had
given him had, he said, deprived him of strength, and he felt
much reduced by their effects.  He would like me to go with him
and attack the island his three brothers, Rionga, Wahitu, and
Pohuka, are in possession of.  When I said I never fought with
black men, he wished to know if I would not shoot them if they
attacked me.  My replay was, alluding to our fight in the river,
"How did N'yamyonjo's men fare?"  I found that Kamrasi had thirty
brothers and as many sisters.

4th.--I gave Kamrasi a bottle of quinine, which we call "strong
back," and asked him in return for a horn containing all the
powders necessary to give me the gift of tongues, so that I
should be able to converse with any black men whom I might meet
with.  We heard that Kamrasi has called all his Gani guests to
play before him, and a double shot from his Blissett rifle
announced to our ears that he in turn was amusing them.  This was
the first time the gun had been discharged since he received it,
and, fearing to fire it himself, he called one of my men to do it
for him.

5th.--At 9 a.m., the time for measuring the fall of rain for the
last twenty-four hours, we found the rain-gauge and the bottle
had been removed, so we sent Kidgwiga to inform the king we
wished his magicians to come at once and institute a search for
it. Kidgwiga immediately returned with the necessary adept, an
old man, nearly blind, dressed in strips of old leather fastened
to the waist, and carrying in one hand a cow's horn primed with
magic powder, carefully covered on the mouth with leather, from
which dangled an iron bell.  The old creature jingled the bell,
entered our hut, squatted on his hams, looked first at one, then
at the other-- inquired what the missing things were like,
grunted, moved his skinny arm round his head, as if desirous of
catching air from all four sides of the hut, then dashed the
accumulated air on the head of his horn, smelt it to see if all
was going right, jingled the bell again close to his ear, and
grunted his satisfaction; the missing articles must be found.

To carry out the incantation more effectually, however, all my
men were sent for to sit in the open before the hut, when the old
doctor rose, shaking the horn and tinkling the bell close to his
ear. He then, confronting one of the men, dashed the horn forward
as if intending to strike him on the face, then smelt the head,
then dashed at another, and so on, till he became satisfied that
my men were not the thieves.  He then walked into Grant's hut,
inspected that, and finally went to the place where the bottle
had been kept. There he walked about the grass with his arm up,
and jingling the bell to his ear, first on one side, then on the
other, till the track of a hyena gave him the clue, and in two or
three more steps he found it.  A hyena had carried it into the
grass and dropped it.  Bravo, for the infallible horn! and well
done the king for his honesty in sending it!  So I gave the king
the bottle and gauge, which delighted him amazingly; and the old
doctor who begged for pombe, got a goat for his trouble.  My men
now, recollecting the powder robbery at Uganda, said king Mtesa
would not send his horn when I asked for it, because he was the
culprit himself.

6th.--Kidgwiga told us to-day that king Kamrasi's sisters are not
allowed to wed; they live and die virgins in his palace.  Their
only occupation in life consisted of drinking milk, of which each
one consumes the produce daily of from ten to twenty cows, and
hence they become so inordinately fat that they cannot walk. 
Should they wish to see a relative, or go outside the hut for any
purpose, it requires eight men to lift any of them on a litter. 
The brothers, too, are not allowed to go out of his reach.  This
confinement of the palace family is considered a state necessity,
as a preventive to civil  wars, in the same way as the
destruction of the Uganda princes, after a certain season, is
thought necessary for the preservation of peace there.

7th.--In the morning the Kamraviona called, on the king's behalf,
to inquire after my health, and also to make some important
communications.  First he was to request a supply of bullets,
that the king might fire a salute when Bombay returned from Gani;
next, to ask for stimulative medicine, now that he had consumed
all I gave him, and gone through the preliminary course; further,
to request I would spread a charm over all his subjects, so that
their hearts might be inclined towards him, and they would come
without calling and bow down at his feet; finally, he wished me
to exchange my blood with him, that we might be brothers till
death. I sent the bullets, advised him to wait a day or two for
the medicine, and said there was only one charm by which he could
gain the influence he required over his subjects--this was,
knowledge and the power of the pen.  Should he desire some of my
children (meaning missionaries) to come here and instruct his,
the thing would be done; but not in one year, nor even ten, for
it takes many years to educate children.

As to exchanging by blood with a black man's, it was a thing
quite beyond my comprehension; though Rumanika, I must confess,
had asked me to do the same thing.  The way the English make
lasting friendships is done either by the expressions of their
hearts, or by the exchange of some trifles, as keepsakes; and
now, as I had given Kamrasi some specimens of English
manufacture, he might give me a horn, or anything else he chose,
which I could show to my friends, so as to keep him in
recollection all my life.

The Kamraviona, before leaving, said, for our information, that a
robbery had occurred in the palace last night; for this morning,
when Kamrasi went to inspect his Mzungu (the block-tin box),
which he had forgotten to lock, he found all his beads had been
stolen. After sniffing round among the various wives, he smelt
the biggest one to be the culprit, and turned the beads out of
her possession. Deputies came in the evening with a pot of pombe
and small screw of butter, to tell me some Gani people had just
arrived, bringing information that the vessel at Gani had left to
go down the river; but when intelligence reached the vessel of
the approach of my men they turned and came back again.  Bombay
was well feasted on the road by Kamrasi's people, receiving eight
cows from one and two cows from another.

8th and 9th.--We had a summons to attend at the Kafu palace with
the medicine-chest, a few select persons only to be present.  It
rained so much on the 8th as to stop the visit, but we went next
day.  After arriving there, and going through the usual
salutations, Kamrasi asked us from what stock of people we came,
explaining his meaning by saying, "As we, Rumanika, Mtesa, and
the rest of us (enumerating the kings), are Wawitu (or princes),
Uwitu (or the country of princes) being to the east."  This
interesting announcement made me quite forget to answer his
question, and induced me to say, "Omwita, indeed, as the ancient
names for Mombas, if you came from that place: I know all about
your race for two thousand years or more.  Omwita, you mean, was
the last country you resided in before you came here, but
originally you came from Abyssinia, the sultan of which, our
great friend, is Sahela Selassie."

He pronounced this name laughing, and said, "Formerly our stock
was half-white and half-black, with one side of our heads covered
with straight hair, and the other side frizzly: you certainly do
know everything."  The subject then turned upon medicine, and
after inspecting the chest, and inquiring into all its contents,
it ended by his begging for the half of everything.  The
mosquito-curtains were again asked for, and refused until I
should leave this. As Kamrasi was anxious I should take two of
his children to England to be instructed, I agreed to do so, but
said I thought it would be better if he invited missionaries to
come here and educate all his family.  His cattle were much
troubled with sickness, dying in great numbers--could I cure
them?  As he again began to persecute us with begging, wanting
knives and forks, etc., I advised his using ivory as money, and
purchasing what he wanted from Gani.  This brought out the
interesting fact, the truth of which we had never reached before,
that when Petherick's servant brought him one necklace of beads,
and asked after us, he gave in return fourteen ivories, thirteen
women, and seven mbugu cloths.  One of his men accompanied the
visitors back to the boats, and saw Petherick, who took the ivory
and rejected the women.

10th.--At 2 p.m. we were called by Kamrasi to visit him at the
Kafu palace again, and requested to bring a lot of medicines tied
up in various coloured cloths, so that he might know what to
select for different ailments.  We repaired there as before,
putting the medicines into the sextand-stand box, and found him
lying at full length on the platform of his throne, with a glass-
bead necklace of various colours, and a charm tied on his left
arm.  Nobody was allowed to be present at our interview.  The
medicines, four varieties, were weighed out into ten doses each,
and their uses and effects explained.  He begged for four bottles
to put them in, till he was laughed out of it by our saying he
required forty bottles; for if the powders were mixed, how could
he separate them again?  And to keep his mind from the begging
tack, which he was getting alarmingly near, I said, "Now I have
given you these things because you would insist on having them. 
I must also tell you they are dangerous in your hands, in
consequence of your being ignorant of their properties.  If you
take my advice you won't meddle with them until the two children
you wish educated have learnt the use of them in England; and if
I have to take boys from this, I hope they will be of your
family."  He said, "You speak like a father to us, and we very
much approve.  Here is a pot of pombe; I did not give you one
yesterday."

11th.--To-day, the king having graciously granted permission, we
went out shooting, but saw only a few buffalo tracks.

12th.--The  Kamraviona was sent to inquire after our health, and
to ascertain from me all I knew respecting the origin of
Kamrasi's tribe, the distribution of countries, and the seat of
the government. I sent the king a diagram, painted in various
colours, with full explanations of everything, and asked
permission to send two more of my men in search of Bombay, who
had now been absent twenty days. The reply was, that if Bombay
did not return within four days, Kamrasi would send other men
after him on the fifth day; and, in the meantime, he sent one pot
of pombe as a token of his kind regard.

13th.--The Kamraviona was sent to inquire after our health, to
ask for medicine for himself, and to inquire more into the origin
of his race.  I, on the other hand, wishing to make myself as
disagreeable as possible, in order that Kamrasi might get tired
of us, sent Frij to ask for fresh butter, eggs, tobacco, coffee,
and fowls, every day, saying, I will pay their price when I reach
Gani, for we were suffering from want of proper food.  Kamrasi
was surprised at this clamour for food, and inquired what we ate
at home that we were so different from everybody else.

We heard to-day a strange story, involving the tragic fate of
Budja. On coming here, he had been bewitched by Kamrasi's
frontier officer, who put the charm into a pot of pombe.  From
the moment Budja drank it he was seized with sickness, and
remained so until he reached the first station in Uganda, when he
died.  The facts of the bewitchment had been found out by means
of the perpetrator's wives, who, from the moment the pombe was
drunk, took to precipitate flight, well knowing what effects
would follow, and dreading the chastisement Mtesa would bring
upon their household.  We heard, too, that the deserters had
returned to the place they deserted from, with thirty Waganda,
and a present of some cows for me.

14th.---Kamrasi sent me four parcels of coffee, very neatly
enclosed in rush pith.

15th.--Getting more impatient, and desirous to move on at any
sacrifice, I proposed giving up all claims to my muskets, as well
as the present of cows from Mtesa, if Kamrasi would give us boats
to Gani at once; but the reply was simply, Why be in such a
hurry?

16th.--The Kamraviona was sent to us with a load of coffee, which
Kamrasi had purchased with cowries, and to inquire how we had
slept.  Very badly, was the reply, because we knew Bombay would
have been back long ago if Kamrasi was not concealing him
somewhere, and we did not know what he was doing with deserters
and Waganda. Kamrasi then wanted us to paint his mbugu cloths in
different patterns and colours; but we sent him instead six
packages of red-ink powder, and got abused for sauciness.  He
then wanted black ink, else how could he put on the red with
taste; but we had none to give him.  Next, he asked leave for my
men to shoot cows, before his Kidi visitors, which they did to
his satisfaction, instructing him at the same time to fire powder
with his own rifle; when, triumphant with his success, he
protested he would never use anything but guns again, and threw
away his spear as useless.  Bombay, we learned, had reached Gani,
and ought to return in eight days.

17th and 18th.--A large party of Chopi people arrived, by
Kamrasi's orders, to tell the reason which induced them to apply
for guns to the white men at Gani, as it appeared evident they
must have wished to fight their king.  The Kidi visitors got
broken heads for helping themselves from the Wanyoro's fields,
and when they cried out against such treatment, were told they
should rob the king, if they wished to rob at all.

19th.--Nothing was done because Kamrasi was dismissing his Kidi
guests, 200, with presents of cows and women.

20th.--Having asked Kamrasi to return my pictures, he sent the
book of birds, but not of animals; and said he could not see us
until a new hut was built, because the old one was flooded by the
Kafu, which had been rising several days.  We must not, he said,
talk about Bombay any more, because everybody said he was
detained by the N'yanswenge (Petherick's party), and would return
here with the new moon.  I would not accept the lie, saying, How
can my "children" at Gani detain my messengers, when they have
received strict orders from me by letter to send an answer
quickly?  It was all Kamrasi's doing, for he had either hidden
Bombay, or ordered his officers to take him slowly, as he did us,
stopping four days at each stage.

Frij again told me he was present when Said Said, the Sultan of
Zanzibar, sent an army to assist the Wagunya at Amu, on the
coast, against the incursions of the Masai.  These Amu people
have the same Wahuma features as Kamrasi, whom they also resemble
both in general physical appearance, and in many of them having
circular marks, as if made by cautery, on the forehead and
temples.  These marks I took not to be tatooing or decorative,
but as a cure for disease--cautery being a favourite remedy with
both races.

The battle lasted only two days, though the Masai brought a
thousand spears against the Arabs' cannon.  But this was not the
only battle Said Said had to fight on those grounds; for some
years previously he had to subdue the Waziwa, who live on very
marshy land, into respect for his sovereignty, when the battle
lasted years, in consequence of the bad nature of the ground, and
the trick the Waziwa had of staking the ground with spikes.  The
Wasuahili, or coast-people, by his description, are the bastards
or mixed breeds who live on the east coast of Africa, extending
from the Somali country to Zanzibar. Their language is Kisuahili;
but there is no land Usuahili, though people talk of going to the
Suahili in the same vague sense as they do of going to the
Mashenzi, or amongst the savages.  The common story amongst the
Wasuahili at Zanzibar, in regard to the government of that
island, was, that the Wakhadim, or aborigines of Zanzibar, did
not like the oppressions of the Portuguese, and therefore allied
themselves to the Arabs of Muscat--even compromising their
natural birthright of freedom in government, provided the Arabs,
by their superior power, would secure to them perpetual equity,
peace and justice.  The senior chief, Sheikh Muhadim, was the
mediator on their side, and without his sanction no radial
changes compromising the welfare of the land could take place;
the system of arbitration being, that the governing Arab on the
one side, and the deputy of the Wakhadim on the other, should
hold conference with a screen placed between them, to obviate all
attempts at favour, corruption, or bribery.

The former report of the approach of my men, with as many Waganda
and cows for me, turned out partly false, inasmuch as only one of
my men was with 102 Waganda, whilst the whole of the deserters
were left behind in Uganda with cows; and Kamrasi hearing this,
ordered all to go back again until the whole of my men should
arrive.

21st.--I was told how a Myoro woman, who bore twins that died,
now keeps two small pots in her house, as effigies of the
children, into which she milks herself every evening, and will
continue to do so five months, fulfilling the time appointed by
nature for suckling children, lest the spirits of the dead should
persecute her. The twins were not buried, as ordinary people are
buried, under ground, but placed in an earthenware pot, such as
the Wanyoro use for holding pombe.  They were taken to the jungle
and placed by a tree, with the pot turned mouth downwards. 
Manua, one of my men, who is a twin, said, in Nguru, one of the
sister provinces to Unyanyembe, twins are ordered to be killed
and thrown into water the moment they are born, lest droughts and
famines or floods should oppress the land.  Should any one
attempt to conceal twins, the whole family would be murdered by
the chief; but, though a great traveller, this is the only
instance of such brutality Manua had ever witnessed in any
country.

In the province of Unyanyembe, if a twin or twins die, they are
thrown into water for the same reason as in Nguru; but as their
numbers increase the size of the family, their birth is hailed
with delight.  Still there is a source of fear there in
connection with twins, as I have seen myself; for when one dies,
the mother ties a little gourd to her neck as a proxy, and puts
into it a trifle of everything which she gives the living child,
lest the jealousy of the dead spirit should torment her. 
Further, on the death of the child, she smears herself with
butter and ashes, and runs frantically about, tearing her hair
and bewailing piteously; whilst the men of the place use towards
her the foulest language, apparently as if in abuse of her
person, but in reality to frighten away the demons who have
robbed her nest.

22d.--I sent Frij to Kamrasi to find out what he was doing with
the Waganda and my deserters, as I wished to speak with their two
head representatives.  I also wanted some men to seek for and to
fetch Bombay, as I said I believed him to be tied by the leg
behind one of the visible hills in Kidi.  The reply was, 102
Waganda, with one of my men only, had been stationed at the
village my men deserted from since the date (13th) we heard of
them last.  They had no cows for me, but each of the Waganda bore
a log of firewood, which Mtesa had ordered them to carry until
they either returned with me or brought back a box of gunpowder,
in default of which they were to be all burnt in a heap with the
logs they carried.  Kamrasi, still acting on his passive policy,
would not admit them here, but wished them to return with a
message, to the effect that Mtesa had no right to hold me as his
guest now I had once gone into another's hands.  We were all
three kings to do with our subjects as we liked, and for this
reason the deserters ought to be sent on here; but if I wished to
speak to the Waganda, he would call their officer.  There was no
fear, he said, about Bombay; he was on his way; but the men who
were escorting him were spinning out the time, stopping at every
place, and feasting every day.  To-morrow, he added, some more
Gani people would arrive here, when we should know more about it. 
I still advised Kamrasi to give the road to Mtesa provided he
gave up plundering the Wanyoro of women and cattle; but if my
counsel was listened to, I could get no acknowledgment that it
was so.

23d and 24th.--I sent to inquire what news there was of Bombay's
coming, and what measures Kamrasi had taken to call the Waganda's
chief officer and my deserters here; as also to beg he would send
us specimens of all the various tribes that visit him, in order
that me might draw them.  He sent four loads of dried fish, with
a request for my book of birds again, as it contains a portrait
of king Mtesa, and proposed seeing us at the newly-constructed
Kafu palace to-morrow, when all requests would be attended to. 
In the meanwhile, we were told that Bombay had been seen on his
way returning from Gani; and the Waganda had all run away
frightened, because they were told the Kidi and Chopi visitors,
who had been calling on Kamrasi lately, were merely the nucleus
of an army forming to drive them away, and to subdue Uganda. 
Mtesa was un