dergoing the coronation formalities, and for this
reason had sent the deserters to Kari's hill, giving them cows
and a garden to live on, as no visitors can remain near the court
while the solemnities of the coronation were going on.  The
thirty-odd brothers will be burnt to death, saving two or three,
of which one will be sent into this country--as was the case with
one of the late king Sunna's brothers, who is still in Unyoro--
and the others will remain in the court with Mtesa as playfellows
until the king dies, when, like Sunna's two brothers still living
in Uganda, one at N'yama Goma and one at Ngambezi, they will be
pensioned off.  After the coronation is concluded, it is expected
Mtesa will go into Kittari, on the west of Uganda, to fight
first, and then, turning east, will fight with the Wasoga; but we
think if he fights anywhere, it will be with Kamrasi.

25th and 26th.--I sent Frij to the palace to inquire after
Bombay, and got the usual reply: "Why is Bana in such a hurry? 
He is always for doing things quickly.  Tell my 'brother' to keep
his mind at rest; Bombay is now on the boundary of Gani coming
here, and will in due course arrive."  Both Rumanika's men and
those belonging to Dr K'yengo asked Kamrasi's leave to return to
their homes, but were refused, because the road was unsafe.  "Had
they not," it was said, "heard of Budja's telling Mtesa that
K'yengo's children prevented the white men from returning to
Uganda? and since then Mtesa had killed his frontier officer for
being chicken-hearted, afraid to carry out his orders, and had
appointed another in his stead, giving him strict orders to make
prisoners of all foreigners who might pass that way; and,
further, when some twenty Wanyoro were going to Karague, they
were hunted down by Mtesa's orders, and three of their number
killed; for he was determined to cut off all intercourse between
this country and Karague.  They must therefore wait till the road
is safe."

Hearing this, Dr K'yengo's men, who happened to be as well off
here as anywhere, accepted the advice; but Rumanika's men said,
"We are starving; we have been here too long already doing
nothing, and must go, let what will happen to us."  Kamrasi said,
"What will be the use of your going empty-handed?  I cannot send
cows and slaves to Rumanika when the road is so unsafe; you must
wait a bit."  But they still urged as before, and so forced the
king reluctantly to acquiesce, but only on the condition that two
of their head men should remain behind until some more of
Rumanika's men came to fetch them away--in fact, as we had been
accredited to him by Rumanika, he wanted to keep some of that
king's people as a security until we were out of his hands.

27th.--I sent Frij to the palace to ask once more for leave to
visit the Luta Nzige river-lake to the westward, and to request
Kamrasi would send men to fetch my property from Karague.  He
sent four loads of small fish and one pot of pombe, to say he
would see me on the morrow, when every arrangement would be made. 
Late at night orders came announcing that I might write my
despatches, as sixty men were ready to start for Karague.

28th.--I sent one of my men with despatches to Kamrasi, who
detained him half the day, and then ordered him to call to-
morrow.  This being the fifteenth or twentieth time Kamrasi had
disappointed me, after promising an interview, that we might have
a proper understanding about everything, and when no begging on
his party was to interrupt our conversation, I sent him a
threatening message, to see what effect that would have.   The
purport of it was, that I was afraid to send men to Karague, now
I had seen his disposition to make prisoners of all who visit
him.  Here had I been kept six weeks waiting for Bombay's return
from Gani, where I only permitted him to go because I was told
the journey to and fro would only occupy from eight to ten days
at most.  Then Rumanika's men, who came here with Baraka, though
daily crying to get away, were still imprisoned here, without any
hope before them.  If I sent Msalima, he would be kept ten years
on the road.  If I went to the lake Luta Nzige, God only knows
when he would let me come back; and now, for once and for all, I
wished to sacrifice my property, and leave the countries of black
kings; for what Kamrasi had done, Mtesa had done likewise,
detaining the two men I detached on a friendly mission, which
made me fear to send any more and inquire after my guns, lest he
should seize them likewise. I would stay no longer among such
people.

Kamrasi, in answer, begged I would not be afraid; there was no
occasion for alarm; Bombay would be here shortly.  I had promised
to wait patiently for his return, and as soon as he did return, I
would be sent off without one day's delay, for I was not his
slave, that he should use violence upon me.  Rumanika's men, too,
would be allowed to go, only that the road was unsafe, and he
feared Rumanika would abuse him if any harm befell them.

29th.--To-day I met Kamrasi at his new reception-palace on this
side the Kafu--taking a Bible to explain all I fancied I knew
about the origin and present condition of the Wahuma branch of
the Ethiopians, beginning with Adam, to show how it was the king
had heard by tradition that at one time the people of his race
were half white and half black.  Then, proceeding with the Flood,
I pointed out that the Europeans remained white, retaining
Japhet's blood; whilst the Arabs are tawny, after Shem; and the
African's black, after Ham.  And, finally, to show the greatness
of the tribe, I read the 14th chapter of 2d Chronicles, in which
it is written how Zerah, the Ethiopian, with a host of a thousand
thousand, met the Jew Asa with a large army, in the valley of
Zephathah, near Mareshah; adding to it that again, at a much
later date, we find the Ethiopians battling with the Arabs in the
Somali country, and with the Arabs and Portuguese at Omwita
(Mombas)--in all of which places they have taken possession of
certain tracts of land, and left their sons to people it.

To explain the way in which the type or physical features of
people undergo great changes by interbreeding, Mtesa was
instanced as having lost nearly every feature of his Mhuma blood,
but the kings of Uganda having been produced, probably for
several generations running, of Waganda mothers.  This amused
Kamrasi greatly, and induced me to inquire how his purity of
blood was maintained--"Was the king of Unyoro chosen, as in
Uganda, haphazard by the chief men--or did the eldest son sit by
succession on the throne?"  The reply was, "The brothers fought
for it, and the best man gained the crown."

Kamrasi then began counting the leaves of the Bible, an amusement
that every negro that gets hold of a book indulges in; and,
concluding in his mind that each page or leaf represented one
year of time since the beginning of creation, continued his
labour till one quarter of the way through the book, and then
only shut it up on being told, if he desired to ascertain the
number more closely, he had better count the words.

I begged for my picture-books, which were only lent him at his
request for a few days; and then began a badgering verbal
conflict: he would not return them until I drew others like them;
he would not allow me to go to the Little Luta Nzige, west of
this, until Bombay returned, when he would send me with an army
of spears to lead the way, and my men with their guns behind to
protect the rear.  This was for the purpose of making us his
tools in his conflict with his brothers.  I complained that he
had, without consulting me, ordered away the men who had been
sent, either to fetch me back to Uganda, or else get powder from
me, although they had orders to carry out their king's desire,
under the threat of being burnt with the fire logs they carried;
and all this Kamrasi had professed to do merely out of respect
for my dignity, as I was no slave, that Mtesa should order me
about.  I argued, founding on each particular in succession, that
his conduct throughout was most unjustifiable, and anything but
friendly.  He then produced an officer, who was to escort my man
Msalima to Karague, giving him orders to collect the sixty men
required on the way; five of Rumanika's men could go with him,
but five must stop, until other Karague men came to say the road
was safe, when he would send by them the present he had prepared
for Rumanika.

Then, turning to us, he said, "Why have you not brought the
medicine-chest and the saw?  We wish to see everything you have
got, though we do not wish to rob you."  When these things came
for inspection, he coveted the saw, and discovered there were
more varieties of medicine in the chest than had been given him. 
This he was told was not the case, because the papers given him
contained mixed medicines--a little being taken from every
bottle.  "But there are no pills; why won't you give us pills? 
We have men, women, and children who require pills as well as you
do."  We were much annoyed by this dogged begging; and as he
said, "Well, if you won't give my anything, I will go," we at
once rose, hat in hand; when, regretting the hastiness of his
speech, he begged us to be seated again, and renewed his demands. 
We told him the road to Gani was the only condition on which we
would part with any more medicine; we had asked leave to go a
hundred times, and that was all we now desired.  At last he rose
and walked off in a huff; but, repenting before he reached home,
he sent us a pot of pombe, when, in return, I finished the farce
by sending him a box of pills.

30th.--I gave Msalima a letter in the Kisuahili or coast language
to convey to Rumanika, ordering all my property to be sent here,
his account of the things as they left him to be given to Msalima
to convey to the coast, while I sent him one pound of gunpowder
as a sort of agency fee.  Msalima also took a map of all the
countries we had passed, with lunar observations, and a letter to
Rigby, by which he, Baraka, and Uledi would be able to draw their
pay on arrival.

31st.--I sent Frij with a letter to the king, containing an
acknowledgment that, on the arrival of the rear property from
Karague, he would be entitled to half of everything, reserving
the other half for any person I might in future send to take them
from him.  He accepted the letter, and put it into his mzungu--
the tin box I had given him.  He said he would take every care of
the kit from the time it arrived, and would not touch his share
of it till my deputy arrived.  An inhabitant of Chopi reported
that he heard Bombay's gun fire the evening before he left home,
and was rewarded with the present of a cow.

1st.--I purchased a small kitten, Felis serval, from an Unyoro
man, who requested me to give it back to him to eat if it was
likely to die, for it is considered very good food in Unyoro.

Bombay at last arrived with Mabruki in high glee, dressed in
cotton jumpers and drawers, presents given them by Petherick's
outpost. Petherick himself was not there.  The journey to and fro
was performed in fourteen days' actual travelling, the rest of
the time being frittered away by the guides.  The jemadar of the
guard said he commanded two hundred Turks, and had orders to wait
for me, without any limit as to time, until I should arrive, when
Petherick's name would be pointed out to me cut on a tree; but as
no one in camp could read my letter, they were doubtful whether
we were the party they were looking out for.

They were all armed with elephant-guns, and had killed sixteen
elephants.  Petherick had gone down the river eight days'
journey, but was expected to return shortly.  Kamrasi would not
see Bombay immediately on his return, but sent him some pombe,
and desired an interview the following day.

2d.--I sent Bombay with a farewell present to Kamrasi, consisting
of one tent, one mosquito-curtain, one roll of bindera or red
cotton cloth, one digester pot, one saw, six copper wires, one
box of beads, containing six varieties of the best sort, and a
request to leave his country.  Much pleased with the things,
Kamrasi ordered the tent to be pitched before all his court,
pointed out to them what clever people the white people are,
making iron pots instead of earthen ones.  Covetous and never
satisfied, however, instead of returning thanks, he said he was
sure I must have more beads than those I sent him; and, instead
of granting the leave asked for, said he would think about it,
and send the Kamraviona in the evening with his answer.  This,
when it came, was anything but satisfactory; for we were required
to stop here until the king should have prepared the people on
the road for our coming, so that they might not be surprised, or
try to molest us on the way.  Kamrasi, however, returned the
books of birds and animals, requesting a picture of the king of
Uganda to be drawn for him, and gave us one pot of pombe.

3d.--I sent the picture required, and an angry message to Kamrasi
for breaking his word, as he promised us we should go without a
day's delay; and go we must, for I could neither eat nor sleep
from thinking of my home.  His only reply to this was, Bana is
always in a preposterous hurry.  He answered, that for our
gratification he had directed a dwarf called Kimenya to be sent
to us, and the Kamraviona should follow after.  Kimenya, a little
old man, less than a yard high, called on us with a walking-stick
higher than himself, made his salaam, and sat down very
composedly.  He then rose and danced, singing without invitation,
and following it up with queer antics. Lastly, he performed the
tambura, or charging-march, in imitation of Wakugnu, repeating
the same words they use, and ending by a demand for simbi, or
cowrie-shells, modestly saying, "I am a beggar, and want simbi;
if you have not 500 to spare, you must at any rate give me 400."

He then narrated his fortune in life.  Born in Chopi, he was sent
for by Kamrasi, who first gave him two women, who died; then
another, who ran away; and, finally, a distorted dwarf like
himself, whom he rejected, because he thought the propagation of
his pigmy breed would not be advantageous to society.  Bombay
then marched him back to the palace, with 500 simbi strung in
necklaces round his neck.  When these two had gone, the
Kamraviona arrived with two spears, one load of flour, and a pot
of pombe, which he requested me to accept, adding that the spears
were given as it was observed I had accepted some from the king
of Uganda; a shield was still in reserve for me, and spears would
be sent for Grant.  Then with regard to my going, Kamrasi must
beg us to have patience until he had sent messengers into Kidi,
requesting the natives there not to molest me on the way, for
they had threatened they would do so, and if they persisted, he
would send us with a force by another route via Ugungu--another
attempt to draw us off to fight against his brothers.

I stormed at this announcement as a breach of faith; said I had
given the king my only tent, my only digester, my only saw, my
only wire, my only mosquito-curtains, and my last of everything,
because he had assured me I should have to pay no more chiefs,
and he would give me the road at once.  If he did not intend now
to fulfil his promise, I begged he would take back his spears,
for I would only accept them as a farewell present.  The
Kamraviona finding me rather warm, with the usual pertinacious
duplicity of a negro, then said, "Well, let that subject drop,
and consider the present Kamrasi promised you when you gave him
the Uganga" (meaning the watch); "Kamrasi's horn is not ready
yet."  This second prevarication completely set my dander up.  If
I did not believe in his dangers of the way before, it quite
settled my opinion of the worth of his words now.  I therefore
tendered him what might be called the ultimatum to this effect.
There was no sincerity in such haggling; I would not submit to
being told lies by kings or anybody else.  He must take back the
spears, or give us the road to-morrow; and unless the Kamraviona
would tell him this and bring me an answer at once, the spears
should not remain in my house during the night.  Evidently in
alarm, the Kamraviona, with Kidgwiga and Frij in company to bear
him witness, returned to the palace, telling Kamrasi that he saw
we were in thorough earnest. He extracted a promise that Kamrasi
would have a farewell meeting with us either to-morrow or the
next day, when we should have a large escort to Petherick's
boats, and the men would be able to bring back anything that he
wanted; but he could not let us go without a parting interview,
such as we had at Uganda with Mtesa.

The deputation, delighted with their success and the manner in
which it was effected, hurried back to me at once, and said they
were so frightened themselves that they would have skulked away
to their homes and not come near me if they could not have
arranged matters to my satisfaction.  Kamrasi would not believe I
had threatened to turn out his spears until Frij testified to
their statements; and he then said, "Let Bana keep the spears and
drink the pombe, for I would not wish him to be a prisoner
against his will."  Bombay, after taking back the dwarf, met one
of N'yamasore's officers, just arrived from Uganda on some
important business, and upbraided Mtesa for not having carried
out my instructions.  The officer in turn tried to defend Mtesa's
conduct by saying he had given the deserters seventy cows and
four women, as well as orders to join us quickly; but they had
been delayed on the road, because wherever they went they
plundered, and no one liked their company.  Had we returned to
Uganda, Mtesa would have given us the road through Masai, which,
in my opinion, is nearer for us than this one.

This officer had been wishing to see us as much as we had been to
see him; but Kamrasi would not allow him to get access to us, for
fear, it was said, lest the Waganda should know where we were
hidden, and enable Mtesa to send an army to come and snatch us
away.  As the officer said he would deliver any message I might
wish to send to Uganda, I folded a visiting-card as a letter to
the queen-dowager, intimating that I wished the two men whom I
sent back to Mtesa to be forwarded on to Karague; but desired
that the remainder, who deserted their master in difficulty,
should be placed on an island of the N'yanza to live in exile
until some other Englishman should come to release them; that
their arms should be taken from them and kept in the palace.  I
said further, that should Mtesa act up to my desires, I would
then know he was my friend, and other white men would not fear to
enter Uganda; but if he acted otherwise, they would fear lest he
should imprison them, or seize their property of their men. If
these deserters escaped punishment, no white men would ever dare
trust their lives with such men again.  The officer said he
should be afraid to deliver such a message to Mtesa direct; but
he certainly would tell the queen every word of it, which would
be even more efficacious.

4th.--I bullied Kamrasi by telling him we must go with this moon,
for the benefit of its light whilst crossing the Kidi wilderness;
as if we did not reach the vessels in time for seasonable
departure down the Nile, we should have to wait another year for
their return from Khartum.  "What!" said Kamrasi, "does Bana
forget my promised appointment that I would either see him to-day
or to-morrow? I cannot do so to-day, and therefore to-morrow we
will certainly meet and bid good-bye."  The Gani men, who came
with Bombay, said they would escort us to their country,
although, as a rule, they never cross the Kidi wilderness above
once in two years, from fear of the hunting natives, who make
gave of everybody and everything they see; in other words, they
seize strangers, plunder them, and sell them as slaves.  To cross
that tract, the dry season is the best, when all the grass is
burnt down, or from the middle of December to the end of March. 
I gave them a cow, and they at once killed it, and, sitting down,
commenced eating her flesh raw, out of choice.

5th.--The Kamraviona came to inform us that the king was ready
for the great interview, where we could both speak what we had at
heart, for as yet he had only heard what our servants had to say;
and there was a supplement to the message, of the usual kind,
that he would like a present of a pencil.  The pencil was sent in
the first place, because we did not like talking about trifles
when we visited great kings.

The interview followed.  It was opened on our side by our saying
we had enjoyed his hospitality a great number of days, and wished
to go to our homes; should be have any message to send to the
great Queen of England, we should be happy to convey it.  A long
yarn then emanated from the throne.  He defended his over-
cautiousness when admitting us into Unyoro.  It was caused at
first by wicked men who did not wish us to visit him; he
subsequently saw through their representations, and now was very
pleased with us as he found us. Of course he could not tie us
down to stopping here against our wish, but, for safety's sake,
he would like us to stop a little longer, until he could send
messengers ahead, requesting the wild men in Kidi not to molest
us.  That state trick failing to frighten and stop us, he tried
another, by saying, when we departed, he hoped we would leave two
men with guns behind, to occupy our present camp, and so delude
the people into the belief that merely a party of their
followers, and not the white men themselves, had left his house,
for the purpose of spreading terror in the minds of the people we
might meet, who, not knowing the number of men behind, would
naturally conclude there was a large reserve force ready to
release us in case of necessity.

This foxy speech was too transparent to require one moment's
reflection.  In a country where men were property, the fate of
one or two left behind was obvious; and had we doubted that his
object was to get possession of them, his next words would have
sufficiently revealed it.  He said, "As you gave men to Mtesa,
why would you refuse them to me?" but was checkmated on being
told, "Should any of those men who deserted us in this country
ever reach their homes, they will all be hung for breaking their
allegiance or oath." "Well," says the king, "I have acceded to
everything you have to say; and the day after to-morrow, when I
shall have had time to collect men to go with you, and selected
the two princes you have promised to educate, we will meet again
and say good-bye; but you must give me a gun and some more
medicine, as well as the powder and ball you promised after
reaching the vessels."  This was all acquiesced in, and we wished
to take his portrait, but he would not have it done on any
consideration.  The Kamraviona and Kidgwiga followed us home, and
told Bombay the king did not wish us to leave till next moon, and
then he would like us to fight his brothers on the way. This
message, sent in such an underhand manner after the meeting,
Bombay failed to deliver, telling them he should be afraid to do
so.

6th.--The Kamraviona was sent to us with four loads of fish and a
request for ammunition, notwithstanding everything asked for
yesterday had been refused until we reached the vessels. 
"Confound Kamrasi!" was the reply; "does he think we came here to
trick kings that he doubts our words?  We came to open the road;
and, as sure as we wish it, we will send him everything that has
been promised. Why should he doubt our word more than anybody
else?  We are not accustomed to be treated in this manner, and
must beg he won't insult us any more.  Then about fighting his
brothers, we have already given answer that we never fight with
black men; and should the king persist in it, we will never take
another thing from his hands. The boys shall not go to England,
neither will any other white men come this way."  The Kamraviona
made the following answer:-- "But there are two more things the
king wishes to know about: he has asked the question before, but
forgotten the answers.  Is there any medicine for women or
children which will prevent the offspring from dying shortly
after birth?--for it is a common infirmity in this country with
some women, that all their children die before they are able to
walk, whilst others never lose a child.  The other matter of
inquiry was, What medicine will attach all subjects to their
king?-- for Kamrasi wants some of that most particularly."  I
answered, "Knowledge of good government, attended with wisdom and
justice, is all the medicine we know of; and this his boys can
best learn in England, and instruct him in when they return."

7th.--We went to meet Kamrasi at his Kafu palace to bid good-bye.
After all the huckstering and begging with which he had tormented
us, the state he chose to assume on this occasion was very
ludicrous. He sat with an air of the most solemn dignity, upon
his throne of skins, regarding us like mere slaves, and asking
what things we intended to send to him.  On being told we did not
like being repeatedly reminded of our promises, he came down a
little from his dignity, saying, "And what answer have you about
the business on the island?"--meaning the request to fight his
brothers.  That, of course, could not be listened to, as it was
against the principle of our country.  Grant's rings were then
espied, and begged for, but without success.  We told him it was
highly improper to beg for everything he saw, and if he persisted
in it, no one would ever dare to come near him again.

Then, to change the subject, we begged K'yengo's men might be
allowed to go as far as Gani with us; but no reply was given,
until the question was put again, with a request that the reason
might be told us for his not wishing it, as we saw great benefit
would be derived to Unyoro, as the Wanyamuezi instead of trading
merely with Karague and Zanzibar, would bring their ivory through
this country and barter it, thus converting Unyoro into a great
commercial country; when Kamrasi said, "We don't want any more
ivory in Unyoro; for the tusks are already as numerous as grass." 
Kidgwiga was then appointed to receive all the things we were to
send back from Gani; our departure was fixed for the 9th; and the
king walked away as coldly as he came, whilst we felt as jolly as
birds released from a cage.

Floating islands of grass were seen going down the Kafu,
reminding us of the stories told at Kaze by Musa Mzuri, of the
violent manner in which, at certain season, the N'yanza was said
to rise and rush with such velocity that islands were uprooted
and carried away.  In the evening a pot of pombe was brought,
when the man in charge, half-drunk, amused us with frantic
charges, as if he were fighting with his spear; and after
settling the supposed enemy, he delighted in tramping him under
foot, spearing him repeatedly through and through, then wiping
the blade of the spear in the grass, and finally polishing it on
this tufty head, when, with a grunt of satisfaction, he
shouldered arms and walked away a hero.

8th.--As the king seemed entirely to disregard our comfort on the
journey, we made a request for cows, butter, and coffee, in
answer to which we only got ten cows, the other things not being
procurable without delay.  Twenty-four men were appointed us to
escort us and bring back our presents from Gani, which were to
be--six carbines, with a magazine of ammunition, a large brass or
iron water-pot, a hair-brush, lucifers, a dinner-knife, and any
other things procurable that had never been seen in Unyoro.

Two orphan boys, seized by the king as slaves, were brought for
education in England; but as they were both of the common negro
breed, with nothing attractive about them, and such as no one
could love but their mothers, we rejected them, fearing lest no
English boys would care to play with them, and told Kamrasi that
his offspring only could play with our children, and unless I got
some princes of that interesting breed, no one would ever
undertake to teach children brought from this country.  The king
was very much disappointed at this announcement; said they were
his adopted children, and the only ones he could part with, for
his own boys were mere balls of fat, and too small to leave home.




                          Chapter XIX



                       The March to Madi

Sail down the Kafu--The Navigable Nile--Fishing and Sporting
Population--The Scenery on the River--An Inhospitable Governor--
Karuma Falls--Native Superstitions--Thieveries--Hospitable
Reception at Koki by Chongi.

After giving Kamrasi a sketching-stool, we dropped down the Kafu
two miles in a canoe, in order that the common people might not
see us; for the exclusive king would not allow any eyes but his
won to be indulged with the extraordinary sight of white men in
Unyoro! The palace side of the river, however, as we paddled
away, was thronged with anxious spectators amongst whom the most
conspicuous was the king's favourite nurse.  Dr K'yengo's men
were very anxious to accompany us, even telling the king, if he
would allow the road to be opened to their countrymen, all would
hongo, or pay customs-duty to him; but the close, narrow-minded
king could not be persuaded.  Bombay here told us Kamrasi at the
last moment wished to give me some women and ivory; and when told
we never accepted anything of that sort, wished to give them to
my head servants; but this being contrary to standing orders
also, he said he would smuggle them down to the boats for Bombay
in such a manner that I should not find out.

We were not expected to march again, but being anxious myself to
see more of the river, before starting, I obtained leave to go by
boat as far as the river was navigable, sending our cattle by
land. To this concession was accompanied a request for a few more
gun-caps, and liberty was given us to seize any pombe which might
be found coming on the river in boats, for the supplies to the
palace all come in this manner.  We then took boat again, an
immense canoe, and, after going a short distance, emerged from
the Kafu, and found ourselves on what at first appeared a long
lake, averaging from two hundred at first to one thousand yards
broad before the day's work was out; but this was the Nile again,
navigable in this way from Urondogani.

Both sides were fringed with the huge papyrus rush.  The left one
was low and swampy, whilst the right one--in which the Kidi
people and Wanyoro occasionally hunt--rose from the water in a
gently sloping bank, covered with trees and beautiful convolvuli,
which hung in festoons.  Floating islands, composed of rush,
grass, and ferns, were continually in motion, working their way
slowly down the stream, and proving to us that the Nile was in
full flood. On one occasion we saw hippopotami, which our men
said came to the surface because we had domestic fowls on board,
supposing them to have an antipathy to that bird.  Boats there
were, which the sailors gave chase to; but, as they had no
liquor, they were allowed to go their way, and the sailors,
instead, set to lifting baskets and taking fish from the snares
which fisherman, who live in small huts amongst the rushes, had
laid for themselves.

After arrival, as we found the boatmen wished to make off,
instead of carrying out their king's orders to take us to the
waterfall, we seized all the paddles, and kept their tongues
quiet by giving them a cow to eat.  The overland route, by which
Kidgwiga and the cattle went, was not so interesting, by all
accounts, as the river one; for they walked the whole way through
marshy ground, and crossed one drain in boats, where some savages
struggled to plunder our men of their goats.

With a great deal of difficulty, and after hours of delay, we
managed to get under way with two boats besides the original one;
and, after an hour and a half's paddling in the laziest manner
possible, the men seized two pots of pombe and pulled in to Koki,
guided by a king's messenger, who said this was one of the places
appointed by order to pick up recruits for the force which was to
take us to Gani.  We found, however, nothing but loss and
disappointment--one calf stolen, and five goats nearly so.
Fortunately, the thief who attempted to run off with the goats
was taken by my men in the act, tied with his hands painfully
tight behind his back, and left, with his face painted white,
till midnight, when his comrades stole into Bombay's hut and
released him.  After all these annoyances, the chief officer of
the place offered us a present of a goat, but was sent to the
right-about in scorn.  How could he be countenanced as a friend
when the men under him steal from us?

The big boat gave us the slip, floating away and leaving its
paddles behind.  To supply its place, we took six small boats,
turning my men into sailors, and going as we liked.  The river
still continued beautiful; but after paddling three hours we
found it bend considerably, and narrow to two hundred yards, the
average depth being from two to three fathoms.  At the fourth
hour, imagining our cattle to be far behind, we pulled in, and
walked up a well-cultivated hill to Yaragonjo's, the governor of
these parts. The guide, however, on first sighting his thorn-
fenced cluster of huts, regarding it apparently with the awe and
deference due to a palace, shrank from advancing, and merely
pointed, till he was forced on, and in the next minute we found
ourselves confronted with the heads of the establishment.  The
father of the house, surprised at our unexpected manner of
entrance--imagining, probably, we were the king's sorcerers, in
consequence of our hats, sent to fight "the brothers"--without
saying a word, quietly beckoned us to follow him out of the gate
by the same way as we came.  Preferring, however, to have a
little talk where we were, we remained.

The eldest son, a fine young man considerably above six feet
high, with large gashes on his body received in war during late
skirmishes with the refractory brothers, now came in, did the
honours, and, on hearing of the importance of his visitors,
directed us to some huts a little distance off, where we could
rest for the night, for there was no accommodation for such a
large party in the palace. The red hill we were now on, with
plantain-gardens, fine huts neatly kept, and dense grasses
covering the country, reminded us of our residence in Uganda. 
The people seemed of a decidedly sporting order, for they kept
hippopotamus-harpoons, attached to strong ropes with trimmers of
pith wood, in their huts; and, outside, trophies of their toil in
the shape of a pile of heads, consisting of those of buffalo and
hippopotami.  The women, anything but pretty, wore their mbugu
cut into two flounces, fastened with a drawing-string round the
waist; and, in place of stockings, they bound strings of small
iron beads, kept bright and shining, carefully up the leg from
the ankle to the bottom of the calf.

Kidgwiga with our cattle arrived in the morning.  A bundle of
cartridges, stolen from one of the men's pouches, which we knew
could only have been done by some comrade, was discovered by
stopping the rations of flesh.  The guilty person, to save
detection, threw it on the road, and allowed some of the natives
to pick it up.  Strange as it may appear, the only motive for
this petty theft was the hope of being able to sell the
cartridges for a trifle at Gani.  Yaragonjo brought us a present
of a goat and plantains.  He was sorry he sent us back yesterday
from his house; and invited us to change ground to another
village close by, where he would make arrangements for our
receiving other boats, as the ones we had in possession must go
back.  Presuming this to be a very fair proposition, and thinking
we would only have to walk across an elbow of land where the
river bends considerably, we gave him a return-present of beads,
and did as we were bid; but, after moving, it was obvious we had
been sold.  We had lost our former boats, and no others were near
us; therefore, feeling angry with Yaragonjo, I walked back to his
palace, taking the presented goat with me, as I knew that would
touch the savage in the most tender part; then flaring up with
the officer for treating the king's orders with contempt, as well
as his guests, by sending us into the jungles like a pack of
thieves, whose riddance from his presence was obviously his only
intent, I gave him his goat again, and said I would have nothing
more to say to him, for I should look to the king for redress.

This frightened him to such an extent that he immediately
produced another and finer goat, which he begged me to accept,
promising to convey all my traps to the next governor's, where
there would be no doubt about our getting boats.  He did not
intend to deceive us, but committed an error in not informing us
he had no boats of his own; and, to show his earnestness,
accompanied us to the camp. Here I found the missing calf taken
at Koki, and a large deputation of natives awaiting our arrival. 
They told me that the Koki governor had taken such fright in
consequence of my anger when I refused his proffered goat, that
he had traced the calf back to Kitwara, and now wished to take
Kidgwiga a prisoner to Kamrasi's for having seized five cows of
his, and a woman from another governor. As yet I had not heard of
this piece of rough justice; and, on inquiry, found out that he
had been compelled to do as he had done, because those officers,
on finding we had gone ahead in boats would not produce the
complement of men required of them by the king's orders for
escorting us to Gani; but now they sent the men, the woman and
cows could not be returned, as they had been sent overland by the
ordinary route to the ferry on the Nile.

Of course we would not listen to this reference for justice with
Kamrasi, as the woman and cows were still all alive; commended
Kidgwiga for carrying out his orders so well, and told the
officers they had merited their punishment--as how could the
affairs of government be carried on, when subordinate officers
refused immediate compliance?  The submkungu of Northern Gueni,
Kasoro, now proffered a goat and plantains, and everything was
settled for the day.

With a full complement of porters, travelling six miles through
cultivation and jungle, we reached the headquarters of governor
Kaeru, where all the porters threw down their loads and bolted,
though we were still two miles from the post.  We inquired for
the boats at once, but were told they were some distance off, and
we must wait here for the night.  Four pots of pombe were sent
us, and Kaeru thought we would be satisfied and conform.  We
suspected, however, that there was some trick at the bottom of
all; so, refusing the liquor, we said, with proper emphasis,
"Unless we are forwarded to the boats at once, and get them on
the following morning, we cannot think of receiving presents from
any one." This served our purpose, for a fresh set of porters was
found like magic, and traps, pombe, and all together, were
forwarded to the journey's end--a snug batch of huts imbedded in
large plantain cultivation surrounded by jungle, and obviously
near the river, as numerous huge harpoons, intended for striking
hippopotami, were suspended from the roof.  Kaeru here presented
us with a goat, and promised the boats in the morning.

After fighting for the boats, we still had to wait the day for
Kidgwiga and his men, who said it was all very well our pushing
ahead, indifferent as to whether men were enlisted or not, but he
had to prepare for the future also, as he could never recross the
Kidi wilderness by himself; he must have a sufficient number of
men to form his escort, and these were now grinding corn for the
journey.  Numerous visitors called on us here, and consequently
our picture-books were in great request.  We gave Kaeru some
beads.

After walking two miles to the boats, we entered the district of
Chopi, subject to Unyoro, and went down the river, keeping the
Kikunguru cone in view.  On arrival at camp, Viarwanjo, the
officer of the district, a very smart fellow, arrived with a
large escort of spearmen, presented pombe, ordered fowls to be
seized for us, and promised one boat in the morning, for he had
no more disposable, and even that one he felt anxious about lest
the men on ahead should seize it.

I gave Viarwanjo some beads, and dropped down the river in his
only wretched little canoe--he, with Grant and the traps, going
overland. I caught a fever, and so spent the night.

Here I halted to please Magamba, the governor, who is a relation
of the king.  He called in great state, presented a cow and
pombe, was much pleased with the picture-books, and wished to
feast his eyes on all the wonders in the hut.  He was very
communicative, also, as far as his limited knowledge permitted. 
He said the people are only a sub-tribe of the Madi; and the
reason why the right bank of the river is preferred to the left
for travelling is, that Rionga, who lives down the river, is
always on the look-out for Kamrasi's allies, with a view to kill
them.  Magamba also, on being questioned, told us about Ururi, a
province of Unyoro, under the jurisdiction of Kimerziri, a noted
governor, who covers his children with bead ornaments, and throws
them into the N'yanza, to prove their identity as his own true
offspring; for should they sink, it stands to reason some other
person must be their father; but should they float, then he
recovers them.  One of Kamrasi's cousins, Kaoroti, with his chief
officer, called on us, presenting five fowls as an honorarium. 
He had little to say, but begged for medicine, and when given
some in a liquid state, said his sub would like some also; then
Kidgwiga's wife, who was left behind, must have some; and as
pills were given for her, the two men must have dry medicine too,
to take home with them.  Severe drain as this was on the
medicine-chest, Magamba and his wife must have both wet and dry;
and even others put in a claim, but were told they were too
healthy to require physicking.  Many Kidi men, dressed as in the
woodcut, crossed the river to visit Kamrasi; they could not,
however, pass us without satisfying their curiosity with a look. 
Usually these men despise clothes, and never deign to put any
covering on except out of respect, when visiting Kamrasi.  Their
"sou'-wester"-shaped wigs are made of other men's hair, as the
negro hair will not grow long enough.  A message came from Ukero,
the governor-general of Chopi, to request we would not go down
the river in boats to-morrow, lest the Chopi ferrymen at the
falls should take fright at our strange appearance, paddle
precipitately across the river, hide their boats, and be seen no
more.

We started, leaving all the traps and men to follow, and made
this place in a stride, as a whisper warned me that Kamrasi's
officers, who are as thick as thieves about here, had made up
their minds to keep us each one day at his abode, and show us
"hospitality." Such was the case, for they all tried their powers
of persuasion, which failing, they took the alternative of making
my men all drunk, and sending to camp sundry pots of pombe.  The
ground on the line of march was highly cultivated, and
intersected by a deep ravine of running water, whose sundry
branches made the surface very irregular.  The sand-paper tree,
whose leaves resemble a cat's tongue in roughness, and which is
used in Uganda for polishing their clubs and spear-handles, was
conspicuous; but at the end of the journey only was there
anything of much interest to be seen. There suddenly, in a deep
ravine one hundred yards below us, the formerly placid river, up
which vessels of moderate size might steam two or three abreast,
was now changed into a turbulent torrent.  Beyond lay the land of
Kidi, a forest of mimosa trees, rising gently away from the water
in soft clouds of green. This, the governor of the place, Kija,
described as a sporting-field, where elephants, hippopotami, and
buffalo are hunted by the occupants of both sides of the river. 
The elephant is killed with a new kind of spear, with a double-
edged blade a yard long, and a handle which, weighted in any way
most easy, is pear-shaped.

With these instruments in their hands, some men climb into trees
and wait for the herd to pass, whilst others drive them under.
The hippopotami, however, are not hunted, but snared with lunda,
the common tripping-trap with spike-drop, which is placed in the
runs of this animal, described by every South African traveller,
and generally known as far as the Hametic language is spread. The
Karuma Falls, if such they may be called, are a mere sluice or
rush of water between high syenitic stones, falling in a long
slope down a ten-feet drop.  There are others of minor
importance, and one within ear-sound, down the river, said to be
very grand.

The name given to the Karuma Falls arose from the absurd belief
that Karuma, the agent or familiar of a certain great spirit,
placed the stones that break the waters in the river, and, for so
doing, was applauded by his master, who, to reward his services
by an appropriate distinction, allowed the stones to be called
Karuma. Near this is a tree which contains a spirit whose
attributes for gratifying the powers and pleasures of either men
or women who summon its influence in the form appropriate to
each, appear to be almost identical with that of Mahadeo's Ligna
in India.

20th.--We halted for the men to collect and lay in a store of
food for the passage of the Kidi wilderness.  Presents of fish,
caught in baskets, were sent us by Kija.  They were not bad
eating, though all ground animals of the lowest order.  At the
Grand Falls below this, Kidgwiga informs us, the king had the
heads of one hundred men, prisoners taken in war against Rionga,
cut off and thrown into the river.

21st and 22d.--The governor, who would not let us go until we saw
him, called on the 22d with a large retinue, attended by a
harpist, and bringing a present of one cow, two loads flour, and
three pots of pombe.  He expected a chair to sit upon, and got a
box, as at home he has a throne only a little inferior to
Kamrasi's.  He was very generous to Bombay on his former journey
to Gani; and then said he thought the white men were all flocking
this way to retake their lost country; for tradition recorded
that the Wahuma were once half-black and half-white, with half
the hair straight and the other half curly; and how was this to
be accounted for, unless the country formerly belonged to white
men with straight hair, but was subsequently taken by black men? 
We relieved his apprehensions by telling him his ancestors were
formerly all white, with straight hair, and lived in a country
beyond the salt sea, till they crossed that sea, took possession
of Abyssinia, and are now generally known by the name of Hubshies
and Gallas; but neither of these names was known to him.

On the east, beyond Kidi, he only knew of one clan of Wahuma, a
people who subsist entirely on meat and milk.  The sportsmen of
this country, like the Wanyamuezi, plant a convolvulus of
extraordinary size by the side of their huts, and pile the jaw-
bones and horns of their spoils before, as a means of bringing
good-luck. This same flower, held in the hand when a man is
searching for anything that he has lost, will certainly bring him
to the missing treasure.  In the evening, Kidgwiga, at the head
of his brave army, made one of their theatrical charges on "Bana"
with spear and shield, swearing they would never desert him on
the march, but would die to a man if it were necessary; and if
they deserted him, then might they be deprived of their heads, or
of other personal possessions not much less valuable.

Just as we were ready for crossing the river, a line of Kidi men
was descried filing through the jungle on the opposite side,
making their way for a new-moon visit to Rionga, who occasionally
leads them into battle against Ukero.  The last time they fought,
two men only were killed on Kamrasi's side, whilst nine fell on
Rionga's. There was little done besides crossing, for the last
cow was brought across as sunset--the ferrying-toll for the whole
being one cow, besides a present of beads to the head officer. 
Kidgwiga's party sacrificed two kids, one on either side the
river, flaying them with one long cut each down their breasts and
bellies.  These animals were then, spread-eagle fashion, laid on
their backs upon grass and twigs, to be steeped over by the
travellers, that their journey might be prosperous; and the spot
selected for the ordeal was chosen in deference to the Mzimu, or
spirit--a sort of wizard or ecclesiastical patriarch, whose
functions were devoted to the falls.

After a soaking night, we were kept waiting till noon for the
forty porters ordered by Kamrasi, to carry our property to the
vessels wherever they might be.  Only twenty-five men arrived,
notwithstanding the wife and one slave belonging to a local
officer, who would not supply the men required of him, were
seized and confiscated by Ukero, of Wire.  We now mustered twenty
Wanguana, twenty-five country porters, and thirty-one of
Kidgwiga's "children"--making a total, with ourselves, of
seventy-eight souls. By a late arrival a message came from
Kamrasi.  Its import was, that we must defer the march, as it was
reported the refractory brother Rionga harboured designs of
molesting us on the way, and therefore the king conceived it
prudent to clear the road by first fighting him.  Without heeding
this cunning advice, we made a short march across swamps, and
through thick jungle and long grasses, which proved anything but
pleasant--wet and labouring hard all the way.

It was a rainy day, and we had still to toil on fighting with the
grasses.  We marched up the wet margin of swamp all day, crossing
the water at a fork near the end.  The same jungle prevails on
all sides, excluding all view; and the only signs of man's
existence in these wilds lay in the meagre path, which is often
lost, and an occasional hut or two, the temporary residence of
the sporting Kidi people.

After toiling five miles through the same terrible grasses, and
crossing swamp after swamp, we were at last rewarded by a
striking view.  The jungles had thinned; we found ourselves
unexpectedly standing on the edge of a plateau, on the west of
which, for distance interminable, lay apparently a low flat
country of grass, yellowed by the sun, with a few trees or shrubs
only thinly scattered over the surface; while, from fifteen to
twenty miles in the rear, bearing south by west, stood
conspicuously the hill of Kisuga, said to be situated in Chopi,
not far from the refractory brothers.  But this view was only for
the moment; again we dived into the grasses and forced our way
along. Presently elephants were seen, also buffalo; and the
guide, to make the journey propitious, plucked a twig, denuded it
of its leaves and branches, waved it like a wand up the line of
march, muttered some unintelligible words to himself, broke it in
twain, and threw the separated bits on either side of the path.

Immediately after starting, the guide ran up on an ant-hill and
pointed out to us all the glories of the country round.  In our
rear we could see back upon Wire and the hill of Kisuga; to the
west were the same low plains of grass; east and by south, the
jungles of Kidi; and to the northward, over downs of grass, the
tops of some hills, which marked the neighbouring village of
Koki, which we were making for.  Its appearance in the distance
warned us that we were closing on the habitations of men, and we
were told that Bombay had drunk pombe there.  Then plunging
through grass again over our heads, and crossing constant swamps,
we arrived at a stream which drains all these lands to westward,
and rested a while that the men might bathe, and also that they
might set fire to the grass as a telegraph to the settlement of
Koko, to apprise the people of our advance, and be ready with
their pombe ere our arrival. Shortly after, towards the close of
the day's work, as a solitary buffalo was seen grazing by a
brook, I put a bullet through him, and allowed the savages the
pleasure of despatching him in thei