r own wild fashion with
spears.

It was a sight quite worthy of a little delay.  No sooner was it
observed that the huge beast could not retire, than, with
springing bounds, the men, all spear in hand, as if advancing on
an enemy, went top speed at him, over rise and fall alike, till,
as they neared the maddened bull, he instinctively advanced to
meet his assailants with the best charge his exhausted body could
muster up. Wind, however, failed him soon; he knew his
disadvantage, and tried to hide by plunging in the water,--the
worst policy he could have pursued, for the men from the bank
above him soon covered him with bristling spears, and gained
their victory.  Now, what was to be done with this huge carcass? 
No one could be induced to leave it. A cow was ordered as a bribe
on reaching camp; but no, the buffalo was bigger than a cow, and
must be quartered on the spot; so, to gain our object, we went
ahead and left the rear men to follow, thus saving a cow in
rations, for we required to slaughter one every day.

By dint of hard perseverance we accomplished ten miles over the
same downs of tall grass with occasional swamps.  We saw a herd
of hartebeest, and reached at night a place within easy run of
Koki in Gani.

The weather had now become fine.  At length we reached the
habitations of men--a collection of conical huts on the ridge of
a small chain of granitic hills lying north-west.  As we
approached the southern extremity of this chain, knots of naked
men, perched like monkeys on the granite blocks were anxiously
awaiting our arrival.  The guides, following the usages of the
country, instead of allowing us to mount the hill and look out
for accommodation at once, desired us to halt, and sent on a
messenger to inform Chongi, the governor-general, that we were
visitors from Kamrasi, who desired he would take care of us and
forward us to our brothers. This Mercury brought forth a hearty
welcome; for Chongi had been appointed governor by Kamrasi of
this district, which appears to have been the extreme northern
limit of the originally vast kingdom of Kittara.  All the elite
of the place, covered with war-paints, and dressed, so far as
their nakedness was covered at all, like clowns in a fair,
charging down the hill full tilt with their spears, and, after
performing their customary evolutions, mingled with our men, and
invited us up the hill, where we no sooner arrived than Chongi, a
very old man, attended by his familiar, advanced to receive us--
one holding a white hen, the other a small gourd of pombe and a
little twig.

Chongi gave us all a friendly harangue by way of greeting; and
taking the fowl by one leg, swayed it to and fro close to the
ground in front of his assembled visitors.  After this ceremony
had been also repeated by the familiar, Chongi then took the
gourd and twig, and sprinkled the contents all over us; retired
to the Uganga, or magic house--a very diminutive hut--sprinkled
pombe over it; and, finally, spreading a cow-skin under a tree,
bade us sit, and gave us a jorum of pombe, making many apologies
that he could not show us more hospitality, as famine had reduced
his stores.  What politeness in the midst of such barbarism!!! 
Nowhere had we seen such naked creatures, whose sole dress
consisted of bead, iron, or brass ornaments, with some feathers
or cowrie-beads on the head.  Even the women contented themselves
with a few fibres hung like tails before and behind.  Some of our
men who had seen the Watuta in Utambara, declared these savages
to resemble them in every particular, save one small specialty in
their costume, alluded to in the description of the Zulu Kafir's
dress.  The hair of the men was dressed in the same fantastic
fashion, and the women placed half-gourds over the baby as it
rode on its mother's back. They also, like the Kidi people, whom
they much fear, carry diminutive stools to sit upon wherever they
go.

Their habitat extends from this to the Asua river, whilst the
Madi occupy all the country west of this meridian to the Nile,
which is far beyond sight.  The villages are composed of little
conical huts of grass, on a framework of bamboo raised above low
mud walls. There are no sultans here of any consequence, each
village appointing its own chief.  The granitic hills, like those
of Unyamuezi, are extremely pretty, and clad with trees,
contrasting strangely with the grassy downs of indefinite extend
around, which give the place, when compared with the people, the
appearance of a paradise within the infernal regions.  From the
site of Koki we saw the hills behind which, according to Bombay,
Petherick was situated with his vessels; and we also saw a nearer
hill, behind which his advanced post of elephant-hunters were
waiting our arrival.

I tried to ascertain if there were any prefixes, as in the South
African dialects, by which one might determine the difference
between the people and the country; but I was assured that both
here and in the adjacent countries these people saw Chopi, Kidi,
Gani, Madi, Bari, alike for person and place, though Jo in their
language is the equivalent for Wa in South Africa, and Dano takes
the place of Mtu.  All the words and system of language were
wholly changed-- as for example, Poko poko wingi bongo, means "we
do not understand"; Mazi, "fire"; Pi, "water"; Pe, "there is
none; Bugra, "cow." In sound, the language of these people
resembles that of the Tibet Tartars.  Chongi considers himself
the greatest man in the country, and of noble descent, his great-
grandfather having been a Mhuma, born at Ururi, in Unyoro, and
appointed by the then reigning king to rule over this country,
and keep the Kidi people in check.

30th.--We halted at the earnest solicitation of Chongi, as well
as of the Chopi porters, who said they required a day to lay in
grain, as the Wichwezi, or mendicant sorcerers--for so they
thought fit to designate Petherick's elephant-hunters--had eaten
up the country all about them, and those who went before with
Bombay to visit their camp could get no food.

1st.--We halted again at the request of all parties, and much to
the delight of old Chongi, who supplied us with abundant pombe,
promised a cow, that we should not be put to any extra expense by
stopping, and said that without fail he would furnish us with
guides who knew a short cut across country, by which we might
reach the Wichwesi camp in one march, instead of going by the
circuitous route which Bombay formerly took.  The cow, however,
never came, as the old man did not intend to give his own, and
his officers refused to obey his orders in giving one of theirs.

We left Koki with difficulty, in consequence of the Chopi porters
refusing to carry any loads, leaving the burden of lifting them
on the country people, as they said, "We have endured all the
trouble and hardships of bringing these visitors through the
wilderness; and now, as they have visited you, it is your place
to help them on."  The consequence was, we had to engage fresh
porters at every village, each in turn saying he had done all the
work which with justice fell to his lot, till at last we arrived
at the borders of a jungle, where the men last engaged, feeling
tired of their work, pleaded ignorance of the direct road, and
turned off to the longer one, where villages and men were in
abundance, thus upsetting all our plans, and doubling the actual
distance.

To pass the night half-way was now imperative, as we had been the
whole day travelling without making good much ground.  From the
Gani people we had, without any visible change, mingled with the
Madi people, who dress in the same naked fashion as their
neighbours, and use bows and arrows.  Their villages were all
surrounded with bomas (fences), and the country in its general
aspect resembled that of Northern Unyamuezi.  At one place, the
good-natured simple people, as soon as we reached their village,
spread a skin, deposited a stool upon it, and placed in front two
pots of pombe. At the village where we put up, however, the women
and children of the head man at first all ran away, and the head
man himself was very shy of us, thinking we were some unearthly
creatures. He became more reconciled to us, however, when he
perceived we fed like rational beings; and, calling his family in
by midnight, presented us with pombe, and made many apologies for
having allowed us to dine without a drop of his beer, for he was
very glad to see us.




                           Chapter XX



                              Madi

Junction of the Two Hemispheres--The First Contact with Persons
Acquainted with European Habits--Interruptions and Plots-- The
Mysterious Mahamed--Native Revelries--The Plundering and Tyranny
of the Turks--The Rascalities of the Ivory Trade--Feeling for the
Nile--Taken to see a Mark left by a European--Buffalo, Eland, and
Rhinoceros Stalking--Meet Baker--Petherick's Arrival at
Gondokoro.

After receiving more pombe from the chief, and, strange to say,
hot water to wash with--for he did not know how else to show
hospitality better--we started again in the same straggling
manner as yesterday.  In two hours we reached the palace of
Piejoko, a chief of some pretensions, and were summoned to stop
and drink pombe.  In my haste to meet Petherick's expedition, I
would listen to nothing, but pushed rapidly on, despite all
entreaties to stop, both from the chief and from my porters, who,
I saw clearly, wished to do me out of another day.

Half of my men, however, did stop there, but with the other half
Grant and I went on; and, as the sun was setting, we came in
sight of what we thought was Petherick's outpost, N. lat. 3§ 10'
33", and E. long. 21§ 50' 45".  My men, as happy as we were
ourselves, now begged I would allow them to fire their guns, and
prepare the Turks for our reception.  Crack, bang, went their
carbines, and in another instant crack, bang, was heard from the
northerners' camp, when, like a swarms of bees, every height and
other conspicuous place was covered with men.  Our hearts leapt
with an excitement of joy only known to those who have escaped
from long-continued banishment among barbarians, once more to
meet with civilised people, and join old friends.  Every minute
increased this excitement.  We saw three large red flags heading
a military procession, which marched out of the camp with drums
and fifes playing.  I halted and allowed them to draw near.  When
they did so, a very black man, named Mahamed, in full Egyptian
regimentals, with a curved sword, ordered his regiment to halt,
and threw himself into my arms, endeavouring to hug and kiss me. 
Rather staggered at this unexpected manifestation of affection,
which was like a conjunction of the two hemispheres, I gave him a
squeeze in return for his hug, but raised my head above the reach
of his lips, and asked who was his master?  "Petrik," was the
reply.  "And where is Petherick now?"  "Oh, he is coming."  "How
is it you have not got English colours, then?"  "The colours are
Debono's."  "Who is Debono?"  "The same as Petrik; but come along
into my camp, and let us talk it out there;" saying which,
Mahamed ordered his regiment (a ragamuffin mixture of Nubians,
Egyptians, and slaves of all sorts, about two hundred in number)
to rightabout, and we were guided by him, whilst his men kept up
an incessant drumming and fifing, presenting arms and firing,
until we reached his huts, situated in a village kept exactly in
the same order as that of the natives.  Mahamed then gave us two
beds to sit upon, and ordered his wives to advance on their knees
and give us coffee, whilst other men brought pombe, and prepared
us a dinner of bread and honey and mutton.

A large shed was cleared for Grant and myself, and all my men
were ordered to disperse, and chum in ones and twos with
Mahamed's men; for Mahamed said, now we had come there, his work
was finished. "If that is the case," I said, "tell us your
orders; there must be some letters."  He said, "No, I have no
letters or written orders; though I have directions to take you
to Gondokoro as soon as you come.  I am Debono's Vakil, and am
glad you are come, for we are all tired of waiting for you.  Our
business has been to collect ivory whilst waiting for you."  I
said, "How is it Petherick has not come here to meet me? is he
married?"  "Yes, he is married; and both he and his wife ride
fore-and-aft on one animal at Khartum." "Well, then, where is the
tree you told Bombay you would point out to us with Petherick's
name on it?"  "Oh, that is on the way to Gondokoro.  It was not
Petherick who wrote, but some one else, who told me to look out
for your coming this way.  We don't know his name, but he said if
we pointed it out to you, you would know at once."

4th.--After spending the night as Mahamed's guest, I strolled
round the place to see what it was like, and found the Turks were
all married to the women of the country, whom they had dressed in
clothes and beads.  Their children were many, with a prospect of
more.  Temporary marriages, however, were more common than
others-- as, in addition to their slaves, they hired the
daughters of the villagers, who remained with them whilst they
were trading here, but went back to their parents when they
marched to Gondokoro. They had also many hundreds of cattle,
which it was said they had plundered from the natives, and now
used for food, or to exchange for ivory, or other purposes.  The
scenery and situation were perfect for health and beauty.  The
settlement lay at the foot of small, well-wooded granitic hills,
even prettier than the outcrops of Unyamuezi, and was intersected
by clear streams.

At noon, all the rear troops arrived with Bombay and Piejoko in
person.  This good creature had treated Bombay very handsomely on
his former journey.  He said he felt greatly disappointed at my
pushing past him yesterday, as he wished to give me a cow, but
still hoped I would go over and make friends with him.  I gave
him some beads and off he walked.  Old Chongi's "children," who
had escorted us all the way from Kamrasi's, then took some beads
and cast-off clothes for themselves and their father, and left us
in good-humour.

This reduced the expedition establishment to my men and
Kidgwiga's. With these, now, as there was no letter from
Petherick, I ordered a march for the next morning, but at once
met with opposition. Mahamed told me that there were no vessels
at Gondokoro; we must wait two months, by which time he expected
they would arrive there, and some one would come to meet him with
beads.  I said in answer, that Petherick had promised to have
boats there all the year round, so I would not wait.  "Then,"
said Mahamed, "we cannot go with you, for there is a famine at
this season at Gondokoro."  I said, "Never mind; do you give me
an interpreter, and I will go as I am." "No," said Mahamed, "that
will not do, as the Bari people are so savage, you could not get
through them with so small a force; besides which, just now there
is a stream which cannot be crossed for a month or more."

Unable to stand Mahamed's shifting devices with equanimity any
longer, I accused him of trying to trick me in the same way as
all the common savage chiefs had done wherever I went, because
they wished me to stop for their own satisfaction, quite
disregarding my wishes and interest; so I said I would not stop
there any longer I would raft over the river, and find my way
through the Bari, as I had through the rest of the African
savages.  We talked and talked, but could make nothing of it.  I
maintained that if he was commissioned to help me, he at least
could not refuse to give me a guide and interpreter; when, if I
failed in the direct route, I would try another, but go I must,
as I could not hold out any longer, being short of beads and
cows.  I had just enough, but none to spare.  He told me not to
think of such a thing, as he would give me all that was needful,
both for myself and my men; but if I would have patience, he
would collect all his officers, and the next morning would see
what their opinions were on the subject.

5th.--I found that every one of Mahamed's men was against our
going to Gondokoro.  They told me, in fact, with one voice, that
it was quite impossible; but they said, if I liked they would
furnish me guides to escort me on ten marches to a depot at the
further end of the Madi country, and if I chose to wait there
until they could collect all their ivory tusks together and join
us, we would be a united party too formidable to be resisted by
the Bari people. This offer of immediate guides I of course
accepted at once, as to keep on the move was my only desire at
that time; for my men were all drunk, and Kidgwiga's were
deserting.  Once more on the way, I did not despair of reaching
Gondokoro by myself.  In the best good-humour now, I showed
Mahamed our picture-books: and as he said he always drilled his
two hundred men every Friday, I said I would, if he liked,
command them myself.  This being agreed to, all the men turned
out in their best, and, to my surprise, they not only knew the
Turkish words of command, but manoeuvred with some show of good
training; though, as might have been expected with men of this
ragamuffin stamp, all the privates gave orders as well as their
captains.

When the review was over, I complimented Mahamed on the
efficiency of his corps, and, retiring to my hut, as I thought I
had him now in a good-humour, again discussed our plans for going
ahead the next day.  Scarcely able to look me in the face, the
humbugging scoundrel said he could not think of allowing me to go
on without him, for if any accident happened he would be blamed
for it.  At the same time, he could not move for a few days, as
he expected a party of men to arrive about the next new moon with
ivory.   My hurry he thought was uncalled for; for, as I had
spent so many days with Kamrasi, why could I not be content to do
so with him?

I was provoked beyond measure with this, as it upset all my
plans. Kidgwiga's men were deserting, and I feared I should not
be able to keep my promise to Kamrasi of sending him another
white visitor, who would perhaps do what I had left undone, when
I did not follow up the connection of the Little Luta Nzige with
the Nile. We battled away again, and then Mahamed said there was
not one man in his camp who would go with me until their crops
were cut and taken in; for whilst residing here they grew grain
for their support.  We battled again, and Mahamed at last, out of
patience himself, said, "Just look here, what a fix I am in,"
showing me a hut full of ivory.  "Who," he said, "is to carry all
this until the natives have got in their crops?"  This, I said,
so far as I was concerned, was all nonsense.  I merely had asked
him for a guide and interpreter, for go I must.  In a huff he
then absconded; and my men--those of them who were not too drunk-
-came and said to me, "For Godsake let us stop here.  Mahamed
says the road is too dangerous for us to go alone; he has
promised to carry all our loads for us if we stop; and all
Kamrasi's men are running away, because they are afraid to go
on."

6th.--Next morning I called Kidgwiga, and begged him to procure
two men as guides and interpreters.  He said he could not find
any. I then went at Mahamed again, who first said he would give
me the two men I wanted, then went off, and sent word to say he
would not be visible for three days.  This was too much for my
patience, so I ordered all my things to be tied up in marching
order, and gave out that I should leave and find out the way
myself the following morning.  Like an evil spirit stirred up, my
preparations for going no sooner were heard of than Mahamed
appeared again, and after a long and sharp contest in words, he
promised us guides if I would consent to write him a note,
testifying that my going was against his expressed desire.

This was done; but the next morning (7th), after our things were
put out for the march, all Kidgwiga's men bolted, and no guides
would take service with us.  It was now obvious that, even
supposing I succeeded in taking Kidgwiga to Gondokoro, he would
not have a sufficient escort to come back with, unless, indeed,
it happened that Englishmen might be there who might wish to
carry out my investigations by penetrating to the Little Luta
Nzige, and to pay a visit to Kamrasi.  I therefore called
Kidgwiga, and after explaining these circumstances, advised him
to go back to Kamrasi.  He was loth to leave, he said, until his
commission was fully performed; but as I thought it advisable, he
would consent.  I then gave him a double gun and ammunition, as
well as some very rich beads which I obtained from Mahamed's
stores, to take back to Kamrasi, with orders to say that, as soon
as I reached Gondokoro or Khartum, I would send another white man
to him--not by the way I had come through Kidi, but by the left
bank of the Nile: to which Kidgwiga replied, "That will do
famously, for Kamrasi will change his residence soon, and come on
the Nile this side of Rionga's palace, in order that he may cut
in between his brother and the Turks' guns."

After this, I gave a lot of rich beads to Kidgwiga for himself,
and a lot also for the senior officers at the Chopi and Kamrasi's
palaces, and sent the whole set off as happy as birds.  When
these men were gone, I tried to get up an elephant-shooting
excursion due west of this, with a view to see where the Nile
was, for I would not believe it was very far off, although no one
as yet, since I left Chopi, either would or could tell me where
the stream had gone to.

8th.  Mahamed professed to be delighted I had made up my mind to
such a scheme.  He called the heads of the villages to give me
all the information I sought for, and went with me to the top of
a high rock, from which we could see the hills I first viewed at
Chopi, sweeping round from south by east to north, which demarked
the line of the Asua river.  The Nile at that moment was, I
believed, not very far off; yet, do or say what I would,
everybody said it was fifteen marches off, and could not be
visited under a month.[FN#25] It would be necessary for me to
take thirty-six of Mahamed's men, besides all my own, to go
there, which, he said, I was welcome to, but I should have to pay
them for their services.  This was a damper at once.

I knew in my mind all these reports were false, but, rather than
be out of the way when the time came for marching, I agreed to
wait patiently, write the history of the Wahuma, and make
collections, till Mahamed was ready, trusting that I might find
some one at Gondokoro who would finish what I had left undone; or
else, after arriving there, I might go up the Nile in boats and
see for myself. The same evening I was attracted by the sound of
drums to a neighbouring village, where, by the moonlight, I found
the natives were dancing.  A more indecent or savage spectacle I
never witnessed.  The whole place was alive with naked humanity
in a state of constant motion.  Drawing near, I found that a
number of drums were beaten by men in the centre.  Next to them
was a deep ring of women, half of whom carried their babies; and
outside these again was a still deeper circle of men, some
blowing horns, but most holding their spears erect.  To the sound
of the music both these rings of the opposite sexes kept jumping
and sidling round and round the drummers, making the most
grotesque and obscene motions to one another.

9th to 14th.--Nothing of material consequence happened until the
14th, when eighty of Rionga's men brought in two slaves and
thirty tusks of ivory, as a present to Mahamed.  Of course, I
knew this was a bribe to induce Mahamed to fight with Rionga
against Kamrasi; but, counting that no affair of mine, I tried to
induce these men to give me some geographical information of the
countries they had just left.  Not one of them would come near
me, for they knew I was friends with Kamrasi; and Mahamed's men,
when they saw mine attempting to converse with them, abused them
for "prying into other men's concerns."  "These men," they said,
"are our friends, and not yours; if we choose to give them
presents of cloth and beads, and they give us a return in ivory,
what is that to you?" Mysterious Mahamed next came to me, and
begged for a blanket, as he said he was going off for a few days
to a depot where he had some ivory; and he also wanted to borrow
a musket, as one of his had been burnt.

My suspicions and even apprehensions, were now greatly excited. I
began to think he had prevailed on me to stop here, that I might
hold the place whilst he went to fight Kamrasi with Rionga's men;
so I begged him to listen to my advice, and not attempt to cross
the Nile, "else," I said, "all his guns would be taken from him,
and his passage back cut off."  At once he saw the drift of my
thought, and said he was not going towards the Nile, but on the
contrary, he was going with Rionga's men in the opposite
direction, to a place called Paira.  "If that is the case," I
said, "why do you want a gun?"  "Because there are some other
matters to settle.  I shall not be long away, and my men will
take care of you whilst I am gone." I gave him the blanket after
this, but was too suspicious of his object to lend him a gun.

15th to 20th.--I saw Mahamed march his regiment out of the place,
drums and fifes playing, colours flying, a hundred guns firing,
officers riding,--some of them on donkeys and others--yes,
actually on cows! whilst a host of the natives,  Rionga's men
included, carrying spears and bows and arrows, looked little like
a peaceful caravan of merchants, but very much resembled a band
of marauders. After this I heard they were not going to Rionga
himself, but were going to show Rionga's men the way that they
made friends with old Chongi of Koki.  In reality, Chongi had
invited Mahamed to fight against an enemy of his, in whose
territories immense stores of ivory were said to be buried, and
the people had an endless number of cattle--for they lived by
plunder, and had lifted most of old Chongi's; and this was the
service on which the expedition had set off.

21st to 31st.--I had constantly wondered, ever since I first came
here, and saw the brutal manner in which the Turks treated the
natives, that these Madi people could submit to their "Egyptian
taskmasters," and therefore was not surprised now to find them
pull down their huts and march off with the materials to a
distant site. Every day this sort of migration continued, just as
you see in the picture; and nothing more important occurred until
Christmas-day, when an armadillo was caught, and I heard from
Mahamed's head wife that the Turks had plundered and burnt down
three villages, and in all probability they would return shortly
laden with ivory. This was a true anticipation; for, on the 31st,
Mahamed came in with his triumphant army laden with ivory, and
driving in five slave-girls and thirty head of cattle.

1st to 3d.--I now wished to go on with the journey, as I could
get no true information out of the suspicious blackguards who
called themselves Turks; but Mahamed postponed it until the 5th,
by which time he said he would be able to collect all the men he
wanted to carry his ivory.  Rionga's men then departed, and
Mahamed showed some signs of getting ready by ordering one dozen
cows to be killed, the flesh of which was to be divided amongst
those villagers who would carry his ivory, and the skins to be
cut into thongs for binding the smaller tusks of ivory together
in suitable loads.

4th and 5th.--Another specimen of Turkish barbarity came under my
notice, in the head man of a village bringing a large tusk of
ivory to Mahamed, to ransom his daughter with; for she had been
seized as a slave on his last expedition, in common with others
who could not run away fast enough to save themselves from the
Turks. Fortunately for both, it was thought necessary for the
Turks to keep on good terms with the father as an influential
man; and therefore, on receiving the tusk, Mahamed gave back the
girl, and added a cow to seal their friendship.

6th to 10th.--I saw this land-pirate Mahamed take a blackmail
like a negro chief.  Some men who had fled from their village
when Mahamed's plundering party passed by them the other day,
surprised that he did not stop to sack their homes, now brought
ten large tusks of ivory to him to express the gratitude they
said they felt for his not having molested them.  Mahamed, on
finding how easy it was to get taxes in this fashion, instead of
thanking them, assumed the air of the great potentate, whose
clemency was abused, and told the poor creatures that, though
they had done well in seeking his friendship, they had not
sufficiently considered his dignity, else they would have brought
double that number of tusks, for it was impossible he could be
satisfied at so low a price.  "What," said these poor creatures,
"can we do then? for this is all we have got." "Oh," says
Mahamed, "if it is all you have got now in store, I will take
these few for the present; but when I return from Gondokoro, I
expect you will bring me just as many more.  Good-bye, and look
out for yourselves."

Tired beyond all measure with Mahamed's procrastination, as I
could not get him to start, I now started myself, much to his
disgust, and went ahead again, leaving word that I would wait for
him at the next place, provided he did not delay more than one
day.  The march led us over long rolling downs of grass, where we
saw a good many antelopes feeding; and after going ten miles, we
came, among other villages, to one named Panyoro, in which we
found it convenient to put up.  At first all the villagers,
thinking us Turks, bolted away with their cattle and what stores
they could carry; but, after finding out who we were, they
returned again, and gave us a good reception, helping us to rig
up a shed with grass, and bringing a cow and some milk for our
dinner.

12th.--To-day I went out shooting, but though I saw and fired at
a rhinoceros, as well as many varieties of antelopes, I did not
succeed in killing one head.  All my men were surprised as well
as myself; and the villagers who were escorting me in the hope of
getting flesh, were so annoyed at their disappointment, they
offered to cut my fore-finger with a spear and spit on it for
good-luck. Joining in their talk, I told them the powder must be
crooked; but, on inspecting my rifle closer, I found that the
sights had been knocked on one side a little, and this created a
general laugh at all in turn.  Going home from the shooting, I
found all the villagers bolting again with their cattle and
stores, and, on looking towards Faloro, saw a party of Turks
coming.

As well as I could I reassured the villagers, and brought them
back again, when they said to me, "Oh, what have you done?  We
were so happy yesterday when we found out who you were, but now
we see you have brought those men, all our hearts have sunk
again; for they beat us, they make us carry their loads, and they
rob us in such a manner, we know not what to do."  I told them I
would protect them if they would keep quiet; and, when the Turks
came, I told them what I had said to the head man.  They were the
vanguard of Mahamed's party, and said they had orders to march on
as far as Apuddo with me, where we must all stop for Mahamed,
who, as well as he could, was collecting men.  There was a
certain tree near Apuddo which was marked by an Englishman two
years ago, and this, Mahamed thought, would keep us amused.

The next march brought us to Paira, a collection of villages
within sight of the Nile.  It was truly ridiculous; here had we
been at Faloro so long, and yet could not make out what had
become of the Nile.  In appearance it was a noble stream, flowing
on a flat bed from west to east, and immediately beyond it were
the Jbl (hills) Kuku, rising up to a height of 2000 feet above
the river.  Still we could not make out all, until the following
day, when we made a march parallel to the Nile, and arrived at
Jaifi.

This was a collection of huts close to a deep nullah which drains
The central portions of Eastern Madi.  At this place the Turks
killed a crocodile and ate him on the spot, much to the amusement
of my men, who immediately shook their heads, laughingly, and
said, "Ewa, Allah! are these men, then, Mussulmans?  Savages in
our country don't much like a crocodile."

After crossing two nullahs, we reached Apuddo, and at once, I
went to see the tree said to have been cut by an Englishman some
time before.  There, sure enough, was a mark, something like the
letters M. I., on its bark, but not distinct enough to be
ascertained, because the bark had healed up.  In describing the
individual who had done this, the Turks said he was exactly like
myself, for he had a long beard, and a voice even much resembling
mine.  He came thus far with Mahamed from Gondokoro two years
ago, and then returned, because he was alarmed at the accounts
the people gave of the countries to the southward, and he did not
like the prospect of having to remain a whole rainy season with
Mahamed at Faloro. He knew we were endeavouring to come this way,
and directed Mahamed to point out his name if we did so.

We took up our quarters in the village as usual, but the Turks
remained outside, and carried off all the tops of the villagers'
huts to make a camp for themselves.  I rebuked them for doing so,
but was mildly told they had no huts of their own.  They carried
no pots either for cooking their dinners, and therefore took from
the villagers all that they wanted.  It was a fixed custom now,
they told us, and there was no use in our trying to struggle
against it. If the natives were wise, they would make enough to
sell; but as they would not, they must put up with their lot; for
the "government" cannot be baulked of its ivory.  Truly there
seemed to be nothing but misery here; food was so scarce the
villagers sought for wild berries and fruits; whilst the Turks
helped themselves out of their half-filled bins--a small reserve
store to last up to the far-distant harvest.  Then, to make
matters worse, all the village chiefs were at war with one
another.

At night a party of warriors walked round our village, but feared
to attack it because we were inside.  Next morning the villagers
turned out and killed two of the enemy; but the rest, whilst
retreating, sang out that they would not attempt to fight until
"the guns" were gone--after that, the villagers had better look
out for themselves. I now proposed going on if the Apina, or
chief of the village, would give me a guide; but he feared to do
so lest I should come to grief, and Mahamed would then be down
upon him.  Struggling was useless, for I had no beads to pay my
way with, and my cows were now all finished; so I took the matter
quietly, and went out foraging with the rifle.

18th and 19th.--Antelopes were numerous, but so wild I could not
get near them.  On bending round homewards, however, three
buffaloes, feeding in the distance, on the top of a roll of high
ground beyond where we stood, were observed by the natives, who
had flocked out in the hopes of getting flesh.  To stalk them, I
went up wind to near where I expected to find them; then bidding
the natives lie down, I stole along through the grass until at
last I saw three pairs of horns glistening quite close in front
of me.  Anxious lest they should take sudden fright, I gently
raised myself, wishing to fire, but I was quite puzzled; there
was no mistake about what they were; still, look from as high as
I would, I could not see their bodies. The thought never struck
me they were lying down in such open ground in the day-time; so,
as I could not go closer without driving them off, I took a shot
with my single rifle at where I judged the chest of the nearest
one ought to be, and then discovered my error.  In an instant all
three sprang on their legs and scampered off.  I began loading,
but before I had half accomplished my object, those three had
mingled with the three previously seen grazing, and all six
together came charging straight at me.  I really thought I should
now catch a toss, if I were not trampled to death; but suddenly,
as they saw me standing, whether from fear or what else I cannot
say, they changed their ferocious-looking design, swerved round,
and galloped off as fast as their legs could carry them.  This
was bad luck; but Grant made up for it the next day by killing a
very fine buck nsamma.

20th.--I went again after the herd of six buffaloes, as I thought
one was wounded, and after walking up a long sloping hill for
three miles towards the east, I found myself at once in view of
the Nile on one hand, and the long-heard-of Asua river on the
other, backed by hills even higher than the Jbl Kuku.  The bed of
the Asua seemed very large, but, being far off, was not very
distinct, nor did I care to go and see it them; for at that
moment, straight in front of me, five buffaloes, five giraffes,
two eland and sundry other antelopes, were too strong a
temptation.

The place looked like a park, and I began stalking in it, first
at the eland, as I wanted to see if they corresponded with those
I shot in Usagara; but the gawky giraffes, always in the way,
gave the alarm, and drove all but two of the buffaloes away.  At
these two I now went with my only rifle, leaving the servants and
savages behind.  They were out in the open grass feeding
composedly, so that I stole up to within forty yards of them, and
then, in a small naked patch of ground, I waited my opportunity,
and put a ball behind the shoulder of the larger one.  At the
sound of the gun, in an instant both bulls charged, but they
pulled up in the same naked ground as myself, sniffing and
tossing their horns, while looking out for their antagonist, who,
as quick as themselves, had thrown himself flat on the ground.

There we were, like three fools, for twenty minutes or so; one of
the buffaloes bleeding at the mouth and with a broken hind-leg,
for the bullet had traversed his body, and the other turning
round and round looking out for me, while I was anxiously
watching him, and by degrees loading my gun.  When ready, I tried
a shot at the sound one, but the cap snapped and nearly betrayed
me, for they both stared at the spot where I lay--the sound one
sniffing the air and tossing his horns, but the other bleeding
considerably.  Some minutes more passed in this manner, when they
allowed me to breathe freer by walking away.  I followed, of
course, but could not get a good chance; so, as the night set in,
I let them alone for the time being, to get out the following
morning.

21st and 22d.--At the place where I left off, I now sprang a
large herd of fifty or more buffaloes, and followed them for a
mile, when the wounded one, quite exhausted from the fatigue,
pulled up for a charge, and allowed me to knock him over.  This
was glorious fun for the villagers, who cut him up on the spot
and brought him home.  Of course, one half the flesh was given to
them, in return for which they brought us some small delicacies
to show their gratitude; for, as they truly remarked, until we
came to their village they never knew what it was to get a
present, or any other gift by a good thrashing.

23d.--To-day I tried the ground again, and, whilst walking up the
hill, two black rhinoceros came trotting towards us in a very
excited manner.  I did not wish to fire at them, as what few
bullets remained in my store I wished to reserve in better sport,
and therefore for the time being, let them alone.  Presently,
however, they separated; one passed in front of us, stopped to
drink in a pool, and then lay down in it.  Not heeding him, I
walked up the hill, whilst the other rhinoceros, still trotting,
suddenly turned round and came to drink within fifty yards of us,
obstructing my path; this was too much of a joke; so, to save
time, I gave him a bullet, and knocked him over.  To my surprise,
the natives who were with me would not touch his flesh, though
pressed by me to "n'yam n'yam," or to eat.  I found that they
considered him an unclean beast; so, regretting I had wasted my
bullet, I went farther on and startled some buffaloes.

Though I got very near them, however, a small antelope springing
up in front of me scared them away, and I could not get a front
shot at any of them.  Thus the whole day was thrown away, for I
had to return empty-handed.

24th to 30th.--Grant and I after this kept our pot boiling by
shooting three more antelopes; but nothing of consequence
transpired until the 30th, when Bukhet, Mahamed's factotum,
arrived with the greater part of the Turk's property.  He then
confirmed a report we had heard before, that, some days
previously, Mahamed had ordered Bukhet to go ahead and join us,
which he attempted to do; but, on arrival at Panyoro, his party
had a row with the villagers, and lost their property.  Bukhet
then returned to Mahamed and reported his defeat and losses; upon
hearing which, Mahamed at once said to him, "What do you mean by
returning to me empty-handed? go back at once and recover your
things else how can I make my report at Gondokoro?"  With these
peremptory orders Bukhet went back to Panyoro, and commenced to
attack it.  The contest did not last long; for, after three of
Bukhet's men had been wounded, he set fire to the villages,
killed fifteen of the natives, and, besides recovering his own
lost property, took one hundred cows.

31st.--To-day Mahamed came in, and commenced to arrange for the
march onwards.  This, however, was no easy matter, for the Turks
alone required six hundred porters--half that number to carry
their ivory, and the other half to carry their beds and bedding;
whilst from fifty to sixty men was the most a village had to
spare, and all the village chiefs were at enmity with one
another.  The plan adopted by Mahamed was, to summon the heads of
all the villages to come to him, failing which, he would seize
all their belongings. Then, having once got them together, he
ordered them all to furnish him with so many porters a-head,
saying he demanded it of them, for the "great government's
property" could not be left on the ground. Their separate
interests must now be sacrificed, and their feuds suspended: and
if he heard, on his return again, that one village had taken
advantage of the other's weakness caused by their employment in
his service, he would then not spare his bullets,-- so they might
look out for themselves.

Some of the Turks, having found ninty-nine eggs in a crocodile's
nest, had a grand feast.  They gave us two of the eggs, which we
ate, but did not like, for they had a highly musky flavour.

1st.--On the 1st of February we went ahead again, with Bukhet and
the first half of Mahamed's establishment, as a sufficient number
of men could not be collected at once to move all together.  In a
little while we struck on the Nile, where it was running like a
fine Highland stream between the gneiss and mica-schist hills of
Kuku, and followed it down to near where the Asua river joined
it.  For a while we sat here watching the water, which was
greatly discoloured, and floating down rushes.  The river was not
as full as it was when we crossed it at the Karuma Falls, yet,
according to Dr Khoblecher's[FN#26] account, it ought to have
been flooding just at this time: if so, we had beaten the stream. 
Here we left it again as it arched round by the west, and forded
the Asua river, a stiff rocky stream, deep enough to reach the
breast when waded, but not very broad. It did not appear to me as
if connected with Victoria N'yanza, as the waters were falling,
and not much discoloured; whereas judging from the Nile's
condition, it ought to have been rising.  No vessel ever could
have gone up it, and it bore no comparison with the Nile itself. 
The exaggerated account of its volume, however, given by the
expeditionists who were sent up the Nile by Mehemet Ali, did not
surprise us, since they had mistaken its position; for we were
now 3§ 42' north, and therefore had passed their "farthest point"
by twenty miles.

In two hours more we reached a settlement called Madi, and found
it deserted.  Every man and woman had run off into the jungles
from fright, and would not come back again.  We wished ourselves
at the end of the journey; thought anything better than this kind
of existence--living entirely at the expense of others; even the
fleecings in Usui felt less dispiriting; but it could not be
helped, for it must always exist as long as these Turks are
allowed to ride rough-shod over the people.  The Turks, however,
had their losses also; for on the way four Bari men and one Bari
slave-girl slipped off with a hundred of their plundered cattle,
and neither they nor the cattle could be found again.  Mijalwa
was here convicted of having stolen the cloth of a Turk whilst
living in his hut when he was away at the Paira plundering and
got fifty lashes to teach him better behaviour for the future.

A party of fifty men came from Labure, a station on ahead of
this, to take service as porters, knowing that at this season the
Turks always come with a large herd of plundered cattle, which
they call government property, and give in payment to the men who
carry their tusks of ivory across the Bari country.

We now marched over a rolling ground, covered in some places with
bush-jungle, in others with villages, where there were fine
trees, resembling oaks in their outward appearance; and stopping
one night at the settlement of Barwudi, arrived at Labure, where
we had to halt a day for Mahamed to collect some ivory from a
depot he had formed near by.  We heard there was another ivory
party collecting tusks at Obbo, a settlement in the country of
Panuquara, twenty miles east of this.

Next we crossed a nullah draining into the Nile, and, travelling
over more rolling ground, flanked on the right by a range of
small hills, put up at the Madi frontier station, Mugi, where we
had to halt two days to collect a full complement of porters to
traverse the Bari country, the people of which are denounced as
barbarians by the Turks, because they will not submit to be
bullied into carrying their tusks for them.  Here we felt an
earthquake.  The people would not take beads, preferring, they
said, to make necklaces and belts out of ostrich-eggs, which they
cut into the size of small shirt-buttons, and then drill a hole
through their centre to string them together.  A passenger told
us that three white men had just arrived in vessels at Gondokoro;
and the Bari people, hearing of our advance, instead of trying to
kill us with spears, had determined to poison all the water in
their country.  Mahamed now disposed of half of his herd of cows,
giving them to the chiefs of the villages in return for porters. 
These, he said, were all that belonged to the government; for the
half of all captures of cows, as well as all slaves, all goats,
and sheep, were allowed to the men as part of their pay.

When all was settled we marched, one thousand strong, to Wurungi;
and next day, by a double march, arrived at Marson, in the Bari
country.  I wished still to put up in the native villages, but
Mahamed so terrified all my men, by saying these Bari would kill
us in the night if we did not all sleep together in one large
camp, that we were obliged to submit.  The country, still flanked
on the right by hills, was undulating and very prettily wooded. 
Villages were numerous, but as we passed them the inhabitants all
fled from us, save a few men, who, bolder than the rest, would
stand and look on at us as we marched along.  Both night and
morning the Turks beat their drums; and whenever they stopped to
eat they sacked the villages.

Pushing on by degrees, stopping at noon to eat, we came again in
sight of the Nile, and put up at a station called Doro, within a
short distance of the well-known hill Rijeb, where Nile voyagers
delight in cutting their names.  The country continued the same,
but the grass was conspicuously becoming shorter and finer every
day--so much so, that my men all declared it was a sign of our
near approach to England.  After we had settled down for the
night, and the Turks had finished plundering the nearest
villages, we heard two guns fired, and immediately afterwards the
whole place was alive with Bari people.  Their drums were beaten
as a sign that they would attack us, and the war-drums of the
villages around responded by beating also.  The Turks grew
somewhat alarmed at this, and as darkness began to set in, sent
out patrols in addition to their nightly watches.  The savages
next tried to steal in on us, but were soon frightened off by the
patrols cocking their guns.  Then, seeing themselves defeated in
that tactic, they collected in hundreds in front of us, set fire
to the grass, and marched up and down, brandishing ignited grass
in their hands, howling like demons, and swearing they would
annihilate us in the morning.

We slept the night out, nevertheless, and next morning walked in
to Gondokoro, N. Lat. 4§ 54' 5", and E. long. 31§ 46' 9", where
Mahamed, after firing a salute, took us in to see a Circassian
merchant, named Kurshid Agha.  Our first inquiry was, of course,
for Petherick.  A mysterious silence ensued; we were informed
that Mr Debono was THE man we had to thank for the assistance we
had received in coming from Madi; and then in hot haste, after
warm exchanges of greeting with Mahamed's friend, who was
Debono's agent here, we took leave, to hunt up Petherick. 
Walking down the bank of the river--where a line of vessels was
moored, and on the right hand a few sheds, one-half broken down,
with a brick-built house representing the late Austrian Church
Mission establishment--we saw hurrying on towards us the form of
an Englishman, who, for one moment, we believed was the Simon
Pure; but the next moment my old friend Baker, famed for his
sports in Ceylon, seized me by the hand. A little boy of his
establishment had reported our arrival, and he in an instant came
out to welcome us.  What joy this was I can hardly tell.  We
could not talk fast enough, so overwhelmed were we both to meet
again.  Of course we were his guests in a moment, and learned
everything that could be told.  I now first heard of the death of
H.R.H. the Prince-Consort, which made me reflect on the inspiring
words he made use of, in compliment to myself, when I was
introduced to him by Sir Roderick Murchison, a short while before
leaving England.  Then there was the terrible war in America, and
other events of less startling nature, which came on us all by
surprise, as years had now passed since we had received news from
the civilised world.

Baker then said he had come up with three vessels--one dyabir and
two nuggers--fully equipped with armed men, camels, horses,
donkeys, beads, brass wire, and everything necessary for a long
journey, expressly to look after us, hoping, as he jokingly said,
to find us on the equator in some terrible fix, that he might
have the pleasure of helping us out of it.  He had heard of
Mahamed's party, and was actually waiting for him to come in,
that he might have had the use of his return-men to start with
comfortably.  Three Dutch ladies[FN#27], also, with a view to
assist us in the same way as Baker (God bless them), had come
here in a steamer, but were driven back to Khartum by sickness. 
Nobody had even dreamt for a moment it was possible we could come
through.  An Italian, named Miani, had gone farther up the Nile
than any one else; and he, it now transpired, was the man who had
cut his name on the tree by Apuddo.  But what had become of
Petherick?  He was actually trading at N'yambara, seventy miles
due west of this, though he had, since I left him in England,
raised a subscription of œ1000, from those of my friends to whom
this Journal is most respectfully dedicated as the smallest
return a grateful heart can give for their attempt to succour me,
when knowing the fate of the expedition was in great jeopardy.

Instead of coming up the Nile at once, as Petherick might have
done --so I was assured--he waited, whilst a vessel was building,
until the season had too far advanced to enable him to sail up
the river. In short, he lost the north winds at 7§ north, and
went overland to his trading depot at N'yambara.  