Previously,
however, he had sent some boats up to this, under a Vakil, who
had his orders to cross to his trading depot at N'yambara, and to
work from his trading station due south, ostensibly with a view
to look after me, though contrary to my advice before leaving him
in England, in opposition to his own proposed views of assisting
me when he applied for help to succour me, and against the
strongly-expressed opinions of every European in the same trade
as himself; for all alike said they knew he would have gone to
Faloro, and pushed south from that place, had his trade on the
west of the Nile not attracted him there.

Baker now offered me his boats to go down to Khartum, and asked
me if there was anything left undone which it might be of
importance for him to go on and complete, by survey or otherwise;
for, although he should like to go down the river with us, he did
not wish to return home without having done something to
recompense him for the trouble and expense he had incurred in
getting up his large expedition.  Of course I told him how
disappointed I had been in not getting a sight of the Little Luta
Nzige.  I described how we had seen the Nile bending west where
we crossed in Chopi, and then, after walking down the chord of an
arc described by the river, had found it again in Madi coming
from the west, whence to the south, and as far at least as Koshi,
it was said to be navigable, probably continuing to be so right
into the Little Luta Nzige.  Should this be the case, then, by
building boats in Madi above the cataracts, a vast region might
be thrown open to the improving influences of navigation. 
Further, I told Baker of my contract with Kamrasi, and of the
property I had left behind, with a view to stimulate any
enterprising man who might be found at this place to go there,
make good my promise, and, if found needful, claim my share of
the things, for the better prosecution of his own travels there.
This Baker at once undertook, though he said he did not want my
property; and I drew out suggestions for him how to proceed. He
then made friends with Mahamed, who promised to help him on to
Faloro, and I gave Mahamed and his men three carbines as an
honorarium.

I should now have gone down the Nile at once if the moon had been
in "distance" for fixing the longitude; but as it was not, I had
to remain until the 26th, living with Baker.  Kurshid Agha became
very great friends with us, and, at once making a present of a
turkey, a case of wine, and cigars, said he was only sorry for
his own sake that we had found a fellow-countryman, else he would
have had the envied honour of claiming us as his guests, and had
the pleasure of transporting us in his vessels down to Khartum.

The Rev. Mr Moorlan, and two other priests of the Austrian
Mission, were here on a visit from their station at Kich, to see
the old place again before they left for Khartum; for the
Austrian Government, discouraged by the failure of so many years,
had ordered the recall of the whole of the establishment for
these regions. It was no wonder these men were recalled; for, out
of twenty missionaries who, during the last thirteen years, had
ascended the White river for the purpose of propagating the
Gospel, thirteen had died of fever, two of dysentary, and two had
retired broken in health, yet not one convert had been made by
them.

The fact is, there was no government to control the population or
to protect property; boys came to them, looked at their pictures,
and even showed a disposition to be instructed, but there it
ended; they had no heart to study when no visible returns were to
be gained.  One day the people would examine the books, at
another throw them aside, say their stomachs were empty, and run
away to look for food.  The Bari people at Gondokoro were
described as being more tractable than those of Kich, being of a
braver and more noble nature; but they were all half-starved--not
because the country was too poor to produce, but because they
were too lazy to cultivate. What little corn they grew they
consumed before it was fully ripe, and then either sought for
fish in the river or fed on tortoises in the interior, as they
feared they might never reap what they sowed.

The missionaries never had occasion to complain of these blacks,
and to this day they would doubtless have been kindly inclined to
Europeans, had the White Nile traders not brought the devil
amongst them.  Mr Moorlan remembers the time when they brought
food for sale; but now, instead, they turn their backs upon all
foreigners, and even abuse the missionaries for having been the
precursors of such dire calamities.  The shell of the brick
church at Gondokoro, and the cross on the top of a native-built
hut in Kich, are all that will remain to bear testimony of these
Christian exertions to improve the condition of these heathens. 
Want of employment, I heard was the chief operative cause in
killing the poor missionaries; for, with no other resource left
them to kill time, they spent their days eating, drinking,
smoking, and sleeping, till they broke down their constitutions
by living too fast.

Mr Moorlan became very friendly, and said he was sorry he could
not do more for us.  His headquarters were at Kich, some way down
the river, where, as we passed, he hoped at least he might be
able to show us as much attention and hospitality as lay in his
power. Mosquitoes were said to be extremely troublesome on the
river, and my men begged for some clothes, as Petherick, they
said, had a store for me under the charge of his Vakil.  The
storekeeper was then called, and confirming the story of my men,
I begged him to give me what was my own.  It then turned out that
it was all Petherick's, but he had orders to give me on account
anything that I wanted.  This being settled, I took ninety-five
yards of the commonest stuff as a makeshift for mosquito-curtains
for my men, besides four sailor's shirts for my head men.

On the 18th, Kurshid Agha was summoned by the constant fire of
musketry, a mile or two down the river, and went off in his
vessels to the relief.  A party of his had come across from the
N'yambara country with ivory, and on the banks of the Nile, a few
miles north of this, were engaged fighting with the natives.  He
arrived just in time to settle the difficulty, and next day came
back again, having shot some of the enemy and captured their
cows.  Petherick, we heard, was in a difficulty of the same kind,
upon which I proposed to go down with Baker and Grant to succour
him; but he arrived in time, in company with his wife and Dr
James Murie, to save us the trouble, and told me he had brought a
number of men with him, carrying ivory, for the purpose now of
looking after me on the east bank of the Nile, by following its
course up to the south, though he had given up all hope of seeing
me, as a report had reached him of the desertion of my porters at
Ugogo.  He then offered me his dyabir, as well as anything else
that I wanted that lay within his power to give.  Suffice it to
say, I had, through Baker's generosity, at that very moment
enough and to spare; but at his urgent request I took a few more
yards of cloth for my men, and some cooking fat; and, though I
offered to pay for it, he declined to accept any return at my
hands.

Though I naturally felt much annoyed at Petherick--for I had
hurried away from Uganda, and separated from Grant at Kari,
solely to keep faith with him--I did not wish to break
friendship, but dined and conversed with him, when it transpired
that his Vakil, or agent, who went south from the N'yambara
station, came amongst the N'yam N'yam, and heard from them that a
large river, four days' journey more to the southward, was
flowing from east to west, beyond which lived a tribe of "women,"
who, when they wanted to marry, mingled with them in the stream
and returned; and then, again, beyond this tribe of women there
lived another tribe of women and dogs.  Now, this may all seem a
very strange story to those who do not know the negro's and
Arab's modes of expression; but to me it at once came very
natural, and, according to my view, could be interpreted thus: --
The river, running from east to west, according to the native
mode of expressing direction, could be nothing but the Little
Luta Nzige running the opposite way, according to fact and our
mode of expression.  The first tribe of women were doubtless the
Wanyoro-- called women by the naked tribes on this side because
they wear bark coverings--an effeminate appendage, in the naked
man's estimation; and the second tribe must have been in allusion
to the dog-keeping Waganda, who also would be considered women,
as they wear bark clothes.  In my turn, I told Petherick he had
missed a good thing by not going up the river to look for me;
for, had he done so, he would not only have had the best ivory-
grounds to work upon, but, by building a vessel in Madi above the
cataracts, he would have had, in my belief, some hundred miles of
navigable water to transport his merchandise.  In short, his
succouring petition was most admirably framed, had he stuck to
it, for the welfare of both of us.[FN#28]

We now received our first letters from home, and in one from Sir
Roderick Murchison I found the Royal Geographical Society had
awarded me their "founder's medal" for the discovery of the
Victoria N'yanza in 1858.




                           Conclusion



My journey down to Alexandria was not without adventure, and
carried me through scenes which, in other circumstances, it might
have been worth while to describe.  Thinking, however, that I
have already sufficiently trespassed on the patience of the
reader, I am unwilling to overload my volume with any matter that
does not directly relate to the solution of the great problem
which I went to solve.  Having now, then, after a period of
twenty-eight months, come upon the tracks of European travellers,
and met them face to face, I close my Journal, to conclude with a
few explanations, for the purpose of comparing the various
branches of the Nile with its affluences, so as to show their
respective values.

The first affluent, the Bahr el Ghazal, took us by surprise; for
instead of finding a huge lake, as described in our maps, at an
elbow of the Nile, we found only a small piece of water
resembling a duck-pond buried in a sea of rushes.  The old Nile
swept through it with majestic grace, and carried us next to the
Geraffe branch of the Sobat river, the second affluent, which we
found flowing into the Nile with a graceful semicircular sweep
and good stiff current, apparently deep, but not more than fifty
yards broad.

Next in order came the main stream of the Sobat, flowing into the
Nile in the same graceful way as the Geraffe, which in breadth it
surpassed, but in velocity of current was inferior.  The Nile by
these additions was greatly increased; still it did not assume
that noble appearance which astonished us so much, immediately
after the rainy season, when we were navigating it in canoes in
Unyoro.

I here took my last lunar observations, and made its mouth N.
lat. 9§ 20' 48", E. long. 31§ 24' 0".  The Sobat has a third
mouth farther down the Nile, which unfortunately was passed
without my knowing it; but as it is so well known to be
unimportant, the loss was not great.

Next to be treated of is the famous Blue Nile, which we found a
miserable river, even when compared with the Geraffe branch of
the Sobat.  It is very broad at the mouth, it is true, but so
shallow that our vessel with difficulty was able to come up it. 
It has all the appearance of a mountain stream, subject to great
periodical fluctuations.  I was never more disappointed that with
this river; if the White river was cut off from it, its waters
would all be absorbed before they could reach Lower Egypt.

The Atbara river, which is the last affluent, was more like the
Blue river than any of the other affluences, being decidedly a
mountain stream, which floods in the rains, but runs nearly dry
in the dry season.

I had now seen quite enough to satisfy myself that the White
river which issues from the N'yanza at the Ripon Falls, is the
true or parent Nile; for in every instance of its branching, it
carried the palm with it in the distinctest manner, viewed, as
all the streams were by me, in the dry season, which is the best
time for estimating their relative perennial values.

Since returning to England, Dr Murie, who was with me at
Gondokoro, has also come home; and he, judging from my account of
the way in which we got ahead of the flooding of the Nile between
the Karuma Falls and Gondokoro, is of opinion  that the Little
Luta Nzige must be a great backwater to the Nile, which the
waters of the Nile must have been occupied in filling during my
residence in Madi; and then about the same time that I set out
from Madi, the Little Luta Nzige having been surcharged with
water, the surplus began its march northwards just about the time
when we started in the same direction.  For myself, I believe in
this opinion, as he no sooner asked me how I could account for
the phenomenon I have already mentioned of the river appearing to
decrease in bulk as we descended it, than I instinctively
advanced his own theory.  Moreover, the same hypothesis will
answer for the sluggish flooding of the Nile down to Egypt.

I hope the reader who has followed my narrative thus far will be
interested in knowing how "my faithful children," for whose
services I had no further occasion, and whom I had taken so far
from their own country, were disposed of.  At Cairo, where we put
up in Shepherd's Hotel, I had the whole of them photographed, and
indulged them at the public concerts, tableaux vivants, etc.  By
invitation, we called on the Viceroy at his Rhoda Island palace,
and were much gratified with the reception; for, after hearing
all our stories with marked intelligence, he most graciously
offered to assist me in any other undertaking which would assist
to open up and develop the interior of Africa.

I next appointed Bombay captain of the "faithfuls," and gave him
three photographs of all the eighteen men and three more of the
four women, to give one of each to our Consuls at Suez, Aden, and
Zanzibar, by which they might be recognised.  I also gave them
increased wages, equal to three years' pay each, by orders on
Zanzibar, which was one in addition to their time of service; an
order for a grand "freeman's garden," to be purchased for them at
Zanzibar; and an order that each one should receive ten dollars
dowry-money as soon as he could find a wife.

With these letters in their hands, I made arrangements with our
Consul, Mr Drummond Hay, to frank them through Suez, Aden, and
the Seychelles to Zanzibar.

Since then, I have heard that Captain Bombay and his party missed
the Seychelles, and went on to the Mauritius, where Captain
Anson, Inspector-General of Police, kindly took charge of them
and made great lions of them.  A subscription was raised to give
them a purse of money; they were treated with tickets to the
"circus," and sent back to the Seychelles, whence they were
transported by steamer to Zanzibar, and taken in charge by our
lately-appointed Consul, Colonel Playfair, who appears to have
taken much interest in them. Further, they volunteered to go with
me again, should I attempt to cross Africa from east to west,
through the fertile zone.




                           Footnotes:



[FN#1]  The equator was crossed on the 8th February 1862.

[FN#2]  The Wahuma are treated of in Chapter IX.

[FN#3]  The list of my fauna collection will be found in an early
Number of the "Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London."

[FN#4]  Captain Burton, on receiving his gold medal at the hands
of Sir Roderick I. Murchison, said, "You have alluded, sir, to
the success of the last expedition.  Justice compels me to state
the circumstances under which it attained that success.  To
Captain Speke are due those geographical results to which you
have alluded in such flattering terms.  Whilst I undertook the
history and ethnography, the languages, and the peculiarity of
the people, to Captain Speke fell the arduous task of delineating
an exact topography, and of laying down our positions by
astronomical observations--a labour to which, at times, even the
undaunted Livingstone found himself unequal."

[FN#5]  Vol. iii. of A. D. 1801.

[FN#6]  It was such an attack as I had on my former journey; but
while mine ceased to trouble me after the first year, his kept
recurring every fortnight until the journey ended.

[FN#7]  It may be as well to remark here, that the figures both
in latitude and longitude, representing the position of Kaze,
computed by Mr Dunkin, accord with what appeared in Blackwood's
Magazine, computed by myself, and in the R. G. S. Journal Map,
computed by Captain George.

This applies also to the position of Ujiji; at any rate, the
practical differences are so trifling that it would require a
microscope to detect them on the map.

[FN#8]  The Jub is the largest river known to the Zanzibar Arabs.
It debouches on the east coast north of Zanzibar, close under the
equator.

[FN#9]  The two first gold watches were given away at Zanzibar.

[FN#10]  If one asked the name of a tree, and it happened to be
the kind from which this cloth was made, the answer would be
"mbugu." If, again, the question was as to the bark, the same
answer; and the same if one saw the shirt, and asked what it was. 
Hence I could not determine whether the word had been originally
the name of the tree, of its bark, or of the article made from
the bark, though I am inclined to think it is the bark, as there
are many varieties of these trees, which, being besides being
called mbugu, had their own particular names.

[FN#11]  Rumanika's present.--One block-tin box, one Raglan coat,
five yards scarlet broadcloth, two coils copper wire, a hundred
large blue egg-beads, five bundles best variegated beads, three
bundles minute beads--pink, blue, and white.

[FN#12] Nnanaji's present.--One deole or gold-embroidered silk,
two coils copper wire, fifty large blue egg-beads, five bundles
best variegated beads, three bundles minute beads--pink, blue and
white.

[FN#13]  Since named by Dr P. L. Sclater "Tragelaphus Spekii."
These nzoe have been drawn by Mr Wolf, from specimens brought
home by myself.

[FN#14]  Round arm, 1 ft. 11 in.; chest, 4 ft. 4 in.; thigh, 2
ft. 7 in.; calf, 1 ft. 8 in.; height, 5 ft. 8 in.

[FN#15]  I.e. Dead Locust Lake,--Luta, dead--Nzige, locust.

[FN#16]  In 'Blackwood's Magazine' for August 1859.

[FN#17]  See p. 211.

[FN#18]  1 block-tin box, 4 rich silk cloths, 1 rifle
(Whitworth's), 1 gold chronometer, 1 revolver pistol, 3 rifled
carbines, 3 sword-bayonets, 1 box ammunition, 1 box bullets, 1
box gun-caps, 1 telescope, 1 iron chair, 10 bundles best beads, 1
set of table-knives, spoons, and forks.

[FN#19]  The straight road down the Nile through Unyoro no one
dares allude to at this time, as the two kings were always
fighting.

[FN#20]  Some say a group of forty islands compose Sese.

[FN#21]  Named by Dr P. L. Sclater, Cosmetornis Spekii.  The
seventh pen feathers are double the length of the ordinaries, the
eighth double that of the seventh, and the ninth 20 inches long. 
Bombay says the same bird is found in Uhiyow.

[FN#22]  It is questionable whether or not this word is a
corruption of Bahr (sea of) Ingo.

[FN#23] This obviously was an allusion to the way in which the
first king of Uganda was countenanced by the great king of
Kittara, according to the tradition given in Chapter IX.

[FN#24] 1 double rifle, 1 block-tin box, 1 red blanket, 1 brown
do., 10 copper wire, 4 socks full of different-coloured minute
beads, 2 socks full of blue and white pigeon eggs, 1 Rodgers's
pen-knife, 2 books, 1 elastic circle, 1 red handkerchief, 1 bag
gun-caps, 1 pair scissors, 1 pomatum-pot, 1 quart bottle, 1
powder flask, 7 lb. powder, 1 dressing-case, 1 blacking-box, 1
brass lock and key, 4 brass handles, 8 brass sockets, 7 chintz, 7
binders, 1 red bag, 1 pair glass spectacles, 1 lucifer-box.

[FN#25] It will appear shortly that is was actually not more than
two marches to the northward of Faloro.

[FN#26] Dr Khoblecher, the founder of the Austrian Church Mission
Establishment of Gondokoro, ascertained that the Nile reached its
lowest level there in the middle of January.

[FN#27] The Baroness Miss A. van Capellan, and Mrs and Miss
Tinne.

[FN#28] See Petherick's succouring petition, addressed to the
Right Hon. Lord Ashburton, President of the Royal Geographical
Society, in the Proceedings of that Society, date 10th June 1860.










This etext was produced by Donald Lainson, charlie@idirect.com.





DENNISON GRANT

A Novel of To-day


by ROBERT STEAD




CHAPTER I


"Chuck at the Y.D. to-night, and a bed under the shingles," shouted
Transley, waving to the procession to be off.

Linder, foreman and head teamster, straightened up from the half
load of new hay in which he had been awaiting the final word,
tightened the lines, made an unique sound in his throat, and the
horses pressed their shoulders into the collars.  Linder glanced
back to see each wagon or implement take up the slack with a jerk
like the cars of a freight train; the cushioned rumble of wagon
wheels on the soft earth, and the noisy chatter of the steel teeth
of the hay-rakes came up from the rear.  Transley's "outfit" was
under way.

Transley was a contractor; a master of men and of circumstances.
Six weeks before, the suspension of a grading order had left him
high and dry, with a dozen men and as many teams on his hands and
hired for the season.  Transley galloped all that night into the
foothills; when he returned next evening he had a contract with the
Y.D. to cut all the hay from the ranch buildings to The Forks.  By
some deft touch of those financial strings on which he was one day
to become so skilled a player Transley converted his dump scrapers
into mowing machines, and three days later his outfit was at work
in the upper reaches of the Y.D.

The contract had been decidedly profitable.  Not an hour of broken
weather had interrupted the operations, and to-day, with two
thousand tons of hay in stack, Transley was moving down to the
headquarters of the Y.D.  The trail lay along a broad valley,
warded on either side by ranges of foothills; hills which in any
other country would have been dignified by the name of mountains.
From their summits the grey-green up-tilted limestone protruded,
whipped clean of soil by the chinooks of centuries.  Here and there
on their northern slopes hung a beard of scrub timber; sharp
gulleys cut into their fastnesses to bring down the turbulent
waters of their snows.

Some miles to the left of the trail lay the bed of the Y.D.,
fringed with poplar and cottonwood and occasional dark green
splashes of spruce.  Beyond the bed of the Y.D., beyond the
foothills that looked down upon it, hung the mountains themselves,
their giant crests pitched like mighty tents drowsing placidly
between earth and heaven.  Now their four o'clock veil of blue-
purple mist lay filmed about their shoulders, but later they would
stand out in bold silhouette cutting into the twilight sky.
Everywhere was the soft smell of new-mown hay; everywhere the
silences of the eternal, broken only by the muffled noises of
Transley's outfit trailing down to the Y.D.

Linder, foreman and head teamster, cushioned his shoulders against
his half load of hay and contemplated the scene with amiable
satisfaction.  The hay fields of the foothills had been a pleasant
change from the railway grades of the plains below.  Men and horses
had fattened and grown content, and the foreman had reason to know
that Transley's bank account had profited by the sudden shift in
his operations.  Linder felt in his pocket for pipe and matches;
then, with a frown, withdrew his fingers.  He himself had laid down
the law that there must be no smoking in the hay fields.  A
carelessly dropped match might in an hour nullify all their labor.

Linder's frown had scarce vanished when hoof-beats pounded by the
side of his wagon, and a rider, throwing himself lightly from his
horse, dropped beside him in the hay.

"Thought I'd ride with you a spell, Lin.  That Pete-horse acts like
he was goin' sore on the off front foot.  Chuck at the Y.D. to-night?"

"That's what Transley says, George, and he knows."

"Ever et at the Y.D?"

"Nope."

"Know old Y.D?"

"Only to know his name is good on a cheque, and they say he still
throws a good rope."

George wriggled to a more comfortable position in the hay.  He had
a feeling that he was approaching a delicate subject with
consummate skill.  After a considerable silence he continued--

"They say that's quite a girl old Y.D.'s got."

"Oh," said Linder, slowly.  The occasion of the soreness in that
Pete-horse's off front foot was becoming apparent.

"You better stick to Pete," Linder continued.  "Women is most
uncertain critters."

"Don't I know it?" chuckled George, poking the foreman's ribs
companionably with his elbow.  "Don't I know it?" he repeated, as
his mind apparently ran back over some reminiscence that verified
Linder's remark.  It was evident from the pleasant grimaces of
George's face that whatever he had suffered from the uncertain sex
was forgiven.

"Say, Lin," he resumed after another pause, and this time in a more
confidential tone, "do you s'pose Transley's got a notion that
way?"

"Shouldn't wonder.  Transley always knows what he's doing, and why.
Y.D. must be worth a million or so, and the girl is all he's got to
leave it to.  Besides all that, no doubt she's well worth having on
her own account."

"Well, I'm sorry for the boss," George replied, with great
soberness.  "I alus hate to disappoint the boss."

"Huh!" said Linder.  He knew George Drazk too well for further
comment.  After his unlimited pride in and devotion to his horse,
George gave his heart unreservedly to womankind.  He suffered from
no cramping niceness in his devotions; that would have limited the
play of his passion; to him all women were alike--or nearly so.
And no number of rebuffs could convince George that he was
unpopular with the objects of his democratic affections.  Such a
conclusion was, to him, too absurd to be entertained, no matter how
many experiences might support it.  If opportunity offered he
doubtless would propose to Y.D.'s daughter that very night--and get
a boxed ear for his pains.

The Y.D. creek had crossed its valley, shouldering close against
the base of the foothills to the right.  Here the current had
created a precipitous cutbank, and to avoid it and the stream the
trail wound over the side of the hill.  As they crested a corner
the silver ribbon of the Y.D. was unravelled before them, and half
a dozen miles down its course the ranch buildings lay clustered in
a grove of cottonwoods and evergreens.  All the great valley lay
warm and pulsating in a flood of yellow sunshine; the very earth
seemed amorous and content in the embrace of sun and sky.  The
majesty of the view seized even the unpoetic souls of Linder and
Drazk, and because they had no other means of expression they swore
vaguely and relapsed into silence.

Hoof-beats again sounded by the wagon side.  It was Transley.

"Oh, here you are, Drazk.  How long do you reckon it would take you
to ride down to the Y.D. on that Pete-horse?"  Transley was a
leader of men.

Drazk's eyes sparkled at the subtle compliment to his horse.

"I tell you, Boss," he said, "if there's any jackrabbits in the
road they'll get tramped on."

"I bet they will," said Transley, genially.  "Well, you just slide
down and tell Y.D. we're coming in.  She's going to be later than I
figured, but I can't hurry the work horses.  You know that, Drazk."

"Sure I do, Boss," said Drazk, springing into his saddle.  "Just
watch me lose myself in the dust."  Then, to himself, "Here's where
I beat the boss to it."

The sun had fallen behind the mountains, the valley was filled with
shadow, the afterglow, mauve and purple and copper, was playing far
up the sky when Transley's outfit reached the Y.D. corrals.  George
Drazk had opened the gate and waited beside it.

"Y.D. wants you an' Linder to eat with him at the house," he said
as Transley halted beside him.  "The rest of us eat in the bunk-
house."  There was something strangely modest in Drazk's manner.

"Had yours handed to you already?" Linder managed to banter in a
low voice as they swung through the gate.

"Hell!" protested Mr. Drazk.  "A fellow that ain't a boss or a
foreman don't get a look-in.  Never even seen her. . . .  Come, you
Pete-horse!"  It was evident George had gone back to his first
love.

The wagons drew up in the yard, and there was a fine jingle of
harness as the teamsters quickly unhitched.  Y.D. himself
approached through the dusk; his large frame and confident bearing
were unmistakable even in that group of confident, vigorous men.

"Glad to see you, Transley," he said cordially.  "You done well out
there.  'So, Linder!  You made a good job of it.  Come up to the
house--I reckon the Missus has supper waitin'.  We'll find a room
for you up there, too; it's different from bein' under canvas."

So saying, and turning the welfare of the men and the horses over
to his foreman, the rancher led Transley and Linder along a path
through a grove of cottonwoods, across a footbridge where from
underneath came the babble of water, to "the house," marked by a
yellow light which poured through the windows and lost itself in
the shadow of the trees.

The nucleus of the house was the log cabin where Y.D. and his wife
had lived in their first married years.  With the passage of time
additions had been built to every side which offered a point of
contact, but the log cabin still remained the family centre, and
into it Transley and Linder were immediately admitted.  The poplar
floor had long since worn thin, save at the knots, and had been
covered with edge-grained fir, but otherwise the cabin stood as it
had for twenty years, the white-washed logs glowing in the light of
two bracket lamps and the reflections from a wood fire which burned
merrily in the stove.  The skins of a grizzly bear and a timber
wolf lay on the floor, and two moose heads looked down from
opposite ends of the room.  On the walls hung other trophies won by
Y.D.'s rifle, along with hand-made bits of harness, lariats, and
other insignia of the ranchman's trade.

The rancher took his guests' hats, and motioned each to a seat.
"Mother," he said, directing his voice into an adjoining room,
"here's the boys."

In a moment "Mother" appeared drying her hands.  In her appearance
were courage, resourcefulness, energy,--fit mate for the man who
had made the Y.D. known in every big cattle market of the country.
As Linder's eye caught her and her husband in the same glance his
mind involuntarily leapt to the suggestion of what the offspring of
such a pair must be.  The men of the cattle country have a proper
appreciation of heredity. . . .

"My wife--Mr. Transley, Mr. Linder," said the rancher, with a
courtliness which sat strangely on his otherwise rough-and-ready
speech.  "I been tellin' her the fine job you boys has made in the
hay fields, an' I reckon she's got a bite of supper waitin' you."

"Y.D. has been full of your praises," said the woman.  There was a
touch of culture in her manner as she received them, which Y.D.'s
hospitality did not disclose.

She led them into another room, where a table was set for five.
Linder experienced a tang of happy excitement as he noted the
number.  Linder allowed himself no foolishness about women, but, as
he sometimes sagely remarked to George Drazk, you never can tell
what might happen.  He shot a quick glance at Transley, but the
contractor's face gave no sign.  Even as he looked Linder thought
what an able face it was.  Transley was not more than twenty-six,
but forcefulness, assertion, ability, stood in every line of his
clean-cut features.  He was such a man as to capture at a blow the
heart of old Y.D., perhaps of Y.D.'s daughter.

"Where's Zen?" demanded the rancher.

"She'll be here presently," his wife replied.  "We don't have Mr.
Transley and Mr. Linder every night, you know," she added, with a
smile.

"Dolling up," thought Linder.  "Trust a woman never to miss a bet."

But at that moment a door opened, and the girl appeared.  She did
not burst upon them, as Linder had half expected; she slipped
quietly and gracefully into their presence.  She was dressed in
black, in a costume which did not too much conceal the charm of her
figure, and the nut-brown lustre of her face and hair played
against the sober background of her dress with an effect that was
almost dazzling.

"My daughter, Zen," said Y.D.  "Mr. Transley, Mr. Linder."

She shook hands frankly, first with Transley, then with Linder, as
had been the order of the introduction.  In her manner was neither
the shyness which sometimes marks the women of remote settlements,
nor the boldness so readily bred of outdoor life.  She gave the
impression of one who has herself, and the situation, in hand.

"We're always glad to have guests at the Y.D." she was saying.  "We
live so far from everywhere."

Linder thought that a strange peg on which to hang their welcome.
But she was continuing--

"And you have been so successful, haven't you?  You have made quite
a hit with Dad."

"How about Dad's daughter?" asked Transley.  Transley had a manner
of direct and forceful action.  These were his first words to her.
Linder would not have dared be so precipitate.

"Perhaps," thought Linder to himself, as he turned the incident
over in his mind, "perhaps that is why Transley is boss, and I'm
just foreman."  The young woman's behavior seemed to support that
conclusion.  She did not answer Transley's question, but she gave
no evidence of displeasure.

"You boys must be hungry," Y.D. was saying.  "Pile in."

The rancher and his wife sat at the ends of the table; Transley on
the side at Y.D.'s right; Linder at Transley's right.  In the
better light Linder noted Y.D.'s face.  It was the face of a man of
fifty, possibly sixty.  Life in the open plays strange tricks with
the appearance.  Some men it ages before their time; others seem to
tap a spring of perpetual youth.  Save for the grey moustache and
the puckerings about the eyes Y.D.'s was still a young man's face.
Then, as the rancher turned his head, Linder noted a long scar, as
of a burn, almost grown over in the right cheek. . . .  Across the
table from them sat the girl, impartially dividing her position
between the two.

A Chinese boy served soup, and the rancher set the example by
"piling in" without formality.  Eight hours in the open air between
meals is a powerful deterrent of table small-talk.  Then followed a
huge joint of beef, from which Y.D. cut generous slices with swift
and dexterous strokes of a great knife, and the Chinese boy added
the vegetables from a side table.  As the meat disappeared the call
of appetite became less insistent.

"She's been a great summer, ain't she?" said the rancher, laying
down his knife and fork and lifting the carver.  "Transley, some
more meat?  Pshaw, you ain't et enough for a chicken.  Linder?
That's right, pass up your plate.  Powerful dry, though.  That's
only a small bit; here's a better slice here.  Dry summers
gen'rally mean open winters, but you can't never tell.  Zen, how
'bout you?  Old Y.D.'s been too long on the job to take chances.
Mother?  How much did you say, Transley?  About two thousand tons?
Not enough.  Don't care if I do,"--helping himself to another piece
of beef.

"I think you'll find two thousand tons, good hay and good
measurement," said Transley.

"I'm sure of it," rejoined his host, generously.  "I'm carryin'
more steers than usual, and'll maybe run in a bunch of doggies from
Manitoba to boot.  I got to have more hay."

So the meal progressed, the rancher furnishing both the hospitality
and the conversation.  Transley occasionally broke in to give
assent to some remark, but his interruption was quite unnecessary.
It was Y.D.'s practice to take assent for granted.  Once or twice
the women interjected a lead to a different subject of conversation
in which their words would have carried greater authority, but Y.D.
instantly swung it back to the all-absorbing topic of hay.

The Chinese boy served a pudding of some sort, and presently the
meal was ended.

"She's been a dry summer--powerful dry," said the rancher, with a
wink at his guests.  "Zen, I think there's a bit of gopher poison
in there yet, ain't there?"

The girl left the room without remark, returning shortly with a jug
and glasses, which she placed before her father.

"I suppose you wear a man's size, Transley," he said, pouring out a
big drink of brown liquor, despite Transley's deprecating hand.
"Linder, how many fingers?  Two?  Well, we'll throw in the thumb.
Y.D?  If you please, just a little snifter.  All set?"

The rancher rose to his feet, and the company followed his example.

"Here's ho!--and more hay," he said, genially.

"Ho!" said Linder.

"The daughter of the Y.D!" said Transley, looking across the table
at the girl.  She met his eyes full; then, with a gleam of white
teeth, she raised an empty glass and clinked it against his.

The men drained their glasses and re-seated themselves, but the
women remained standing.

"Perhaps you will excuse us now," said the rancher's wife.  "You
will wish to talk over business.  Y.D. will show you upstairs, and
we will expect you to be with us for breakfast."

With a bow she left the room, followed by her daughter.  Linder had
a sense of being unsatisfied; it was as though a ravishing meal has
been placed before a hungry man, and only its aroma had reached his
senses when it had been taken away.  Well, it provoked the appetite--

The rancher re-filled the glasses, but Transley left his untouched,
and Linder did the same.  There were business matters to discuss,
and it was no fair contest to discuss business in the course of a
drinking bout with an old stager like Y.D.

"I got to have another thousand tons," the rancher was saying.
"Can't take chances on any less, and I want you boys to put it up
for me."

"Suits me," said Transley, "if you'll show me where to get the
hay."

"You know the South Y.D?"

"Never been on it."

"Well, it's a branch of the Y.D. which runs south-east from The
Forks.  Guess it got its name from me, because I built my first
cabin at The Forks.  That was about the time you was on a milk
diet, Transley, and us old-timers had all outdoors to play with.
You see, the Y.D. is a cantank'rous stream, like its godfather.  At
The Forks you'd nat'rally suppose is where two branches joined, an'
jogged on henceforth in double harness.  Well, that ain't it at
all.  This crick has modern ideas, an' at The Forks it divides
itself into two, an' she hikes for the Gulf o' Mexico an' him for
Hudson's Bay.  As I was sayin', I built my first cabin at The
Forks--a sort o' peek-a-boo cabin it was, where the wolves usta
come an' look in at nights.  Well, I usta look out through the same
holes.  I had the advantage o' usin' language, an' I reckon we was
about equal scared.  There was no wife or kid in those days."

The rancher paused, took a long draw on his pipe, and his eyes
glowed with the light of old recollections.

"Well, as I was sayin'," he continued presently, "folks got to
callin' the stream the Y.D., after me.  That's what you get for
bein' first on the ground--a monument for ever an ever.  This bein'
the main stream got the name proper, an' the other branch bein'
smallest an' running kind o' south nat'rally got called the South
Y.D.  I run stock in both valleys when I was at The Forks, but not
much since I came down here.  Well, there's maybe a thousand tons
o' hay over in the South Y.D., an' you boys better trail over there
to-morrow an' pitch into it--that is, if you're satisfied with the
price I'm payin' you."

"The price is all right," said Transley, "and we'll hit the trail
at sun-up.  There'll be no trouble--no confliction of interests, I
mean?"

"Whose interests?" demanded the rancher, beligerently.  "Ain't I
the father of the Y.D?  Ain't the whole valley named for me?  When
it comes to interests--"

"Of course," Transley agreed, "but I just wanted to know how things
stood in case we ran up against something.  It's not like the old
days, when a rancher would rather lose twenty-five per cent. of his
stock over winter than bother putting up hay.  Hay land is getting
to be worth money, and I just want to know where we stand."

"Quite proper," said Y.D., "quite proper.  An' now the matter's
under discussion, I'll jus' show you my hand.  There's a fellow
named Landson down the valley of the South Y.D. that's been
flirtin' with that hay meadow for years, but he ain't got no claim
to it.  I was first on the ground an' I cut it whenever I feel like
it an' I'm goin' to go on cuttin' it.  If anybody comes out raisin'
trouble, you just shoo 'em off, an' go on cuttin' that hay, spite
o' hell an' high water.  Y.D.'ll stand behind you."

"Thanks," said Transley.  "That's what I wanted to know."



CHAPTER II


The rancher had ridden into the Canadian plains country from below
"the line" long before barbed wire had become a menace in cattle-
land.  From Pincher Creek to Maple Creek, and far beyond, the
plains lay unbroken save by the deep canyons where, through the
process of ages, mountain streams had worn their beds down to
gravel bottoms, and by the occasional trail which wandered through
the wilderness like some thousand-mile lariat carelessly dropped
from the hand of the Master Plainsman.  Here and there, where the
cutbanks of the river Canyons widened out into sloping valleys,
affording possible access to the deep-lying streams, some ranchman
had established his headquarters, and his red-roofed, whitewashed
buildings flashed back the hot rays which fell from an opalescent
heaven.  At some of the more important fords trading posts had come
into being, whither the ranchmen journeyed twice a year for
groceries, clothing, kerosene, and other liquids handled as
surreptitiously as the vigilance of the Mounted Police might
suggest.  The virgin prairie, with her strange, subtle facility for
entangling the hearts of men, lay undefiled by the mercenary
plowshare; unprostituted by the commercialism of the days that were
to be.

Into such a country Y.D. had ridden from the South, trailing his
little bunch of scrub heifers, in search of grass and water and, it
may be, of a new environment.  Up through the Milk River country;
across the Belly and the Old Man; up and down the valley of the
Little Bow, and across the plains as far as the Big Bow he rode in
search of the essentials of a ranch headquarters.  The first of
these is water, the second grass, the third fuel, the fourth
shelter.  Grass there was everywhere; a fine, short, hairy crop
which has the peculiar quality of self-curing in the autumn
sunshine and so furnishing a natural, uncut hay for the herds in
the winter months.  Water there was only where the mountain streams
plowed their canyons through the deep subsoil, or at little lakes
of surface drainage, or, at rare intervals, at points where pure
springs broke forth from the hillsides.  Along the river banks
dark, crumbling seams exposed coal resources which solved all
questions of fuel, and fringes of cottonwood and poplar afforded
rough but satisfactory building material.  As the rancher sat on
his horse on a little knoll which overlooked a landscape leading
down on one side to a sheltering bluff by the river, and on the
other losing itself on the rim of the heavens, no fairer prospect
surely could have met his eye.

And yet he was not entirely satisfied.  He was looking for no
temporary location, but for a spot where he might drive his claim-
stakes deep.  That prairie, which stretched under the hot sunshine
unbroken to the rim of heaven; that brown grass glowing with an
almost phosphorescent light as it curled close to the mother sod;--
a careless match, a cigar stub, a bit of gun-wadding, and in an
afternoon a million acres of pasture land would carry not enough
foliage to feed a gopher.

Y.D. turned in his saddle.  Along the far western sky hung the
purple draperies of the Rockies.  For fifty miles eastward from the
mighty range lay the country of the foothills, its great valleys
lost to the vision which leapt only from summit to summit.  In the
clear air the peaks themselves seemed not a dozen miles away, but
Y.D. had not ridden cactus, sagebrush and prairie from the Rio
Grande to the St. Mary's for twenty years to be deceived by a so
transparent illusion.  Far over the plains his eye could trace the
dark outline of a trail leading mountainward.

The heifers drowsed lazily in the brown grass.  Y.D., shading his
eyes the better with his hand, gazed long and thoughtfully at the
purple range.  Then he spat decisively over his horse's shoulder
and made a strange "cluck" in his throat.  The knowing animal at
once set out on a trot to stir the lazy heifers into movement, and
presently they were trailing slowly up into the foothill country.

Far up, where the trail ahead apparently dropped over the end of
the world, a horse and rider hove in view.  They came on leisurely,
and half an hour elapsed before they met the rancher trailing west.

The stranger was a rancher of fifty, wind-whipped and weather-
beaten of countenance.  The iron grey of his hair and moustache
suggested the iron of the man himself; iron of figure, of muscle,
of will.

"'Day," he said, affably, coming to a halt a few feet from Y.D.
"Trailing into the foothills?"

Y.D. lolled in his saddle.  His attitude did not invite conversation,
and, on the other hand, intimated no desire to avoid it.

"Maybe," he said, noncommittally.  Then, relaxing somewhat,--"Any
water farther up?"

"About eight miles.  Sundown should see you there, and there's a
decent spot to camp.  You're a stranger here?"  The older man was
evidently puzzling over the big "Y.D." branded on the ribs of the
little herd.

"It's a big country," Y.D. answered.  "It's a plumb big country,
for sure, an' I guess a man can be a stranger in some corners of
it, can't he?"

Y.D. began to resent the other man's close scrutiny of his brand.

"Well, what's wrong with it?" he demanded.

"Oh, nothing.  No offense.  I just wondered what 'Y.D.' might stand
for."

"Might stand for Yankee devil," said Y.D., with a none-of-your-
business curl of his lip.  But he had carried his curtness too far,
and was not prepared for the quick retort.

"Might also stand for yellow dog, and be damned to you!"  The
stranger's strong figure sat up stern and knit in his saddle.

Y.D.'s hand went to his hip, but the other man was unarmed.  You
can't draw on a man who isn't armed.

"Listen!" the older man continued, in sharp, clear-cut notes.  "You
are a stranger not only to our trails, but our customs.  You are a
young man.  Let me give you some advice.  First--get rid of that
artillery.  It will do you more harm than good.  And second, when a
stranger speaks to you civilly, answer him the same.  My name is
Wilson--Frank Wilson, and if you settle in the foothills you'll
find me a decent neighbor, as soon as you are able to appreciate
decency."

To his own great surprise, Y.D. took his dressing down in silence.
There was a poise in Wilson's manner that enforced respect.  He
recognized in him the English rancher of good family; usually a man
of fine courtesy within reasonable bounds; always a hard hitter
when those bounds are exceeded.  Y.D. knew that he had made at
least a tactical blunder; his sensitiveness about his brand would
arouse, rather than allay, suspicion.  His cheeks burned with a
heat not of the afternoon sun as he submitted to this unaccustomed
discipline, but he could not bring himself to express regret for
his rudeness.

"Well, now that the shower is over, we'll move on," he said,
turning his back on Wilson and "clucking" to his horse.

Y.D. followed the stream which afterwards bore his name as far as
the Upper Forks.  As he entered the foothills he found all the
advantages of the plains below, with others peculiar to the
foothill country.  The richer herbage, induced by a heavier
precipitation; the occasional belts of woodland; the rugged ravines
and limestone ridges affording good natural protection against
fire; abundant fuel and water everywhere--these seemed to
constitute the ideal ranch conditions.  At the Upper Forks, through
some freak of formation, the stream divided into two.  From this
point was easy access into the valleys of the Y.D. and the South
Y.D., as they were subsequently called.  The stream rippled over
beds of grey gravel, and mountain trout darted from the rancher's
shadow as it fell across the water.  Up the valley, now ruddy gold
with the changing colors of autumn, white-capped mountains looked
down from amid the infinite silences; and below, broad vistas of
brown prairie and silver ribbons of running water.  Y.D. turned his
swarthy face to the sunlight and took in the scene slowly,
deliberately, but with a commercialized eye; blue and white and
ruddy gold were nothing to him; his heart was set on grass and
water and shelter.  He had roved enough, and he had a reason for
seeking some secluded spot like this, where he could settle down
while his herds grew up, and, perhaps, forget some things that were
better forgotten.

With sudden decision the cattle man threw himself from his horse,
unstrapped the little kit of supplies which he carried by the
saddle; drew off saddle and bridle and turned the animal free.  The
die was cast; this was the spot.  Within ten minutes his ax was
ringing in the grove of spruce trees close by, and the following
night he fried mountain trout under the shelter of his own
temporary roof.

It was the next summer when Y.D. had another encounter with Wilson.
The Upper Forks turned out to be less secluded than he had
supposed; it was on the trail of trappers and prospectors working
into the mountains.  Traders, too, in mysterious commodities, moved
mysteriously back and forth, and the log cabin at The Forks became
something of a centre of interest.  Strange companies forgathered
within its rude walls.

It was at such a gathering, in which Y.D. and three companions sat
about the little square table, that one of the visitors facetiously
inquired of the rancher how his herd was progressing.

"Not so bad, not so bad," said Y.D., casually.  "Some winter
losses, of course; snow's too deep this far up.  Why?"

"Oh, some of your neighbors down the valley say your cows are
uncommon prolific."

"They do?" said Y.D., laying down his cards.  "Who says that?"

"Well, Wilson, for instance--"

Y.D. sprang to his feet.  "I've had one run-in with that ----," he
shouted, "an' I let him talk to me like a Sunday School
super'ntendent.  Here's where I talk to him!"

"Well, finish the game first," the others protested.  "The night's
young."

Y.D. was sufficiently drunk to be supersensitive about his honor,
and the inference from Wilson's remark was that he was too handy
with his branding-iron.

"No, boys, no!" he protested.  "I'll make that Englishman eat his
words or choke on them."

"That's right," the company agreed.  "The only thing to do.  We'll
all go down with you."

"An' you won't do that, neither," Y.D. answered.  "Think I need a
body-guard for a little chore like that?  Huh!"  There was
immeasurable contempt in that monosyllable.

But a fresh bottle was produced, and Y.D. was persuaded that his
honor would suffer no serious damage until the morning.  Before
that time his company, with many demonstrations of affection and
admonitions to "make a good job of it," left for the mountains.

Y.D. saddled his horse early, buckled his gun on his hip, hung a
lariat from his saddle, and took the trail for the Wilson ranch.
During the drinking and gambling of the night he had been able to
keep the insult in the background, but, alone under the morning
sun, it swept over him and stung him to fury.  There was just
enough truth in the report to demand its instant suppression.

Wilson was branding calves in his corral as Y.D. came up.  He was
alone save for a girl of eighteen who tended the fire.

Wilson looked 