up with a hot iron in his hand, nodded, then turned
to apply the iron before it cooled.  As he leaned over the calf
Y.D. swung his lariat.  It fell true over the Englishman, catching
him about the arms and the middle of the body.  Y.D. took a half-
hitch of the lariat about his saddle horn, and the well-trained
horse dragged his victim in the most matter-of-fact manner out of
the gate of the corral and into the open.

Y.D. shortened the line.  After the first moment of confused
surprise Wilson tried to climb to his feet, but a quick jerk of the
lariat sent him prostrate again.  In a moment Y.D. had taken up all
the line, and sat in his saddle looking down contemptuously upon
him.

"Well," he said, "who's too handy with his branding-iron now?"

"You are!" cried Wilson.  "Give me a man's chance and I'll thrash
you here and now to prove it."

For answer Y.D. clucked to his horse and dragged his enemy a few
yards farther.  "How's the goin', Frank?" he said, in mock
cordiality.  "Think you can stand it as far as the crick?"

But at that instant an unexpected scene flashed before Y.D.  He
caught just a glimpse of it--just enough to indicate what might
happen.  The girl who had been tending the fire was rushing upon
him with a red-hot iron extended before her.  Quicker than he could
throw himself from the saddle she had struck him in the face with
it.

"You brand our calves!" she cried in a fury of recklessness.  "I'll
brand YOU--damn you!"

Y.D. threw himself from the saddle, but in the suddenness of her
onslaught he failed to clear it properly, and stumbled to the
ground.  In a moment she was on him and had whipped his gun from
his belt.

"Get up!" she said.  And he got up.

"Walk to that post, put your arms around it with your back to me,
and stand there."  He did so.

The girl kept him covered with the revolver while she released the
lariat that bound her father.

"Are you hurt, Dad?" she inquired solicitously.

"No, just shaken up," he answered, scrambling to his feet.

"All right.  Now we'll fix him!"

The girl walked to the next post from Y.D.'s, climbed it leisurely
and seated herself on the top.

"Now, Mr. Y.D.," she said, "you are going to fight like a white
man, with your fists.  I'll sit up here and see that there's no
dirty work.  First, advance and shake hands."

"I'm damned if I will," said Y.D.

The revolver spoke, and the bullet cut dangerously close to him.

"Don't talk back to me again," she cried, "or you won't be able to
fight.  Now shake hands."

He extended his hand and Wilson took it for a moment.

"Now when I count three," said the girl, "pile in.  There's no time
limit.  Fight 'til somebody's satisfied.  One--two--three--"

At the sound of the last word Wilson caught his opponent a punch on
the chin which stretched him.  He got up slowly, gathering his wits
about him.  He was twenty years younger than Wilson, but a rancher
of fifty is occasionally a better man than he was at thirty.  Any
disadvantages Wilson suffered from being shaken up in the lariat
were counterbalanced by Y.D.'s branding.  His face was burning
painfully, and his vision was not the best.  But he had not
followed the herds since childhood without learning to use his
fists.  He steadied himself on his knee to bring his mind into tune
with this unusual warfare.  Then he rushed upon Wilson.

He received another straight knock-out on the chin.  It jarred the
joints of his neck and left him dazed.  It was half a minute before
he could steady himself.  He realized now that he had a fight on
his hands.  He was too cool a head to get into a panic, but he
found he must take his time and do some brain work.  Another chin
smash would put him out for good.

He advanced carefully.  Wilson stood awaiting him, a picture of
poise and self-confidence.  Y.D. led a quick left to Wilson's ribs,
but failed to land.  Wilson parried skilfully and immediately
answered with a left swing to the chin.  But Y.D. was learning, and
this time he was on guard.  He dodged the blow, broke in and seized
Wilson about the body.  The two men stood for a moment like bulls
with locked horns.  Y.D. brought his weight to bear on his
antagonist to force him to the ground, but in some way the
Englishman got elbow room and began raining short jabs on his face,
already raw from the branding-iron.  Y.D. jerked back from this
assault.  Then came the third smash on the chin.

Y.D. gathered himself up very slowly.  The world was swimming
around in circles.  On a post sat a girl, covering him with a
revolver and laughing at him.  Somewhere on the horizon Wilson's
figure whipped forward and back.  Then his horse came into the
circle.  Y.D. rose to his feet, strode with quick, uncertain steps
to his horse, threw himself into the saddle and without a word
started up the trail to The Forks.

"Seems to have gone with as little ceremony as he came," Wilson
remarked to his daughter.  "Now, let us get along with the
calves." . . .

Y.D. rode the trail to The Forks in bitterness of spirit.  He had
sallied forth that morning strong and daring to administer summary
punishment; he was retracing his steps thrashed, humiliated,
branded for life by a red iron thrust in his face by a slip of a
girl.  He exhausted his by no means limited vocabulary of epithets,
but even his torrents of abuse brought no solace to him.  The hot
sun beat down on his wounded face and hurt terribly, but he almost
forgot that pain in the agony of his humiliation.  He had been
thrashed by an old man, with a wisp of a girl sitting on a post and
acting as referee.  He turned in his saddle and through the empty
valley shouted an insulting name at her.

Then Y.D. slowly began to feel his face burn with a fire not of the
branding-iron nor of the afternoon sun.  He knew that his word was
a lie.  He knew that he would not have dared use it in her father's
hearing.  He knew that he was a coward.  No man had ever called
Y.D. a coward; no man had ever known him for a coward; he had never
known himself as such--until to-day.  With all his roughness Y.D.
had a sense of honor as keen as any razor blade.  If he allowed
himself wide latitude in some matters it was because he had lived
his life in an atmosphere where the wide latitude was the thing.
The prairie had been his bed, the sky his roof, himself his own
policeman, judge, and executioner since boyhood.  When responsibility
is so centralized wide latitudes must be allowed. But the uttermost
borders of that latitude were fixed with iron rigidity, and when he
had thrown a vile epithet at a decent woman he knew he had broken
the law of honor.  He was a cur--a cur who should be shot in his
tracks for the cur he was.

Y.D. did hard thinking all the way to The Forks.  Again and again
the figure of the girl flashed before him; he would close his eyes
and jerk his head back to avoid the burning iron.  Then he saw her
on the post, sitting, with apparent impartiality, on guard over the
fight.  Yes, she had been impartial, in a way.  Y.D. was willing to
admit that much, although he surmised that she knew more about her
father's prowess with his fists than he had known.  She had had no
doubt about the outcome.

"Well, she's good backing for her old man, anyway," he admitted,
with returning generosity.  He had reached his cabin, and was
dressing his face with salve and soda.  "She sure played the game
into the old man's hand."

Y.D. could not sleep that night.  He was busy sorting up his ideas
of life and revising them in the light of the day's experience.
The more he thought of his behavior the less defensible it
appeared.  By midnight he was admitting that he had got just what
was coming to him.

Presently he began to feel lonely.  It was a strange sensation to
Y.D., whose life had been loneliness from the first, so that he had
never known it.  Of course, there was the hunger for companionship;
he had often known that.  A drinking bout, a night at cards, a
whirl into excess, and that would pass away.  But this loneliness
was different.  The moan of the wind in the spruce trees communicated
itself to him with an eerie oppressiveness.  He sat up and lit a
lamp.  The light fell on the bare logs of his hut; he had never
known before how bare they were.  He got up and shuffled about; took
a lid off the stove and put it back on again; moved aimlessly about
the room, and at last sat down on the bed.

"Y.D.," he said with a laugh, "I believe you've got nerves.  You're
behavin' like a woman."

But he could not laugh it off.  The mention of a woman brought
Wilson's daughter back vividly before him.  "She's a man's girl,"
he found himself, saying.

He sat up with a shock at his own words.  Then he rested his chin
on his hands and gazed long at the blank wall before him.  That was
life--his life.  That blank wall was his life. . . .  If only it
had a window in it; a bright space through which the vision could
catch a glimpse of something broader and better. . . .  Well, he
could put a window in it.  He could put a window in his life.

The next noon Frank Wilson looked up with surprise to see Y.D.
riding into his yard.  Wilson stiffened instantly, as though
setting himself against the shock of an attack, but there was
nothing belligerent in Y.D.'s greeting.

"Wilson," he said, "I pulled a dirty trick on you yesterday, an' I
got more than I reckoned on.  The old Y.D. would have come back
with a gun for vengeance.  Well, I ain't after vengeance.  I reckon
you an' me has got to live in this valley, an' we might as well
live peaceful.  Does that go with you?"

"Full weight and no shrinkage," said Wilson, heartily, extending
his hand.  "Come up to the house for dinner."

Y.D. was nothing loth to accept the invitation, even though he had
his misgivings as to how he should meet the women folks.  It turned
out that Mrs. Wilson had been at a neighboring ranch for some days,
and the girl was in charge of the home.  The flash in her eyes did
not conceal a glint of triumph--or was it humor?

"Jessie," her father said, with conspicuous matter-of-factness,
"Y.D. has just dropped in for dinner."

Y.D. stood with his hat in his hand.  This was harder than meeting
Wilson.  He felt that he could manage better if Wilson would get
out.

"Miss Wilson," he managed to say at length, "I just thought I'd run
in an' thank you for what you did yesterday."

"You're very welcome," she answered, and he could not tell whether
the note in her voice was of fun or sarcasm.  "Any time I can be of
service--"

"That's what I wanted to talk about," he broke in.  There was
something bewitching about the girl.  She more than realized his
fantastic visions of the night.  She had mastered him.  Perhaps it
was a subtle masculine desire to turn her mastery into ultimate
surrender that led him on.

"That's just what I want to talk about.  You started breakin' in an
outlaw yesterday, so to speak.  How'd you like to finish the job?"

Y.D. was very red when this speech was finished.  He had not known
that a wisp of a girl could so discomfit a man.

"Is that a proposal?" she asked, and this time he was sure the note
in her voice was one of banter.  "I never had one, so I don't
know."

"Well, yes, we'll call it that," he said, with returning courage.

"Well we won't, either," she flared back.  "Just because I sat on a
post and superintended the--the ceremonies, is no reason that you
should want to marry me,--or I, you.  You'll find water and a basin
on the bench at the end of the house, and dinner will be ready in
twenty minutes."

Y.D. had a feeling of a little boy being sent to wash himself.

But the next spring he built a larger cabin down the valley from
The Forks, and to that cabin one day in June came Jessie Wilson to
"finish the job."



CHAPTER III


Transley and Linder were so early about on the morning after their
conversation with Y.D. that there was no opportunity of another
meeting with the rancher's wife or daughter.  They were slipping
quietly out of the house to take breakfast with the men when Y.D.
intercepted them.

"Breakfast is waitin', boys," he said, and led them back into the
room where they had had supper the previous evening.  Y.D. ate with
them, but the meal was served by the Chinese boy.

In the yard all was jingling excitement.  The men of the Y.D. were
fraternally assisting Transley's gang in hitching up and getting
away, and there was much bustling activity to an accompaniment of
friendly profanity.  It was not yet six o'clock, but the sun was
well up over the eastern ridges that fringed the valley, and to the
west the snow-capped summits of the mountains shone like polished
ivory.  The exhilaration in the air was almost intoxicating.

Linder quickly converted the apparent chaos of horses, wagons and
implements into order; Transley had a last word with Y.D., and the
rancher, shouting "Good luck, boys!  Make it a thousand tons or
more," waved them away.

Linder glanced back at the house.  The bright sunshine had not
awakened it; it lay dreaming in its grove of cool, green trees.

The trail lay, not up the valley, but across the wedge of foothills
which divided the South Y.D. from the parent stream.  The assent
was therefore much more rapid than the trails which followed the
general course of the stream.  Huge hills, shouldering together,
left at times only wagon-track room between; at other places they
skirted dangerous cutbanks worn by spring freshets, and again
trekked for long distances over gently curving uplands.  In an hour
the horses were showing the strain of it, and Linder halted them
for a momentary rest.

It was at that moment that Drazk rode up, his face a study in
obvious annoyance.

"Danged if I ain't left that Pete-horse's blanket down at the
Y.D.," he exclaimed.

"Oh, well, you can easily ride back for it and catch up on us this
afternoon," said Linder, who was not in the least deceived.

"Thanks, Lin," said Drazk.  "I'll beat it down an' catch up on you
this afternoon, sure," and he was off down the trail as fast as
"that Pete-horse" could carry him.

At the Y.D. George conducted the search for his horse blanket in
the strangest places.  It took him mainly about the yard of the
house, and even to the kitchen door, where he interviewed the
Chinese boy.

"You catchee horse blanket around here?" he inquired, with
appropriate gesticulations.

"You losee hoss blanket?"

"Yep."

"What kind hoss blanket?"

"Jus' a brown blanket for that Pete-horse."

"Whose hoss?"

"Mine," proudly.

"Where you catchee?"

"Raised him."

"Good hoss?"

"You betcha."

"Huh!"

Pause.

"You no catchee horse blanket, hey?"

"No!" said the Chinaman, whose manner instantly changed.  In this
brief conversation he had classified Drazk, and classified him
correctly.  "You catchee him, though--some hell, too--you stickee
lound here.  Beat it," and Drazk found the kitchen door closed in
his face.

Drazk wandered slowly around the side of the house, and was not
above a surreptitious glance through the windows.  They revealed
nothing.  He followed a path out by a little gate.  His ruse had
proven a blind trail, and there was nothing to do but go down to
the stables, take the horse blanket from the peg where he had hung
it, and set out again for the South Y.D.

As he turned a corner of the fence the sight of a young woman burst
upon him.  She was hatless and facing the sun.  Drazk, for all his
admiration of the sex, had little eye for detail.  "A sort of
chestnut, about sixteen hands high, and with the look of a
thoroughbred," he afterwards described her to Linder.

She turned at the sound of his footsteps, and Drazk instantly
summoned a smirk which set his homely face beaming with good humor.

"Pardon me, ma'am," he said, with an elaborate bow.  "I am Mr.
Drazk--Mr. George Drazk--Mr. Transley's assistant.  No doubt he
spoke of me."

She was inside the enclosure formed by the fence, and he outside.
She turned on him eyes which set Drazk's pulses strangely a-tingle,
and subjected him to a deliberate but not unfriendly inspection.

"No, I don't believe he did," she said at length.  Drazk cautiously
approached, as though wondering how near he could come without
frightening her away.  He reached the fence and leaned his elbows
on it.  She showed no disposition to move.  He cautiously raised
one foot and rested it on the lower rail.

"It's a fine morning, ma'am," he ventured.

"Rather," she replied.  "Why aren't you with Mr. Transley's gang?"

The question gave George an opening.  "Well, you see," he said,
"it's all on account of that Pete-horse.  That's him down there.  I
rode away this morning and plumb forgot his blanket.  So when Mr.
Transley seen it he says, 'Drazk, take the day off an' go back for
your blanket,' he says.  'There's no hurry,' he says.  'Linder an'
me'll manage,' he says."

"Oh!"

"So here I am."  He glanced at her again.  She was showing no
disposition to run away.  She was about two yards from him, along
the fence.  Drazk wondered how long it would take him to bridge
that distance.  Even as he looked she leaned her elbows on the
fence and rested one of her feet on the lower rail.  Drazk fancied
he saw the muscles about her mouth pulling her face into little,
laughing curves, but she was gazing soberly into the distance.

"He's some horse, that Pete-horse," he said, taking up the subject
which lay most ready to his tongue.  "He's sure some horse."

"I have no doubt."

"Yep," Drazk continued.  "Him an' me has seen some times.  Whew!
Things I couldn't tell you about, at all."

"Well, aren't you going to?"

Drazk glanced at her curiously.  This girl showed signs of leading
him out of his depth.  But it was a very delightful sensation to
feel one's self being led out of his depth by such a girl.  Her
face was motionless; her eyes fixed dreamily upon the brown
prairies that swept up the flanks of the foothills to the south.
Far and away on their curving crests the dark snake-line of
Transley's outfit could be seen apparently motionless on the rim of
the horizon.

Drazk changed his foot on the rail and the motion brought him six
inches nearer her.

"Well, f'r instance," he said, spurring his imagination into
action, "there was the fellow I run down an' shot in the Cypress
Hills."

"Shot!" she exclaimed, and the note of admiration in her voice
stirred him to further flights.

"Yep," he continued, proudly.  "Shot an' buried him there, right by
the road where he fell.  Only me an' that Pete-horse knows the
spot."

George sighed sentimentally.  "It's awful sad, havin' to kill a
man," he went on, "an' it makes you feel strange an' creepy,
'specially at nights.  That is, the first one affects you that way,
but you soon get used to it.  You see, he insulted--"

"The first one?  Have you killed more than one?"

"Oh yes, lots of them.  A man like me, what knocks around all over
with all sorts of people, has to do it.

"Then there's the police.  After you kill a few men nat'rally the
police begins to worry you.  I always hate to kill a policeman."

"It must be an interesting life."

"It is, but it's a hard one," he said, after a pause during which
he had changed feet again and taken up another six inches of the
distance which separated them.  He was almost afraid to continue
the conversation.  He was finding progress so much easier than he
had expected.  It was evident that he had made a tremendous hit
with Y.D.'s daughter.  What a story to tell Linder!  What would
Transley say?  He was shaking with excitement.

"It's an awful hard life," he went on, "an' there comes a time,
Miss, when a man wants to quit it.  There comes a time when every
decent man wants to settle down.  I been thinkin' about that a lot
lately. . . .  What do YOU think about it?"  Drazk had gone white.
He felt that he actually had proposed to her.

"Might be a good idea," she replied, demurely.  He changed feet
again.  He had gone too far to stop.  He must strike the iron when
it was hot.  Of course he had no desire to stop, but it was all so
wonderful.  He could speak to her now in a whisper.

"How about you, Miss?  How about you an' me jus' settlin' down?"

She did not answer for a moment.  Then, in a low voice,

"It wouldn't be fair to accept you like this, Mr. Drazk.  You don't
know anything about me."

"An' I don't want to--I mean, I don't care what about you."

"But it wouldn't be fair until you know," she continued.  "There
are things I'd have to tell you, and I don't like to."

She was looking downwards now, and he fancied he could see the
color rising about her cheeks and her frame trembling.  He turned
toward her and extended his arms.  "Tell me--tell your own George,"
he cooed.

"No," she said, with sudden rigidity.  "I can't confess."

"Come on," he pleaded.  "Tell me.  I've been a bad man, too."

She seemed to be weighing the matter.  "If I tell you, you will
never, never mention it to anyone?"

"Never.  I swear it to you," dramatically raising his hand.

"Well," she said, looking down bashfully and making little marks
with her finger-nail in the pole on which they were leaning, "I
never told anyone before, and nobody in the world knows it except
he and I, and he doesn't know it now either, because I killed
him. . . .  I had to do it."

"Of course you did, dear," he murmured.  It was wonderful to
receive a woman's confidence like this.

"Yes, I had to kill him," she repeated.  "You see, he--he proposed
to me without being introduced!"

It was some seconds before Drazk felt the blow.  It came to him
gradually, like returning consciousness to a man who has been
stunned.  Then anger swept him.

"You're playin' with me," he cried.  "You're makin' a fool of me!"

"Oh, George dear, how could I?" she protested.  "Now perhaps you
better run along to that Pete-horse.  He looks lonely."

"All right," he said, striding away angrily.  As he walked his rage
deepened, and he turned and shook his fist at her, shouting, "All
right, but I'll get you yet, see?  You think you're smart, and
Transley thinks he's smart, but George Drazk is smarter than both
of you, and he'll get you yet."

She waved her hand complacently, but her composure had already
maddened him.  He jerked his horse up roughly, threw himself into
the saddle, and set out at a hard gallop along the trail to the
South Y.D.

It was mid-afternoon when he overtook Transley's outfit, now
winding down the southern slope of the tongue of foothills which
divided the two valleys of the Y.D.  Pete, wet over the flanks,
pulled up of his own accord beside Linder's wagon.

"'Lo, George," said Linder.  "What's your hurry?"  Then, glancing
at his saddle, "Where's your blanket?"

Drazk's jaw dropped, but he had a quick wit, although an unbalanced
one.

"Well, Lin, I clean forgot all about it," he admitted, with a
laugh, "but when a fellow spends the morning chatting with old
Y.D.'s daughter I guess he's allowed to forget a few things."

"Oh!"

"Reckon you don't believe it, eh, Lin?  Reckon you don't believe I
stood an' talked with her over the fence for so long I just had to
pull myself away?"

"You reckon right."

George was thinking fast.  Here was an opportunity to present the
incident in a light which had not before occurred to him.

"Guess you wouldn't believe she told me her secret--told me
somethin' she had never told anybody else, an' made me swear not to
mention.  Guess you don't believe that, neither?"

"You guess right again."  Linder was quite unperturbed.  He knew
something of Drazk's gift for romancing.

Drazk leaned over in the saddle until he could reach Linder's ear
with a loud whisper.  "And she called me 'dear'; 'George dear,' she
said, when I came away."

"The hell she did!" said Linder, at last prodded into interest.  He
considered the "George dear" idea a daring flight, even for Drazk.
"Better not let old Y.D. hear you spinning anything like that,
George, or he'll be likely to spoil your youthful beauty."

"Oh, Y.D.'s all right," said George, knowingly.  "Y.D.'s all right.
Well, I guess I'll let Pete feed a bit here, and then we'll go back
for his blanket.  You'll have to excuse me a bit these days, Lin;
you know how it is when a fellow's in love."

"Huh!" said Linder.

George dropped behind, and an amused smile played on the foreman's
face.  He had known Drazk too long to be much surprised at anything
he might do.  It was Drazk's idea of gallantry to make love to
every girl on sight.  Possibly Drazk had managed to exchange a word
with Zen, and his imagination would readily expand that into a love
scene.  Zen!  Even the placid, balanced Linder felt a slight leap
in the blood at the unusual name, which to him suggested the bright
girl who had come into his life the night before.  Not exactly into
his life; it would be fairer to say she had touched the rim of his
life.  Perhaps she would never penetrate it further; Linder rather
expected that would be the case.  As for Drazk--she was in no
danger from him.  Drazk's methods were so precipitous that they
could be counted upon to defeat themselves.

Below stretched the valley of the South Y.D., almost a duplicate of
its northern neighbor.  The stream hugged the feet of the hills on
the north side of the valley; its ribbon of green and gold was like
a fringe gathered about the hem of their skirts.  Beyond the stream
lay the level plains of the valley, and miles to the south rose the
next ridge of foothills.  It was from these interlying plains that
Y.D. expected his thousand tons of hay.  There is no sleugh hay in
the foothill country; the hay is cut on the uplands, a short, fine
grass of great nutritive value.  This grass, if uncut, cures in its
natural state, and affords sustenance to the herds which graze over
it all winter long.  But it occasionally happens that after a snow-
fall the Chinook wind will partially melt the snow, and then a
sudden drop in the temperature leaves the prairies and foothills
covered with a thin coating of ice.  It is this ice covering,
rather than heavy snow-fall or severe weather, which is the
principal menace to winter grazing, and the foresighted rancher
aims to protect himself and his stock from such a contingency by
having a good reserve of hay in stack.

Here, then, was the valley in which Y.D. hoped to supplement the
crop of his own hay lands.  Linder's appreciative eye took in the
scene: a scene of stupendous sizes and magnificent distances.  As
he slowly turned his vision down the valley a speck in the distance
caught his sight and brought him to his feet.  Shading his eyes
from the bright afternoon sun he surveyed it long and carefully.
There was no doubt about it: a haying outfit was already at work
down the valley.

Leaving his team to manage themselves Linder dropped from his wagon
and joined Transley.  "Some one has beat us to it," he remarked.

"So I observed," said Transley.  "Well, it's a big valley, and if
they're satisfied to stay where they are there should be enough for
both.  If they're not--"

"If they're not, what?" demanded Linder.

"You heard what Y.D. said.  He said, 'Cut it, spite o' hell an'
high water,' and I always obey orders."

They wound down the hillside until they came to the stream, the
horses quickening their pace with the smell of water in their eager
nostrils.  It was a good ford, broad and shallow, with the typical
boulder bottom of the mountain stream.  The horses crowded into it,
drinking greedily with a sort of droning noise caused by the bits
in their mouths.  When they had satisfied their thirst they raised
their heads, stretched their noses far out and champed wide-mouthed
upon their bits.

After a pause in the stream they drew out on the farther bank,
where were open spaces among cottonwood trees, and Transley
indicated that this would be their camping ground.  Already smoke
was issuing from the chuck wagon, and in a few minutes the men's
sleeping tent and the two stable tents were flashing back the
afternoon sun.  They carried no eating tent; instead of that an
eating wagon was backed up against the chuck wagon, and the men
were served in it.  They had not paused for a midday meal; the cook
had provided sandwiches of bread and roast beef to dull the edge of
their appetite, and now all were keen to fall to as soon as the
welcome clanging of the plow-colter which hung from the end of the
chuck wagon should give the signal.

Presently this clanging filled the evening air with sweet music,
and the men filed with long, slouchy tread into the eating wagon.
The table ran down the centre, with bench seats at either side.
The cook, properly gauging the men's appetites, had not taken time
to prepare meat and potatoes, but on the table were ample basins of
graniteware filled with beans and bread and stewed prunes and
canned tomatoes, pitchers of syrup and condensed milk, tins with
marmalade and jam, and plates with butter sadly suffering from the
summer heat.  The cook filled their granite cups with hot tea from
a granite pitcher, and when the cups were empty filled them again
and again.  And when the tables were partly cleared he brought out
deep pies filled with raisins and with evaporated apples and a
thick cake from which the men cut hunks as generous as their
appetite suggested.  Transley had learned, what women are said to
have learned long ago, that the way to a man's heart is through his
stomach, and the cook had carte blanche.  Not a man who ate at
Transley's table but would have spilt his blood for the boss or for
the honor of the gang.

The meal was nearing its end when through a window Linder's eye
caught sight of a man on horseback rapidly approaching.  "Visitors,
Transley," he was able to say before the rider pulled up at the
open door of the covered wagon.

He was such a rider as may still be seen in those last depths of
the ranching country where wheels have not entirely crowded Romance
off of horseback.  Spare and well-knit, his figure had a suggestion
of slightness which the scales would have belied.  His face, keen
and clean-shaven, was brown as the August hills, and above it his
broad hat sat in the careless dignity affected by the gentlemen of
the plains.  His leather coat afforded protection from the heat of
day and from the cold of night.

"Good evening, men," he said, courteously.  "Don't let me disturb
your meal.  Afterwards perhaps I can have a word with the boss."

"That's me," said Transley, rising.

"No, don't get up," the stranger protested, but Transley insisted
that he had finished, and, getting down from the wagon, led the way
a little distance from the eager ears of its occupants.

"My name is Grant," said the stranger; "Dennison Grant.  I am
employed by Mr. Landson, who has a ranch down the valley.  If I am
not mistaken you are Mr. Transley."

"You are not mistaken," Transley replied.

"And I am perhaps further correct," continued Grant, "in surmising
that you are here on behalf of the Y.D., and propose cutting hay in
this valley?"

"Your grasp of the situation does you credit."  Transley's manner
was that of a man prepared to meet trouble somewhat more than half
way.

"And I may further surmise," continued Grant, quite unruffled,
"that Y.D. neglected to give you one or two points of information
bearing upon the ownership of this land, which would doubtless have
been of interest to you?"

"Suppose you dismount," said Transley.  "I like to look a man in
the face when I talk business to him."

"That's fair," returned Grant, swinging lightly from his horse.  "I
have a preference that way myself."  He advanced to within arm's
length of Transley and for a few moments the two men stood
measuring each other.  It was steel boring steel; there was not a
flicker of an eyelid.

"We may as well get to business, Grant," said Transley at length.
"I also can do some surmising.  I surmise that you were sent here
by Landson to forbid me to cut hay in this valley.  On what
authority he acts I neither know nor care.  I take my orders from
Y.D.  Y.D. said cut the hay.  I am going to cut it."

"YOU ARE NOT!"

Transley's muscles could be seen to go tense beneath his shirt.

"Who will stop me?" he demanded.

"You will be stopped."

"The Mounted Police?"  There was contempt in his voice, but the
contempt was not for the Force.  It was for the rancher who would
appeal to the police to settle a "friendly" dispute.

"No, I don't think it will be necessary to call in the police,"
returned Grant, dropping back to his pleasant, casual manner.  "You
know Y.D., and doubtless you feel quite safe under his wing.  But
you don't know Landson.  Neither do you know the facts of the case--
the right and wrong of it.  Under these handicaps you cannot reach
a decision which is fair to yourself and to your men."

"Further argument is simply waste of time," Transley interrupted.
"I have told you my instructions, and I have told you that I am
going to carry them out.  Have you had your supper?"

"Yes, thanks.  All right, we won't argue any more.  I'm not arguing
now--I'm telling you, Y.D. has cut hay in this valley so long he
thinks he owns it, and the other ranchers began to think he owned
it.  But Landson has been making a few inquiries.  He finds that
these are not Crown lands, but are privately owned by speculators
in New York.  He has contracted with the owners for the hay rights
of these lands for five years, beginning with the present season.
He is already cutting farther down the valley, and will be cutting
here within a day or two."

"The trout ought to bite on a fine evening like this," said
Transley.  "I have an extra rod and some flies.  Will you try a
throw or two with me?"

"I would be glad to, but I must get back to camp.  I hope you land
a good string," and so saying Grant remounted, nodded to Transley
and again to the men now scattered about the camp, and started his
horse on an easy lope down the valley.

"Well, what is it to be?" said Linder, coming up with the rest of
the boys.  "War?"

"War if they fight," Transley replied, unconcernedly.  "Y.D. said
cut the hay; 'spite o' hell an' high water,' he said.  That goes."

Slowly the great orb of the sun sank until the crest of the
mountains pierced its molten glory and sent it burnishing their
rugged heights.  In the east the plains were already wrapped in
shadow.  Up the valley crept the veil of night, hushing even the
limitless quiet of the day.  The stream babbled louder in the
lowering gloom; the stamp and champing of horses grew less
insistent; the cloudlets overhead faded from crimson to mauve to
blue to grey.

Transley tapped the ashes from his pipe and went to bed.



CHAPTER IV


"How about a ride over to the South Fork this afternoon, Zen?" said
Y.D. to his daughter the following morning.  "I just want to make
sure them boys is hittin' the high spots.  The grass is gettin'
powerful dry an' you can never tell what may happen."

"You're on," the girl replied across the breakfast table.  Her
mother looked up sharply.  She wondered if the prospect of another
meeting with Transley had anything to do with Zen's alacrity.

"I had hoped you would outgrow your slang, Zen," she remonstrated
gently.  "Men like Mr. Transley are likely to judge your training
by your speech."

"I should worry.  Slang is to language what feathers are to a hat--
they give it distinction, class.  They lift it out of the drab
commonplace."

"Still, I would not care to be dressed entirely in feathers," her
mother thrust quietly.

"Good for you, Mother!" the girl exclaimed, throwing an arm about
her neck and planking a firm kiss on her forehead.  "That was a
solar plexus.  Now I'll try to be good and wear a feather only here
and there.  But Mr. Transley has nothing to do with it."

"Of course not," said Y.D.  "Still, Transley is a man with snap in
him.  That's why he's boss.  So many of these ornery good-for-
nothin's is always wishin' they was boss, but they ain't willin' to
pay the price.  It costs somethin' to get to the head of the herd--
an' stay there."

"He seems firm on all fours," the girl agreed.  "How do we travel,
and when?"

"Better take a democrat, I guess," her father said.  "We can throw
in a tent and some bedding for you, as we'll maybe stay over a
couple of nights."

"The blue sky is tent enough for me," Zen protested, "and I can
surely rustle a blanket or two around the camp.  Besides, I'll want
a riding horse to get around with there."

"You can run him beside the democrat," said her father.  "You're
gettin' too big to go campin' promisc'us like when you was a kid."

"That's the penalty for growing up," Zen sighed.  "All right, Dad.
Say two o'clock?"

The girl spent the morning helping her mother about the house, and
casting over in her mind the probable developments of the near
future.  She would not have confessed outwardly to even a casual
interest in Transley, but inwardly she admitted that the promise of
another meeting with him gave zest to the prospect.  Transley was
interesting.  At least he was out of the commonplace.  His bold
directness had rather fascinated her.  He had a will.  Her father
had always admired men with a will, and Zen shared his admiration.
Then there was Linder.  The fierce light of Transley's charms did
not blind her to the glow of quiet capability which she saw in
Linder.  If one were looking for a husband, Linder had much to
recommend him.  He was probably less capable than Transley, but he
would be easier to manage. . . .  But who was looking for a
husband?  Not Zen.  No, no, certainly not Zen.

Then there was George Drazk, whose devotions fluctuated between
"that Pete-horse" and the latest female to cross his orbit.  At the
thought of George Drazk Zen laughed outright.  She had played with
him.  She had made a monkey of him, and he deserved all he had got.
It was not the first occasion upon which Zen had let herself drift
with the tide, always sure of justifying herself and discomfiting
someone by the swift, strong strokes with which, at the right
moment, she reached the shore.  Zen liked to think of herself as
careering through life in the same way as she rode the half-broken
horses of her father's range.  How many such a horse had thought
that the lithe body on his back was something to race with, toy
with, and, when tired of that, fling precipitately to earth!  And
not one of those horses but had found that while he might race and
toy with his rider within limitations, at the last that light body
was master, and not he. . . .  Yet Zen loved best the horse that
raced wildest and was hardest to bring into subjection.

That was her philosophy of life so far as a girl of twenty may have
a philosophy of life.  It was to go on and see what would happen,
supported always by a quiet confidence that in any pinch she could
take care of herself.  She had learned to ride and shoot, to sleep
out and cook in the open, to ride the ranges after dark by instinct
and the stars--she had learned these things while other girls of
her age learned the rudiments of fancy-work and the scales of the
piano.

Her father and mother knew her disposition, loved it, and feared
for it.  They knew that there was never a rider so brave, so
skilful, so strong, but some outlaw would throw him at last.  So at
fourteen they sent her east to a boarding-school.  In two months
she was back with a letter of expulsion, and the boast of having
blacked the eyes of the principal's daughter.

"They couldn't teach me any more, Mother," she said.  "They
admitted it.  So here I am."

Y.D. was plainly perplexed.  "It's about time you was halter-
broke," he commented, "but who's goin' to do it?"

"If a girl has learned to read and think, what more can the schools
do for her?" she demanded.

And Y.D., never having been to school, could not answer.

The sun was capping the Rockies with molten gold when the rancher
and his daughter swung down the foothill slopes to the camp on the
South Y.D.  Strings of men and horses returning from the upland
meadows could be seen from the hillside as they descended.

Y.D.'s sharp eyes measured the scale of operations.

"They're hittin' the high spots," he said, approvingly.  "That boy
Transley is a hum-dinger."

Zen made no reply.

"I say he's a hum-dinger," her father repeated.

The girl looked up with a quick flush of surprise.  Y.D. was no
puzzle to her, and if he went out of his way to commend Transley he
had a purpose.

"Mr. Transley seems to have made a hit with you, Dad," she
remarked, evasively.

"Well, I do like to see a man who's got the goods in him.  I like a
man that can get there, just as I like a horse that can get there.
I've often wondered, Zen, what kind you'd take up with, when it
came to that, an' hoped he'd be a live crittur.  After I'm dead an'
buried I don't want no other dead one spendin' my simoleons."

"How about Mr. Linder?" said Zen, naively.

Her father looked up sharply.  "Zen," he said, "you're not serious?"

Zen laughed.  "I don't figure you're exactly serious, Dad, in your
talk about Transley.  You're just feeling out.  Well--let me do a
little feeling out.  How about Linder?"

"Linder's all right," Y.D. replied.  "Better than the average, I
admit.  But he's not the man Transley is.  If he was, he wouldn't
be workin' for Transley.  You can't keep a man down, Zen, if he's
got the goods in him.  Linder comes up over the average, so's you
can notice it, but not like Transley does."

Zen did not pursue the subject.  She understood her father's
philosophy very well indeed, and, to a large degree, she accepted
it as her own.  It was natural that a man of Y.D.'s experience, who
had begun life with no favors and had asked none since, and had
made of himself a big success--it was natural that such a man
should judge all others by their material achievements.  The only
quality Y.D. took off his hat to was the ability to do things.  And
Y.D.'s idea of things was very concrete; it had to do with steers
and land, with hay and money and men.  It was by such things he
measured success.  And Zen was disposed to agree with him.  Why
not?  It was the only success she knew.

Transley was greeting them as they drew into camp.

"Glad to see you, Y.D.; honored to have a visit from you, Ma'am,"
he said, as he helped them from the democrat, and gave instructions
for the care of their horses.  "Supper is waiting, and the men
won't be ready for some time."

Y.D. shook hands with Transley cordially.  "Zen an' me just thought
we'd run over and see how the wind blew," he said.  "You got a good
spot here for a camp, Transley.  But we won't go in to supper just
now.  Let the men eat first; I always say the work horses should be
first at the barn.  Well, how's she goin'?"

"Fine," said Transley, "fine," but it was evident his mind was
divided.  He was glancing at Zen, who stood by during the
conversation.

"I must try and make your daughter at home," he continued.  "I
allow myself the luxury of a private tent, and as you will be
staying over night I will ask you to accept it for her."

"But I have my own tent with me, in the democrat," said Zen.  "If
you will let the men pitch it under the trees where I can hear the
water murmuring in the night--"

"Who'd have thought it, from the daughter of the practical Y.D!"
Transley bantered.  "All right, Ma'am, but in the meantime take my
tent.  I'll get water, and there's a basin."  He already was
leading the way.  "Make yourself at home--Zen.  May I call you
Zen?" he added, in a lower voice, as they left Y.D. at a distance.

"Everybody calls me Zen."

They were standing at the door of the tent, he holding back the
flap that she might enter.  The valley was already in shadow, and
there was no sunlight to play on her hair, but her face and figure
in the mellow dusk seemed entirely winsome and adorable.  There was
no taint of Y.D.'s millions in the admiration that Transley bent
upon her. . . .  Of course, as an adjunct, the millions were not to
be despised.

When the men had finished supper Transley summoned her.  On the way
to the chuck-wagon she passed close to George Drazk.  It was
evident that he had chosen a station with that result in view.  She
had passed by when she turned, whimsically.

"Well, George, how's that Pete-horse?" she said.

"Up an comin' all the time, Zen," he answered.

She bit her lip over his familiarity, but she had no come-back.
She had given him the opening, by calling him "George."

"You see, I got quite well acquainted with Mr. Drazk when he came
back to hunt for a horse blanket which had mysteriously
disappeared," she explained to Transley.

They ascended the steps which led from the ground into the wagon.
The table had been reset for four, and as the shadows were now
heavy in the valley, candles had been lighted.  Y.D. and his
daughter sat on one side, Transley on the other.  In a moment
Linder entered.  He had already had a talk with Y.D., but had not
met Zen since their supper together in the rancher's house.

"Glad to see you again, Mr. Linder," said the girl, rising and
extending her hand across the table.  "You see we lost no time in
returning your call."

Linder took her hand in a frank grasp, but could think of nothing
in particular to say.  "We're glad to have you," was all he could
manage.

Zen was rather sorry that Linder had not made more of the situation.
She wondered what quick repartee, shot, no doubt, with double
meaning, Transley would have returned.  It was evident that, as
her father had said, Linder was second best.  And yet there was
something about his shyness that appealed to her even more than did
Transley's superb self-confidence.

The meal was spent in small talk about horses and steers and the
merits of the different makes of mowing machines.  When it was
finished Transley apologized for not offering his guests any
liquor.  "I never keep it about the camp," he said.

"Quite right," Y.D. agreed, "quite right.  Booze is like fire; a
valuable thing in careful hands, but mighty dangerous when
everybody gets playin' with it.  I reckon the grass is gettin'
pretty dry, Transley?"

"Mighty dry, all right, but we're taking every precaution."

"I'm sure you are, but you can't take precautions for other people.
Has anybody been puttin' you up to any trouble here?"

"Well, no, I can't exactly say trouble," said Transley, "but we've
got notice it's coming.  A chap named Grant, foreman, I think, for
Landson, down the valley, rode over last night, and invited us not
to cut any hay hereabouts.  He was very courteous, and all that,
but he had the manner of a man who'd go quite a distance in a
pinch."

"What did you tell him?"

"Told him I was working for Y.D., and then asked him to stay for
supper."

"Did he stay?" Zen asked.

"He did not.  He cantered off back, courteous as he came.  And this
morning we went out on the job, and have cut all day, and nothing
has happened."

"I guess he found you were not to be bluffed," said Zen, and
Transley could not prevent a flush of pleasure at her compliment.
"Of course Landson has no real claim to the hay, has he, Dad?"

"Of course not.  I reckon them'll be his stacks we saw down the
valley.  Well, I'm not wantin' to rob him of the fruit of his
labor, an' if he keeps calm perhaps we'll let him have what he has
cut, but if he don't--"  Y.D.'s face hardened with the set of a man
accustomed to fight, and win, his own battles.  "I think we'll just
stick around a day or two in case he tries to start anythin'," he
continued.

"Well, five o'clock comes early," said Transley, "and you folks
must be tired with your long drive.  We've had your tent pitched
down by the water, Zen, so that its murmurs may sing you to sleep.
You see, I have some of the poetic in me, too.  Mr. Linder will
show you down, and I will see that your father is made comfortable.
And remember--five o'clock does not apply to visitors."

The camp now lay in complete darkness, save where a lantern threw
its light from a tent by the river.  Zen walked by Linder's side.
Presently she reached out and took his arm.

"I beg your pardon," said Linder.  "I should have offered--"

"Of course you should.  Mr. Transley would not have waited to be
told.  Dad thinks that anything that's worth having in this world
is worth going after, and going after hard.  I guess I'm Dad's
daughter in more ways than one."

"I suppose he's right," Linder confessed, "but I've always been
shy.  I get along all right with men."

"The truth is, Mr Linder, you're not shy--you're frightened.  Now I
can well believe that no man could frighten you.  Consequently you
get along all right with men.  Do I need to tell you the rest?"

"I never thought of myself as being afraid of women," he replied.
"It has always seemed that they were, well, just out of my line."

They had reached the tent but the girl made no sign of going in.
In the silence the sibilant lisp of the stream rose loud about
them.

"Mr. Linder," she said at length, "do you know why Mr. Transley
sent you down here with me?"

"I'm sure I don't, except to show you to your tent."

"That was the least of his purposes.  He wanted to show you that he
wasn't afraid of you; and he wanted to show me that he wasn't
afraid of you.  Mr. Transley is a very self-confident individual.
There is such a thing as being too self-confident, Mr. Linder, just
as there is such a thing as being too shy.  Do you get me?  Good
night!"  And with a little rush she was in her tent.

Linder walked slowly down to the water's edge, and stood there,
thinking, until her light went out.  His brain was in a whirl with
a sensation entirely strange to it.  A light wind, laden with snow-
smell from the mountains, pressed gently against his features, and
presently Linder took deeper breaths than he had ever known before.

"By Jove!" he said.  "Who'd have thought it possible?"



CHAPTER V


When Zen awoke next morning the mowing machines of Transley's
outfit were already singing their symphony in the meadows; she
could hear the metallic rhythm as it came borne on the early
breeze.  She lay awake on her camp cot for a few minutes,
stretching her fingers to the canvas ceiling and feeling that it
was good to be alive.  And it was.  The ripple of water came from
almost underneath the walls of her tent; the smell of spruce trees
and balm-o'-Gilead and new-mown hay was in the air.  She could feel
the warmth of the sunshine already pouring upon her white roof; she
could trace the gentle sway of the trees by the leafy patterns
gliding forward and back.  A cheeky gopher, exploring about the
door of her tent, ventured in, and, sitting bolt upright, sent his
shrill whistle boldly forth.  She watched his fine bravery for a
minute, then clapped her hands together, and laughed as he fled.

"Therein we have the figures of both Transley and Linder," she
mused to herself.  "Upright, Transley; horizontal, Linder.  I doubt
if the poor fellow slept last night after the fright I gave him."
Slowly and calmly she turned the incident over in her mind.  She
wondered a little if she had been quite fair with Linder.  Her
words and conduct were capable of very broad interpretations.  She
was not at all in love with Linder; of that Zen was very sure.  She
was equally sure that she was not at all in love with Transley.
She admitted that she admired Transley for his calm assumptions,
but they nettled her a little nevertheless.  If this should develop
into a love affair--IF it should--she had no intention that it was
to be a pleasant afternoon's canter.  It was to be a race--a race,
mind you--and may the best man win!  She had a feeling, amounting
almost to a conviction, that Transley underrated his foreman's
possibilities in such a contest.  She had seen many a dark horse,
less promising than Linder, gallop home with the stakes.

Then Zen smiled her own quiet, self-confident smile, the smile
which had come down to her from Y.D. and from the Wilsons--the only
family that had ever mastered him.  The idea of either Transley or
Linder thinking he could gallop home with HER!  For the moment she
forgot to do Linder the justice of remembering that nothing was
further from his thoughts.  She would show them.  She would make a
race of it--ALMOST to the wire.  In the home stretch she would make
the leap, out and over the fence.  She was in it for the race, not
for the finish.

Zen contemplated for some minutes the possibilities of that race;
then, as the imagination threatened to become involved, she sprang
from her cot and thrust a cautious head through the door of her
tent.  The gang had long since g