one to the fields, and friendly
bushes sheltered her from view from the cook-car.  She drew on her
boots, shook out her hair, threw a towel across her shoulders, and,
soap in hand, walked boldly the few steps to the stream rippling
over its shiny gravel bed.  She stopped and tested the water with
her fingers; then brought it in fresh, cool handfuls about her face
and neck.

"Mornin', Zen!" said a familiar voice.  "'Scuse me for happenin' to
be here.  I was jus' waterin' that Pete-horse after a hard ride."

"Now look here, Mr. Drazk!" said the girl, whipping her scanty
clothing about her, "if I had a gun that Pete-horse would be
scheduled for his fastest travel in the next twenty seconds, and
he'd end it without a rider, too.  I won't have you spying about!"

"Aw, don' be cross," Drazk protested.  He was sitting on his horse
in the ford a dozen yards away.  "I jus' happened along.  I guess
the outside belongs to all of us.  Say, Zen, if I was to get
properly interduced, what's the chances?"

"Not one in a million, and if that isn't odds enough I'll double
it."

"You're not goin' to hitch up with Linder, are you?"

"Linder?  Who said anything about Linder?"

"Gee, but ain't she innercent?"  Drazk stepped his horse up a few
feet to facilitate conversation.  "I alus take an interest in
innercent gals away from home, so I kinda kep' my angel eye on you
las' night.  An' I see Linder stalkin' aroun' here an' sighin' out
over the water when he should 'ave been in bed.  But, of course,
he's been interduced."

"George Drazk, if you speak to me again I'll horse-whip you out of
the camp at noon before all the men.  Now, beat it!"

"Jus' as you say, Ma'am," he returned, with mock courtesy.  "But I
could tell a strange story if I would.  But you don't need to be
scared.  That's one thing I never do--I never squeal on a friend."

She was burning with his insults, and if she had had a gun at hand
she undoubtedly would have made good her threat.  But she had none.
Drazk very deliberately turned his horse and rode away toward the
meadows.

"Oh, won't I fix him!" she said, as she continued her toilet in a
fury.  She had not the faintest idea what revenge she would take,
but she promised herself that it would leave nothing to be desired.
Then, because she was young and healthy and an optimist, and did
not know what it meant to be afraid, she dismissed the incident
from her mind to consider the more urgent matter of breakfast.

Tompkins, the cook, had not needed Transley's suggestion to put his
best foot forward when catering to Y.D. and his daughter.  Tompkins'
soul yearned for a cooking berth that could be occupied the year
round.  Work in the railway camps had always left him high and dry
at the freeze-up--dry, particularly, and a few nights in Calgary or
Edmonton saw the end of his season's earnings.  Then came a
precarious existence for Tompkins until the scrapers were back on
the dump the following spring.  A steady job, cooking on a ranch
like the Y.D.; if Tompkins had written the Apocalypse that would
have been his picture of heaven.  So he had left nothing undone,
even to despatching a courier over night to a railway station thirty
miles away for fresh fruit and other delicacies. Another of the gang
had been impressed into a trip up the river to a squatter who was
suspected of keeping one or two milch cows and sundry hens.

"This way, Ma'am," Tompkins was waving as Zen emerged from the
grove.  "Another of our usual mornings.  Hope you slep' well,
Ma'am."  He stood deferentially aside while she ascended the three
steps that led into the covered wagon.

Zen gave a little shriek of delight, and Tompkins felt that all his
efforts had been well repaid.  One end of the table--it was with a
sore heart Tompkins had realized that he could not cut down the big
table--one end of the table was set with a clean linen cloth and
granite dishware scoured until it shone.  Beside Zen's plate were
grape fruit and sliced oranges and real cream.

"However did you manage it?" she gasped.

"Nothing's too good for Y.D.'s daughter," was the only explanation
Tompkins would offer, but, as Zen afterwards said, the smile on his
face was as good as another breakfast.  After the fruit came
porridge, and more cream; then fresh boiled eggs with toast; then
fresh ripe strawberries with more cream.

"Mr.--Mr.--"

"Tompkins, Ma'am; Cyrus Tompkins," he supplied.

"Well, Mr. Tompkins, you're a wonder, and when there's a new cook
to be engaged for the Y.D. I shall think of you."

"Indeed I wish you would, Ma'am," he said, earnestly.  "This road
work's all right, and nobody ever cooked for a better boss than Mr.
Transley--savin' it would be your father, Ma'am--but I'm a man of
family, an' it's pretty hard--"

"Family, did you say, Mr. Tompkins?  How many of a family have
you?"

"Well, it's seven years since I heard from them--I haven't
corresponded very reg'lar of late, but they WAS six--"

The story of Tompkins' family was cut short by the arrival of a
team and mowing machine.

"What's up, Fred?" called Tompkins through a window of his dining
car to the driver.  "Breakfust is just over, an' dinner ain't
begun."

For answer the man addressed as Fred slowly produced an iron stake
about eighteen inches long and somewhat less than an inch in
diameter.

"What kind of shrubbery do you call that, Tompkins?" he demanded.

"Well, it ain't buffalo grass, an' it ain't brome grass, an' I
don't figger it's alfalfa," said Tompkins, meditatively.

"No, and it ain't a grub-stake," Fred replied, with some sarcasm.
"It's a iron stake, growin' right in a nice little clump of grass,
and I run on to it and bust my cuttin'-bar all to--that is, all to
pieces," he completed rather lamely, taking Zen into his glance.

"I think I follow you," she said, with a smile.  "Can you fix it
here?"

"Nope.  Have to go to town for a new one.  Two days' lost time,
when every hour counts.  Hello!  Here comes someone else."

Another of the teamsters was drawing into camp.  "Hello, Fred!" he
said, upon coming up with his fellow workman, "you in too?  I had a
bit of bad luck.  I run smash on to an iron stake right there in
the ground and crumpled my knife like so much soap."

"I did worse," said Fred, with a grin.  "I bust my cuttin'-bar."

The two men exchanged a steady glance for half a minute.  Then the
new-comer gave vent to a long, low whistle.

"So that's the way of it," he said.  "That's the kind of war Mr.
Landson makes.  Well, we can fight back with the same weapons, but
that won't cut the hay, will it?"

By this time Y.D. and Transley, with four other teamsters, were
observed coming in.  Each driver had had the same experience.  An
iron stake, carefully hidden in a clump of grass, had been driven
down into the ground until it was just high enough to intercept the
cutting-bar.  The fine, sharp knives were crumpled against it; in
some cases the heavy cutting-bar, in which the knives operate, was
damaged.

Y.D.'s face was black with fury.

"That's the lowest, mangyest, cowardliest trick I ever had pulled
on me," he was saying.  "I'm plumb equal to ridin' down to
Landson's an' drivin' one of them stakes through under his short
ribs."

"But can you prove that Landson did it?" said Zen, who had an
element of caution in her when her father was concerned.  She had a
vision of a fight, with Landson pleading entire ignorance of the
whole cause of offence, and her father probably summoned by the
police for unprovoked assault.

"No, I can't prove that Landson did it, an' I can't prove that the
grass my steers eat turns to hair on their backs," he retorted,
"but I reach my own conclusions.  Is there any shootin' irons in
the place?"

"Now, Dad, that's enough," said the girl, firmly.  "There'll be no
shooting between you and Landson.  If there is to be anything of
that kind I'll ride down ahead and warn him of what's coming."

"Darter," said Y.D.--it was only on momentous occasions that he
addressed her as daughter--"I brought you over here as a guest, not
as manager o' my affairs.  I've taken care of those affairs for some
considerable years, an' I reckon I still have the qualifications.
If you're a-goin' to act up obstrep'rous I'll get Mr. Transley to
lend me a man to escort you home."

"At your service, Y.D.," said George Drazk, who was in the crowd
which had gathered about the rancher, his daughter, and Transley.
"That Pete-horse an' me would jus' see her over the hills a-
whoopin'."

"I don't think it would be wise to take any extreme measures, at
least, not just yet," said Transley.  "It's out of the question to
suppose that Landson has picketed the whole valley with those
stakes.  It is now quite clear why we were left in peace yesterday.
He wanted us to get started, and get a few swaths cut, so that he
would know where to drive the stakes to catch us the next morning.
Some of these machines can be repaired at once, and the others
within a day or two.  We will just move over a little and start on
new fields.  There's pretty good moonlight these nights and we'll
leave a few men out on guard, and perhaps we can catch the enemy at
his little game.  Let us get one of Landson's men with the goods on
him."

Y.D. was somewhat pacified by this suggestion.  "You're a practical
devil, Transley," he said, with considerable admiration.  "Now, in
a case of this kind I jus' get plumb fightin' mad.  I want to bore
somebody.  I guess it's the only kind o' procedure that comes easy
to my hand.  I guess you're right, but I hate to let anybody have
the laugh on me."  Y.D. looked down the valley, shading his eyes
with his hand.  "That son-of-a-gun has got a dozen or more stacks
down there.  I don't wish nobody any hard luck, but if some
tenderfoot was to drop a cigar--"

"In that case I suppose you'd pray for a west wind, Dad," Zen
suggested, "but the winds in these valleys, even with your prayers
to direct them, are none too reliable."

"Everybody to work on fixing up these machines," Transley ordered.
"Linder, make a list of what repairs are needed and Drazk will ride
to town with it at once.  Some of them may have to come out from
the city by express.  Drazk can get the orders in and a team will
follow to bring out the repairs."

In a moment Transley's men were busy with wrenches and hammers,
replacing knives and appraising damages.  Even in his anger Y.D.
took approving note of the promptness of Transley's decisions and
the zest with which his men carried them into effect.

"A he-man, that fellow, Zen," he confided to his daughter, "If he'd
blowed into this country thirty years ago, like I did, he'd own it
by this time plumb to the sky-line."

When the list of repairs was completed Linder handed it to Drazk.

"Beat it to town on that Pete-horse of yours, George," he said.
"Burn the grass on the road."

"I bet I'll be ten miles on the road back when I meet my shadow
goin'," said Drazk, making a spectacular leap into his saddle.
"Bye, Y.D!; bye, Zen!" he shouted while he whirled his horse's head
eastward and waved his hand to where they stood.  In spite of her
annoyance at him she had to smile and return his salute.

"Mr. Drazk is irrepressible," she remarked to Transley.

"And irresponsible," the contractor returned.  "I sometimes wonder
why I keep him.  In fact, I don't really keep him; he just stays.
Every spring he hunts me up and fastens on.  Still, I get a lot of
good service out of him.  Praise 'that Pete-horse,' and George
would ride his head off for you.  He has a weakness for wanting to
marry every woman he sees, but his infatuations seem harmless
enough."

"I know something of his weakness," Zen replied.  "I have already
been honored with a proposal."

Transley looked in her face.  It was slightly flushed, whether with
the summer sun or with her confession, but it was a wonderfully
good face to look in.

"Zen," he said, in a low voice that Y.D. and the others might not
hear, "how would you take a serious proposal, made seriously by one
who loves you, and who knows that you are, and always will be, a
queen among women?"

"If you had been a cow puncher instead of a contractor," she told
him, "I'm sure you would long ago have ended your life in some dash
over a cutbank."

Meanwhile Drazk pursued his way to town.  The trail, after crossing
the ford, turned abruptly to the right from that which led across
country to the North Y.D.  For a mile or more it skirted the stream
in a park-like drive through groves of spruce and cottonwood.
Sunshine and the babble of water everywhere filled the air.
Sunshine, too, filled George Drazk's heart.  The importance of his
mission was pleasantly heavy upon him.  He pictured the impression
he would make in town, galloping in with his horse wet over the
back, and rushing to the implement agency with all the importance of
a courier from Y.D.  He would let two of the boys take Pete to the
stable, and then, seated on a mower seat in the shade, he would tell
the story.  It would lose nothing in the telling.  He would even add
how Zen had thrown a kiss at him in parting.  Perhaps he would have
Zen kiss him on the cheek before the whole camp.  He turned that
possibility over in his mind, weighing nicely the credulity of his
imaginary audience. . . .  At any rate, whether he decided to put
that in the story or not, it was very pleasant to think about.

Presently the trail turned abruptly up a gully leading into the
hills.  A huge cutbank, jutting into the river, barred the way in
front, and its precipitous side, a hundred feet or more in height,
kept continually crumbling and falling into the stream.  These
cutbanks are a terror to inexperienced riders.  The valleys are
swallowed up in the tawny sameness of the ranges; the vision
catches only the higher levels, and one may gallop to the verge of
a precipice before becoming aware of its existence.  It was to this
that Zen had referred in speaking of Transley's precipitateness.

Drazk followed the gully up into the hills, letting his horse drop
back to a walk in the hard going along the dry bed of a stream
which flowed only in the spring freshets.  Pete had to pick his way
over boulders and across stretches of sand and boggy patches of
black mud formed by little springs leaking out under clumps of
willows.  Here and there the white ribs of a steer's skeleton
peered through the brush; once or twice an overpowering stench gave
notice of a carcass not wholly decomposed.

It was not a pleasant environment, but in an hour Drazk was out
again on the brow of the brown hills, where the sunshine flooded
about and a fresh breeze beat up against his face.  After all his
winding about in the gully he was not more than a mile from the
cutbank.

"I reckon I could get a great view from that cutbank of what
Landson is doin'," he suddenly remarked to himself.  He took off
his hat and scratched his tousled head in reflection.  "Linder said
to beat it," he ruminated, "but I can't get back to-night anyway,
an' it might be worth while to do a little scoutin'.  Here goes!"

He struck a smart gallop to the southward, and brought his horse
up, spectacularly, a yard from the edge of the precipice.  The view
which his position commanded was superb.  Up the valley lay the
white tents of Transley's outfit, almost hidden in green foliage;
the ford across the river was distinctly visible, and stretching
south from it lay, like a great curving snake, the trail which
wound across the valley and lost itself in the foothills far to the
south; across the western horizon hung the purple curtain of the
mountains, soft and vague in their noonday mists, but touched with
settings of ivory where the snow fields beat back the blazing
sunshine; far down the valley was the gleam of Landson's
whitewashed buildings, and nearer at hand the greenish-brown of the
upland meadows which his haymakers had already cleared of their
crop of prairie wool.  This was now arising in enormous stacks; it
must have been three miles to where they lay, but Drazk's keen eyes
could distinguish ten completed stacks and two others in course of
building.  He could even see the sweeps hauling the new hay, after
only a few hours of sun-drying, and sliding it up the inclined
platforms which dumped it into the form of stacks.  The foothill
rancher makes hay by horse power, and almost without the aid of a
pitch-fork.  Even as Drazk watched he saw a load skidded up; saw
its apparent momentary poise in air; saw the well-trained horses
stop and turn and start back to the meadow with their sweep.  And
up the valley Transley's outfit was at a standstill.

Drazk employed his limited but expressive vocabulary.  It was
against all human nature to look on such a scene unmoved.  He
recalled Y.D.'s half-spoken wish about a random cigar.  Then
suddenly George Drazk's mouth dropped open and his eyes rounded
with a great idea.

Of course, it was against all the rules of the range--it was outlaw
business--but what about driving iron stakes in a hay meadow?
Drazk's philosophy was that the end justifies the means.  And if
the end would win the approval of Y.D.--and of Y.D.'s daughter--
then any means was justified.  Had not Linder said, "Burn the grass
on the road?"  Drazk knew well enough that Linder's remark was a
figure of speech, but his eccentric mind found no trouble in
converting it into literal instructions.

Drazk sniffed the air and looked at the sun.  A soft breeze was
moving slowly up the valley; the sun was just past noon.  There was
every reason to expect that as the lowland prairies grew hot with
the afternoon sunshine a breeze would come down out of the mountains
to occupy the area of great atmospheric expansion.  Drazk knew
nothing about the theory of the thing; all that concerned him was
the fact that by mid-afternoon the wind would probably change to the
west.

Two miles down the valley he found a gully which gave access to the
water's edge.  He descended, located a ford, and crossed.  There
were cattle-trails through the cottonwoods; he might have followed
them, but he feared the telltale shoe-prints.  He elected the more
difficult route down the stream itself.  The South Y.D. ran mostly
on a wide gravel bottom; it was possible to pick out a course which
kept Pete in water seldom higher than his knees.  An hour of this,
and Drazk, peering through the trees, could see the nearest of
Landson's stacks not half a mile away.  The Landson gang were
working farther down the valley, and the stack itself covered
approach from the river.

Drazk slipped from the saddle, and stole quietly into the open.
The breeze was now coming down the valley.



CHAPTER VI


Transley's men had repaired such machines as they could and
returned to work.  The clatter of mowing machines filled the
valley; the horses were speeded up to recover lost time.  Transley
and Y.D. rode about, carefully scrutinizing the short grass for
iron stakes, and keeping a general eye on operations.

Suddenly Transley sat bolt-still on his horse.  Then, in a low
voice,

"Y.D!" he said.

The rancher turned and followed the line of Transley's vision.  The
nearest of Landson's stacks was ablaze, and a great pillar of smoke
was rolling skyward.  Even as they watched, the base of the fire
seemed to spread; then, in a moment, tongues of flame were seen
leaping from a stack farther on.

"Looks like your prayers were answered, Y.D.," said Transley.  "I
bet they haven't a plow nearer than the ranch."

Y.D. seemed fascinated by the sight.  He could not take his eyes
off it.  He drew a cigar from his pocket and thrust it far into his
mouth, chewing it savagely and rolling it in his lips, but,
according to the law of the hayfield, refraining from lighting it.
At first there was a gleam of vengeance in his eyes, but presently
that gave way to a sort of horror.  Every honorable tradition of
the range demanded that he enlist his force against the common
enemy.

"Hell, Transley!" he ejaculated, "we can't sit and look at that!
Order the men out!  What have we got to fight with?"

For answer Transley swung round in his saddle and struck his palm
into Y.D.'s.

"Good boy, Y.D!" he said.  "I did you an injustice--I mean, about
your prayers being answered.  We haven't as much as a plow, either,
but we can gallop down with some barrels in a wagon and put a sack
brigade to work.  I'm afraid it won't save Landson's hay, but it
will show where our hearts are."

Transley and Y.D. galloped off to round up the men, some of whom
had already noticed the fire.  Transley despatched four men and two
teams to take barrels, sacks, and horse blankets to the Landson
meadows.  The others he sent off at once on horseback to give what
help they could.

Zen rode up just as they left, and already her fine horse seemed to
realize the tension in the air.  His keen, hard-strung muscles
quivered as she brought his gallop to a stop.

"How did it start, Dad?" she demanded.

"How do I know?" he returned, shortly.  "D'ye think I fired it?"

"No, but I just asked the question that Landson will ask, so you
better have your answer handy.  I'm going to gallop down to their
ranch; perhaps I can help Mrs. Landson."

"The ranch buildings are safe enough, I think," said Transley.
"The grass there is close cropped, and there is some plowing."

For a moment the three sat, watching the spread of the flames.  By
this time the whole lower valley was blanketed in smoke.  Clouds of
blue and mauve and creamy yellow rolled from the meadows and
stacks.  The fire was whipping the light breeze of the afternoon to
a gale, and was already running wildly over the flanks of the
foothills.

"Well, I'm off," said Zen.  "Good-bye!"

"Be careful, Zen!" her father shouted.  "Fire is fire."  But
already her horse was stretching low and straight in a hard gallop
down the valley.

"I'll ride in to camp and tell Tompkins to make up a double supply
of sandwiches and coffee," said Transley.  "I guess there'll be no
cooking in Landson's outfit this afternoon.  After that we can both
run down and lend a hand, if that suits you."

As they rode to camp together Y.D. drew up close to the contractor.
"Transley," he said, "how do you reckon that fire started?"

"I don't know," said Transley, "any more than you do."

"I didn't ask you what you KNEW.  I asked you what you reckoned."

Transley rode for some minutes in silence.  Then at last he spoke:

"A man isn't supposed to reckon in things of this kind.  He should
know, or keep his mouth shut.  But I allow myself just one guess.
Drazk."

"Why Drazk?" Y.D. demanded.  "He has nothin' to gain, and this
prank may put him in the cooler."

"Drazk would do anything to be spectacular," Transley explained.
"He probably will boast openly about it.  You know, he's trying to
make an impression on Zen."

"Nonsense!"

"Of course it's nonsense, but Drazk doesn't see it that way."

"I'd string him to the nearest cottonwood if I thought he--"

"Now don't do him an injustice, Y.D.  Drazk doesn't realize that
he is no mate for Zen.  He doesn't know of any reason why Zen
shouldn't look on him with favor; indeed, with pride.  It's
ridiculous, I know, but Drazk is built that way."

"Then I'll change his style of architecture the first time I run
into him," said Y.D. savagely.  "Zen is too young to think of such
a thing, anyway."

"She will always be too young to think of such a thing, so far as
Drazk or his type is concerned," Transley returned.  "But suppose--
Y.D., to be quite frank, suppose _I_ suggested--"

"Transley, you work quick," said Y.D.  "I admit I like a quick
worker.  But just now we have a fire on our hands."

By this time they had reached the camp.  Transley gave his
instructions in a few words, and then turned to ride down to
Landson's.  They had gone only a few hundred yards when Y.D. pulled
his horse to a stop.

"Transley!" he exclaimed, and his voice was shaking.  "What do you
smell?"

The contractor drew up and sniffed the air.  When he turned to Y.D.
his face was white.

"Smoke, Y.D!" he gasped.  "The wind has changed!"

It was true.  Already low clouds of smoke were drifting overhead
like a broken veil.  The erratic foothill wind, which a few minutes
before had been coming down the valley, was now blowing back up
again.  Even while they took in the situation they could feel the
hot breath of the distant fire borne against their faces.

"Well, it's up to us," said Transley tersely.  "We'll make a fight
of it.  Got any speed in that nag of yours?"  Without waiting for
an answer he put spurs to his horse and set forward on a wild
gallop into the smoke.

A mile down the line he found that Linder had already gathered his
forces and laid out a plan of defence.  The valley, from the South
Y.D. to the hills, was about four miles wide, and up the full
breadth of it was now coming the fire from Landson's fields.  There
was no natural fighting line; Linder had not so much as a buffalo
path to work against.  But he was already starting back-fires at
intervals of fifty yards, allotting three men to each fire.  A
back-fire is a fire started for the purpose of stopping another.
Usually a road, or a plowed strip, or even a cattle path, is used
for a base.  On the windward side of this base the back-fire is
started and allowed to eat its way back against the wind until it
meets the main fire which is rushing forward with the wind, and
chokes it out for lack of fuel.  A few men, stationed along a
furrow or a trail, can keep the small back-fire from jumping it,
although they would be powerless to check the momentum of the main
fire.

This was Linder's position, except that he had no furrow to work
against.  All he could do was tell off men with sacks and horse
blankets soaked in the barrels of water to hold the back-fire in
check as best they could.  So far they were succeeding.  As soon as
the fire had burned a few feet the forward side of it was pounded
out with wet sacks.  It didn't matter about the other side.  It
could be allowed to eat back as far as it liked; the farther the
better.

"Good boy, Lin!" Transley shouted, as he drew up and surveyed
operations.  "She played us a dirty trick, didn't she?"

Linder looked up, red-eyed and coughing.  "We can hold it here," he
said, "but we can never cross the valley.  The fire will be on us
before we have burned a mile.  It will beat around our south flank
and lick up everything!"

Transley jumped from his horse.  He seized Linder in his arms and
literally threw him into the saddle.  "You're played, boy!" he
shouted in his foreman's ear.  "Ride down to the river and get into
the water, and stay there until you know we can win!"

Then Transley threw himself into the fight.  As the men said
afterwards, Linder fought like a wildcat, but Transley fought like
a den of lions.  When the wagon galloped up from the river with
barrels of water Transley seized a barrel at the end and set it
bodily on the ground.  He sprang into the wagon, shouting commands
to horses and men.  A hundred yards they galloped along the
fighting front; then Transley sprang out and set another barrel on
the ground.  In this way, instead of having the men all coming to
the wagon to wet their sacks, he distributed water along the line.
Then they turned back, picked up the empty barrels, and galloped to
the river for a fresh supply.

Soon they had the first mile secure.  The backfires had all met;
the forward line of flames had all been pounded out; the rear line
had burned back until there was no danger of it jumping the burned
space.  Then Transley picked up his kit and rushed it on to a new
front farther south.  At intervals of a hundred yards he started
fires, holding them in check and beating out the western edge as
before.

But his difficulties were increasing.  He was farther from the
river.  It took longer to get water.  One of the barrels fell off
and collapsed.  Some of the men were playing out.  The horses were
wild with excitement and terror.  The smoke was growing denser and
hotter.  Men were coughing and gasping through dry, seared lips.

"You can't hold it, Transley; you can't hold it!" said one of the
men.

Transley hit him from the shoulder.  He crumpled up and collapsed.

A mile and a half had been made safe, but the smoke was
suffocatingly thick and the roar of the oncoming fire rose above
the shouts of the fighters.  Up galloped the water wagon; made a
sharp lurch and turn, and a front wheel collapsed with the shock.
The wagon went down at one corner and the barrels were dumped on
the ground.

The men looked at Transley.  For one moment he surveyed the
situation.

"Is there a chain?" he demanded.  There was.

"Hitch on to the tire of this broken wheel.  Some of you men yank
the hub out of it.  Others pull grass.  Pull, like hell was after
you!"

They pulled.  In a minute or two Transley had the rim of the wheel
flat on the ground, with a team hitched to it and a little pile of
dry grass inside.  Then he set fire to the little pile of grass and
started the team slowly along the battle front.  As they moved the
burning grass in the rim set fire to the grass on the prairie
underneath; the rim partly rubbed it out again as it came over, and
the men were able to keep what remained in check, but as he
lengthened his line Transley had to leave more and more men to beat
out the fire, and had fewer to pull grass.  The sacks were too wet
to burn; he had to have grass to feed his moving fire-spreader.

At length he had only a teamster and himself, and his fire was
going out.  Transley whipped off his shirt, rolled it into a little
heap, set fire to it, and ran along beside the rim, firing the
little moving circle of grass inside.

It was the teamster, looking back, who saw Transley fall.  He had
to drop the lines to run to his assistance, and the horses,
terrified by smoke and fire and the excitement of the fight,
immediately bolted.  The teamster took Transley in his arms and
half carried, half dragged him into the safe area behind the
backfires.  And a few minutes later the main fire, checked on its
front, swept by on the flank and raced on up through the valley.

In riding down to the assistance of Mrs. Landson Zen found herself
suddenly caught in an eddy of smoke.  She did not realize at the
moment that the wind had turned; she thought she must have ridden
into the fire area.  To avoid the possibility of being cut off by
the fire, and also for better air, she turned her horse to the
river.  All through the valley were billows of smoke, with here and
there a reddish-yellow glare marking the more vicious sections of
flame.  Vaguely, at times, she thought she caught the shouting of
men, but all the heavens seemed full of roaring.

When Zen reached the water the smoke was hanging low on it, and she
drove her horse well in.  Then she swung down the stream, believing
that by making a detour in this way she could pass the wedge of
fire that had interrupted her and get back on to the trail leading
to Landson's.  She was coughing with the smoke, but rode on in the
confidence that presently it would lift.

It did.  A whip of wind raised it like a strong arm throwing off a
blanket.  She sat up and breathed freely.  The hot sun shone
through rifts in the canopy of smoke; the blue sky looked down
serene and unmoved by this outburst of the elements.  Then as Zen
brought her eyes back to the water she saw a man on horseback not
forty yards ahead.  Her first thought was that it must be one of
the fire fighters, driven like herself to safety, but a second
glance revealed George Drazk.  For a moment she had an impulse to
wheel and ride out, but even as she smothered that impulse a tinge
of color rose in her cheeks that she should for a moment have
entertained it.  To let George Drazk think she was afraid of him
would be utmost humiliation.

She continued straight down the stream, but he had already seen her
and was headed her way.  In the excitement of what he had just done
Drazk was less responsible than usual.

"Hello, Zen!" he said.  "Mighty decent of you to ride down an' meet
me like this.  Mighty decent, Zen!"

"I didn't ride down to meet you, Drazk, and you know it.  Keep out
of the way or I'll use a whip on you!"

"Oh, how haughty!  Y.D. all over!  Never mind, dear, I like you all
the better for that.  Who wants a tame horse?   An' as for comin'
down to meet me, what's the odds, so long as we've met?"

He had turned his horse and blocked the way in front of her.  When
Zen's horse came within reach Drazk caught him by the bridle.

"Will you let go?" the girl said, speaking as calmly as she could,
but in a white passion.  "Will you let go of that bridle, or shall
I make you?"

He looked her full in the face.  "Gad, but you're a stunner!" he
exclaimed.  "I'm glad we met--here."

She brought her whip with a biting cut around the wrist that held
her bridle.  Drazk winced, but did not let go.

"Jus' for that, young Y.D.," he hissed, "jus' for that we drop all
formalities, so to speak."

With a dexterous spurring he brought his horse alongside and threw
an arm about Zen before she could beat him off.  She used her whip
at short range on his face, but had not arm-room in which to land a
blow.  They were stirrup-deep in water, and as they struggled the
horses edged in deeper still.  Finding that she could not beat
Drazk off Zen clutched her saddle and drove the spurs into her
horse.  At this unaccustomed treatment he plunged wildly forward,
but Drazk's grip on her was too strong to be broken.  The manoeuvre
had, however, the effect of unhorsing Drazk.  He fell in the water,
but kept his grip on Zen.  With his free hand he still had the
reins of his own horse, and he managed also to get hold of hers.
Although her horse was plunging and jumping, Drazk's strong grip on
his rein kept him from breaking away.

"You fight well, Zen, damn you--you fight well," he cried.  "So you
might.  You played with me--you made a fool of me.  We'll see who's
the fool in the end."  With a mighty wrench he tore her from her
saddle and she found herself struggling with him in the water.

"If I put you under for a minute I guess you'll be good," he
threatened.  "I'll half drown you, Zen, if I have to."

"Go ahead," she challenged.  "I'll drown myself, if I have to."

"Not just yet, Zen; not just yet.  Afterwards you can do as you
like."

In their struggles they had been getting gradually into deeper
water.  At this moment they found their feet carried free, and the
horses began to swim for the shore.  Drazk held to both reins with
one hand, still clutching his victim with the other.  More than
once they went under water together and came up half choking.

Zen was not a good swimmer, but she would gladly have broken away
and taken chances with the current.  Once on land she would be at
his mercy.  She was using her head frantically, but could think of
no device to foil him.  It was not her practice to carry weapons;
her whip had already gone down the stream.  Presently she saw a
long leather thong floating out from the saddle of Drazk's horse.
It was no larger than a whiplash; apparently it was a spare lace
which Drazk carried, and which had worked loose in the struggle.
It was floating close to Drazk.

"Don't let me sink, George!" she cried frantically, in sudden
fright.  "Save me!  I won't fight any more."

"That's better," he said, drawing her up to him.  "I knew you'd
come to your senses."

Her hand reached the lash.  With a quick motion of the arm, such as
is given in throwing a rope, she had looped it once around his
neck.  Then, pulling the lash violently, she fought herself out of
his grip.  He clutched at her wildly, but could reach only some
stray locks of her brown hair which had broken loose and were
floating on the water.

She saw his eyes grow round and big and horrified; saw his mouth
open and refuse to close; heard strange little gurgles and
chokings.  But she did not let go.

"When you insulted me this morning I promised to settle with you; I
did not expect to have the chance so soon."

His head had gone under water. . . .  Suddenly she realized that he
was drowning.  She let go of the thong, clutched her horse's tail,
and was pulled quickly ashore.

Sitting on the gravel, she tried to think.  Drazk had disappeared;
his horse had landed somewhat farther down. . . .  Doubtless Drazk
had drowned.  Yes, that would be the explanation.  Why change it?

Zen turned it over in her mind.  Why make any explanations?  It
would be a good thing to forget.  She could not have done otherwise
under the circumstances; no jury would expect her to do otherwise.
But why trouble a jury about it?

"He got what was coming to him," she said to herself presently.
She admitted no regret.  On the contrary, her inborn self-confidence,
her assurance that she could take care of herself under any
circumstances, seemed to be strengthened by the experience.

She got up, drew her hair into some kind of shape, and scrambled a
little way up the steep bank.  Clouds of smoke were rolling up the
valley.  She did not grasp the significance of the fact at the
first glance, but in a moment it impacted home to her.  The wind
had changed!  Her help now would be needed, not by Mrs. Landson,
but probably at their own camp.  She sprang on her horse, re-
crossed the stream, and set out on a gallop for the camp.  On the
way she had to ride through one thin line of fire, which she
accomplished successfully.  Through the smoke she could dimly see
Transley's gang fighting the back-fires.  She knew that was in good
hands, and hastened on to the camp.  Zen had had prairie experience
enough to know that in hours like this there is almost sure to be
something or somebody, in vital need, overlooked.

She galloped into the camp and found only Tompkins there.  He had
already run a little back-fire to protect the tents and the chuck-
wagon.

"How goes it, Tompkins?" she cried, bursting upon him like a
courier from battle.

"All set here, Ma'am," he answered.  "All set an' safe.  But
they'll never hold the main fire; it'll go up the valley hell-
scootin',--beggin' your pardon, Ma'am."

"Anyone live up the valley?"

"There is.  There's the Lints--squatters about six miles up--it was
from them I got the cream an' fresh eggs you was good enough to
notice, Ma'am.  An' there's no men folks about; jus' Mrs. Lint an'
a young herd of little Lints; least, that's all was there las'
night."

"I must go up," said Zen, with instant decision.  "I can get there
before the fire, and as the Lints are evidently farmers there will
be some plowed land, or at least a plow with which to run a furrow
so that we can start a back-fire.  Direct me."

Tompkins directed her as to the way, and, leaving a word of
explanation to be passed on to her father, she was off.  A half
hour's hard riding brought her to Lint's, but she found that this
careful settler had made full provision against such a contingency
as was now come about.  The farm buildings, implements, stables,
everything was surrounded, not by a fire-guard, but by a broad
plowed field.  Mrs. Lint, however, was little less thankful for
Zen's interest than she would have been had their little steading
been in danger.  She pressed Zen to wait and have at least a cup
of tea, and the girl, knowing that she could be of little or no
service down the valley, allowed herself to be persuaded.  In this
little harbor of quiet her mind began to arrange the day's events.
The tragic happening at the river was as yet too recent to appear
real; had it not been for the touch of her wet clothing Zen could
have thought that all an unhappy dream of days ago.  She reflected
that neither Tompkins nor Mrs. Lint had commented upon her
appearance.  The hot sun had soon dried her outer apparel, and her
general dishevelled condition was not remarkable on such a day as
this.

The wind had gone down as the afternoon waned, and the fire was
working up the valley leisurely when Zen set out on her return
trip.  A couple of miles from the Lint homestead she met its
advance guard.  It was evening now; the sun shone dull red through
the banked clouds of smoke resting against the mountains to the
west; the flames danced and flickered, advanced and receded, sprang
up and died down again, along mile after mile of front.  It was a
beautiful thing to behold, and Zen drew her horse to a stop on a
hill-top to take in the grandeur of the scene.  Near at hand
frolicking flames were working about the base of the hill, and far
down the valley and over the foothills the flanks of the fire
stretched like lines of impish infantry in single file.

Suddenly she heard the sound of hoofs, and a rider drew up at her
side.  She supposed him one of Transley's men, but could not recall
having seen him in the camp.  He sat his horse with an ease and
grace that her eye was quick to appraise; he removed his broad felt
hat before he spoke; and he did not call her "ma'am."

"Pardon me--I believe I am speaking to Y.D.'s daughter?" he asked,
and before waiting for a reply hastened to introduce himself.  "My
name is Dennison Grant, foreman on the Landson ranch."

"Oh!" she exclaimed.  "I thought--I thought you were one of Mr.
Transley's men."  Then, with a quick sense of the barrier between
them, she added, "I hope you don't think that I--that we--had
anything to do with this?"  She indicated the ruined valley with
her hand.

"No more than I had to do with those coward's stakes," he answered.
"Neither of us understand just now, but can we take that much for
granted?"

There was something about him that rather appealed to her.  "I
think we can," she said, simply.

For a moment they watched the kaleidoscopic scene below them.  "It
may help you to understand," she continued, "if I say that I was
riding down to see if I could be of some use to Mrs. Landson when
the wind changed, and I saw I would be more likely to be needed
here."

"And it may help you to understand," he said, "if I say that as
soon as immediate danger to the Landson ranch was over I rode up to
Transley's camp.  Only the cook was there, and he told me of your
having set out to help Mrs. Lint, so I followed up.  Fortunately
the fire has lost its punch; it will probably go out through the
night."

There was a short silence, in which she began to realize her
peculiar position.  This man was the rival of Transley and Linder
in the business of hay-cutting in the valley.  He was the foreman
of the Landson crowd--Landson, against whom her father had been
voicing something very near to murder threats not many hours ago.
Had she met him before the fire she would have spurned and despised
him, but nothing unites the factions of man like a fight against a
common elemental enemy.  Besides, there was the question, How DID
the fire start?  That was a question which every Landson man would
be asking.  Grant had been generous about it; he had asked her to
be equally generous about the episode of the stakes. . . .  And
there was something about the man that appealed to her.  She had
never felt that way about Transley or Linder.  She had been
interested in them; amused, perhaps; out for an adventure, perhaps;
but this man--  Nonsense!  It was the environment--the romantic
setting.  As for Drazk--  A quick sense of horror caught her as the
memory of his choking face protruded into her consciousness. . . .

"Well, suppose we ride home," he suggested.  "By Jove!  The fire
has worked around us."

It was true.  The hill on which they stood was now entirely
surrounded by a ring of fire, eating slowly up the side.  The
warmth of its breath already pressed against their faces; the
funnel effect created by the circle of fire was whipping up a
stronger draught.  The smoke seemed to be gathering to a centre
above them.

He swung up close to her.  "Will your horse face it?" he asked.
"If not, we'd better blindfold him."

"I'll try him," she said.  "He was all right this afternoon, but he
was reckless then with a hard gallop."

Zen's horse trotted forward at her urging to within a dozen yards
of the circle of fire.  Then he stopped, snorting and shivering.
She rode back up the hill.

"Better blindfold him," Grant advised, pulling off his leather
coat.  "A sleeve of my shirt should be about right.  Will you cut
it off?"

She protested.

"There's no time to lose," he reminded her, as he placed his knife
in her hand.  "My horse will go through it all right."

So urged she deftly cut off his sleeve above the elbow and drew it
through the bridle of her horse across his eyes.

"Now keep your head down close to his neck.  You'll go through all
right.  Give him the spurs, and good luck!" he shouted.

She was already careering down the hillside.  A few paces from the
fire the horse plunged into a badger hole and fell headlong.  She
went over his head, down, with a terrific shock, almost in the very
teeth of the fire.



CHAPTER VII


When Zen came to herself it was with a sense of a strange swimming
in her head.  Gradually it resolved itself into a sound of water
about her head; a splashing, fighting water; two heads in the
water; two heads in the water; a lash floating in the water--

"Oh!"  She was sure she felt water on her face. . . .

"Where am I?"

"You're all right--you'll be all right in a little while."

"But where am I?  What has happened?"  She tried to sit up.  All
was dark.  "Where am I?" she demanded.

"Don't be alarmed, Zen--I think your name is Zen," she heard a
man's voice saying.  "You've been hurt, but you'll be all right
presently."

Then the curtain lifted.  "You are Dennison Grant," she said.  "I
remember you now.  But what has happened?  Why am I here--with
you?"

"Well, so far, you've been enjoying about three hours'
unconsciousness," he told her.  "At a distance which seems about a
mile from here--although it may be less--is a little pond.  I've
carried water in the sleeve of my coat--fortunately it is leather--
and poured it somewhat generously upon your brow.  And at last I've
been rewarded by a conscious word."

She tried to sit up, but desisted when a sudden twitch of pain held
her fast.

"Let me help you," he said, gently.  "We have camped, as you may
notice, on a big, flat rock.  I found it not far from the scene of
the accident, so I carried you over to it.  It is drier than the
earth, and, for the forepart of the night at least, will be
warmer."  With a strong arm about her shoulders he drew her into a
sitting posture.

Her eyes were becoming accustomed to the darkness.  "What's wrong
with my foot?" she demanded.  "My boot's off."

"I'm afraid you turned your ankle getting free from your stirrup,"
he explained.  "I had to do a little surgery.  I could find nothing
broken.  It will be painful, but I fear there is nothing to do but
bear it."

She reached down and felt her foot.  It was neatly bandaged with
cloth very much like that which she had used to blindfold Quiver.
It was easy to surmise where it came from.  Evidently her protector
had stopped at nothing.

"Well, are we to stay here permanently?" she asked, presently.

"Only for the night," he told her.  "If we're lucky, not that long.
Search parties will be hunting for you, and they will doubtless
ride this way.  Both of our horses bolted in the fire--"

"Oh yes, the fire!  Tell me what happened."

He hesitated.

"I remember riding into the fire," she continued, "and then next
thing I was on this rock.  How did it all happen?"

"Your horse fell," he explained, "just as you reached the fire, and
threw you, pretty heavily, to the ground.  I was behind, so I
dismounted and dragged you through."

"Oh!"  She felt her face.  "But I am not even singed!" she
exclaimed.

It was plain that he was holding something back.  She turned and
laid her fingers on his arm.  "Tell me how you did it," she
pressed.

The darkness hid his modest confusion.  "It was really nothing," he
stammered.  "You see, I had a leather coat, and I just threw it
over your head--and mine--and dragged you out."

She was silent for a moment while the meaning of his words came
home to her.  Then she placed her hand frankly in his.

"Thank you," she said, and even in the darkness she knew that their
eyes had met.

"You are very resourceful," she continued presently.  "Must we sit
here all night?"

"I can think of no alternative," he confessed.  "If we had fire-
arms we could shoot a signal, or if there were grass about we could
start a fire, although it probably would not be noticed with so
many glows on the horizon to-night."  He stopped to look about.
Dull splashes of red in the sky pointed out remnants of the day's
conflagration still eating their way through the foothills.  The
air was full of the pungent but not unpleasant smell of burnt
grass.

"A pretty hard night to send a signal," he said, "but they're
almost sure to ride this way."

She wondered why he did not offer to walk to the camp for help; it
could not be more than four or five miles.  Suddenly she thought
she understood.

"I am not afraid to stay here alone," she said, with a little
laugh.  It was the first time Grant had heard her laugh, and he
thought it very musical indeed.  "I've slept out many a night, and
you would be back within a couple of hours."

"I'm quite sure you're not afraid," he agreed, "but, you see, I am.
You got quite a tap on the head, and for some time before you came
to you were talking--rather foolishly.  Now if I should leave you
it is not only possible, but quite probable, that you would lapse
again into unconsciousness. . . .  I really think you'll have to
put up with me here."

"Oh, I wasn't thinking of that! . . .  Did I--did I talk--foolishly?"

"Rather.  Seemed to think you were swimming--or fighting--I
couldn't be sure which.  Sometimes you seemed to be doing both."

"Oh!"  With a cold chill the events of the day came back upon her.
That struggle in the water; it came to her now like a bad dream out
of the long, long past.  How much had she said?  How much would she
have given to know what she said?  She felt herself recounting
events. . . .

Presently she pulled herself up with a start.  She must not let him
think her moody.

"Well, if we MUST enjoy each other's company, we may as well do so
companionably," she said, with an effort at gaiety.  "Let us talk.
Tell me about yourself."

"First things first," he parried.

"Oh, I've nothing to tell.  My life has been very unromantic.  A
few years at school, and the rest of it on the range.  A very
every-day kind of existence."

"I think it's the 'every-day kind of existence' that IS romantic,"
he returned.  "It is a great mistake to think of romance as
belonging to other times and other places.  Even the most
commonplace person has experienced romance enough for a dozen
books.  Quite possibly he has not recognized the romance, but it
was there.  The trouble is that with our limited sense of humor,
what we think of as romance in other people's lives becomes tragedy
in our own."

How much DID he know? . . .  "Yes," she said, "I suppose that is
so."

"I know it is so," he went on.  "If we could read the thoughts--
know the experiences--of those nearest to us, we would never need
to look out of our own circles for either romance or tragedy.  But
it is as well that we can't.  Take the experience of to-day, for
example.  I admit it has not been a commonplace day, and yet it has
not been altogether extraordinary.  Think of the experiences we
have been through just this day, and how, if they were presented in
fiction they would be romantic, almost unbelievable.  And here we
are at the close, sitting on a rock, matter-of-fact people in a
matter-of-fact world, accepting everything as commonplace and
unexceptional."

"Not quite that," she said daringly.  "I see that you are neither
commonplace nor unexceptional."  She spoke with sudden impulse out
of the depth of her sincerity.  She had not met a man like this
before.  In her mind she fixed him in contrast with Transley, the
self-confident and aggressive, and Linder, the shy and unassertive.
None of those adjectives seemed to fit this new acquaintance.
Nevertheless, he suffered nothing by the contrast.

"If I had been bright enough I would have said that first," he
apologized, "but I got rather carried away in one of my pet
theories about romance.  Now my life, I suppose, to many people
would seem quite tame and unromantic, but to me it has been a
delightful succession of somewhat placid adventures.  It began in a
very orthodox way, in a very orthodox family.