 one in the staff had
spoken to him like that; Murdoch himself would not have dared
address him in so familiar a manner.  He decided to take a firm
position.

"Were you in the habit of speaking to my father like that?"

"Your father was a man well on in years, Mr. Grant.  Every man
according to his age."

"I am the head of the firm."

"That is so," she assented.  "But if it were not for me and the
others on your pay roll there would be no firm to require a head,
and you'd be out of a job.  You see, we are quite as essential to
you as you are to us."

Grant looked at her keenly.  Whatever her words, he had to admit
that her tone was not impertinent.  She had a manner of stating a
fact, rather than engaging in an argument.  There was nothing
hostile about her.  She had voiced these sentiments in as matter-
of-fact a way as if she were saying, "It's raining out; you had
better take your umbrella."

"You appear to be a very advanced young woman," he remarked.  "I am
a little surprised--I had hardly thought my father would select
young women of your type as his confidential secretaries."

"Private stenographer," she corrected.  "A little extra side on a
title is neither here nor there.  Well, I will admit that I rather
took your father's breath at times; he discharged me so often it
became a habit, but we grew to have a sort of tacit understanding
that that was just his way of blowing off steam.  You see, I did
his work, and I did it right.  I never lost my head when he got
into a temper; I could always read my notes even after he had spent
most of the day in death grips with some business rival.  You see,
I wasn't afraid of him, not the least bit.  And I'm not afraid of
you."

"I don't believe you are," Grant admitted.  "You are a remarkable
woman.  I think we shall get along all right if you are able to
distinguish between independence and bravado."  He turned to his
desk, then suddenly looked up again.  He was homesick for someone
he could talk to frankly.

"I don't mind telling you," he said abruptly, "that the deference
which is being showered upon me around this institution gives me a
good deal of a pain.  I've been accustomed to working with men on
the same level.  They took their orders from me, and they carried
them out, but the older hands called me by my first name, and any
of them swore back when he thought he had occasion.  I can't fit
in to this 'Yes sir,' 'No sir,' 'Very good, sir,' way of doing
business.  It doesn't ring true."

"I know what you mean," she said.  "There's too much servility in
it.  And yet one may pay these courtesies and not be servile.  I
always 'sir'd' your father, and he knew I did it because I wanted
to, not because I had to.  And I shall do the same with you once we
understand each other.  The position I want to make clear is this:
I don't admit that because I work for you I belong to a lower order
of the human family than you do, and I don't admit that, aside from
the giving of faithful service, I am under any obligation to you.
I give you my labor, worth so much; you pay me; we're square.  If
we can accept that as an understanding I'm ready to begin work now;
if not, I'm going out to look for another job."

"I think we can accept that as a working basis," he agreed.

She produced notebook and pencil.  "Very well, SIR.  Do you wish to
dictate?"

The selection of a place to call home was a matter demanding
Grant's early attention.  He discussed it with Mr. Jones.

"Of course you will take memberships in some of the better clubs,"
the lawyer had suggested.  "It's the best home life there is.  That
is why it is not to be recommended to married men; it has a
tendency to break up the domestic circle."

"But it will cost more than I can afford."

"Nonsense!  You could buy out one of their clubs, holus-bolus, if
you wanted to."

"You don't quite get me," said Grant.  "If I used the money which
was left by my father, or the income from the business, no doubt I
could do as you say.  But I feel that that money isn't really mine.
You see, I never earned it, and I don't see how a person can,
morally, spend money that he did not earn."

"Then there are a great many immoral people in the world," the
lawyer observed, dryly.

"I am disposed to agree with you," said Grant, somewhat pointedly.
"But I don't intend that they shall set my standards."

"You have your salary.  That comes under the head of earnings, if
you are finnicky about the profits.  What do you propose to pay
yourself?"

"I have been thinking about that.  On the ranch I got a hundred
dollars a month, and board."

"Well, your father got twenty thousand a year, and Roy half that,
and if they wanted more they charged it up as expenses."

"Considering the cost of board here, I think I would be justified
in taking two hundred dollars a month," Grant continued.

Jones got up and took the young man by the shoulders.  "Look here,
Grant, you're not taking yourself seriously.  I don't want to
assail your pet theories--you'll grow out of them in time--but you
hired me to give you advice, and right here I advise you not to
make a fool of yourself.  You are now in a big position; you're a
big man, and you've got to live in a big way.  If for nothing else
than to hold the confidence of the public you must do it.  Do you
think they're going to intrust their investments to a firm headed
by a two-hundred-dollar-a-month man?"

"But I AM a two-hundred-dollar-a-month man.  In fact, I'm not sure
I'm worth quite that much.  I've got no more muscle, and no more
sense, and very little more experience than I had a month ago, when
in the open market my services commanded a hundred and board."

"When a man is big enough--or his job is big enough--" Jones
argued, "he arises above the ordinary law of supply and demand.  In
fact, in a sense, he controls supply and demand.  He puts himself
in the job and dictates the salary.  You have a perfect right to
pay yourself what other men in similar positions are getting.
Besides, as I said, you'll have to do so for the credit of the
firm.  Do you call a doctor who lives in a tumble-down tenement?
You do not.  You call one from a fine home; you select him for his
appearance of prosperity, regardless of the fact that he may have
mortgaged his future to create that appearance, and of the further
fact that he will charge you a fee calculated to help pay off the
mortgage.  When you want a lawyer, do you seek some garret
practitioner?  You do not.  You go to a big building, with a big
name plate"--the pugnacious moustache gave hint of a smile
gathering beneath--"and you pay a big price for a man with an
office full of imposing-looking books, not a tenth part of which he
has ever read, or intends ever to read.  I admit there's a good
deal of bunco in the game, but if you sit in you've got to play it
that way, or the dear public will throw you into the discard.  Many
a man who votes himself a salary in five figures--or gets a
friendly board of directors to do it for him--if thrown unfriended
between the millstones of supply and demand probably couldn't
qualify for your modest hundred dollars a month and board.  But he
has risen into a different world; instead of being dictated to, he
dictates.  That is your position, Grant.  Look at it sensibly."

"Nevertheless, I shall get along on two hundred a month.  If I find
it necessary in order to protect the interests of the business to
take a membership in an expensive club, or commit any other
extravagance, I shall do so, and charge it up as a business
expense.  Besides, I think I can be happier that way."

"And in the meantime your business is piling up profits.  What are
you going to do with them?  Give them away?"

"No.  That, too, is immoral--whether it be a quarter to a beggar or
a library to a city.  It feeds the desire to get money without
earning it, which is the most immoral of all our desires.  I have
not yet decided what I shall do with it.  I have hired an expert,
in you, to show me how to make money.  I shall probably find it
necessary to hire another to show me how to dispose of it.  But not
a dollar will be given away."

"And so you would let the beggar starve?  That's a new kind of
altruism."

"No.  I would correct the conditions that made him a beggar.
That's the only kind of altruism that will make him something
better than a beggar."

"Some people would beg in any case, Grant.  They are incapable of
anything better."

"Then they are defectives, and should be cared for by the State."

"Then the State may practise charity--"

"It is not charity; it is the discharge of an obligation.  A father
may support his children, but he must not let anyone else do it."

"Well, I give up," said Jones.  "You're beyond me."

Grant laughed and extended a cigar box.  "Don't hesitate," he said,
"this doesn't come out of the two hundred.  This is entertainment
expense.  And you must come and see me when I get settled."

"When you get settled--yes.  You won't be settled until you're
married, and you might as well do some thinking about that.  A man
in your position gets a pretty good range of choice; you'd be
surprised if you knew the wire-pulling I have already encountered;
ambitious old dames fishing for introductions for their daughters.
You may be an expert with rope or branding-iron, but you're
outclassed in this matrimonial game, and some one of them will land
you one of these times before you know it.  You should be very
proud," and Mr. Jones struck something of an attitude.  "The youth
and beauty of the city are raving about you."

"About my money," Grant retorted.  "If my father had had time to
change his will they would every one of them have passed me by with
their noses in the air.  As for marrying--that's all off."

The lawyer was about to aim a humorous sally, but something in
Grant's appearance closed his lips.  "Very well, I'll come and see
you if you say when," he agreed.

Grant found what he wanted in a little apartment house on a side
street, overlooking the lake.  Here was a place where the vision
could leap out without being beaten back by barricades of stone and
brick.  He rested his eyes on the distance, and assured the
inveigling landlady that the rooms would do, and he would arrange
for decorating at his own expense.  There was a living-room, about
the size of his shack on the Landson ranch; a bathroom, and a
kitchenette, and the rent was twenty-two dollars a month.  A
decorator was called in to repaper the bathroom and kitchenette, but
for the living-room Grant engaged a carpenter.  He ordered that the
inside of the room should be boarded up with rough boards, with
exposed scantlings on the walls and ceiling.  No doubt the tradesman
thought his patron mad, or nearly so, but his business was to obey
orders, and when the job was completed it presented a very passable
duplicate of Grant's old quarters on the ranch.  He had spared the
fireplace, as a concession to comfort.  When he had gotten his
personal effects out of storage, when he had hung rifle, saddle and
lariat from spikes in the wall; had built a little book-shelf and
set his old favorites upon it; had installed his bed and the trunk
with the big D. G.; sitting in his arm chair before the fire, with
Fidget's nose snuggled companionably against his foot, he would not
have traded his quarters for the finest suite in the most expensive
club in the city.  Here was something at least akin to home.

As he was arranging the books on his shelf the clipping with the
account of Zen's wedding fell to the floor.  He sat down in his
chair and read it slowly through.  Later he went out for a walk.

It was in his long walks that Grant found the only real comfort of
his new life.  To be sure, it was not like roaming the foothills;
there was not the soft breath of the Chinook, nor the deep silence
of the mighty valleys.  But there was movement and freedom and a
chance to think.  The city offered artificial attractions in which
the foothills had not competed; faultlessly kept parks and lawns;
splashes of perfume and color; spraying fountains and vagrant
strains of music.  He reflected that some merciful principle of
compensation has made no place quite perfect and no place entirely
undesirable.  He remembered also the toll of his life in the
saddle; the physical hardship, the strain of long hours and broken
weather.  And here, too, in a different way, he was in the saddle,
and he did not know which strain was the greater.  He was beginning
to have a higher regard for the men in the saddle of business.  The
world saw only their success, or, it may be, their pretence of
success.  But there was a different story from all that, which each
one of them could have told for himself.

On this evening when his mind had been suddenly turned into old
channels by the finding of the newspaper clipping dealing with the
wedding of Y.D.'s daughter, Grant walked far into the outskirts of
the city, paying little attention to his course.  It was late
October; the leaves lay thick on the sidewalks and through the
parks; there was in all the air that strange, sad, sweet dreariness
of the dying summer. . . .  Grant had tried heroically to keep his
thoughts away from Transley's wife.  The past had come back on him,
had rather engulfed him, in that little newspaper clipping.  He let
himself wonder where she was, and whether nearly a year of married
life had shown her the folly of her decision.  He took it for
granted that her decision had been folly, and he arrived at that
position without any reflection upon Transley.  Only--Zen had been
in love with him, with him, Dennison Grant!  Sooner or later she
must discover the tragedy of that fact, and yet he told himself he
was big enough to hope she might never discover it.  It would be
best that she should forget him, as he had--almost--forgotten her.
There was no doubt that would be best.  And yet there was a
delightful sadness in thinking of her still, and hoping that some
day--  He was never able to complete the thought.

He had been walking down a street of modest homes; the bare trees
groped into a sky clear and blue with the first chill presage of
winter.  A quick step fell unheeded by his side; the girl passed,
hesitated, then turned and spoke.

"You are preoccupied, Mr. Grant."

"Oh, Miss Bruce, I beg your pardon.  I am glad to see you."  Even
at that moment he had been thinking of Zen, and perhaps he put more
cordiality into his words than he intended.  But he had grown to
have considerable regard, on her own account, for this unusual girl
who was not afraid of him.  He had found that she was what he
called "a good head."  She could take a detached view; she was
absolutely fair; she was not easily flustered.

Her step had fallen into swing with his.

"You do not often visit our part of the city," she essayed.

"You live here?"

"Near by.  Will you come and see?"

He turned with her at a corner, and they went up a narrow street
lying deep in dead leaves.  Friendly domestic glimpses could be
caught through unblinded windows.

"This is our home," she said, stopping before a little gate.
Grant's eye followed the pathway to a cottage set back among the
trees.  "I live here with my sister and brother and mother.  Father
is dead," she went on hurriedly, as though wishing to place before
him a quick digest of the family affairs, "and we keep up the home
by living on with mother as boarders; that is, Grace and I do.
Hubert is still in high school.  Won't you come in?"

He followed her up the path and into a little hall, lighted only by
chance rays falling through a half-opened door.  She did not switch
on the current, and Grant was aware of a comfortable sense of her
nearness, quite distinct from any office experience, as she took
his hat.  In the living-room her mother received him with visible
surprise.  She was not old, but widowhood and the cares of a young
family had whitened her hair before its time.

"We are glad to see you, Mr. Grant," she said.  "It is an
unexpected pleasure.  Big business men do not often--"

"Mr. Grant is different," her daughter interrupted, lightly.  "I
found him wandering the streets and I just--retrieved him."

"I think I AM different," he admitted, as his eye took in the
surroundings, which he appraised quickly as modest comfort,
attained through many little economies and makeshifts.  "You are
very happy here," he went on, frankly.  "Much more so, I should
say, than in many of the more pretentious homes.  I have always
contended that, beyond the margin necessary for decent living, the
possession of money is a burden and a handicap, and I see no reason
to change my opinion."

"Phyllis is a great help to me--and Grace," the mother observed.
"I hope she is a good girl in the office."

Grant was hurrying an assent but the girl interrupted, perhaps
wishing to relieve him of the necessity of an answer.

"'Decent living' is a very elastic term," she remarked.  "There are
so many standards.  Some women think they must have maids and
social status--whatever that is--and so on.  It can't be done on
mother's income."

"That quality is not confined to women," Grant said.  "I know I am
regarded as something of a freak because I prefer to live simply.
They can't understand my preference for a plain room to read and
sleep in, for quiet walks by myself when I might be buzzing around
in big motor cars or revelling with a bunch at the club.  I suppose
it's a puzzle to them."

Miss Bruce had seated herself near him.  "They are beginning to
offer explanations," she said.  "I hear them--such things always
filter down.  They say you are mean and niggardly--that you're
afraid to spend a dollar.  The fact that you have raised the wages
of your staff doesn't seem to answer them; they rather hold that
against you, because it has a tendency to make them do the same.
Other office staffs are going to their heads and saying, 'Grant is
paying his help so much.'  That doesn't popularize you.  To be a
good fellow you should hold your staff down to the lowest wages at
which you can get service, and the money you save in this way
should be spent with gusto and abandon at expensive hotels and
other places designed to keep rich people from getting too rich."

"I am afraid you are satirizing them a little, but there is a good
deal in what you say.  They think I'm mean because they don't
understand me, and they can't understand my point of view.  I
believe that money was created as a medium for the exchange of
value.  I think they will all agree with me there.  If that is so,
then I have no right to money unless I have given value for it, and
that is where they part company with me; but surely we can't accept
the one fact without the other."

Grant found himself thumbing his pockets.  "You may smoke, if you
have tobacco," said Mrs. Bruce.  "My husband smoked, and although I
did not approve of it then, I think I must have grown to like it."

He lighted a cigarette, and continued.  "Not all the moral law was
given on Mount Sinai.  It seems to me that the supernaturalism
which has been introduced into the story of the Ten Commandments is
most unfortunate.  It seems to remove them out of the field of
natural law, whereas they are, really, natural law itself.  No
social state can exist where they are habitually ignored.  But of
course these natural laws existed long before Moses.  He did not
make the law; he discovered it, just as Newton discovered the law
of gravitation.  Well--there must be many other natural laws, still
undiscovered, or at least unaccepted.  The thing is to discover
them, to obey them, and, eventually, to compel others to obey them.
I am no Moses, but I think I have the germ of the law which would
cure our economic ills--that no person should be allowed to receive
value without earning it.  Because I believed in that I gave up a
fortune and went to work as a laborer on a ranch, but Fate has
forced wealth upon me, doubtless in order that I may prove out my
own theories.  Well, that is what I am doing."

"It shouldn't be hard to get rid of money if you don't want it,"
Mrs. Bruce ventured.

"But it is.  It is the hardest kind of thing.  You see, I am
limited by my principles.  I believe it is morally wrong to receive
money without earning it; consequently I cannot give it away, as by
doing so I would place the recipient in that position.  I believe
it is morally wrong to spend on myself money which I have not
earned; consequently I can spend only what I conceive to be a
reasonable return for my services.  Meanwhile, my wealth keeps
rolling up."

"It's a knotty problem," said Phyllis.  "I think there is only one
solution."

"And that is?--"

"Marry a woman who is a good spender."

At this moment Grace and Hubert came in from the picture-show
together, and the conversation turned to lighter topics.  Mrs.
Bruce insisted on serving tea and cake, and when Grant found that
he must go Phyllis accompanied him to the gate.

"This all seems so funny," she was saying.  "You are a very
remarkable man."

"I think I once passed a similar opinion about you."

She extended her hand, and he held it for a moment.  "I have not
changed my first opinion," he said, as he released her fingers and
turned quickly down the pavement.



CHAPTER XIII


Grant's first visit to the home of his private stenographer was not
his last, and the news leaked out, as it is sure to do in such
cases.  The social set confessed to being on the point of being
shocked.  Two schools of criticism developed over the five o'clock
tea tables; one held that Grant was a gay dog who would settle down
and marry in his class when he had had his fling, and the other
that Phyllis Bruce was an artful hussy who was quite ready to sell
herself for the Grant millions.  And there were so many eligible
young women on the market, although none of them were described as
artful hussies!

Grant's behavior, however, placed him under no cloud in so far as
social opportunities were concerned; on the contrary, he found
himself being showered with invitations, most of which he managed
to decline on the grounds of pressure of business.  When such an
excuse would have been too transparent he accepted and made the
best of it, and he found no lack of encouragement in the one or two
incipient amorous flurries which resulted.  From such positions he
always succeeded in extricating himself, with a quiet smile at the
vagaries of life.  He had to admit that some of the young women
whom he had met had charms of more than passing moment; he might
easily enough find himself chasing the rainbow. . . .

Mrs. LeCord carried the warfare into his own office.  The late Mr.
LeCord had left her to face the world with a comfortable fortune
and three daughters, of whom the youngest was now married and the
oldest was a forlorn hope.  To place the second was now her
purpose, and the best bargain on the market was young Grant.
Caroline, she was sure, would make a very acceptable wife, and the
young lady herself confessed a belief that she could love even a
bold Westerner whose bank balance was expressed in seven figures.

The fact that Grant avoided social functions only added zest to the
determination with which Mrs. LeCord carried the war into his own
office.  She chose to consult him for advice on financial matters
and she came accompanied by Caroline, a young woman rather
prepossessing in her own right.  The two were readily admitted into
Grant's private office, where they had opportunity not only to meet
the young man in person, but to satisfy their curiosity concerning
the Bruce girl.

"I am Mrs. LeCord, Mr. Grant," the lady introduced herself.  "This
is my daughter Caroline.  We wish to consult you on certain
financial matters, privately, if you please."

Grant received them cordially.  "I shall be glad to advise you, if
I can," he said.

Mrs. LeCord cast a significant glance at Phyllis Bruce.

"Miss Bruce is my private stenographer.  You may speak with perfect
freedom."

Mrs. LeCord took up her subject after a moment's silence.  "Mr.
LeCord left me not entirely unprovided for," she explained.
"Almost a million dollars in bonds and real estate made a
comfortable protection for me and my three daughters against the
buffetings of a world which, as you may have found, Mr. Grant, is
not over-considerate."

"The buffetings of the world are an excellent training for the
world's affairs."

"Maybe so, maybe so," his visitor conceded.  "However, there are
other trainings--trainings of finer quality, Mr. Grant--than those
which have to do with subsistence.  I have been able to give my
daughters the best education that money could command, and, if I do
say it, I permit myself some gratification over the result.  Gretta
is comfortably and happily married,--a young man of some distinction
in the financial world--a Mr. Powers, Mr. Newton Powers--you may
happen to know him; Madge, I think, is always going to be her
mother's girl; Caroline is still heart-free, although one can never
tell--"

"Oh, mother!" the girl protested, blushing daintily.

"I said you could never tell, Mr. Grant,--while handsome young men
like yourself are at large.  Mrs. LeCord laughed heartily, as much
as to say that her remark must be regarded only as a little
pleasantry.  "But you will think I am a gossipy old body," she
continued briskly.  "I really came to discuss certain financial
matters.  Since Mr. LeCord's death I have taken charge of all the
family business affairs with, if I may confess it, some success.
We have lived, and my girls have been educated, and our little
reserve against a rainy day has been almost doubled, in addition to
giving Gretta a hundred thousand in her own right on the occasion
of her marriage.  Caroline is to have the same, and when I am done
with it there will be a third of the estate for each.  In the
meantime I am directing my investments as wisely as I can.  I want
my daughters to be provided for, quite apart from any income
marriage may bring them.  I should be greatly humiliated to think
that any daughter of mine would be dependent upon her husband for
support.  On the contrary, I mean that they shall bring to their
husbands a sum which will be an appreciable contribution toward the
family fortune."

"If I can help you in any way in your financial matters--" Grant
suggested.

"Oh, yes, we must get back to that.  How I wander!  I'm afraid, Mr.
Grant, I must be growing old."

Grant protested gallantly against such conclusion, and Mrs. LeCord,
after asking his opinion on certain issues shortly to be floated,
arose to leave.

"You must find life in this city somewhat lonely, Mr. Grant," she
murmured as she drew on her gloves.  "If ever you find a longing
for a quiet hour away from business stress--a little domesticity,
if I may say it--our house--"

"You are very kind.  Business allows me very few intermissions.
Still--"

She extended her hand with her sweetest smile.  Caroline shook
hands, too, and Grant bowed them out.

On other occasions Mrs. LeCord and her daughter were fortunate
enough to find Grant alone, and at such times the mother's
conversation became even more pointed than in their first
interview.  Grant hesitated to offend her, mainly on account of
Caroline, for whom he admitted to himself it would not be at all
difficult to muster up an attachment.  There were, however, three
barriers to such a development.  One was the obvious purpose of
Mrs. LeCord to arrange a match; a purpose which, as a mere matter
of the game, he could not allow her to accomplish.  One was Zen
Transley.  There was no doubt about it.  Zen Transley stood between
him and marriage to any girl.  Not that he ever expected to take
her into his life, or be admitted into hers, but in some way she
hedged him about.  He felt that everything was not yet settled; he
found himself entertaining a foolish sense that everything was not
quite irrevocable. . . .  And then there was--perhaps--Phyllis
Bruce.

When at length, for some reason, Mrs. LeCord visited him alone he
decided to be frank with her.

"You have thought me clever enough to advise you on financial
matters?" he queried, when his visitor had discussed at some length
the new loan in which she was investing.

"Why, yes," she returned, detecting the personal note in his voice.
"I sometimes think, Mr. Grant, you hardly do yourself justice.
Even the hardest old heads on the Exchange are taking notice of
you.  I have heard your name mentioned--"

"Then it may be presumed," he interrupted, "that I am clever enough
to know the real purpose of your visits to this office?"

She turned a little in her chair, facing him squarely.  "I hardly
understand you, Mr. Grant."

"Then I possess an advantage, because I quite clearly understand
you.  I have hesitated, out of consideration for your daughter, to
show any resentment of your behavior.  But I must now tell you that
when I marry, if ever I do, I shall choose my wife without the
assistance of her mother, and without regard to her dowry or the
size of the family bank account."

"Oh, I protest!" exclaimed Mrs. LeCord, who had grown very red.  "I
protest against any such conclusion.  I have seen fit to intrust my
financial affairs to your firm; I have visited you on business--
accompanied at times by my daughter, it is true--but only on
business; recognizing in you a social equal I have invited you to
my house, a courtesy which, so far, you have not found yourself
able to accept; but in all this I have shown toward you surely
nothing but friendliness and a respect amounting, if I may say it,
to esteem.  But now that you are frank, Mr. Grant, I too will be
frank.  You cannot be unaware of the rumors which have been
associated with your name?"

"You mean about Miss Bruce?"

"Ah, then you know of them.  You are a young man, and we older
people are disposed to make allowance for the--for that.  But you
must realize the great mistake you would be making should you allow
this matter to become more than--a rumor."

"I do not admit your right to question me on such a subject, Mrs.
LeCord, but I shall not avoid a discussion of it.  Suppose, for the
sake of argument, that I were to contemplate marriage with Miss
Bruce; if she and her relatives were agreeable, what right would
anyone have to object?"

"It would be a great mistake," Mrs. LeCord insisted, avoiding his
question.  "She is not in your class--"

"What do you mean by 'class'?"

"Why, I mean socially, of course.  She lives in a different world.
She has no standing, in a social way.  She works in an office for a
living--"

"So do I," he interrupted, "and your daughters do not.  It would
therefore appear that I am more in Miss Bruce's 'class' than in
theirs."

"Ah, but you are an employer.  You direct things.  You work because
you want to, not because you have to.  That makes a difference."

"Apparently it does.  Well, if I had my way, everybody would work,
whether he wanted to or not.  I would not allow any healthy man to
spend money which he had not earned by the sweat of his own brow.
I am convinced that that is the only economic system which is sound
at the bottom, but it would destroy 'class,' as at present
organized, so 'class' must fight it."

"I am afraid you are rather radical, Mr. Grant.  You may be sure
that a system which has served so long and so well is a good
system."

"That introduces the clash between East and West.  The East says
because things are so, and have always been so, they must be right.
The West says because things are so, and have always been so, they
are in all probability wrong.  I guess I am a Westerner."

"You should not allow your theories of economics to stand in the
way of your success," Mrs. LeCord pursued.  "Suppose I admit that
Caroline would not be altogether deaf to your advances.  Suppose I
admit that much.  Allowing for a mother's prejudice, will you not
agree with me that Caroline has her attractions?  She is well bred,
well educated, and not without appearance.  She belongs to the
smartest set in town.  Her circle would bring you not only social
distinction, but valuable business connections.  She would
introduce that touch of refinement--"

But Grant, now thoroughly angry, had risen from his chair.  "You
speak of refinement," he exclaimed, in the quick, sharp tones which
alone revealed the fighting Grant;--"you, who have been guilty of--
I could use a very ugly word which I will give you the credit of
not understanding.  When I decide to buy myself a wife I will send
to you for a catalogue of your daughter's charms."

Grant dismissed Mrs. LeCord from his office with the confident
expectation that he soon would have occasion to know something of
the meaning of the proverb about hell's furies and a woman scorned.
She would strike at him, of course, through Phyllis Bruce.  Well--

But his attention was at once to be turned to very different
matters.  A stock market, erratic for some days, went suddenly into
a paroxysm.  Grant escaped with as little loss as possible for
himself and his clients, and after three sleepless nights called
his staff together.  They crowded into the board-room, curious,
apprehensive, almost frightened, and he looked over them with an
emotion that was quite new to his experience.  Even in the
aloofness which their standards had made it necessary for him to
adopt there had grown up in his heart, quite unnoticed, a tender,
sweet foliage of love for these men and women who were a part of
his machine.  Now, as he looked in their faces he realized how,
like little children, they leaned on him--how, like little
children, they feared his power and his displeasure--how, perhaps,
like little children, they had learned to love him, too.  He
realized, as he had never done before, that they WERE children;
that here and there in the mass of humanity is one who was born to
lead, but the great mass itself must be children always, doing as
they are bid.

"My friends," he managed to say, "we suddenly find ourselves in
tremendous times.  Some of you know my attitude toward this
business in which we are engaged.  I did not seek it; I did not
approve of it; I tried to avoid it; yet, when the responsibility
was forced upon me I accepted that responsibility.  I gave up the
life I enjoyed, the environment in which I found delight, the
friends I loved.  Well--our nation is now in a somewhat similar
position.  It has to go into a business which it did not seek, of
which it does not approve, but which fate has thrust upon it.  It
has to break off the current of its life and turn it into
undreamed-of channels, and we, as individuals who make up the
nation, must do the same.  I have already enlisted, and expect that
within a few hours I shall be in uniform.  Some of you are single
men of military age; you will, I am sure, take similar steps.  For
the rest--the business will be wound up as soon as possible, so
that you may be released for some form of national service.  You
will all receive three months' salary in lieu of notice.  Mr.
Murdoch will look after the details.  When that has been done my
wealth, or such part of it as remains, will be placed at the
disposal of the Government.  If we win it will be well invested in
a good cause; if we lose, it would have been lost anyway."

"We are not going to lose!"  It was one of the younger clerks who
interrupted; he stood up and for a moment looked straight at his
chief.  In that instant's play of vision there was surely something
more than can be told in words, for the next moment he rushed
forward and seized one of Grant's hands in both his own.  There was
a moment's handclasp, and the boy had become a man.

"I'm going, Grant," he said.  "I'm going--NOW!"

He turned and made his way out of the room, leaving his chief
breathless in a rapture of joy and pride.  Others crowded up.  They
too were going--NOW.  Even old Murdoch tried to protest that he was
as good a man as ever.  It seemed to Grant that the drab everyday
costumings of his staff had fallen away, and now they were heroes,
they were gods!

No one knew just how the meeting broke up, but Grant had a confused
remembrance of many handclasps and some tears.  He was not sure
that he had not, perhaps, added one or two to the flow, but they
were all tears of friendship and of an emotion born of high
resolve. . . .  The most wonderful thing was that the youngster had
called him Grant!

As he stood in his own office again, trying to get the events of
these last few days into some sort of perspective, Phyllis Bruce
entered.  He motioned dumbly to a chair, but she came and stood by
his desk.  Her face was very white and her lips trembled with the
words she tried to utter.

"I can't go," she managed to say at length.

"Can't go?  I don't understand?"

"Hubert has joined," she said.

"Hubert, the boy!  Why, he is only in school--"

"He is sixteen, and large for his age.  He came home confessing,
and saying it was his first lie, and the first important thing he
ever did without consulting mother.  He said he knew he wouldn't be
able to stand it if he told her first."

"Foolish, but heroic," Grant commented.  "Be proud of him.  It
takes more than wisdom to be heroic."

"And Grace is going to England.  She was taking nursing, you know,
and so gets a preference.  We can't ALL leave mother."

He found it difficult to speak.  "You wanted to go to the Front?"
he managed.

"Of course; where else?"

Her hand was on the desk; his own slipped over until it closed on
it.

"You are a little heroine," he murmured.

"No, I'm not.  I'm a little fool to tell you this, but how can I
stay--why should I stay--when you are gone?"

She was looking down, but after her confession she raised her eyes
to his, and he wondered that he had never known how beautiful she
was.  He could have taken her in his arms, but something, with the
power of invisible chains, held him back.  In that supreme moment a
vision swam before him; a vision of a mountain stream backed by
tawny foothills, and a girl as beautiful as even this Phyllis who
had wrapped him in her arms . . . and said, "We must go and
forget."  And he had not forgotten. . . .

When he did not respond she drew herself slowly away.  "You will
hate me," she said.

"That is impossible," he corrected, quickly.  "I am very sorry if I
have let you think more than I intended.  I care for you very, very
much indeed.  I care for you so much that I will not let you think
I care for you more.  Can you understand that?"

"Yes.  You like me, but you love someone else."

He was disconcerted by her intuition and the terse frankness with
which she stated the case.

"I will take you into my confidence, Phyllis, if I may," he said at
length.  "I DO like you; I DID love someone else.  And that old
attachment is still so strong that it would be hardly fair--it
would be hardly fair--"

"Why didn't you marry her?" she demanded.

"Because some one else did."

"Oh!"

Her hands found his this time.  "I'm sorry," she said.  "Sorry I
brought this up--sorry I raised these memories.  But now you--who
have known--will know--"

"I know--I know," he murmured, raising her fingers to his lips. . . .

"Time, they say, is a healer of all wounds.  Perhaps--"

"No.  It is better that you should forget.  Only, I shall see you
off; I shall wave my handkerchief to YOU; I shall smile on YOU in
the crowd.  Then--you will forget." . . .



CHAPTER XIV


Four years of war add only four years to the life of a man
according to the record in the family Bible, if he happen to spring
from stock in which that sacred document is preserved.  But four
years of war add twenty years to the grey matter behind the eyes--
eyes which learn to dream and ponder strangely, and sometimes to
shine with a hardness that has no part with youth.  When Captain
Grant and Sergeant Linder stepped off the train at Grant's old city
there was, however, little to suggest the ageing process that
commonly went on among the soldiers in the Great War.  Grant had
twice stopped an enemy bullet, but his fine figure and sunburned
health now gave no evidence of those experiences.  Linder counted
himself lucky to carry only an empty sleeve.

They had fallen in with each other in France, and the friendship
planted in the foothills of the range country had grown, through
the strange prunings and graftings of war, into a tree of very
solid timber.  Linder might have told you of the time his captain
found him with his arm crushed under a wrecked piece of artillery,
and Grant could have recounted a story of being dragged unconscious
out of No Man's Land, but for either to dwell upon these matters
only aroused the resentment of the other, and frequently led to
exchanges between captain and sergeant totally incompatible with
military discipline.  They were content to pay tribute to each
other, but each to leave his own honors unheralded.

"First thing is a place to eat," Grant remarked, when they had been
dismissed.  Words to similar effect had, indeed, been his first
remark upon every suitable opportunity for three months.  An
appetite which has been four years in the making is not to be
satisfied overnight, and Grant, being better fortified financially
against the stress of a good meal, sought to be always first to
suggest it.  Linder accepted the situation with the complacence of
a man who has been four years on army pay.

When they had eaten they took a walk through the old town--Grant's
old town.  It looked as though he had stepped out of it yesterday;
it was hard to realize that ages lay between.  There are experiences
which soak in slowly, like water into a log.  The new element
surrounds the body, but it may be months before it penetrates to the
heart.  Grant had some sense of that fact as he walked the old
familiar streets, apparently unchanged by all these cataclysmic
days. . . .  In time he would come to understand.  There was the name
plate of Barrett, Jones, Barrett, Deacon & Barrett.  There had not
even been an addition to the firm.  Here was the old Grant office,
now used for some administration purpose. That, at least, was a move
in the right direction.

They wandered along aimlessly while the sunset of an early summer
evening marshalled its glories overhead.  On a side street children
played in the roadway; on a vacant spot a game of ball was in
progress.  Women sat on their verandas and shot casual glances
after them as they passed.  Handsome pleasure cars glided about;
there was a smell of new flowers in all the air.

"What do you make of it, mate?" said Grant at last.

Linder pulled slowly on his cigarette.  Even his training as a
sergeant had not made him ready of speech, but when he spoke it
was, as ever, to the point.

"It's all so unnecessary," he commented at length.

"That's the way it gets me, too.  So unnecessary.  You see, when
you get down to fundamentals there are only two things necessary--
food and shelter.  Everything else may be described as trimmings.
We've been dealing with fundamentals so long---mighty bare
fundamentals at that--that all these trimmings seem just a little
irritating, don't you think?"

"I follow you.  I simply can't imagine myself worrying over a stray
calf."

"And I can't imagine myself sitting in an office and dealing with
such unessential things as stocks and bonds. . . .  And I'm not
going to."

"Got any notion what you will do?" said Linder, when he had reached
the middle of another cigarette.

"Not the slightest.  I don't even know whether I'm rich or broke.
I suppose if Jones and Murdoch are still alive they will be looking
after those details.  Doing their best, doubtless, to embarrass me
with additional wealth.  What are YOU going to do?"

"Don't know.  Maybe go back and work for Transley."

The mention of Transley threw Grant's mind back into old channels.
He had almost forgotten Transley.  He told himself he had quite
forgotten Zen Transley, but once he knew he lied.  That was when
they potted him in No Man's Land.  As he lay there, waiting . . . .
he knew he had not forgotten.  And he had thought many times of
Phyllis Bruce.  At first he had written to her, but she had not
answered his letters.  Evidently she meant him to forget.  Nor had
she come to the station to welcome him home.  Perhaps she did not
know.  Perhaps--  Many things can happen in four years.

Suddenly it occurred to Grant that it might be a good idea to call
on Phyllis.  He would take Linder along.  That would make it less
personal.  He knew his man well enough to keep his own counsel, and
eventually they reached the gate of the Bruce cottage, as though by
accident.

"Let's turn in here.  I used to know these people.  Mother and
daughter; very fine folk."

Linder looked for an avenue of retreat, but Grant barred his way,
and together they went up the path.  A strange woman, with a baby
on her arm, met them at the door.  Grant inquired for Mrs. Bruce
and her daughter.

"Oh, you haven't heard?" said the woman.  "I suppose you are just
back.  Well, it was a sad thing, but these have been sad times.  It
was when Hubert was killed I came here first.  Poor dear, she took
that to heart awful, and couldn't be left alone, and Phyllis was
working in an office, so I came here part time to help out.  Then
she was just beginning to brace up again when we got the word about
Grace.  Grace, you know, was lost on a hospital ship.  That was too
much for her."

Grant received this information with a strange catching about the
heart.  There had been changes, after all.

"What became of Phyllis?"  He tried to ask the question in an even
voice.

"I moved into the house after Mrs. Bruce died," the woman
continued, "as my man came back discharged about that time.
Phyllis tried to get on as a nurse, but couldn't manage it.  Then
her office was moved to another part of the city and she took rooms
somewhere.  At first she came to see us often, but not lately.  I
suppose she's trying to forget."

"Trying to forget," Grant muttered to himself.  "How much of life
is made up of trying to forget!"

Further questions brought no further information.  The woman didn't
know the firm for which Phyllis worked; she thought it had to do
with munitions.  Suddenly Grant found himself impelled by a
tremendous desire to locate this girl.  He would set about it at
once; possibly Jones or Murdoch could give him information.
Strangely enough, he now felt that he would prefer to be rid of
Linder's company.  This was a matter for himself alone.  He took
Linder to an hotel, where they arranged for lodgings, and then
started on his search.

He located Murdoch without difficulty.  It was now late, and the
old clerk came down the stairs with inoffensive imprecations upon
the head of his untimely caller, but his mutterings soon gave way
to a cry of delight.

"My dear boy!" he exclaimed, embracing him.  "My dear boy--excuse
me, sir, I'm a blithering old man, but oh! sir--my boy, you're home
again!"  There was no doubting the depth of old Murdoch's welcome.
He ran before Grant into the living-room and switched on the
lights.  In a moment he was back with his arm about the young man's
shoulder; he was with difficulty restraining caresses.

"Sit you down, Mr. Grant; here--this chair--it's easier.  I must
get the women up.  This is no night for sleeping.  Why didn't you
send us word?"

"There is a tradition that official word is sent in advance," Grant
tried to explain.

"Aye, a tradition.  There's a tradition that a Scotsman is a dour
body without any sentiment.  Well--I must call the women."

He hurried up the stairs and Grant settled back into his chair.
So this was the home of Murdoch, the man who really had earned a
considerable part of the Grant fortune.  He had never visited
Murdoch before; he had never thought of him in a domestic sense;
Murdoch had always been to him a man of figures, of competent
office routine, of almost too respectful deference.  The light over
the centre table fell subdued through a pinkish shade; the corners
of the room lay in restful shadows; the comfortable furniture
showed the marks of years.  The walls suggested the need of new
paper; the well-worn carpet had been shifted more than once for
economy's sake.  Grant made a hasty appraisal of these conditions;
possibly his old clerk was feeling the pinch of circumstances--

Murdoch, returning, led in his wife, a motherly woman who almost
kissed the young soldier.  In the welcome of her greeting it was a
moment before Grant became aware of the presence of a fourth person
in the room.

"I am very glad to see you safely back," said Phyllis Bruce.  "We
have all been thinking about you a great deal."

"Why, Miss--Phyllis!  It was you I was looking for!"  The frank
confession came before he had time to suppress it, and, having said
so much, it seemed better to finish the job.

"Yes, Phyllis is making her home with us now," Mrs. Murdoch
explained.  "It is more convenient to her work."

Grant wondered how much of this arrangement was due to Mrs.
Murdoch's sympathy for the bereaved girl, and how much to the
addition which it made to the family income.  No doubt both
considerations had contributed to it.

"I called at your old home," he continued.  "I needn't say how
distressed I was to hear--  The woman could tell me nothing of you,
so I came to Murdoch, hoping--"

"Yes," she said, simply, as though there were nothing more to
explain.  Grant noticed that her eyes were larger and her cheeks
paler than they had been, but the delight of her presence leapt
about him.  Her hurried costume seemed to accentuate her beauty
despite of all that war had done to destroy it.  There was a
silence which lengthened out.  They were all groping for a footing.

Mrs. Murdoch met the situation by insisting that she would put on
the kettle, and Mr. Murdoch, in a burst of almost divine
inspiration, insisted that his wife was quite incompetent to light
the gas alone at that hour of the night.  When the old folks had
shuffled into the kitchen Grant found himself standing close to
Phyllis Bruce.

"Why didn't you answer my letters?" he demanded, plunging to the
issue with the directness of his nature.

"Because I had promised to let you forget," she replied.  There was
a softness in her voice which he had not noted in those bygone
days; she seemed more resigned and yet more poised; the strange
wizardry of suffering had worked new wonders in her soul.  Suddenly,
as he looked upon her, he became aware of a new quality in Phyllis
Bruce--the quality of gentleness.  She had added this to her unique
self-confidence, and it had toned down the angularities of her
character.  To Grant, straight from his long exile from fine womanly
domesticity, she suddenly seemed altogether captivating.

"But I didn't want to forget!" he insisted.  "I wanted not to
forget--YOU."

She could not misunderstand the emphasis he placed on that last
word, but she continued as though he had not interrupted.

"I knew you would write once or twice out of courtesy.  I knew you
would do that.  I made up my mind that if you wrote three times,
then I would know you really wanted to remember me. . . .  I did
not get any third letter."

"But how could I know that you had placed such a test--such an
arbitrary measurement--upon my friendship?"

"It wasn't necessary for you to know.  If you had cared--enough--
you would have kept on writing."

He had to admit to himself that there was just enough truth in what
she said to make her logic unanswerable.  His delight in her
presence now did not alter the fact that he had found it quite
possible to live for four years without her, and it was true that
upon one or two great vital moments his mind had leapt, not to
Phyllis Bruce, but to Zen Transley!  He blushed at the recollection;
it was an impossible situation, but it was true!

He was framing some plausible argument about honorable men not
persisting in a correspondence when Murdoch bustled in again.

"Mother is going to set the dining-room table," he announced, "and
the coffee will be ready presently.  Well, sir, you do look well in
uniform.  You will be wondering how the business has gone?"

"Not half as much as I am wondering some other things," he said,
with a significance intended for the ear of Phyllis.  "You see--I
was just talking it over with a pal to-day, a very good comrade
whom I used to know in the West, and who pulled me out of No Man's
Land where I would have been lying yet if he hadn't thought more of
me than he did of 