sed
at this prospect--had the foot been more seriously hurt than they
had supposed?  Grant told himself that he must go over that night
and make inquiry.  That would be the neighborly thing to do. . . .

But early that afternoon his heart was delighted by the sight of a
little figure skipping joyously over the furrows toward him.  He
had his hat crumpled in one hand, and his teddy-bear in the other,
and his face was alive with excitement.  He was puffing profusely
when he pulled up beside the plow, and Grant stopped the team while
he got his breath.

"My! My!  What is the hurry?  I see the foot is all better."

"We got a pig!" the lad gasped, when he could speak.

"A pig!"

"Yessir!  A live one, too!  He's awful big.  A man brought him in a
wagon.  That is why I couldn't come this morning."

Grant treated himself to a humble reflection upon the wisdom of
childish preferments.

"What are you going to do with him?"

"Eat him up, I guess.  Daddy said there was enough wasted about our
house to keep a pig, so we got one.  Aren't you going to take me
up?"

"Of course.  But first we must put teddy in his place."

"I'm to go home at five o'clock," the boy said, when he had got
properly settled.

The hours slipped by all too quickly, and if the lad's presence
did not contribute to good plowing, it at least made a cheerful
plowman.  It was plain that Zen had sufficient confidence in her
farmer neighbor to trust her boy in his care, and his frequent
references to his mother had an interest for Grant which he could
not have analyzed or explained.  During the afternoon the merits of
the pig were sung and re-sung, and at last Wilson, after kissing
his friend on the cheek and whispering, "I like you, Uncle Man-on-
the-Hill," took his teddy-bear under his arm and plodded homeward.

The next morning he came again, but mournfully and slow.  There
were tear stains on the little round cheeks.

"Why, son, what had happened?" said Grant, his abundant sympathies
instantly responding.

"Teddy's spoiled," the child sobbed.  "I set him--on the side of--
the pig pen, and he fell'd in, and the big pig et him--ate him--up.
He didn't 'zactly eat him up, either--just kind of chewed him,
like."

"Well that certainly is too bad.  But then, you're going to eat the
pig some day, so that will square it, won't it?"

"I guess it will," said the boy, brightening.  "I never thought of
that."

"But we must have a teddy for Prince.  See, he is looking around,
waiting for it."  Grant folded his coat into the shape of a dummy
and set it up on the hames, and all went merrily again.

That afternoon, which was Saturday, the boy came thoughtfully and
with an air of much importance.  Delving into a pocket he produced
an envelope, somewhat crumpled in transit.  It was addressed, "The
Man on the Hill."

Grant tore it open eagerly and read this note:


"DEAR MAN-ON-THE-HILL,--That is the name Wilson calls you, so
perhaps you will let me use it, too.  Frank is to be home to-
morrow, and will you come and have dinner with us at six?  My
father and mother will be here, and possibly one or two others.
You had a clash with my men-folk once, but you will find them ready
enough to make allowance for, even if they fail to understand, your
point of view.  Do come.--ZEN.

"P.S.--It just occurs to me that your associates in your colonization
scheme may want to claim your time on Sunday.  If any of them come
out, bring them along.  Our table is an extension one, and its
capacity has never yet been exhausted."


Although Grant's decision was made at once he took some time for
reflection before writing an acceptance.  He was to enter Zen's
house on her invitation, but under the auspices, so to speak, of
husband and parents.  That was eminently proper.  Zen was a
sensible girl.  Then there was a reference to that ancient squabble
in the hay meadow.  It was evidently her plan to see the hatchet
buried and friendly relations established all around.  Eminently
proper and sensible.

He turned the sheet over and wrote on the back:


"DEAR ZEN,--Delighted to come.  May have a couple of friends with
me, one of whom you have seen before.  Prepare for an appetite long
denied the joys of home cooking.--D. G."


It was not until after the child had gone home that Grant
remembered he had addressed Transley's wife by her Christian name.
That was the way he always thought of her, and it slipped on to
paper quite naturally.  Well, it couldn't be helped now.

Grant unhitched early and hurried to his house and the telephone.
In a few minutes he had Linder on the line.

"Hello, Linder?  I want you to go to a store for me and buy a
teddy-bear."

The chuckle at the other end of the line irritated Grant.  Linder
had a strange sense of humor.

"I mean it.  A big teddy, with electric eyes, and a deep bass
growl, if they make 'em that way.  The best you can get.  Fetch it
out to-morrow afternoon, and come decently dressed, for once.
Bring Murdoch along if you can pry him loose."

Grant hung up the receiver.  "Stupid chap, Linder, some ways," he
muttered.  "Why shouldn't I buy a teddy-bear if I want to?"

Sunday afternoon saw the arrival of Linder and Murdoch, with the
largest teddy the town afforded.  "What is the big idea now?"
Linder demanded, as he delivered it into Grant's hands.

"It is for a little boy I know who has been bereaved of his first
teddy by the activities of the family pig.  You will renew some
pleasant acquaintanceships, Linder.  You remember Transley and his
wife--Zen, of the Y.D?"

"You don't say!  Thanks for that tip about dressing up.  I may
explain," Linder continued, turning to Murdoch, "there was a time
when I might have been an also-ran in the race for Y.D.'s daughter,
only Transley beat me on the getaway."

"You!" Grant exclaimed, incredulously.

"You, too!" Linder returned, a great light dawning.

"Well, Mr. Grant," said Murdoch, "I brought you a good cigar,
bought at the company's expense.  It comes out of the organization
fund.  You must be sick of those cheap cigars."

"Since the war it is nothing but Player's," Grant returned, taking
the proffered cigar.  "They tell me it has revolutionized the
tobacco business.  However, this does smell a bit all right.  How
goes our venture, Murdoch?  Have I any prospect of being impoverished
in a worthy cause?"

"None whatever.  Your foreman here is spending every dollar in a
way to make you two in spite of your daft notion--begging your
pardon, sir--about not taking profits.  The subscribers are coming
along for stock, but fingering it gently, as though they can't well
believe there's no catch in it.  They say it doesn't look reasonable,
and I tell them no more it is."

"And then they buy it?"

"Aye, they do.  That's human nature.  There's as many members
booked now as can be accommodated in the first colony.  I suppose
they reason that they will be sure of their winter's housing,
anyway."

"You don't seem to have much faith in human nature, Murdoch."

"Nor have I.  Not in that kind of human nature which is always
wanting something for nothing."

Linder's report was more cheerful.  The houses and barns were built
and were now being painted, the plowing was done, and the fences
were being run.  By the use of a triangular system of survey twelve
farm homes had been centralized in one little community where a
community building would be erected which would be used as a school
in daytime, a motion-picture house at night, and a church on
Sunday.  A community secretary would have his office here, and
would have charge of a select little library of fiction, poetry,
biography, and works of reference.  The leading periodicals dealing
with farm problems, sociology, and economics, as well as lighter
subjects, would be on file.  In connection with this building would
be an assembly-room suitable for dances, social events, and
theatricals, and equipped with a player piano and concert-size
talking machine.  Arrangements were being made for a weekly
exchange of records, for a weekly musical evening by artists from
the city, for a semi-monthly vaudeville show, and for Sunday
meetings addressed by the best speakers on the more serious topics
of the time.

"What has surprised me in making these arrangements," Linder
confessed, "is the comparatively small outlay they involve.  The
building will cost no more than many communities spend on school
and church which they use thirty hours a week and three hours a
week respectively.  This one can be used one hundred and sixty-
eight hours a week, if needed.  Lecturers on many subjects can be
had for paying their expenses; in some cases they are employed by
the Government, and will come without cost.  Amateur theatrical
companies from the city will be glad to come in return for an
appreciative audience and a dance afterward, with a good fill-up on
solid farm cooking.  Even some of the professionals can be had on
these terms.  Of course, before long we will produce our own
theatricals.

"Then there is to be a plunge bath big enough to swim in, open to
men and women alternate nights, and to children every day.  There
will be a pool-room, card-room, and refreshment buffet; also a
quiet little room for women's social events, and an emergency
hospital ward.  I think we should hire a trained nurse who would
not be too dignified to cook and serve meals when there's no
business doing in the hospital.  You know how everyone gets
hankering now and then for a meal from home,--not that it's any
better, but it's different.  I suppose there are farmer's wives who
don't get a meal away from home once a year.  I'm going to change
all that, if I have to turn cook myself!"

"Bully for you, Linder!" said Grant, clapping him on the shoulder.
"I believe you actually are enthusiastic for once."

"I understand my orders are to make the country give the city a run
for its money, and I'm going to do it, or break you.  If all I've
mentioned won't do it I've another great scheme in storage."

"Good!  What is it?"

"I am inventing a machine that will make a noise like a trolley-car
and a smell like a sewer.  That will add the last touch in city
refinements."

When the laugh over Linder's invention had subsided Murdoch
broached another.

"The office work is becoming pretty heavy, Mr. Grant, and I'm none
too confident in the help I have.  Now if I could send for Miss
Bruce--"

"What do you think you should pay her?"

"I should say she is worth a hundred dollars a month."

"Then she must be worth two hundred.  Wire her to come and start
her at that figure."



CHAPTER XVIII


Promptly at six Linder drew his automobile up in front of the
Transley summer home with Grant and Murdoch on board.  Wilson had
been watching, and rushed down upon them, but before he could
clamber up on Grant a great teddy-bear was thrust into his arms and
sent him, wild with delight, to his mother.

"Look, mother!  Look what The-Man-on-the-Hill brought!  See!  He
has fire in his eyes!"

Transley and Y.D. met the guests at the gate.  "How do, Grant?
Glad to see you, old man," said Transley, shaking his hand
cordially.  "The wife has had so many good words for you I am
almost jealous.  What ho, Linder!  By all that's wonderful!  You
old prairie dog, why did you never look me up?  I was beginning to
think the Boche had got you."

Grant introduced Murdoch, and Y.D. received them as cordially as
had Transley.  "Glad to see you fellows back," he exclaimed.  "I
al'us said the Western men 'ud put a crimp in the Kaiser, spite o'
hell an' high water!"

"One thing the war has taught us," said Grant, modestly, "is that
men are pretty much alike, whether they come from west or east or
north or south.  No race has a monopoly of heroism."

"Well, come on in," Transley beckoned, leading the way.  "Dinner
will be ready sharp on time twenty minutes late.  Not being a
married man, Grant, you will not understand that reckoning.  You'll
have to excuse Mrs. Transley a few minutes; she's holding down the
accelerator in the kitchen.  Come in; I want you to meet Squiggs."

Squiggs proved to be a round man with huge round tortoise-shell
glasses and round red face to match.  He shook hands with a manner
that suggested that in doing so he was making rather a good fellow
of himself.

"We must have a little lubrication, for Y.D.'s sake," said
Transley, producing a bottle and glasses.  "I suppose it was the
dust on the plains that gave these old cow punchers a thirst which
never can be slaked.  These be evil days for the old-timers.
Grant?"

"Not any, thanks."

"No?  Well, there's no accounting for tastes.  Squiggs?"

"I'm a lawyer," said Squiggs, "and as booze is now ultra vires I do
my best to keep it down," and Mr. Squiggs beamed genially upon his
pleasantry and the full glass in his hand.

"I take a snort when I want it and I don't care who knows it," said
Y.D.  "I al'us did, and I reckon I'll keep on to the finish.  It
didn't snuff me out in my youth and innocence, anyway.  Just the
same, I'm admittin' it's bad medicine in onskilful hands.  Here's
ho!"

The glasses had just been drained when Mrs. Transley entered the
room, flushed but radiant from a strenuous half hour in the
kitchen.

"Well, here you are!" she exclaimed.  "So glad you could come, Mr.
Grant.  Why, Mr. Linder!  Of all people--  This IS a pleasure.  And
Mr.--?"

"Mr. Murdoch," Transley supplied.

"My chief of staff; the man who persists in keeping me rich," Grant
elaborated.

"I mustn't keep you waiting longer.  Dinner is ready.  Dad, you are
to carve."

"Hanged if I will!  I'm a guest here, and I stand on my rights,"
Y.D. exploded.

"Then you must do it, Frank."

"I suppose so," said Transley, "although all I get out of a meal
when I have to carve is splashing and profanity.  You know,
Squiggs, I've figured it out that this practice of requiring the
nominal head of the house to carve has come down from the days when
there wasn't usually enough to go 'round, and the carver had to
make some fine decisions and, perhaps, maintain them by force.  It
has no place under modern civilization."

"Except that someone must do it, and it's about the only household
responsibility man has not been able to evade," said Mrs. Transley.

As they entered the dining-room Zen's mother, whiter and it seemed
even more distinguished by the years, joined them, accompanied by
Mrs. Squiggs, a thin woman much concerned about social status, and
the party was complete.

Transley managed the carving more skilfully than his protest might
have suggested, and there was a lull in the conversation while the
first demands of appetite were being satisfied.

"Tell us about your settlement scheme, Mr. Grant," Mrs. Transley
urged when it seemed necessary to find a topic.  "Mr. Grant has
quite a wonderful plan."

"Yes, wise us up, old man," said Transley.  "I've heard something
of it, but never could see through it."

"It's all very simple," Grant explained.  "I am providing the
capital to start a few families on farms.  Instead of lending the
money directly to them I am financing a company in which each
farmer must subscribe for stock to the value of the land he is to
occupy.  His stock he will pay for with a part of the proceeds of
each year's crop, until it is paid in full, when he becomes a paid-
up shareholder, subject to no further call except a levy which may
be made for running expenses."

"And then your advances are returned to you with interest," Squiggs
suggested.  "A very creditable plan of benefaction; very creditable,
indeed."

"No, that is not the idea.  In the first place, I am accepting no
interest on my advances, and in the second place the money, when
repaid by the shareholders, will not be returned to me, but will be
used to establish another colony on the same basis, and so on--the
movement will be extended from group to group."

Mr. Squiggs readjusted his large round tortoise-shell glasses.

"Do I understand that you are charging no interest?"

"Not a cent."

"Then where do YOU come in?"

"I had hoped to make it clear that I am not seeking to 'come in.'
You see, the money I am doing this with is not really mine at all."

"Not yours?" cried a chorus of voices.

"No.  Mr. Squiggs, you are a lawyer, and therefore a man of
perspicuity and accurate definitions.  What is money?"

"You flatter me.  I should say that money is a medium for the
exchange of value."

"Very well.  Therefore, if a man accepts money without giving value
for it in exchange he is violating the fundamental principle
underlying the use of money.  He is, in short, an economic outlaw."

"I am afraid I don't follow you."

"Let me illustrate by my own experience, and that of my family.  My
father was possessed of a piece of land which at one time had
little or no value.  Eventually it became of great value, not
through anything he had done, but as a result of the natural law
that births exceed deaths.  Yet he, although he had done nothing to
create this value, was able, through a faulty economic system, to
pocket the proceeds.  Then, as a result of the advantages which his
wealth gave him, he was able to extract from society throughout all
the remainder of his life value out of all proportion to any return
he made for it.  Finally it came down to me.  Holding my peculiar
belief, which my right and left bower consider sinful and silly
respectively, I found money forced upon me, regardless of the fact
that I had given absolutely no value in exchange.  Now if money is
a medium for the exchange of value and I receive money without
giving value for it, it is plain that someone else must have parted
with money without receiving value in return.  The thing is
basically immoral."

"Your father couldn't take it with him."

"But why should _I_ have it?  I never contributed a finger-weight
of service for it.  From society the money came and to society it
should return."

"You should worry," said Transley.  "Society isn't worrying over
you.  Some more of the roast beef?"

"No, thank you.  But to come down to date.  It seems that I cannot
get away from this wealth which dogs me at every turn.  Before
enlisting I had been margining certain steel stocks, purely in the
ordinary course of affairs.  With the demands made by the war on
the steel industry my stocks went up in price and my good friend
Murdoch was able to report that it had made a fortune for me while
I was overseas. . . .  And we call ourselves an intelligent
people!"

"And so we are," said Mr. Squiggs.  "We stick to a system we know
to be sound.  It has weathered all the gales of the past, and
promises to weather those of the future.  I tell you, Grant,
communism won't work.  You can't get away from the principle of
individual reward for individual effort."

"My dear fellow, that's exactly what I'm pleading for.  I have no
patience with any claim that all men are equal, or capable of
rendering equal service to society, and I want payment to be made
according to service rendered, not according to the freaks of a
haphazard system such as I have been trying to describe."

"But how are you going to bring that golden age about?" Murdoch
inquired.

"By education.  The first thing is to accept the principle that
wealth cannot be accepted except in exchange for full-measure
service.  You, Mrs. Transley--you teach your little boy that he
must not steal.  As he grows older simply widen your definition of
theft to include receiving value without giving value in exchange.
When all the mothers begin teaching that principle the golden age
which Mr. Murdoch inquires about will be in sight."

"How would you drive it home?" said Y.D.  "We have too many laws
already."

"Let us agree on that.  The acceptance of this principle will make
half the laws now cluttering our statute books unnecessary.  I
merely urge that we should treat the CAUSE of our economic malady
rather than the symptoms."

"Theoretically your idea has much to commend it, but it is quite
impracticable," Mr. Squiggs announced with some finality.  "It
could never be brought into effect."

"If a corporation can determine the value of the service rendered
by each of its hundred thousand employees, why cannot a nation
determine the value of the service rendered by each of its hundred
million citizens?"

"THERE'S something for you to chew on, Squiggs," said Transley.
"You argue your case well, Grant; I believe you have our legal
light rather feazed--that's the word, isn't it, Mr. Murdoch?--for
once.  I confess a good deal of sympathy with your point of view,
but I'm afraid you can't change human nature."

"I am not trying to do that.  All that needs changing is the
popular idea of what is right and what is wrong.  And that idea is
changing with a rapidity which is startling.  Before the war the
man who made money, by almost any means, was set up on a pedestal
called Success.  Moralists pointed to him as one to be emulated;
Sunday school papers printed articles to show that any boy might
follow in his footsteps and become great and respected.  To-day,
for following precisely the same practices, the nation demands that
he be thrown into prison; the Press heaps contumely upon him; he
has become an object of suspicion in the popular eye.  This change,
world wide and quite unforeseen, has come about in five years."

"Is that due to a new sense of right and wrong, or to just old-
fashioned envy of the rich which now feels strong enough to
threaten where it used to fawn?" Y.D.'s wife asked, and Grant was
spared a hard answer by the rancher's interruption, "Hit the
profiteer as hard as you like.  He's got no friends."

"That depends upon who is the profiteer--a point which no one seems
to have settled.  In the cities you may even hear prosperous
ranchers included in that class--absurd as that must seem to you,"
Grant added, with a smile to Y.D.  "Require every man to give
service according to his returns and you automatically eliminate
all profiteers, large and small."

"But you will admit," said Mrs. Squiggs, "that we must have some
well-off people to foster culture and give tone to society
generally?"

"I agree that the boy who is brought up in a home with a bath tub,
and all that that stands for, is likely to be a better citizen than
the boy who doesn't have that advantage.  That's why I want every
home to have a bath tub."

Mrs. Squiggs subsided rather heavily.  In youth her Saturday night
ablutions had been taken in the middle of the kitchen floor.

"I have a good deal of sympathy," said Transley, "with any movement
which has for its purpose the betterment of human conditions.  Any
successful man of to-day will admit, if he is frank about it, that
he owes his success as much to good luck as to good judgment.  If
you could find a way, Grant, to take the element of luck out of
life, perhaps you would be doing a service which would justify you
in keeping those millions which worry you so.  But I can't see that
it makes any difference to the prosperity of a country who owns the
wealth in it, so long as the wealth is there and is usefully
employed.  Money doesn't grow unless it works, and if it works it
serves Society just the same as muscle does.  You could put all
your wealth in a strong-box and bury it under your house up there
on the hill, and it wouldn't increase a nickel in a thousand years,
but if you put it to work it makes money for you and money for
other people as well.  I'm a little nervous about new-fangled
notions.  It's easier to wreck the ship than to build a new one,
which may not sail any better.  What the world needs to-day is the
gospel of hard work, and everybody, rich and poor, on the job for
all that's in him.  That's the only way out."

"We seem to have much in common," Grant returned.  "Hard work is
the only way out, and the best way to encourage hard work is to
find a system by which every man will be rewarded according to the
service rendered."

At this point Mrs. Transley arose, and the men moved out into the
living-room to chat on less contentious subjects.  After a time the
women joined them, and Grant presently found himself absorbed in
conversation with the old rancher's wife.  Zen seemed to pay but
little attention to him, and for the first time he began to realize
what consummate actresses women are.  Had Transley been the most
suspicious of husbands--and in reality his domestic vision was as
guileless as that of a boy--he could have caught no glint of any
smoldering spark of the long ago.  Grant found himself thinking of
this dissembling quality as one of nature's provisions designed for
the protection of women, much as the sombre plumage of the prairie
chicken protects her from the eye of the sportsman.  For after all
the hunting instinct runs through all men, be the game what it may.

Before they realized how the time had flown Linder was protesting
that he must be on his way.  At the gate Transley put a hand on
Grant's shoulder.

"I'm prepared to admit," he said, "that there's a whole lot in this
old world that needs correcting, but I'm not sure that it can be
corrected.  You have a right to try out your experiments, but take
a tip and keep a comfortable cache against the day when you'll want
to settle down and take things as they are.  It is true and always
has been true that a man who is worth his salt, when he wants a
thing, takes it--or goes down in the attempt.  The loser may
squeal, but that seems to be the path of progress.  You can't beat
it."

"Well, we'll see," said Grant, laughing.  "Sometimes two men, each
worth his salt, collide."

"As in the meadow of the South Y.D.," said Transley, with a smile.
"You remember that, Y.D.--when our friend here upset the haying
operations?"

"Sure, I remember, but I'm not holdin' it agin him now.  A dead
horse is a dead horse, an' I don't go sniffin' it."

"Perhaps I ought to say, though," Grant returned, "that I really do
not know how the iron pegs got into that meadow."

"And I don't know how your haystacks got afire, but I can guess.
Remember Drazk?  A little locoed, an' just the crittur to pull off
a fool stunt like that.  When the fire swept up the valley, instead
of down, he made his get-away and has never been seen since.  I
reckon likely there was someone in Landson's gang capable o'
drivin' pegs without consultin' the boss."

The little group were standing in the shadow and Grant had no
opportunity to notice the sudden blanching of Zen's face at the
mention of Drazk.

"You're wrong about his not having been seen again, Y.D.," said
Grant.  "He managed to locate me somewhere in France.  That reminds
me, he had a message for you, Mrs. Transley.  I'm afraid Drazk is
as irresponsible as ever, provided he hasn't passed out, which is
more than likely."

Grant shook hands cordially with Y.D. and his wife, with Squiggs
and Mrs. Squiggs, with Transley and Mrs. Transley.  Any inclination
he may have felt to linger over Zen's hand was checked by her quick
withdrawal of it, and there was something in her manner quite
beyond his understanding.  He could have sworn that the self-
possessed Zen Transley was actually trembling.



CHAPTER XIX


The next day Wilson paid his usual visit to the field where Grant
was plowing, and again was he the bearer of a message.  With much
difficulty he managed to extricate the envelope from a pocket.

"Dear Mr. Grant," it read, "I am so excited over a remark you
dropped last night I must see you again as soon as possible.  Can
you drop in to-night, say at eight.  Yours,--ZEN."

Grant read the message a second time, wondering what remark of his
could have occasioned it.  As he recalled the evening's conversation
it had been most about his experiment, and he had a sense that he
had occupied a little more of the stage than strictly good form
would have suggested.  However, it was HIS scheme that had been
under discussion, and he did not propose to let it suffer for lack
of a champion.  But what had he said that could be of more than
general interest to Zen Transley?  For a moment he wondered if she
had created a pretext upon which to bring him to the house by the
river, and then instantly dismissed that thought as unworthy of him.
At any rate it was evident that his addressing her by her Christian
name in the last message had given no offence.  This time she had
not called him "The Man-on-the-Hill," and there was no suggestion of
playfulness in the note.  Then the signature, "Yours, Zen"; that
might mean everything, or it might mean nothing.  Either it was
purely formal or it implied a very great deal indeed.  Grant
reflected that it could hardly be interpreted anywhere between those
two extremes, and was it reasonable to suppose that Zen would use it
in an ENTIRELY formal sense?  If it had been "yours truly," or
"yours sincerely," or any such stereotyped conclusion, it would not
have called for a second thought, but the simple word "yours"--

"If only she were," thought Grant, and felt the color creeping to
his face at the thought.  It was the first time he had dared that
much.  He had not bothered to wonder much where or how this affair
must end.  Through all the years that had passed since that night
when she had fallen asleep on his shoulder, and he had watched the
ribbons of fire rising and falling in the valley, and the smell of
grass-smoke had been strong in his nostrils, through all those
years Zen had been to him a sweet, evasive memory to be dreamed
over and idealized, a wild, daring, irresponsible incarnation of
the spirit of the hills.  Even in these last few days he had
followed the path simply because it lay before him.  He had not
sought her out in all that great West; he had been content with his
dream of the Zen of years gone by; if Fate had brought him once
more within the orbit of his star surely Fate had a purpose in all
its doings.  One who has learned to believe that no bullet will
find him unless "his name and number are on it" has little
difficulty in excusing his own indiscretions by fatalistic
reasoning.

He wrote on the back of the note, "Look for me at eight," and then,
observing that the boy had not brought teddy along, he inquired
solicitously for the health of the little pet.

"He's all right, but mother wouldn't let me bring him.  Said I
might lose him."  The tone in which the last words were spoken
implied just how impossible such a thing was.  Lose teddy!  No one
but a mother could think such an absurdity.

"But I got a knife!" Wilson exclaimed, his mind darting to a
happier subject.  "Daddy gave it to me.  Will you sharpen it?  It
is as dull as a pig."

Grant was to learn during the day that all the boy's figures of
speech were now hung on the family pig.  The knife was as dull as a
pig; the plow was as rough as a pig; the horses, when they capered
at a corner, were as wild as a pig; even Grant himself, while he
held the little chap firmly on his knee, received the doubtful
compliment of being as strong as a pig.  He went through the form
of sharpening the knife on the leather lines of the harness, and
was pleased to discover that Wilson, with childish dexterity of
imagination, now pronounced it as sharp as a pig.

The boy did not return to the field in the afternoon, and Grant
spent the time in a strange admixture of happiness over the
pleasant companionship he had found in this little son of the
prairies and anticipation of his meeting with Zen that night.  All
his reflection had failed to suggest the subject so interesting to
her as to bring forth her unconventional note, but it was enough
for him that his presence was desired.  As to the future--he would
deal with that when he came to it.  As evening approached the
horses began their usual procedure of turning their heads homeward
at the end of each furrow.  Beginning about five o'clock, they had
a habit of assuming that each furrow was obviously the last one for
the day, and when the firm hand on the lines brought them sharply
back to position they trudged on with an apologetic air which
seemed to say that of course they were quite willing to work
another hour or two but they supposed their master would want to be
on his way home.  Today, however, he surprised them, and the first
time they turned their heads he unhitched, and, throwing himself
lightly across Prince's ample back, drove them to their stables.

Grant prepared his supper of bacon and eggs and fried potatoes,
bread and jam and black tea, and ate it from the kitchen table as
was his habit except on state occasions.  Sometimes a touch of the
absurdity of his behavior would tickle his imagination--he, who
might dine in the midst of wealth and splendor, with soft lights
beating down upon him, soft music swelling through arching
corridors, soft-handed waiters moving about on deep, silent
carpetings, perhaps round white shoulders across the table and the
faint smell of delicate perfumes--that he should prefer to eat from
the white oilcloth of his kitchen table was a riddle far beyond any
ordinary intellect.  And yet he was happy in this life; happy in
his escape from the tragic routine of being decently civilized;
happier, he knew, than he ever could be among all the artificial
pleasures that wealth could buy him.  Sometimes, as a concession to
this absurdity, he would set his table in the dining-room with his
best dishes, and eat his silent meal very grandly, until the
ridiculousness of it all would overcome him and he would jump up
with a boyish whoop and sweep everything into the kitchen.

But to-night he had no time for make-belief.  Supper ended, he put
a basin of water on the stove and went out to give his horses their
evening attention, after which he had a wash and a careful shave
and dressed himself in a light grey suit appropriate to an autumn
evening.  And then he noticed that he had just time to walk to
Transley's house before eight o'clock.

Zen received him at the door; the maid had gone to a neighbor's,
she said, and Wilson was in bed.  It was still bright outside, but
the sheltered living-room, to which she showed him, was wrapped in
a soft twilight.

"Shall we have a lamp, or the fireplace?" she asked, then
inferentially answered by saying that a cool wind was blowing down
from the mountains.  "I had the maid build the fire," she
continued, and he could see the outline of her form bending over
the grate.  She struck a match; its glow lit up her cheeks and
hair; in a moment the dry wood was crackling and ribbons of blue
smoke were curling into the chimney.

"I have been so anxious to see you--again," she said, drawing a
chair not far from his.  "A chance remark of yours last night
brought to memory many things--things I have been trying to
forget."  Then, abruptly, "Did you ever kill a man?"

"You know I was in the war," he returned, evading her question.

"Yes, and you do not care to dwell on that phase of it.  I should
not have asked you, but you will be the better able to understand.
For years I have lived under the cloud of having killed a man."

"You!"

"Yes.  The day of the fire--you remember?"

Grant had started from his chair.  "I can't believe it!" he
exclaimed.  "There must have been justification!"

"YOU had justification at the Front, but it doesn't make the memory
pleasant.  I had justification, but it has haunted me night and
day.  And then, last night you said he was still alive, and my soul
seemed to rise up again and say, 'I am free!'"

"Who?"

"Drazk."

"DRAZK!"

"Yes.  I thought I had killed him that day of the fire.  It is
rather an unpleasant story, and you will excuse me repeating the
details, I know.  He attacked me--we were both on horseback, in the
river--I suppose he was crazed with his wild deed, and less
responsible than usual.  He dragged me from my horse and I fought
with him in the water, but he was much too strong.  I had concluded
that to drown myself, and perhaps him, was the only way out, when I
saw a leather thong floating in the water from the saddle.  By a
ruse I managed to flip it around his neck, and the next moment he
was at my mercy.  I had no mercy then.  I understand how it might
be possible to kill prisoners.  I pulled it tight, tight--pulled
till I saw his face blacken and his eyes stand out.  He went down,
but still I pulled.  And then after a little I found myself on
shore.

"I suppose it was the excitement of the fire that carried me on
through the day, but at night--you remember?--there came a
reaction, and I couldn't keep awake.  I suddenly seemed to feel
that I was safe, and I could sleep."

Grant had resumed his seat.  He was deeply moved by this strange
confidence; he bent his eyes intently upon her face, now shining in
the ruddy light from the fire-place.  Her frank reference to the
event that night seemed to create a new bond between them; he knew
now, if ever he had doubted it, that Zen Transley had treasured
that incident in her heart even as he had treasured it.

"I was so embarrassed after the--the accident, you know," she
continued.  "I knew you must know I had been in the water.  For
days and weeks I expected every hour to hear of the finding of the
body.  I expected to hear the remark dropped casually by every new
visitor at the ranch, 'Drazk's body was found to-day in the river.
The Mounted Police are investigating.'  But time went on and
nothing was heard of it.  It would almost have been a relief to me
if it had been discovered.  If I had reported the affair at once,
as I should have done, all would have been different, but having
kept my secret for a while I found it impossible to confess it
later.  It was the first time I ever felt my self-reliance severely
shaken. . . .  But what was his message, and why did you not tell
me before?"

"Because I attached no value to it; because I was, perhaps, a
little ashamed of it.  I learned something of his weaknesses at the
Front.  According to Drazk's statement of it he won the war, and
could as easily win another, if occasion presented itself, so when
he said, 'If ever you see Y.D.'s daughter tell her I'm well; she'll
be glad to hear it,' I put it down to his usual boasting and
thought no more about it.  I thought he was trying to impress me
with the idea that you were interested in him, which was a very
absurd supposition, as I saw it."

"Well, now you know," she said, with a little laugh.  "I'm glad
it's off my mind."

"Of course your husband knows?"

"No.  That made it harder.  I never told Frank."

She arose and walked to the fire-place, pretending to stir the
logs.  When she had seated herself again she continued.

"It has not been easy for me to tell all things to Frank.  Don't
misunderstand me; he has been a model husband, according to my
standards."

"According to your standards?"

"According to my standards--when I married him.  If standards were
permanent I suppose happy matings would be less unusual.  A young
couple must have something in common in order to respond at all to
each other's attractions, but as they grow older they set up
different standards, and they drift apart."

She paused, and Grant sat in silence, watching the glow of the
firelight upon her cheek.

"Why don't you smoke?" she exclaimed, suddenly springing up.  "Let
me find you some of Frank's cigars."

Grant protested that he smoked too much.  She produced a box of
cigars and extended them to him.  Then she held a match while he
got his light.

"Your standards have changed?" said Grant, taking up the thread
when she had sat down again.

"They have.  They have changed more than Frank's, which makes me
feel rather at fault in the matter.  How could he know that I would
change my ideal of what a husband should be?"

"Why shouldn't he know?  That is the course of development.
Without changing ideals there would be stagnation."

"Perhaps," she returned, and he thought he caught a note of
weariness in her voice.  "But I don't blame Frank--now.  I rather
blame him then.  He swept me off my feet; stampeded me.  My parents
helped him, and I was only half disposed to resist.  You see, I had
this other matter on my mind, and for the first time in my life I
felt the need of protection.  Besides, I took a matter-of-fact view
of marriage.  I thought that sentiment--love, if you like--was a
thing of books, an invention of poets and fiction writers.
Practical people would be practical in their marriages, as in their
other undertakings.  To marry Frank seemed a very practical course.
My father assured me that Frank had in him qualities of large
success.  He would make money; he would be a prominent man in
circles of those who do things.  These predictions he has
fulfilled.  Frank has been all I expected--then."

"But you have changed your opinion of marriage--of the essentials
of marriage?"

"Do YOU need to ask that?  I was beginning to see the light--
beginning to know myself--even before I married him, but I didn't
stop to analyze.  I plunged ahead, as I have always done, trusting
not to get into any position from which I could not find a way out.
But there are some positions from which there is no way out."

Grant reflected that possibly his experience had been somewhat
like hers in that respect.  He, too, had been following a path,
unconcerned about its end. . . .  Possibly for him, too, there
would be no way out.

"Frank has been all I expected of him," she repeated, as though
anxious to do her husband justice.  "He has made money.  He spends
it generously.  If I live here modestly, with but one maid, it is
because of a preference which I have developed for simplicity.  I
might have a dozen if I asked it, and I think Frank is somewhat
surprised, and, it may be, disappointed, that I don't ask it.
Although not a man for display himself, he likes to see me make
display.  It's a strange thing, isn't it, that a husband should
wish his wife to be admired by other men?"

"Some are successful in that," Grant remarked.

"Some are more successful than they intend to be."

"Frank, for instance?" he queried, pointedly.

"I have not sought any man's admiration," she went on, with her
astonishing frankness.  "I am too independent for that.  What do I
care for their admiration?  But every woman wants love."

Grant had changed his position, and sat with his elbows upon his
knees, his chin resting upon his hands.  "You know, Zen," he said,
using her Christian name deliberately, "the picture I drew that day
by the river?  That is the picture I have carried in my mind ever
since--shall carry to the end.  Perhaps it has led me to be
imprudent--"

"Imprudent?"

"Has brought me here to-night, for example."

"You had my invitation."

"True.  But why develop another situation which, as you say, has no
way out?"

"Do you want to go?"

"No, Zen, no!  I want to stay--with you--always!  But organized
society must respect its own conventions."

She arose and stood by his chair, letting her hand fall beside his
cheek.

"You silly boy!" she said.  "You didn't organize society, nor
subscribe to its conventions.  Still, I suppose there must be a
code of some kind, and we shall respect it.  You had your chance,
Denny, and you passed it up."

"Had my chance?"

"Yes.  I refused you in words, I know, but actions speak louder--"

"But when you told me you were engaged what could I honorably do?"

"More--very much more--than you can do now.  You could have shown
me my mistake.  How much better to have learned it then, from you,
than later, by my own experience!  You could have swept me off my
feet, just as Frank did.  You did nothing.  If I had sought
evidence to prove how impractical you are, as compared with my
super-practical husband, I would have found it in the way you
handled, or rather failed to handle, that situation."

"What would your super-practical husband do now if he were in my
position?" he said, drawing her hands into his.

"I don't know."

"You do!  He says that any man worth his salt takes what he wants
in this world.  Am I worth my salt?"

"There are different standards of value. . . .  Goodness! how late
it is!  You must go now, and don't come back before, let us say,
Wednesday."



CHAPTER XX


Whatever may have been Grant's philosophy about the unwisdom of
creating a situation which had no way out he found himself looking
forward impatiently to Wednesday evening.  An hour or two at Zen's
fireside provided the social atmosphere which his bachelor life
lacked, and as Transley seemed unappreciative of his domestic
privileges, remaining in town unless his business brought him out
to the summer home, it seemed only a just arrangement that they
should be shared by one who valued them at their worth.

The Wednesday evening conversation developed further the
understanding that was gradually evolving between them, but it
afforded no solution of the problem which confronted them.  Zen
made no secret of the error she had made in the selection of her
husband, but had no suggestions to offer as to what should be done
about it.  She seemed quite satisfied to enjoy Grant's conversation
and company, and let it go at that--an impossible situation, as the
young man assured himself.  She dismissed him again at a quite
respectable hour with some reference to Saturday evening, which
Grant interpreted as an invitation to call again at that time.

When he entered Saturday night it was evident that she had been
expecting him.  A cool wind was again blowing down from the
mountains, laden with the soft smell of melting snow, and the fire
in the grate was built ready for the match.

"I am my own maid to-night," she said, as she stooped to light it.
"Sarah usually goes to town Saturday evening.  Now we shall see if
someone is in good humor."

The fire curled up pleasantly about the wood.  "There!" she
exclaimed, clapping her hands.  "All is well.  You see how
economical I am; if we must spend on fires we save on light.  I
love a wood fire; I suppose it is something which reaches back to
the original savage in all of us."

"To the days when our great ancestors roasted their victims while
they danced about the coals," said Grant, completing the picture.
"And yet they say that human nature doesn't change."

"Does it?  I think our methods change with our environments, but
that is all.  Wasn't it you who propounded a theory about an age
when men took what they wanted by force giving way to an age in
which they took what they wanted by subtlety?  Now, I believe, you
want society to restrain the man of clever wits just as it has
learned to restrain the man of big biceps.  And when that is done
will not man discover some other means of taking what he wants?"

She had seated herself beside him on a divanette and the joy of her
nearness fired Grant with a very happy intoxication.  It recalled
that night on the hillside when, as she had since said, she felt
safe in his protection.

"I am really very interested," she continued.  "I followed the
argument at the table on Sunday with as much concern as if it had
been my pet hobby, not yours, that was under discussion.  If I said
little it was because I did not wish to appear too interested."

Her amazing frankness brought Grant, figuratively, to his feet at
every turn.  She seemed to have no desire to conceal her interest
in him, her attachment for him.  Hers was such candor as might well
be born of the vast hillsides, the great valleys, the brooding
silences of her girlhood.  Yet it seemed obvious that she must be
less candid with Transley. . . .

"I am glad you were interested," he answered.  "I was afraid I was
rather boring the company, but it was MY scheme and I had to stand
up for it.  I fear I made few converts."

"You were dealing with practical men," she returned, "and practical
men are never converted to a new idea.  That is one of the things I
have learned in my years of married life, Dennison.  Practical men
find many ways of turning an old idea to advantage, but they never
evolve new ones.  New ideas come from dreamers--theoretical fellows
like you."

"The dreamer is always a lap ahead of the rest of civilization, and
the funny thing is that the rest always thinks itself much more
sane than the dreamer, out there blazing the way."

"That's not remarkable," she replied.  "That's logical.  The
dreamer blazes the way--proves the possibilities of his dream--and
the practical man follows it up and makes money out of it.  To a
practical man there is nothing more practical than making money."

"Did I convert you?" he pursued.

"I was not in need of conversion.  I have been a follower of the
new faith--an imperfect and limping follower, it is true--ever
since you first announced it."

"I believe you are laughing at me."

"Certainly not!  I have been brought up in an environment where
there is no standard higher than the money standard.  Not that my
father or husband are dishonest; they are rigidly honest according
to their ideas of honesty.  But to say that a man must give actual
service for every dollar he gets or it isn't his--that is a
conception of honesty so far beyond them as to be an absurdity.
But I have wanted to ask you how you are going to enforce this new
idealism."

"Idealism is not enforced.  We aspire to it; we may not attain to
it.  Christianity itself is idealism--the idealism of unselfishness.
That ideal has never been attained by any considerable number of
people, and yet it has drawn all humanity on to somewhat higher
levels as surely as the moon draws the tide. Superficial persons in
these days are drawing pictures of the failure of Christianity,
which has failed in part; but they could find a much more depressing
subject by painting a world from which all Christian idealism had
been removed."

"But surely you have some plan for putting your theories to the
test--some plan which will force those to whom idealism appeals
in vain.  We do not trust to a man's idealism to keep him from
stealing; we put him in jail."

"All that will come in time, but the question for the seeker after
truth is not 'Will it work?' but 'Is it true?'  I fancy I can see
the practical men of Moses' time leaning over his shoulder as he
inscribed the Ten Commandments and remarking 'No use of putting
that down, Moses; you can never enforce it.'  But Moses put it down
and left the enforcement to natural law and the growing intelligence
of the generations which have followed him.  We are too much
disposed to think it possible to evade a law; to violate it, and
escape punishment; but if a law is true, punishment follows
violation as implacably as the stars follow their courses.  And if
society has failed to recognize the law that service, and service
only, should be able to command service in return, society must
suffer the penalty.  We have only to look about us to see that
society is paying in full for its violations.

"Yes, I have plans, and I think they would work, but the first
thing is the ideal--the new moral sense--that value must not be
accepted without giving equal value in return.  Society, of course,
will have to set up the standards of value.  That is a matter of
detail--a matter for the practical men who come in the wake of the
idealist.  But of this I am certain--and I hark back to my old
theme--that just as society has found a means of preventing the man
who is physically superior from taking wealth without giving
service in return, so must society find a means to prevent men who
are mentally superior from taking wealth without giving service in
return.  The superior person, mark you, will still have an
advantage, in that his superiority will enable him to EARN more; we
shall merely stop him taking what he does not earn.  That must
come.  I think it will come soon.  It is the next step in the
social evolution of the race."

She had drunk in his argument as one who hangs on every word, and
her wrapt face turned toward his seemed to glow and thrill him in
return with a sense of their spiritual oneness.  She did not need
to tell him that Transley never talked to her like this.  Transley
loved her, if he loved her at all, for the glory she reflected upon
him; he was proud of her beauty, of her daring, of her physical
charm and self-reliance.  The deeper side of her mental life was to
Transley a field unexplored; a field of the very existence of which
he was probably unaware.  Grant looked into her eyes, now close and
responsive, and found within their depths something which sent him
to his feet.

"Zen!" he exclaimed.  "The mystery of life is too much for me.
Surely there must be an answer somewhere!  Surely the puzzle has a
system to it--a key which may some da