y be found!  Or can it be just
chaos--just blind, driveling, senseless chaos?  In our own lives,
why should we be stranded, helpless, wrecked, with the happiness
which might have been ours hung just beyond our reach?  Is there no
answer to this?"

"I suppose we disobeyed the law, back in those old days.  We heard
it clearly enough, and we disobeyed.  I allowed myself to be guided
by motives which were not the highest; you seemed to lack the
enterprise which would have won you its own reward.  And as you
have said, those who violate the law must suffer for it.  I have
suffered."

She drew up her chin; he could see the firm muscles set beneath
the pink bloom of her flesh. . . .  He had not thought of Zen
suffering; all his thought of her had been very grateful to his
vanity, but he had not thought of her suffering.  He extended his
hands and took hers within them.

"I have sometimes wondered," he said, "why there is no second
chance; why one cannot wipe the slate clear of everything that has
been and start anew.  What a world this might be!"

"Would it be any better?  Or would we go on making our mistakes
over again?  That seems to be the only way we learn."

"But a second chance; the idea seems so fair, so plausible.
Suppose you are shooting on the ranges, for instance; you are
allowed a shot or two to find your nerve, to get your distance, to
settle yourself to the business in hand.  But in this business of
life you fire, and if some distraction, some momentary influence or
folly sends your aim wild, the shot is gone and you are left with
all the years that follow to think about it.  You can do nothing
but think about it--the most profitless of all occupations."

"For you there is a second chance," she reminded him.  "You must
have thought of that."

"No--no second chance."

She drew herself up slightly and away from him.  "I have been very
frank with you, Dennison," she said.  "Suppose you try being frank
with me?"

In her eyes was still the fire of Zen of the Y.D., a woman
unconquered and unconquerable.  She gave the impression that she
accepted the buffetings of life, but no one forced them upon her.
She had erred; she would suffer.  That was fair; she accepted that.
But as Grant gazed on her face, tilted still in some of its old-
time recklessness and defiance, he knew that the day would come
when she would say that her cup was full, and, throwing it to the
winds, would start life over, if there can be such a thing as
starting life over.  And something in her manner told him that day
was very, very near.

"All right," he said, "I will be frank.  Fate HAS brought within my
orbit a second chance, or what would have been a second chance had
my heart not been so full of you.  She was a girl well worth
thinking about.  When an employee introduces herself to you with a
declaration of independence you may know that you have met with
someone out of the ordinary.  I am not speaking of these days of
labor scarcity; it takes no great moral quality to be independent
when you have the whip-hand.  But in the days before the war, with
two applicants for every position, a girl who valued her freedom of
spirit more than her job--more than even a very good job--was a
girl to think about."

"And you thought about her?"

"I did.  I was sick of the cringing and fawning of which my wealth
made me the object; I loathed the deference paid me, because I knew
it was paid, not to me, but to my money--I was homesick to hear
someone tell me to go to hell.  I wanted to brush up against that
spirit which says it is as good as anybody else--against the
manliness which stands its ground and hits back.  I found that
spirit in Phyllis Bruce."

"Phyllis Bruce--rather a nice name.  But are the men and women of
the East so--so servile as you suggest?"

"No!  That is where I was mistaken.  Generations of environment had
merely trained them into docility of habit.  Underneath they are
red-blooded through and through.  The war showed us that.  Zen--the
proudest moment of my life--except one--was when a kid in the
office who couldn't come into my room without trembling jumped up
and said 'We WILL win!'--and called me Grant!  Think of that!  Poor
chap. . . .  What was I saying?  Oh, yes; Phyllis.  I grew to like
her--very much--but I couldn't marry her.  You know why."

Zen was looking into the fire with unseeing eyes.  "I am not sure
that I know why," she said at length.  "You couldn't marry me.  It
was your second chance.  You should have taken it."

"Would that be playing the game fairly--with her?"

She rested her fingers lightly on the back of his hand, extending
them gently down until they fell between his own.

"Denny, you big, big boy!" she murmured.  "Do you suppose every man
marries his first choice?"

"It has always seemed to me that a second choice is a makeshift.
It doesn't seem quite square--"

"No.  I fancy some second choices are really first choices.  Wisdom
comes with experience, you know."

"Not always.  At any rate I couldn't marry her while my heart was
yours."

"I suppose not," she answered, and again he noted a touch of
weariness in her voice.  "I know something of what divided
affection--if one can even say it is divided--means.  Denny, I will
make a confession.  I knew you would come back; I always was sure
you would come back.  'Then,' I said to myself, 'I will see this
man Grant as he is, and the reality will clear my brain of all this
idealism which I have woven about him.'  Perhaps you know what I
mean.  We sometimes meet people who impress us greatly at the time,
but a second meeting, perhaps years later, has a very different
effect.  It sweeps all the idealism away, and we wonder what it was
that could have charmed us so.  Well--I hoped--I really hoped for
some experience like that with you.  If only I could meet you again
and find that, after all, you were just like other men; self-
centred, arrogant, kind, perhaps, but quite superior--if I could
only find THAT to be true then the mirage in which I have lived for
all these years would be swept away and my old philosophy that
after all it doesn't matter much whom one marries so long as he is
respectable and gives her a good living would be vindicated.  And
so I have encouraged you to come here; I have been most
unconventional, I know, but I was always that--I have cultivated
your acquaintance, and, Denny, I am SO disappointed!"

"Disappointed?  Then the mirage HAS cleared away?"

"On the contrary, it grows more distorted every day.  I see you
towering above all your fellow humans; reaching up into a heaven so
far above them that they don't even know of its existence.  I see
you as really The Man-On-the-Hill, with a vision which lays all
this selfish, commonplace world at your feet.  The idealism which I
thought must fade away is justified--heightened--by the reality."

She had turned her face to him, and Grant, little as he understood
the ways of women, knew that she had made her great confession.
For a moment he held himself in check. . . . then from somewhere in
his subconsciousness came ringing the phrase, "Every man worth his
salt. . . . takes what he wants."  That was Transley's morality;
Transley, the Usurper, who had bullied himself into possession of
this heart which he had never won and could never hold; Transley,
the fool, frittering his days and nights with money!  He seized her
in his arms, crushing down her weak resistance; he drew her to him
until, as in that day by a foothill river somewhere in the sunny
past, her lips met his and returned their caress.  He cared now for
nothing--nothing in the whole world but this quivering womanhood
within his arms. . . .

"You must go," she whispered at length.  "It is late, and Frank's
habits are somewhat erratic."

He held her at arm's length, his hands upon her shoulders.  "Do you
suppose that fear--of anything--can make me surrender you now?"

"Not fear, perhaps--I know it could not be fear--but good sense may
do it.  It was not fear that made me send you home early from your
previous calls.  It was discretion."

"Oh!" he said, a new light dawning, and he marvelled again at her
consummate artistry.

"But I must tell you," she resumed, "Frank leaves on a business
trip to-morrow night.  He will be gone for some time, and I shall
motor into town to see him off.  I am wondering about Wilson," she
hurried on, as though not daring to weigh her words; "Sarah will be
away--I am letting her have a little holiday--and I can't take
Wilson into town with me because it will be so late."  Then, with a
burst of confession she spoke more deliberately.  "That isn't
exactly the reason, Dennison; Frank doesn't know I have let Sarah
go, and I--I can't explain."

Her face shone pink and warm in the glow of the firelight, and as
the significance of her words sank in upon him Grant marvelled at
that wizardry of the gods which could bring such homage to the foot
of man.  A tenderness such as he had never known suffused him; her
very presence was holy.

"Bring the boy over and let him spend the night with me.  We are
great chums and we shall get along splendidly."



CHAPTER XXI


Grant spent his Sunday forenoon in an exhaustive house-cleaning
campaign.  Bachelor life on the farm is not conducive to domestic
delicacy, and although Grant had never abandoned the fundamentals
he had allowed his interpretation of essential cleanliness to
become somewhat liberal.  The result was that the day of rest
usually confronted him with a considerable array of unwashed pots
and pans and other culinary utensils.  To-day, while the tawny
autumn hills seemed to fairly heave and sigh with contentment under
a splendor of opalescent sunshine, he scoured the contents of his
kitchen until they shone; washed the floor; shook the rugs from the
living-room and swept the corners, even behind the gramophone;
cleared the ashes from the hearth and generally set his house in
order, for was not she to call upon him that evening on her way to
town, and was not little Wilson--he of the high adventures with
teddy-bear and knife and pig--to spend the night with him?

When he was able to view his handiwork with a feeling that even
feminine eyes would find nothing to offend, Grant did an unwonted
thing.  He unlocked the whim-room and opened the windows that the
fresh air might play through the silent chamber.  To the west the
mountains looked down in sombre placidity as they had looked down
every bright autumn morning since the dawn of time, their shoulders
bathed in purple mist and their snow-crowned summits shining in the
sun.  For a long time Grant stood drinking in the scene; the
fertile valley lying with its square farms like a checker-board of
the gods, with its round little lakes beating back the white
sunshine like coins from the currency of the Creator; the ruddy
copper-colored patches of ripe wheat, and drowsy herds motionless
upon the receding hills; the blue-green ribbon of river with its
yellow fringes of cottonwood and bluffs of forbidding spruce, and
behind and over all the silent, majestic mountains.  It was a sight
to make the soul of man rise up and say, "I know I stand on the
heights of the Eternal!"  Then as his eyes followed the course of
the river Grant picked out a column of thin blue smoke, and knew
that Zen was cooking her Sunday dinner.

The thought turned him to his dusting of the whim-room, and
afterwards to his own kitchen.  When he had lunched and dressed he
took a stroll over the hills, thinking a great deal, but finding no
answer.  On his return he descried the familiar figure of Linder in
a semi-recumbent position on the porch, and Linder's well-worn car
in the yard.

"How goes it, Linder?" he said, cheerily, as he came up.  "Is the
Big Idea going to fructify?"

"The Big Idea seems to be all right.  You planned it well."

"Thanks.  But is it going to be self-supporting--I mean in the
matter of motive power.  Would it run if you and I and Murdoch were
wiped out?"

"Everything must have a head."

"Democracy must find its own head--must grow it out of the materials
supplied.  If it doesn't do that it's a failure, and the Big Idea
will end in being the Big Fizzle.  That's why I'm leaving it so
severely alone--I want to see which way it's headed."

"I could suggest another reason," said Linder, pointedly.

"Another reason for what?"

"For your leaving it so severely alone."

"What are you driving at?" demanded Grant, somewhat petulantly.
"You are in a taciturn mood to-day, Linder."

"Perhaps I am, Grant, and if so it comes from wondering how a man
with as much brains as you have can be such a damned fool upon
occasion."

"Drop the riddles, Linder.  Let me have it in the face."

"It's just like this, Grant, old boy," said Linder, getting up and
putting his hand on his friend's shoulder, "I feel that I still
have an interest in the chap who saved all of me except what this
empty sleeve stands for, and it's that interest which makes me
speak about something which you may say is none of my business.
I was out here Monday night to see you, and you were not at home.
I came out again Wednesday, and you were not at home.  I came last
night and you were not at home, and had not come back at midnight.
Your horses were in the barn; you were not far away."

"Why didn't you telephone me?"

"If I hadn't cared more for you than I do for my job and the Big
Idea thrown in I could have settled it that way.  But, Grant, I
do."

"I believe you.  But why this sudden worry over me?  I was merely
spending the evening at a neighbor's."

"Yes--at Transley's.  Transley was in town, and Mrs. Transley is--
not responsible--where you are concerned."

"Linder!"

"I saw it all that night at dinner there.  Some things are plain to
everyone--except those most involved.  Now it's not my job to say
to you what's right and wrong, but the way it looks to me is this:
what's the use of setting up a new code of morality about money
which concerns, after all, only some of us, if you're going to
knock down those things which concern all of us?"

Grant regarded his foreman for some time without answering.  "I
appreciate your frankness, Linder," he said at length.  "Your
friendship, which I can never question, gives you that privilege.
Man to man, I'm going to be equally frank with you.  To begin with,
I suppose you will admit that Y.D.'s daughter is a strong
character, a woman quite capable of directing her own affairs?"

"The stronger the engine the bigger the smash if there's a wreck."

"It's not a case of wrecking; it's a case of trying to save
something out of the wreck.  Convention, Linder, is a torture-
monger; it binds men and women to the stake of propriety and bids
them smile while it snuffs out all the soul that's in them.  We
have pitted ourselves against convention in economic affairs; shall
we not--"

"No!  It was pure unselfishness which led you into the Big Idea.
That isn't what's leading you now."

"Well, let me put it another way.  Transley is a clever man of
affairs.  He knows how to accomplish his ends.  He applied the
methods--somewhat modified for the occasion--of a landshark in
winning his wife.  He makes a great appearance of unselfishness,
but in reality he is selfish to the core.  He lavishes money on her
to satisfy his own vanity, but as for her finer nature, the real
Zen, her soul if you like--he doesn't even know she has one.  He
obtained possession by false pretences.  Which is the more moral
thing--to leave him in possession, or to throw him out?  Didn't you
yourself hear him say that men who are worth their salt take what
they want?"

"Since when did you let him set YOUR standards?"

"That's hardly fair."

"I think it is.  I think, too, that you are arguing against your
own convictions.  Well, I've had my say.  I deliberately came out
to-day without Murdoch so that I might have it.  You would be quite
justified in firing me for what I've done.  But now I'm through,
and no matter what may happen, remember, Linder will never have
suspected anything."

"That's like you, old chap.  We'll drop it at that, but I must
explain that Zen is going to town to-night to meet Transley, and is
leaving the boy with me.  It is an event in my young life, and I
have house-cleaned for it appropriately.  Come inside and admire my
handiwork."

Linder admired as he was directed, and then the two men fell into a
discussion of business matters.  Eventually Grant cooked supper,
and just as they had finished Mrs. Transley drove up in her motor.

"Here we are!" she cried, cheerily.  "Glad to see you, Mr. Linder.
Wilson has his teddy-bear and his knife and his pyjamas, and is a
little put out, I think, that I wouldn't let him bring the pig."

"I shall try and make up the deficiency," said Grant, smiling
broadly, as the boy climbed to his shoulder.  "Won't you come in?
Linder, among his other accomplishments learned in France, is an
excellent chaperon."

"Thank you, no; I must get along.  I shall call early in the
morning, so that you will not be delayed on Wilson's account."

"No need of that; he can ride to the field with me on Prince.  He
is a great help with the plowing."

"I'm sure."  She stepped up to Grant and drew the boy's face down
to hers.  "Good-bye, dear; be a good boy," she whispered, and
Wilson waved kisses to her as the motor sped down the road.

Linder took his departure soon after, and Grant was surprised to
find himself almost embarrassed in the presence of his little
guest.  The embarrassment, however, was all on his side.  Wilson
was greatly interested in the strange things in the house, and
investigated them with the romantic thoroughness of his years.
Grant placed a collection of war trophies that had no more fight in
them at the child's disposal, and he played about until it was time
to go to bed.

Where to start on the bedtime preparations was a puzzle, but Wilson
himself came to Grant's aid with explicit instructions about
buttons and pins.  Grant fervently hoped the boy would be able to
reverse the process in the morning, otherwise--

Suddenly, with a little dexterous movement, the child divested
himself of all his clothing, and rushed into a far corner.

"You have to catch me now," he shouted in high glee.  "One, two--"

Evidently it was a game, and Grant entered into the spirit of it,
finally running Wilson to earth on the farthest corner of the
kitchen table.  To adjust the pyjamas was, as Grant confessed, a
bigger job than harnessing a four-horse team, but at length it was
completed.

"You must hear my prayer, Uncle Man-on-the-Hill," said the boy.
"You have to sit down in a chair."

Grant sat down and with a strange mixture of emotions drew the
little chap between his knees as he listened to the long-forgotten
prattle.  He felt his fingers running through Wilson's hair as
other fingers, now long, long turned to dust, had once run through
his. . . .

At the third line the boy stopped.  "You have to tell me now," he
prompted.

"But I can't, Willie; I have forgotten."

"Huh, you don't know much," the child commented, and glibly quoted
the remaining lines.  "And God bless Daddy and Mamma and teddy-bear
and Uncle Man-on-the-Hill and the pig.  Amen," he concluded,
accompanying the last word with a jump which landed him fairly in
Grant's lap.  His little arms went up about his friend's neck, and
his little soft cheek rested against a tanned and weather-beaten
one.  Slowly Grant's arms closed about the warm, lithe body and
pressed it to his in a new passion, strange and holy.  Then he led
him to the whim-room, turned down the white sheets in which no form
had ever lain and placed the boy between them, snuggled his teddy
down by his side and set his knife properly in view upon the dresser.
And then he leaned down again and kissed the little face, and
whispered, "Good night, little boy; God keep you safe to-night, and
always."  And suddenly Grant realized that he had been praying. . . .

He withdrew softly, and only partly closed the door; then he chose
a seat where he could see the little figure lying peacefully on the
white bed.  The last shafts of the setting sun were falling in
amber wedges across the room.  He picked up a book, thinking to
read, but he could not keep his attention on the page; he found his
mind wandering back into the long-forgotten chambers of its
beginning, conjuring up from the faint recollections of infancy
visions of the mother he had hardly known. . . .  After a while he
tip-toed to the whim-room door and found that Wilson, with his arms
firmly clasped about his teddy-bear, was deep in the sleep of
childhood.

"The dear little chap," he murmured.  "I must watch by him to-night.
It would be unspeakable if anything should happen him while he
is under my care."

He felt a sense of warmth, almost a smothering sensation, and
raised his hand to his forehead.  It came down covered with
perspiration.

"It's amazingly close," he said, and walked to one of the French
windows opening to the west.  The sun had gone down, and a brooding
darkness lay over all the valley, but far up in the sky he could
trace the outline of a cloud.  Above, the stars shone with an
unwonted brightness, but below all was a bank of blue-black
darkness.  The air was intensely still; in the silence he could
hear the wash of the river.  Grant reflected that never before had
he heard the wash of the river at that distance.

"Looks like a storm," he commented, casually, and suddenly felt
something tighten about his heart.  The storms of the foothill
country, which occasionally sweep out of the mountains and down the
valleys on the shortest notice, had no terror for him; he had sat
on horseback under an oilskin slicker through the worst of them;
but to-night!  Even as he watched, the distant glare of lightning
threw the heaving proportions of the thundercloud into sharp
relief.

He turned to his chair, but found himself pacing the living-room
with an altogether inexplicable nervousness.  He had held the line
many a bad night at the Front while Death spat out of the darkness
on every hand; he had smoked in the faces of his men to cover his
own fear and to shame them out of theirs; he had run the whole
gamut of the emotion of the trenches, but tonight something more
awesome than any engine of man was gathering its forces in the deep
valleys.  He shook himself to throw off the morbidness that was
settling upon him; he laughed, and the echo came back haunting from
the silent corners of the house.  Then he lit a lamp and set it,
burning low, in the whim-room, and noted that the boy slept on, all
unconcerned.

"Damn Linder, anyway!" he exclaimed presently.  "I believe he shook
me up more than I realized.  He charged me with insincerity; me,
who have always made sincerity my special virtue. . . .  Well,
there may be something in it."

A faint, indistinct growling, as of the grinding of mighty rocks,
came down from the distances.

"The storm will be nothing," he assured himself.  "A gust of wind;
a spatter of rain; perhaps a dash of hail; then, of a sudden, a sky
so calm and peaceful one would wonder how it ever could have been
disturbed."  Even as he spoke the house shivered in every timber as
the gale struck it and went whining by.

He rushed to the whim-room, but found the boy still sleeping
soundly.  "I must stay up," he reasoned with himself; "I must be on
hand in case he should be frightened."

Suddenly it occurred to Grant that, quite apart from his love for
Wilson, if anything should happen the child in his house a very
difficult situation would be created.  Transley would demand
explanations--explanations which would be hard to make.  Why was
Wilson there at all?  Why was he not at home with Sarah?  Sarah
away from home!  Why had Zen kept that a secret? . . .  How long
had this thing been going on, anyway?  Grant feared neither
Transley nor any other man, and yet there was something akin to
fear in his heart as he thought of these possibilities.  He would
be held accountable--doubly accountable--if anything happened the
child.  Even though it were something quite beyond his control;
lightning, for example--

The gale subsided as quickly as it had come, and the sudden silence
which followed was even more awesome.  It lasted only for a moment;
a flash of lightning lit up every corner of the house, bursting
like white fire from every wall and ceiling.  Grant rushed to the
whim-room and was standing over the child when the crash of thunder
came upon them.  The boy stirred gently, smiled, and settled back
to his sleep.

Grant drew the blinds in the whim-room, and went out to draw them
in the living-room, but the sight across the valley was of a
majesty so terrific that it held him fascinated.  The play of the
lightning was incessant, and with every flash the little lakes shot
back their white reflection, and distant farm window-panes seemed
heliographing to each other through the night.  As yet there was no
rain, but a dense wall of cloud pressed down from the west, and the
farther hills were hidden even in the brightest flashes.

Turning from the windows, Grant left the blinds open.  "Only
cowardice would close them," he muttered to himself, "and surely,
in addition to the other qualities Linder has attributed to me, I
am not a coward.  If it were not for Willie I could stand and enjoy
it."

Presently rain began to fall; a few scattered drops at first, then
thicker, harder, until the roof and windows rattled and shook with
their force.  The wind, which had gone down so suddenly, sprang up
again, buffeting the house as it rushed by with the storm.  Grant
stood in the whim-room, in the dim light of the lamp turned low,
and watched the steady breathing of his little guest with as much
anxiety as if some dread disease threatened him.  For the first
time in his life there came into Grant's consciousness some sense
of the price which parents pay in the rearing of little children.
He thought of all the hours of sickness, of all the childish hurts
and dangers, and suddenly he found himself thinking of his father
with a tenderness which was strange and new to him.  Doubtless
under even that stern veneer of business interest had beat a heart
which, many a time, had tightened in the grip of fear for young
Dennison.

As the night wore on the storm, instead of spending itself quickly
as Grant had expected, continued unabated, but his nervous tension
gradually relaxed, and when at length Wilson was awakened by an
exceptionally loud clap of thunder he took the boy in his arms and
soothed his little fears as a mother might have done.  They sat for
a long while in a big chair in the living-room, and exchanged such
confidences as a man may with a child of five.  After the lad had
dropped back into sleep Grant still sat with him in his arms,
thinking. . . .

And what he thought was this:  He was a long while framing the
exact thought; he tried to beat it back in a dozen ways, but it
circled around him, gradually closed in upon him and forced its
acceptance.  "Linder called me a fool, and he was right.  He might
have called me a coward, and again he would have been right.
Linder was right."

Some way it seemed easy to reach that conclusion while this little
sleeping form lay in his arms.  Perhaps it had quickened into life
that ennobling spirit of parenthood which is all sacrifice and love
and self-renunciation.  The ends which seemed so all-desirable a
few hours ago now seemed sordid and mean and unimportant.  Reaching
out for some means of self-justification Grant turned to the Big
Idea; that was his; that was big and generous and noble.  But after
all, was it his?  The idea had come in upon him from some outside
source--as perhaps all ideas do; struck him like a bullet; swept
him along.  He was merely the agency employed in putting it into
effect.  It had cost him nothing.  He was doing that for society.
Now was the time to do something that would cost; to lay his hand
upon the prize and then relinquish it--for the sake of Wilson
Transley!

"And by God I'll do it!" he exclaimed, springing to his feet.  He
carried the child back to his bed, and then turned again to watch
the storm through the windows.  It seemed to be subsiding; the
lightning, although still almost continuous, was not so near.  The
air was cooling off and the rain was falling more steadily, without
the gusts and splatters which marked the storm in its early stages.
And as he looked out over the black valley, lighted again and again
by the glare of heaven's artillery, Grant became conscious of a
deep, mysterious sense of peace.  It was as though his soul, like
the elements about him, caught in a paroxysm of elemental passion,
had been swept clean and pure in the fire of its own upheaval.

"What little incidents turn our lives!" he thought.  "That boy; in
some strange way he has been the means of bringing me to see things
as they are--which not even Linder could do.  The mind has to be
fertilized for the thought, or it can't think it.  He brought the
necessary influence to bear.  It was like the night at Murdoch's
house, the night when the Big Idea was born.  Surely I owe that to
Murdoch, and his wife, and Phyllis Bruce."

The name of Phyllis Bruce came to him with almost a shock.  He had
been so occupied with his farm and with Zen that he had thought but
little of her of late.  As he turned the matter over in his mind
now he felt that he had used Phyllis rather shabbily.  He recalled
having told Murdoch to send for her, but that was purely a business
transaction.  Yet he felt that he had never entirely forgotten her,
and he was surprised to find how tenderly the memory of her welled
up within him.  Zen's vision had been clearer than his; she had
recognized in Phyllis Bruce a party to his life's drama.  "The
second choice may be really the first," she had said.

Grant lit a cigar and sat down to smoke and think.  The matter of
Phyllis needed prompt settlement.  It afforded a means to burn his
bridges behind him, and Grant felt that it would be just as well to
cut off all possibility of retreat.  Fortunately the situation was
one that could be explained--to Phyllis.  He had come out West
again to be sure of himself; he was sure now; would she be his
wife?  He had never thought that line out to a conclusion before,
but now it proved a subject very delightful to contemplate.

He had told himself, back in those days in the East, that it would
not be fair to marry Phyllis Bruce while his heart was another's.
He had believed that then; now he knew the real reason was that he
had allowed himself to hope, against all reason, that Zen Transley
might yet be his.  He had harbored an unworthy desire, and called
it a virtue.  Well--the die was cast.  He had definitely given Zen
up.  He would tell Phyllis everything. . . .  That is, everything
she needed to know.

It would be best to settle it at once--the sooner the better.  He
went to his desk and took out a telegraph blank.  He addressed it
to Phyllis, pondered a minute in a great hush in the storm, and
wrote,

"I am sure now.  May I come?  Dennison."

This done he turned to the telephone, hurrying as one who fears for
the duration of his good resolutions.  It was a chance if the line
was not out of business, but he lifted the receiver and listened to
the thump of his heart as he waited.

Presently came a voice as calm and still as though it spoke from
another world, "Number?"

He gave the number of Linder's rooms in town; it was likely Linder
had remained in town, but it was a question whether the telephone
bell would waken him.  He had recollections of Linder as a sound
sleeper.  But even as this possibility entered his mind he heard
Linder's phlegmatic voice in his ear.

"Oh, Linder!  I'm so glad I got you.  Rush this message to Phyllis
Bruce. . . .  Linder? . . . Linder!"

There was no answer.  Nothing but a hollow, empty sound on the
wire, as though it led merely into the universe in general.  He
tried to call the operator, but without success.  The wire was
down.

He turned from it with a sense of acute impatience.  Was this an
omen of obstacles to bar him now from Phyllis Bruce?  He had a wild
thought of saddling a horse and riding to town, but at that moment
the storm came down afresh.  Besides, there was the boy.

Suddenly came a quick knock at the door; the handle turned, and a
drenched, hatless figure, with disheveled, wet hair, and white,
drawn face burst in upon him.  It was Zen Transley.



CHAPTER XXII


"Zen!"

"How is he--how is Wilson?" she demanded, breathlessly.

"Sound as a bell," he answered, alarmed by her manner.  The self-
assured Zen was far from self-assurance now.  "Come, see, he is
asleep."

He led her into the whim-room and turned up the lamp.  The lad was
sleeping soundly, his teddy-bear clasped in his arms, his little
pink and white face serene under the magic skies of slumberland.
Grant expected that Zen would throw herself upon the child in her
agitation, but she did not.  She drew her fingers gently across his
brow, then, turning to Grant,

"Rather an unceremonious way to break into your house," she said,
with a little laugh.  "I hope you will pardon me. . . .  I was
uneasy about Wilson."

"But tell me--how--where did you come from?"

"From town.  Let me stand in your kitchen, or somewhere."

"You're wet through.  I can't offer you much change."

"Not as wet as when you first met me, Dennison," she said, with a
smile.  "I have a good waterproof, but my hat blew off.  It's
somewhere on the road.  I couldn't see through the windshield, so I
put my head out, and away it went."

"The hat?"

Then both laughed, and an atmosphere that had been tense began to
settle back to normal.  Grant led her out to the living-room,
removed her coat, and started a fire.

"So you drove out over those roads?" he said, when the smoke began
to curl up around the logs.  "You had your courage."

"It wasn't courage, Dennison; it was terror.  Fear sometimes makes
one wonderfully brave.  After I saw Frank off I went to the hotel.
I had a room on the west side, and instead of going to bed I sat by
the window looking out at the storm and at the wet streets.  I
could see the flashes of lightning striking down as though they
were aimed at definite objects, and I began to think of Wilson, and
of you.  You see, it was the first night I had ever spent away from
him, and I began to think. . . .

"After a while I could bear it no longer, and I rushed down and out
to the garage.  There was just one young man on night duty, and I'm
sure he thought me crazy.  When he couldn't dissuade me he wanted
to send a driver with me.  You know I couldn't have that."

She was looking squarely at him, her face strangely calm and
emotionless.  Grant nodded that he followed her reasoning.

"So here I am," she continued.  "No doubt you think me silly, too.
You are not a mother."

"I think I understand," he answered, tenderly.  "I think I do."

They sat in silence for some time, and presently they became aware
of a grey light displacing the yellow glow from the lamp and the
ruddy reflections of the fire.  "It is morning," said Grant.  "I
believe the storm has cleared."

He stood beside her chair and took her hand in his.  "Let us watch
the dawn break on the mountains," he said, and together they moved
to the windows that overlooked the valley and the grim ranges
beyond.  Already shafts of crimson light were firing the scattered
drift of clouds far overhead. . . .

"Dennison," she said at length, turning her face to his, "I hope
you will understand, but--I have thought it all over.  I have not
hidden my heart from you.  For the boy's sake, and for your sake,
and for the sake of 'a scrap of paper'--that was what the war was
over, wasn't it?--"

"I know," he whispered.  "I know."

"Then you have been thinking, too? . . .  I am so glad!"  In the
growing light he could see the moisture in her bright eyes glisten,
and it seemed to him this wild, daring daughter of the hills had
never been lovelier than in this moment of confession and of high
resolve.

"I am so glad," she repeated, "for your sake--and for my own.  Now,
again, you are really the Man-on-the-Hill.  We have been in the
valley of late.  You can go ahead now with your high plans, with
your Big Idea.  You will marry Miss Bruce, and forget."

"I shall remember with chastened memory, but I shall never forget,"
he said at length.  "I shall never forget Zen of the Y.D.  And you--
what will you do?"

"I have the boy.  I did not realize how much I had until to-night.
Suddenly it came upon me that he was everything.  You won't
understand, Dennison, but as we grow older our hearts wrap up
around our children with a love quite different from that which
expresses itself in marriage.  This love gives--gives--gives,
lavishly, unselfishly, asking nothing in return."

"I think I understand," he said again.  "I think I do."

They turned their eyes to the mountains, and as they looked the
first shafts of sunlight fell on the white peaks and set them
dazzling like mighty diamond-points against the blue bosom of the
West.  Slowly the flood of light poured down their mighty sides and
melted the mauve shadows of the valley.  Suddenly a ray of the
morning splendor shot through the little window in the eastern wall
of the living-room and fell fairly upon the woman's head, crowning
her like a halo of the Madonna.

"It is morning on the mountains--and on you!" Grant exclaimed.
"Zen, you are very, very beautiful."  He raised her hand and
pressed her fingers to his lips.

As they stood watching the sunlight pour into the valley a sharp
knock sounded on the door.  "Come," said Dennison, and the next
moment it swung open and Phyllis Bruce entered, followed immediately
by Linder.  A question leapt into her eyes at the remarkable
situation which greeted them, and she paused in embarrassment.

"Phyllis!" Grant exclaimed.  "You here!"

"It would seem that I was not expected."

"It is all very simple," Grant explained, with a laugh.  "Little
Willie Transley was my guest overnight.  On account of the storm
his mother became alarmed, and drove out from the city early this
morning for him.  Mrs. Transley, let me introduce Miss Bruce--
Phyllis Bruce, of whom I have told you."

Zen's cordial handshake did more to reassure Phyllis than any
amount of explanations, and Linder's timely observation that he
knew Wilson was there and was wondering about him himself had
valuable corroborative effect.

"But now--YOUR explanations?" said Grant.  "How comes it, Linder?"

"Simple enough, from our side.  When I got back to town last night
I found Murdoch highly excited over a telegram from Miss Bruce that
she would arrive on the 3 a.m. train.  He was determined to wait
up, but when the storm came on I persuaded him to go home, as I was
sure I could identify her.  So I was lounging in my room waiting
for three o'clock when I got your telephone call.  All I could
catch was the fact that you were mighty glad to get me, and had
some urgent message for Miss Bruce.  Then the connection broke."

"I see.  And you, of course, assured Miss Bruce that I was being
murdered, or meeting some such happy and effective ending, out here
in the wilderness."

"Not exactly that, but I reported what I could, and Miss Bruce
insisted upon coming out at once.  The roads were dreadful, but we
had daylight.  Also, we have a trophy."

Linder went out and returned in a moment with a sadly bedraggled
hat.

"My poor hat!" Zen exclaimed.  "I lost it on the way."

"It is the best kind of evidence that you had but recently come
over the road," said Linder, significantly.

"I think no more evidence need be called," said Phyllis.  "May I
lay off my things?"

"Certainly--certainly," Grant apologized.  "But I must introduce
one more exhibit."  He handed her the telegram he had written
during the night.  "That is the message I wanted Linder to rush to
you," he said, and as she read it he saw the color deepen in her
cheeks.

"I'm going to get breakfast, Mr. Grant," Zen announced with a
sudden burst of energy.  "Everybody keep out of the kitchen."

"Guess I'll feed up for you, this morning, old chap," said Linder,
beating a retreat to the stables.

And when Phyllis had laid aside her coat and hat and had
straightened her hair a little in the glass above the mantelpiece
she walked straight to Grant and put both her hands in his.  "Let
me see this boy, Willie Transley," she said.

Grant led her into the whim-room, where the boy still slept
soundly, and drew aside the blinds that the morning light might
fall about him.  Phyllis bent over the child.  "Isn't he dear?" she
said, and stooped and kissed his lips.

Then she stood up and looked for what seemed to Grant a very long
time at the panorama of grandeur that stretched away to the
westward.

"When may I expect an answer, Phyllis?" he said at length.  "You
know why my question has been so long delayed.  I shall not attempt
to excuse myself.  I have been very, very foolish.  But to-day I am
very, very wise.  May I also be very, very happy?"

He had taken her hands in his, and as she did not resist he drew
her gently to him.

"Little Willie christened me The Man-on-the-Hill," he whispered.
"I have tried to live on the hill, but I need you to keep me from
falling off."

"What about your settlement plan?  I thought you wanted me for
that."

"We will give our lives to that, together, Phyllis, to that, and to
making this house a home.  If God should give us--"

He did not finish the thought, for the form of Phyllis Bruce
trembled against his, and her lips had murmured "Yes." . . .

"Mr. Grant!  Mr. Grant!  The telephone is ringing," called the
clear voice of Zen Transley.  "Shall I take the message?"

"Please do," said Dennison, inwardly abjuring the efficiency of the
lineman who had already made repairs.

"It's Mr. Murdoch, and he's highly excited, and he says have you
Phyllis Bruce here."

"Tell him I have, and I'm going to keep her."










This etext was produced by David A. Schwan <davidsch@earthlink.net>





The City of Domes


A Walk with an Architect About the Courts and Palaces of the Panama
Pacific International ExposItion with a Discussion of Its Architecture -
Its Sculpture - Its Mural Decorations Its Coloring - And Its Lighting -
Preceded by a History of Its Growth




by John D. Barry




To the architects, the artists and the artisans and to the men of
affairs who sustained them in the cooperative work that created an
exposition of surpassing beauty, unique among the expositions of the
world.




Contents



Chapter

        Preface
        Introduction
     I. The View from the Hill
    II. The Approach
   III. In the South Gardens
    IV. Under the Tower of Jewels
     V. The Court of the Universe
    VI. On the Marina
   VII. Toward the Court of the Four Seasons
  VIII. The Court of the Four Seasons
    IX. The Palace of Fine Arts from across the Lagoon
     X. The Palace of Fine Arts at Close Range
    XI. At the Palace of Horticulture
   XII. The Half Courts
  XIII. Near Festival Hall
   XIV. The Palace of Machinery
    XV. The Court of the Ages
   XVI. The Brangwyns
  XVII. Watching the Lights Change
XVIII. The Illuminating and the Reflections
        Features that Ought to he Noted by Day
        Features that Ought to be Noted by Night
        Index



Illustrations



"The Pioneer Mother"
Design of the Exposition made in 1912
Site of the Exposition before Construction was Begun
Fountain of Youth
Fountain of El Dorado
Court of the Universe
"Air" and "Fire"
"Nations of the West" and "Nations of the Fast
"The Setting Sun" and "The Rising Sun"
"Music" and "Dancing Girls
"Hope and Her Attendants"
Star Figure; Medallion Representing "Art"
California Building
Spanish Plateresque Doorway, in Northern Wall
Eastern Entrance to Court of Four Seasons
Night View of Court of Four Seasons
Portal in Court of Four Seasons
The Marina at Night
Rotunda of the Palace of Fine Arts
Altar of Palace of Fine Arts
"The Power of the Arts"
Italian Fountain, Dome of Philosophy
"The Thinker"
"Aspiration"
"Michael Angelo"
Italian Renaissance Towers
"The End of the Trail"
Colonnade in Court of Palms
"Victorious Spirit"
Entrance to Palace of Horticulture
Night View of the Palace of Horticulture
Festival Hall at Night
"The Pioneer"
Fountain of Beauty and the Beast
Entrance to Palace of Varied Industries
Group above Doorway of Palace of Varied Industries
Avenue of Palms at Night
Avenue of Progress at Night
Arcaded Vestibule in Entrance to Palace of Machinery
"Genii of Machinery"
"The Genius of Creation"
Tower in Court of the Ages
Fountain of the Earth
"The Stone Age"
"Fruit Pickers"
Entrance to Court of the Ages, at Night
"The Triumph of Rome"
"The Thirteenth Labor of Hercules"



Preface



In the main, this volume consists of articles originally published in
the San Francisco BULLETIN. It includes material gathered from many
visits to the Exposition grounds and from many talks with men concerned
in the organization and the building and ornamentation. The brief
history that forms the Introduction gives an account of the development.
For me, as, I presume, for most people, the thing done, no matter how
interesting it may he, is never so interesting as the doing of the
thing, the play of the forces behind. Even in the talk with the
architect, where the finished Exposition itself is discussed, I have
tried to keep in mind those forces, and wherever I could to indicate
their play.

The dialogue form I have used for several reasons: it is easy to follow;
it gives scope for more than one kind of opinion; and it deals with the
subject as we all do, when with one friend or more than one we visit the
Exposition grounds. It has been my good fortune to he able to see the
Exposition from points of view very different from my own and much
better informed and equipped. I am glad to pass on the advantage.

The Exposition is generally acknowledged to be an achievement
unprecedented. Merely to write about it and to try to convey a sense of
its quality is a privilege. I have valued it all the more because I know
that many people, not trained in matters of architecture and art, are
striving to relate themselves to the expression here, to understand it
and to feel it in all its hearings. If, at times, directly or in
indirectly, I have been critical, the reason is that I wished, in so far
as I could, to persuade visitors not to swallow the Exposition whole,
but to think about it for themselves, and to bear in mind that the men
behind it, those of today and those of days remote, were human beings
exactly like themselves, and to draw from it all they could in the way
of genuine benefit.

Though the volume is mainly devoted to the artistic features associated
with the courts and the main palaces, I have included, among the
illustrations, pictures of the California Building, both because of its
close relation to California and because it is in itself magnificent,
and of two notable art features, the mural painting by Bianca in the
Italian Building, and "The Thinker", by Rodin, in the court of the
French Pavilion.



Introduction



The First Steps



In January, 1904, R. B. Hale of San Francisco wrote to his
fellow-directors of the Merchants' Association, that, in 1915, San
Francisco ought to hold an exposition to celebrate the opening of the
Panama Canal. In the financing of the St. Louis Exposition, soon to
begin, Mr. Hale found a model for his plan. Five million dollars should
be raised by popular subscription, five million dollars should be asked
from the State, and five million dollars should be provided by city
bonds.

The idea was promptly endorsed by the business associations.

 From their chairmen was formed a board of governors. It was decided that
the exposition should be held, and formal notification was given to the
world by introducing into Congress a bill that provided for an
appropriation of five million dollars. The bill was not acted on, and it
was allowed to die at the end of the session.

Soon after formulating the plan for the exposition Mr. Hale changed  the
date from, 1915 to 1913, to make it coincide with the four hundredth
anniversary of the discovery by Balboa of the Pacific.

In 1906 came the earthquake and fire. The next few years San Franciscans
were busy clearing away the debris and rebuilding. It was predicted that
the city might recover in ten years, and might not recover in less than
twenty-five years.

Nevertheless, in December, 1906, within nine months of the disaster, a
meeting was held in the shack that served for the St. Francis Hotel, and
the Pacific Ocean Exposition Company was incorporated.

In three years  the city recovered sufficiently to hold a week's
festival, the Portola, and to make it a success.

Two days afterward, in October, 1909, Mr. Hale gave a dinner to a small
group of business men, and told of what had been done toward preparing
for the Exposition. They agreed to help.

Shortly afterward a meeting was held at the Merchants' Exchange. It was
decided that an effort should at once be made to raise the money and to
rouse the people of San Francisco to the importance of the project of
holding the Panama-Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco in
1915.

As many as twenty-five hundred letters were sent to business men, asking
if they favored the idea of holding an exposition. Out of about eight
hundred replies only seven were opposed. Presently there were signs of
enthusiasm, reflected in the newspapers.

A committee of six representative business men was appointed and the
announcement was made that the committee should be glad to hear from
anyone in the city who had suggestions or grievances. It was determined
that every San Franciscan should have his day in court.

Later the committee of six appointed a foundation committee of two
hundred, representing a wide variety of interests.

The committee of two hundred chose a committee of three from outside
their number.

The committee of three chose from among the two hundred a directorate of
thirty. The thirty became the directorate of a new corporation, made in
1910, the Panama-Pacific International Exposition Company.



Financing



The Panama-Pacific Company two local millionaires, W. H. Crocker and W.
B. Bourn, started financially with twenty-five thousand dollars each.
They established the maximum individual subscription. They also secured
forty subscriptions of twenty-five thousand dollars each. Then followed
the call for a mass meeting. Before the meeting was held the business
men of the city were thoroughly canvassed. The Southern Pacific and the
Union Pacific together subscribed two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars. There were many other large subscriptions from public-service
organizations.

On the afternoon of the meeting there was a crowd in the Merchants'
Exchange Board Room. The announcement of the subscriptions created
enthusiasm. In two hours the amount ran up to more than four million
dollars. During the next few years they were increased to about
$6,500,000.

Meanwhile, the State voted a tax levy of five million dollars, and San
Francisco voted a bond and issue of the same amount, and by an act of
the Legislature, in special session, the counties were authorized to
levy a small tax for county Participation, amounting, in estimate, to
about three million dollars.



Recognition From Congress



Next came the task of securing from Congress official recognition of San
Francisco as the site of the International Exposition in celebration of
the Panama Canal.

Headquarters were established in Washington. Presently serious
opposition developed. Emissaries went from San Francisco to Washington
singly and in delegations. Stress was laid on San Francisco's purpose
not to ask for an appropriation from the national government. There were
several cities in competition - Boston, Washington, Baltimore and New
Orleans. New Orleans proved the most formidable rival. It relied on the
strength of of a united Democracy and of the solid South.

In the hearings before the Congressional Committee it was made plain
that the decision would go to the city with the best financial showing.
As soon as the decision was announced New Orleans entered into generous
cooperation with San Francisco.

The Exposition was on the way.



Naming the President.



The offer of the presidency of the Exposition Company was made to a
well-known business man of Sa