sus Christ. Since the sixteenth
century it has been used by the church, a beautiful emblem, made of gold
and designed to suggest the prayer of the sun, the Spirit of God in
radiance. Its use here helps to give the court its ecclesiastical
character."

As we made our way toward the Marina we noted how much the court gained
by its general freedom from color. In the colonnade, to be sure, Guerin
had been particularly successful with the shade of blue. But he would
have done better if he had omitted the color, in fact all color, from
the niches in the tower.

Viewed from the Marina, the entrance to the court proved to be a vision
of loveliness. There was only one intrusive note to jar the harmony, the
coarse sea figure by Sherry Fry, presumably Neptune's, Daughter,
standing in the center, with a great fish at her feet, plainly out of
place here, in spite of the court's celebration of the sea as the source
of human life.



XVI

The Brangwyns



We lingered in the colonnade to view the eight mural decorations by
Frank Brangwyn, of London. In front of The Bowmen we found a friend, a
gifted woman painter, fairly bursting with enthusiasm. "What delights me
in Brangwyn," she said, "is his artistic courage. He dares to put down
just what he feels. This sturdy figure in the foreground, for example,
peering through the trees, how many other painters would have allowed
him to turn his back on the spectator? And yet how interesting he is and
how alive."

"Some of those heads strike me as curious," I remarked. "That fellow
closest to the center, just about to let his arrow fly, seems to have no
head to speak of."

"Sometimes he's careless with his drawing. And yet he can draw
magnificently, too. He evidently had a purpose in making so many of the
heads in these murals almost deformed. He wanted to suggest that these
types were in no way mental. They were wholly physical. Notice the care
he has lavished on their muscular bodies, their great shoulders and
legs."

"It doesn't seem like English work, does it?" said the architect.

"No, there's something almost Oriental about it both in the feeling and
the coloring. And there's the Pagan love of the elemental life."

"But what a chance Brangwyn had to do something new with this
magnificent subject," the architect went on. "At last, after centuries
of effort, men are actually conquering the air. They've learned to fly.
They've become birds. Now why didn't Brangwyn give us a pictorial
expression of that miracle? Why didn't the artist have as much sense as
the man of affairs who pays Art Smith to come out here and fly before
the multitude?"

I argued that Brangwyn preferred to deal with antique themes - they were
so much more pictorial.

The architect interrupted with some impatience. "But that's exactly what
they're not. In my opinion Whistler was perfectly right when he said
that if a mural decorator couldn't make modern life pictorial he didn't
know his business. Flying through the air is only one of many wonders in
the life of today that cry out for expression in art; but you scarcely
catch a note of them here."

"For example?" said the painter.

"Industry - our great machines, the new power they bring into the world,
the change in industrial relations and social and moral ideals. Now in
these murals, Brangwyn has simply repeated himself and he hasn't by any
means done his best work. And I question whether his observation is so
accurate as you admirers of his try to make it appear. Look at the way
those fellows are holding their bows - with the left hand, presumably
for the pictorial effect of the composition. Well, let that point pass.
One fellow has shot his arrow. The other is holding his arrow between
the fore finger and the middle finger. Well, it won't go very far. The
Indians know better. They let the arrow rest on the thumb to give it
plenty of freedom to fly. One of those bows, by the way, has no string.
Brangwyn probably thought it wouldn't be missed."

As we looked at the other panels the architect conceded that the points
the painter raised for Brangwyn, the brilliant use of color; the
dramatic grouping and the fineness of characterization, were true
enough. "But he's too monotonous. Though his groups are of different
periods, some of them ages apart, they're all essentially alike and the
figures are even dressed alike. I'm perfectly willing to make allowance
for artistic convention. But why should an artist limit himself
unnecessarily when he has all the ages to draw on? Why should he neglect
the present, the greatest of all the ages?"

"Ah, I'm afraid you're too literal said the painter. "You want to limit
a genius to rules."

We turned from The Bowmen to study in detail the second illustration of
Air, much more modern and yet charmingly old-fashioned, the windmill and
the little mill high in the background, the group of naked boys flying
kites, the toilers and their children, going home as fast as they could,
fighting the wind, their picturesque draperies flying around them.

The architect was impressed. "He's caught the feeling of the
thunderstorm, hasn't he?" he said.

"And he's brought out all the picturesqueness and the color and the
majesty and even the humor," said the painter. "See how wonderfully be
has composed the picture, what pictorial use he has made of every
detail. The background of the clouds and the rain, the dark blues and
the green and the pink; and the kites catching some of the color, and
the lovely color of the mill and of the grass dried by the sun. And see
that figure up there on the steps, all windblown and rushing under
cover. It's all beautiful and yet there's not one face or figure there
that would be considered beautiful by the painter who works for
prettiness. He has no interest whatever in what the average mural
decorator considers beautiful. And yet he sees beauty everywhere and he
makes it felt. How pictorially he has used those purple flowers in the
foreground at the base of the composition. And observe their relation to
the purple clouds on top. And then what character he has put into those
active figures, particularly in this queer little boy, naked except for
the purple drapery flying from his waist. He has caught something of the
fantastic spirit that you often see in children."

In nearing the two panels illustrating Water we had a chance to see how
dexterously Brangwyn could manage his design without perspective, which
would have made a hole in the wall. Those women with jars on their heads
stood against a sky none the less lovely because it was flat. It was
exquisite in its varieties of blue and white and green. That sturdy
fellow lifting a heavy jar was actually working and working hard. "And
how splendidly Brangwyn has modeled the figure with his back turned to
us," the painter exclaimed. "What a stroke of genius it was that a
yellow handkerchief of just that shade should hang from his neck. And
the figures in the companion panel drawing their nets, they are putting
their heart and soul into their work and they are having a good time,
too. And this man here in the corner, with the purple shadows on his
bare back, lifting his net, he's evidently had a big catch. He's holding
the net in a way that shows it's heavy. And how decorative those men in
the background are, with the baskets on their heads. Brangwyn loves to
use figures in this attitude. They are interesting and picturesque and
dramatic at the same time."

"But they're too conscious," the architect insisted, "too posed.

"Remember, they're not paintings," the painter insisted. "They're formal
decorations."

In the panel representing the elementary use of Fire we were all struck
by Brangwyn's daring and fine treatment of the ugly. Nearly every face
was almost grotesque. And yet every face was appealing for the simple
reason that it expressed attractive human qualities. Two, a man and a
woman, had noses ridiculously large. The group of men in the center of
the background, at the base, around the fire, had apparently started the
fire by rubbing sticks together. One was intently leaning forward, as if
in the act of blowing. Among the figures behind the group stood a man
with an infant in his arms, vividly characterized by the unseeing eyes.

That infant was instantly singled out by the painter.

"Brangwyn is very wonderful in his observation of children. He has a
quality that is almost maternal. Observe the difference between the
expression in the face of that baby and the expression in the face of
that little boy to the left of the fire-makers. How intently he is
looking on as he leans against the brown jar. He shows all the interest
of a boy just learning how to do things."

The kiln charmed us, too, though we regretted that it did not explain
itself quite so spontaneously as most of the other panels. "But
symbolism ought not to be too obvious, you know," the painter argued.
"There's a certain charm in vagueness. It makes you feel your way toward
a work- of art. The more you think about this panel the more you find
there. To me it suggests the relation between fire and the abundance of
the earth. See how cleverly, in each case of these two panels, Brangwyn
has used smoke, first as a thin line, breaking into two lines as it goes
up and interweaving, and then as a great flowing wreath, dividing the
panel in two parts without weakening the unity."

For composition we decided that the two Earth panels were among the most
remarkable of all. With satisfaction I heard Brangwyn compared by the
painter to a great stage manager. "When I look at these groupings, I am
reminded of Forbes-Robertson's productions of plays." Now we could see
how brilliantly the decorator had planned in securing his effects of
height by starting his group of figures close to the top of the canvas.
And with what skill he had used trees and vines and vegetables and
fruits, both for design and for coloring. "He has always been mad about
apples and squashes," said that feminine voice. "In nearly every picture
here you will find not one squash only, but several squashes. He loves
them for their color and their shape. And how wonderful he makes the
color of the grape. He suggests the miracle of its deep purple."

We admired the painter's pictorial use of shadow on those powerful and
scantily draped figures and the animation he put into the bodies of the
wine-pressers. And down there in a corner he had perfectly reproduced
the attitude and facial expression of the worker at rest, holding out
his cup for a drink. "There's another of those queer and interesting
children. But oh, most wonderful of all is the opposite panel that ought
to be called Abundance. See that mother, holding her lusty baby. The
face is commonplace enough, but it has all motherhood in it. And the
woman behind, she looks as if she might be a mother bereft or one of
those women cheated out of motherhood."

The architect, though he still had his reservations on the subject of
the Brangwyns, conceded that they were distinctly architectural. They
blended into the spirit of the court.

The painter at once supported the opinion. "In these colonnades Guerin
has done some of his finest coloring. The blue and the red are in
absolute harmony with Brangwyn's rich tones. They must have been applied
to fit the canvases. But the marvel is that the murals should show up so
magnificently. Brangwyn painted them in London and he must have had
second sight to divine just the right scheme. Do you realize," she went
on enthusiastically, fairly losing herself in her enjoyment, "the
immense difficulties he had to contend with? In the first place, see how
huge those canvases are. Their size created all kinds of problems. To
view them right, to get a line on the detail, so to speak, would have
meant, for the average painter, walking long distances. But, in his
studio, Brangwyn could not have taken anything like accurate
measurements."

"Perhaps he painted them out of doors," the architect suggested.

"I believe the explanation is that he thought them all out and he saw
them in their places. From Mr. Mullgardt he had probably received a
complete account, with drawings, of just what the court was going to be
like. Then it lived before him and he made the murals live. His work
shows that he begins in the right place, unlike so many people who paint
from outside. He feels the qualities of the people he is going to paint.
He really loves them. He loves their surroundings. He must be very
elemental in his nature. They say he is a great, uncouth sort of a
fellow. When he first went to London he was very contemptuous of the
work done by the academicians. It must have seemed to him, a good deal
of it, effeminate and trifling. Can't you see how those murals show that
he is a man clear through? They are masculine in every detail."

"And yet they have a good deal of delicacy, too, haven't they?" said the
architect. "See how atmospheric those backgrounds are. They actually
suggest nature."

"Because they are unconventional and because they are true. And yet they
are purely decorative. You wouldn't like to think of them as standing
apart in a great frame. When you go close you will see that the colors
are laid on flat. And they don't shine. For this reason they have great
carrying power. Observe The Bowmen down there in the distance. Even from
this remote end of the court it expresses itself as lovely in color and
composition. Let us walk down and see how it grows on us as we
approach."

Slowly we moved along the colonnade, the figures seeming to grow more
and more lifelike as the painter indicated their technical merits. "They
are of the earth, those men, aren't they? They are the antithesis of the
highly civilized types used by so many of the painters today. They
suggest red blood and strength of limb and joy in the natural things of
life, eating, drinking, the open air, and simple comradeship. They make
us see the wonder of outdoor living, the kind of living that most of us
have missed. What a pleasure it is to find a worker in any kind of work
trying to do a thing and actually doing it and doing it with splendid
abandon. Now if Brangwyn hadn't entered into the feelings of those
bowmen in the foreground, he couldn't have made the figure alive. And
the life, remember, isn't merely brought out by the happy use of the
flesh tints or by the play of the muscles. It's in the animating spirit.
As Brangwyn painted those fellows, he felt like a bowman. So he
succeeded in putting into his canvas the strength that each bowman put
into his bow. He isn't pretending to shoot, that sturdy fellow in front.
He is shooting, and he's going to get what he is after."

Before each of the four pairs of murals, the painter indicated to us the
happy way in which, by the deft use of the coloring, each blended into
the other, and she called my attention to the clearness of the
symbolism. So often, she remarked, the mural decorators used
compositions that seemed like efforts to hide secrets, a childish way of
working, sure to defeat itself. Brangwyn had no secrets. He was sincere
and direct. He was happy over this work. He said that he had enjoyed
doing it more than anything else he had ever done before. If these
canvases had been found in the heart of Africa they would have been
identified as coming from Brangwyn. No one else used color just as he
did, with his kind of courage. His colors were arbitrary, too. He didn't
follow nature and yet he always conveyed the spirit of natural things.
Throughout his work he showed that he was a close and subtle observer.
The sweep of rain through the air, the movement of figures and of
draperies in the wind, the expression of human effort, how wonderfully
he managed to suggest them all and to make them pictorial. But he wasn't
interested in merely an activity. He loved repose. In nearly all of
these eight canvases, so brimming with life, there were figures looking
on serenely, calmly, conveying the impression of being absolutely at
rest.

In every particular, according to the searching observer, Brangwyn was
successful, with the exception of one, his treatment of birds. He
evidently didn't know birds. If he had known them he would have loved
them, and if he had loved them he would have entered into their spirit
and he would have flown with them and he would have made them fly in his
painting. Now they merely flopped. They were just about as much alive as
the clay figures used in a shooting match. Even his highly decorative
flamingoes weren't right. They did not stand firmly on the ground. They
weren't alive. And the necks of the two flamingoes never could have met
in the curves that Brangwyn gave them. This very failure, amusing as it
was and hardly detracting from the effect of his work as a whole, was
another proof that he was an instinctive painter, who relied for his
guidance on feeling. But it was plain enough that he had chosen those
flamingoes for their color, and a right choice it was.

We could not decide which of the eight murals we liked best. Perhaps,
after all, they could not be considered apart. Though each was in itself
a unity, the eight completely expressed a big conception. And in detail
each canvas was full of delightful bits. If you closed your hand and
peered between your thumb and your fingers, you could see how
beautifully the color had been applied and how, throughout the whole
surface, the workmanship sustained itself. Never was there the sense of
faltering or of petering out. And everywhere there were expressions of
fine understanding and sympathy, in the study of a peasant mother
holding her babe, nude boys flying kites, a happy face with the lips
blowing a pipe, a muscular figure lifting a jar, all conveying abundant
life and rich coloring.

The painter finally ran away from us, apologizing for her enthusiasm.

In discussing her opinions, the architect said: "Well, I don't
altogether agree. But she may be right. She sees from the inside, which
is very different from seeing from the outside. There is a great deal of
artistic appreciation that can be felt only by the artist, by the
fellow-craftsman. No wonder we go so far astray when we criticise
aspects of art that we're only related to indirectly or not related at
all."

We walked to the Marina. From there we saw the sun, a great red ball,
sinking behind the Golden Gate.



XVII

Watching the Lights Change



"There probably never was an Exposition in a more magnificent setting,"
said the architect. "The stretch from here to the Golden Gate makes one
of the most splendid bits of scenery in the whole world. It was a good
idea on the part of the Exposition people to build the little railway
here so that visitors should get a glimpse of all the beauty. But,
ideally, the view ought to be seen from a height. The curve from here to
the Cliff House makes our foreign visitors gasp. It also makes them
wonder why our boasting over San Francisco doesn't include some of the
things we have the best excuse to boast about."

We stopped at one of the open-air restaurants, where we could eat and
watch the fading light at the same time. Then we went to the lagoon,
which the architect declared to be particularly interesting at this time
of day.

The rotunda and the colonnade began to take on a deeper mystery. Across
the surface of the water ran a faint ripple. In the background, over the
Golden Gate, the sky was turning to flame. Delicate, gray cobwebs seemed
to float in the air like veils, dusk and fog intermingled.

The light grew dim as we sauntered along the colonnade of the Palace.
Through the columns we could see the Tower of Jewels, suddenly
illuminated from inside, all in red, obscuring the sculptured figures
and giving the lines greater unity and reach.

In the red glow the Italian towers fairly leaped into the air. "It's
curious how the light makes them taller," said the architect.

Now the grounds were twinkling with a multitude of bulbs.

Presently the red light in the tower softened into white. Two of the
Italian towers grew paler, the other two retaining their brilliancy.
Ryan was putting on his colors like a painter, one over another.

We made our way back to the Marina, where the scintillators were soon to
blaze. Before we arrived they informed us of their presence by the great
feathered fan, of many colors, that rose into the sky.

"There was some opposition to the decorating of the Tower with jewels.
The architects with conservative ideas very naturally felt that
architecture which depended on its lines for beauty didn't need that
kind of ornament. But Ryan has unquestionably justified himself. The
feature has been talked about throughout the country more than any
other. See how the light falls on the tower like a great shimmering
robe. It gains by the contrast it makes with the subdued lighting
beneath."

The group on the Column of Progress stood out against the sky.

The doorways were taking on the color of gold, becoming even more
beautiful than they had been by day.

"What Ryan tried hardest to get," said the architect, "was evenness of
lighting. He wanted to bring out clearly the details of the architecture
and he succeeded."



XVIII

The Illuminating and the Reflections



That motionless steam engine, all in gray, harmonizing with the
Travertine, was furiously at work. Into the air it sent clouds of steam
that turned to red and blue and green under Ryan's magic. And up there,
at the top of the Column of Progress, we saw the Adventurous Bowman and
his companions in two groups, one reflected on the illuminated fog.

Through the smoke and the fog the bombs were shooting and breaking into
great masses of liquid fire, golden and green and pink and yellow.
"Someone says we're all children at heart," the architect remarked.
"These fireworks get more attention than all the architecture and the
art put together. But, after all, they're just about as beautiful as
anything man can make and, in the way of color, they put the artists to
shame."

We were part of the crowd that swept to the Court of the Universe, never
so splendid as at night, with the columns reflected in the pool and
Calder's star figures shining from the concealed electric bulbs. On
reaching the court itself we stood at the end of one of the corridors
and looked down. Great drops of light hung on the columns like molten
gold. "Ryan has done something very artistic and unusual there," the
architect remarked. "So far as I know nothing just like it has ever been
done before. It suggests the tongues of fire mentioned in the Scripture
that descended from Heaven."

In the sunken garden those two shafts, rising from the fountains,
looking like stone by day, had become great candles, glowing from the
base to the glass globe on top. "They're practically the sole means of
illuminating this court. The other lights are merely ornamental. So far
as I'm aware nothing just like these shafts has ever been tried in an
Exposition or anywhere else. It's a novel Expositional effect. Some
people don't like it; but most people admire it immensely. It symbolizes
the gold that first drew the multitude to this part of the world. If the
golden color had been used more extensively throughout the Exposition it
would have helped a lot. Guerin gets it at night by means of the light
that shines through the windows and Faville gets it in the light behind
those wonderful doorways of his that haven't been praised half as much
as they ought to be."

The Court of the Ages lured us along the dimly lighted inner court, the
arches taking on an even more delicate beauty in the night light. Once
within the court we found ourselves under the spell of Mullgardt's
genius. The architecture, the cauldrons sending out pink steam, the
flaming serpents, the torches on the tower, the warm lights from within
the tower, the great ecclesiastical stars, brilliant with electricity,
all carried out the idea of the earth, cast off by the sun.

In the entrance court we found the effects less magnificent but, in
their way, just as beautiful. The lighting emphasized the refinement of
the court, the rich delicacy of the ornamentation. "Mullgardt ought to
go down into history for this contribution to the Exposition," said the
architect. "He has shown that originality is still possible in
architecture."

In the Court of the Four Seasons we watched the Emerald Pool turning the
architecture into a mermaids' palace. The water flowing under the four
groups of the seasons shone from an invisible light beneath, coloring it
a rich green. "When Ryan promised to illuminate the water here without
letting the source of the light be seen, it was thought by the people it
couldn't be done." For a long time we sat in front of the lagoon where
the swans were silently floating and, and the Palace of Fine Arts was
reproduced with a deeper mystery. Now we could feel the relation between
the colonnade and Gerome's chariot race. "It would please Gerome if he
could know that he had helped to inspire so magnificent a conception,"
said the architect. "And if Boecklin could see this vision and hear that
his Island of the Dead had started Maybeck's mind thinking of it he
would probably be astonished and delighted at the same time. With his
fine understanding of the influences operating in art he would see that
his contribution did not in any way detract from Maybeck's originality.
Down the centuries minds have been influencing one another and, in this
way, adding to the sum of wisdom and beauty in the world. Now and then,
as in this instance, we can plainly see the influences at work. Behind
Boecklin and Gerome there were doubtless influences that led to their
making those two pictures, inspirations from nature or from other
artists, or both together. And this palace will doubtless inspire many
another noble conception."

"When we apply that thought to the Exposition as a whole," I said, "we
can see what a big influence it is likely to have on the art of the
country."

"It has undoubtedly had a big influence already, even though we may not
he able, as yet, to see it working. The very interest the Exposition
has, aroused in the people that come here, whether they are artists or
not, can't help being productive."



Seeing the Lights Fade



We went over to the South Gardens to see the lights change on the Tower
of Jewels, passing the half-dome of Philosophy, the stained glass of the
windows enveiling the background. They were still robing the tower in
pure white, and the hundred thousand pieces of Austrian cut glass were
shimmering. "They must have had a hard time getting those jewels
fastened on the ornamentation of the upper tiers. The wind up there is
very strong. Some of the men came near being blown off. It took pretty
expert acrobatic work to hang the jewels out on the extreme edges.

Suddenly the lights on the tower glowed into red. The tower itself
seemed to become thinner and finer in outline.

"There are people who don't like this color," said the architect. "It's
fashionable nowadays to feel a prejudice against red. But it is one of
the most beautiful colors in nature and one of nature's greatest
favorites, associated with fire and with flowers. To me the tower is
never so beautiful as it is when the red light seemed to burn from a
fire inside. See how it tends to eliminate the superfluous
ornamentation. It brings out the grace of line in the upper tiers, like
folded wings. With just a few eliminations the improvement in that tower
would be astonishing."

Presently the lights in the tower went out altogether. The four Italian
towers also grew dim. It was getting late. People were hurrying out. But
we lingered. We wished to see this city of domes as it appeared without
any lights at all, except for those that were kept burning to meet the
requirements of the law.

For an hour we roamed about the deserted place. Here and there we would
meet a belated visitor or a group of people from some indoor festivity.

The material had taken on a finer quality. It looked like stone.
Wonderful as the Exposition was by day and in the evening, it was far
more wonderful at this hour.

Now it was easy to imagine the scene as a city, with the inhabitants
asleep in their beds. But just what kind of city it was I could not make
up my mind. When I expressed this thought to the architect, he said:

"Have you ever seen David Roberts' big illustrated volumes, 'Travels in
the Holy Land'? If you haven't, look them up. Then you will see what
kind of a city this city is. It's a city of Palestine. It's Jerusalem
and Jaffa and Akka all over again."



Features that Ought to be Noted by Day



The South Gardens



Hedge. Idea suggested by W. B. Faville, of Bliss & Faville, architects,
of San Francisco, and developed by John McLaren, landscape gardener and
superintendent of the Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, to give
impression of old English wall. African dew plant grown in shallow
boxes, two inches deep, covered with wire netting.

Design of entrance at Scott Street, by Joseph J. Rankin.

South Gardens, French in character, with suggestions of Spanish.
Planting by John McLaren.

In center, "Fountain of Energy," by A. Stirling Calder, acting chief of
sculpture; French influence. Expresses triumph of energy that built the
canal. Youth on horseback, standing in stirrups, "Energy." Figures on
shoulders, "Fame" and "Valor." Figures on globe, two hemispheres;
Western, bull-man; Eastern, lioness-woman. Figures on base, sea-spirits.
Upright figure on globe, Panama. Large figures in pool, the oceans: The
Atlantic, a woman with coral in her hair, riding on back of armored
fish; North Sea, an Eskimo hunting on back of walrus; Pacific, a woman
on back of large sea lion; and South Sea, a negro on back of trumpeting
sea-elephant. Sea-maidens on dolphins' backs, in pool.

To right and left, in front of Festival Hall, and Horticultural Palace,
at ends of long pools, French fountain of "The Mermaid," figure, by
Arthur Putnam, of San Francisco.

To right, large building, Festival Hall, by Robert Farquhar, of Los
Angeles; French theatre architecture. Studied from the theatres of the
Beaux Arts style of French architecture. Details, French Renaissance
developed from the Italian influence.

To right, Press Building, designed and built by the Exposition; Harris
H. D. Connick, Director of Works.

To left, large building, Palace of Horticulture, Bakewell & Brown,
architects.

To left, Young Women's Christian Association.

French light standards, by Walter D'Arcy Ryan and P. E. Denneville.

French ornamental vases, filled with flowers, by E. F. Champney.

The wall, by Faville, with ornamental Spanish entrances, runs around
main courts and palaces, making the walled city. Tiled roofs suggesting
mission architecture, associated with early California missions, a style
developed from the Spanish.

Four smaller towers, two on either side of large tower, by George W.
Kelham, of San Francisco; Italian Renaissance.

Sand on walks, selected by Jules Guerin for its pink color to harmonize
with color scheme. Binds together buildings, its pink harmonizing with
pink of walls. Grains of sand in walks translucent.

Flag poles, ornamented with gilt star, by Faville. Orange-colored
streamers by Guerin.

Heraldic designs related to history of Pacific Coast, by Ryan.

Thoroughfare running along wall and lined with palms, Avenue of Palms.

Equestrian statue, to right of Tower of Jewels, by Charles Niehaus,
"Cortez," conquerer of Mexico.

Equestrian statue, to left, by Charles Cary Rumsey, "Pizarro," conqueror
of Peru. Fine in action and spirit.



Tower of Jewels



Main tower breaking southern wall, facing South Gardens, the Tower of
Jewels, by Thomas Hastings, of Carrere & Hastings, New York. Developed
from Italian Renaissance architecture, with Byzantine modifications, and
designed to suggest an Aztec tower; 433 feet high; original intention to
make it 100 feet higher.

Inscriptions on wall at base of tower chosen by Porter Garnett of
Berkeley, explain steps that led to building of Panama Canal, celebrated
by Exposition. On both sides of inscriptions Roman fasces denoting
public authority. From left to right: "1501 Rodrigo de Bastides pursuing
his course beyond the West Indies discovers Panama"; "1513 Vasco Nunes
de Balboa crosses the Isthmus of Panama and discovers the Pacific
Ocean"; "1904 the United States, succeeding France, begins operations on
the Panama Canal"; "1915 the Panama Canal is opened to the commerce of
the world."

Large Composite columns on base. Arched capitals with acanthus,
ornamented with the American eagle, the nude figure of child, and
ornamental design suggesting California fruits. Colored to resemble
Sienna marble.

Corinthian columns at either side, eagles at corners of capital, human
head above.

Figures by John Flanagan, of New York, represent types in early
California history: Spanish adventurer of sixteenth century, who came to
California and started Spanish influence; priest, who brought the
Catholic religion to California Indians; philosopher, or scholar and
teacher; and the Spanish warrior, the soldier of sixteenth century, who
came to win territory for Spanish king. Above cornice of tower stand
four figures on each of the four sides, twice life-size.

Between statues by Flanagan, square decorative panels; youthful figures
with wreath, repeated on north of tower. Designed by Hastings, modelled
by Newman and Evans, New York.

Armored horsemen on terrace, by F. M. L. Tonetti, type of Spanish
soldier. Repeated four times on each side. Well modeled, but damaged in
effect by being placed in row.

Rows of eagles on niches of tower, symbol of American initiative.

Decorative vase on wings of tower, Italian. Use of ram's head below
bowl.

Wreaths of laurel under eagles, rewards of courage, suggesting triumph
of building canal.

Prows of triremes, at corners on third lift, denoting worldwide
commerce.

Ornamental use of niches, columns, vases, head-piece, breastplates,
shields, the pagan bull, Cleopatra's Needle.

Human figures supporting globe, encircled with girdle, point of tower;
suggest Atlas; ancient idea; somewhat like the group of the four
quarters of the world by Jean Baptiste Carbeaux in the gardens of the
Luxembourg.

Tower broken into seven stages. Horizontal lines have flattening effect;
tower does not appear so high as it really is.

One hundred and thirty-five thousand jewels on tower, suspended to
vibrate. Ruby, emerald, aquamarine, white, yellow. Made in Austria, of
Sumatra stone.

Arch of Tower of Jewels, 110 feet high, 60 feet broad; fine example of
Roman arch, like Arch of Constantine and Arch of Titus.

Figure of Minerva on centerpiece of arch, north and south.

Recessed or coffered panels in ceiling, richly colored, blue harmonizing
with murals on east and west walls.

Murals by William de Leftwich Dodge, of New York. To west, "Atlantic and
the Pacific," with the "Purchase" to right, and the "Discovery" to left.
Opposite, "Gateway of All Nations," with "Labor Crowned" and the
"Achievement" on sides. Tone of murals strengthens arch. Subjects
related to history of California and the Panama Canal.

Fountains, one in each of the colonnades. To right, "Fountain of Youth,"
by Mrs. Edith Woodman Burroughs, of Flushing, New York. Figure of girl,
simple and well-modeled; panels at either side show boats, youth rowing
the older people; eagle and laurel wreath at back, suggest that central
figure is United States. One figure shows a woman with hand at ear, her
attention turned toward the beauty and happiness of lost youth. To left,
"Fountain of El Dorado," by Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney (Mrs. Harry
Payne Whitney), of New York. Panels at either side show human struggle
for "land of gold," or "happiness," or "success." Portals ajar, but
Egyptian guardians bar the way. Dramatic subject, vigorous handling.

View of San Francisco hills between the columns, one of the most
beautiful views on the grounds.

Inscriptions on north of tower, by Garnett, discovery of California and
union with United States. From left to right: "1542 Juan Rodriguez
Cabrillo discovers California and lands on its shores." "1776 Jose
Joaquin Moraga founds the Mission of San Francisco de Asis"; "1846 the
United States upon the outbreak of war with Mexico takes possession of
California"; "1850 California is admitted to the Union as a sovereign
State."

Forecourt of Court of Universe; coloring good, graceful planting of
cypress.

Trees in niches under tower; contrast of colors, dark green, blue and
pink.



Court of the Universe



Elephant poles, Roman, by McKim, Mead & White; streamers by Guerin.

Bear fountains, in walls of Palaces of Liberal Arts and Manufactures,
north of Tower of Jewels. Three on each wall. Colors, pink, dark blue,
light green.

Largest court in Exposition. By McKim, Mead & White, architects, of New
York. Inspired by Bernini's entrance to St. Peter's, in Rome.

Area of court, seven acres; 650 feet wide from arch to arch; 1200 feet
from Tower of Jewels to Column of Progress.

Palaces around court: northeast, Transportation; northwest, Agriculture;
southwest, Liberal Arts; southeast, Manufactures.

Sunken Garden, planted by John McLaren.

Height of Arches of Rising Sun and Setting Sun, 203 feet from base to
tip of sculpture.

East, Arch of Rising Sun; Arch of Setting Sun, in west. Suggested by
arches of Constantine and Titus in Rome; modified by use of green
lattices, Oriental, and by colossal sculptural groups, the East and the
West, in place of Roman chariot or quadriga.

Columns in front of arches; composite, mingling of Ionic and Corinthian;
female figure used as decoration.

"Angel of Peace," by Leo Lentelli, on each side of arches on Sienna
columns, repeated four times. Sword is turned down, but not sheathed, a
commentary on modern peace.

"Pegasus," in triangular spaces above arch, by Frederick G. R. Roth,
repeated on the other side.

Medallions, right and left sides of arches. Female figures suggesting
Nature, by Calder; male figures suggesting Art, by B. Bufano, of New
York.

Above medallions on frieze, decorative griffons.

Quotations on Arch of Rising Sun, west side, facing court, chosen by
Garnett. Panels from left to right: "They who know the truth are not
equal to those who love it," from Confucius, the Chinese philosopher;
"The moon sinks yonder in the west while in the east the glorious sun
behind the herald dawn appears; thus rise and set in constant change
those shining orbs and regulate the very life of this, our world," from
"Shakuntala" by Kalidasa, the Indian poet; "Our eyes and hearts uplifted
seem to gaze on heaven's radiance," from Hitomaro, the Japanese poet.

Quotations on Arch of Rising Sun, east side, facing Florentine Court.
Panels from left to right: "He that honors not himself lacks honor
wheresoe'er he goes," from Zuhayr, the Arabian poet; "The balmy air
diffuses health and fragrance; so tempered is the genial glow that we
know neither heat nor cold; tulips and hyacinths abound; fostered by a
delicious clime, the earth blooms like a garden," from Firdausi, the
Persian poet; "A wise man teaches, be not angry. From untrodden ways
turn aside," from Phra Ruang, the Siamese poet.

Crenellated parapet on arches, note from military architecture. Archers
used to shoot from behind.

Cleopatra's Needle repeated on edge of arches. Used by the Egyptians as
historical records and public bulletins. Merely decorative.

Green jars, beautifully designed, in niches at base of Arches of Rising
and Setting Sun, McKim, Mead & White. Eight in each arch.

Arch of the Rising Sun, surmounted by group representing types of
Oriental civilization. "Nations of the East," designed by Calder, and
executed in collaboration with Lentelli and Roth. From left to right:
Arab sheik on horse, negro slave, Egyptian on camel, Arab falconer,
Indian prince, Buddhist priest or lama from Thibet, Mohammedan with
crescent, negro slave, and Mongolian on horseback.

Murals in arch by Edward Simmons, of New York. On north wall, from left
to right, True Hope and False Hope, Commerce, Inspiration, Truth,
Religion, Wealth, Family; in background Asiatic and American cities. On
south wall: historical types, nations that have crossed the Atlantic;
from left to right, "Call to Fortune," listening to the past, the
workman, the artist, the priest, Raleigh the adventurer, Columbus the
discoverer, the savage of lost Atlantis, the Graeco-Roman, and the
Spirit of Adventure sounding the call to fortune. In background, ancient
and modern ships.

Arch of Setting Sun. Statues, frieze, spandrels, parapet, identical with
Arch of Rising Sun. Group on top, "The Nations of the West," designed by
Calder, executed in collaboration with Lentelli and Roth. American
figures grouped around prairie wagon, drawn by two oxen. Above wagon,
"Enterprise"; in front, "The Mother of Tomorrow," white boy on one side,
colored boy on other; south, a French-Canadian, an Alaskan woman, a
Spanish-American, a German; north, an Italian, British-American, squaw,
American Indian.

Quotations on Arch of Setting Sun, chosen by Garnett. Panels from left
to right, facing court: "In Nature's infinite book of secrecy a little I
can read," from "Antony and Cleopatra," by Shakespeare, the English
poet;

      "Facing west from California's shores,
      Inquiring, tireless, seeking what is yet unfound,

I, a child, very old, over waves, toward the house of maternity, the
land of migrations, look afar,

Look off the shores of my Western sea, the circle almost circled. from
"Leaves of Grass," by Walt Whitman the American poet; "Truth, witness
of the past, councillor of the present, guide of the future," from "Don
Quixote," by Cervantes, the Spanish novelist.

Murals in Arch of the Setting Sun, by Frank Vincent Du Mond of New York.
"Westward March of Civilization," beginning on north and continuing on
south wall. Four groups in north panel, from left to right, Emigrants
setting out for the west; two workmen and a woman holding child;
symbolic figure of the Call to Fortune; types of those who crossed the
continent, the driver, the Preacher, the Pioneer, the Judge, the
Schoolmistress, the children; youth bidding farewell to parents; in
background, New England home and meeting place. South wall: four groups
in panel, from left to right; two Spanish-American soldiers and captain
with a Spanish priest, suggesting Mission period; symbolical figure
"Spirit of Enlightenment"; types of immigrants, the Scientist, the
Architect, the Writer Bret Harte, the Sculptor, the Painter William
Keith, the Agriculturist, the Laborer, women and children; California
welcoming the easterners, figures of California bear, farmer, miner,
fruit pickers; orange tree, grain and fruit, symbols of state.

Classic groups at head of steps in front of arches leading down into
gardens by Paul Manship, of New York. North side, "The Dancing Girls";
south, "Music and Art."

Star-figure, along upper edge of court, by Calder. Repeated ninety
times. Contrast with angel in front of arches.

Lion's head, on cornice below star-figure, repeated around court.

Gilt balls on the domes of all six pavilions. Represent an ornamental
motive borrowed from the Byzantines and often used on synagogues. A
feature of St. Mark's. Dr. Jacob Nieto, rabbi of the Temple Israel, of
San Francisco, has an interesting theory as to their origin. "The
ancients always had the greatest regard for the central star of each of
the constellations that made tip the zodiacal signs. No doubt in their
method of representation they would symbolize the central stars by a
globe, as they also did the sun and the moon, looking upon them all as
servants of the earth, and having, possibly, no idea that these other
constellations might be separate solar systems."

Frieze on pavilions at corners of court, "Signs of the Zodiac," Atlas
and fourteen daughters, seven Pleiades and seven Hyades twelve bearing
plaques, by Herman A. MacNeil, of New York. On four sides of each of the
six dome-covered pavilions. The third figure from the end on either side
represents Electra. Sculptor, in modelling the form, put it on one side
and then reversed it on the other side. The daughters of Atlas: only
those representing signs of the Zodiac, have shields. On each shield is
one of the signs of the Zodiac. What the sculptor has designed on the
right is reversed on the left, securing absolute symmetry. The figures
are finely done and merit special attention.

Lamps around sunken garden. Women; the Canephori, priestesses who
carried baskets in ancient Greek religious festivals; men, suggestive of
Hermes, used by Romans at ends of roads. Instead of baskets, they all
carry jars.

"Fountain of the Rising Still." Ninety-foot column crowned by figure of
Rising Sun, by Adolph A. Weinman, of New York. Reliefs at base of
column, "Day Triumphant"; Time, Light, Truth, Energy, conquering
Falsehood, Vice, and Darkness. Ornamental figures under upper bowl
looking down into water, suggest Neptune, but are winged, "Spirit of the
Waters."

"Fountain of Setting Sun." Column with figure of Setting Sun, a woman;
called also "Descending Night." Reliefs at base of fountain, "Gentle
Powers of Night," with Dusk covering Labor, Love, and Peace, followed by
the Stars, Luna, Illusions, and Evening Mists.

Tritons in pools of Fountains of Rising and Setting Sun, by Weinman. Two
statues; one, triton struggles with snake; in the other, with fish. Two
duplicated in each pool.

Sheetlike appearance of water when full force of water is on; streams
from figures in pool, overflowing from bowl, spouting from lion heads
above frieze.

"The Elements," reclining figures at head of main stairs leading down to
sunken gardens by Robert Aitken, of New York. In size and treatment,
suggestive of Michael Angelo. Northeast, "Water," riding a wave, with
his trident in one hand, sea weed in the other. Northwest, "Fire," a
Greek warrior lies in agony, grasping fire and lightning, with Phoenix,
bird of flame, at back, and the salamander, reptile of fire, under his
right leg. Southeast, "Earth," a woman leaning against a tree,
apparently sleeping; at back two human figures struggle to uproot tree,
symbol of man's war with nature. Southwest "Air" woman holding star to
ear; birds, symbol of air; Icarus, mythological aviator who fell into
sea, tied to wings of woman, typifying man's effort to conquer the air.

Small lion fountains below "The Elements," by McKim, Mead & White.

Bandstand, Arabic; picturesque, but inharmonious; obstructs view through
entrance court.

Four tigers at base of bandstand, facing pool; decorative.

Court leading from gardens to Column of Progress. Designs repeated in
frieze and in jeweled lamps of shell design, McKim, Mead & White; fine
detail.

Colonnades on either side of court leading to Marina. Large Roman
hanging lamps. Stars in ceilings. Beauty in design, coloring and sweep
of corridor.

Frieze around main doorway in colonnades, bird and conventionalized
foliage; skilfully designed.



On the Marina



View from Marina: Extreme right, Berkeley and Oakland; in center of bay,
Alcatraz Island, like a white citadel; left of Alcatraz, Angel Island;
left of Angel Island, Belvedere; left, Marin County, including Sausalito
and Mount Tamalpais, with military reservation facing the Golden Gate
and looking across to the large military reservation, Presidio.

Column of Progress, celebrating the Progress of Man. Preliminary sketch
by Calder. W. Symmes Richardson, architect. Reliefs at base, by Isidore
Konti, of New York. Surmounting statue, by Hermon A. MacNeil, of New
York.

Tablets on four sides of base, in commemoration of aerial advancement.
To the west, the scientific phase, a tribute to Langley, who first
solved the problem of flying. To the north, aerial achievement. To the
east, aerial organization. To the south, history of flying.

Frieze at base on four sides celebrates beginning of progress. On south
front, two women holding palm branches, symbol of victory, call mankind
to achievement.

Wreath at base of column, reward of achievement.

Top of pedestal, ornamental garland, with figure of Sphinx at corners.

Spiral, winding around column, with ships in full sail, suggestive of
upward progress of world. Similar spiral on Column of Trajan and Column
of Marcus Aurelius, in Rome.

Circular frieze sustaining main group at top, "The Burden Bearers," by
MacNeil.

Group on top, "The Adventurous Bowman," the Superman, representing
moment of attainment. Three figures, the dominating male, with the male
supporter steadying his arm, and the devoted woman ready to crown him
with laurel.

First use of this kind of column for an idealistic conception.
Prototypes of this column, like Trajan's Column, but to celebrate some
warlike figure or feat.

Best place to view column, from north, near California Building.

Esplanade, straight northern wall, broken by Court of Four Seasons,
Court of the Universe, and Court of the Ages. Northern facades of all
four buildings, ornate doors in duplicate of Spanish plateresque
doorways.

Main doorways, rich detail. Statues in niches, by Allen Newman, of New
York. Center, "Conquistador," sixteenth century Spanish adventurer.
Figure on either side in duplicate, Newman's "Pirate," who preyed on
shore commerce of South America. Humorous touch in bowlegs.

Magnificent view from Marina of San Francisco back of the Tower Of
Jewels. Like a painting by Cezanne.



Approaching the Court of Four Seasons From the Court of the Universe



Venetian Court.

Palaces on sides of court; to the north, Agriculture; to the south,
Liberal Arts.

Quotation on Arch of Setting Sun, facing Venetian Court, chosen by
Garnett. Panels from left to right: "The world is in its most excellent
state when justice is supreme," from Dante, the Italian poet; "It is
absolutely indispensable for the United States to effect a passage from
the Mexican Gulf to the Pacific Ocean, and I am certain that they will
do it. Would that I might live to see it. But I shall not," from Goethe,
the German poet; "The Universe, an infinite sphere, the center
everywhere, the circumference no where," from Pascal, the French
philosopher.

Italian Renaissance architecture.

Colors rich and well harmonized; pink and green.

Picturesque lattice work in small doorways.

Lighting standards, by Faville.

Goats' heads at top of standards, just below the globe.

Arches on sides, coupled Corinthian columns. Endeavor to make them more
interesting than formal type of fluted columns. Four designs. They add
to richness of court.

Winged figures over arches, by Faville.

Blue medallions above arches, Faville. Italian adaptation of Byzantine,
Ship of State, the Bison, the Twins holding garlands representing
abundance, the horn of plenty and cadeucus, and tree.

Coloring under eaves, bright shades, blue and orange.

Planting, by McLaren, well-massed, in great profusion.



Court of Four Seasons



Court of Four Seasons, Henry Bacon, of New York, architect. Hadrian's
Villa used as model for half-dome and columns in front of fountain.
Italian Renaissance in feeling. Every detail in classic spirit. Gives
impression of seclusion and peace.

Quotations on gateways chosen by Garnett. On the eastern gateway, "So
forth issew'd the seasons of the yeare - first, lusty spring all dight
in leaves and flowres - then came the jolly sommer being dight in a thin
cassock coloured greene, then came the autumne all in yellow clad -
lastly came winter cloathed all in frize, chattering his teeth for cold
that did him chill," from "The Faerie Queene," by Edmund Spenser. On the
western gateway, "For lasting happiness we turn our eyes to one alone,
and she surrounds you now, great nature, refuge of the weary heart and
only balm to breasts that have been bruised. She bath cool hands for
every fevered brow and gentlest silence for the troubled soul," from
"The Triumph of Bohemia," by George Sterling.

Palaces around court: northeast, Agriculture; northwest, Food Products;
southwest, Education; southeast, Liberal Arts.

Emerald pool. Surrounded by shrubbery. No sculpture. Architectural term,
a "black mirror." Fine reflections.

Planting, by McLaren, simple and effective. Trees, olive, acacia,
eucalyptus, cypress, laurel. All foliage, grey-green; banner poles same
color.

Banners, by Ryan; no heraldic designs.

Best view of court from betw